XIV. 5 

7 

% 4 

« 

% 

• t 

% 

Digitized by Google 

DIALOGUES OF PLATO 

JOWETT 

VOL. II. 

a 

Digitized by Google 

ftonfcon 

PUBLISHERS TO THE UNIVERSITY OF 

<dxfor& 

THE 

DIALOGUES OF PLATO 

Translated i?ito English 

WITH ANALYSES AND INTRODUCTIONS 

BY 

B. JOWETT, M. A. 

MASTER OF BALLIOL COLLEGE 
R ECU'S PROFESSOR OF GREEK IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 

IN FOUR VOLUMES 

VOL. II 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
M DCCC LXXI 

[All Rights reserved ] 

Digitized by Google 

CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

THE REPUBLIC i 

TIMAEUS ......... 465 

C.RITIAS 

. 5 

THE REPUBLIC 

INTRODUCTION. 

The Republic of Plato is the longest of his works with the exception 
of the Laws, and is certainly the greatest of them. There are nearer 
approaches to modern metaphysics in the Philebus and in the Sophist. 
The Politicus or Statesman is more ideal ; the form and institutions of 
the State are more clearly drawn out in the Laws; as works of art, the 
Symposium and the Protagoras are of higher excellence. But no other 
Dialogue of Plato has the same largeness of view and the same perfection 
of style ; no other contains more graphic descriptions of character, or is 
richer in humour and imagery. Nor in any other Dialogue is the 
attempt made to unite the speculative and practical, or to interweave the 
State with philosophy. Neither must we forget that the Republic is but ■ 
the third part of a still larger work which was to have included an 
ideal history of Athens, as well as a political and physical philosophy. 
Lastly, Plato may be regarded as the ‘captain or leader' of a goodly 
band of followers ; in him is to be found the original of Cicero’s 
De Republica, of St. Augustin’s City of God, of the Utopia of Sir 
Thomas More, and of the numerous modern writings which are framed 
upon the same model. The Republic of Plato is also the first treatise 
upon education, of which Milton and Locke, Rousseau, Jean Paul, and 
Goethe are the legitimate descendants. Like Dante or Bunyan, he has 
a revelation of another world ; in the early Church he exercised a real 
influence on theology, and at the Revival of Literature on politics. And 
many of the latest thoughts of modem philosophers and statesmen, 
such as the unity of knowledge, the reign of law, and the equality of 
the sexes, have been anticipated in a dream by Plato. 

The argument of the Republic is the search after Justice, the nature 

VOL. II. B 

V 

w 

Digitized by Google 

2 

THE REPUBLIC. 

\ 

of which is first hinted at by Cephalus — then discussed on the basis of 
the old proverbial morality by Socrates and Polemarchus — then cari- 
catured by Thrasymachus and partially explained by Socrates — reduced 
to an abstraction by Glaucon and Adeimantus, and having become 
invisible in the individual reappears at length in the ideal State which is 
constructed by Socrates. The State introduces the subject of education, 
of which the first outline is drawn after the old Hellenic model, pro- 
viding only for an improved religion and morality, and more simplicity 
in music and gymnastic, and greater harmony of the individual and the 
State. But this leads to the conception of a higher state, in which ‘ no 
man calls anything his own/ and in which there is neither * marrying 
nor giving in marriage/ and * kings are philosophers' and ‘ philosophers 
are kings / and there is another and higher education, intellectual as well 
as moral and religious, of science as well as art, and not of youth only 
but of the whole of life. Such a State soon begins to degenerate, and is 
hardly to be realized in this world. The old quarrel of poetry and 
philosophy which has been lightly touched upon in the earlier books of 
the Republic is then fought out to the end. Poetry is discovered to be 
an imitation thrice removed from the truth, and Homer, as well as the 
dramatic poets, having been condemned as an imitator, is sent into 
banishment along with them. And the idea of the State is supplemented 
by the revelation of a future life. 

The division into books, like all similar divisions1, is probably later 
than the age of Plato. The natural divisions are six in number ; — first, 
book i. and the first half of book ii. down to p. 368, which is intro- 
ductory; the first book containing a refutation of the popular and 
sophistical notions of justice, and concluding, like some of the earlier 
Dialogues, without arriving at a definite conclusion. To this is appended 
a restatement of the nature of justice according to common opinion, 
and an answer is demanded to the question — What is justice, stripped 
of appearances? The second division includes the remainder of the 
second and the whole of the third and fourth books, which are mainly 
occupied with the construction of the first State and the first education. 
The third division consists of the fifth, sixth, and seventh books, in 
which philosophy rather than justice is the subject of enquiry, and the 
second State is constructed on principles of communism and ruled by 

1 Cp. Sir G. C. Lewis in the Classical Museum, vol. ii. p. I. 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

3 

philosophers, and the contemplation of the idea of good takes the place 
of the social and political virtues. In the eighth and ninth books the 
perversions of States and the individuals which correspond to them are 
reviewed in succession ; and the nature of pleasure and the principle of 
tyranny are further analyzed in the individual character. The tenth book 
is the conclusion of the whole, in which the relations of philosophy to 
poetry are finally determined, and the happiness of the citizens in this 
life, which has now been assured, is crowned by the vision of another. 

Or a more general division into two parts may be adopted ; the first 
(books i — iv) containing the description of a state framed generally 
in accordance with Hellenic notions of religion and morality, while in 
the second (v — x) the Hellenic state is transformed into an ideal 
kingdom of philosophy, of which all other governments are the per- 
versions. These two points of view are really opposed, and the op- 
position is only veiled by the genius of Plato. The Republic, like the 
Phaedrus (see vol. i. p. 551), is an imperfect whole; the higher light of 
philosophy breaks through the regularity of the Hellenic temple, which 
at last fades away into the heavens (592 B). Whether this imperfection 
of structure arises from an enlargement of the plan, or, perhaps, from the 
composition of the work at different times, is one of those questions, like 
the similar question about the Iliad and Odyssee, which are worth 
asking, but which cannot have a distinct answer. In the age of Plato 
there was no regular mode of publication, and an author would have the 
less scruple in altering or adding to a work which was known only to a 
few of his friends. There is no absurdity in supposing that he may have 
laid his labours aside for a time, or turned from one work to another ; 
and such interruptions would be more likely to occur in the case of a long 
than of a short writing. In all attempts to determine the chronological 
order of the Platonic writings on internal evidence, this uncertainty 
about any single work being composed at one time is a disturbing 
element, which must be admitted to affect longer works, such as the 
Republic and the Laws, more than shorter ones. But, on the other hand, 
the seeming discrepancies of the Republic may only arise out of the 
discordant elements which the philosopher has attempted to unite in a 
single whole, perhaps without being himself able to recognize the 
inconsistency which is obvious to us. For there is a criticism of after 
ages which few great writers have ever been able to anticipate for 
themselves. And the supposition that the Republic was written at one 

4 

THE REPUBLIC. 

time, and without interruption, is confirmed by numerous references 
from one part of the work to another. 

The second title, ‘ Concerning Justice,’ is not the one by which the 
Republic is generally quoted in antiquity, and may therefore be assumed 
to be of later date. Morgenstem and others have asked whether the 
definition of justice, which is the professed aim, or the construction of 
the State, is the principal argument of the work. The answer is that 
the two blend in one, and are two faces of the same truth ; for justice 
is the order of the State, and the State is the visible embodiment of 
justice under the conditions of human society. The one is the soul 
and the other is the body, and the Greek ideal of the State, as of the 
individual, is a fair mind in a fair body. In Hegelian language the 
State is the reality of which justice is the idea. Or, as in Christian 
theology, the kingdom of God is within, and yet is imagined also as an 
external kingdom. And when the constitution of the State is com- 
pleted, the conception of justice is not dismissed, but reappears under 
the same or different names throughout the work, both as the inner law 
of the individual soul, and finally as the principle of rewards and punish- 
ments in another life. The virtues are based on justice of which com- 
mon honesty in buying and selling is the shadow, and justice is based 
on the idea of good, which is the harmony of the world, and is reflected 
both in the institutions of states and in the motions of the heavenly 
bodies (cp. Tim. 47). 

Neither is it necessary to discuss at length another question which 
has been raised by Boeckh, respecting the imaginary date at which the 
conversation was held (the year 4 1 1 b.c. which is proposed by him will 
do as well as any other) ; for a writer of fiction, and especially a writer 
who, like Plato, is notoriously careless of chronology, only aims at 
general probability. Whether all the persons mentioned in the Re- 
public could ever have met at any one time is not a difficulty which 
would have occurred to an Athenian reading the work forty years later, 
or to Plato himself at the time of writing (any more than to Shakespeare 
in a parallel case) ; and need not greatly trouble us now. Yet this 
may be also one of those questions which are worth asking, because the 
investigation shows that we cannot argue historically from the dates in 
Plato, and have therefore no need to waste time in inventing far-fetched 
reconcilements of them (such, for example, as the conjecture that 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

5 

Glaucon and Adeimantus are not the brothers but the uncles of Plato)2, 
in order to avoid chronological difficulties. 

The principal characters in the Republic are Cephalus, Polemarchus, 
Thrasymachus, Socrates, Glaucon, and Adeimantus. Cephalus appears 
in the introduction only, Polemarchus drops at the end of the first 
argument, and Thrasymachus is reduced to silence at the close of the 
first book. The main discussion is carried on by Socrates, Glaucon, 
and Adeimantus. Among the audience are Lysias the orator and 
Euthydemus the sons of Cephalus and brothers of Polemarchus, an 
unknown Charmantides — these are mute auditors; also there is Cleito- 
phon, who once interrupts (340 A), and there, as in the Dialogue which 
bears his name, appears as the friend and ally of Thrasymachus. 

Cephalus, the father of Polemarchus and his two brothers, is the 
patriarch of the house who has been appropriately engaged in offering 
a sacrifice. He is the pattern of an old man who has almost done with 
life, and is at peace with himself and with all mankind. * He seems to 
linger around the memory of the past, and is not without consolation 
in the future. He is eager that Socrates should come to visit him, 
fond of the poetry of the last generation, happy in the consciousness 
of a well-spent life, glad at having escaped from the tyranny of youthful 
lusts. His love of conversation, his indifference to money, even his 
prolixity and repetition, are interesting traits of character. The re- 
spectful attention shown to him by Socrates, who must however be 
asking questions of him as of all men, is also remarkable. The 
moderation with which old age is pictured by him as a very tolerable 
portion of existence is characteristic, not only of him, but of Greek 
feeling generally, and contrasts with the exaggeration of Cicero in his 
work on old age. The evening of life is described by Plato in the most 
expressive manner, yet with the fewest possible touches. As Cicero 
remarks, the aged Cephalus would have been out of place in the dis- 
cussion which follows, and which he could neither have understood nor 
taken part in without a violation of dramatic propriety (cp. Melesias in 
the Laches). 

His * son and heir ’ Polemarchus has the frankness and impetuousness 
of youth ; he is for detaining Socrates by force in the opening scene, 
and will not ‘let him off’ (449 B) on the subject cf women and children. 
Like Cephalus, he is limited in his point of view, and represents the 

2 Stallbaum. 

6 

THE REPUBLIC . 

proverbial stage of morality which has rules of life rather than principles ; 
and he quotes Simonides as his father had quoted Pindar. But after 
appealing to this authority he has no more to say ; the inferences which 
he draws are only elicited from him by the dialectic of Socrates. He 
has not yet experienced the influence of the Sophists like Glaucon and 
Adeimantus, nor is he sensible of the necessity of refuting them ; he 
belongs, in short, to the pre-Socratic age. He is bewildered by Socrates 
to such a degree that he does not know what he is saying. From his 
brother Lysias (contra Eratos, p. 121) we learn that he fell a victim to 
the thirty tyrants, but no allusion is made to his fate, nor to the cir- 
cumstance that Cephalus and his family were of Syracusan origin, and 
had migrated to Athens. 

The ‘ Chalcedonian giant/ Thrasymachus, of whom we have already 
heard in the Phaedrus (p. 267), is the personification of the Sophists 
according to Plato’s conception of them, in some of their worst charac- 
teristics. He' is vain and blustering, refusing to discourse unless he 
is paid, fond of making an oration, and hoping in that way to escape 
the inevitable Socrates ; but a mere child in argument, and unable to 
foresee that the next ‘move’ (to use a Platonic expression) will ‘shut 
him up’ (487 B). He has reached the stage of framing general 
notions, and in this respect may be regarded as in advance of Cephalus 
and Polemarchus. But he is incapable of defending them in a dis- 
cussion, and vainly tries to cover his confusion with banter and insolence. 
He further makes an irrelevant appeal to the experience of daily life. 
Whether such doctrines as are attributed to him by Plato were really 
held either by him or by any other Sophist is uncertain: — in the 
eagerness for generalization such fundamental errors might easily grow 
up, and are certainly put into the mouths of speakers in Thucydides ; 
but we are concerned at present with Plato’s description of him, 
and not with the historical reality. The inequality of the contest adds 
greatly to the humour of the scene. He is utterly helpless in the hands 
of Socrates, who knows how to touch all the springs of vanity and 
weakness in him. His determination to cram down their throats, or 
put ‘bodily into their souls’ his own words, elicits a cry of horror from 
Socrates. The state of his temper is quite as worthy of remark as the 
process of the argument. Nothing is more amusing than his complete 
submission when he has been once thoroughly beaten. At first he 
seems to carry on the discussion with reluctance, but soon with ap- 

INTRODUCTION. 

7 

parent good-will, and he even testifies his interest at a later stage by 
one or two occasional remarks (v. 450 A, B). When attacked by 
Glaucon (in book vi. 498 C, D) he is humorously protected by 
Socrates ‘as one who has never been his enemy and is now his 
friend.’ 

When Thrasymachus has been silenced, the two principal respondents, 
Glaucon and Adeimantus, appear on the scene ; here as in Greek tragedy 
(cp. Introd. to Phaedo, vol. i.) three actors are introduced. At first sight 
the two sons of Ariston may seem to wear a family likeness, like the two 
friends Simmias and Cebes in the Phaedo. But on a nearer examina- 
tion of them the similarity vanishes, and they are seen to be distinct 
characters. Glaucon is the impetuous youth who can ‘just never have 
enough of fechting ’ (cp. the character of him in Xen. Mem. iii. 6.) ; the 
man of pleasure who is acquainted with the mysteries of love (v. 474 D) ; 
the ‘ juvenis qui gaudet canibus,’ and who improves the breed of animals 
(v. 459 A) ; the lover of art and music (iii. 398 D, E) who has all the 
experiences of youthful life. He is full of quickness and penetration, 
piercing easily below the clumsy platitudes of Thrasymachus to the real 
difficulty; he turns out to the light the seamy side of human life, and 
yet does not lose faith in the just and true. It is Glaucon who seizes 
what may be termed the ludicrous relation of the philosopher or the 
state of philosophers to the world, to whom a state of simplicity is 
‘ a city of pigs/ who is always prepared with a jest (iii. 398 C, vi. 509 C) 
when the argument offers him an opportunity, and is ever ready to 
second the humour of Socrates and to appreciate the ridiculous, whether 
in the connoisseurs of music (vii. 531 A), or in the lovers of theatricals 
(v. 475 D), or in the fantastic behaviour of the citizens of democracy 
(viii. 557 foil.). His weaknesses are several times alluded to by Socrates 
(iii. 402 E), who, however, will not allow him to be attacked by his 
brother Adeimantus (viii. 548 D, E). He is a soldier, and, like 
Adeimantus, has been distinguished at the battle of Megara (ii. 368 A, 
anno 456?). The character of Adeimantus is deeper and graver, and 
the profounder objections are commonly put into his mouth. Glaucon 
is more demonstrative, and generally opens the game ; Adeimantus 
pursues the argument further. Glaucon has more of the liveliness and 
quick sympathy of youth; Adeimantus has the maturer judgment of 
a grown-up man of the world. In the second book, when Glaucon 
insists that justice and injustice shall be considered without regard to 

8 

THE REPUBLIC. 

their consequences, Adeimantus remarks that they are regarded by 
mankind in general only for the sake of their consequences. In 
a similar vein of reflection Adeimantus urges at the beginning of the 
fourth book that Socrates fails in making his citizens happy, and is 
answered that happiness is not the direct aim, but the indirect con- 
sequence of the good government of a State. It is Adeimantus again 
who volunteers the criticism of common sense on the Socratic method 
of argument, and who refuses to let Socrates pass lightly over the 
question of women and children. It is Adeimantus who is the re- 
spondent in the more argumentative, as Glaucon in the lighter and more 
imaginative portions of the Dialogue. For example, throughout the 
greater part of the sixth book, the causes of the corruption of philo- 
sophy, and the conception of the idea of good are discussed with 
Adeimantus. At the end of the book, Glaucon resumes his place of 
principal respondent ; but he has a difficulty in apprehending the higher 
education of Socrates, and makes some false hits in the course of the 
discussion (526 D, 527 D). 

Thus in a succession of characters Plato represents the successive 
stages of morality, beginning with the Athenian gentleman of the olden 
time, wrho is followed by the practical man of that day regulating his life 
by proverbs and saws ; to him succeeds the wild generalization of the 
Sophists, and lastly come the young disciples of the great teacher, who 
know the sophistical arguments but will not be convinced by them, and 
desire to go deeper into the nature of things. 

The character of Socrates in the Republic is not wholly consistent. 
In the first book wre appear to have more of the real Socrates, such as 
he is depicted in the earliest Dialogues of Plato and in the Apology. 
He is ironical, provoking, questioning, the old enemy of the Sophists, 
ready to put on the mask of Silenus as well as to argue seriously. But 
in the sixth book his enmity towards the Sophists abates ; he acknow'- 
ledges that they are the representatives rather than the corruptors of 
the world (vi. 492 A). He also becomes more dogmatic and con- 
structive, passing beyond the range either of the political or the specu- 
lative ideas of the real Socrates. In one passage (vi. 506 C) Plato 
himself seems to intimate that the time had nowr come for Socrates, who 
had passed his whole life in philosophy, to give his own opinion, and not 
to be always repeating the notions of other men. There is no evidence 
that either the idea of good or the conception of a perfect state were 

INTRODUCTION. 

9 

comprehended in the Socratic teaching, though he certainly dwelt on 
the nature of the universal and of final causes (cp. Xen. Mem. i. 4; 
Phaed. 97) ; and a deep thinker like him, in his thirty or forty years of 
public teaching, could hardly have failed to touch on the nature of 
family relations, for which there is also some positive evidence in the 
Memorabilia (Mem. 1. 2, 51 foil.). The Socratic method is nominally 
retained ; and every inference is either put into the mouth of the 
respondent or represented as the common discovery of him and 
Socrates. But any one can see that this is a mere form, the affectation 
of which grows wearisome as the work advances. The nature of the 
process is truly characterized by Glaucon, when he describes himself 
as a companion who is not good for much in an investigation, but can 
see what he is shown (iv. 432 C), and may, perhaps, give the answer to 
a question more aptly than another (v. 474 A). 

Neither can we be absolutely certain that Socrates himself taught the 
immortality of the soul, which is unknown to his disciple Glaucon in the 
Republic (book x. 608 D) ; nor is there any reason to suppose that 
he used myths or revelations of another world as a vehicle of instruction, 
or that he would have banished poetry or have denounced the Greek 
mythology. His favourite oath is retained, and a slight mention is made 
of the daemonium, or internal sign, which is alluded to by Socrates as a 
phenomenon peculiar to himself (book vi. 496 C). A real element 
of Socratic teaching, which is more prominent in the Republic than in 
any of the other Dialogues of Plato, is the use of example and illustration 
(ra (fiopriKa airrcp Trpo<r<f)epovTfs, iv. 442 E) : ‘Let us apply the test of 
common instances.’ ‘ You,’ says Adeimantus, ironically, in the sixth 
book, ‘are so unaccustomed to speak in images.' And this use of 
examples or images, though truly Socratic in origin, is enlarged by the 
genius of Plato into the form of an allegory or parable, which embodies 
in the concrete what has been already described, or is about to be 
described, in the abstract. Thus the figure of the cave in book vii. is 
a recapitulation of the divisions of knowledge in book vi. The com- 
posite animal in book ix. is an allegory of the parts of the soul. The 
captain and the ship and the true pilot in book vi. are a figure of the 
relation of philosophers to the State which is about to be described. 

Plato is most true to the character of his master when he describes 
him as ‘ not of this world.’ And with this the paradox of the ideal state 
and the other paradoxes of the Republic, though they cannot be shown 

IO 

THE REPUBLIC 

to have been speculations of Socrates, are in harmony. He is not any 
nearer the common opinions of mankind when he is constructing than 
when he is destroying. But it must also be observed that this opposition 
to the world in the latter part of the work turns to a sort of ironical pity 
or love. The world is incapable of philosophy, and is therefore at 
enmity with the philosopher ; but this arises from an unavoidable ne- 
cessity (vi. 494 foil.) : for they have never seen him as he truly is in his 
own proper image; they are only acquainted with artificial systems in 
which there is no native force of truth — words which admit of another 
application. They do not know how to measure, and therefore are 
angry with those who take their measure. They are to be pitied 
or laughed at, not to be quarrelled with ; they mean well with their 
nostrums, but are unconscious that they are cutting off a Hydra’s head 
(iv. 426 D, E). This moderation towards those who are in error is one 
of the most characteristic features of Socrates in the Republic. In all 
the different representations of Socrates, whether of Xenophon or Plato, 
and amid the differences of the earlier or later Dialogues, he always 
retains the character of the unwearied and disinterested seeker after 
truth, without which he would have ceased to be Socrates. 

Leaving the characters we may now analyze the contents of the 
Republic, and then proceed to consider, (1) The general aspects of 
this Hellenic ideal of the State. (2) The modem lights in which the 
thoughts of Plato may be read. 

BOOK I. The Republic opens with a truly Greek scene — a festival 
in honour of the goddess Bendis which is held at the Piraeus ; to this 
is added the promise of an equestrian torch-race in the evening. The 
whole work is supposed to be recited by Socrates on the day after the 
festival to a small party, consisting of Critias, Timaeus, Hermocrates, 
and another ; this we learn from the first words of the Timaeus. 

When the rhetorical advantage of reciting the Dialogue has been 
gained, the attention is not distracted by any reference to the audience ; 
nor is the reader further reminded of the extraordinary length of the 
narrative. The incident out of which the conversation had arisen on 
the preceding day is described as follows : — Socrates and his companion 
Glaucon are just leaving the festival when they are detained by a message 
from Polemarchus, who soon arrives accompanied by Adeimantus, the 
brother of Glaucon, and with playful violence compels them to remain, 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

r i 

promising them not only the torch-race, but the pleasure of conversation 
with the young, which to Socrates is a far greater attraction. They return 
to the house of Cephalus, Polemarchus’ father, who is now in extreme old 
age, and is found sitting upon a cushioned seat crowned for a sacrifice. 
‘ You should come to me oftener, Socrates, for I am too old to go to 
you, and at my time of life, having lost other pleasures, I care the more 
for conversation.’ Socrates asks him what he thinks of age, to which 
the old man replies, that the miseries and discontents of age are to be 
attributed to the tempers of men, and that age is a time of peace in which 
the tyranny of the passions is no longer felt. Yes, replies Socrates, 
but the world will say, Cephalus, that you are happy in old age because 
you are rich. * And there is something in that, Socrates, as Themistocles 
replied to the Seriphian, “ Neither you, if you had been an Athenian, nor 
I if I had been a Seriphian, would ever have been famous,” I might reply 
to you that neither a good poor man can be happy in age, nor yet a bad 
rich man.’ Socrates remarks that Cephalus appears not to care about 
riches, and would like to know what he considers the chief advantage 
of them. Cephalus answers that, when you are old the belief in the world 
below grows upon you, and then to have done justice and never to have 
b<?en compelled to do injustice through poverty, or to have deceived any 
one, is felt to be an unspeakable blessing. Socrates, who is evidently 
preparing for an argument, next asks, What is the meaning of this word 
justice? To tell the truth and pay your debts ? No more than this ? Or 
must we admit exceptions ? Ought I, for example, to put back into the 
hands of my friend, who is a madman, the sword which I borrowed of 
him when he was in his right mind ? * There must be exceptions.' ‘ And 
yet/ said Polemarchus, ‘the definition given has the authority of Simonides.’ 
Here Cephalus retires to look after the sacrifices, and bequeaths, as 
Socrates says, the possession of the argument to his heir, Polemarchus. . . 
The picture of old age is finished, and Plato, as his manner is, has al- 
ready lightly touched the key-note of the whole work in asking for the 
definition of justice, just raising Glaucon’s question respecting external 
goods, and preparing for the concluding mythus of the world below in 
the slight allusion of Cephalus. The first explanation has been sup- 
ported by a gnome of Simonides ; and now Socrates has a mind to show 
that the resolution of justice into two unconnected precepts, which have 
no common principle, fails to satisfy the demands of dialectic. 

He proceeds : What did Simonides mean by this saying ? Did he mean 

I 

THE REPUBLIC. 

I 2 

that I was to give back arms to a madman ? ' No, not in that case, not if 
the parties are friends, and evil would result. He meant that you were 
to do what was proper, good to friends, and harm to enemies.' Every act 
does something to somebody ; and following this analogy, Socrates asks, 
What is this due and proper thing which justice does, and to whom ? 
He is answered that justice does good to friends and harm to enemies. 
But in what way good or harm ? * In making alliances with the one, and 
going to war with the other.' Then in time of peace what is the good 
of justice ? The answer is that justice is of use in contracts, and contracts 
are money partnerships. Yes ; but how in such partnerships is the just 
man of more use than any other man ? ‘ When you want to have money 
safely kept and not used.’ Then justice will be useful when money is 
useless. And there is another difficulty : justice, like war or any other 
art, must be of opposites, good at attack as well as at defence, at stealing 
as well as guarding. But then justice is a thief, though a hero notwith- 
standing, after the fashion of some Homeric heroes, who were ‘ excel- 
lent above all men in theft and perjury’ — to such a pass have you and 
Homer and Simonides brought us ; though I do not forget that the 
thieving must be for the good of friends and the harm of enemies. And 
still there arises another question : Are friends to be interpreted as real or 
seeming ; enemies as real or seeming ? And are our friends to be only 
the good, and our enemies to be the evil ? The answer is that we must 
do good to our seeming and real good friends, and evil to our seeming and 
real evil enemies — good to the good, and evil to the evil. But ought we to 
render evil for evil at all, for this will only make men more evil ? Can 
justice produce injustice any more than heat cold? The final conclusion 
is, that no sage or poet ever said that the just return evil for evil ; this 
was a maxim of some tyrant, Periander, Perdiccas, or some other tyrant. 
.... Thus the first stage of aphoristic or unconscious morality is shown 
to be inadequate to the wants of the age ; the authority of the poets is 
set aside, and through the winding mazes of dialectic we make an 
approach to the Christian precept of forgiveness of injuries. We may 
note in passing the antiquity of casuistry, which not only arises out of 
the conflict of established principles in particular cases, but also out 
of the effort to attain them, and is prior as well as posterior to our 
fundamental notions of morality. The ‘interrogation’ of moral ideas; 
the appeal to the authority of Homer ; the conclusion that the maxim, 
‘ Do good to your friends and harm to your enemies,’ being erroneous, 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

<3 

could not have been the word of any great man (cp. ii. 380 A, B) are 
all of them very characteristic of the Platonic Socrates. 

Here Thrasymachus, who had made several attempts to interrupt, 
but had hitherto been kept in order by the company, takes advantage 
of a pause and rushes into the arena, like a savage animal beginning 
with a roar. * Socrates/ he says, ‘ what folly is this ? Why do you agree 
to be vanquished by one another in a pretended argument?’ He then 
prohibits all the ordinary definitions of justice ; to which Socrates replies 
that he cannot tell how many twelve is, if he is forbidden to say 2x6, 
or 3 x 4, or 6 x 2, or 4 x 3. At first Thrasymachus is reluctant to 
argue; but at length, with a promise of payment on the part of the 
company and of praise from Socrates, he is induced to open the game. 
‘ Listen/ he says ; ‘ my answer is that might is right, justice the interest 
of the stronger : now praise me.’ Let me understand you first. Do 
you mean that because Polydamas the wrestler, who is stronger than we 
are, finds the eating of beef for his interest, the eating of beef is also for 
our interest, who are not so strong ? Thrasymachus is indignant at the 
illustration, and explains his meaning to be that the rulers make laws for 
their own interests. But suppose, says Socrates, that the ruler or 
stronger makes a mistake — then the interest of the stronger is not his 
interest. Thrasymachus escapes this absurdity by introducing the word 
‘thinks' — not the actual interest of the ruler, but what the ruler thinks 
his interest, is justice. 

This line of argument is not pursued further, and in what follows 
Thrasymachus does in fact withdraw his admission, that the ruler may 
make a mistake, by affirming that the ruler as a ruler is infallible. 
Socrates is quite ready to accept the new position, which he equally 
turns against Thrasymachus by the help of the analogy of the arts. 
Every7 art or science has an interest, but this interest is to be dis- 
tinguished from the accidental interest of the artist, and is only con- 
cerned with the good of the things or persons which come under the 
art. And justice has an interest which is the interest not of the ruler 
or judge, but of those who come under his sway. 

Thrasymachus is on the brink of the inevitable conclusion, when he 
makes a bold diversion. ‘Tell me, Socrates/ he says, ‘have you a 
nurse ? ' What a question ! Why do you ask ? * Because I should 
imagine that she never wipes your nose, as she has never taught you 
what the shepherd does with his sheep. Like the ruler he fattens them 

M 

THE REPUBLIC . 

for his use. And experience proves that in every relation of life the 
just man loses and the unjust gains, especially where injustice is on the 
grand scale, which is quite another thing from the petty rogueries of 
swindlers and burglars and robbers of temples. The language of men 
proves this — our gracious and blessed tyrant and the like — all which 
tends to show (i) that justice is the interest of the stronger; and (2) that 
injustice is more profitable and also stronger than justice.’ 

Thrasymachus, who is better at a speech than at a close argument, 
having deluged the company with words, has a mind to escape. But 
the others will not let him go, and Socrates adds a humble but earnest 
request that he would not desert them at such a crisis of their fate. 
‘And what can I do more for you?’ he said; ‘would you have me put 
the words bodily into your souls ? ' God forbid ! replies Socrates ; we 
only want you to be consistent in the use of terms, and not to employ 
‘physician’ in an exact sense, and then again * shepherd’ or ‘ ruler’ in an 
inexact sense, — whereas the ruler in himself, and the shepherd in himself 
are looking only to the good of their flocks and not to their own ; and 
yet you will insist that the ruler likes being in office. ‘ No doubt about 
that,’ replies Thrasymachus. Then why are they paid? Is not the 
reason that their interest is not comprehended in their art, and is 
therefore the concern of another art, which is common to the arts in 
general, and therefore not identical with any one of them ; and this is 
the art of pay. Nor would any man be a ruler unless he were induced 
by the hope of reward or the fear of punishment ; the reward is money 
or honour, the punishment is the necessity of being ruled by a worse 
man than himself. And if a State were composed of good men only, 
there would be as much ‘ nolo episcopari ' as there is at present of 

the opposite This satire on existing governments is heightened 

by the simple and apparently incidental manner in which the remark 
is introduced. There is a similar irony in the argument that the gov- 
ernors of mankind are disinterested, because they receive pay 

Enough of this : the other assertion of Thrasymachus is far more 
important — that the unjust life is more gainful than the just. Now, as 
you and I, Glaucon, are not convinced of this, we ought to try and 
answer him, and as we cannot number the gains of either, we had better 
proceed by making mutual admissions of the truth to one another. 

Thrasymachus had asserted that perfect injustice was more gainful 
than perfect justice, and after a little hesitation he is induced by Socrates 

INTRODUCTION. 

i5 

to admit the still greater paradox that injustice is virtue and justice vice. 
Socrates praises his frankness, and assumes the attitude of one whose only 
wish is to understand the meaning of his opponents. At the same time 
he is weaving a net in which Thrasymachus is finally enclosed. The 
admission is elicited from him that the just man only seeks to gain an 
advantage over the unjust, but not over the just — while the unjust would 
gain an advantage over either. Socrates, in order to test this statement, 
employs once more the favourite analogy of the arts. The musician, 
doctor, skilled artist of any sort, does not seek to get more than the 
skilled, but only more than the unskilled (that is to say, he works up to 
a rule, standard, law, and does not exceed it), whereas the unskilled 
makes random efforts at excess. Thus the skilled falls on the side of 
the good, and the unskilled on the side of the evil, and the just is the 
skilled, and the unjust is the unskilled 

There was great difficulty in bringing Thrasymachus to this point ; 
the day was hot and he was streaming with perspiration, and for the 
first time in his life he was seen to blush. But his other thesis that 
injustice was stronger than justice has not yet been refuted, and Socrates 
now proceeds to the consideration of this, which, with the assistance of 
Thrasymachus, he hopes to clear up ; the latter is at first churlish, but 
in the judicious hands of Socrates is soon restored to good humour. . . Is 
there not honour among thieves ? Is not the strength of injustice only a 
remnant of justice? Is not absolute injustice absolute weakness also? 
A house that is divided against itself cannot stand ; two men who 
quarrel detract from one another’s strength, and he who is at war with 
himself is the enemy of himself and the gods. Not wickedness there- 
fore, but semi-wickedness flourishes in states, — a remnant of good is 
needed in order to make union in action possible, — there is no kingdom 
of evil in this world. 

There is another question to be answered : Is the just or the unjust 
happier ? Has not every art an end, and is there not an excellence or 
virtue by which every end is accomplished ? And is not the end of the 
soul happiness, and justice the excellence of the soul by which happiness 
is attained ? This is our answer to the question whether the just or the 
unjust man is the happier ? 

Thrasymachus replies : ‘ Let this be your entertainment, Socrates, at the 
festival of Bendis/ Yes ; and a very good entertainment with which your 
kindness has supplied me, now that you have left off scolding. And yet 

i6 

THE REPUBLIC. 

not a good entertainment — but that was my own fault for tasting of many 
things. First of all the nature of justice was the subject of our enquiry, 
and then whether justice is virtue and wisdom, or evil and folly ; and then 
the comparative advantages of just and unjust : and the sum of all is that 
I know not what justice is ; how then shall I know whether the just is 
happy or not ? . . . . 

Thus the sophistical fabric has been demolished, chiefly by appealing 
to the analogy of the arts. ‘Justice is like the arts (i) in having no 
external interest, and (2) in not aiming at excess, and (3) justice is to 
happiness what the implement of the workman is to his work/ At 
this the modern reader is apt to stumble, because he forgets that Plato 
is writing in an age when the arts and the virtues, like the moral and 
intellectual faculties were still undistinguished. Among early enquirers 
into the nature of human action the arts helped to fill up the void of 
speculation; and at first the comparison of the arts and the virtues was 
not perceived to be fallacious. The contemporaries of Plato had not 
realized the Aristotelian distinction ‘ that virtue is concerned with action, 
art with production.’ And yet in the absurdities which follow from some 
uses of the analogy (cp. 333 E, 334 B), there seems to be an intimation 
conveyed that virtue is more than art. This is implied in the conclusion 
that ‘justice is a thief,’ and in the dissatisfaction which Socrates ex- 
presses at the final result. The second of the three arguments, ‘ that 

the just does not aim at excess,’ has a real meaning, though wrapped 

#» 

up in an enigmatical form. That the good is of the nature of the 
finite is a peculiarly Pleilenic sentiment, which may be compared with 
n the language of those modern writers who speak of virtue as fitness, 

and of freedom as obedience to law. The mathematical or logical 
notion of limit easily passes into an ethical one, and even finds a mytho- 
logical expression in the conception of (< frdovos ) envy. Ideas of measure, 
equality, order, unity, proportion, still linger in the writings of moralists ; 
and the true spirit of the fine arts is better conveyed by such terms than 
by superlatives. 

‘When workmen strive to do better than well,’ 

* They do confound their skill in covetousness/ 

In what may be called the epilogue of the discussion with Thrasyma- 
chus, Plato argues that evil is not a principle of strength, but of discord 
and dissolution, just touching the question which has been often treated 
in modern times by theologians and philosophers of the negative nature 

Digitized by Google 

1 

\ 

INTRODUCTION. 17 

of evil (cp. on the other hand, x. 610). In the last argument we trace 
the germ of the Aristotelian doctrine of an end and a virtue directed 
towards the end, which again is suggested by the arts. The final re- 
concilement of justice and happiness, and the identity of the individual 
and the State are also intimated. Nothing is concluded; but the ten- 
dency of the dialectical process, here as always, is to enlarge the con- 
ception of ideas, and to widen their application to human life. 

BOOK II. Thrasymachus is pacified, but the intrepid Glaucon in- 
sists on continuing the argument. He begins by dividing goods into 
three classes : — first, goods desirable in themselves ; secondly, goods 
desirable in themselves and for their results; thirdly, goods desirable 
for their results only. He then asks Socrates in which of the three 
classes he would place justice. In the second class, replies Socrates, 
among goods desirable for themselves and also for their results. ‘ Then 
the world in general will be of another mind, for they will say that 
justice belongs to the troublesome class of goods which are desirable 
for their results only.’ Socrates answers that this is the doctrine of 
Thrasymachus which he rejects. Glaucon thinks that Thrasymachus 
was too ready to listen to the voice of the charmer, and proposes to 
consider the nature of justice and injustice in themselves and apart 
from the results and rewards which accompany them. He will first of 
all speak of the nature and origin of justice; secondly, of the manner 
in which men view justice as a necessity and not a good ; and thirdly, 
he will prove the reasonableness of this view. 

‘To do injustice is said to be a good; to suffer injustice an evil. 
As the evil is discovered by experience to be greater than the good, 
the sufferers, who cannot also be doers, make a compact that they will 
have neither, and this compact or mean is called justice, but is really 
the impossibility of doing injustice. No one would observe such a 
compact if he were not obliged. We may test this by supposing that 
the just and unjust have two rings, like that of Gyges in the well-known 
story, which make them invisible, and then no difference would appear 
in them, for every one would do evil if he could. And he who 
abstained would be regarded by the world as a fool for his pains. 
Men might praise him in public out of fear for themselves, but they 
would laugh at him in their hearts. (Cp. Gorgias, 483 B.) 

‘ And now let us frame an ideal of the just and unjust. Imagine the 

VOL. 11. 

c 

« 

1 8 THE REPUBLIC. 

unjust man to be master of his craft, seldom making mistakes and easily 
correcting them; having gifts of money, speech, strength — the greatest 
villain bearing the highest character: and at his side let us place the 
just in his nobleness and simplicity — being, not seeming — without name 
or reward— clothed in his justice only — the best of men who is thought 
to be the worst, and let him die as he has lived. I might add (but I 
would rather put the rest into the mouth of the panegyrists of injustice. 
They will tell you) that the just man will be scourged, racked, bound, 
have his eyes put out, and will at last be crucified [literally impaled] — 
and all this because he ought to have preferred seeming to being. 
How different is the case of the unjust ! who clings to appearance as 
the true reality. His high character makes him a ruler ; he can marry 
where he likes, trade where he likes, help his friends and hurt his 
enemies; having got rich by dishonesty he can worship the gods 
better, and will therefore be more loved by them than the just.’ 

I was thinking what to answer, when Adeimantus, like an Homeric 
hero, ‘ brother helping brother,’ desired to join in the already unequal 
contest. He considered that the most important point of all had been 
omitted : * the grand error has been that men are taught to be just for 
the sake of rewards; parents and guardians make reputation the in- 
centive to virtue. And other advantages are promised by them of a 
more solid kind ; e. g. wealthy marriages, and high offices which depend 
upon the good opinion of mankind. There is the picture in Homer 
of fat sheep and heavy fleeces, rich corn-fields and trees toppling with 
fruit, which the gods provide in this life for the just. And the Orphic 
poets add a similar picture of another. Musaeus gets his heroes down 
in the world below, and has the saints feasting on couches, with garlands 
on their heads, enjoying as the meed of virtue a gross paradise of 
immortal drunkenness. Some go further, and speak also of a fair 
posterity in the third and fourth generation. But the wicked are 
drowned by them in a slough of despond, and are made to carry 
water in a sieve. Our description of the infamy and sufferings of the 
just is transferred by them to the unjust. This is all that their imagi- 
nation supplies. 

‘Take another kind of argument which is found both in poetry and 
prose : — “ Virtue,” as Hesiod says, “ is honourable but difficult ” — “ steep 
is the way and narrow is the gate;" but vice is easy and profitable — 
“ broad is the way and many walk therein.” And you may often see 

INTRODUCTION. 

*9 

the wicked in great prosperity and the righteous afflicted by the will of 
heaven. And mendicant prophets knock at rich men’s doors, promising 
to atone for the sins of themselves or their fathers in a pleasant easy 
manner with festive games, or with charms and invocations to get rid 
of an enemy good or bad by divine help and at a small charge; — 
they appeal to a heap of books professing to be written by Musaeus 
and Orpheus, and carry away the minds of whole cities, and promise 
to “ get souls out of purgatory,” and are dangerous if they are refused. 

‘ When a lively-minded ingenuous youth hears all this, what will be 
his conclusion ? “ Will he,” in the language of Pindar, make justice 

“ his high tower, or fortify himself with crooked deceit ?” Justice, he 
reflects, without the appearance of justice, is misery and ruin ; injustice 
has the promise of a glorious life. Appearance is master of truth and 
lord of happiness. To appearance then he will turn, — he will put on 
the show of virtue and trail behind him the fox of Archilochus. And 
even if there is a danger of being discovered, union and force and 
rhetoric will do much, and although they cannot prevail over the gods, 
still how do we know that there are gods ? Only from the poets, who 
acknowledge that they may be appeased by sacrifices. Then why 
not sin and pay for indulgences out of your sin ? For if the righteous 
are unpunished, the wicked may be unpunished and have the pleasures 
of sinning too. But is there not a danger of the world below ? Nay, 
my friend, says the argument, there are mysteries and atoning powers 
who will set that matter right, as the poets, who are the sons of the 
gods, tell us, and this is confirmed by the authority of the State. 

‘On what principle can we resist such arguments in favour of in- 
justice? Add good manners, and, as the wise tell us, we shall fare 
well both with gods and men ; we shall make the best of both worlds. 
Who that is not a miserable caitiff will refrain from smiling at the 
praises of justice? Even if a man knows the better part he will not 
be angry with other men ; for he knows also that more than human 
virtue is needed to save a man, and that he only praises justice who is 
incapable of injustice. 

‘ And the origin of the evil is that all men from the beginning, heroes, 
poets, instructors of youth, have always asserted “ the temporal dispen- 
sation,” the honours, glories, profits, expediencies of justice. Had they 
been taught in early youth the power of justice and injustice immanent 
in the soul, and unseen by any human or divine eye, they would not have 

20 

THE REPUBLIC. 

needed others to be their guardians, but every one would have been the 
guardian of himself. And this is what I want you to show, Socrates ; — 
other men use arguments which rather tend to strengthen the position of 
Thrasymachus that might is right. But from you I expect better things.’ 

. . . The thesis, which for the sake of argument is maintained by Glau- 
con, is the converse of that of Thrasymachus — not right is the interest of 
the stronger, but right is the necessity of the weaker. Starting from the 
same premises he carries the analysis of society a step further back ; — 
might is still right, but the might is the weakness of the many combined 
against the strength of the few. 

There have been theories in modern as well as in ancient times which 
have a family likeness to the speculations of Glaucon : e. g. that power 
is the foundation of right ; or that virtue is self-love or the love of power ; 
or that war is the natural state of man ; or that private vices are public 
benefits. All such theories have a kind of plausibility from their partial 
agreement with experience. For human nature oscillates between good 
and evil, and the motives of actions and the origin of institutions may 
be explained to a certain extent on either hypothesis according to the 
character or point of view of a particular thinker. But theories of this 
sort do not represent the real nature of the State, which is based on a 
vague sense of right gradually corrected and defined by experience 
(although capable also of perversion), any more than the origin of 
society, which is to be sought in the family and in the social and reli- 
gious instincts of man. Nor do they represent the average character of 
individuals, which cannot be explained simply on a theory of evil, but 
has always a counteracting element of good. And as men become better 
such theories appear more and more untruthful to them, because they 
are more conscious of their own disinterestedness. * ' 

V 1 

The two brothers ask Socrates to prove to them that the just is happy £ 
when they have taken from him all that in which happiness is ordinarily' 4 
supposed to consist. Not that there is (i) any absurdity in the attempt to^. , 
frame a notion of justice apart from circumstances. For the ideal must 
always be a paradox when compared with the ordinary conditions of 
human life. Neither the Stoical ideal nor the Christian ideal is true as 
a fact, but they may serve as a basis of education, and may exercise an 
ennobling influence. An ideal is none the worse because ‘ some one 
has made the discovery’ that no such ideal was ever realized. (Cp. v. 
472 D.) And in a few exceptional individuals who are raised above the 

INTRODUCTION. 

21 

ordinary level of humanity, the ideal of happiness may be almost, if 
not altogether, realized in death and misery. This may be the state 
which the reason deliberately approves, and which the utilitarian as well 
as every other moralist may be bound in certain cases to prefer. 

Nor again, (2) must we forget that Plato, though he agrees generally 
with the view implied in the argument of the two brothers, is not ex- 
pressing his own final conclusion, but rather seeking to dramatize one 
of the aspects of ethical truth. He is developing his idea gradually in 
a series of positions or situations. He is exhibiting Socrates for the 
first time undergoing the Socratic interrogation. Lastly, (3) the word 
* happiness’ involves some degree of confusion because associated in the 
language of modern philosophy with conscious pleasure or satisfaction, 
which was not equally present to his mind. 

Glaucon has been drawing a picture of the misery of the just and the 
happiness of the unjust, to which the misery of the tyrant in book ix. is 
the real counterpart. And still the unjust must appear just ; this is ‘ the 
homage which vice pays to virtue.’ But now Adeimantus proceeds to 
show that this regard for justice is only for the sake of rewards and 
reputation, and points out the advantage which is given to such argu- 
ments as those of Thrasymachus and Glaucon by the conventional 
morality of mankind. He seems to feel the difficulty of ‘justifying the 
ways of God to man.' Both of them touch upon the question, how far 
the morality of actions is determined by their consequences (cp. iv. 420 
foil.) ; and both of them go beyond the position of Socrates, that justice 
belongs to the class of goods not desirable for themselves only, but 
desirable for themselves and for their results, to which he recalls them, 
jh their attempt to view justice as an internal principle, and in their 
Whdemnation of the poets they anticipate him. The common life of 
Greece is not enough for them; they must penetrate deeper into the 
g*t u re of things. 

Sr It has been objected that justice is honesty in the sense of Glaucon 
and Adeimantus, but is taken by Socrates to mean all virtue. May we 
not more truly say that the old-fashioned notion of justice is enlarged 
by Socrates, and becomes equivalent to universal order or well-being, 
first in the State, and secondly in the individual ? He has found a new 
answer to his old question ‘whether the virtues are one or many,’ viz. 
that one is the ordering principle of the three others. In seeking to 
establish the purely internal nature of justice, he is met by the fact that 

22 

THE REPUBLIC. 

man is a social being, and he tries to harmonize them as well as he can. 
There is no more inconsistency in this than was inevitable in his age 
and country; there is no use in turning upon him the cross lights of 
modern philosophy, which, from some other point of view, would appear 
equally inconsistent. Plato does not give the final solution of philo- 
sophical questions for us ; nor can he be judged of by our standard. 

The remainder of the Republic is developed out of the question of 
the sons of Ariston. Three points are deserving of remark in what 
immediately follows: — First, that the answer of Socrates is altogether 
indirect. He does not say that happiness consists in the contemplation 
of the idea of justice, and still less will he be tempted to affirm the 
Stoical paradox that the just man can be happy on the rack. But first 
he dwells on the difficulty of the problem and insists on restoring man 
to his natural condition, before he will answer the question at all. He 
too will frame an ideal, but his ideal comprehends not only abstract 
justice, but the whole relations of man. Under the fanciful illustration 
of the large letters he implies that he will only look for justice in society, 
and that from the State he will proceed to the individual. His answer 
in substance amounts to this, — that under favourable conditions, i. e. in 
the perfect State, justice and happiness will coincide, and that when 
justice has been once found, happiness may be left to take care of itself. 
That he falls into some degree of inconsistency, when in the tenth book 
he claims to have got rid of the rewards and honours of justice, may be 
admitted ; for he has left those which are allowed to exist in the perfect 
State. Still he preserves the true attitude of moral action. Let a man 
do his duty towards his country first, without asking whether he will be 
happy or not, and happiness will be the inseparable accident which 
attends him. ‘ Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, 
and all these things shall be added unto you.’ 

Secondly, it may be remarked that Plato preserves the true character of 
Greek thought in beginning with the State and going on to the individual; 
first ethics then politics is the order of ideas to us ; the reverse is the 
order of history. Only after many struggles of thought does the indi- 
vidual assert his full right and become a perfectly moral agent. Thirdly, 
we may observe that here begins the confusion or identification of the 
individual and the State, of ethics and politics, which pervades Greek 
political speculation, and even in modern times retains a certain degree 
of influence. 

INTRODUCTION. 

23 

. . . Socrates praises the sons of Ariston, ‘ inspired offspring of the 
renowned hero,’ as the elegiac poet terms them ; but he is at a loss to 
understand how they can argue so eloquently on behalf of injustice 
while their character shows that their own arguments have no influence 
on them. He does not know how to answer them, although he is 
afraid of deserting justice in the hour of need. He therefore makes a 
condition, that having weak eyes he shall be allowed to read the large 
letters first and then go on to the smaller. He means to say, that he 
must be allowed to look for justice in the State first, and shall then pro- 
ceed to the individual. This is agreed, and Socrates constructs the 
State. 

Society arises out of the wants of man. His first want is food ; his 
second a house; his third a coat. The sense of these needs and the 
possibility of satisfying them by exchange, draw individuals together 
on the same spot ; and this is the beginning of a State, which we take 
the liberty to invent, although necessity is the real inventor. There 
must be first a husbandman, secondly, a builder, thirdly, a weaver, to 
which may be added a cobbler. Four or five citizens at least are re- 
quired to make a city. Now men have different natures, and one man 
will do one thing better than many; and business waits for no man. 
Hence there must be a division of labour into different employments; 
into wholesale and retail ; into workers, and makers of workmen’s tools ; 
into shepherds and husbandmen. A city which includes all this will 
have far exceeded the limit of four or five, and yet not be very large. 
But then again imports will be required, and imports necessitate exports, 
and this implies variety of produce in order to attract the taste of pur- 
chasers ; also merchants and ships. In the city too we must have a 
market and money and retail trades, otherwise buyers and sellers will 
never meet, and the valuable time of the producers will be wasted in 
vain efforts at exchange. If we add hired servants the State will be 
complete, and we may guess that somewhere in the intercourse of the 
citizens with one another justice and injustice will appear. 

Here follows a rustic picture of their way of life. They build houses, 
and produce corn and wine, and make coats and shoes. They are 
lightly clad in summer while at their work, but well shod and clothed 
in winter. Their principal food is flour and meal, of which they make 
noble puddings, and these they serve up on wattled reeds or clean 
leaves. They repose on couches strewn with yew and myrtle, passing 

Digitized by Google 

24 

THE REPUBLIC . 

their time in pleasant converse with one another, hymning the gods 
and drinking their wine. * Yes, Socrates/ said Glaucon, * but you 
should give them a relish.’ Yes, I replied, and a relish they shall have — 
salt and olives and cheese and potherbs and chestnuts which they 
will roast at the fire, indulging in moderate potations. Fed on such 
a diet they will live in peace and health, and bequeath a similar life to 
their descendants; and they will be careful not to have too many 
children. Glaucon said, ‘ 'Tis a city of pigs, Socrates.' Why, I 
replied, what do you want more ? ‘ Only the conveniences of life, 

which every one has, — sofas to lie upon, tables to eat from, also 
meats and sweets.’ I see that you want not only a State, but a 
state of luxury ; and possibly in the more complex frame we shall 
sooner find justice and injustice. Then our ideas will have to enlarge 
themselves ; the fine arts must go to work — every instrument and 
ornament of luxury in furniture and dress and food will be wanted in 
every form. There will be dancers, painters, sculptors, musicians, 
cooks, barbers, tire-women, nurses, artists ; and we must not forget 
the swineherds and neatherds too for the animals, and physicians to 
cure the disorders of which luxury is the source. And then to feed all 
these superfluous mouths we shall need a part of our neighbours’ land, 
and they will want a part of ours : and this is the origin of war, which 
may be traced to the same causes as other political evils. Our city 
will now require the slight addition of a camp, and the citizen will be 
converted into a soldier. But then our old doctrine of the division of 
labour must not be forgotten. The art of war cannot be learned in a 
day, and there must be natural aptitudes for military duties. There 
will be some warlike natures who have this aptitude — dogs keen of 
scent and swift of foot to pursue, and strong of limb to fight. And as 
passion is the foundation of courage, such natures, whether of men or 
animals, will be full of passion. And here arises a difficulty: — these 
passionate natures are apt to bite and devour one another ; the union 
of gentleness to friends and fierceness against enemies appears to be 
an impossibility in nature ; and the guardian requires both qualities. 
Who then can be a guardian ? After a pause, Socrates adds that the 
image of the dog suggests a way of escape. For in dogs too there 
is a double character of gentleness to friends and enmity to strangers. 
Your dog is a philosopher and judges by the rule of knowing or not 
knowing, and philosophy whether in man or beast is the parent of 

INTRODUCTION. 

25 

gentleness. And the human watchdogs too must be philosophers or 
lovers of learning which will make them gentle. And how are they 
to be learned without education ? 

But what is education? Is any better than the old-fashioned sort 
which is comprehended under the names of music and gymnastic? 
Music includes literature, and literature is of two kinds, true and false. 
‘What do you mean?' he said. I mean that children hear stories 
before they learn gymnastics, and that the stories are mostly untrue, 
or have only one or two grains of truth in a bushel of falsehood. 
Now early life is very impressible, and children ought not to be allowed 
to learn what they will have to unlearn when they grow up; and in 
order to prevent this we must have a censorship of nursery tales, 
banishing some and keeping some. Some of them are very improper, 
as we may see in the great instances of Homer and Hesiod, who 
are really much to blame, for they not only tell lies but bad lies; 
stories about Uranus and Saturn, which are immoral as well as false, 
and which should never be spoken of to young persons or indeed at 
all; or, if at all, then in a mystery after the sacrifice, not of an 
Eleusinian pig, but of some unprocurable animal. Shall our youth be 
encouraged to beat their fathers by the example of Zeus, or our 
citizens be incited to war by seeing the wars of the gods and giants 

embroidered on the robe of Athene? Shall they hear the narrative of 

/ 

Hephaestus binding his mother, and of Zeus sending him flying for 
helping her when she was beaten ? Even if such tales are capable of 
a mystical interpretation the interpretation is not obvious to the young 
at the age when impressions are most powerful. But if any one asks 
what tales are to be allowed, to that, Adeimantus, you and I answer 
that we are legislators and not book-makers; we only lay down the 
principles according to which books are to be written, but to write 
them is the duty of others. 

And our first principle is that God is good, and the author of good, 
and good only ; not that he is the steward of good and evil, or that 
he has two casks full of destinies, as Homer says; or that Athene 
and Zeus incited Pandarus to break the treaty ; or that God caused the 
sufferings of Niobe, or of Pelops, or the Trojan war. We maintain, 
on the contrary, either that these were not the actions of the gods 
or that God was just, and men were all the better for being punished : 
but that the deed was evil, and God the author of the deed — this is 

26 

THE REPUBLIC. 

not to be said or sung in any well-ordered commonwealth by old or 
young, and is suicidal, immoral, impious. This is our first and great 
principle, — God is the author of good only. 

And the second principle is of the same nature: — With God is no 
variableness or change of form ; he is no Proteus. Reason teaches 
us this ; for if we suppose a change in God, he must be changed cither 
by another or by himself. By another ? — but the best works of nature 
and art and the noblest qualities of mind are least liable to be changed 
by any external force. By himself? — but he cannot change for the better, 
and he will hardly change for the worse. He remains for ever fairest 
and best in his own image. Therefore we refuse to listen to the 
poets who tell us of the goddess Here begging in the likeness of a 
priestess, or of other deities who prowl about at night in strange 
disguises ; all that blasphemous nonsense with which mothers fool the 
manhood out of their children is got at secondhand from the poets 
and ought to be suppressed. But you will say that God who is 
himself unchangeable may take a form in relation to us. Why should 
he do this? For gods as well as men hate the lie in the soul or 
principle of falsehood; and as for any other form of lying which is 
used for a purpose and is regarded as innocent in certain exceptional 
cases — what need have the gods of this? For they are not ignorant 
of antiquity like the poets, nor are they afraid of their enemies, nor 
is any madman a friend of theirs. God then is true, he is absolutely 
true ; he changes not, he deceives not, by day or night, by word or 
sign. This is our second great principle, — God is true. Away with 
the lying dream of Agamemnon in Homer, and the accusation of 
Thetis against Apollo in Aeschylus. 

... In order to give clearness to his conception of the State, Plato 
prefers to trace the first principles of mutual need and of division of 
labour in an imaginary community of four or five citizens. Gradually 
this community increases; the division of labour extends to countries; 
imports necessitate exports ; a medium of exchange is required, and 
retailers sit in the market-place to save the time of the producers. These 
are the steps by which Plato constructs the first or primitive state, intro- 
ducing the elements of political economy by the way. When he makes 
a transition to a second state, which is framed on the civilized model, 
this is only a device of style ; he indulges in a picture of primitive life, 
but he does not seriously mean to say that one is better than the other 

INTRODUCTION. 

27 

(cp. Politicus, p. 272); nor can any inference be drawn from the de- 
scription of the first state taken apart from the second, such as Aristotle 
appears to draw in the Politics, book iv. 4, 12. 

The disappointment of Glaucon at the ‘city of pigs/ the ludicrous 
description of the ministers of luxury in the more refined state, and the 
afterthought of the necessity of doctors, the ironical illustration of the 
nature of the true guardian taken from the dog, the desirableness of 
offering some almost unprocurable victim when impure mysteries are to 
be celebrated, are touches of humour which may be noted in passing. 
In the education of the young, Plato startles us by affirming that a child 
must begin by learning falsehood first and truth afterwards. Yet this is 
not very different from saying that children must be taught through the 
medium of imagination as well as reason; that their minds can only 
develope gradually, and that there is much which they must learn without 
understanding (cp. iii. 402 A.). This is also the substance of Plato’s 
view, though he must also be allowed to have drawn the line somewhat 
differently from modern ethical writers respecting truth and falsehood. 
To us economies or accommodations could be only allowable as far as 
they are required by the human faculties or necessary for the commu- 
nication of knowledge to the simple and ignorant. But Plato seems to 
limit the use of them only by requiring that they should have a good 
moral effect, and that such a dangerous weapon as falsehood should be 
used by the rulers alone and for great objects. 

A singular conception which occurs towards the end of the book is 
the lie in the soul; this is connected with the Platonic and Socratic 
doctrine that involuntary ignorance is worse than voluntary. The lie in 
the soul is the most involuntary of all ignorance, a real deception which 
he ironically terms a true lie, a false principle hated by gods and men. 
For example, to represent God as false or immoral, or, according to Plato, 
as deluding men with appearances, would be a lie of this hateful descrip- 
tion. To this is opposed the lie in words, which is only such a decep- 
tion as may occur in a play or poem, or allegory or figure of speech, or 
in any sort of accommodation, — which though useless to the gods may 
be useful to men in certain cases. Reserving for another place the 
greater questions of religion or education, we may note further, ( 1 ) the 
approval of the old traditional education of Greece; (2) the preparation 
which Plato is making for the attack on Homer and the poets; (3) the 
preparation which he is also making for the use of economies in the 

28 

THE REPUBLIC. 

State ; ( 4 ) the familiar use of the allegorical interpretation of the poets 
in the age of Plato, which here, as in the Phaedrus, is rejected by him ; 
(5) the contemptuous and at the same time euphemistic manner in which 
here as below (iii.390) he alludes to the Chronique Scarutaleuse of the gods. 

BOOK III. There is another motive in purifying religion, which is 
to banish fear ; for no man can be courageous who is afraid of death, 
or who believes the tales which are repeated by the poets concerning the 
world below. A gentle request should be made to them by the authori- 
ties not to abuse hell, accompanied by an intimation that their tales are 
untrue, and the reverse of inspiring to heroes. The licenser is desired 
to expunge obnoxious passages, such as the chilling words of Achilles : — 
‘ I would rather be a serving-man than rule over all the dead and the 
verses which tell of the squalid mansions, the meaningless ghosts, the 
flitting soul mourning over her lost strength and youth, the soul with a 
gibber going beneath the earth like smoke, the souls of the suitors which 
flutter about like bats — all this sort of thing Homer and the other poets 
must not be angry at our erasing. The terrors and horrors of Cocytus 
and Styx, ghosts and sapless shades, and the rest of their Tartarian 
nomenclature, must vanish. Such tales may have their use ; but they 
terrify people out of their senses, and are not the proper food for soldiers. 
As little can we admit the sorrows and sympathies of the Homeric 
heroes : — Achilles, the son of a goddess, lying first on his back, and then 
on his face, then starting up and prancing on the sea-shore ; or Priam, 
the cousin of the gods, crying aloud, rolling in the mire. A good man 
is not altogether prostrated at the loss of children or fortune. Neither is 
death terrible to him ; and therefore lamentations over the dead should 
not be practised by men of note ; they should be the concern of women 
and of inferior persons only, whether women or men. Still worse is the 
attribution of such weakness to the gods ; as when the goddesses say, 
‘ Alas ! my travail 1 ’ and worst of all, when the king of heaven himself 
laments his inability to save Hector, or sorrows over the impending 
doom of his dear Sarpedon. Such a character of God, if not ridiculed 
by our young men, is likely to be imitated by them. Nor should our 
citizens be given to excess of laughter — ‘Such violent delights have 
violent ends.’ The scene in the Iliad in which the gods are introduced 
shaking their sides at Hephaestus is unseemly. 

Truth should have a high place among the virtues, for falsehood 

INTRODUCTION. 

29 

is of no use to the gods and is useful only as a medicine in the case 
of men. The State physician or ruler may occasionally employ this 
medicine, but the subject must not in return tell a lie to the ruler; 

that would be as great an error as for the patient to tell a lie to the 

physician, or the sailor to his captain. If the ideal State is ever realized, 
the false word of any common man must be regarded as treason. 

In the next place our youth must be temperate, and temperance 
consists in obedience to the rulers and abstinence from sensual 
pleasures. That is a lesson which Homer teaches in some places: 
‘ The Achaeans marched breathing prowess in silent awe of their 
’ leaders;’ — and a very different lesson in other places: ‘O heavy with 
wine, who hast the eyes of a dog, and the heart of a stag.’ This is 
a sort of language not likely to impress the lesson of self-control on 
the minds of youth. The same may be said of his praises of eating 

and drinking and of his dread of starvation ; also of the verses in 

which he tells with great circumstance of the rapturous loves of Zeus 
and Here, which made the former forget his intention of honouring 
Achilles ; or of the tale of the net in which Hephaestus detained Ares 
and Aphrodite on a similar occasion. There is a nobler strain heard 
in the words: — ‘Endure, my soul, thou hast endured worse.’ Nor 
must we allow our citizens to receive bribes, or to say, ‘ Gifts 
persuade the gods, gifts reverend kings;’ or to applaud the ignoble 
advice of Phoenix to Achilles that he should get money out of the 
Greeks before he assisted them; or the meanness of Achilles himself 
in taking gifts from Agamemnon; or his requiring a ransom for the 
body of Hector ; or his cursing of Apollo ; or his insolence to the river- 
god; or his dedication to the dead Patroclus of his own hair which 
had been already dedicated to the other river-god Sperchius ; or 
the fit of cruelty which made Cheiron’s pupil drag the body of Hector 
round the walls, and slay the captives at the pyre, especially as he 
is avaricious as well, which seems to be a contradiction. The amatory 
exploits of Pirithous and Theseus, Zeus and Poseidon’s sons are equally 
unworthy. Either these sons of gods were not the sons of god, or 
they were not such as the poets imagine them, any more than the 
gods themselves are the authors of evil. The youth who l>elieves that 
such things are done by those who have the blue blood of heaven 
flowing in their veins will be too ready to imitate their example. 

Enough of gods and heroes ; — what shall we say about men ? what 

30 

THE REPUBLIC . 

the poets and story-tellers say? — that the wicked prosper and the 
righteous are afflicted, or that justice is another’s gain? Not this 
at all events, but rather the opposite. Only in raising the question 
at all we are anticipating the definition of justice, and had therefore 
better defer the enquiry. 

Next to subject follows style. Now all style is narrative, and nar- 
rative is of three kinds, the simple, imitative, and a composition of 
the two. An instance will make my meaning clear. The first scene 
in Homer is of the last or mixed kind, being partly description and 
partly dialogue. If you throw the dialogue into the ‘oratio obliqua’ 
(I am no poet and therefore I drop the metre), the priest came and (do 
not say ‘spoke these words,’ but) prayed the gods that the Achaeans 
might take Troy and have a safe return if Agamemnon would only give 
him back his daughter, and the other Greeks assented, but Agamemnon 
was wroth, and so on, — then the whole becomes descriptive. Or if 
you leave out the intermediate pieces of description and the dialogue 
remains, in this case the epic becomes dramatic, and the poet disappears. 
Or if you take away the dialogue, then the poet is the only speaker 
left, as in dithyrambic poetry. These are the three styles ; and I want 
to know which of them is to be admitted into our State. ‘ Do you 
ask whether tragedy and comedy are to be admitted?’ Nay, perhaps 
there is more than this involved; and indeed the question has been 
already answered, for we have decided that one man cannot in his 
life play many parts. And therefore he cannot both live and act, 
or compose both tragedy and comedy, or be a rhapsodist and actor 
at once. Human nature is coined into very small pieces, and as our 
guardians have their own business already, which is the care of 
freedom, they will have enough to do without imitating. But if they 
imitate they should not imitate any meanness or baseness, but the 
good only, for the mask that the actor wears is apt to become his 
face. We cannot allow men to play the parts of women, young or 
old, quarrelling or weeping, scolding their husbands, or setting up 
their necks against the gods, — least of all when making love or in 
labour. They must not represent slaves, or bullies, or cowards, or 
drunkards, or madmen, or blacksmiths, or neighing horses, or bellowing 
bulls, or sounding rivers, or a raging sea. A good or wise man will 
be willing to perform good or wise actions only; and he will prefer 
the epic style with as little imitation as possible. The man who has 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

31 

no self-respect, on the contrary, will imitate any body and anything ; 
sounds of nature, cries of animals; he will whistle like the wind, 
rattle like hail, growl like thunder, and play on any instrument; also 
he will bark like a dog, baa like a sheep, and crow like a cock : his 
whole performance will be imitation of gesture and voice. Now in 
the descriptive style there are few changes, but in the dramatic there 
are a great many. Poets and musicians use either, or a compound of 
both, and this compound is very attractive to youth and their teachers 
as well as to the vulgar. But our State in which one man plays one 
part only, and a cobbler is a cobbler, and a ploughman a ploughman, 
is not adapted for , complexity. And when one of these polyphonous 
pantomimic gentlemen offers to exhibit himself and his poetry we will 
fall down and worship him as a sweet creature, and a holy and won- 
derful being; he shall be anointed with myrrh and have a garland of 
wool set upon his head — but then we shall bid him turn about and go 
to the next city, for we are patrons of the rough, honest poet, and will 
not depart from the primitive model. (Cp. Laws, vii. 817.) 

Next as to the music. A song or ode has three parts, — the subject, 
the harmony, and the rhythm ; of which the two last are dependent upon 
the first. As we banished strains of lamentation, so we may now banish 
the mixed Lydian harmonies, which are the harmonies of lamentation ; 
and as our citizens are to be temperate, we may also banish convivial 
harmonies, such as the Ionian and pure Lydian. Two remain, — the 
Dorian and Phrygian, the first for war, the second for peace; the one 
expressive of courage, the other of obedience, or instruction, or religious 
feeling. And as we reject varieties of harmony, we shall also reject the 
queer, many-stringed, variously-shaped instruments which give utterance 
to them, and in particular the flute, which is more complex than any of 
them. The lyre and the harp may be permitted in the town, and the 
Pan’s-pipe in the fields. Thus we have made a purgation of music, and 
will now make a purgation of metres. Metres, like harmonies, should 
be simple and suitable to the occasion. There are three kinds of them, 
as there are four notes of the tetrachord, which all have their characters, 
and there are different characters of feet as well as of rhythms. But 
about this I must ask Damon, the musical doctor, who speaks, if I 
remember rightly, of a martial measure as well as of dactylic, trochaic, 
and iambic rhythms, which he arranges so as to compensate and equalize 
with one another. We only venture to affirm the general principle that 

32 

THE REPUBLIC . 

beauty depends upon rhythm, and rhythm upon style, and style upon 
subject, and subject upon the simplicity and harmony of the soul which 
is reflected in them. This lesson of simplicity above all things has to 
be learnt by every one in the days of his youth, and may be gathered 
anywhere from painting and embroidery, or any other creative and con- 
structive art, as well as from the forms of plants and animals, and is 
a lesson which runs through nature as well as art, and has a wide 
kindred in the world. 

Other artists as well as poets should be warned against meanness or 
extravagance or unseemliness in their creations. The same rule applies 
to sculpture or any other invention. And he who violates the rule must 
not be allowed to work in our city, and to corrupt the taste of our 
citizens. For images of deformity are like a hurtful pasture, and day by 
day, little by little, our guardians gather evil from them, which becomes 
a festering mass of evil in the soul. Place them only where they may 
breathe the air of health and beauty, amid fair sights and sounds, and 
they will quickly drink in from surrounding objects sweet and harmo- 
nious influences ; and this is the great power of music, which more than 
any other influence enters into the soul and gives the sense of deformity 
and beauty. At first the effect is unconscious ; but when reason 
arrives then he who has been thus trained welcomes her as the friend 
whom he always knew. As in learning to read, first we acquire the 
elements or letters separately, and afterwards their combinations, and do 
not recognize the reflections of them in the water until we know the 
letters themselves ; — in like manner we must first attain the elements or 
essential forms of temperance and courage and liberality and magni- 
ficence and the like, and then trace the combinations of them in life and 
experience. There is a music of the soul which answers to the harmony 
of the world ; and the fairest object of a musical soul is the fair mind in 
the fair body. Some defect in the latter may be excused, but not in the 
former. True love is the daughter of temperance, and temperance is 
utterly opposed to the madness of bodily pleasure. Enough has been 
said of music, which makes a fair ending with love. 

Next we pass on to gymnastics; about which I would remark, that 
the soul is related to the body as a cause to an effect, and therefore if 
we educate the mind we may leave the education of the body in her 
charge, and need only give a general outline of the course to be pursued. 
In the first place the guardians will abstain from strong drink, for they 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

33 

should be the last persons to lose their wits. Whether the habits of the 
palaestra are suitable to them is more doubtful, for the ordinary gym- 
nastic is a sleepy, heavy sort of thing, and when left off suddenly is 
apt to be dangerous. And our warrior athletes must be wide-awake 
dogs, having all their senses about them, and must also be inured to 
all changes of food and climate. Hence they will require a finer dis- 
cipline and a simpler gymnastic, which will be like their music ; and 
for their diet a rule may be found in Homer, who gives his heroes no 
fish although they were living at the sea-side, nor boiled meats which 
involve an apparatus of pots and pans. Sweets and Sicilian cookery, 
and Attic confections, and Corinthian courtezans, must be forbidden 
them; these are to gymnastic what Lydian and Ionian melodies are 
to music. Gluttony and intemperance fill the town with doctors and 
pleaders, who open their halls for practice ; and law and medicine give 
themselves airs as soon as the freemen of a State go out and buy them. 
But what can show a more disgraceful state of education than the 
importation of justice from abroad because you have none of your 
own at home ? And yet there is something more disgraceful still in 
the further stage of the same disease, when men have learned to take 
a pleasure and pride in the twists and turns of the law ; not considering 
how much better it would be for them so to order their lives as to have 
no need of a nodding justice. And there is a similar disgrace in em- 
ploying a physician, not for the cure of wounds or epidemic disorders, 
but because a man has blown himself out like a bladder, and has got 
more diseases than he knows the names of, or than ever existed in the 
days of Asclepius. For observe how simple is the Homeric practice of 
medicine. Eurypylus after he has been wounded drinks a posset of 
Pramnian wine, which is of a heating nature ; and yet the sons of Ascle- 
pius blame neither the damsel who gives him the drink, nor Patroclus 
who is attending on him. The truth is that this modem system of 
nursing diseases was introduced by Herodicus the trainer; who, being 
of a sickly constitution, by a compound of training and medicine, 
tortured first himself and then a good many other people, and died a 
long time after he ought to have died. Now Asclepius was a statesman, 
and refused to practise this art, which he knew well enough; but he 
would not have men wasting time in being ill, and therefore he adopted 
the rough ‘kill or cure’ method, which artisans and labourers employ. 

‘ They must be at their business/ they say, ‘ and have no time for 

VOL. II. 

D 

34 

THE REPUBLIC . 

swathing and dieting : if they recover, well ; and if they don’t, there is 
an end of them/ There is a maxim of Phocylides, that ‘ when a man 
begins to be rich’ (or, perhaps, a little before) ‘he should practise 
virtue/ But how can excessive care of health be inconsistent with an 
ordinary occupation, and yet consistent with this maxim ? A man ought 
to be thinking of something, and he says that philosophy gives him the 
headache, and never does anything because he is always unwell. And this 
was the reason why Asclepius and his sons practised no such art. They 
were in the interest of the public, and did not wish to preserve useless 
lives, or raise up a puny offspring to wretched sires. Honest diseases 
they honestly cured ; and if a man was wounded he might drink a sack 
posset, — that did not hinder his recovery. But they would have nothing 
to do with persons whose lives were of no use either to themselves or to 
others, even though they might have made large fortunes out of them. 
And as to the story of Pindar, that Asclepius was slain by a thunderbolt 
for restoring a rich man to life, that is a lie ; following our old rule we 
must say either that he did not take bribes, or that he was not the son 
of a god. 

Glaucon then asks Socrates whether the best physicians and judges 
will not be those who have had the greatest experience of diseases and 
of crimes. Socrates is disinclined to place them in the same category. 
The physician should have experience of disease in his own body, for 
he cures with his mind and not with his body. But with the lawyer this 
is otherwise : he controls mind by mind ; and therefore he should have 
no experience of evil in his own mind. Where then is he to gain expe- 
rience ? How is he to be wise and also innocent P A good man when 
he is young is apt to be deceived by evil-doers, because he has no 
pattern of evil in himself; and therefore the judge should be advanced 
in years; his youth should have been innocent, and he should have 
acquired experience of evil late in life by extended observation. This 
is the ideal of a judge ; your mere detective is wonderful at suspicion 
and discovery, but when he has to do with good men he is at fault, 
foolishly imagining that every one is as bad as himself. Vice may be 
known of virtue, but cannot know virtue. Medicine and law will be 
healing arts to better natures ; but the evil body will be left to die by 
the one, and the evil soul will be put to death by the other. And the 
necessity for either will be greatly diminished by good music and good 
gymnastic. The former will give harmony to the soul ; the latter health 

INTRODUCTION. 

\ 

35 

to the body. Not that this division of music and gymnastic really cor- 
responds to soul and body, for both are equally concerned with the soul, 
which is tamed by the one and aroused and sustained by the other. 
The mere lover of gymnastic becomes a savage; the musician grows 
effeminate ; but the two together supply our guardians with their twofold 
nature. The passionate disposition which has too much of gymnastic is 
hardened and brutalized, the gentle temper of philosophy which has too 
much music becomes enervated. While a man is singing and twittering 
and pouring music like water through the funnel of his ears, the edge of 
his soul gradually wears away, and the passionate or spirited element is 
dissolved and liquefied. In the spiritless nature this is soon effected, 
and passion is converted into nervous irritability. In like manner the 
athlete is at first courageous, but soon degenerates into dulness ; his 
senses are never purged, and like a wild beast he is ready to do every- 
thing by blows and nothing by counsel or policy. These are the two 
principles in man, and the gods have given two arts corresponding to 
them, and not to the soul and body, as some vainly talk — music and 
gymnastic; the unity of which makes a harmony higher far than the 
concord of musical notes. And the true musician is he who attempers 
them — he shall be the presiding genius of our State. 

The next question is, Who are to be our rulers ? First, the elder must 
rule the younger ; and the best of the elders will be the best guardians. 
He who guards best is hp who loves best, and he who loves others has 
an interest in them Those then must be selected who have always been 
devoted to the interest of their country. And a watch must be put over 
them to discover whether at every epoch of life they have retained the 
• same opinions and held out against force and enchantment. For time 
and persuasion and the love of pleasure may seduce a man into a 
change of purpose, and force may compel him. And therefore we must 
choose for our guardians men of known firmness, who have been tried 
by many tests, like gold in the refiner’s fire, and who at every age have 
come out of such trials victorious and without stain in full command 
of themselves and their principles; having all their faculties in har- 
monious exercise for their country’s good. Those who attain this 
degree of virtue are worthy of the highest honours both in life and 
death. It would perhaps be better to speak of those whom we before 
called guardians as auxiliaries or allies, and to reserve the higher title 
for the more select class. 

D 2 

Digitized by Google 

3<> 

THE REPUBLIC. 

And now for one noble, useful lie, a lie upon a grand scale, to be the 
corner-stone of our State, — in the belief of which, O that we could train 
our rulers ! and at any rate let us make the attempt with the rest of the 
world. I know not how to give utterance to my ideas, and yet what I 
am going to tell is only a republication of the Phoenician story of Cadmus 
and his earthbom men — which has often happened in past times, but 
not in our own, for the age of miracles has ceased, and the world is an 
unbelieving world. I am ashamed to look you in the face as I repeat 
the audacious tale, which I would have you impart in regular gradation, 
first to the rulers, then to the soldiers, and lastly to the people. The lie 
is as follows : — The citizens shall be told that their youth was a dream, 
and that during all that time in which they seemed to be undergoing a 
process of education they were really being fashioned in the bowels of 
the earth, their alma mater and true parent ; they are her children, and 
therefore brothers and sisters to one another. ‘ I do not wonder at your 
being ashamed to propound such a fiction.’ There is more behind. 
These brothers and sisters have different natures, and some of them 
God made to rule; these he fashioned of gold, others of silver to be 
helps ; others again to be husbandmen and craftsmen, and these he 
made of brass and iron. But sometimes a golden parent may have a 
silver son, or a silver parent a golden son, and then nature orders a 
transposition of ranks ; the eye of the ruler must not be pitiful towards 
his offspring if he has to descend in the social scale ; for an oracle says 
‘ that the State will come to an end if governed by a man of brass.’ Is 
there any possibility of making our citizens believe all this ? * Not in the 
present generation, but in the next, perhaps yes.' 

Now let the earthbom men go forth under the command of their 
rulers, and look about and pitch their camp in a high place, which will 
be safe against enemies descending upon the fold, and also against 
insurrections from within. There let them sacrifice and set up their 
tents ; for soldiers they are to be and not shopkeepers, the watchdogs 
and guardians of the sheep ; and luxury and avarice will turn them into 
wolves and tyrants. Their habits and their dwellings should correspond 
to their education. They should have no property; their pay should 
only meet their expenses ; and they should have common meals. Gold 
and silver we will tell them that they have from God, and this divine 
gift in their souls they must not alloy with that earthly dross which 
passes under the name of gold. They only of the citizens may not 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

37 

touch it, or be under the same roof with it, or drink from it ; it is the 
accursed thing. Should they ever acquire houses or lands or money of 
their own, they will become householders and tradesmen instead of 
guardians, enemies and tyrants instead of helpers, and our society will 
be a world of ruin and confusion. 

The religious and ethical aspect of Plato’s education will hereafter be 
considered under a separate head. Some lesser points may be more 
conveniently noticed in this place. 

1. The constant appeal to the authority of Homer, whom, with a 
sort of grave irony, Plato, after the manner of his age, summons as a 
witness about ethics and psychology, as well as about diet and medicine ; 
attempting to distinguish the better lesson from the worse (p. 390), some- 
times altering the text from design (p. 388), and perhaps (389), more 
than once quoting or alluding to Homer inaccurately (pp. 391, 406), 
like the early logographers, turning Homer into prose (p. 393), and 
delighting to draw far-fetched inferences from his words, or to make 
ludicrous applications of them. These fanciful and humorous allusions 
add a charm to Plato’s style, and at the same time they have the effect 
of a satire on the follies of Homeric interpretation. The real, like the 
Platonic Socrates, as we gather from the Memorabilia of Xenophon, was 
fond of making similar adaptations, (i. 2, 58 ; ii. 6, 11.) 

2. In the third book of the Republic a nearer approach is made to a 
theory of art than anywhere else in Plato. His views may be summed 
up as follows : — True art is not fanciful and imitative, but simple and 
ideal, — the expression of the highest moral energy, whether in action or 
repose. To live among works of plastic art which are of this noble and 
simple character, or to listen to such strains, is the best of influences, — 
the true Greek atmosphere, in which youth should be brought up. That 
is the way to create in them a natural good taste, which will have a 
feeling of truth and beauty everywhere. For though the poets are to be 
expelled, still art is recognized as another aspect of reason — like love in 
the Symposium, extending over the same sphere, but confined to the 
preliminary education ; and this conception of art is not limited to strains 
of music or the forms of plastic art, but pervades all nature. Plato seems 
rather to desire to reconcile art and nature than to make an opposition 
between them. The ideal Republic of Plato, like the Athens of Pericles, 
has an artistic as well as a political side. 

38 

THE REPUBLIC. 

3. Plato makes the subtle remark that the physician had better not 
be in robust health ; and should have known what illness is in his own 
person. On the other hand, the judge ought to have had no similar 
experience of evil ; this should only be attained by him as the result of 
observation in after life ; and therefore, according to Plato, a young man 
is not fit to be a judge, as, according to Aristotle, he is not fit to be a 
hearer of moral philosophy. But it may be doubted whether this latter 
view is justified by experience. The union of gentleness and courage in 
book ii. at first seemed to be a paradox, yet was afterwards ascertained 
to be a truth. And had Plato pursued this question in a similar spirit, 
he might also have found that the intuitive perception of evil may be 
consistent with the abhorrence of it. There is a directness of aim in 
virtue which gives an insight into vice. And the knowledge of character 
is in some degree a natural sense independent of any special experience 
of good or evil. 

4. One of the most remarkable conceptions of the Republic, because 
un-Greek in character and also unlike anything that existed at all in that 
age of the world, is that of the transposition of ranks. In the Spartan 
state there had been indeed enfranchisement of Helots and degradation 
of citizens under special circumstances, but nothing like that ‘ open 
career’ which Plato promises to his citizens. Two principles are indi- 
cated by him: first, that there is a distinction of ranks dependent on 
circumstances prior to the individual ; second, that this distinction is and 
ought to be broken through by personal qualities. Here again, as in 
the Phaedrus, Plato shows a true sense of the nature of mythology, as 
capable of creation and adaptation to the wants of a State. Every Greek 
state had a myth respecting its own origin ; the Platonic republic may 
also have a tale of earthbom men. The gravity and verisimilitude with 
which the tale is told, and the analogy of Greek tradition, are a sufficient 
verification of the ‘ monstrous falsehood.’ Ancient poetry had spoken of 
a gold and silver, and brass and iron age succeeding one another, but 
Plato supposes these differences in the natures of men to exist together in 
a single state. Mythology supplies abundance of figures under which the 
world may be conceived (as Protagoras says, * the mythus is more inter- 
esting'), and also enables Plato to touch lightly on new principles without 
going into detail. He shadows forth a general truth, but he does not 
tell us by what steps the transposition of ranks is to be effected. Indeed 
throughout the Republic he allows the lower ranks to fade into the dis- 

INTRODUCTION. 

39 

tance. Nor is there any use in arguing strictly either from this or from 
other passages of the Republic, or in drawing inferences which were be- 
yond the vision of Plato. Aristotle, in his criticism on the position of the 
lower .classes, does not perceive that .the poetical creation is 1 like the air, 
invulnerable,’ and cannot be divided by the shafts of his logic. (2,5, 1 8 fol.) 

5. Lesser matters of style may also be remarked. (1) The affected 
ignorance of music, which is Plato’s way of expressing that he is passing 
lightly over the subject. (2) The tentative manner in which here, as in 
the second book, he proceeds with the construction of the State. (3) The 
description of the State sometimes as a reality, and then again as a work 
of imagination only ; these are the arts by which he sustains the reader’s 
interest. (4) The two companion pictures of the lover of litigation and 
the valetudinarian (p. 403), the satirical jest about the maxim of Pho- 
cylides, the manner in which the image of the gold and silver citizens 
is taken up into the subject, and the grave argument from the practice 
of Asclepius, should not escape notice. 

BOOK IV. Adeimantus said : ‘ Suppose a person to argue, So- 
crates, that you make your citizens miserable, and this by their own free- 
will; they are the lords of the city, and yet instead of having lands, 
and houses, and furniture, and gold, and silver, and sacrifices, and hos- 
pitalities of their own, like other men, they live as mercenaries and are 
always mounting guard.’ You may add, I replied, that they are on 
board wages, and have no money to spend on a journey or a lady of 
pleasure, which, as the world goes, is thought to be happiness. ‘ Well, 
suppose all this, what answer do you give?’ My answer is, that our 
guardians may or may not be the happiest of men, — I should not be 
surprised to find in the long-run that they were, — but this is not the aim 
of our constitution, which was designed for the good of the whole and 
not of any one part. If I went to a sculptor and blamed him for having 
painted the eye, which is the noblest feature of the face, not purple but 
black, he would reply : * The eye must be an eye, but you ought to look 
at the statue as a whole.' Now I can well imagine a fool’s paradise, in 
which everybody is eating and drinking, clothed in purple and fine linen, 
and potters lie on sofas and have their wheel at hand, that they may 
work a little when they please ; and cobblers and all the other classes of 
a State lose their distinctive character. And a State may get on without 
cobblers ; but when the guardians degenerate into boon companions, then 

40 

THE REPUBLIC. 

the ruin is complete. This would be very unlike our State, in which every 
man is expected to be doing his duty and receiving his share of happi- 
ness with the rest. I have another remark to make : — A middle condi- 
tion is best for artisans ; they should have money enough to buy tools, 
and not money enough to be independent of their business; — the 
guardians should look to this. And will not the same condition be best 
for our citizens ? They should have neither poverty nor riches, for the 
one is the parent of meanness and the other of luxury, and both of dis- 
content. ‘ But then, Socrates, how will our city go to war, not having 
the sinews of war, especially against a rich enemy?’ There may be a 
difficulty in fighting against one enemy, but there is no difficulty in fight- 
ing against two of them. In the first place, remember that the contest * 
will be carried on by trained warriors against well-to-do citizens: and 
might not a regular boxer upset more than one stout gentleman, stepping 
lightly back himself and making a sudden turn upon them — in hot 
weather especially ? * Yes, many a one.’ But suppose again, that before 
engaging we send ambassadors to one of the two cities, saying, ‘ Silver 
and gold we neither have nor can have, do you help us and take our 
share ;’ — who in such a case would choose to fight with the lean, wiry dogs, 
instead of joining with them against the fatted sheep ? ‘ But if the wealth 
of many states coalesce in one, shall we not be in danger?’ I am amused 
to hear you use the word ‘state’ of any but our own State. They are 
* states,’ but not ‘ a state,’ many in one ; — a game of states at which men 
play \ For every state, however small, has two nations struggling within 
her, which you may set one against the other. But our State, while at 
unity with herself and fixed in her principles, will be the mightiest of 
Hellenic states, and will always have numerous allies and few enemies. 

To the size of the state there is no limit but the necessity of unity; it 
must be neither too large nor too small to be one. This is a matter of 
secondary importance, like the principle of transposition which was inti- 
mated in the parable of the men dug out of the earth. The meaning 
was that every man should do that for which he was fitted, and be at one 
with himself, and then the whole city would be united. But all these 
things are secondary, if education, which is the great matter, be duly 
regarded. When the wheel has once been set in motion, the speed is 
always increasing; and each generation improves upon the preceding, 
both in physical and moral qualities. The care of the governors should 
1 In allusion to a game called cities or states (ir<5\cu.) 

INTRODUCTION. 

4i 

be directed to preserve music and gymnastic from innovation ; alter the 
songs of a country, and you will soon end by altering the laws. When 
Homer praises new songs, he must not be supposed to praise new kinds 
of song. Damon assures me that new chants cannot be introduced with- 
out danger to the whole political system. The change appears innocent 
at first, and begins in play ; but the evil soon becomes serious, working 
secretly upon the characters of individuals, then upon social and com- 
mercial relations, and lastly upon the institutions of a state ; and there 
is ruin and confusion everywhere. But if education remains in the estab- 
lished form, then the reverse follows ; there is a restorative process always 
going on; nor will any rules be needed for the lesser matters of life 
— such as when to sit down and when to stand, when to speak and when 
to be silent, and what mode of tonsure is the true pattern. Education 
will correct deficiencies and supply the power of self-government. Regu- 
lations about the appointment of judges and the order of causes, harbour 
and market duties, may be left ; let them take care of education, and edu- 
cation will take care of all other things. 

But without education they may mend and cobble and doctor as they 
please, they will make no progress, any more than a patient who asks 
the physician to cure him and will not give up his luxurious mode of 
living. If such persons are told that they will never improve unless 
they alter their habits, then they grow angry; their way of going on is 
charming. ‘ Charming, — nay, the reverse of charming.’ I see that these 
gentlemen are not in your good graces, nor the state which is like them. 
And such states there are which first make solemn ordinances that no 
one under penalty of death shall alter the constitution, and then suffer 
themselves to be flattered into and out of anything, and they flatter in 
return, and their rulers, under the influence of flattery, begin to add 
cubits to their stature, and imagine themselves to be eight feet high at 
least. When all the world is telling a man this and he has no measure, 
how can he believe otherwise ? ‘I am more inclined to pity the deceived 
than the deceivers.’ Don’t get into a passion : to see our statesmen trying 
their nostrums, and fancying that they can cut off at a blow the Hydra- 
like rogueries of mankind, is as good as a play. Minute enactments are 
superfluous in good states, and are useless in bad ones. 

And now what remains of the work of legislation ? Nothing for us ; 
but to Apollo the god of Delphi we leave the ordering of the greatest of 
all — that is to say, religion. Only our ancestral deity sitting upon the 

42 

THE REPUBLIC, 

centre and navel of the earth will be trusted by us if we have any sense 
in an affair of such magnitude. No foreign god shall be supreme in 
our realms. 

. . . Here, as Socrates would say, let us ‘ reflect’ (mcontontv) on what 
has preceded: thus far we have not spoken of the happiness of the 
citizens, but only of the well-being of the State. They may be the 
happiest of men, but this is not our principal aim in founding the State. 
Ancient philosophy thus lightly touches on the modern question of the 
relation of duty to happiness, of right to utility. 

First duty, then happiness, is the natural order of our moral ideas. 
The utilitarian principle is of value as a corrective of long-standing error, 
and presents a side of ethics which is apt to be neglected. It may be 
admitted further that right and utility are co-extensive, and that he who 
makes the happiness of mankind his object has one of the highest and 
noblest motives of human action. But utility is not the historical basis 
of morality ; nor the aspect in which moral and religious ideas commonly 
occur to the mind. The greatest happiness of the greatest number may 
be the far-off result of the divine government of the universe. The 
greatest happiness of the individual may be the indirect consequence of 
a life of virtue and goodness. But the first principle is an insufficient 
interpreter of the appearances of the world around us ; the second pre- 
sents virtue in a form which is hardly natural. The question reappears 
in the sphere of politics ; and all the more ideal systems of politics, as 
of ethics, agree either in denying the supremacy of utility or happiness, 
or in explaining the term in some other sense than that of material 
comfort or prosperity. This is the order of thought in Plato ; first, he 
expects his citizens to do their duty, and then under favourable circum- 
stances, that is to say, in a well-ordered State, their happiness is assured. 
That he was far from excluding the modern principle of utility in poli- 
tics, is sufficiently evident from other passages, in which the most bene- 
ficial is affirmed to be the most honourable (457 B), and also the most 
sacred (458 E). 

We may note (1) The manner in which the objection of Adeimantus 
here, as at the commencement of book vi, is designed to draw out and 
deepen the argument of Socrates. (2) The conception of a whole as 
lying at the foundation both of politics and of art, in the latter supplying 
the only principle of criticism, which, under the various names of har- 
mony, symmetry, measure, proportion, unity, the Greek seems to have 

INTRODUCTION. 

43 

applied to works of art (3) The requirement that the State should be 
limited in size, after the traditional model of a Greek state. (4) The 
humorous pictures of the lean dogs and the fatted sheep, of the light 
active boxer upsetting two stout gentlemen at least, of the * charming’ 
patients who are always making themselves worse ; or again, the playful 
assumption that there is no State but our own ; or the grave irony with 
which the statesman is excused who believes because he is told that he 
is eight feet high, and having nothing to measure with is happy in his 
ignorance. (5) The light and superficial manner in which religion is 
passed over when provision has been made for two great principles, — 
first, that religion should be based on the highest conception of the gods ; 
secondly, that the true national or Hellenic type shall be maintained. 

Socrates proceeds : But where amid all this is justice ? Son of Ariston, 
tell me where. Light a candle and search the city, and get your brother 
and the rest of our friends to help in seeking for her. ‘ Nonsense/ 
replied Glaucon, ‘ what were you saying about the impiety of deserting 
justice in the hour of need?’ Well, I said, as you remind me of this, I 
will lead the way, but do you follow. My notion is, that our State being 
perfect will contain all the four virtues — wisdom, courage, temperance, 
justice. If we eliminate the three first, the unknown remainder will be 
justice. 

First then, of wisdom : the State which we have called into being will 
be wise because politic. And policy is one among many kinds of skill, 
— not the skill of the carpenter, or of the worker in metal, or of the 
husbandman, but the skill of him who regards the interests of the whole 
State. And that is the skill of the guardians, who are a small class in 
number, far smaller than the blacksmiths, but if this small ruling class 
have wisdom, then the whole State will be wise ; in other words, wisdom 
is the virtue of the guardians. 

Our second virtue is courage, which we have no difficulty in finding 
in another class — that of soldiers. Courage may be defined as a sort of 
salvation — salvation of the opinions which law and education have pre- 
scribed concerning dangers. You know the way in which dyers first 
prepare the white ground and then lay on the dye of purple or of any 
other colour. The colours which are dyed in this way become fixed, 
and no soap or lye will ever wash them out. And laughable is the 
shabby washed-out look of any colour which has not been dyed in this 
way. Now the ground is education, and the laws are the colours ; and if 

44 

THE REPUBLIC. 

the ground is properly laid, neither the soapiness of pleasure nor the lye 
of pain or fear will wash them out. The power which preserves right 
opinion about danger I would ask you to call ‘courage/ adding the epithet 
‘political' or ‘civilized' in order to distinguish it from the brute courage 
of barbarians and from a higher courage which may hereafter be dis- 
cussed. 

Two virtues remain; shall we skip one and go to the other? * Let us 
rather take them in their order; first temperance, then justice.' More 
than the preceding virtues temperance suggests the idea of harmony. 
Some light is thrown upon the nature of this virtue by the amusing 
description of a man as master of himself — the absurdity of which is 
that the master is also the servant. The expression is really a term of 
praise, meaning that the better principle in a man masters the worse. 
There are in cities whole classes — of women, slaves and the like — who 
correspond to the worse, and a few only to the better; and in our State 
the former class are held under control by the latter. Now to which of 
these classes does temperance belong? ‘To both of them.’ And if in 
any state temperance dwells, that must be ours ; and we were right in 
describing temperance as a harmony which is diffused through the whole, 
making the dwellers in the city to be of one mind, and uniting the upper 
and middle and lower classes like the strings of an instrument, whether 
you suppose them to differ in wisdom, strength or money. This unity, 
in whatever way acquired, is called temperance. 

And now we are near the spot'; let us draw in and surround the cover 
and watch with all our eyes, lest justice should slip away and escape. 
Tell me if you see the thicket move first. ‘ Nay, I would have you lead.' 
Well then, offer up a prayer and follow. There is no path and the way 
is dark ; we must push on. I begin to see a track. ‘ Good news.’ It is 
there and will not escape. Why, Glaucon, our dulness of scent is quite 
disgraceful ! Shall we not be laughed at ? While we are straining our 
eyes at the distance, justice is tumbling out at our feet. We are as bad 
as the people who sweep the house to look for a thing which they have 
in their hands. Have you forgotten our old principle of the division 
of labour, or of every man doing his own business, concerning which 
we spoke at the foundation of the State — what but this was justice ? 
Such a notion of justice may fairly compete with wisdom and temper- 
ance and courage in the scale of political virtue. For is not every one 
having his own the great object of our courts of law ? and the great 

INTRODUCTION. 

45 

object of trade is that every man should do his own business. Not that 
there is much harm in a carpenter trying to be a cobbler, or a cobbler 
transforming himself into a carpenter ; but great evil may arise from the 
cobbler leaving his last and turning into a guardian or legislator, or 
when a single individual is trainer, warrior, legislator, all in one. And 
this evil is injustice, or every man doing another’s business. I do not 
say that at this point we are in a condition to arrive at a final conclusion. 
For the definition which we believe to hold good in states has yet to be 
tested by the individual. Having read the large letters we will now come 
back to the small. From the two together a brilliant light may be struck 
out. 

. . . Socrates proceeds to discover the nature of justice by a method 
of residues. Each of the three first virtues corresponds to one of the 
three parts of the soul, and one of the three classes in the State, although 
the third, temperance, has more of the nature of a harmony than the 
two first. If there be a fourth virtue, that can only be sought for in the 
relation of the three parts in the soul or classes in the State to one 
another. It is the most obvious and simple of all things, and for that 
very reason has not been found out. The definition here given of 
justice is verbally the same as one of the definitions given of temperance 
in the Charmides (162 A), which however is only provisional, and is 
afterwards rejected. The temperance and justice of the Republic may 
be distinguished as follows: — temperance is the virtue of a part only, 
justice of the whole soul. Temperance is one of three virtues, justice is 
universal virtue : temperance is the harmony of discordant elements ; 
justice is the perfect order by which all natures and classes do their own 
business, the right man in the right place, the division and co-operation 
of all the citizens. Justice, again, is a more abstract notion than the 
other virtues, and therefore, from Plato’s point of view, the foundation 
of them, to which they are referred and which in idea precedes them. 
The proposal to omit temperance is a mere trick of style intended to 
avoid monotony. (Cp. vii. 528.) 

There is a famous question in the earlier Dialogues of Plato (cp. Pro- 
tagoras 329, 330 ; Ar. Nic. Ethics, vi. 13. 6), ‘ Whether the virtues are one 
or many?’ This receives an answer which is to the effect that there are 
four cardinal virtues (now for the first time brought together in ethical 
philosophy), and one supreme over the rest, which is not like Aristotle's 
conception of universal justice, virtue relative to others, but the whole 

46 

THE REPUBLIC. 

of virtue relative to the parts. To this universal conception of justice 
or order in the first education and in the moral nature of man, the still 
more universal conception of the good in the second education, and in 
the speculative division, seems to succeed. Both might be equally 
described by the terms ‘ law,’ ‘ order,’ ‘ harmony but while the idea of 
good embraces all time and all existence, the conception of justice is not 
extended beyond man. 

. . . Socrates is now going to identify the individual and the State. But 
first he must prove that there are three parts of the individual soul. His 
argument is as follows : — Quantity makes no difference in quality. The 
word ‘just,’ whether applied to the individual or the State, has the same 
meaning. And the term ‘justice’ implied that the same three principles 
in the State and in the individual were doing their own business. But are 
they really three or one? There is a small matter for consideration. 

‘ A very small matter,’ is the ironical reply. Nay, the reverse of small ; 

I should rather think one which will never be brought to a conclusion 
by the methods which we are now employing ; there is a surer, but that 
is also a longer way, which would take up too much time. * The shorter 
will satisfy me.’ Well then, you would admit that the qualities of states 
mean the qualities of the individuals who compose them ? Ask the 
question why the Scythians and Thracians are passionate, or our own 
race intellectual, or the Egyptians and Phoenicians covetous, — there is no 
difficulty in replying that individuals are of such or such a character, but 
there is great difficulty in determining whether the several principles are 
one or three ; whether, that is to say, we reason with one part of our 
nature, desire with another, are angry with another, or whether the whole 
soul comes into play in each sort of action. This enquiry, however, re- 
quires a very exact definition of terms. The same thing in the same rela- 
tion cannot be affected in two opposite ways. But there will be no 
impossibility in a man standing still, yet moving his arms, or in a top 
which is fixed on one spot going round upon its axis. There is no 
necessity to mention all the possible exceptions; let us provisionally 
assume that opposites cannot do or be or suffer opposites in the same 
relation. And to the class of opposites belong assent and dissent, - 
desire and avoidance. And one form of desire is thirst and hunger : and 
here arises a new point,— thirst is thirst of drink, hunger is hunger of 
food ; not of warm drink or of a particular kind of food, with the single 
exception of course that the very fact of our desiring anything implies 

INTRODUCTION. 

47 

that it is good. When relative terms have no attributes, their correlatives 
have no attributes ; when they have attributes, their correlatives also have 
them. For example, the term ‘ greater' is simply relative to ‘less/ and 
knowledge refers to a subject of knowledge. But on the other hand, a 
particular knowledge is of a particular subject. Again, every science has a 
distinct character, which is defined by an object ; medicine, for example, is 
the science of health, although not to be confounded with health. Having 
cleared our ideas thus far, let us return to the original instance of thirst, 
which has a definite object — drink. Now the thirsty soul may feel two 
distinct impulses ; the animal one saying, Drink ; the rational one, which 
says, Do not drink, and is in direct contradiction to the former. Here 
are two contradictory acts of the soul ; the one derived from reason, the 
other from desire ; these two then are proved to be distinct principles in 
the soul. Is passion a third principle or, as our first impression may 
lead us to suppose, akin to desire? There is a story of a certain 
Leontius which throws some light on this question. He was coming 
up from the Piraeus by the way beneath the wall, and he passed a spot 
where there w'ere dead bodies lying by the executioner. He felt a longing 
desire to see them and also an abhorrence of them ; at first he turned 
away and shut his eyes, then, suddenly tearing them open, he said, — 
‘Take your fill, ye wretches, of the fair sight.’ Now is there not here a 
third principle which is often found to come to the assistance of reason 
against desire, but never of desire against reason ? This is passion or 
spirit, of the separate existence of which we may further convince our- 
selves by putting the following case : — When a man suffers justly, if he 
be of a generous nature he cannot chafe or boil or get into a state of 
righteous indignation at the hardships which he undergoes; but when 
he suffers unjustly, his indignation is his great support ; hunger and thirst 
cannot tame him; the spirit within him must do or die, until the voice 
of the shepherd, that is, of reason, bidding his dog bark no more, is 
heard within. This shows that passion is the ally of reason. Is passion 
then the same as reason? No, for the former exists in children and 
brutes ; and Homer affords a proof of the distinction between them 
when he says, * He smote his breast, and thus rebuked his soul.' 

And now, after much tossing in the argument, we have reached land, 
and are able to infer that the virtues of the state and of the individual 
are the same. For wisdom and courage and justice in the State are 
severally the wisdom and courage and justice in the individuals who 

48 

THE REPUBLIC . 

form the State. Each of the three classes will do the work of his own 
class in the State, and each part in the individual soul ; . reason, the 
superior, and passion, the inferior, will be harmonized by the influence 
of music and gymnastic. The counsellor and the warrior, the head and 
the arm, will act together in the town of Mansoul, and music and gym- 
nastic will put them in commission over the desires. The courage of 
the warrior is that quality which preserves a right opinion about dangers 
in spite of pleasures and pains. The wisdom of the counsellor presides 
in that small part of the soul which has authority and reason. The 
virtue of temperance is the friendship of this ruling and the subject- 
principle, both in the state and in the individual. Of justice we have 
already spoken ; and the notion before given may be further confirmed 
by common instances. Will the just state or the just individual steal, lie, 
commit adultery, or be guilty of impiety to gods and men ? ‘ No.' And 
is not the reason of this that the several principles in either do their own 
business? And justice is the quality which makes just men and just 
states. Moreover, our old division of labour, which required that there 
should be one man for one use, was a sort of dream or anticipation of 
this; — that dream has now been realized in justice, which begins by 
binding together the three chords of the soul, and then acts harmoniously 
in every relation of life. And injustice, which is the habit of being a 
busybody and of doing another man’s business, and which tries to rule 
and ought to serve, is the opposite of justice, and is inharmonious and 
unnatural, being to the soul what disease is to the body; for in the soul 
as well as in the body, good or bad actions produce good or bad habits. 
And virtue is the health and beauty and wellbeing of the soul, and vice 
is the disease and weakness and deformity of the soul. 

Again the old question returns upon us: Is justice or injustice the 
more profitable? The question has become ridiculous. For injustice, 
like mortal disease, is suicidal. Come up with me to the hill which over- 
hangs the city and look down upon the single form of virtue, and the 
infinite forms of vice or decline in states and individuals. Their name 
is legion; but there are four special forms of them, corresponding to the 
four forms of perversion in the State. And there is one form of the true 
state in which reason rules under one of two names, — monarchy and 
aristocracy. 

... In attempting to prove that the soul has three separate faculties, 
Plato takes occasion to discuss what makes difference of faculties. And 

INTRODUCTION. 

49 

the criterion which he proposes is difference in the working of the 
faculties. The same faculty cannot produce contradictory effects. But 
the path of early reasoners is beset by thorny entanglements, and he 
cannot proceed a step without first clearing the ground. This leads him 
into a tiresome digression, which is intended to explain the nature of 
contradiction. First, the contradiction must be at the same time and 
in the same relation. Secondly, no extraneous word must be introduced 
into either of the terms in which the contradictory proi>osition is ex- 
pressed : for example, thirst is of drink, not of warm drink. He is going 
to argue that if, by the advice of reason, or by the impulse of anger, a 
man is restrained from drinking, this proves that thirst, or desire under 
which thirst is included, is distinct from anger and reason. But suppose 
that we allow the term ‘ thirst' or ‘desire ' to be modified, and say an angry 
thirst, or bloody and revengeful desire, then the two spheres of desire 
and anger overlap and become confused. This case therefore has to 
be excluded. And still there remains an exception to the exception in 
the use of the term ‘good/ which is always implied in the object of desire. 
These are the discussions of an age before logic ; and any one who is 
wearied by them should remember that they are necessary to the clearing 
up of ideas in the first development of human faculties. Whether 
there is any higher or ideal sense in which two contradictions may be 
true, is a question which is not determined by Plato, though in the Par- 
menides and the Sophist he is not far from the solution. 

At the commencement of the discussion he speaks with contempt of 
the methods which are now in use, and seems to intimate some meta- 
physic of the future by which these and similar questions might be more 
surely resolved. In the sixth and seventh books he has given us a 
sketch of such a metaphysic ; but when Glaucon asks for the final reve- 
lation of the idea of good, he is put off with the declaration that he has 
not yet studied the preliminary sciences. How he would have filled up 
the sketch, or argued about such questions from a higher point of view, 
we can only conjecture. Perhaps he hoped to find some a priori method 
of developing the parts out of the whole ; or he might have asked which 
of the ideas contains the other ideas, and possibly have stumbled on the 
Hegelian identity of the ‘ ego’ and the ‘ universal.' The most certain and 
necessary truth was to Plato the universal ; and to this he was always 
seeking to refer all knowledge or opinion, just as in modern times we 
are always seeking to rest them on the opposite pole of experience. 

VOL. II. 

E 

50 

THE REPUBLIC . 

BOOK V. I was going to enumerate the four forms of vice or 
decline in states, when Polemarchus— he was sitting a little farther from 
me than Adeimantus — taking him by the coat and leaning towards him, 
said something in an undertone, of which I only caught the words, ‘ Shall 
we let him off?’ ‘Certainly not,' said Adeimantus, raising his voice. 
What or whom, I said, are you not going to let off? ‘You,’ he said. 
Why ? I again asked. ‘ Why, because we think that you are not 
dealing fairly with us in omitting women and children, of whom you 
slily dispose under the general formula that friends have all things in 
common.’ And am I not right in saying that? ‘ Yes/ he replied, ‘but 
there are many sorts of communism or community, and we want to 
know which of them is right. The company, as you have just heard, are 
resolved not to let you off without a further explanation of this matter.’ 
Thrasymachus said, ‘ Do you think that we have come hither to dig for 
gold, or to hear you discourse?' Yes, I said; but the discourse should 
be of a reasonable length. Glaucon added, ‘ Yes, Socrates, and there is 
reason in spending the whole of life in listening to such discussions ; but 
without further consideration of us proceed in your own manner, and tell 
us how this community is to be carried out, and how the interval between 
birth and education is to be filled up.’ Well, I said, the subject has 
several difficulties — What is possible ? is the first question. What is de- 
sirable? is the second. ‘Fear not,’ he replied, ‘for you are speaking 
among friends, who will put a fair and liberal construction on what 
is said by you.’ That, I said, is anything but a consolation ; I shall 
destroy my friends as well as myself. Not that I mind a little innocent 
laughter ; but he who kills the truth is a murderer. ‘ Then,’ said Glaucon, 
laughing, * in case you should murder us we will acquit you beforehand, 
and just as in a criminal cause he who is acquitted is not guilty, you 
shall be acquitted and not guilty.' 

Socrates proceeds : The guardians of our State are to be watch-dogs, 
and their properties and families must be ordered with a view to this. 
Dogs are not divided into hes and shes, nor do we take the masculine 
gender out to hunt and leave the females at home to look after their 
puppies. They have the same employments— the only difference be- 
tween them is that the one are stronger and the other weaker. But if 
women are to have the same employments as men, they must have the 
same education —they must be taught music and gymnastics, and the art of 
war. I know that a great joke will be made of their riding on horseback 

INTRODUCTION. 

5i 

and carrying weapons ; the sight of the naked old wrinkled women 
showing their agility in the palestra, will certainly not be a vision of 
beauty, and may be expected to become a famous jest. But we must 
not mind the wits ; there was a time when they might have laughed at 
our present gymnastics. All is habit: people have at last found out 
that the exposure is better than the concealment of the person, and 
now they laugh no more. Evil only should be the object of ridicule ; 
‘ Honi soi qui mal y pense.’ 

The first question is, whether women are able either wholly or par- 
tially to share in the employments of men. And here we may be 
charged with inconsistency in making the proposal at all. For we started 
originally with the division of labour ; and the diversity of employments 
was based on the difference of natures. But is there no difference 
between men and women? Nay, are they not wholly different? There 
was the difficulty, Glaucon, which made me unwilling to speak of family 
relations. However, when a man is out of his depth, whether in a pool 
or in an ocean, he can only swim for his life, and may hope to be 
saved by Arion’s dolphin, or some other miracle. Let us try then and 
find a way out, if we can. 

The argument is, that different natures have different uses, and the 
natures of men and women are said to differ. ‘ Exactly.’ But observe, 
Glaucon, that this is only a verbal opposition. We courageously repeat, 
different natures for different uses, never considering that the difference 
may be purely nominal and accidental ; for example, a bald man and a 
hairy man are opposed in a single point of view, but you cannot infer 
that because a bald man is a cobbler a hairy man ought not to be a 
cobbler. Now why should such an inference be erroneous ? Simply 
because the opposition between them is partial only, like the difference 
between a male physician and a female physician ; but not like the differ- 
ence between a physician and a carpenter. And if the difference of the 
sexes is only that the one beget and the other bear children, this does not 
prove that they ought to have distinct educations. Admitting that women 
differ from men in capacity, do not men equally differ from one another ? 
Has not nature scattered all the qualities which our citizens require, 
whether as philosophers or physicians or weavers or makers of cakes, 
indifferently up and down among the two sexes ? and even in the pecu- 
liar pursuits of women, are they not often ridiculously enough surpassed 
by men, though in some cases superior ? Women are the same in kind, 

52 

THE REPUBLIC. 

and have the same aptitude or want of aptitude for gymnastic and war, 
but in a less degree. One woman will be a good guardian, another not ; 
and the good must be chosen to be help-meets to our guardians. If 
however their natures are the same, the inference is that their education 
must also be the same ; there is no longer anything unnatural or impos- 
sible in a woman learning music and gymnastic. And this education 
will be the very best, far better than that of cobblers, and will train up 
the very best women, and nothing can be better for the State than this. 
Therefore let them strip, clothed in their chastity, and share in the toils 
of war and in the defence of their country ; he who laughs at them is a 
fool for his pains. 

The first wave is past, and the argument is compelled to admit that 
men and women have common duties and pursuits. A second and 
greater wave is rolling in — community of wives and children; is this 
expedient? is this possible? The expediency I do not doubt, but I 
am not so sure of the possibility. ‘Nay, I think that a considerable 
doubt will be entertained on both subjects.’ I meant to have escaped 
the trouble of proving the first, but as you have detected the little 
stratagem I must even submit. Only allow me to feed my fancy like 
the solitary in his walks, with a dream of what might be, and then I will 
return to the question of what can be. 

In the first place our rulers will enforce the laws and make new ones 
where they are wanted, and their allies or ministers will obey. You, as 
legislator, have already selected the men ; and now you shall select the 
womens After the selection has been made, they will live in common 
houses and have their meals in common, and will be brought together 
by a necessity more certain than that of mathematics. But they cannot 
be allowed to live in licentiousness ; that is an unholy and unlawful 
thing, which the rulers are determined to prevent. For the avoidance 
of this, holy marriage festivals will be instituted, and their holiness will 
be in proportion to their usefulness. And here, Glaucon, I should like 
to ask (as I know that you are a breeder of birds and animals), Do 
you not take the greatest care in the mating ? ‘ Certainly.’ And there 

is no reason to suppose that less care is required in the marriage of 
human beings. But then, our rulers must be physicians, and use many 
medicines in their treatment of the body corporate ; some falsehoods too, 
which are allowed by us in the practice of medicine. The good must be 
paired with the good as often as possible, and the bad with the bad as 

INTRODUCTION. 

53 

seldom as possible, and the offspring of the one must be reared, and the 
other destroyed ; this will be the only way of preserving the flock in 
prime condition. But how can this be accomplished ? The hymeneal 
festivals will be celebrated at times fixed with an eye to population, and 
then the brides and bridegrooms will meet, but not too often ; and by 
an ingenious system of lots the rulers will contrive that the brave only 
deserve the fair, and that those of inferior breed are paired with inferiors ; 
the latter will ascribe to chance what is really the invention of the rulers. 
And when children are born, the offspring of the brave and fair will be 
carried to an enclosure in a certain part of the city, and there attended 
by suitable nurses; the rest will be hurried awray to places unknown. 
The mothers will be brought to the fold and will suckle the children ; care 
however must be taken that none of them recognise her owrn offspring ; 
and if necessary other nurses may also be hired. The trouble of watch- 
ing and getting up at night will be transferred to attendants. * Then the 
wives of our guardians will have a fine easy time when they are in the 
family wray.’ And quite right too, I said, that they should. 

The parents ought to be in the prime of life, which for a man may 
be fixed at thirty years — from tw’enty-five, when he has ‘ passed the point 
at which the speed of life is greatest,' to fifty-five ; and at twenty years for 
a woman — from twenty to forty. Any one above or below those ages 
who partakes in the hymeneals shall be guilty of impiety ; also every one 
who forms a marriage connexion at other times. This applies to those 
who are within the specified ages, after which they may range at will, 
provided they avoid the prohibited degrees of parents and children, or 
of brothers and sisters ; the latter, however, are not absolutely pro- 
hibited, if a dispensation from the oracle be procured. ‘ But how shall 
we know the degrees of affinity, when all things are common?’ The 
answer is, that brothers and sisters are such as are bom seven and ten 
months after the espousals, and their parents are those w'ho are then 
espoused, and every one will have many children and every child many 
parents. 

Socrates proceeds : I have now to prove that this scheme is ad- 
vantageous and also consistent writh our entire polity. The greatest 
good of a State is unity ; the greatest evil, discord and distraction. And 
there will be unity where there are no private pleasures or pains or 
interests; where if one member suffer all the members suffer, if one 
citizen is touched all are quickly sensitive — and the least hurt to the 

54 

THE REPUBLIC . 

little finger of the State runs through the whole body and vibrates to 
the soul. For the true State has the feelings of an individual, and is 
injured as a whole when any part is affected. Every State has subjects 
and rulers, who in a democracy are called rulers, and in other States 
masters: but in our State they are called saviours and allies; and the 
subjects who in other States are termed slaves, are by us termed nur- 
tures and paymasters, and those who are termed comrades and col- 
leagues in other places, are by us called fathers and brothers. And 
whereas in other States members of the same government regard one of 
their colleagues as a friend and another as an enemy, in our State no 
man is a stranger to another ; for everybody whom he meets is bound 
to him by ties of blood, and these names and this way of speaking will 
have a corresponding reality — brother, father, repeated from infancy in 
the ears of children, will not be mere words. Then again the citizens 
will have all things in common, and having common property they 
will have common pleasures and pains. 

Can there be strife and contention among those who are of one mind ; 
or lawsuits about property when men have nothing but their bodies 
which they call their own ; or suits about violence and insult when they 
are all bound to defend one another ? — for young men will take the law 
into their own hands ; if they are angry they will fight, and this will be 
an antidote against the gathering of conspiracies. The old will correct 
the young, but no young man will strike an elder; two sentinels will 
hold him back, reverence and fear, — reverence which will prevent him 
from laying hands on his kindred, and fear that the rest of the family 
may retaliate. Moreover, they will be rid of the lesser evils of life; 
there will be no flattering of rich men for the sake of a dinner, or 
heaping up of money for the support of their families, or borrowing and 
not paying. But I need not enter further into particulars. Let me say 
in conclusion, that when compared with the citizens of other States, ours 
will be Olympic victors, and crowned with blessings greater still, — they 
and their children having a better maintenance during life, and after 
death an honourable burial. Nor has the happiness of the individual 
been sacrificed to the happiness of the State (cp. iv. 419 E); our Olympic 
victor has not been turned into a cobbler, but he has a happiness beyond 
that of any cobbler. At the same time, if any conceited youth begins 
to dream of appropriating the State to himself, we shall do well to read 
him the lesson out of Hesiod, that ‘ half is better than the whole.’ * If he 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION . 

55 

were to consult me, I should say to him, Slay where you are, having 
such a brave life.’ 

But is such a community possible ?: — as among other animals, so 
also among men ; and if possible, in what way possible ? About war 
there is no difficulty ; the principle of communism is adapted to that. 
Parents will train their children to the spectacle of war, as potters’ boys 
are trained to the business by looking on at the wheel. And to the 
parents themselves, as to other animals, the sight of their young ones will 
prove a great incentive to bravery. Young warriors must learn, but they 
must not run into danger, although a certain degree of risk is worth 
incurring when the benefit is great. The young creatures should be 
under the care of experienced veterans, and they should have wings — 
that is to say, swift and tractable steeds on which they will fly away and 
escape. One of the first things to be done is to teach a youth to ride. 

Cowards and deserters shall be degraded to the class of husbandmen ; 
gentlemen who allow themselves to be taken prisoners, may be presented 
to the enemy. But what shall be done to the hero? First of all he 
shall be crowned by all the youths in the army ; secondly, he shall 
receive the right hand of fellowship ; and thirdly, do you think that there 
is any harm in his being kissed ? for the brave should possess the fair, 
whether male or female. Have we not the authority of Homer for 
honouring brave men with ‘ perpetual chines/ which is an appropriate 
compliment, because meat is a very strengthening thing. Fill the bowl 
then, and give the best seats and meats to the brave — may they do them 
good ! And he who dies in battle will be at once declared to be of 
golden race, and shall become one of Hesiod’s guardian angels. He 
shall be worshipped in the manner prescribed by the oracle after death ; 
and not only he, but all other benefactors of the State who die in any 
other way, shall be admitted to the same honours. 

The next question is, How we shall treat our enemies ? Shall Hellenes 
be enslaved ? No; for there is too great a risk of the w'holc race passing 
under the yoke of the barbarians. Or, Shall the dead be despoiled? 
Certainly not ; for that sort of thing is an excuse for skulking, and has 
been the ruin of many an army. There is meanness and feminine 
malice in making an enemy of the dead body, when the soul which 
was the owner has fled — like a dog who cannot reach his assailants, and 
quarrels with the stones which are thrown at him instead. Thirdly, 
arms should not be offered up in the temples, for they are a pollution 

5<> 

THE REPUBLIC . 

when they are taken from brethren. And for similar reasons there 
should be a limit to the devastation of Hellenic territory — the houses 
should not be burnt, nor more than the annual produce carried off. 
For war is of two kinds, civil and foreign ; the first of which is properly 
termed ‘ strife/ and only the second ‘ war and war between Hellenes 
is in reality civil war — a quarrel in a family, which is ever to be regarded 
as unpatriotic and unnatural, and ought to be prosecuted with a view 
to reconciliation in a true phil-Hellenic spirit, as of those who would 
chasten but not utterly enslave. The war is not against a whole nation 
who are a friendly multitude of men, women, and children, but only 
against a few guilty persons ; and when they are punished peace will be 
restored. That is the way in which Hellenes should war against one 
another — and against barbarians, as they war against one another now. 

‘ But, my dear Socrates, in all this you are only getting away from 
the main question : Is such a State possible ? I grant all and more than 
you say about the blessedness of being one family — fathers, brothers, 
mothers, daughters, going out to war together ; but I want to ascertain 
the possibility of this ideal State/ If I loiter for a moment, I said, you 
make a descent upon me. The first wave and the second wave I have 
hardly escaped, and now you will certainly drown me with the third. 
When you see the mountain crest of the wave, I expect you to take 
pity. * Not a whit.' 

Then let me begin by reminding you that we were led to form our 
ideal polity in the search after justice, and the just man answered to the 
just State. Is this ideal at all the worse for being impracticable ? Would 
the picture of a perfectly beautiful man be any the worse because no 
such man ever lived? Can any reality come up to the idea? Nature 
will not allow words to be fully realized ; but if I am to try and realize 
the ideal of the State in a measure, I think that an approach may be 
made to the attainment of this by one or two, I do not say slight, but 
possible changes in the present constitution of States. I would reduce 
them to a single one — the great wave, as I call it, at which I expect your 
laughter to be as the letting out of water. Until then kings are phi- 
losophers, or philosophers are kings, cities will never cease from ill : no, 
nor the human race ; nor will our ideal polity ever come into being. I know 
that this is a hard saying, which few will be able to receive. ‘ Socrates, 
all the world will take off his coat and rush upon you with sticks and 
stones, and therefore I would advise you to prepare an answer to them.’ 

INTRODUCTION. 

57 

You got me into the scrape, I said. ‘ And I was right/ he replied ; 
* however, I will stand by you as a sort of do-nothing, well-meaning ally.’ 
Having the help of such a champion, I will do my best to maintain my 
position. And first, I must explain whom I mean and what sort of natures 
these are who are to be philosophers and rulers. As you are a man of 
pleasure, I dare say that you have not forgotten how indiscriminate lovers 
are in their attachments ; they love all, and turn blemishes into beauties. 
The snub-nosed youth is said by you to have a winning grace ; the beak 
of another has a royal look ; the featureless are faultless ; the dark are 
manly, and the fair are angels ; the sickly have a new term of endear- 
ment invented expressly for them, which is ‘ honey-pale/ Lovers of wine 
and lovers of ambition also desire their objects in every form. Now 
here comes the point : — The philosopher too is a lover of knowledge in 
every form ; he has an insatiable curiosity. ‘ But will curiosity make a 
philosopher ? Are they to be called philosophers who let out their eyes 
and ears at every Dionysiac festival in country as well as town?’ Those 
are not true philosophers, I said, but only an imitation. ‘ Then how are 
we to describe the true?’ 

You would acknowledge the existence of abstract ideas, such as 
justice, beauty, good, evil, which are severally one, yet in their various 
combinations appear to be many. Those who recognize these realities 
are philosophers ; whereas the other class hear sounds and see colours, 
and understand their use in the arts, but cannot attain to the true or 
waking vision of absolute justice or beauty or truth ; they have not the 
light of knowledge, but of opinion only, which is a dream. Perhaps 
he of whom we say the last will be angry with us; can we offer him 
any consolation without revealing the fact that he is not in his right 
mind ? Come, then, and let us reason with him ; if he has knowledge 
we rejoice to hear it, but knowledge must be of something which is, and 
not of something which is and is not. The latter is the object-matter of 
opinion, as being is of knowledge, and not-being of ignorance. Having 
distinct objects, opinion and knowledge must also have distinct faculties. 
And by faculties I mean powers unseen and distinguishable only by the 
difference in their objects, and opinion and knowledge differ in their 
objects, as the one is liable to err and the other is not, but is the 
mightiest of all faculties. If being is the object of knowledge, and not- 
being of ignorance, and these are the extremes, opinion must lie be- 
tween them, and may be called darker than the one and brighter than the 

Digitized by Google 

58 

THE REPUBLIC. 

other. This intermediate or contingent matter is and is not at the same 
time, and partakes both of existence and of non-existence. Now I would 
ask my good friend, who denies abstract beauty and justice, and affirms 
a many beautiful and a many just, whether everything he sees is not 
in some point of view different — the beautiful ugly, the pious impious, 
the just unjust ? Is not the double also the half, and are not heavy and 
light relative terms which pass into one another ? Everything is and is 
not, as in the old riddle — ‘ A man and not a man shot and did not shoot 
a bird and not a bird with a stone and not a stone.’ The mind cannot 
be fixed on either alternative, and these ambiguous, intermediate, erring, 
half-lighted objects, which have a disorderly movement in the region 
between being and not-being, are the proper matter of opinion, as the 
immutable objects are the proper matter of knowledge. And he who 
has only this uncertain perception of them grovelling in the world of 
sense is not a pliilosopher, but a lover of opinion only. 

. . . The fifth book is the new beginning of the Republic, in which the 
community of property and family are first maintained, and the transition 
is made to the kingdom of philosophers. For both of these Plato, after 
his manner, has been preparing in some chance words of book iv. (424 A), 
which fall unperceived on the reader's mind, as they are supposed at first 
to have fallen unperceived on the ear of Glaucon and Adeimantus. The 
* paradoxes’ of this book of the Republic will be reserved for another 
place ; a few remarks on the style, and some explanations of difficulties, 
may be briefly added. 

First, there is the image of the waves, which serves for a sort of 
scheme or plan of the book. The first wave, the second wave, the third 
and greatest wave come rolling in, and we hear the roar of them. All 
that can be said of the extravagance of Plato’s proposals is anticipated 
by himself. Nothing is more admirable than the hesitation with which 
he proposes the solemn text, ‘Until kings are philosophers,' &c.; or the 
reaction from the sublime to the ridiculous, when Glaucon describes the 
manner in which the new truth will be received by mankind. 

Some critical and metaphysical difficulties may also be noted. Among 
these may be reckoned the imperfect execution of the communistic plan 
— nothing is told us of the application of communism to the lower 
classes ; nor is the table of prohibited degree^ capable of being made 
out. Plato is afraid of incestuous unions, but at the same time he 

r 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION . 

59 

does not wish to bring before us the fact that the city would be divided 
into families of those born seven and nine months after each hymeneal 
festival. The singular expression which is employed to describe the age 
of five-and-twenty may, perhaps, be taken from some poet. 

In the delineation of the philosopher, the illustrations of the nature of 
philosophy derived from love are more suited to the apprehension of 
Glaucon, the Athenian man of pleasure, than to modem tastes or feel- 
ings. They are partly facetious, but also contain a germ of truth. That 
science is a whole remains a true principle of inductive as well as of 
metaphysical philosophy ; and the love of universal knowledge is still the 
characteristic of the philosopher in modern as well as in ancient times. 

At the end of the fifth book Plato introduces the figment of con- 
tingent matter, which occurs here for the first time in the history of phi- 
losophy. He did not remark that the degrees of knowledge in the sub- 
ject have nothing corresponding to them in the object. With him, a word 
must answer to an idea ; he could not conceive of an opinion which was 
an opinion about nothing. On the other hand, the conception of not- 
being was dark and mysterious to the mind of early thinkers (Sophist, 
254 A); they could not see that this terrible apparition which threatened 
destruction to all knowledge was only a logical determination. In the 
attempt to introduce order into the first chaos of human thought, Plato 
seems to have confused perception and opinion, and to have failed to 
distinguish the contingent from the relative. In the Theaetetus the first 
of these difficulties begins to clear up ; in the Sophist the second ; and 
for this, as well as for other reasons, both these dialogues are probably 
to be regarded as later than the Republic. 

BOOK VI. Having determined that the many have no knowledge 
of true being, and have no clear patterns in their minds of justice, 
beauty, truth, and that philosophers have such patterns, we have now to 
ask which of them shall be rulers in our State: who can doubt that 
philosophers should be chosen, if they have the other qualities which 
are required in a ruler ? And we may begin by observing, that they are 
lovers of the knowledge of the eternal and of all being ; they are lovers 
of truth and haters of falsehood ; their desires are absorbed in the 
interests of knowledge; there is no meanness in them, for they are 
spectators of all time and all existence ; and in the magnificence of their 
contemplation the life of man is as nothing to them, nor is death fearful. 

Digitized by Google 

6o 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Moreover, they are of a social, gracious disposition, equally free from 
cowardice and arrogance. They learn easily; they remember and do 
not forget; they are harmonious, well-regulated minds; truth flows to 
them sweetly by nature. Can the god of Jealousy himself find any fault 
with such an assemblage of good qualities ? 

Here Adeimantus interposes an objection. ‘ No man,’ he says, * can 
answer you, Socrates ; but every man feels that this is owing to his own 
deficiency in the power of arguing. He is carried away little by little, 
until at last the discrepancy between the premises and the conclusion is 
enormous. The argument is like a game of draughts in which the un- 
skilful player is reduced to his last move by his more skilful antagonist. 
And in this new game, of which words are the counters, the disputant 
is out-argued, and yet he may be in the right. He may know, in this 
very instance, that those who make philosophy the business of their 
lives, generally turn out rogues if they are bad men, and fools if they 
are good. What do you say to this?’ I should say that he is quite 
right. ‘ Then how is that admission reconcileable with the doctrine that 
philosophers should be kings ? ’ 

I shall answer you in a figure which will give you an opportunity of 
judging how poor a hand I am at the invention of allegories. The 
relation of good men to their governments is so peculiar, that in order 
to defend them I must take an illustration from that world of fiction 
in which painters find their winged dragons, camel-leopards, and the 
like. Conceive the captain, whether of a ship or of a fleet, taller by a 
head and shoulders than all his sailors, yet a little deaf, a little blind, and 
rather ignorant of the seaman’s art. The sailors are wanting to steer, 
although they know nothing and have learnt nothing of the art of steer- 
ing ; and they have a theory, which no one is allowed to doubt under pain 
of death, that the art cannot be learned. If the care of the helm is 
refused them, they drug the captain’s posset and bind him hand and 
foot ; having got rid of him, they take possession of the ship, and make 
themselves at home with the stores. He who joins in the mutiny is 
termed an able seaman, a good pilot, and what not ; they are not aware 
that the true pilot is another sort of man, who must observe the wind 
and the stars, and who must and will have authority — but such an one 
is called by them a fool, prater, star-gazer. And now, I said, do you 
interpret the parable to those who ask why the philosopher has such an 
evil name, and make them understand that not he, but those who refuse 

i 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

6 1 

to use him, are to blame for his uselessness. The philosopher should 
not blow a trumpet before him, or beg of mankind to be put in 
authority over them. The wise man is not to seek the rich man, but 
every man, whether rich or poor, must knock at the door of the phy- 
sician when he has need of him. Now the philosopher is the pilot — he 
whom in the parable they call star-gazer, and the sailors are the mob of 
politicians by whom he is rendered useless. Not that these are the worst 
enemies of philosophy, who is far more dishonoured by her own pro- 
fessing sons when they are corrupted by the world. Need I recall the 
original image of the philosopher? Did we not say of him just now, 
that he loved truth and hated falsehood, and that he could not rest in the 
multiplicity of phenomena, but was led by a sympathy in his own nature 
to the contemplation of the absolute ? All the virtues as well as truth, 
■who is the leader of them, took up their abode in his soul. But as you 
were observing, if we turned aside from this ideal to view the reality, 
we saw that the persons who are thus described, with the exception of 
a small and useless class, are utter rogues. 

The point which has to be considered, is the origin of this corruption 
in nature. Every one will admit that the philosopher, in our description 
of him, is a rare being. And what numberless causes tend to destroy 
these rare beings ! There is no good thing which may not be a cause 
of evil — not only health, wrealth, strength and rank, but the virtues them- 
selves, when placed under unfavourable circumstances. For as in the 
• animal or vegetable world the strongest seeds most need the accom- 
paniments of air and soil, so the best of human characters turn out the 
worst when they fall upon an unsuitable soil ; whereas weak natures 
hardly ever do any considerable good or harm ; they are not the stuff 
out of which either great criminals or great heroes are made. The 
philosopher follows the same analogy : if he have suitable training he is 
the best of all men; when surrounded by evil influences he becomes, 
if left to himself, the worst of all. Some persons say that the Sophists 
are the corrupters of youth, but do they really corrupt them in any 
appreciable degree? Is not public opinion the real Sophist who is 
everywhere present in those very persons, in the assembly, in the courts, 
in the camp, in the applauses and hisses of the theatre re-echoed by the 
surrounding hills ? Will not a young man's heart leap within him when 
he hears these sounds ? — will any education save him from being carried 
aw'ay in the torrent ? And this is not all. For if he will not yield to 

Digitized by Google 

62 

THE REPUBLIC . 

opinion, there follows the gentle compulsion of exile or death. What 
principle of rival Sophists or anybody else can overcome in such an 
unequal contest ? Characters there may be more than human, who are 
exceptions. God may save a man, but not his own strength. Further, 
I would have you consider that the hireling Sophist only gives back to 
the world their own opinions ; he is the keeper of the monster, who 
knows how to flatter or anger him, and observes the meaning of his 
inarticulate grunts. Good is pronounced to be what pleases him, and 
evil is what he dislikes, and truth and beauty have no other standard 
but the taste of the brute, and the rules which embody this are the 
Sophist's wisdom. This is no exaggeration of the case of those who 
make public opinion the test of truth, whether in art or in morals. The 
curse is laid upon them of being and doing what they approve, and 
when such men attempt first principles the failure is ludicrous. Think 
of all this, and ask yourself whether the world is likely to be a believer 
in the unity of the idea or in the multiplicity of phenomena. And the 
world if not a believer in the idea cannot be a philosopher, and cannot 
help, therefore, being a persecutor of philosophers. There is another 
evil: — the world docs not like to lose the gifted nature, and their way 
is to flatter the young [Alcibiades] into a magnificent opinion of his 
own capacity ; the tall, proper youth begins to expand, and is dreaming 
of kingdoms and empires. If at this instant a friend whispers to him, 

* Now the gods lighten thee ; thou art a great fool and must be 
educated;’ do you think that he will listen? Or suppose a better- 
nature, who is attracted towards philosophy, will they not make Her- 
culean efforts to spoil and corrupt him ? Are we not right in saying 
that philosophical parts, no less than riches, may divert a man from 
philosophy ? Men of this class often become politicians — they are the 
authors of great mischief in states, and sometimes also of great good. 
And thus philosophy is deserted by those who are her natural protectors, 
and others enter in and dishonour her ; and this is the reason why she 
has such an evil name. Vulgar little minds see the land open and rush 
from the prisons of the arts to get a place in her temple; a clever 
mechanic, having a soul coarse as his body, thinks that he will gain caste 
by making a profession of philosophy. For philosophy, even in her 
fallen estate, has a dignity of her own. He is like a bald little black- 
smith’s apprentice, who having just got out of durance and made a 
little money, washes and decks himself out as a bridegroom, and marries 

INTRODUCTION. 

63 

his master’s daughter ; and will not the offspring of such marriages be 
vile and bastard, devoid of truth and nature ? ‘ They will.’ Small, then, 

is the remnant of genuine philosophers ; there may be a few who are 
citizens of small states, in which politics are not worth thinking of, or 
who have been detained by Theages’ bridle of ill health ; for my own 
case of the oracular sign is almost singular, and too rare to be worth 
mentioning. And these few, when they have tasted the pleasures of phi- 
losophy, and taken a look at that den of thieves and place of wild beasts, 
which is human life, will go out of the world and stand aside from the 
storm under the shelter of a wall, and try to preserve their own inno- 
cence and to depart in peace. 4 A great work, too, will have been accom- 
plished by them/ Great, yes, but not the greatest ; for man is a social 
being, and can only attain the highest development in the society which 
is best suited to him. 

Enough, then, of the causes why philosophy has such an evil name. 
Another question is, Which of existing states is suited to her ? There 
is none ; for at present she has no abiding-place on earth, and may be 
compared to the exotic seed which degenerates in a strange soil. Only 
in her proper state will she be shown to be of heavenly growth. ‘ And 
is her proper state ours or some other?’ Ours in all points but one, 
which was left undetermined. It was said, indeed, that some living mind 
or witness of the legislator was needed in states. But we were afraid to 
enter upon a subject of such difficulty, and now the question recurs and 
has not grown easier : — How may philosophy be safely studied ? Let us 
bring her to the light of day, and make an end of the inquiry. 

In the first place, nothing can be worse than the present mode of 
study. The fashion is, that for a few years in the days of youth, and in 
the intervals of household matters and business, persons get a smattering 
of philosophy, but are off as soon as they approach the real difficulty, 
which is dialectic. Later, they perhaps accompany a dilettante friend 
at his request to a lecture on philosophy. Years advance, and the sun 
of philosophy like that of Heracleitus sets, unlike that of Heracleitus 
never to rise again. Now this order ought to be entirely reversed ; 
education should never finish — beginning with gymnastics in youth, 
which will minister to philosophy in after life ; but as the man strengthens 
increasing the gymnastics of the soul. Then, when nature begins to 
decay and active life is over, he should return to philosophy again and 
for ever. “You are in profound earnest, Socrates, and I think that the 

Digitized by Google 

64 

THE REPUBLIC . 

world will be equally earnest in withstanding you — no one more likely 
than our friend Thrasymachus.’ Do not make a quarrel between Thra- 
symachus and me, who were never enemies and are now very good 
friends. And I shall do my best to persuade him and all mankind, and 
if I cannot, I will at any rate lay a foundation for another life, when after 
coming to the birth again we hold similar discourses. ‘ That is a long 
time hence.’ Not long, I said, in comparison with eternity. I do not 
wonder that the many will not believe, for they have never seen natural 
unities of ideas, but only ingenious juxtapositions ; not free and generous 
thoughts, but tricks of controversy and quips of law; — a perfect man 
ruling in a perfect state, even a single one they have not known. And 
we foresaw that there was no chance of perfection either in states or 
individuals until a necessity was laid upon that second small class of 
philosophers — not the rogues, but those whom we called useless — of 
taking the government; or until the sons of kings were inspired with 
a true love of philosophy. Whether in the infinity of past time there 
ever has been, or is in some distant land, or will be hereafter, an ideal 
such as we have described, we will stoutly maintain that there has been 
and might be such a state wherever the Muse of philosophy rules. Will 
you say that the wrorld is of another mind ? O, my friend, do not revile 
the world I They will be of another mind if they are gently entreated, and 
learn the true nature of the philosopher. Who can hate a man who loves 
them ? or be jealous of one who has no jealousy ? A few such natures 
there may be, but this is not the common temper. Consider, again, 
that the many hate not the true but the false philosophers — the hirelings 
wrho are not the shepherds and who enter in by force, and are always 
speaking of persons and not of principles, which is the reverse of the 
philosophical spirit. Whereas the true philosopher has no time to think 
of the squabbles of men ; his eye is fixed on the eternal order in accord- 
ance with which he moulds himself into the Divine image (and not him- 
self only, but the characters of other men), and is the creator of the 
virtues private as well as public. And when mankind see that the 
happiness of states is only to be found in that image, will they be 
angry with us for attempting to delineate it ? ‘ Certainly not. But what 

will be the process of delineation?’ The artist will do nothing until he 
has made a tabula rasa ; on this he will draw the constitution of a state, 
glancing often at the divine truth of nature, and from that deriving the 
godlike among men, mingling the two elements, rubbing out and painting 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

<>r> 

in, until there is a perfect harmony or fusion of the divine and 
human. But perhaps the world will doubt the existence of such an 
artist. What will they doubt ? That the philosopher is a lover of truth, 
having a nature akin to the best ? — and if they admit this will they still 
quarrel with us for making philosophers our kings ? ‘ They will be less 
disposed to quarrel/ Let us assume then that they make peace. Still, 
a person may hesitate about the probability of the son of a king being a 
philosopher. And we do not deny that they are very liable to be cor- 
rupted; but yet surely in the course of ages there might be one excep- 
tion— and one is enough. If one son of a king were a philosopher, 
and had obedient citizens, he might bring the ideal polity into being, 
and then the impossible would become possible. 

I gained nothing by evading the troublesome questions which arose 
concerning women and children. I will be wiser now and acknowledge 
that we must go to the foundation of another question : What is to be 
the education of our guardians? It was agreed that they were to be 
lovers of their country, and were to be tested in the refiner’s fire of 
pleasures and pains, and those who came forth pure and remained fixed 
in their principles were to have honours and rewards in life and after 
death. That was what we were saying, when, like a coy maiden, the argu- 
ment put on a veil and turned into another path. There was an unwilling- 
ness to make the assertion which I now hazard, — that our guardians 
must be philosophers. You remember all the contradictory elements, 
intellectual as well as moral, which met in the philosopher. How diffi- 
cult to find them all in a single person ! The steadfast, immoveable 
nature which has not the wit to run away in battle is apt to go to sleep 
at a lecture on philosophy. And yet both elements, as we were saying, 
are necessary, and therefore both were to be tested in the pleasures and 
pains of which we spoke ; and now we must further add, that they are 
to be tested in the highest branches of knowledge. You will remember 
also, that when we spoke of the virtues mention was made of a longer 
road, which you were satisfied to leave unexplored. ‘ Enough seemed 
to us to have been said.’ Enough, my friend ; but what is enough while 
anything remains wanting ? The watchman, of all men, should not linger 
in the search after truth ; he must be prepared to take the longer road, 
or he will never reach the summit of perfection. ‘ What, is there a 
higher region of truth above the four virtues?' Yes, there is; and of 
the virtues too he must not only get an outline, but a clear and distinct 

VOL. II. f 

Digitized by Google 

66 

THE REPUBLIC. 

vision. (Strange that we should be so precise about trifles, so confused 
and inaccurate about the highest truths !) And of this truth you have 
heard before a hundred times at least, although you put on that pro- 
voking air of unconsciousness — the idea of good, about which we know 
so little, and without which though a man gain the world he has no 
good of it. Some people imagine that the good is wisdom ; but this 
involves a circle, — the good is wisdom, wisdom is of the good. 
According to another notion the good is pleasure; but this is literally 
•blasphemous, and involves the absurdity that good is bad, because there 
are bad pleasures as well as good. Again, the good must have reality ; 
a man may desire the appearance of virtue, but he will not desire the 
appearance of good. And ought our guardians then to be ignorant of 
this supreme principle, of which every man has a presentiment, and 
upon which all things depend, and without which no man has any real 
knowledge of anything ? ‘ But, Socrates, what is this supreme principle, 

knowledge or pleasure, or what other ? You may call me a troublesome 
fellow, but I say that you have no business to be always repeating the 
doctrines of others instead of giving us your own.’ Have I any business 
to say what I do not know? ‘You may offer an opinion/ And wall 
the crooked wray of opinion content you where you ought to require 
the clearness of certainty, or will you be satisfied with the cloudiness of 
opinion w'hen you might have the light of science ? * I will ask you to 
give such an explanation of the good as you did before of “temperance” 
and “justice;” that will be enough/ I wish that I could, but the force 
that is in me is not sufficient to reach to the height of the knowledge of 
the good. To the parent or principal I cannot introduce you, but to the 
child begotten in his image, which I may compare with the interest on 
the principal, I will. (Audit the account, and do not let me give you a 
false statement of the debt.) You remember our old distinction of the 
many beautiful and the one beautiful, the particular and the universal, 
the objects of sight and the objects of thought ? Did you ever consider 
that the objects of sight imply a faculty of sight which is the most 
complex and costly of our senses, requiring not only objects of sense, 
but also a medium, which is light; without which the sight will see 
nothing and the colours will remain blank ? Which light is the noble 
bond between the perceiving faculty and the thing perceived, and the 
god who gives us light is the sun, who is the eye of the day, but is not 
to be confounded with the eye of man. The sun, or eye of the day, is 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

67 

what I call the child of the good, standing in the same relation to the 
visible world as the good to the intellectual. When the sun shines the 
eye sees, ancf in the intellectual world where truth is, there is sight and 
light. Now that wliich is the sun of intelligible natures, is the idea of 
good, the cause of knowledge and truth, yet fairer and other than they 
are, and standing in the same relation to them in which the sun stands 
to light. O inconceivable height of beauty, which is above knowledge 
and above truth ! (‘You cannot surely mean pleasure,’ he said. Peace, I 
replied.) And this idea of good, like the sun, is also the cause of growth 
and the author not of knowledge only, but of being, and exceeding being 
in dignity and power. Glaucon said, with a comical air : ‘ By Heaven ! that 
is a reach of thought more than human.’ I must lay the exaggeration 
to your door, for you made me utter my fancies. ‘ Nay,’ he said, ‘ go on 
with the image, for I know that there is more behind.' There is, I said ; 
and bearing in mind our tw'O suns or principles, imagine further their 
corresponding worlds — one of the visible, the other of the intelligible — 
you may assist your fancy by figuring the distinction under the image of 
a line divided into tw'o unequal parts, and may again subdivide each 
part into two lesser segments representative of the stages of knowledge 
in either sphere. The lower half of the lower or visible sphere will 
consist of shadows and reflections, and the upper half of the same 
sphere will contain real objects in the w'orld of nature or of art. The 
sphere of the intelligible will also have two divisions, — one of mathe- 
matics, in which there is no ascent but all is descent ; no inquiring into 
premises, but only drawing of inferences. In this division the mind 
wrorks with figures and numbers, the images of which are taken not from 
the shadow's, but from the objects, although the truth of them is seen 
only with the mind’s eye ; and they are used without being analysed as 
hypotheses. Whereas in the other division reason uses the hypotheses 
as stages or steps in the ascent to the idea of good, to w'hich she fastens 
them, and then again descends, walking firmly in the region of ideas, 
and of ideas only, in her ascent as well as descent, and finally resting in 
them. ‘ I partly understand your meaning, which is that the ideas of 
science are superior to the hypothetical, metaphorical conceptions of 
geometry and the other arts, as with some degree of inaccuracy they 
may be termed, and the latter conceptions you refuse to make the sub- 
ject of pure intellect, because they have no first principle, although when 
resting on a first principle, they pass into the higher sphere.’ You 

68 

THE REPUBLIC. 

understand me very well, I said. And now to those four divisions of 
knowledge you may assign four corresponding faculties — pure intelli- 
gence to the highest sphere ; active intelligence to the second ; to the 
third, faith ; to the fourth, the perception of likenesses — and the clear- 
ness of the several faculties will be in the same ratio as the truth of the 
objects to which they are related. 

% 

* 

.... Like Socrates, we may recapitulate the virtues of the philosopher. 
In language which seems to reach beyond die horizon of that age and 
country, he is described as ‘ the spectator of all time and all existence/ 
He has the noblest gifts of nature, and makes the highest use of them. 
All his desires are absorbed in the love of wisdom, which is the love of 
truth. None of the graces of a beautiful soul are wanting in him ; 
neither can he fear death, or think much of human life. The ideal of 
modern times hardly retains the simplicity of the antique ; there is not 
the same originality either in truth or error which characterized the 
Greeks. The philosopher is no longer living in the unseen, nor is he 
sent by an oracle to convict mankind of ignorance ; nor does he regard 
knowledge as a system of ideas leading upwards by regular stages to 
the idea of good. The eagerness of the pursuit has abated ; there is 
more division of labour and less of comprehensive reflection upon nature 
and human life as a whole ; more of exact observation and less of anti- 
cipation and inspiration. Still, in the altered conditions of knowledge, 
the parallel is not wholly lost; and there may be a use in translating 
the conception of Plato into the language of our own age. The phi- 
losopher in modern times is one who fixes his mind on the laws of 
nature in their sequence and connexion, not on fragments or pictures of 
nature ; on history, not on controversy ; on the truths which are acknow- 
ledged by the few, not on the opinions of the many. He is aware of 
the importance of ‘ classifying according to nature,' and will try to ‘ sepa- 
rate the limbs of science without breaking them/ (Phaedr. 265 E.) There 
is no part of truth, whether great or small, which he will dishonour ; and 
in the least things he will discern the greatest. (Parmen. 1 30 C.) Like 
the ancient philosopher, he sees the world pervaded by analogies, but 
he can also tell ‘ why in some cases a single instance is sufficient to 
prove a law/ w'hile in other cases a thousand examples would prove 
nothing. He inquires into a portion of knowledge only, because the 
whole has grow’n too vast to be embraced by a single mind or life. He 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

69 

has a clearer conception of the divisions of science and of their relation 
to the mind of man than was possible to the ancients. Like Plato, he 
has a vision of the unity of knowledge, not as the beginning of phi- 
losophy to be attained by a study of elementary mathematics, but as 
the far-off result of the working of many minds in many ages. He is 
aware that mathematical studies are preliminary to almost every other ; 
at the same time, he will not reduce all varieties of knowledge to the 
type of mathematics. Pie too must have a nobility of character, without 
which genius loses the better half of greatness. Regarding the world as 
a point in immensity, and each individual as a link in a never-ending 
chain of existence, he will not think much of human life, or be greatly 
afraid of death. 

Adeimantus objects first of all to the form of the Socratic reasoning, 
thus showing that Plato is aware of the imperfection of his own method. 
He brings the accusation against himself which might be brought against 
him by a modem logician — that he extracts the answer because he 
knows how to put the question. In a long argument words are apt to 
change their meaning slightly, or premises may be assumed or conclu- 
sions inferred with rather too much certainty or universality ; the varia- 
tion at each step may be unobserved, and yet at last the divergence 
becomes considerable. Hence the failure of attempts to apply arith- 
metical or algebraic formulae to logic. The imperfection, or rather 
the higher and more elastic nature of language, does not allow words to 
have the precision of numbers or of symbols. And this quality in lan- 
guage impairs the force of an argument which has many steps. 

The objection, though fairly met by Socrates in this particular in- 
stance, may be regarded as implying a reflection upon the Socratic 
mode of reasoning. And here, as at p. 506 B, Plato seems to intimate 
that the time had come when the negative and interrogative method of 
Socrates must be superseded by a positive and constructive one, of 
which examples are given in some of the later dialogues. Adeimantus 
further argues that the ideal is wholly at variance with facts ; for expe- 
rience proves philosophers to be either useless or rogues. Contrary to all 
expectation (cp. p. 497 for a similar surprise) Socrates has no hesitation 
in admitting the truth of this, and explains the anomaly in an allegory, 
first characteristically depreciating his own inventive powers. In this 
allegory the people are distinguished from the professional politicians, 
and, as at pp. 499, 500, are spoken of in a tone of pity rather than of 

70 

THE REPUBLIC. 

censure under the image of * the noble captain who is not very quick in 
his perceptions.’ 

The uselessness of philosophers is explained by the circumstance that 
mankind will not use them. The world in all ages has been divided 
between contempt and fear of those who employ the power of ideas and 
know no other weapons. Concerning the other class, Socrates argues 
that the best is most liable to corruption ; the finer nature is more likely 
to suffer from alien conditions. There are some kinds of excellence 
which spring from a peculiar delicacy of constitution ; this is evidently 
true of the poetical and imaginative temperament, which often seems to 
depend on impressibility, and hence can only live in a certain atmo- 
sphere. The man of genius has greater pains and greater pleasures, 
greater powers and greater weaknesses, and often a greater play of 
character than is to be found in ordinary men. He can assume the dis- 
guise of virtue or disinterestedness without having them, or veil personal 
enmity in the language of patriotism and philosophy, — he can say the 
word which all men are thinking, and is ever ready to take various forms 
as the situation changes. An Alcibiades, a Mirabeau, or a Napoleon the 
First, are born either to be the authors of great evils in states, or ‘ of great 
good when they are drawn in that direction.’ Yet the thesis, ‘ corruptio 
optimi pessima,’ cannot be maintained generally or without regard to 
the kind of excellence which is corrupted. For the alien conditions 
which are corrupting influences to one nature, may be the elements of 
culture to another. 

Plato would have us consider how easily the best natures are over- 
powered by public opinion, and what efforts the rest of mankind will 
make to get possession of them. The world, the church, their own pro- 
fessions, any political or party organization, are always carrying them 
off their legs and teaching them to apply high and holy names to their 
own prejudices and interests. The ‘ monster' corporation to which they 
belong judges right and truth to be the pleasure of the community. 
The individual becomes one with his order ; or, if he resists, the world is 
too much for him, and will sooner or later be revenged on him. This 
is, perhaps, a one-sided but not wholly untrue picture of the maxims 
and practice of mankind when they ‘ sit down together at an assembly,' 
either in ancient or modern times. 

When the higher natures are corrupted by politics, the lower take 
possession of the vacant place of philosophy. This is described in one 

INTRODUCTION. 

7* 

of those continuous images in which the argument, to use a Platonic 
expression, ‘ veils herself,’ and which is dropped and reappears at inter- 
vals. Then arises the question, — Why the citizens of states are inimical 
to philosophy? The answer is, that they do not know her. And yet 
there is also a better mind of the many ; they would believe if they were 
taught. But hitherto they have only known a conventional imitation of 
philosophy, words without thoughts, systems which have no life in 
them ; a [divine] person uttering the words of beauty and freedom, the 
friend of man holding communion with the Eternal, and seeking to 
frame the state in that image, they have never known. The same double 
feeling respecting the mass of mankind has always existed among men. 
The first thought is that the people are the enemies of truth and right ; 
the second, that this only arises out of an accidental error and con- 
fusion, and that they do not really hate those who love them, if they 
could be educated to know them. 

In the latter part of the sixth book, three questions have to be con- 
sidered: i st, the nature of the longer and more circuitous way, which 
is contrasted with the shorter and more imperfect method of book iv. ; 
2nd, the heavenly pattern or idea of the state; 3rd, the relation of the 
divisions of knowledge to one another and to the corresponding faculties 
of the soul. 

1. Of the higher method of knowledge in Plato we have only a 
glimpse. Neither here nor in the Symposium, nor yet in the Philcbus, 
does he give any clear explanation of his meaning. He would probably 
have described his method as proceeding by regular steps to a system of 
universal knowledge, which inferred the parts from the whole rather than 
the whole from the parts. This ideal logic is not the method which 
was pursued by him in the search after justice ; there, like Aristotle 
in the N. Ethics, he is arguing from experience and the common use of 
language. But at the end of the sixth book he conceives of a higher 
method, in which all ideas are only steps or grades or moments of 
thought, forming a connected whole or intellectual world, which is self- 
supporting, and in which consistency is the test of truth. I11 modern 
times, indeed, we hardly need to be reminded that the process of ac- 
quiring knowledge is here confused with the contemplation of absolute 
knowledge. In all science a priori and a posteriori truths mingle in 
various proportions. But Plato erroneously imagines that the syn- 
thesis is separable from the analysis, and that the method of science 

Digitized by Google 

72 

THE REPUBLIC. 

can anticipate science. In entertaining such a vision of a priori know- 
ledge he is sufficiently justified, or at least his meaning may be suffi- 
ciently explained by the similar attempts of Descartes, Kant, Hegel, and 
even of Bacon himself, in Modern Philosophy. Nor can we deny that 
in ancient times knowledge must have stood still, and the human mind 
been deprived of the very instruments of thought, if philosophy had been 
strictly confined to the results of experience. 

2. Plato supposes that when the tablet has been made blank the 
artist will fill in the lineaments of the ideal state. Is this a pattern laid 
up in heaven, or mere vacancy on which he is supposed to gaze with 
wondering eye ? The answer is, that such ideals are framed partly by 
the omission of particulars, partly by imagination perfecting the form 
which experience supplies. (Phaedo, 74.) Plato represents these ideals in 
a figure as belonging to another world ; and in modern times the idea will 
sometimes seem to precede, at other times to co-operate with the hand 
of the artist. As in science, so also in creative art, there is a synthetical 
as well as an analytical method. One man will have the whole in his 
mind before he begins ; to another the processes of mind and hand will 
be simultaneous. 

3. There is no difficulty in seeing that Plato’s divisions of knowledge 
are based, first, on the fundamental antithesis of sensible and intellectual 
which pervades the whole pre-Socratic philosophy ; in which is implied 
also the opposition of the permanent and transient, of the universal and 
particular. But the age of philosophy in which he lived seemed to re- 
quire a further distinction; — numbers and figures were beginning to 
separate from ideas. The world could no longer regard justice as a 
cube, and was learning to see, though imperfectly, that the abstractions 
of sense were distinct from the abstractions of mind. Between the 
Eleatic being or essence and the shadows of phenomena, the Pytha- 
gorean philosophy of number found a place, and was, as Aristotle re- 
marks, a conducting medium from one to the other. (Metaph. 1, 6, 4.) 
Yet the passage from one to the other is really imaginary. Moral phi- 
losophy has no connexion with mathematics ; number and figure are the 
abstractions of time and space, not the expressions of purely intellectual 
conceptions. When divested of metaphor, a straight line or a square 
has no more to do with right and justice than a crooked line with vice. 
The figurative association was mistaken for a real one; and thus the 
three latter divisions of the Platonic scheme were constructed. 

INTRODUCTION. 

73 

There is more difficulty in comprehending how he arrived at the first 
term of the series, which is nowhere else mentioned, and has no refer- 
ence to anything else in his system. Nor indeed does the relation of 
shadows to objects correspond to the relation of numbers to ideas. 
Probably Plato has been led by the love of analogy (cp. Timaeus, 
p. 32 B) to make four terms instead of three, although the objects per- 
ceived in both divisions of the lower sphere are equally objects of sense. 
He is also preparing the way, as his manner is, for the shadows of images 
at the beginning of the seventh book, and the imitation of an imitation in 
the tenth. The line may be regarded as reaching from unity to infinity, 
and is divided into two unequal parts, and subdivided into two more; 
each lower sphere is the multiplication of the preceding. Of the four 
faculties, faith in the lower division has an intermediate position, con- 
trasting equally with the vagueness of the perception of shadows (tbcacrla) 
and the higher certainty of understanding (diavoia) and reason (w>0s). 

The difference between understanding and mind or reason ( vovs ) is 
analogous to the difference between acquiring knowledge in the parts 
and the contemplation of the whole. True knowledge is a whole, and 
is at rest ; consistency and universality are the tests of truth. To this 
self-evidencing knowledge of the whole the faculty of mind is supposed 
to correspond. But there is a knowledge which is incomplete and in 
motion always, because unable to rest in the subordinate ideas. Those 
ideas are called both images and hypotheses — images because they are 
clothed in forms of sense, hypotheses because they are assumptions only, 
until they are brought into (a fancied) connexion with the idea of good. 

The method of Socrates is hesitating and tentative, awaiting the fuller 
explanation of the idea of good, and of the nature of dialectic in the 
seventh book. The imperfect intelligence of Glaucon, and the reluctance 
of Socrates to make a beginning, mark the difficulty of the subject The 
allusion to Theages' bridle and to the oracular sign, which here, as 
always in Plato, is only prohibitory ; the reference to another state of 
existence which is unknown to Glaucon in the tenth book ; the surprise 
in the answers at pp. 487 and 497 ; the fanciful irony of Socrates, where 
he pretends that he can only describe the strange position of the phi- 
losopher in a figure of speech ; the original remark that the Sophists, 
after all, are only the representatives and not the leaders of public 
opinion ; the picture of the philosopher standing aside in the shower of 
sleet under a wall ; the ‘ right noble thought ’ that the highest truths 

74 

THE REPUBLIC . 

demand the greatest exactness; the hesitation of Socrates in returning 
once more to his well-worn theme of the idea of good ; the ludicrous 
earnestness of Glaucon — are characteristic and interesting features. 

BOOK VII. After this I took up my parable, and said : Imagine 
human beings living in a sort of underground den which has a mouth wide 
open towards the light, and behind them a breastwork such as marionette 
players might use for a screen ; and there is a way beyond the breast- 
work along which passengers are moving, holding in their hands various 
works of art, and among them images of men and animals, wood and 
stone, and some of the passers are talking and others silent. * A strange 
parable,’ he said, ‘ and strange captives.’ They are ourselves, I replied ; 
and they see nothing but the shadows which the fire throws on the wall 
of the cave; to these they give names, and if we add an echo which 
returns from the wall, the voices of the passengers will seem to proceed 
from the shadows. Suppose now that you suddenly turn them round 
and make them look with pain and grief to themselves at the real 
images ; will they believe them to be real ? Will not their eyes be 
dazzled, and will they not try to get away from the fire to something 
which they are able to behold without blinking ? And suppose further, 
that they are dragged up a steep and rugged ascent into the presence 
of the sun himself, will not their eyes be darkened with the excess of 
light ? Some time will pass before they get the habit of perceiving at 
all ; and at first they will be able to perceive only shadows and reflec- 
tions in the water; then they will recognize the moon and the stars, 
and will at length behold the sun in his own proper place as he is. 
Last of all they will conclude : — This is he who gives us the year and 
the seasons, and is the author of all that we see. IIow will they rejoice 
in passing from darkness to light 1 How worthless to them will seem 
the honours and glories of the den or cave out of which they came ! 
As Homer says: ‘Better to be the servant of a poor master than a 
prince over all the dead.’ And now imagine further, that they descend 
into their old habitations ; — in that darkness visible they will not see as 
well as their fellows, and will not be able to compete with them in the 
measurement of the shadows on the wall ; there will be many jokes 
about the man who went on a visit to the sun and lost his eyes — men 
should not do such things — and if they find anybody trying to set free 
and enlighten one of their number, they will put him to death, if they 

1 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

75 

can catch him. Which things are an allegory : The cave or den is the 
world of sight, the fire is the sun, the way upwards is the way to know- 
ledge, and in the world of knowledge the idea of good is last seen and 
with difficulty, but when seen is inferred to be the author of good and 
right — parent of the lord of light in this world and of truth and un- 
derstanding in the other. And those who attain to the beatific vision 
are always going upwards, and are unwilling to descend into political 
assemblies and courts of law. Their eyes are apt to blink at the images 
or shadows of images which they behold in them. They cannot enter 
into the ideas of those who have never in their lives understood the 
relation of the shadow to the substance. Now blindness is of two 
kinds, and may be caused either by passing out of darkness into light 
or out of light into darkness, and a man of sense will distinguish be- 
tween them — he will not laugh equally at both of them, but the blindness 
which arises from fulness of light he will deem blessed, and pity the 
other ; or if he laugh at the blinking idiot looking up at the sun, he will 
have more reason to laugh than the inhabitants of the den. There is a 
further lesson taught by this parable of ours. Some persons fancy that 
instruction is like giving eyes to the blind, but we say that the faculty 
of sight was always there, and that the soul only requires to be turned 
round towards the light. And this is conversion ; other virtues are 
almost like bodily habits, and may be acquired in the same manner, but 
intelligence has a diviner life, and is indestructible, turning either to 
good or evil according to the direction given. Did you never observe 
how the soul of a clever rogue peers out of his eyes, and the more 
clearly he sees, the more evil he does ? Now if you take such an one 
and circumcise his passions, and cut away from him the leaden weights 
which drag him down and keep the eye of his soul fixed upon the 
ground, the same faculty in him will be turned round, and he will 
behold the truth as clearly as he now discerns his meaner ends. And 
have we not decided that our rulers must neither be so uneducated as to 
have no fixed rule of life, nor so over-educated as to be unwilling to leave 
their paradise for the business of the world ? And we must choose out 
the natures who are most likely to ascend to the light and knowledge 
of the good, and not allow them to do as they do now. I mean to say 
that they must not be allowed to remain in the region of light, but must 
be forced down again among the captives in the den to partake of their 
labours and honours. ‘Is not this hard? and what if they had rather 

76 

THE REPUBLIC . 

not?’ You should remember, my friend, that our purpose in framing 
the State was not that our citizens should do what they like, but that 
they should serve the State for the common good of all. May we not 
fairly say to our philosopher, — Friend, we do you no wrong ; for in 
other States philosophy grows wild, and a wild plant owes nothing to 
the gardener, but you we have trained to be the rulers and kings of our 
hive, and therefore we must insist on your descending into the darkness 
of the den ? You must, each of you, take your turn, and become able 
to use your eyes in the dark, and with a little practice you will see ten 
thousand times as well as those who quarrel about the shadows, whose 
knowledge is a dream only, whilst yours is a waking reality. It may be 
that the saint or philosopher who is best fitted, may also be the least in- 
clined to rule, but necessity is laid upon him, and he must no longer live 
in the heaven of ideas. And this will be the salvation of the State. For 
those who rule must not be those who are desirous to rule ; and if you can 
offer to our citizens a better life than that of rulers there will be a chance 
that the rich, not only in this world’s goods, but in virtue and wisdom, 
may bear rule. And the only life which is better than the life of political 
ambition is that of philosophy, which is also the best preparation for the 
government of a State. * 

Then now comes the question, — How shall we create our rulers; 
what way is there from darkness to light? How like departed spirits 
may they be raised from the world below into the upper air? The 
change is effected by philosophy, which is not the spinning round of 
an oyster, but the conversion of a soul from night to day, from becoming 
to being. And what sort of training will draw the soul upwards ? Our 
former education had two branches, — gymnastic, wrhich was occupied 
with the body, and music, the sister art, which infused a sort of harmony 
into mind and literature ; but neither of these sciences gave any promise 
of doing w'hat we want. What have w>e left ? All that remains to us 
is that universal science w'hich is the primary element of all the rest. 
♦What is that?’ A small matter — one, two, three — or in other words, 
number, of w'hich I say that all arts and sciences are partakers. ♦ Very 
true.’ Including the art of war ? ♦ Yes, certainly.’ Then there is some- 
thing very ludicrous about Palamedes in the tragedy, coming in and 
saying that he had invented number, and counted the ranks and set in 
order the ships. For if Agamemnon could not count his feet (and with- 
out number howr could he?) he must have been a pretty sort of general 

INTRODUCTION. 

77 

indeed. No man should be a soldier who cannot count, and indeed he 
is hardly to be called a man. But I am not speaking of these practical 
applications of arithmetic, for number, in my view, is rather to be re- 
garded as a conductor to thought and being. I will explain what I 
mean by the last expression : — Things sensible are of two kinds ; the 
one class irritate the mind, while in the other the mind acquiesces. Now 
the irritating class are the things which suggest contrast and relation. 
For example, suppose that I hold up to the eyes three fingers — a fore 
finger, a middle finger, a little finger — the sight equally recognizes all 
three fingers, but cannot distinguish which is first, second, or third. Or 
again, suppose two objects to be relatively great and small, these ideas 
of greatness and smallness are supplied not by the sense, but by the 
mind. And the perception of their contrast or relation quickens and 
sets in motion the mind, which is puzzled by the confused intimations of 
sense, and has recourse to number in order to find out whether the 
things indicated are one or more than one. Number replies that they 
are two and not one, and are to be distinguished from one another. 
Again, the sight beholds great and small, but only in a confused chaos, 
and not until they are distinguished does the question arise of their 
respective natures, leading on to the distinction between the visible and 
intellectual. And that was what I meant when I spoke of irritants to 
the intellect ; I was thinking of the contradictions which arise in per- 
ception. The idea of unity, for example, like that of a finger, does not 
arouse thought unless involving some conception of plurality ; but when 
the one is also the opposite of one, the contradiction gives rise to reflec- 
tion. An example of this is afforded by any object of sight ; and what 
is true of one is true of all number. It raises the mind out of the 
foam and flux of generation to the contemplation of being, having lesser 
military and retail uses also. The retail use is not required by us ; but 
as our guardian is to be a soldier as well as a philosopher, the military 
one may be retained. No science can be more suitable for our higher 
purpose, when pursued for the sake of knowledge only, and not in the 
spirit of a shopkeeper. Great is the power of arithmetic in giving ab- 
straction ; for numbers are pure abstractions, and the true arithmetician 
indignantly denies that his unit is capable of division. You may divide, 
but he insists that you are only multiplying ; his one is not material or 
divisible into parts, but an unvarying and absolute equality; and this 
shows the purely intellectual character of his study. Note also the great 

78 

THE REPUBLIC. 

power which arithmetic has of sharpening the wits ; no other discipline 
is equally severe, or an equal test of ability in general, or equally im- 
proving to a stupid man. 

Let our second branch of education be geometry. * I can easily see,’ 
replied Glaucon, ‘ that in manoeuvring an army or taking up a position, 
the skill of the general will be more than doubled by his knowledge of 
geometry.' Not much will be required for this purpose ; the use of 
geometry, to which I should rather refer, is the assistance given by it in 
the contemplation of the idea of good, compelling the mind to look at 
true being, and not at generation only. Any one who is the least of a 
mathematician is aware that the present mode of pursuing these studies 
is mean and ridiculous ; they are made to look downwards to the arts, 
and not upwards to eternal existence. The geometer is always talking 
of squaring, subtending, apposing, as if he had in view action rather 
than knowledge; whereas the knowledge of the eternal is the real 
object of geometry. The study tends to elevate the soul ; to draw 
upwards what is tending downwards ; and may also have lesser uses in 
war and military tactics, and in improving the reasoning faculties. 

Shall we propose as a third branch of our education — astronomy? 

4 Very good,' replied Glaucon; ‘the knowledge of the heavens is good 
at once for husbandry, navigation, military tactics.’ I like your way of 
giving useful reasons for everything in order to conciliate the world. 
Nor do I deny that there is a difficulty in proving to mankind that 
education is not only useful information but an illumination and puri- 
fication of the soul, better than ten thousand eyes, for by that alone is 
truth seen. Now, will you appeal to mankind in general or to the phi- 
losopher ? or would you prefer to look to yourself only ? ‘ Every man 

is his own best friend/ Then take a step backward, for we are out of 
order, and insert the third dimension which is of solids, after the second 
which is of planes, and then you may proceed to solids in motion. But 
the properties of the third dimension can hardly be said to be as yet 
discovered. The study is not popular and has not the patronage of the 
State, nor is the use of it fully recognized; the difficulty is great, and 
the votaries of the study are full of conceit and impatient of direction. 
Still the charm of the pursuit wins upon men, and, if the State would 
lend a little assistance, there might be great progress made. ‘ Very true,’ 
replied Glaucon, ‘ I admit the charm ; and I understand you now to 
begin with plane geometry, and to place next solid geometry, which you 

Z_L 

|by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

79 

omitted as being a pursuit likely to raise a smile ; thirdly, astronomy, or 
the motion of solids.’ Yes, I found the more haste the less speed. 
‘ Very good,’ he said; ‘ and, now that the missing link is supplied, letrus 
proceed to astronomy/ 

‘ About astronomy I am willing to speak in your lofty strain. No one 
can fail to see that the contemplation of the heavens draws the soul 
upwards.’ I am an exception, then; astronomy as studied at present 
appears to me to draw the soul not upwards, but downwards. Star- 
gazing is just looking up at the ceiling — no better ; a man may float on 
his back by land or by water — he may look up or look down, but 
there is no science in that. The vision of knowledge of which I speak 
is seen not with the eyes, but with the mind. All the magnificence of 
the heavens is but the embroidery of a copy which falls far short of the 
divine Original, and teaches nothing about the absolute harmonies or 
motions of things. They are like mathematical diagrams, drawn by the 
hand of Daidalus or any other great artist, which may be used for illustra- 
tion, but no mathematician would seek to obtain from them true concep- 
tions of equality or numerical relations. How ridiculous then to look for 
these in the map of the heavens, in which the imperfection of matter 
comes in everywhere as a disturbing element, marring the symmetry of 
day and night, of months and years, of the sun and stars in their courses. 
Only by problems can we place astronomy on a truly scientific basis. 
Let the heavens alone, and exert the intellect. 

Still, mathematics admit of other applications, as the Pythagoreans 
say, and we agree. There is a sister science of harmonica! motion 
adapted to the ear as astronomy is to the eye, and there may be other 
applications also. Let us inquire of the Pythagoreans about them, not 
forgetting that we have a higher aim, which is the relation of these 
sciences to the idea of good. The error which pervades astronomy 
also pervades harmonics. The musicians put their ears in the place 
of their minds. ‘ Yes/ replied Glaucon, ‘ I like to see them laying their 
ears alongside of their neighbours’ faces — some saying, “ that’s a new 
note,” others declaring that the two notes are the same.’ Yes, I said ; 
but you mean the gentlemen who are always twisting and torturing the 
strings of the lyre, and who quarrel about the tempers of the strings, as 
though they were human beings. These empirics are not the people of 
whom I am speaking ; I refer rather to the Pythagorean harmonists, whom 
we were about to consult. Their error is, that they investigate only the 

Digitized by Google 

8o 

THE REPUBLIC . 

numbers of the consonances which are heard, and ascend no higher, — 
of the true numerical harmony which is unheard, and is only to be 
found in problems, they have not even a conception. ‘ That last,’ he 
said, * must be a marvellous thing.’ A thing of value, I replied, if pursued 
with a view to the good — if pursued in any other spirit, useless. 

All these sciences are the prelude of the strain, and are profitable if 
they are regarded in their natural relations to one another. * I dare 
say, Socrates,’ said Glaucon ; ‘ but such a study will be an endless busi- 
ness.' What study do you mean — of the prelude, or what ? For all these 
things are only the prelude, and you surely do not suppose that a mere 
mathematician is also a dialectician ? * Certainly not. In all my expe- 
rience I have hardly ever known a mathematician who could reason.’ 
And yet, Glaucon, is not true reasoning that hymn of dialectic which is 
the music of the intellectual world, and which was by us compared to 
the effort of sight, when from beholding the shadows on the wall we 
arrived at last at the images which gave the shadows ? Even so the dia- 
lectical faculty withdrawing from sense arrives by the pure intellect at 
the contemplation of the idea of good, and never rests but at the very 
end of the intellectual world. And the royal road out of the cave into 
the light, and the blinking of the eyes at the sun and turning to con- 
template the shadows of reality — not the shadows of an image only; 
this progress and gradual acquisition of a new faculty of sight by the 
help of the mathematical sciences, is the elevation of the soul to the 
contemplation of the highest ideal of being. * I agree in what you say, 
though I do not fully understand you.' 

And now, leaving the prelude, let us proceed to the hymn. ‘ What, 
then, is the nature of dialectic, and what are the paths which lead 
thither?’ Dear Glaucon, you cannot follow me here. There can be 
no revelation of the absolute truth to one who has not been disciplined 
in the previous sciences. But that there is a science of absolute truth, 
which is attained in some way very different from those now practised, 
I am confident. For all other arts or sciences are relative to the wants 
and opinions of men, and are designed for generation and produc- 
tion, or again for the preservation and support of life ; and the mathe- 
matical sciences are but a dream and hypothesis, never attaining to the 
dignity of true knowledge, because never analysing their own principles. 
Dialectic only does away with hypotheses, and rises to the principle which 
is above them, converting and gently leading the eye of the soul out 

INTRODUCTION . 

8 1 

of the barbarous slough of ignorance into the light of the upper world, 
with the help of the arts which we have been describing— arts, as they 
may indeed be termed, although they require some other name implying 
greater clearness than opinion and less clearness than science, which 
may be called understanding. And thus we get four names — two for 
intellect and two for opinion, — reason or mind, understanding, faith, 
perception of likenesses, which make a proportion — being : generation 
: : intellect : opinion — and knowledge : faith : : opinion : perception of like- 
nesses. Dialectic may be further described as that science which defines 
and explains the essence or being of each nature, which distinguishes 
and abstracts the good, and is ready to do battle against all opponents 
in the cause of good. This is that knowledge without which life is but 
a sleepy dream ; and many a man is in his grave before he is well 
waked up. And would you have the children of your ideal State, 
who are to be your governors, intelligent beings, or stupid as posts? 
‘ Certainly not the latter.’ Then you must train them in dialectic. 
This is the highest knowledge and the coping-stone of all other 
knowledge. 

I dare say that you have not forgotten the selection of the rulers ; the 
process of selection may now be carried a step further : — They must be 
not only firm and valiant, and, as far as possible, good-looking, and 

of manners noble and grand, but must also have the qualities which will 

% 

be likely to profit by education; that is to say, they must have keen- 
ness and be quick at learning, for the soul soon gets tired of mental 
gymnastics in which the toil is not shared by the body. And they must 
be retentive, solid, diligent, laborious natures, who combine intellectual 
with moral virtues, — not lame and one-sided, diligent in bodily exercise 
and indolent in mind, or conversely ; — not a maimed soul, which hates 
falsehood and yet unintentionally is always losing the pearl of truth in 
the mire of ignorance ; not a bastard or feeble person, but sound in 
wind and limb, and in perfect condition for the great gymnastic trial of 
the mind. Justice herself can find no fault with natures such as these, 
who will be the saviours of our State ; disciples of another sort would 
only make philosophy more ridiculous than she is at present. Forgive 
my enthusiasm ; I had forgotten that we were not in earnest and became 
excited ; when I see philosophy trampled under foot, I am angry at the 
authors of her disgrace. * I did not notice that you were more excited 
than you ought to have been.’ But I felt that I was. Now do not let us 

VOL. II. o 

Digitized by Google 

82 

THE REPUBLIC. 

forget another point in the selection of our disciples — that they must be 
young and not old. For Solon is mistaken in saying that old men can 
be always learning— no more than they can be always running. Youth 
is the time of study, and here we must remember that the mind is free 
and dainty, and, unlike the body, must not be made to work against the 
grain. Learning in youth should be a sort of play, in which the natural 
bent is detected. As in training them for war the young dogs should only 
taste blood, but when the necessary gymnastics are over which divide 
life between sleep and bodily exercise, then the education of the soul will 
become a more serious matter. At twenty years of age, after various 
trials in which 4 muscular philosophy’ is not to be neglected, a selection 
must be made of the more promising disciples, with whom a new epoch 
of education will begin. The sciences which they have hitherto learned in 
fragments will now be viewed in a more comprehensive way, and brought 
into relation with each other and with true being ; the faculty of com- 
bining them is the test of real speculative and dialectical ability. And 
afterwards there shall be trials for still higher honours ; and at thirty a 
further selection shall be made of those who are able to withdraw from 
the world of sense into the abstraction of ideas. And here, according 
to present experience, there is great danger that a negative dialectic 
may fill them with iniquity. The danger may be illustrated by a parallel 
case: — Imagine a person who has been brought up in wealth and 
luxury amid a crowd of flatterers, and who is suddenly informed that 
he is a supposititious son. He has hitherto honoured his supposed 
parents and disregarded the flatterers, and now he does the reverse ; — 
this is just what happens with a man’s principles. There are certain 
doctrines which he learnt at home and which had a sort of parental 
authority over him. Presently he finds that imputations are cast upon 
them ; a troublesome querist comes and asks, 4 What is the just and 
good?’ or proves that virtue is vice and vice virtue, and his mind be- 
comes unsettled, and he ceases to love, honour and obey them as he 
had hitherto done. He is seduced into the life of pleasure, and becomes 
a lawless person and a rogue. The case of such speculators is very 
pitiable, and, in order that our thirty years’ old pupils may not deserve 
this pity, let us take every possible care that young persons do not study 
philosophy too early; a man should have some ballast in his compo- 
sition before he begins. For a young man is a sort of puppy who only 
plays with an argument, and is reasoned into and out of his opinions 

INTRODUCTION. 

83 

every day; they set upon their neighbours tossing and goring them, 
and bring themselves into discredit and philosophy with them. A man 
of thirty has too much sense to run on in this way ; he will argue and 
not merely contradict, and will give a degree of weight and dignity to 
the pursuit of philosophy. This is a caution which, like all the previous 
ones, is intended to impress harmony and steadiness of character on 
our disciples. What time shall we allow for this second gymnastic 
training of the soul ? — say, twice the time required for the gymnastics of 
the body; six, or perhaps five years, to commence at thirty, and then 
for fifteen years let the student go down into the den, and command 
armies, and gain experience of life. At fifty let him return to the end of 
all things, and have his eyes uplifted to the idea of good, and order his 
life after that pattern ; if necessary, taking his turn at the helm of State, 
and training up others to be his successors. When his time comes he 
shall depart in peace to the islands of the blest. He shall be honoured 
with sacrifices, and be worshipped as a god if the Pythian oracle ap- 
proves; and at any rate, he shall be revered as a man. 

And now the statues of our rulers are finished, and you have only to 
add that the women will share in all things with the men. And you will 
admit that our State is not a mere aspiration, and may really come into 
being in the way which we have described, when there shall arise philo- 
sopher-kings, one or more, who will despise the pomps and vanities of this 
present world, and will be the servants of justice only in the administra- 
tion of the State. ‘And how will they commence their administration?’ 
The first step will be to send away into the country all those who are 
more than ten years of age, and begin on those who are left. ‘ That 
will be a very great saving of time.’ 

... At the commencement of the sixth book, Plato anticipated his 
explanations of the relation of the philosopher to the world in an alle- 
gory; in this, as in other passages, following the order which he pre- 
scribes in education, and proceeding from the concrete to the abstract. 
At the commencement of book vii., under the figure of a cave having 
an opening towards a fire and a way upwards to the true light, he 
returns to view the divisions of knowledge, exhibiting familiarly, as in a 
picture, the result which had been hardly won by a great effort of 
thought in the previous discussion ; at the same time casting a glance 
onward at the dialectical process, which is represented by the way 

o 2 

Digitized by Google 

84 

THE REPUBLIC. 

leading from darkness to light. The shadows, the images, the reflection 
of the sun and stars in the water, the stars and sun themselves, severally 
correspond, — the first, to the realm of fancy and poetry, — the second, to 
the world of sense, — the third, to the abstractions or universals of sense, 
of which the mathematical sciences furnish the type, — the fourth and 
last to the same abstractions, imagined to be seen in the unity of the 
idea, from which they derive a new meaning and power. The true 
dialectical process begins with the contemplation bf the real stars, and 
not mere reflections of them, and ends with the recognition of the sun, 
or idea of good, as the parent not only of light but of warmth and 
growth. To the divisions of knowledge the stages of education partly 
answer; — first, there is the early education of childhood and youth in 
the fancies of the poets, and in the laws and customs of the State ; — then 
there is the training of the body to be a warrior athlete, and a good 
servant of the mind; — and thirdly, after an interval follows the educa- 
tion of later life, which begins with mathematics and proceeds to phi- 
losophy in general. 

There seem to be two great aims in the philosophy of Plato, — first, to 
realize abstractions ; secondly, to connect them. According to him, the 
true education is that which draws men from becoming to being and to 
a comprehensive survey of all being. He desires to develop in the 
human mind the faculty of seeing the universal in all things ; until at 
last the particulars of sense drop away and the universal alone remains. 
He never understood that abstractions, as Hegel says, are ‘mere ab- 
stractions’— of use when employed in the arrangement of facts, but 
adding nothing to the sum of knowledge when pursued apart from 
them, or with reference to an imaginary idea of good. Still the exercise 
of the faculty of abstraction has enlarged the powers of the human 
mind, and played a great part in the education of the human race. 
Plato appreciated the value of this, and saw that the faculty might be 
quickened by the study of number and relation. All things in which 
there is opposition or proportion are suggestive of reflection. The dull 
impression of sense evokes no power of thought or of mind, but when 
objects of sense ask to be compared and distinguished, then philosophy 
begins. The science of arithmetic first suggests such distinctions. There 
follow in order the other sciences of plain and solid geometry, and of 
solids in motion, one branch of which is astronomy or the harmony 
of the spheres, — to this is appended the sister science of the harmony of 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION . 

«5 

sounds. Plato seems also to hint at the possibility of other applications 
of arithmetical or mathematical proportions. 

The modern mathematician will readily sympathise with Plato's delight 
in the properties of pure mathematics. He will not be disinclined to 
say with him : — Let alone the heavens, and study the beauties of number 
and figure in themselves. He, too, will be apt to depreciate their appli- 
cation to the arts. He will observe that Plato has a conception of 
geometry, in which figures are to be dispensed with ; thus in a distant 
and shadowy way seeming to anticipate the possibility of working 
geometrical problems by a more general mode of analysis. He will 
remark with interest on the backward state of solid geometry, which, 
alas ! was not encouraged by the aid of the State in the age of Plato ; 
and he will recognize the grasp of Plato’s mind in his ability to conceive 
of one science of solids in motion including the earth as well as the 
heavens, — not forgetting to notice the intimation to which allusion has 
been already made, that besides astronomy and harmonics the science 
of solids in motion may have other applications. Still more will he be 
struck with the comprehensiveness of view which led Plato, at a time 
when these sciences hardly existed, to say that they must be studied in 
relation to one another, and to the idea of good, or common principle 
of truth and being. But he will also see (and perhaps without surprise) 
that in that stage of physical and mathematical knowledge, Plato has 
fallen into the error of supposing that he can construct the heavens 
a priori by mathematical problems, and determine the principles of har- 
mony irrespective of their adaptation to the human ear. The illusion 
was a natural one in that age and country. The simplicity and certainty 
of astronomy and harmonics seemed to contrast with the variation and 
complexity of the world of sense; — hence the circumstance that there 
was some elementary basis of fact, some measurement of distance or time 
on which they must ultimately rest, was overlooked by him. The modern 
predecessors of Newton fell into errors at least equally great ; and Plato 
can hardly be said to have been very' far wTong, or may even claim a sort 
of prophetic insight into the subject, when we consider that the greater 
part of astronomy at the present day consists of abstract dynamics, by 
the help of which most astronomical discoveries have been made. 

The metaphysical philosopher from his point of view recognizes 
mathematics as an instrument of education, — which strengthens the 
power of attention, developes the sense of order and the faculty of 

86 

THE REPUBLIC . 

construction, and enables the mind to grasp under simple formula the 
quantitative differences of physical phenomena. But while acknowledging 
their value in education, he sees also that they have no connexion with 
our higher moral and intellectual ideas. In the attempt which Plato 
makes to connect them, we easily trace the influences of the old Pytha- 
gorean notions. There is no reason to suppose that he is speaking of 
the ideal numbers at p. 525 E; but he is describing numbers which are 
pure abstractions, to which he assigns a real and separate existence, 
which, ‘ as the teachers of the art’ (meaning probably the Pythagoreans) 
would have affirmed, repel all attempts at subdivision, and in which 
unity and every other number are conceived of as absolute. The truth 
and certainty of numbers, when thus disengaged from phenomena, gave 
them a kind of sacredness in the eyes of an ancient philosopher. Nor 
is it easy to say how far ideas of order and fixedness may have had a 
moral and elevating influence on the minds of men, ‘ who/ in the words 
of the Timaeus, ‘ might learn to regulate their erring lives according to 
them/ It is worthy of remark that the old Pythagorean ethical symbols 
still exist as figures of speech among ourselves. And those who see in 
modern times the world pervaded by universal law, may also see a faint 
anticipation of this last word of modern philosophy in the Platonic idea 
of good, which is the source and measure of all things, and yet only an 
abstraction. (Cp. Phileb. sub fin.) 

Two passages seem to require more particular explanations. First, 
that which relates to the analysis of vision. The difficulty in this passage 
may be explained, like many others, from differences in the modes of 
conception prevailing among ancient and modern thinkers. To us, the 
perceptions of sense are inseparable from the act of the mind which 
accompanies them. The consciousness of form, colour, distance, is in- 
distinguishable from the simple sensation, which is the medium of them. 
Whereas to Plato sense is the Heraclitean flux of sense, not the vision 
of objects in the order in which they actually present themselves to the 
experienced sight, but as they may be imagined to appear confused and 
blurred to the half-awakened eye of the infant. The first action of the 
mind is aroused by the attempt to set in order this chaos, and the reason 
is required to frame distinct conceptions under which the confused im- 
pressions of sense may be arranged. Hence arises the question, * What 
is great, what is small?’ and thus begins the distinction of the visible 
and the intelligible. 

INTRODUCTION. 

87 

The second difficulty relates to Plato’s conception of harmonics. 
Three classes of harmonists are distinguished by him : — first, the Pytha- 
goreans, whom he proposes to consult (as in the previous discussion on 
music he will consult Damon) and who are acknowledged to be masters 
in the art, but are nevertheless deficient in the knowledge of its higher 
import and relation to the good ; secondly, the mere empirics, whom 
Glaucon appears to confuse with them, and whom both he and Socrates 
ludicrously describe as experimenting by mere auscultation on the in- 
tervals of sounds. Both of these fall short in different degrees of the 
Platonic idea of harmony, which must be studied in a purely abstract 
way, first by the method of problems, and secondly as a part of universal 
knowledge in relation to the idea of good. 

The allegory has a political as well as a philosophical meaning. The 
den or cave represents the narrow sphere of politics or law (cp. the 
description of the philosopher and lawyer in the Theaetetus, 172-176), 
and the light of the eternal ideas is supposed to exercise a disturbing 
influence on the minds of those who return to this lower world. In 
other words, their principles are too wide for practical application ; they 
are looking far away into the past and future, when their business is with, 
the present. The ideal is not easily reduced to the conditions of actual 
life, and may often seem to be at variance with them. And at first, those 
who return are unable to compete with the inhabitants of the den in the 
measurement of the shadows, and are derided and persecuted by them ; 
but after a while they see the things below in far truer proportions than 
those who have never ascended into the upper world. The difference 
between the politician turned into a philosopher and the philosopher 
turned into a politician, is symbolized by the two kinds of disordered 
eyesight, the one which is experienced by the captive who is transferred 
from darkness to day, the other, of the heavenly messenger who volun- 
tarily for the good of his fellow-men descends into the den. In what 
way the brighter light is to dawn on the inhabitants of the lower world, 
or how the idea of good is to become the guiding principle of politics, is 
left unexplained by Plato. Like the nature and divisions of dialectic, of 
which Glaucon impatiently demands to be informed, perhaps he would 
have said that this could not be revealed except to a disciple of the pre- 
vious sciences. (Compare Symposium, 210 A.) 

Some modem elements of thought may be noted in this part of the 
Republic. We seem to hear the echo of our own times in the com- 

88 

THE REPUBLIC. 

plaints which Plato utters respecting the dangers of speculation in youth. 
The minds of young men become unsettled, and their extravagance 
brings discredit on philosophy and on themselves. They argue about 
the laws and opinions in which they have been brought up, and soon 
begin to think that one thing is as good as another. Their position 
is ingeniously compared to that of an illegitimate son, who has made 
the discovery that his supposed parents are not his real ones, and, ift 
consequence, they have lost their authority over him. The distinction 
between the mathematician and the dialectician is also noticeable. Plato 
is very well aware that the faculty of the mathematician is quite dis- 
tinct from the higher philosophical sense which recognizes and combines 
first principles (531 E). The contempt which he expresses at p. 533 for 
distinctions of words, the danger of involuntary falsehood, the apology 
which Socrates makes for his earnestness of speech, are highly cha- 
racteristic of the Platonic style and mode of thought. The quaint notion 
that if Palamedes was the inventor of number Agamemnon could not 
have counted his feet; the art by which we are made to believe that 
this State of ours is not a dream only ; the gravity with which the first 
step is taken in the actual creation of the State, namely, the sending out 
of the city all who had arrived at ten years of age, in order to expedite 
the business of education by a generation, are also truly Platonic. (For 
the last, compare the passage at the end of the third book, in which he 
expects the lie about the earthborn men to be believed in the second 
generation.) 

BOOK VIII. And so we have arrived at the conclusion, that in 
the perfect State wives and children are to be in common; and their 
education and pursuits, both in war and peace, are also to be common, 
and their kings are to be philosophers and warriors. And a further con- 
clusion is, that our soldiers are to live in common houses and to have 
all things in common ; they are to be warrior athletes receiving no pay, 
but only their food, from the other citizens. Now let us return to the 
point at which we digressed, and recover the track. ‘ That is easily 
done,’ he replied ; ‘ You were speaking before we entered on the sub- 
ject of women and children, of the State which you had constructed, 
and of the individual who answered to this, both of whom you affirmed 
to be good, although of both you were able to show still more excellent 
things; and you said that of inferior States there were four forms and 

INTRODUCTION . 

89 

four individuals corresponding to them, which although deficient in vari- 
ous degrees, were all of them worth inspecting with a view to determining 
the relative happiness or misery of the best or worst man. Then Pole- 
marchus and Adeimantus interrupted you, and this led to another argu- 
ment,— and so here we are.’ Suppose that we put ourselves again in 
the same position, and do you repeat your question. * I want to know 
what are the constitutions of which you spoke ? ’ There are only four of 
any note : — first, the famous Lacedaemonian or Cretan commonwealth ; 
secondly, oligarchy, which is a State full of evils; thirdly, democracy, 
which is next in order ; fourthly, tyranny, which is the disease or death 
of all governments ; and there are other intermediate forms which exist 
among barbarians as well as among Hellenes. Now, States are not 
made of * rock and oak, but of flesh and blood ;’ and therefore as there 
are five states there must be five human natures in individuals, which cor- 
respond to them. And first, there is the ambitious nature, which answers 
to the Lacedaemonian State; secondly, the oligarchical nature; thirdly, 
the democratical ; and fourthly, the tyrannical. This last will have to 
be compared with the perfectly just, that we may know w'hich is the 
happier, and then we shall be able to determine whether the argument 
of Thrasymachus or our owm is the more convincing. And as before 
we began with the State and went on to the individual, so let us do now ; 
beginning with timocracy, let us go on to the timocratical man, and 
then proceed to the other forms of goverment, and the individuals who 
answer to them. 

But how did timocracy arise out of the perfect State ? Plainly, like all 
changes of government, from division in the rulers; for a government 
which is United cannot be moved. But whence came division ? * Sing, 
heavenly Muses,’ as Homer says ; may we not suppose them to speak 
to us as to children, putting on a solemn face in jest ? ‘ And what will 
they say?’ They will say that human things are fated to decay, and the 
immutable city will not escape — when the wheel comes full circle in a 
period short or long ; plants or animals have their times of fertility and 
sterility, which the intelligence of the rulers alloyed by sense will not 
enable them to ascertain, and children will be bom when they ought not. 
For whereas divine creations are in a perfect cycle or number, the human 
creation is in a number which declines from perfection, and has four 
terms and three intervals of numbers, increasing, waning, assimilating, 
dissimilating, and yet perfectly commensurate with each other. The 

9° 

THE REPUBLIC . 

base of the number with a fourth added (or which is 3 : 4), multiplied by 
five and cubed, gives two harmonies : — The first a square number, which 
is a hundred times the base (or a hundred times a hundred); the second, 
an oblong, being a hundred squares of the rational diameter of a figure 
the side of which is five, subtracting one from each square or two per- 
fect squares from all, and adding a hundred cubes of three. This 
entire number is geometrical and contains the rule or law of generation. 
And when this law is neglected marriages will be unpropitious ; the in- 
ferior offspring who are then born will in time become the rulers, and 
the State will decline, and education will fall into decay, and gymnastic 
be preferred to music, and the gold and silver and brass and iron will 
form a chaotic mass, and thus will division arise. Such is the Muses’ 
answer to our question. ‘ And a true answer ; for how can the answer 
of the Muses be other than true? — What more have the Muses to say?’ 
They say that the two races, the iron and brass, and the silver and gold, 
will draw the State different ways;— the one to trade and moneymaking, 
and the others having the true riches and needing no other, will resist 
them — there will be a contest, which will end in a compromise; they 
will have private property, and will enslave their fellow-citizens who were 
once their friends and nurturers. But they will retain their warlike cha- 
racter, and their chief occupation will be to make war, and to control 
their subjects. This is the origin of that middle state which is inter- 
mediate between aristocracy and oligarchy. 

The new form of government resembles the ideal in obedience to 

rulers and contempt for trades and handicrafts, and devotion to warlike 

and gymnastic exercises. But corruption has crept into philosophy, and 

simplicity of character which was once her note, is now looked for only 

in the military class. Arts of war begin to prevail over arts of peace ; 

the ruler is no longer a philosopher ; as in oligarchies, there springs up 

among them an extravagant love of gain — get another man’s and save 

your own, is their principle ; and they have dark places in which they 

hoard their gold and silver, for the use of their women and others ; they 

take their pleasures stealthily, like boys who are running away from their 

father, the law; and their education is not inspired by the muse, but 

¥ 

imposed by the strong arm of power. The leading characteristic of the 
State is party spirit and ambition. But I have said enough of this, for 
time would fail me if I attempted to describe all the varieties of States 
and individuals. 

INTRODUCTION. 

9i 

And what manner of man answers to such a State as this ? ‘ In love 

of contention/ replied Adeimantus, ‘ he will be like our friend Glaucon.’ 
Perhaps, yes, he may be like him in that, but not in other ways; for 
he is self-asserting and ill-educated, yet fond of literature and of hear- 
ing recitations, although himself not a speaker, — fierce with slaves, but 
not truly above them — obedient to rulers, and a lover of power and 
honour, which he hopes to gain by deeds of arms — fond, too, of gym- 
nastics and of hunting. As he advances in years he grows more and 
more avaricious, having never known a saviour or guardian — that is to 
say, reason and music — which are the only saviours of men. His origin 
is as follows : — His father may probably have been a good man dwelling 
in an ill-ordered State, who has retired from public life that he may be 
at peace. His mother is angry at her loss of precedence among other 
women; she is disgusted at the selfishness of her husband, and her 
woman’s tongue expatiates to her son on the unmanliness and indolence 
of his father. ‘Yes/ said Adeimantus, ‘that is the way with all women/ 
Yes, I said, and you may observe also that the old family servant takes 
up the tale, and says to the youth : — ‘ When you are grown up you must 
be more of a man than your father, and proceed against debtors and 
avenge insults/ All the world are agreed that the man who minds his 
own business is an idiot, while a busybody is highly honoured and 
esteemed. The young man hears and sees this, and he also hears his 
father’s words and sees his ways, and as he is naturally well disposed, 
although liable to be perverted by evil influences, he rests at a middle 
point and becomes ambitious and a lover of honour. 

And now, as ^Eschylus says, ‘ Set another man over against another 
city ;’ or rather, let the city come first. The next form of government is 
oligarchy, in which the rule is of the rich only. No eyes are needed to 
see how this form of government springs out of the last. ‘ How is that ?’ 
The private treasury is the beginning of the decline ; the possession of 
gold and silver leads to new fashions of expense, and the citizens and 
their wives break the law. One draws another on, and the multitude are 
infected ; riches are thrown into the scale, and virtue kicks the beam ; — 
lovers of money take the place of lovers of honour ; misers of politicians ; 
and, in time, political privileges are confined to the rich. The latter 
change is commonly effected by fear and violence. 

Thus much of the origin, — let us next consider the evils of oligarchy. 
Would a man who wanted to be safe on a voyage take a bad pilot 

92 

THE REPUBLIC. 

because he was rich, or refuse a good one because he was poor? And 
does not the analogy apply still more to the helm of State ? And there 
are yet greater evils : two nations are struggling together in one State — 
the rich and the poor; and the rich dare not put arms into the hands 
of the poor, and are unwilling to pay for defenders out of their own 
money. And have we not already condemned that State in which the 
same persons are warriors as well as shopkeepers ? The greatest evil of 
all is that a man may sell his property and have no place in the State ; 
while there is one class which has enormous wealth, the other is entirely 
destitute. But observe that these destitutes had not really any more of 
the governing nature in them when they were rich than now that they 
are poor; they were miserable spendthrifts always. They are the drones 
of the hive ; only whereas the actual drone is unprovided by nature with 
a sting, the ‘ unfeathered, two-legged things,’ which we call drones, do 
not all agree in this respect, for some of them are without stings and 
some of them have dreadful stings ; in other words, there are paupers 
and there are rogues. In the cellars and underground places of an 
oligarchical city you will always find this scum of the earth, which in- 
eludes nearly everybody but the governing classes. And this state of 
things originates in bad education and in bad government. 

Like State, like man, — the change in the latter begins with the timo- 
cratic man ; he walks at first in the ways of his father, who may have 
been a statesman, or general, perhaps ; and presently he sees him ‘ fallen 
from his high estate,’ the victim of informers, dying in prison or exile, 
or by the hand of the executioner. The lesson which he learns from 
this is one of caution; he leaves the dangerous arena of politics, and 
makes money; hoping to retrieve his father’s losses, he represses his 
pride and saves pence. Avarice is enthroned as his bosom’s lord, and 
assumes the style of the Great King, and the newest Persian fashions. 
The rational and spirited elements sit humbly on the ground, and the 
only speculation in which they are allowed to indulge is how to get 
rich. The love of honour turns to love of money; the conversion is 
instantaneous. And the man goes through the same process as the 
State ; he is mean, saving, toiling, the slave of one passion which is the 
master of the rest, a skinflint, a hoarder, who chooses a life which the 
vulgar approve : Is he not the very image of the State ? He has had 
no education, or he would never have allowed the blind god of riches 
to lead the dance within him. And being uneducated he will have 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION . 

93 

many slavish desires, some beggarly, some knavish, breeding in his soul. 
Shall I tell you where you may detect him ? If he is the trustee of an 
orphan, and has the power to defraud, he will show that he is not with- 
out the will, and that his passions are only restrained by fear and not by 
reason. He will be respectable in his dealings generally, but when he 
has to spend another man's money, he will show that he has the desires 
of a drone. Hence he leads a divided existence ; in which the better 
desires mostly prevail. But when he is contending for prizes and other 
distinctions, he is afraid to incur a loss which is to be repaid only by 
barren honour ; he represses his desires, and is small and saving in his 
expenditure ; in time of war he fights with a small part of his resources, 
and usually saves his money and loses the battle. 

Next comes democracy and the democratic man, out of oligarchy and 
the oligarcliical man. Insatiable avarice is the ruling passion of an oli- 
garchy; they allow vice and extravagance among the citizens in order that 
they may be enriched by the sale of a spendthrift’s property ; and no man 
can serve two masters, wealth and virtue. In this disorderly condition 
of things men of family often lose their property or rights of citizenship, 
and there they are, not only poor and in debt, but a fixture in the State, 
with their stings out and arms in their hands — ready for any desperate 
enterprise against the new owners of their property and against the 
State. The usurer with stooping walk pretends not to see them; he 
passes by on the other side, and leaves his sting — that is, his money— in 
any one else who will be his victim ; and many a man is reduced into 
the state of dronage by him, and has to pay the parent or principal 
multiplied into a family of children. The only wray of diminishing this 
evil is either to limit a man’s use of his property, or to insist that the 
lender shall lend at his own risk, and have no protection from the law. 
But in an oligarchy the ruling class do not want to apply a remedy; they 
are careful only of money, and as careless of virtue as the poorest of the 
citizens. Now there are occasions on which the governors and the 
governed meet together, — at festivals, on a journey, voyaging or fighting. 
The wiry, sunburnt pauper finds that in the hour of danger he is not 
despised ; he sees the rich man under an umbrella puffing and panting, 
and draws the conclusion which he privately imparts to his companions, 
— ‘ that our people are not good for much ;’ and as a sickly frame is 
made ill by a mere touch from without, or sometimes without external 
impulse is ready to fall to pieces of itself, so from the least cause, 

94 

THE REPUBLIC. 

perhaps from some offer of aristocratic or democratic help, or with no 
cause at all, the city, like the sick man, falls ill and fights a battle for 
life or death. And democracy comes into existence when the poor are 
the victors, killing some and exiling some, and giving equal shares in 
the government to all the rest. 

The manner of life in such a State is that of democrats; there is 
freedom and plainness of speech, and every man does what is right in 
his own eyes, and has his own way of life. Hence arise the most 
various developments of character; the State is like a piece of em- 
broidery of which the colours and figures are the manners of men, and 
there are many who, like women and children, prefer this variety to real 
beauty and excellence. The State is not one but many, like a bazaar 
at which you can buy anything which you want. The great charm is, 
that you may do as you like ; you may govern if you like, let it alone if 
you like ; go to war and make peace if you feel disposed, and all quite 
irrespective of anybody else. When you put men to death they come 
to life again ; a gentleman is desired to go into exile, and he stalks about 
the city like a hero, and nobody sees him or cares for him. Take 
another look at the free and lordly nature of democracy, how grandly 
she sets her foot upon all our fine theories of education, — how little 
does she care for the training of her statesmen ! The only qualification 
which is demanded by her is the profession of patriotism. Such is 
democracy ; — a pleasing, lawless, various sort of government, distributing 
equality to equals and unequals alike. 

Let us now inspect the individual democrat; and first, as in the case 
of the State, we will trace his antecedents. He is the son of a miserly 
oligarch, and has been taught by him to restrain the love of unnecessary 
pleasures. Perhaps for the sake of clearness I ought to explain the 
meaning of this latter term ; necessary pleasures are those which are 
good, and which we cannot do without ; unnecessary pleasures are those 
which do no good, and of which the desire might be eradicated by early 
training. For example, the pleasures of eating and drinking are neces- 
sary and healthy, up to a certain point ; beyond that point they are alike 
hurtful to body and mind, and the excess may be avoided. When in 
excess, they may be rightly called expensive pleasures, in opposition to 
the useful ones. And the drone, as we called him, was the slave of 
these unnecessary pleasures, while the miserly oligarch is under the 
dominion of the others. 

INTRODUCTION. 

95 

The oligarch changes into the democrat in the following manner : — 
The youth who had a mean and miserly bringing up, gets a taste of the 
drone’s honey ; he meets with wild reckless companions, who introduce 
him to every new pleasure. Thus the change begins ; and, as in the 
State, there are allies on both sides, temptations from without and 
passions from within ; there is reason also and external influences of 
parents and friends in alliance with the better nature ; and these two 
factions or armies are in violent conflict with one another. Sometimes 
the party of order prevails, but then again new desires and new dis- 
orders arise, and a whole mob of passions get possession of the Acro- 
polis, that is to say, the head, which they find unguarded — void of 
acquirements and virtues, best sentinels over the lives of men dear to 
the gods. Falsehoods and illusions ascend to take their place; the 
prodigal goes back into the country of the Lotophagi or drones, and 
openly dwells there. And if any offer of alliance or parley of indi- 
vidual elders comes from home, the false spirits shut the gates of the 
castle and permit no one to enter, — there is a battle, and the victory is 
with them ; and then they banish modesty, which they call folly, and thrust 
away temperance ; and all law and order are quickly despatched over the 
border by them and the rabble who are at their heels. And when the 
house is clean swept and garnished, their favourite is initiated by them ; 
— they dress up the exiled vices in bright array, and bring them back 
again crowned with garlands, and give them new names. Insolence 
they call gentility, anarchy freedom, waste magnificence, impudence 
courage. Such is the change from the use of the necessary pleasures 
to the unnecessary ones ; after this the youth is divided impartially be- 
tween them ; and if he be fortunate and not too far gone in his badness, 
when he gets older and the turbulence of his passions begins to pass 
away, he receives back some of the exiles and lives in a sort of equi- 
librium; he indulges first one pleasure and then another, as they offer; 
and if reason comes and tells him that some pleasures are good and 
honourable, and others bad and vile, ‘she is not admitted into the 
citadel — he shakes his head and says that they are all alike, and 
he will have no invidious distinctions between them. Thus he lives 
in the fancy of the hour; sometimes he is drunken and lapped in 
wine and song ; then he will drink water only and get thin ; he takes 
to the gymnasium, or he does nothing at all; then again he would 
be a philosopher or a politician, and he jumps up and says anything 

g6 

THE REPUBLIC. 
% 

that comes into his head ; or again, he would be a warrior and get a 
fortune : — 

• A man so various that he seemed to be 
Not one but ail mankind's epitome.’ 

There remains still the finest and fairest of all men and all States — 
tyranny and the tyrant. Tyranny springs from democracy much in the 
same way that democracy springs from oligarchy. ‘ How do you mean ? ’ 
Both arise from excess; the one from excess of wealth, the other from 
excess of freedom. ‘ The great natural good which makes life worth 
having,’ says the democrat, ‘ is freedom.’ And this exclusive love of 
freedom and regardlessness of everything else, is the cause of the change 
from democracy to tyranny. The State is athirst for freedom, and being 
served by evil cupbearers, swills the strong wine of freedom, and pre- 
sently in a fit of drunken patriotism breaks out and beats her rulers; 
those who are loyal to them are called good for nothing, hereditary bonds- 
men and the like ; equality and fraternity of governors and governed, is 
the approved principle. Anarchy is the law, not of the State only but 
of private houses, and is diffused over all. Father and son, citizen 
and foreigner, teacher and pupil, old and young, are all on a level, and 
fathers and teachers fear their sons and pupils, and the wisdom of the 
young man is a match for the elder, and the old imitate the jaunty 
manners of the young because they are afraid of being thought morose. 
Slaves whom you have bought with money are on a level with their 
masters and mistresses, and there is no difference between men and 
women. And why, as /Eschylus says, should I not utter the word which 
comes to my lips? The very animals in a democratic State have a 
freedom which is unknown in other places. The she-dogs are as good 
as their she- mistresses, and horses and asses march along with dignity 
and run their noses into anybody who comes in their way ; — such exu- 
berance is there and superabundance of freedom. * I have often remarked 
that, and in my country walks have experienced the same.’ The end 
is, that the skins of the citizens become so sensitive that they cannot 
endure the yoke of laws, written or unwritten ; they would have no man 
call himself their master. Such is the fair, glorious beginning of things 
out of which tyranny springs. * Glorious, indeed; and what is to follow?’ 
The ruin of oligarchy is the ruin of democracy ; there is a law of con- 
traries ; the greatness of anything goes before a fall. The excess of 
freedom passes into the excess of slavery, and the greater the freedom 

I 

INTRODUCTION. 

97 

the greater the slavery. You will remember that in the oligarchy were 
found two classes, one of poor and the other of idle men ; the one were 
the leaders, the others the followers — rogues and paupers, who were 
compared by us to drones with and without stings. These two classes 
are to the State what phlegm and bile are to the human body ; and the 
duty of the State physician, or legislator, is to purge them away in the 
same manner that a bee-keeper would cut out the cells of drones. Now 
in a democracy, too, there are drones, but of a much more dangerous 
sort than in the oligarchy ; there they are inert and unpractised, here 
they are full of life and animation ; and the keener sort speak and act, 
while the others buzz about the bema and prevent their opponents from 
being heard. And there is another class in democratic States, of trading, 
thriving individuals, — these are like a sponge, to be squeezed when 
the drones have need of their possessions ; there is moreover a third 
class, who are the labourers and artizans, and they make up the mass 
of the people. When the people meet, they are omnipotent, but there 
is a difficulty in bringing them together unless they are attracted by 
a little honey ; and the rich supply the honey, of which the demagogues 
keep the greater part for themselves and give the others a taste only. 
The possessions of the rich begin to be taken, and they are compelled 
to protect themselves; when they see the demagogues urging on their 
followers to do what they would not do of themselves, they are driven 
mad by the stings of the drones, and become downright oligarchs in 
self-defence. Then follow informations and convictions for treason. 
The people have some protector whom they nurse into greatness, and 
from this root the tree of tyranny springs. The nature of the change is 
indicated in the old fable of the temple of Zeus Lycacus : the story is, 
that he who tastes human flesh mixed up with the flesh of other victims, 
will be turned into a wolf. Even so the protector, who in his hour of 
popularity tastes human blood, and slays some and exiles others with and 
without pretence of law, and proclaims abolition of debts and division 
of lands, must either perish or become a wolf — that is, a tyrant. Perhaps 
he is driven out, but he soon comes back from exile in full power; 
and then if his enemies cannot get rid of him by legal means, they 
plot his assassination. Thereupon the friend of the people makes his 
famous request for a body-guard, which they readily grant, thinking only 
of his danger and not of their own. When he hears of this, let the 
rich man make to himself wings, and not turn back to take anything 
VOL. II. H 

uiguized by Google 

98 

THE REPUBLIC. 

in the house, for he will never run away again if he does not do so 
then. And the Great Protector, instead of his vast bulk lying upon the 
earth, overstrides others, and stands like a colossus in the chariot of 
State, a full-blown tyrant now. Let us enquire into the nature of his 
happiness. 

In the early days of his tyranny he has a smile and ‘ Peace be with 
you’ for everybody; he is not a'dominus,’ no, not he: he has only 
come to put an end to debt and the monopoly of land. He is soon 
reconciled to the enemies of his power abroad, and then he makes him- 
self necessary to the State by always going to war. War- taxes depress 
the poor ; this has the incidental advantage of keeping them from con- 
spiring against him ; and he can only get rid of bolder spirits by handing 
them over to the enemy, — hence he must always be stirring up war. 
Then comes unpopularity; some of those who assisted in setting him 
up have the courage to tell him a piece of their minds. The conse- 
quence is, that he must put them out of the way ; he will always be 
keeping a sharp look-out on the high spirited, the wise, the wealthy ; and 
such is his blessed condition of life, that he is obliged to make a purga- 
tion of them. ‘ And what a purgation !’ Yes, he purges away the good 
as the physician purges away the bad ; he has to choose between death 
and a hateful and shameful life. And the more hated he is, the more he 
will require trusty guards ; but whom will he trust, and w'here will he get 
them ? ‘ They will come flocking like birds, for pay.’ You mean that he 
will hire drones out of foreign parts ; would he not rather obtain them 
on the spot? ‘But how is that possible?’ He will take the slaves from 
their owners and make them his body-guards ; these are his trusted 
friends, from whom alone he receives the tribute of love and admiration. 
Verily the tragedians are wise, and Euripides wiser than any of them, 
who says, — 

‘Tyrants are wise by converse with the wise;* 

meaning to say, that they are the wise w'ho consort with tyrants. More- 
over, he magnifies tyranny as a state of superhuman glory ; and this is an 
excellent reason, as he will allow if he has any wit, why we should refuse 
to admit him into our State. ‘ I think that he may have wit enough for 
that.’ He will go to other cities, and gather the mob about him with 
grand and plausible wrords, and change commonwealths into tyrannies 
and democracies, — receiving honours and rewards for this ; first of all 

INTRODUCTION . 

99 

from tyrants, secondly from democracies, but the higher he and his friends 
ascend constitution hill, the more their honour will fail and become ‘too 
asthmatic to mount.’ But to return to the tyrant; — how will he support 
that rare army of his ? First, by confiscation, which will lighten the taxes; 
then he will take all his father’s property, and spend this on his com* 
panions, male or female. Now his father is the demus, and if the demus 
gets angry, and says that a great hulking son ought not to be a burden 
on his parents, and tells him to depart and take his riotous crew with 
him, then will the parent know what a monster he has been fostering in 
his bosom, and that the son whom he would fain expel is too strong for 
him. ‘You do not mean to say that he will beat his father?’ Yes, he 
will, after having first taken away his arms. ‘ Then he is a parricide, and 
a cruel, unnatural son to a parent whom he is bound to cherish and 
maintain.' And the people have jumped from the fear of slavery into 
slavery, out of the smoke into the fire. Thus liberty, when out of all 
order and reason, passes into the worst form of slavery. 

... In the previous books Plato has described the ideal State ; now he 
returns to the perverted or declining forms, on which he had lightly 
touched at the end of book iv. These he describes in a succession of 
parallels between the individual and the State, tracing the origin of 
either in the State or individual which has preceded them. He begins 
by asking the point at which he digressed ; and is thus led shortly to 
recapitulate the substance of the three former books, which also contain 
a parallel of the philosopher and the State. 

Of the first decline he gives no intelligible account; he would not 
have liked to admit the most probable causes of the fall of his ideal 
State, which to us would appear to be the impracticability of com- 
munism or the natural antagonism of the ruling and subject classes. 
Hence he throws a veil of mystery over the origin of the decline, which 
he attributes to ignorance of the law of population. Of this law the 
famous geometrical figure or number is the expression. Like the an- 
cients in general, he had no idea of the perfectibility of man or of the 
education of the human race. His ideal was not to be attained in the 
course of ages, but was to spring in full armour from the head of the 
legislator. When good laws had been given, he thought only of the 
manner in which they were likely to be corrupted, or of how they might 
be filled up in detail or restored in accordance with their original spirit. 

II 2 

IOO 

THE REPUBLIC. 

He appears not to have reflected upon the full meaning of his own 
words, * in the brief space of human life, nothing great can be accom- 
plished’ (book x. 608 B); or again, as he afterwards says in the Laws, 
iii. 676, ‘infinite time is the maker of cities.' The order of consti- 
tutions which is adopted by him represents an order of thought rather 
than a succession of time, and may be considered as the first attempt 
to frame a philosophy of history. 

The first of these declining States is timocracy, or the government of 

soldiers, and lovers of honour, which answers to the Spartan State ; 

* 

this is a government of force, in which education is not inspired by the 
Muses, but imposed by the law, and in which all the finer elements of 
organization have disappeared. The philosopher himself has lost the 
love of truth, and the soldier, who is of a simpler and honester nature, 
rules in his stead. The individual who answers to timocracy has some 
noticeable qualities. He is described as ill educated, but, like the Spartan, 
a lover of literature ; and although he is a harsh master to his servants 
he has no natural superiority over them. His character is based upon a 
reaction against the circumstances of his father, who in a troubled city 
has retired from politics, and his mother, who is dissatisfied at her own 
position, is always urging him towards the life of political ambition. 
Such a character may have had this origin, and indeed Livy attributes 
the Licinian laws to a feminine jealousy of a similar kind (vii. 34). But 
there is obviously no connection between the manner in which the timo- 
cratic State springs out of the ideal, and the mere accident by which the 
timocratic man is the son of a retired statesman. 

The two next stages in the decline of constitutions have even less his- 
torical foundation. For there is no trace in Greek history of a polity 
like the Spartan or Cretan passing into an oligarchy of wealth, or 
of the oligarchy of wealth passing into a democracy. The order of 
history appears to be different ; first, in the Homeric times there is the 
royal or patriarchal form of government, which a century or two later 
was succeeded by an oligarchy of birth rather than of wealth, and in 
which wealth was only the accident of the hereditary possession of land 
and power. Sometimes this oligarchical government gave way to a 
government based upon a qualification of property, which, according to 
Aristotle’s mode of using words, would have been called a timocracy ; 
and this in some cities, as at Athens, became the conducting medium 
to democracy. But such was not the necessary order of succession in 

INTRODUCTION. 

IOI 

States ; nor, indeed, can any order be discerned in the endless fluc- 
tuation of Greek history (like the tides in the Euripus), except, perhaps, 
in the almost uniform tendency from monarchy to aristocracy in the 
earliest times. At first sight there appears to be a similar inversion in 
the last step of the Platonic succession, for tyranny instead of being the 
natural end of democracy, in early Greek history appears rather as a 
stage leading to democracy ; the reign of Peisistratus and his sons is an 
episode which comes in between the legislation of Solon and the con- 
stitution of Cleisthenes; and some secret cause common to them all 
seems to have led the greater part of Hellas at her first appearance in 
the dawn of history, e. g. Athens, Argos, Corinth, Sicyon, and nearly 
every State with the exception of Sparta, through a similar stage of 
tyranny, which ended either in oligarchy or democracy. But then we 
must remember that Plato is describing rather the contemporary history 
of the Sicilian States, which was an alternation between democracy and 
tyranny, than the ancient history of Athens or Corinth. 

The portrait of the tyrant himself is just such as the later Greek 
delighted to draw of Phalaris and Dionysius, in which, as in the lives of 
mediaeval saints or mythic heroes, the conduct and actions of one were 
attributed to another in order to fill up the outline. There was no 
enormity which the Greek was not ready to believe of them ; the tyrant 
was the negation of government and law ; his assassination was glorious ; 
there was no crime, however unnatural, which might not with probability 
be attributed to him. In this, Plato was only following the common 
thought of his countrymen, which he embellished and exaggerated with 
all the power of his genius. There is no need to suppose that he drew 
from life ; or that his knowledge of tyrants is derived from a personal 
acquaintance with Dionysius. The manner in which he speaks of them 
would rather tend to render doubtful his ever having ‘ consorted ' with 
them, or entertained the schemes which are attributed to him in the 
Epistles, of regenerating Sicily by their help. 

Plato describes with a sort of amusement the follies of democracy, of 
which the political condition is reflected in social life. He conceives 
democracy as a state of individualism or dissolution ; in which every 
one is doing what is right in his own eyes. Of a people animated by 
a common spirit of liberty, rising as one man to repel the Persian host, 
which is the leading idea of democracy in Herodotus and Thucydides, 
he never seems to think. But if he is not a believer in liberty, still less 

102 

THE REPUBLIC. 

is he a lover of tyranny. His deeper and more serious condemnation 
is reserved for the tyrant, who is the ideal of wickedness and also of 
weakness, and who in his utter helplessness and suspiciousness is leading 
an almost impossible existence, without that remnant of good which, in 
Plato’s opinion, was required to give power to evil (book i. p. 352). This 
ideal of wickedness living in helpless misery, is the reverse of that other 
portrait of perfect injustice ruling in happiness and splendour, which first 
of all Thrasymachus, and afterwards the sons of Ariston had drawn, 
and is also the reverse of the king whose rule of life is the good of his 
subjects. 

Each of these governments and individuals has a corresponding ethical 
gradation : the ideal State is under the rule of reason, not extinguishing 
but harmonising the passions, and training them in virtue ; in. the timo- 
cracy and the timocratic man one virtue still remains, but has superseded 
all the rest : the constitution, whether of the State or of the individual, is 
based, first, upon courage, and secondly, upon the love of honour, which 
is hardly a virtue. In the second stage of decline the virtues have alto- 
gether disappeared, and the love of gain has succeeded to them ; in the 
third stage, or democracy, the various passions are allowed to have free 
play, and the virtues and vices are impartially cultivated. But this free- 
dom, which leads to many curious extravagances of character, is in 
reality only a state of weakness and dissipation. At last, one monster 
passion takes possession of the whole nature of man — this is tyranny. 
In all of them excess — the excess first of wealth and then of freedom, is 
the element of decay. 

The eighth book of the Republic abounds in pictures of life and fan- 
ciful allusions ; the use of metaphorical language is carried to a greater 
extent than anywhere else in Plato. We may remark, first, the descrip- 
tion of the two nations in one, which become more and more divided, 
as in the feudal ages, and perhaps in our own times, so also among the 
Greeks; the notion of democracy expressed in a sort of Pythagorean 
formula as equality among unequals; the free and easy ways of men 
and animals, which are characteristic of liberty, as foreign mercenaries 
and universal mistrust are of the tyrant. The proposal that mere debts 
should not be recoverable by law is a speculation which has often been 
entertained by reformers of the law in modern times, and is in harmony 
with the tendencies of modern legislation. Debt and land were the two 
great difficulties of the ancient lawgiver ; and we may be said to have 

INTRODUCTION. 

i°3 

almost, if not quite, solved the one of these difficulties but hardly the 
other. 

Still more remarkable are the corresponding portraits of individuals: 
there is the family picture of the father and mother and the old servant 
of the timocratical man, and the outward respectability and inherent 
meanness of the oligarchical ; the uncontrolled licence and freedom of 
the democrat, in which the young Alcibiades seems to be depicted, doing 
right or wrong as he pleases, and who at last, like the prodigal, goes into 
a far country (note here the play of language by which the democratic 
man is himself represented under the image of a State having a citadel 
and receiving embassies); and there is the wild-beast nature, which 
breaks loose in his successor. The hit about the tyrant being a parri- 
cide ; the representation of the tyrant’s life as an obscene dream ; the 
rhetorical surprise of the more miserable than the most miserable of 
men in book ix. ; the requirement that the poets will have the good 
sense to see that if they are the friends of tyrants they ought to be 
excluded from the State; the continuous image of the drones who are 
of two kinds, swelling at last into the monster drone having wings (see 
infra, book ix.), are among Plato’s happiest touches. 

There remains to be considered the great difficulty of this book of 
the Republic, the so-called number of the State. This is a puzzle 
almost as great as the Number of the Beast in the Book of Revelation, 
and though apparently known to Aristotle, is referred to by Cicero as a 
proverb of obscurity (Ep. ad Att. vii. 13, 5). And some have imagined 
that there is no answer to the puzzle, and that Plato has been practising 
upon his readers. But such a deception as this is inconsistent with the 
manner in which Aristotle speaks of the number (Pol. v. 12. 7), and 
would have been ridiculous to any reader of the Republic who was 
acquainted with Greek mathematics. As little reason is there for sup- 
posing that Plato intentionally used obscure expressions ; the obscurity 
only arises from our want of familiarity with the subject. On the other 
hand, Plato himself indicates that he is not altogether serious, and in 
describing his number as a solemn jest of the Muses, he appears to 
imply some degree of satire on the symbolical use of number. 

Our hope of understanding the passage depends principally on an 
accurate study of the words themselves ; on which a faint light is thrown 
by the parallel passage in the ninth book. Another help is the allusion 
in Aristotle, who makes the important remark that the latter part of the 

104 

THE REPUBLIC. 

passage (from &v rnirpiros irvO^v, k.t.X .) describes a solid figure1. Some 
further clue may be gathered from the appearance of the Pythagorean 
triangle, which is denoted bv the numbers 3, 4, 5, and in which, as in 
every right-angled triangle, the squares of the two lesser sides equal the 
square of the hypothenuse (32 + 42 = 52 or9 + i6 = 2 5). 

Plato begins by speaking of a perfect or cyclical number (cp. Tim. 
39 D , i. e. a number in which the sum of the divisors equals the whole) ; 
this is the divine or perfect number in which all lesser cycles or revo- 
lutions are complete ; he also speaks of a human or imperfect number, 
having four terms and three intervals of numbers which are related to 
one another as roots to powers, and which he describes as assimilating 
and dissimilating, waxing and waning ; in the latter half of the passage 
he finds certain proportions, which give two harmonies, the one square 
the other oblong ; but he does not say that the square number answers 
to the divine, or the oblong number to the human cycle. 

Nor is there any trace in the passage that this second number either 
has reference to a period of time, or is the number of the population of 
the State. Plato is only thinking of some progression of number with 
which he chooses to connect the regulation of births. There would be 
less confusion if, instead of being termed the number of the world and 
of the State (of which nothing is said in Plato), the two numbers were 
called respectively the divine and human number of marriage or gene- 
ration. For Plato does not suppose their influence to extend to any- 
thing but births. They preside over these in the same mysterious 
manner in which the stars preside over them, or in which, according 
to the Pythagoreans, opportunity, justice, marriage, are represented by 
some number or figure. 

I need not repeat the translation and explanations of terms given in 
the text (p. 546), in which I have supposed the number to be 8000. 
This interpretation derives a certain degree of plausibility, — first, from 
the circumstance that the numbers suggested in the first half of the 
passage coincide with the series of numbers which denote the interval 
between royal and tyrannical pleasure ; secondly, the number 8000 
is the ancient number of the Spartan citizens (Herod, vii. 34), and would 

1 Pol. v. 12, 8: — ‘He says that the cause (of the change in the perfect stated is the 
instability of all things, and iheir changing in a certain period ; and that this is dependent 
on certain progressions of number, when a root in the ratio of 3 : 4 joined with the number 

5 gives two harmonics, meaning when the number of the diagram becomes solid.’ 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION . 

105 

be what Plato might have called ‘ a number befitting the population of 
a city;’ — the mysterious disappearance of the Spartan population may 
possibly have suggested to him the first cause of his decline of States ; 
thirdly, the lesser or square harmony of 400 might be a symbol of the 
guardians — the larger or oblong harmony, of the people, and the num- 
bers 3, 4, 5 might refer to the three orders in the State or parts of the 
soul, the four virtues, the five forms of government. But in this expla- 
nation no clear connection is shown between the first and second half 
of the passage, nor are the words of Aristotle (oru v ytVijrui oriptos) suffi- 
ciently explained. And the phrase ewtrpiTos nvBp>)v seems to mean, not 
the number 3 with a third added (4), but the ratio of 4:3. For there 
would be no meaning in thus describing the number 4. And the 
connection with the Pythagorean triangle, the sides of which are repre- 
sented by 3, 4, 5, would be lost. 

More may be urged in defence of the number 216, which is adopted 
by Schleiermacher and ably supported by Dr. Donaldson (Proc. of the 
Philolog. Society, vol. i. p. 81 foil.). According to the latter, the Belov 
ytvvr)Tov is the world (?) ; the dvBpfa reiov either man or the State (?) ; 
av^rja-fis ftwdfxevai rt ku\ bwaoTfvoptvai multiplications of the square by 
its square root (?) ; similar numbers are those whose factors, or the sides 
of the figures represented by them, are in the same ratio, e. g. 3 and 
27 (?) ; increasing numbers are those which are less than the sum of 
their parts, e. g. 12 and 18 (?) ; npocrrfynpa is used of numbers which are 
expressible in the same terms, e. g. 8, 12, 18, 27 (f), prjrd when express- 
ible at all in terms of one another ; eirlrpiros rrvBpfjv is the fundamental 
number dppovlav t<np, k.t.X a square number multiplied by 100, — this 
is the first harmony. The second harmony is a cube of the same 
number, and is also described as 100 (lo-opqKTj piv 77/), multiplied by the 
three following terms:— (1) the square of the rational diameter of 5, less 
1, = 48; (2) two incommensurable diameters, i.e. the two first irrationals, 
2 and 3 ; (3) the cube of 3, = 27. The first series of numbers is 
8:i2::i8:27, or the cubes of 2 and 3 with their mean proportionals. 
The first harmony is (£ x 5)2 = 100 x f}* = The second harmony 

is (48 + 5 + 27) x io2 x = 1000 x The period of the world is 

defined by the first perfect number 6, that of the State by the cube of 
6 = 2 1 6 ■= 53 4- 43 + 33 ; this, taking the roots instead of the cubes (5, 4, 3), 
represents the sides of the Pythagorean triangle, and has various other 
numerical and harmonic properties, e. g. 216 = 23 x 3* (cp. the first 

io6 

THE REPUBLIC . 

series); again, 4x58 = fxio3 and |x§ = 2. The number 216 also 
includes the three musical numbers, 3, 4, 5, and is the period of 
Pythagorean metempsychosis. 

Other interpreters have suggested the number 5040, which is the num- 
ber of citizens in the Laws ; or 17500, which is the addition of the square 
of 100(10,000) -f 4800 + 2 7 00, making a series 10,000 : 7500 : 4800 : 2700, 
of which the first is supposed to be the perfect or square number, and 
the three last stand to one another in the ratios of 52: 4 2 : 32. The num- 
ber has also been supposed to be 50, apparently because the number 50 
is equivalent to the squares of the three sides of the sacred triangle, and 
this is the opinion of Philo; or 10, which multiplied to the fourth power 
gives 10,000, and is supposed to be the perfect number, as 5 is the im- 
perfect number : or again, the number is said to be made up of the two 
progressions of the Pythagorean tetractys 1 : 2 : 4 : 8 and 1:3:9:27. All 
these explanations show curious coincidences of number, which may put us 
on our guard against accepting other coincidences, but none of them is 
self-proving. A later explanation — that of Weber — deserves more notice. 

Pie argues rightly for the substantial genuineness of the text; and 
supposes that the first division of the passage contains a general de- 
scription of the proportions which are to be found in the second half ; 
and explains * assimilating and dissimilating ’ and ‘ waxing and waning ’ 
numbers respectively as numbers which form squares or which form 
oblongs. The increments of number which give these proportions are 
said to ‘equal’ and be ‘equalled in power’ (Swautvai *ai 8wao rrevdfiewu), 
because they are obtained by multiplying powers of 3, 4, 5 — the numbers 
of the Pythagorean triangle, of which the hypothenuse is said to ‘ equal 
in power’ the two lesser sides. The numbers themselves are 6400, 4800, 
3600, and 2700, which are then gained afresh by multiplying the numbers 
4x5 and 3x5 (cmV piros TTvdfiTjv ntunddi av£vy(\s) with the sides of the 

Pythagorean triangle : — 

First Series. Second Series. 

i.c. 3x4x5 = 60 3x3x5 = 45 

4x4x5 = 80 4x3x5 = 60 

5x4x5 = 100. 5x3x5 = 75- 

The former series squared, and multiplied with the second, gives the 

following results : — 

60s = 3,600 
8oa = 6,400 
1002 = 10,000. 

60 x 45 = 2,700 
80 x 60 = 4,800 
100 x 75 = *1,500. 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

107 

Thus two convenient series of numbers are obtained which agree with 
the description already given in the first part of the passage, and with 
the explanation of assimilating and dissimilating numbers as square and 
oblong. But there is no proof that this was the manner in which Plato 
intended the roots 3 : 5 and 4 : 5 to be multiplied. Nor is it likely that he 
would have used the term rp)s avfadds to mean, not the raising of them 
to the third power, but the multiplication of them by 3, 4, 5. Nor is 
there any reason to suppose with Weber, that the words, ‘ this whole 
number is geometrical' refer only to the second of the two harmonies, 
or that the word TtXtios would be applied in such a passage as this (in 
which periods of revolution are spoken of) to any but a cyclical number ; 
or that the first harmony answers to the perfect number. 

And here we take leave of the difficulty, without attempting a further 
solution. The meaning of many words in the passage is so uncertain 
that there is little probability of our finding the answer to the riddle. 
Among uncertain expressions may be reckoned, Swapcvai, dvvaarfvopfvat, 

ofxoiov vtu>v, dvofioLovvTCiv, av£6vro)v, (f)6ivavTU)Vj (irirpiTos irvOprjv vepnadi trvfu- 
yds ) and even the words Appovia, re'Xaos, av^crtis, tv cp 7rpa)rcp, yeooperpiKas, 
are variously explained ; again, the clause hopdav . . . Svfli/ may be either 
taken as an explanation of appyrav or as a further subtraction of 100, 
so that the entire number becomes either 4900 or 4800. And there is 
the further uncertainty of the relation of the first to the second half of 
the passage, and of the two harmonies to one another. 

The discovery of the riddle would be useless, and would throw no 
light on ancient mathematics. The point of interest is that Plato 
should have used such a symbol, and that so much of the Pythagorean 
spirit should have existed in his age. His general meaning is, that 
divine creation is perfect, and represented or presided over by a perfect 
or cyclical number; human generation is imperfect, and represented 
or presided over by an imperfect number or series of numbers. The 
number 5040, which is the number of the State in the Laws, is expressly 
based by him on utilitarian grounds, namely, the convenience of the 
number for division ; but in this passage he is thinking of Pythagorean 
symbols and not of utility. The contrast of the perfect and imperfect 
number may have been easily suggested by the corrections of the cycle, 
which were made first by Meton and secondly by Callippus ; (the latter 
is said to have been a pupil of Plato). Of the degree of importance or 
of exactness to be attributed to the problem, the number of the tyrant 

io8 

THE REPUBLIC. 

in book ix. (729 = 365 x 2), and the slight correction of the error in the 
number 5040-7-12 (Laws, 771 C) may furnish a criterion. There is 
nothing surprising in the circumstance that those who were seeking for 
order in nature and had found order in number, should have imagined 
one to give law to the other, or should have held that a mysterious con- 
nection existed between them. 

BOOK IX. Last of all comes the tyrannical man, about whom we 
have to enquire, Whence he is, and how does he live — in happiness or 
in miser)' ? There is, however, a previous question of the nature and 
number of the appetites, which I should like to consider first. Some of 
them are unlawful, and yet admit of being chastened and weakened in 
various degrees by the power of reason and law. * What appetites do 
you mean ?’ I mean those which are awake when the reasoning powers 
are asleep, which get up and walk about naked without any self-respect 
or shame ; and there is no conceivable folly or crime, however cruel or 
unnatural, of which, in imagination, they may not be guilty. ‘ T’*ue,’ he 
said, * very true.’ But when a man’s pulse beats temperately ; and he has 
supped on a feast of reason and come to a knowledge of himself before 
going to rest, and has satisfied his desires just enough to prevent their 
perturbing his reason, which remains clear and transparent, and when 
he is free from quarrel and heat, — the visions which he has on his bed 
are least irregular and abnormal. I want you to bear in mind, for I 
have something more to say about this, that even in good men there is 
such an irregular wild-beast nature, which peers out in sleep. 

To return: — You remember what was said of the democrat; that he 
was the son of a miserly father, and that he encouraged the saving 
desires and repressed the ornamental and expensive ones ; presently he 
got into fine company, and began to entertain a dislike to his father's 
narrow ways ; and being a better man than the corrupters of his youth, 
he came to a mean, and led a life, not of lawless or slavish passion, but 
of regular and successive indulgence. Now imagine a generation to 
have passed away. The youth has become a father, and has a son who 
is exposed to the same temptations, and has companions who lead him 
into every sort of iniquity, which they call liberty, and he has parents 
and friends who try to keep him right. The counsellors of evil find that 
their only chance of success is to implant in his soul a monster drone, or 

INTRODUCTION. 

109 

love ; while other desires buzz around him and mystify him with sweet 
sounds and scents, this monster love takes possession of him and carries 
him off, and puts an end to every true or modest thought or wish that 
remains in him. Love has of old been called a tyranny, and drunken- 
ness is a tyranny, and a madman has in him the spirit of a tyrant, and 
is fancying that he can rule over gods and men. And the tyrannical 
man, whether made by nature or habit, is just a drinking, lusting, infuri- 
ated sort of animal. 

And how does such an one live ? ‘ That is for you to tell me, not for 

me to tell you/ Well then, I fancy that he will live amid revelries and 
harlotries, and love will dwell in the house, lord and master of all that is 
therein. Many desires require much money; he spends all that he has 
and borrows more, and when he has nothing the young ravens are still 
in the nest in which they were hatched, crying for food. Love, whose 
attendants they are, sets them on ; and they must be gratified by force 
or fraud, or if not, they become painful and troublesome; and as the 
new pleasures take the place of the old ones, so the son will be for 
taking the inheritance of his parents ; and if they show signs of refusing, 
he will defraud and deceive them ; and if they openly resist, do not you 
think that he will possibly be guilty of some tyrannical action ? ‘ I can only 
say, that I should not much like to be in their place/ But, O heavens, 
Adeimantus, to think that for some new-fangled love of a harlot or for 
the waxen beauty of a youth, he will give up his old father and mother, 
best and dearest of friends, or even enslave them to the fancies of the 
hour. A tyrannical son is truly a blessing to his father and mother. 
He begins by taking their property first ; and when that comes to an end, 
and he finds his lusts still pressing upon him, he turns burglar or pick- 
pocket, or robs a temple. Love, attended by the enfranchised lusts, gets 
the better of the thoughts of his youth, and he becomes always in life 
and reality the monster that he was sometimes in sleep. Love is his 
only lord, under the rule of whom he is strong in all violence and law- 
lessness ; ready for any deed of daring that will supply the wants of his 
rabble-rout, whether coming from without or generated within. Where 
there are only a few such in a well-ordered State, in time of war they go 
out and become the mercenaries of the tyrant. In time of peace they 
stay at home and do mischief ; they are the thieves, burglars, footpads, 
cutpurses, man-stealers of the community ; and if they are able to speak, 
they come out in another line as false-witnesses and informers. ‘ Yes,' 

I IO 

THE REPUBLIC . 

said he, ‘ and a small catalogue of crimes truly, even if the perpetrators of 
them are not numerous.’ Yes, I said; but small and great are relative 
terms, and the greatest crimes which are done by them do not approach 
the tyrant; and where there are many of them and they wax strong, 
they create the tyrant out of their number. They choose out their re- 
presentative man, and if the State resists, then the old story is repeated 
— they beat their fatherland and motherland, and place mercenaries over 
them who are their servants. Such men in their early days live with 
flatterers, and they themselves flatter others, and are all things to all 
men, in order to gain their ends ; but they soon discard them, when they 
have no need of them ; they are always cither masters or servants, never 
the friends of anybody; no tyrant ever tasted the joys of friendship. 
And they are utterly treacherous and unjust, if the nature of justice be at 
all understood by us. In a word, such men are the waking vision of the 
dream which we described ; and he who is the most of a tyrant by 
nature, and leads the life of a tyrant for the longest time, will be the 
worst of them, and being the worst of them, will also be the most 
miserable. 

Like man, like State, — the tyrannical man will answer to tyranny, 
which is the extreme opposite of the royal State ; for one is the 
best and the other the worst. We need not stop to enquire which is 
which, but may at once proceed to the next question, Which is the 
happier? And great and terrible as is the outward appearance of the 
tyrant sitting upon a throne in the midst of his satellites, let us not be 
afraid to go in and ask ; and the answer is, that the monarchical is the 
happiest, and the tyrannical the most miserable, of States. And may we 
not ask the same question about the men themselves, requesting some 
one to look into them who is able to penetrate the inner nature of man, 
and will not be struck all of a heap like a child by the vain pomp of 
tyranny. I will suppose that he is one who has lived with him, and has 
seen him in his undress when he is no longer a hero, and perhaps in 
the hour of trouble and danger. Let him who has seen all this tell us 
of his happiness and misery. 

In order to elicit the points of comparison in the individual and in the 
State, I will ask first of all, whether the State is likely to be free or 
enslaved ; will there not be a little freedom and a great deal of slavery ? 
And the freedom is of the bad, and the slavery of the good ; and this is 
true of the man as well as of the State ; for his soul is full of meanness 

INTRODUCTION. 

1 1 1 

and slavery, and the better part is that which is enslaved, and the 
madman and beast have power over him. He cannot do what he would, 
and his mind is full of confusion ; taking the whole man, he is the re- 
verse of a freeman. And the State will be poor and not rich, and the 
man's soul will be poor. And the State will be full of groans and 
lamentations and sorrow, and will be the most miserable of States, and 
the man will be full of sorrows, and the most miserable of men. No, 
not the most miserable, for there is yet a more miserable. ‘ Who is 
that?' The tyrannical man who has the misfortune also to become a 
public tyrant. ‘ There I suspect that you are right.’ Suspect, yes, but 
how much better to be sure about a matter which is of vital importance 
to morals. He is like a wealthy owmer of slaves, only he has more of 
them than any private individual ; and, as you know, the owners are not 
generally in any fear of their slaves. And why is this ? Because the whole 
city is in a league which protects the individual. But suppose that one 
of these owners and his household is carried off by a god into a wilder- 
ness, where there are no freemen to help him (he is the master say of 
about fifty slaves); — will he not be in an agony of terror? — will he not 
be compelled to flatter his slaves and to promise them many things 
much against his will ? And suppose the same god who carried him off 
were to surround him with neighbours who declare that no man has any 
right to have slaves, and that the owners of them should be punished 
with death. * Still worse and worse ! He will be in the midst of his 
enemies.’ And is not our tyrant such an imprisoned, captive soul, who 
is made up of fears and loves, who has a swarm of passions which he is 
incapable of indulging ; living indoors always like a woman, and being 
jealous of those who have the freedom of going about and seeing the 
world ? 

Having so many evils, will not the most miserable of men be still 
more miserable in a public station? Master of others when he is not 
master of himself, like a sick man who is compelled to be an athlete, — 
he is the meanest of slaves and most abject of flatterers; wanting all 
things, and having all his desires craving about him; always in fear 
and distraction, like the State of which he is the representative. His 
jealous, hateful, faithless temper grows worse with command ; he is more 
and more faithless, envious, unrighteous, the most wretched of men, and 
the cause of wretchedness to himself and to others. And so let us 
have a final trial and proclamation ; need we hire the herald, or shall I 

I 12 

THE REPUBLIC. 

proclaim the result ? The son of Ariston (the best) is of opinion that the 
best and justest of men is also the happiest, and that this is he who is 
the most royal master of himself; and that the unjust man is he who 
is the greatest tyrant of himself and his State. ‘ Let the proclamation 
be made.’ And shall I add further — ‘ seen or unseen by gods or 
men ?’ 

This is our first proof. The second is derived from the three kinds 
of pleasure, which answer to the three divisions of the soul — reason, 
passion, desire ; under which last may be comprehended avarice as well 
as sensual appetite, while passion may be said to include ambition, party- 
feeling, love of reputation. Reason, on the other hand, is solely directed 
to the attainment of truth, and may be truly described as a lover of 
knowledge and wisdom, careless of money and reputation. In accord- 
ance with the difference of men’s natures, one of these three principles is 
in the ascendant — love of wisdom, love of honour, love of gain, having 
their several pleasures corresponding to them. Interrogate now the 
three natures, and each one will be found praising his own pleasures 
and depreciating those of others. The money-maker will contrast the 
vanity of knowledge with the solid advantages of gold and silver. The 
ambitious man will think knowledge which is without honour all smoke 
and nonsense ; whereas the philosopher will regard only the fruition of 
truth, which is not far from the heaven of pleasure, and will deem all 
other pleasures to be necessary rather than good. Now, how shall we 
decide between them ? * I cannot say.' Well, is there any better cri- 
terion than experience and knowledge? And which of the three has 
the truest knowledge and the widest experience ? The experience of 
youth makes the philosopher acquainted with the two kinds of desire, 
but the avaricious and ambitious man never taste the pleasures of truth 
and wisdom. Honour he has equally with them ; for the wise man is 
honoured as well as the great and rich ; and he is their equal in expe- 
rience ; they are ‘ judged of him,’ but he is ‘ not judged of them,’ for 
they never attain to the knowledge of true being. And his instrument 
is reason, whereas their measure is wealth and honour; and if by reason 
we are to judge, his good will be the truest. And so we arrive at the 
result that the pleasure of the rational part of the soul, and a life passed 
in such pleasure, is the pleasantest. He who has a right to judge 
judges thus. And next comes the life of ambition, and, in the third 
place, that of money. 

INTRODUCTION. 

”3 

Twice has the just man overthrown the unjust — once more, as in an 
Olympian contest, first offering up a prayer to the saviour Zeus, let him 
try a fall. A wise man whispers to me that the pleasures of the wise are 
true and pure ; all others are a shadow only. Let us examine this : Is 
not pleasure opposed to pain, and is there not a mean state of rest 
between the two ? When a man is sick, nothing is more pleasant to him , 
than health. This he never found out while he was well. But in pain 
he desires only to cease from pain ; his wishes reach no further. When 
he is in an ecstasy of pleasure, on the other hand, rest is painful to him. 
Thus rest or cessation is both pleasure and pain. But can that which 
is neither be both? Again, pleasure and pain are motions, but the 
absence of them is rest : here is another contradiction. Thus we are led 
to infer that all this is appearance only, and witchery of the senses. And 
these are not the only pleasures, for there are others which have no pre- , 
ceding pains. Pure pleasure then is not the absence of pain, nor pure 
pain the absence of pleasure ; although most of the pleasures which reach 
the mind through the body are of this character, and have not only their 
reactions when they depart, but their anticipations before they come. 
Shall I find a simile which will help to describe them ? There is in nature 
an upper, lower, and middle region, and he who goes from the lower to 
the middle imagines that he is going up ; but he who ascends from the 
upper to the middle imagines that he is making the downward descent ; 
and this confusion happens with pleasure and pain, and with many other 
things. The man who compares grey with black, calls grey white ; and 
the man who compares absence of pain with pain, calls the absence of 
pain pleasure. Again, hunger and thirst are inanitions of the body, 
ignorance and folly of the soul ; and food is the satisfaction of the one, 
and knowledge of the other. Now which is the purer satisfaction — that 
of eating and drinking, or that of knowledge ? Consider the matter 
thus : The satisfaction of that which has more existence is truer than 
of that which has less. And the invariable and immortal has a more 
real existence than the variable and mortal, and has a corresponding 
measure of knowledge and truth. And the soul has more existence and 
truth and knowledge than the body, and is therefore more really satis- 
fied and has a more natural pleasure. Those who feast only on earthly 
food, are always going at random up to the middle and down again ; 
but they never pass into the true upper world, or have a taste of true 
pleasure. Like animals, their heads are always turned towards the 

VOL. II. 

i 

THE REPUBLIC . 

i 1 4 

ground, and their bodies are on the dining-table ; they butt at one another 
with iron horns and hoofs, and kill one another by reason of their insa- 
tiable lust, for they are not filled with true being, and their vessel is leaky. 
(Cp. Gorgias, 243 A, foil.) Their pleasures are mixed with pain, and 
are mere shadows of pleasure, infected by their proximity to the opposite, 
intensified by contrast, and therefore intensely desired; and men go fight- 
ing about them, as Stesichorus says that they fought about the shadow of 
Helen, in ignorance of the truth. 

The same may be said of the passionate element, whether the ruling 
motive be ambitious envy, party violence, or angry discontent. The 
desires of the ambitious soul, as well as of the covetous, have an inferior 
satisfaction. Only when under the guidance of reason do either of the 
other principles attain the true pleasure which is natural to them. When 
not attaining, they compel the other parts of the soul to pursue a shadow of 
pleasure which is not theirs. And the more distant they are from law and 
order, the more illusive will be their pleasures. The desires of love and 
tyranny are the farthest from this limit, and those of the king are nearest 
to it. There is one genuine pleasure, and two spurious ones : the tyrant 
goes beyond these latter, beyond law and reason. Nor can the measure 
of his inferiority be told, except in a figure. The tyrant is the third re- 
moved from the oligarch, and has therefore not a shadow of his pleasure, 
but the shadow of a shadow only. The oligarch, again, is thrice removed 
from the king, and thus we get the formula 3x3, which is the number 
of a surface, representing the shadow which is the tyrant’s pleasure, and 
if you like to cube this number of the beast you will find that the mea- 
sure of the difference amounts to 729 ; the king is 729 times more happy 
than the tyrant. And this extraordinary number is nearly equal to the 
number of days and nights which there are in a year (365 x 2 = 730); 
and is therefore akin to human life. This is the measure of the in- 
terval between a good and bad man in happiness only, — what must be 
the difference between them in comeliness of life, in beauty and virtue ? 

Perhaps you may remember some one saying at the beginning of our 
discussion that the unjust man was profited if he had the reputation of 
justice? Now that we have determined the nature of justice and in- 
justice, let us make an ideal image of the soul like the fabulous mon- 
sters of mythology, which will personify his words. First of all, fashion a 
multitudinous many-headed beast, having a ring of heads of all manner 
of animals, tame and wild, and able to produce and change them at 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

i*5 

pleasure. ‘ That would be no easy task for a statuary ; but as imagi- 
nation can create anything, I will do as you say.’ Suppose now another 
form of a lion, and another of a man ; the second smaller than the first, 
and the third smaller than the second, and join them together and cover 
them outside with a human skin, in which you completely conceal all 
that is within. When this has been done, let us tell the supporter of 
injustice that he is feeding up the two beasts and starving the man, 
whom they torment and hate. The maintainer of justice, on the other 
hand, is aiming at strengthening the man; he is nourishing the gentle 
part and making an alliance with the lion half, in order that he may be 
able to keep dawn the many-headed hydra, and bring all into unity with 
each other and with themselves. Thus in every point of view, whether 
in relation to pleasure, honour, or advantage, the just man is right, and 
the unjust wrong. 

Come then, let us reason with the unjust, who is not intentionally in 
error. ‘ Sweet sir,’ we will say to him, ‘ is not the noble that which sub- 
jects the beast to the man, or rather to the God in man ; the ignoble, 
that which subjects the man to the beast?’ He can hardly avoid ad- 
mitting this. And if so, who would receive gold on condition that he 
was to degrade the noblest part of himself under the worst ? — who would 
sell his son or daughter into the hands of brutal and evil men, for any 
amount of money? And will he sell his own fairer and diviner part 
without any compunction to the most godless and foul ? Would he not 
be a traitor worse than Eriphyle, who sold her husband’s life for a neck- 
lace? And intemperance is the letting loose of the multiform monster, 
and pride and sullenness are the growth and tension of the lion and 
serpent element, and luxury and effeminacy are caused by the too great 
relaxation of this. Flattery and meanness again arise from the spirited 
element being subjected to avarice, and the lion metamorphosed into a 
monkey. And the real disgrace of handicraft arts is, that those who are 
engaged in them have no control over themselves ; they have to flatter, 
instead of mastering their desires ; therefore we say that they should be 
placed under the control of the better principle in another because they 
have none of their own ; not, as Thrasymachus imagined, to the injury 
of the subjects, but for their good. And this is the intention of the edu- 
cation of the young, — namely, to give them self-control ; the law desires 
to nurse up in them a higher principle, and when this is attained, they 
may go their ways. 

THE REPUBLIC. 

1 16 

‘What, then, shall a man profit, if he gain the whole world’ and 
become more and more wicked ? Or what shall he profit by escaping 
discovery, if the concealment of evil prevents the cure? Whereas if he 
had been punished, the brutal part of him would have been silenced, and 
the gentler element liberated ; and he would have begun to add to tem- 
perance justice, and to justice wisdom, which is a union fairer far than the 
combination of beauty and health and strength in the body in the same 
degree that the soul is fairer than the body. He who has understanding 
will honour knowledge above all, and to this direct his energies ; in the 
next place he will keep under his body, not only for the sake of health 
and strength, but for the sake of creating in himself the most perfect 
harmony of body and soul. In the acquisition of riches, too, he will aim 
at the same harmonious limit; he will not be led by the admiration of 
the vulgar to heap up wealth without measure, but he will fear that the 
increase of wealth will disturb the constitution of his own soul. For 
the same reason he will only accept such honours as will make him a 
better man ; any others he will decline. ‘ Then,’ said he, * he will not 
be a politician if this is his chief care.’ By the dog of Egypt, he will, I 
said, in his own city, but probably not in his native country, unless by 
some divine accident. ‘ I understand you,’ he said, * to mean that he 
will be a citizen of the ideal city, which has no place upon earth.' But, 
I replied, there is a pattern of such a city, which is laid up in heaven for 
him who has eyes to see and desires to order his life after that image. 
Whether such a state is or ever will be, matters not ; he will act accord- 
ing to that pattern and no other. 

.... The most remarkable points in the 9th Book of the Republic 
are: — (1) the account of pleasure; (2) the number of the interval which 
divides the king from the tyrant ; (3) the pattern which is in heaven. 

1. Plato’s account of pleasure is remarkable for moderation, and in 
this respect contrasts with the later Platonists and the views which are 
attributed to them by Aristotle. He is not, like the Cynics, opposed to 
all pleasure, but rather desires that the several parts of the soul shall 
have their natural satisfaction; he even agrees with the Epicureans in 
describing pleasure as something more than the absence of pain. This 
is proved by the circumstance that there are pleasures which have no 
antecedent pains (as he also remarks in the Philebus), such as the plea- 
sures of smell, and also the pleasures of hope and anticipation. In 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

1 17 

the previous book (pp. 558, 559) he had made the distinction between 
necessary and unnecessary pleasure, which is repeated by Aristotle, and 
he now observes that there are a further class of ‘ wild beast' pleasures, 
corresponding to Aristotle’s He dwells upon the relative and 

unreal character of sensual pleasures and the illusion which arises out 
of the contrast of pleasure and pain, pointing out the superiority of the 
pleasures of reason, which are at rest, over the fleeting pleasures of sense 
and emotion. The pre-eminence of royal pleasure is shown by the fact 
that reason is able to form a judgment of the lower pleasures, while the 
two lower parts of the soul are incapable of judging the pleasures of rea- 
son. Thus, in his treatment of pleasure, as in many other subjects, the 
philosophy of Plato is ‘ sawn up into quantities' by Aristotle ; the analysis 
which was originally made by him became in the next generation the 
foundation of technical distinctions. Both in Plato and Aristotle we 
may observe the illusion under which the ancients fell of regarding the 
transience of pleasure as a proof of its unreality, and of confounding 
the permanence of the intellectual pleasures with the unchangeableness 
of the knowledge from which they are derived. All experience shows 
us that the pleasures of knowledge, though more elevating, are not more 
lasting than any other pleasures, and are almost equally dependent on 
the accidents of our bodily state. (Cp. Introd. to Philebus.) 

2. The number of the interval which separates the king from the 
tyrant and royal from tyrannical pleasures is 729 the cube of 9, which 
Plato characteristically designates as a number suitable to human life, 
because nearly equivalent to the number of days and nights in the year. 
He is desirous of proclaiming that the interval between them is im- 
measurable, and invents a formula to give expression to his idea. 
Those who spoke of justice as a cube, of virtue as an art of measuring 
(Prot. 357 A), saw no inappropriateness in conceiving the soul under 
the figure of a line, or the pleasure of the tyrant as separated from the 
pleasure of the king by the numerical interval of 729. And in modern 
times we sometimes use metaphorically what Plato employed as a phi- 
losophical formula. ‘ It is not easy to estimate the loss of the tyrant, 
except perhaps in this way,’ says Plato. So we might say, that although 
the life of a good man is not to be compared to that of a bad man, yet 
you may measure the difference between them by valuing one minute of 
the one at an hour of the other (‘one day in thy courts is better than a 
thousand'), or you might say that ‘there is an infinite difference.’ But 

Digitized by Google 

1 1 8 

THE REPUBLIC. 

this is not so much as saying, in homely phrase, ‘ they are a thousand 
miles asunder/ And accordingly Plato finds the natural vehicle of his 
thoughts in a progression of numbers ; this arithmetical formula he 
draws out with the utmost seriousness, and both here and in the number 
of generation seems to find an additional proof of the truth of his specu- 
lation in forming the number into a geometrical figure. In speaking of 
the number 729 as proper to human life, he probably intended to inti- 
mate that one year of the tyrannical = 12 hours of the royal life. 

The simple observation that the comparison of two solids is effected 
by the comparison of the cubes of their sides, is the mathematical 
groundwork of this fanciful expression. There is some difficulty in 
explaining the steps by which the number 729 is obtained; the oligarch 
is removed in the third degree from the royal and aristocratical, and the 
tyrant in the third degree from the oligarchical, but we have to arrange 
the terms as the sides of a square and to count the oligarch twice over, 
thus reckoning them not as = 5 but as = 9. The square of 9 is passed 
lightly over as only a step towards the cube. 

3. Towards the close of the Republic, Plato seems to be more and 
more convinced of the ideal character of his own speculations. At the 
end of the 9th Book the pattern which is in heaven takes the place 
of the city of philosophers on earth. The vision which has received 
form and substance at his hands, is now discovered to be at a distance. 
And yet this distant kingdom is also the rule of man’s life. (Bk.vii.540E.) 
(‘ Say not lo ! here, or lo ! there, for the kingdom of God is within you.') 
Thus a note is struck which prepares for the revelation of a future life 
in the following Book. But the future life is present still; the ideal of 
politics is to be realized in the individual. 

BOOK X. Many things pleased me in the order of our State, but 
there is nothing which I like better than the regulation about poetry. 
The division of the soul throws a new light on our exclusion of imita- 
tion. For I do not mind saying to you, what I would rather not have 
you repeat to the poets and their votaries, that all poetry is an outrage 
on the understanding of the hearers, if they have not that balm of know- 
ledge which heals error. I have loved Homer ever since I was a boy, 
and he appears to me to be the great author and master of tragic poetry. 
But much as I love the man, I love truth more, and therefore I must 
speak out : and first of all, will you tell me what is the nature of imita- 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

u9 

tion, for really I do not understand ? * How likely then that I shall 

understand ! ' That may very well be, for the duller often sees better 
than the keener eye. ‘ That is true, but in your presence I can hardly 
venture to say what I think.' Then suppose that we begin in the old 
fashion, with the doctrine of universal ; — let us assume the existence of 
beds and tables. There is one idea of a bed, or of a table, which the 
maker of each had in his mind when making them ; he did not make 
the ideas of beds and tables, but he made beds and tables according to 
the ideas. And is there not a maker of the works of all workmen ? * A 

rare artist that I’ Wait a little, and you may have some reason for that 
exclamation : This is he who makes plants and animals, himself, and all 
other things ; the earth and heaven, and things under the earth ; he 
makes the Gods also. ‘ He must be a wizard, indeed !’ But do you not 
see that there is a sense in which you could do the same? You have 
only to take a mirror, and catch the reflection of the sun, and the earth, 
and plants and animals, and yourself in that, — there you have made 
them. ‘ Yes, in appearance, but not in reality.’ And that is what I 
mean ; the painter is such a creator as you are with the mirror, and is 
even more unreal than the carpenter, although the carpenter or any other 
artist cannot be said to make the absolute bed. ‘ That is what the wise 
tell us.’ Nor is there any reason for wondering that his bed has but an 
indistinct relation to the truth. Reflect : — Here are three beds : one in 
nature, which is made by God ; another, which is made by the carpenter ; 
and the third, by the painter; and there are three artists, who preside 
over them, — God, the maker of the bed, the painter. God only made 
one, nor could he have made more than one ; for if there had been two, 
there would always have been a third — more absolute and abstract than 
either, under which they would have been included. We may therefore 
conceive God as the natural maker of the bed, and in another sense the 
carpenter is also the maker ; but the painter may be more properly de- 
scribed as the imitator of what the other two make ; he has to do with 
a creation which is thrice removed from reality. And the tragic poet is 
an imitator, and, like every other imitator, is thrice removed from the 
king and from the truth. The painter imitates not the absolute truth, 
but the truth of the created object. And this, without being really 
different, appears to be different, and has many points of view, of which 
only one is caught by the painter, who represents everything because 
he represents a piece of everything, and that piece an image. And he 

120 

THE REPUBLIC. 

can paint any artist, although he knows nothing of their arts ; and this 
with sufficient skill to deceive children or simple people. Let us now 
imagine that some one comes and tells us of his having met a man who 
knows all that everybody knows, and better than anybody. Should we 
not infer that he is a simpleton who has no discernment of truth and 
falsehood, and has met with a wizard or enchanter, whom he fancied to 
be all-wise ? And when we hear persons saying that Homer and the 
tragedians know all the arts and all the virtues, must we not infer that 
the persons who say these things are under a similar delusion ? they do 
not see that the poets are imitators, and that their creations are only 
imitations. 1 Very true/ But if a person could create as well as imitate, 
he would rather leave some permanent work and not an imitation only; 
he would rather be the receiver than the giver of praise. ‘ Yes, for then 
he would have more honour and advantage/ And now let me apply 
this to the case of Homer and the poets. Friend Homer, I would say 
to him, I am not going to ask you about medicine, or any of the arts to 
which your poems incidentally refer, but about their main subjects, — 
war, military tactics, politics. If you are not the creator of a shadow 
thrice removed from the truth but only twice, please to inform us what 
good you have ever done to mankind ? Is there any city which pro- 
fesses to have received laws from you, as Sicily and Italy have from 
Charondas, Sparta from Lycurgus, Athens from Solon ? Or was there 
ever any war carried on by your counsels ? or any notion or invention 
which is attributed to you, as there is to Thales and Anacharsis ? Or is 
there any Homeric way of life, such as Pythagoras taught, in which you 
instructed men, and which is called after you? ‘ Nothing of the kind is 
recorded, and indeed that companion of Homer who had the misfortune 
to be called Flesh-child, was more unfortunate in his breeding than he 
was in his name, if, as tradition says, Homer in his lifetime was allowed 
by him and his other friends to starve/ Yes, that is the tradition ; but 
could this ever have happened if Homer had really been the educator of 
Hellas? Would he not have had many attached followers? Can we 
suppose that Protagoras and Prodicus could have persuaded their con- 
temporaries that no one could manage house or State without them, at 
which their admirers were so greatly delighted that they were ready to 
carry them about on their heads, and that Homer and Hesiod would 
have been allowed to go about as beggars— I mean if they had really 
been able to do the world any good, would not mankind have sought 

INTRODUCTION . 

12 I 

after them more than after gold and silver, and have gone abort with 
them in order to get education ? But they did not, and therefore we may 
infer that Homer and all the poets are only imitators, who imitate the 
appearance of all things ; as a painter may paint a cobbler by a know- 
ledge of figure and colour without any practice in cobbling, so the poet 
can put the colours of language on any art, and give harmony and 
rhythm to the cobbler and also to the general ; for you know that mere 
narration, when deprived of the ornaments of metre, is like a face which 
has lost the beauty of youth and never had any other. Once more, 'he 
imitator has no knowledge of reality, but only of appearance. The painter 
paints, and the worker in metal or leather makes a bridle and reins, but 
neither understands the use of them — the knowledge of this is confined 
to the horseman ; and this is true of other things. Thus we have three 
arts : one of use, another of invention, a third of imitation ; and the user 
furnishes the rule to the two others. The flute-player will know the good 
and bad flute, and the maker will put faith in him ; but the imitator will 
neither know nor have faith— neither science nor opinion can be ascribed 
to him. Imitation, then, is devoid of knowledge, being only a kind of play 
or sport, — and the tragic and epic poets are in the highest degree imitators. 

And now let us enquire, what is the faculty in man which answers to 
imitation ? Allow me to explain my meaning thus : — Objects are dif- 
ferently seen when in the water and when out of the water, when near 
and when at a distance; and the painter or juggler makes use of this 
variation to impose upon us. And the art of measuring and weighing 
and calculating comes in to assist our bewildered minds, and save them 
from the power of appearance ; for, as we were saying, two contrary 
opinions of the same about the same and at the same time, cannot both 
of them be true. But which is true is determined by the art of calcu- 
lation, and this is allied to the better faculty in the soul, as the arts of 
imitation are to the worse. And there is yet another aspect of poetical 
imitation, which I will invite you to consider. Men imitate actions 
voluntary or involuntary, in which there is an expectation of a good or 
bad result, and present experience of pleasure and pain. But is a man 
in harmony with himself when he is the subject of these conflicting in- 
fluences ? Is there not rather a contradiction in him ? Let me further 
ask, whether he is more likely to control sorrow when he is alone or 
when he is in company with others ? ‘ The latter.’ And reason and 

law are the controlling principles, while feeling would lead him to 

122 

THE REPUBLIC. 

indulge his sorrow. The law tells him to be patient, and that he cannot 
know whether his affliction is good or evil, and that no human thing is 
of any great consequence, but that sorrow is the greatest impediment to 
that which we most need : — and this is good counsel, which will advise 
what is best under the circumstances. For when we stumble, we should 
not like children set up a cry, holding the part affected in our hands, 
but we should be up and doing, not making a lament but finding a cure. 
The better part is ready to follow the suggestion of reason, while the 
irrational principle is full of grief and sorrow at the recollection. And 
in this irrational part are found the chief materials of the imitative arts. 
For reason is ever in repose and cannot easily be displayed, especially to 
a mixed multitude who have no experience of her. Thus the poet is like 
the painter in two ways : first he paints an inferior degree of truth, and 
secondly, he is concerned with an inferior part of the soul. He indulges 
the feelings, while he enfeebles the reason ; and we refuse to allow him 
to have authority over the mind of man; for he has no measure of 
greater and less, and is a maker of images and very far gone from truth. 

And we have not yet mentioned the heaviest count in the indictment, 
the power which poetry has of injuriously exciting the feelings. When 
we hear Homer, or some tragedian, reciting at length the sorrows of 
heroes lamenting and beating their breast, you know that we sympa- 
thize with them and praise the poet ; and yet in our sorrows any such 
exhibition of feeling is regarded as effeminate and unmanly (cp. Ion, 
535 E). Now, ought a man to feel pleasure in seeing another do what 
he hates and abominates in himself ? Remember that he gives way to 
that which in his own case he would control, whose hunger and thirst 
after sorrow is then satisfied, and that the better principle in us when only 
contemplating another’s sorrow, is apt to be deceived, and does not feel 
that any self-restraint is necessary — he may enjoy the luxury of sorrow 
without disgrace, and will be the gainer by the pleasure. But this self- 
indulgence has a further effect. For he who begins by weeping at the 
sorrows of others, will end by weeping at his own. The same is true 
of comedy, — you may often laugh at buffoonery which you would be 
ashamed to utter, and the love of coarse merriment on the stage will at 
last turn you into a buffoon at home. Poetry feeds and waters the 
passions and desires, and lets them rule instead of ruling them. And 
therefore, when we hear the encomiasts of Homer affirming that he is 
the educator of Hellas, and that he supplies a rule of life for human 

INTRODUCTION . 

123 

things, we may allow that they have good intentions as far as their light 
extends, and agree with them that Homer is a great poet and tragedian. 
At the same time, we will maintain our rule against all poetry which 
goes beyond hymns to the Gods and praises of famous men. Not plea- 
sure and pain, but law and reason shall rule in our State. 

These are our reasons for expelling poetry ; and let us also make an 
apology to her, that she may not charge us with discourtesy. We will 
say to her that there is an ancient quarrel between poetry and philosophy, 
and many are the civilities which pass between them, such as the saying 
of ‘ the she-dog, yelping against her mistress,’ and * the philosophers 
who are ready to circumvent Zeus,’ and ‘ the philosophers who are 
paupers ;’ and there are numberless other signs of enmity between them. 
Still we should like to hear her speak in her own defence. For we 
acknowledge that we are charmed by her; (you would acknowledge, 
would you not, that you are a lover of Homer?) but if she cannot show 
that she is useful as well as delightful, we must do violence to ourselves, 
and like rational lovers renounce our loves, though endeared to us by 
early associations. Having come to years of discretion, we know that 
poetry is not truth, and that a man should be careful how he introduces 
her to that state or constitution which he himself is ; for there is a mighty 
issue at stake — mightier than appears — the good or evil of the human 
soul. And it is not worth while to forsake justice and virtue for the attrac- 
tions of poetry, any more than for the sake of honour or wealth. To 
that he replied, ‘ I agree.’ 

And yet the rewards of virtue are greater far than I have described. 
‘And can we conceive still greater honours?' Why, yes; I said, in the 
brief span of life there can be no greatness worth mentioning. Shall 
an immortal being care about anything short of eternity? ‘Yes, I think 
that he should — but what do you mean?’ Do you not know that the 
soul is immortal ? ‘ Good heavens,’ he said, looking hard at me, ‘ you 
do not mean to say that you can prove that.’ Quite easily, I said. ‘ I 
should like to hear this argument, of which you make so light.’ 

You would admit that there is an element of good and evil, which is 
the salvation and corruption of all things. And all things have their 
own corrupting element, and that which is undestroyed by this is inde- 
structible. And the soul has her own corrupting principles, which are 
injustice, intemperance, cowardice, and the like. But none of these 
destroy the soul in the same sense that disease destroys the body. The 

124 

THE REPUBLIC. 

soul may be full of all iniquities, but is not by reason of them all brought 
any nearer to death. For nothing ever perished by external affection of 
evil, which was not destroyed from within. The body, which is one thing, 
cannot be destroyed by food, which is another, unless infected from within. 
Neither can the soul, which is one thing, be corrupted by the body, 
which is another, unless she herself is corrupted. And as no bodily evil 
can infect the soul, neither can any bodily evil destroy the soul. Nothing 
of the nature of fever or any other disease — not even the discerption of 
the body into the minutest fragments — can kill the soul, unless these things 
can be shown to render the soul unholy and unjust. But no one will ever 
prove that the souls of men will become more unjust because of death. 
And if a person has the audacity to deny this, the answer is— then why 
do criminals require the hand of the executioner, and not die of them- 
selves ? ‘ Truly,' he said, * injustice would lose its terrors if it would bring 
a cessation of evil ; but I should rather think that the injustice which may 
destroy others may greatly quicken and stimulate the life of the unjust.’ 
In that you are right. If the natural inherent evil of the soul be unable 
to destroy the soul, hardly will anything else destroy her. But the soul 
which cannot be destroyed either by internal or external evil must last 
for ever, and if lasting for ever, must be immortal. Now if this be true, 
souls will always exist in the same number. They cannot diminish, 
because they cannot be destroyed ; nor yet increase, for then all would 
become immortal. Neither is the soul variable and diverse ; for that 
which is eternal must be of the fairest composition. If the soul is to be 
conceived truly, she must be viewed in the purity of her nature by the 
light of reason; then we shall behold justice and injustice far more 
clearly than now ; in her present condition we see her only like the 
sea-god Glaucus, knocked about and crushed by the waves, overgrown 
with sea-weed and shells, and anything but what she by nature is. Her 
true image is to be seen in philosophy, when she is holding converse 
with the divine and immortal and eternal ; — thereby we may conceive 
what she would be if she were wholly devoted to such pursuits ; — now 
she is bruised and maimed in the sea, which is the world, and has been 
crushed against the rocks and covered with earth and stones, which 
adhere to her from the entertainments of earth. Then you might see 
her true nature and know whether she is simple or diverse, — her state 
and form in this present world have been sufficiently described. 

Thus far I have said nothing of the rewards and honours which 

INTRODUCTION. 

125 

Homer and Hesiod attribute to her. Justice in herself has been shown 
to be best for the soul in herself, though a man may put on a Gyges' 
ring and have a helmet of Hades too. And now I may fairly enumerate 
the rewards of justice in life and after death. I granted, for the sake of 
argument, as you will remember, that evil might perhaps escape the 
knowledge of Gods and men, although this was really impossible. And 
now that I have shown that justice has reality, you must grant me also 
that she has the palm of appearance. In the first place, the just man is 
known to the Gods, and he is therefore the friend of the Gods, and 
therefore the recipient from them of every good, always excepting such 
evil as is the necessary consequence of former sins All things there- 
fore may be supposed to end in good to him, either in life or after 
death, although they may be apparent evils; for the Gods have a care 
of him who desires to be in their likeness. And what shall we say of 
men ? Is not honesty the best policy ? The clever rogue makes a great 
start at first, but he looks foolish when he appears at the goal with his 
ears trailing on his shoulders and without a crown ; whereas the true 
runner perseveres to the end, and receives the prize. And you must 
allow me to repeat all the blessings which you attributed to the fortunate 
unjust, — they are the rulers, can marry and give their children in mar- 
riage to whom they like ; and the evils which you attributed to the 
unfortunate just, do really fall in the end on the unjust, although, as you 
implied, their sufferings may be more genteelly veiled in silence. 

But all the blessings of this present life are as nothing when com- 
pared with those which await good men after death. ‘ I should like to 
hear about them.' Come, then, and I will tell you a tale not taken from 
the ‘ Pilgrim's Progress,’ and yet a story of a valiant man, Er, the son 
of Armenius, who was supposed to have died in battle, and when he had 
been put on the funeral pyre and lain there twelve days, he came to life 
again, and told what he had seen in the world below. He said that 
when his soul left the body, he went with a great company to a won- 
derful place, in which there were two chasms near together in the earth 
beneath, and two chasms corresponding to them in the heaven above. 
And there were judges sitting in the intermediate space, bidding the just 
ascend by the heavenly way on the right hand, having the seal of their 
judgment set upon them before ; and the unjust, having the seal behind, 
were bidden to descend in like manner by the way on the left hand. Him 
they told to look and listen, as he was to be their messenger and to 

126 

THE REPUBLIC. 

carry to men the tidings of the world below. And he looked and saw 
the souls departing at either chasm, some coming up from the earth, 
who were dusty and worn with travel ; others, who came from heaven, 
were clean and bright. They seemed as if they had come a long way, 
and were delighted to rest in the meadow ; and there they discoursed 
with one another of the things which they had seen in the other world. 
Those who came from the earth wept at the remembrance of their 
sorrows, while the spirits from heaven spoke of glorious sights and 
heavenly bliss. He said that for every evil deed they were punished 
tenfold, and the journey was of a thousand years’ duration, because the 
life of man was reckoned as a hundred years. All the cruelties and 
treacheries and impieties which they had done they also suffered — and 
the rewards of virtue were distributed in the same proportion. I omit 
something which he said of infants and young children, and of special 
modes of torture. He was present when one of the spirits asked, — 
Where is Ardiaeus the great ? (Now this Ardiaeus wras a horrible wicked 
tyrant, who had murdered his old father, and his elder brother, a thousand 
years before.) The answer was, ‘He comes not here, and will never 
come.’ And I myself, he said, actually saw this sight of terror. For at 
the entrance of the chasm, as we were about to re-ascend, Ardiaeus ap- 
peared, and some other sinners — most but not all of whom had been 
tyrants — and just as they fancied that they were returning to life, the 
chasm gave a roar, and then fiery wild-looking men who knew what this 
meant, seized him and some others, and bound them hand and foot and 
threw them down, and dragged them along at the side of the road, lace- 
rating them and carding them, and explaining to the passers-by, that they 
were going to be cast into hell. The greatest terror of the souls was lest 
they should hear the voice, and when there was silence they passed up 
with joy ; and to these sufferings there were corresponding delights. 

Now when they had rested seven days, on the eighth day the souls of 
the pilgrims resumed their journey, and in four days came to a spot at 
which was to be seen a column of light like a rainbow, only brighter and 
clearer. One day more brought them to the place, and at the ends of 
the column they saw the chain of light which encompasses heaven and 
earth, after the manner of the rope which fastens a trireme. At the 
extremity there was the distaff of Necessity, on which all the heavenly 
bodies turned ; — the hook and spindle were of adamant, and the whorl 
of a mixed substance. And the form of the whorl was like a number of 

INTRODUCTION. 

127 

boxes fitting into one another with their edges turned upwards, making 
together a single whorl, which was pierced by the spindle. Now the 
outermost had the edge broadest, and the whorls within were narrower 
and narrower. The largest (or fixed stars) was diverse — the seventh (or 
sun) was brightest — the eighth (or moon) shone by the light of the 
seventh — the second and fifth (Mercury and Saturn) were most like one 
another — the third (Venus) had the whitest light — the fourth (Mars) was 
red — the sixth (Jupiter) was in whiteness second. All the seven in their 
orbs moved gently in the opposite direction to the outer circle, and the 
others had various degrees of swiftness and slowness. The spindle 
turned on the knees of Necessity, and a Siren stood hymning upon each 
circle, while Lachesis, Clotho, and Atropos, the daughters of Necessity, 
sat on thrones at equal intervals, singing of past, present, and future, 
responsive to the music of the Sirens ; Clotho from time to time guiding 
the outer circle w'ith a touch of her right hand ; Atropos with her left 
hand touching and guiding the inner circle; Lachesis in turn putting 
forth her hand to guide both of them from time to time. On their 
arrival the pilgrims went to Lachesis, and there was an interpreter who 
arranged them, and taking from her knees lots, and samples of lives, got 
up into a pulpit and said : ‘ Mortal souls, hear the wrords of Lachesis, the 
daughter of Necessity. A new period of mortal life has begun, and you 
may choose what divinity you please — the responsibility of choosing is 
with you — God is blameless.’ After speaking thus, he gave them the 
lots, and then placed on the ground before them the samples of lives. 
There were tyrannies ending in misery and exile, and lives of men 
famous for their different qualities; and also mixed lives, made up of 
wealth and poverty, sickness and health. And here, beloved Glaucon, is 
the great risk of human life, and therefore the whole of education should 
be directed to the acquisition of such a knowledge as will teach a man 
to refuse the evil and choose the good. He should know all the com- 
binations which occur in life— of beauty with poverty or with wealth, — 
of knowledge with external goods, — and at last choose with reference 
to the nature of the soul, regarding that only as the better life which 
makes men better, and leaving the rest And a man must take with him 
an iron sense of truth and right into the world below, that there too he 
may remain undazzled by wealth and determined to avoid the extremes 
and choose the mean. For this, as the interpreter said, and as the 
messenger reported, is the true happiness of man ; and any man, as he 

128 

THE REPUBLIC. 

proclaimed, may, if he choose with understanding, have a good lot, even 
though he come last. 4 Let not the first be careless of his choice, nor the 
last despair/ He spoke ; and when he had spoken, he who had drawn 
the first lot chose a tyranny: he did not see that he was fated to devour 
his own children — and when he afterwards discovered this, he bewailed 
his misfortune, blaming not himself, as the interpreter had bidden him, 
but chance and the Gods and anybody rather than himself. He was one 
of those who had come from heaven, and in his previous life had been a 
citizen of a well-ordered State, but he had only habit and no philosophy. 
And this was the reason why he, like many others, made a bad choice, 
whereas those who came from earth were not in such a hurry to choose. 
Hence there was often an interchange of souls, owing to their inex- 
perience ; if a man had a reasonably good lot, and when he came to earth 
followed the pursuits of philosophy, he was not only happy here, but his 
pilgrimage from this world to the other, and from the other to this, was 
smooth and heavenly. Nothing was more curious than the spectacle of the 
choice, — sad and laughable and wonderful ; most of the souls only seek- 
ing to avoid their own condition in a previous life. He saw the soul of 
Orpheus changing into a swan because he would not be born of a woman ; 
there was Thamyris becoming a nightingale ; musical birds, like the 
swan, choosing to be men ; the twentieth soul, which was that of Ajax, 
preferring the life of a lion to that of a man, in remembrance of the 
injustice which was done to him in the judgment of the arms; and 
Agamemnon, from a like enmity, passing into an eagle. About the 
middle was the soul of Atalanta choosing the honours of an athlete, 
and next to her Epeus going into the nature of a workwoman ; among 
the last was Thersites, who had been metamorphosed into a monkey. 
Thither, the last of all, came Odysseus, and chose the lot of a private 
man, which lay neglected and could hardly be found, and when he found 
it he went away rejoicing, and said that he was weary of ambition, and 
that if he had been first instead of last, he would have made the same 
choice. And he saw men passing into animals, and wild and tame 
animals passing into one another. 

When all the souls had chosen they went to Lachesis, who sent with 
each of them their genius or attendant to fulfil their lot. He first of 
all brought them under the hand of Clotho, who drew them within the 
revolution of the spindle impelled by her hand ; from her they were 
carried to Atropos, who made the threads irreversible ; whence, without 

INTRODUCTION. 

129 

turning round, they passed beneath the throne of Necessity ; and when 
they had all passed, they moved on in scorching heat through the desert 
to the river Ameles (Negligence), the water of which could not be re- 
tained in any vessel ; of this they had all to drink a certain quantity — 
some of them drank more than was required, and he who drank forgot 
all things. Er himself was prevented from drinking. When they had 
gone to rest, about the middle of the night there were thunderstorms and 
earthquakes, and suddenly they were all driven diverse ways, shooting 
like stars to their birth. Concerning his return to the body, he only 
knew that awaking suddenly in the morning he saw himself lying on the 
pyre. 

Thus, Glaucon, the tale has been saved, and will be our salvation if 
we believe that the soul is immortal, and hold fast to the heavenly way 
of Justice and Knowledge. So shall we pass undefiled over the river of 
Lethe, and be dear to ourselves and to the Gods, and have a crown of 
reward and happiness both in this world and also in the millennial 
pilgrimage of the other. 

The Tenth Book of the Republic of Plato falls into two divisions; 
first, resuming an old thread which has been interrupted, he assails the 
poets, who, now that the nature of the soul has been analysed, are seen 
to be very far gone from the truth; and secondly, having shown the 
reality of the happiness of the just, he demands that appearance shall be 
restored to him, and then proceeds to prove the immortality of the soul. 
The argument, as in the Phaedo and Gorgias, is supplemented by the 
vision of a future life. 

Why Plato, who was himself a poet, and whose dialogues are poems 
and dramas, should have been hostile to the poets as a class, and espe- 
cially to the dramatic poets; why he should not have seen that 
truth may be embodied in verse as well as in prose, and that there 
are some indefinable lights and shadows of human life which can only 
be expressed in poetry — some elements of imagination which always 
entwine with reason; why he should have supposed epic verse to be 
inseparably associated with the impurities of the old Hellenic mytho- 
logy ; why he should try Homer and Hesiod by the unfair and prosaic 
test of utility, — are questions which have always been debated amongst 
students of Plato. Though unable to give a complete answer to them, 

vol. n. 

K 

13° 

THE REPUBLIC. 

we may show — first, that his views arose naturally out of the circum- 
stances of his age ; and secondly, we may elicit the truth as well as the 
error which is contained in them. 

He is the enemy of the poets because poetry was declining in his own 
lifetime, and a theatrocracy, as he says in the Laws (Book III. 701 A), 
had taken the place of an intellectual aristocracy. Euripides exhibited 
the last phase of the drama, and in him Plato saw the friend and apologist 
of tyrants, and the Sophist of tragedy. Nor can he have been expected 
to look with favour on the licence of Aristophanes, who had begun 
by satirizing Socrates in the Clouds, and in a similar spirit forty years 
afterwards had satirized the founders of ideal commonwealths in his 
Eccleziazusae, or Female Parliament. The old and middle comedy 
was almost extinct in the age of Plato, and the new had not yet 
arisen. 

There were also deeper reasons for the antagonism of Plato to poetry. 
The profession of an actor was regarded by him as a degradation of 
human nature, for ‘ one man in his life ’ cannot ‘ play many parts the 
characters which the actor performs seem to destroy his own character, 
and to leave nothing which can be truly called himself. Taking this 
view, he is more decided in his expulsion of the dramatic than of the 
epic poets, though he must have known that the Greek tragedians 
afforded noble lessons and examples of virtue and patriotism, to which 
nothing in Homer can be compared. But great dramatic or even great 
rhetorical power is hardly consistent with firmness or strength of mind, 
and dramatic talent is often incidentally associated with a dissolute 
character. 

In the Tenth Book Plato introduces a new series of objections. First, 
he says that the poet or painter is inferior to the maker, and in the third 
degree removed from the truth. In modern times we should say that 
art is not merely imitation, but rather the expression of the ideal in forms 
of sense. Even adopting the humble image of Plato, from which his 
argument derives a colour, we should maintain that in painting a bed the 
painter may ennoble the bed by the folds of the draper)', or by the feeling 
of home which he introduces ; and there have been modem painters who 
have been enabled to impart an ideal interest to a blacksmith's or a car- 
penter’s shop. Still more would this apply to the greatest works of art, 
which seem to be the visible embodiment of the divine. Had Plato 
been asked whether the Zeus of Pheidias was the imitation of an imita- 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

131 

tion only, would he not have been compelled to admit that something 
more was to be found there than in the form of any mortal ? 

, Again, Plato objects to the fine arts that they express the emotional 
rather than the rational part of human nature. He does not admit 
Aristotle’s theory, that tragedy or other serious imitations are a purifi- 
cation of the passions by pity and fear ; to him they appear only to 
afford the opportunity of indulging them. For there may be a gratification 
of the higher as well as of the lower feelings, — thought, and feelings 
which are too deep for thought, may find an utterance in works of 
art. Few persons who have any degree of sensibility would deny that 
they have been really elevated by strains of music or by the sublimity of 
architecture. Plato has himself acknowledged, in the earlier part of the 
Republic, that art might have the effect of harmonizing as well as of 
enervating the mind; but in the Tenth Book he regards the influences 
of art through a sort of Stoic or Puritan medium. Like Kant, he would 
make virtue as abstract as possible, not seeing that human life is neces- 
sarily concrete, and has many forms and colours. 

He tells us that he rejoices in the banishment of the poets, since he 
has found by the analysis of the soul that they are concerned with the 
inferior faculties. The meaning of this is, that the higher part of the 
soul is discovered to be that which deals in abstractions. The poets are 
on a level with their own age, but not on a level with Socrates and Plato ; 
and he was well aware that the older poets could not be made a rule of 
life by any process of legitimate interpretation : his ironical use of them is 
in fact a denial of their authority ; he saw, too, that the poets were not 
critics — as he says in the Apology, ‘ any one was a better interpreter of 
their writings than they were themselves.’ He, too, had ceased to be a 
poet when he became a disciple of Socrates ; though, as he tells us of 
Solon, ‘ he might have been one of the greatest of them, if he had not 
been deterred by other pursuits.’ (Tim. 21 C.) Thus from many 
points of view there is an antagonism between Plato and the poets, 
which he himself thought that he saw foreshadowed in the old quarrel 
between philosophy and poetry. The poets, as he says in the Prota- 
goras, are the Sophists of their day — new foes under an old face. They 
are regarded by him chiefly in one point of view, as the enemies of rea- 
soning and abstraction, though in the case of Euripides more with regard 
to his immoral sentiments about tyrants and the like. For Plato is the 
prophet who came to convince the world — first of the fallibility of sense 

k 2 

Digitized by Google 

132 

THE REPUBLIC . 

and opinion, and secondly of the reality of abstract ideas. Whatever 
strangeness there may appear to be in modern times in opposing philo- 
sophy to poetry, which to us seem to have so many elements in common, 
the strangeness will disappear if we conceive of poetry as allied to sense, 
and of philosophy as equivalent to abstraction. 

The things that are seen are opposed in Scripture to the things that 
are unseen — they are equally opposed in Plato to universals and ideas ; 
all particulars, according to Plato, have a taint of error and even of evil. 
There is no difficulty in seeing that this is an illusion ; for there is no 
more error and evil in an individual man, horse, bed, &c., than in the 
class man, horse, bed, &c. ; nor is the truth which is displayed in indi- 
vidual instances less certain than that which is conveyed through the 
medium of ideas. But Plato, who is deeply impressed with the real 
importance of universals as instruments of thought, attributes to them 
an essential truth which is imaginary and unreal, for universals may be 
often false and particulars true. Had Plato attained to any clear con- 
ception of the individual, which is the synthesis of the universal and 
the particular, or had he been able to distinguish between opinion and 
sensation, wrhich the ambiguity of the w'ords 8o£a, <£atW0at, (Ikos and 
the like, tended to confuse, he would not have denied truth to the 
particulars of sense. 

A similar answer may be given to the other objection of Plato, that the 
imitative arts by their very nature tend to call forth the emotions. For 
the emotions are neither bad nor good in themselves, and are not most 
likely to be controlled by the attempt to eradicate them, but by the 
moderate indulgence of them. And the vocation of art is to present 
thought in the form of feeling, to enlist the feelings on the side of reason, 
to inspire even for a moment courage or resignation ; perhaps to suggest 
a sense of infinity and eternity in a way which mere language is inca- 
pable of attaining. True, the same power which in the purer age of art 
embodies gods and heroes only, may be made to express the voluptuous 
image of a Corinthian courtezan. But this only shows that art, like 
other outward things, may be turned to good and also to evil, and is 
not more closely connected with the lower than with the higher part of 
the soul. Something of ideal truth is sacrificed for the sake of the repre- 
sentation ; the soul is only partly expressed in the lineaments of the face, 
and something in the exactness of the representation is sacrificed to the 
ideal. Still, w'orks of art have a permanent element ; they idealize and 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

*33 

detain the passing thought, and are the intermediates between sense and 
ideas. 

In our present imperfect state of knowledge, poetry and works of 
imagination may be regarded as a good. But we can also understand 
the existence of an age in which scientific fact has taken the place of 
poetry. At any rate we must admit that poetry holds a different place 
at different periods of the world’s history. In the infancy of mankind 
poetry, with the exception of proverbs, is the whole of literature, and 
the only instrument of intellectual culture ; in modem times she is the 
shadow or echo of her former self, and seems to have a precarious 
existence. At the same time wc must remember, that what Plato would 
have called her charms have been partly transferred to prose ; thus there 
is an ambiguity in the question. Milton doubted whether an epic poem 
was any longer possible. The illusion of the feelings commonly called 
love, has been the inspiring influence of modern poetry and romance, 
and has exercised a humanizing if not a strengthening influence on the 
world. But whether this influence has been on the whole a benefit or 
not, whether the stimulus which love has given to fancy is not now 
exhausted, may fairly be doubted. The philosopher may be excused if 
he imagines an age when poetry and sentiment have disappeared, and 
truth has taken the place of imagination, and the feelings of love are 
understood and estimated at their proper value. 

Nor can art ever claim to be on a level with philosophy or religion, 
and may often corrupt them. It is certainly possible to conceive a state 
of the human mind in which all artistic or poetical representations are 
regarded as a false and imperfect expression, either of the religious ideal 
or of the philosophical ideal. That such a conception is far from being 
unnatural, is proved by the fact that the Mahommedans, and many sects 
of Christians, have renounced the use of pictures and images. It is 
possible also to conceive that they might only be used to express the 
highest truth and the purest sentiment. Some anticipations of this sort 
may have floated before the mind of Plato, who seems to waver between 
these two views, when he insists that youth should be brought up 
(Book III.) amidst wholesome imagery, and when (in Book X.) he 
banishes the poets from his Republic. 

The same mixture of truth and error appears in other parts of the 
argument. Pie is aware of the absurdity of mankind framing their 
whole lives according to Homer; just as in the Phaedrus he intimates 

Digitized by Google 

*34 

THE REPUBLIC . 

the absurdity of interpreting mythology upon rational principles ; both 
these were the modern tendencies of his own age, which he deservedly 
ridicules. On the other hand his argument that Homer, if he had been 
able to teach mankind anything worth knowing, would not have been 
allowed by them to go about begging as a rhapsodist, is both false and 
contrary to the spirit of Plato. 

The argument for the immortality of the soul seems to rest on the 
absolute dualism of soul and body. The soul can not be destroyed by 
her own proper evil, which is vice, and therefore by no other. Yet Plato 
has admitted that the soul may be so overgrown by vice as to lose her 
own nature, and in the Republic, and still more in the Timaeus, he 
recognizes the influence which the body has over the mind ; in the latter 
he denies even the voluntariness of human actions, on the ground that 
they proceed from physical states, (Tim. 86.) In the Republic, as else- 
where, he wavers between the original soul which has to be restored, 
and the character which is developed by training and education. 

The vision of another world is ascribed to Er, the son of Armenius, 
who is said by Clement of Alexandria to have been Zoroaster. The 
tale has certainly an oriental character, and may be compared with the 
pilgrimages of the soul in the Zend Avesta. But no trace of acquaintance 
with Zoroaster is found elsewhere in Plato’s writings, and there is no 
reason for giving him the name of Er, the Pamphylian. There is no 
real evidence that the philosophy of Heraclitus was derived from Zoroaster 
and the East, and still less the myths of Plato. 

The local arrangement of the vision is less distinct than that of the 
Phaedrus and Phaedo. Astronomy is mingled with symbolism and 
mythology ; the great sphere of heaven is represented under the symbol 
of a cylinder or box, containing the orbits of the planets and the fixed 
stars ; this depends upon a spindle which turns on the knees of Neces- 
sity ; the revolutions of the eight orbits are guided by the fates, and their 
harmonious motion produces the music of the spheres. Through the 
innermost or eighth of these, which is the moon, is passed the pole or 
axis ; but it is doubtful whether this is the continuation of the column of 
light, from which the travellers contemplate the heavens. The words of 
Plato imply that they are connected, but not the same ; the column of 
light is clearly not of adamant. The cylinder containing the orbits of 
the stars is almost as much a symbol as the figure of Necessity turning 
the spindle; — for the outermost rim is the sphere of the fixed stars, and 

INTRODUCTION. 

1 35 

nothing is said about the intervals of space which divide the paths of the 
stars in the heavens. The description is both a picture and an orrery. 
The column of light is probably not the milky way, which is neither 
straight, nor like a rainbow, but the imaginary axis of the earth. This is 
compared to the rainbow in respect not of form but of colour, and not 
to the undergirders of a trireme, but to the straight rope running from 
prow to stern in which the undergirders meet. 

There is little trace of any resemblance between the orrery of the 
Republic, and the circles of the same and of the other in the Timaeus. 
For although the fixed stars are distinguished from the planets, they are 
not supposed to exercise any controlling influence over them, as in the 
Timaeus, and they move in orbits parallel to them, although in an 
opposite direction ; and in the Republic, (as in the Timaeus,) they are 
all moving round the axis of the earth, though we are not equally certain 
that they are moving round the earth. Plato probably intended to repre- 
sent the earth, from which Er and his companions are viewing the 
heavens, as stationary in place; but whether or not herself revolving, 
unless this is implied in the revolution of the axis, is uncertain (cp. Tim.) 
The spectator might be supposed to look at the heavenly bodies, cither 
from above or below. The earth is a sort of earth and heaven in one, 
like the heaven of the Phaedrus, on the back of which the spectator goes 
out to take a peep at the stars and is borne round in the revolution. 
There is no distinction between the equator and the ecliptic, though 
probably, as in the Timaeus, Plato is led to imagine that Mars, the third 
swiftest planet, moves in an opposite direction to the others, in order to 
account for the appearances of the planets which are within the earth’s 
orbit. In the description of the meadow, and the retribution of the good 
and evil after death, there are traces of Homer. 

The description of the axis as a spindle, and of the heavenly bodies 
as forming a whole, probably arises out of the attempt to connect the 
motions of the heavenly bodies with the mythological image of the web, 
or weaving of the Fates. The giving of the lots, the weaving of them 
and the making of them irreversible, which are ascribed to the three 
Fates — Lachesis, Clotho, Atropos, are obviously derived from their 
names. The element of chance in human life is indicated by the 
order of the lots. But chance, however adverse, might be overcome by 
the wisdom of man, if he knew how to choose aright; there was a 
worse enemy to man than chance, and this wfas himself. He who was 

1 36 

THE REPUBLIC. 

moderately fortunate in the number of the lot — even the very last comer — 
might have a good life if he chose with wisdom. And as Plato does 
not like to make an assertion which is unproven, he more than confirms 
this statement a few sentences afterwards by the example of Odysseus, 
who chose last. But the life of innocence and bliss is not sufficient to 
enable a man to make a right choice ; he must have a touch of philo- 
sophy in him if he is to act rightly, when placed under circumstances in 
which custom is no longer his guide. Plato is amused at seeing men 
the slaves of custom and habit in another world as in this; and, as 
Coleridge says, ‘Common sense is intolerable which is not based on 
metaphysics/ so Plato would have said, * Custom is worthless which is 
not based upon philosophy.’ The moral of the whole is a truly Platonic 
sentiment : — Men must live not by custom only, but by ideas and prin- 
ciples which will survive custom. 

The verisimilitude which is given to the pilgrimage of a thousand 
years, by the intimation that Ardiaeus had lived a thousand years before ; 
the coincidence of Er coming to life on the twelfth day after he was 
supposed to have been dead with the seven days which the pilgrims 
passed in the meadow, and the four days during which they journeyed 
to the column of light ; the precision with which the soul is mentioned 
who chose the twentieth lot; the passing remarks that there was no 
definite character among the souls, and that the souls which had chosen 
ill, blamed any one rather than themselves; or that some of the souls 
drank more than was necessary of the waters of forgetfulness, while Er 
himself was hindered from drinking ; the desire of Odysseus to rest at 
last, unlike the conception of him in Dante and Tennyson; the feigned 
ignorance of how Er returned to the body, when the other souls went 
shooting like stars to their birth, add greatly to the truthfulness of the 
narrative. They are such touches of nature as the art of Defoe might 
have introduced, when he wished to win credibility for marvels and 
apparitions. 

There still remain to be considered some points which have been in- 
tentionally reserved to the end : first, the Janus-like character of the 
Republic, which presents two faces — one, an Hellenic state, the other, a 
kingdom of philosophers. Connected with the latter of the two aspects 
are (2) the paradoxes of the Republic, as they have been termed by 

INTRODUCTION . 

137 

Morgenstern : (a) the community of property ; (/9) of families ; (y) the 
rule of philosophers; (8) the analogy of the individual and the State, 
which, like some other analogies in the Republic, is carried too far. 
We may then proceed to consider (3) the subject of education as con- 
ceived by Plato, bringing together in a general view the education of 
youth and the education of after life ; lastly, (4) some light may be thrown 
on the Republic of Plato by his imitators ; and hence we may take occa- ' 
sion to consider the nature and value of political ideals. 

I. Plato expressly says that he is intending to found an Hellenic State 
(Book V. 470). The germs of many things in the Republic are Spartan, 
such as the prohibition of money, the military caste of the rulers, the 
training of youth in military exercises. And in Sparta a nearer approach 
was made than in any other Greek State to equality of the sexes and 
community of property. To the Spartan type the ideal State reverts in 
the first decline ; and the character of the individual timocrat is borrowed 
from the Spartan citizen. The love of Lacedaemon not only affected 
Plato and Xenophon, but was shared by many undistinguished Athen- 
ians ; there they seemed to find a principle of order which was wanting 
in their own democracy. Fascinated by the idea, they would imitate the 
Lacedaemonians in their dress and manners ; they were known to the 
contemporaries of Plato as ‘ the persons who had their ears bruised,' like 
the Roundheads of the Commonwealth. The love of another church or 
country when seen at a distance only, the longing for an imaginary 
simplicity in civilized times, the desire of w'hat we are not, are tendencies 
of the human mind which are often displayed among ourselves. Such 
feelings would meet with a response in the Republic of Plato. 

But there are other features of the Platonic Republic, as, for example, 
the literary and philosophical education, and the grace and beauty of 
life, which are the reverse of Spartan. Plato wishes to give his citizens 
a taste of Athenian freedom as well as of Lacedaemonian discipline. His 
individual genius is purely Athenian, although in theory he is a lover of 
Sparta ; and he is something more than either — he has also a true Hellenic 
feeling. He is desirous of humanizing the wars of Hellenes against one 
another ; he acknowledges that the Delphian God is the grand hereditary 
interpreter of all Hellas. The spirit of harmony and the Dorian mode are 
to prevail, and the whole State is to have an external beauty which is 
the reflex of the harmony within. But he has not yet found out the 
truth which he afterwards enunciated in the Laws— that he was a better 

138 

THE REPUBLIC . 

legislator who made men to be of one mind, than he who trained them 
for war. The citizens, as in other Hellenic States, democratic as well as 
aristocratic, are really an upper class ; for, although no mention is made 
of slaves, the lower classes are allowed to fade away into the distance, 
and are represented in the individual by the passions. Plato has no idea 
either of a social State in which all classes are harmonised, or of a feder- 
ation of the world in which different nations have a place. His city is 
equipped for war rather than for peace, and this would seem to be justi- 
fied by the ordinary condition of Hellenic States. The mythe of the 
earth-born men is an embodiment of the orthodox tradition of Hellas, 
and the allusion to the four ages of the world is also sanctioned by the 
authority of Hesiod and the poets. Thus we see that the Republic 
is partly founded on the ideal of the old Greek poll's , partly on the 
actual circumstances of Hellenic States. Plato, like the old painters, 
retains the traditional form, and like them he has also a vision of a city 
in the clouds. 

But there is another thread of gold or silk which is also interwoven 
with the work ; the Republic is not only a Dorian State, but a Pytha- 
gorean order. The way of life which was connected with the name 
of Pythagoras, like the modern monastic orders, showed the power which 
the mind of an individual might exercise over his contemporaries, and 
might naturally suggest to Plato the possibility of reviving such ‘ medi- 
aeval institutions.’ Like the Pythagoreans, he would have enforced a 
rule of life, and a moral and intellectual training. The influence ascribed 
to music, which to us seems exaggerated, is also a Pythagorean feature, 
and is not to be regarded as representing the real influence of music in 
Hellas. The unity of the State and the division into castes also contain 
traces of Pythagoreanism. And similar traces are found in his mystical 
number, in his expression of the interval between the king and the tyrant, 
in the doctrine of transmigration, in the music of the spheres, as well as 
in the great though secondary importance ascribed to mathematics in 
education, and in the harmony pervading art and nature. 

But as in his philosophy, so also in the form of his State, he goes far 
beyond the old Pythagoreans. He attempts a task really impossible, 
which is to unite the past of Greek history with the future of philosophy, 
analogous to that other impossibility, which has often been the dream of 
Christendom, the attempt to unite the past history of Europe with the 
kingdom of Christ. Nothing actually existing in the world at all resem- 

INTRODUCTION. 

*39 

bles Plato’s ideal State ; nor does he himself imagine that such a State is 
possible. This he repeats again and again; first in the Laws (Book V. 
739), where, casting a glance back on the Republic, he admits that the 
perfect state of communism and philosophy is unattainable in the present 
state of the world, though still to be retained as a pattern. The same 
doubt is implied in the earnestness with which he argues in the Republic 
(Book V. 472 D) that ideals are none the worse because they cannot be 
realized in fact, and in the chorus of laughter, like ‘ the letting out of 
water,’ which, as he anticipates, will greet the mention of his proposals, 
though like other writers of fiction, he uses all his art to give reality to his 
inventions. When asked how the ideal polity can come into being, he 
answers ironically, when one son of a king becomes a philosopher ; he 
designates the fiction of the earth-born men as * a noble lie ; ' and at the 
end of the Ninth Book, when he has completed the structure, he fairly 
tells you that his Republic is a vision only which in some sense may have 
reality, but not in the vulgar one of a reign of philosophers upon earth. 
It has been said that Plato flies as well as walks, but this hardly expresses 
the whole truth, for he flies and walks at the same time, and is in the air 
and on firm ground in successive instants. 

Niebuhr has asked a trifling question, which may be briefly noticed in 
this place — Was Plato a good citizen? If by this is meant, Was he 
loyal to Athenian institutions ? he can hardly be said to be the friend of 
democracy, but neither is he the friend of existing forms of government; 
all of them he regarded as ‘ states of faction' (Laws VIII. 832) ; none of 
them came up to his ideal of a voluntary rule over voluntary subjects, 
which seems indeed more nearly to describe democracy than any other, 
and the worst of them is tyranny. The truth is, that the question has 
hardly any meaning when applied to a great philosopher whose writings 
are not meant for a particular age and country, but for all time and 
all mankind. The decline of Athenian politics was probably the motive 
which led Plato to frame an ideal State, and the Republic may be re- 
garded as reflecting the departing glory of Hellas. As well might we 
complain of St. Augustin, whose great work ‘ The City of God’ originated 
in a similar motive, for not being loyal to the Roman Empire ; or even a 
nearer parallel might be afforded by the first Christians, who cannot 
fairly be charged with being bad citizens because, though subject to the 
higher powers, they were looking forward to a city which is in heaven. 

II. The idea of the perfect State is full of paradox when judged of 

140 

THE REPUBLIC . 

according to the ordinary notions of mankind. The paradoxes of one 
age often become the commonplaces of the next ; but the paradoxes of 
Plato are at least as paradoxical to us as they were to his contemporaries. 
The modern world has either ridiculed them as absurd or denounced 
them as unnatural and immoral ; yet as being the thoughts of one of the 
greatest of human intelligences, and of one who has done most to elevate 
morality and religion, they seem to deserve a better treatment at our 
hands. We may have to address the public, as Plato does poetry, and 
assure them that we mean no harm to existing institutions. But still the 
consideration of social questions in their most abstract form, may not 
be without use as a speculation, even if incapable of being reduced to 
practice. 

(a) The first paradox is the community of goods, which is mentioned 
slightly at the end of the Third Book, and seemingly, as Aristotle 
observes, is confined to the guardians ; at least no mention is made of 
the other classes. But the omission is not of any real significance, and 
probably arises out of the plan of the work, which prevents the writer 
from entering into details. 

Aristotle censures the community of property much in the spirit 
of modern political economy, as tending to repress industry, and as 
doing away with the spirit of benevolence. Modern writers almost 
refuse to consider the subject, which is supposed to have been long 
ago settled by the common opinion of mankind. But it must be remem- 
bered that the sacredness of property is a notion far more fixed in 
modern than in ancient times. The world has grown older, and is 
therefore more conservative. Primitive society offered many examples 
of land held in common, either by a tribe or by a township, and such 
may probably have been the original form of landed tenure. Ancient 
legislators had invented various modes of dividing and preserving the 
divisions of land among the citizens ; according to Aristotle there were 
nations who held the land in common and divided the produce, and 
there were others who divided the land and stored the produce in com- 
mon. The evils of debt and the inequality of property were far greater 
in ancient than in modern times, and the accidents to which property 
was subject from war, or revolution, or taxation, or other legislative inter- 
ference, were also greater. All these circumstances gave property a less 
fixed and sacred character. The early Christians are believed to have 
held their property in common, and the principle is sanctioned by the 

INTRODUCTION. 

Hi 

words of Christ himself, and has been maintained as a counsel of per- 
fection in almost all ages of the Church. Nor have there been wanting 
instances of modem enthusiasts who have made a religion of com- 
munism; in every age of religious excitement, notions like Wycliffe’s 
‘ inheritance of grace' have tended to prevail. 

We can hardly judge what effect Plato’s views would have upon his 
own contemporaries ; they would perhaps have seemed to them only an 
exaggeration of the Spartan commonwealth. Even modem writers would 
acknowledge that the right of private property is based on expediency, 
and may be interfered with in a variety of ways for the public good. 
And if any other mode of vesting property were found to be more 
advantageous, that would acquire the same basis of right; ‘the most 
useful,' in Plato’s language, ‘ would be the most sacred.' The lawyers 
and philosophers of former ages would have spoken of property as a 
sacred institution. But they only meant by such language to oppose the 
greatest amount of resistance to any invasion of the rights of individuals 
and of the Church. 

When we consider the question, without any fear of immediate applica- 
tion to practice, in the spirit of Plato's Republic, are we quite sure that 
the received notions of property are the best? Is the distribution of 
wealth which is customary in civilized countries the most favourable that 
can be conceived for the education and development of the mass of man- 
kind? Can ‘the spectator of all time and all existence’ be quite con- 
vinced that one or two thousand years hence, great changes will not have 
taken place in the rights of property, or even that the very notion of pro- 
perty, beyond what is necessary for personal maintenance, may not have 
disappeared ? This was a distinction familiar to Aristotle, though likely 
to be laughed at among ourselves. Such a change would not be greater 
than some other changes through which the world has passed in the 
transition from ancient to modern society ; as, for example, the emanci- 
pation of the serfs, or the abolition of slavery (a work which has only been 
completed in our own day), or than is measured by the interval which 
even now separates the Eastern from the Western World. And to 
accomplish such a change in the course of centuries, would not imply a 
greater rate of progress than has actually existed during the last fifty or 
sixty years. Many opinions and beliefs which have been cherished quite 
as strongly as the right of property have passed away, and the most un- 
tenable propositions respecting the right of bequests or entail have been 

142 

THE REPUBLIC . 

maintained with as much fervour as the most moderate. The reflection 
will occur that the state of society can hardly be final in which the 
interests of thousands are perilled on the life or character of a single 
person. And many will indulge the hope that the state in which we live 
will be only transitional, and may conduct to a higher state, in which 
property, besides ministering to the enjoyment of the few, may also 
furnish the means of the highest culture to all, and will be a greater 
benefit to the public generally, and also more under the control of public 
authority. There may come a time when the saying, ‘Have I not 
a right to do what I will with my own/ may appear to be a barbarous 
relic of individualism. 

Such reflections appear wild and visionary to the eye of the practical 
statesman, but they are fairly within the range of possibility to the philo- 
sopher. He can imagine that in some distant age or clime, and through 
the influence of some poet or philosopher, the notion of common pro- 
perty may or might have sunk as deep into the heart of a race, and have 
become as fixed to them, as private property is to us. He is willing to 
believe that some day men’s notions of property in our own country may 
materially alter, and private interests be much more subservient to public. 
In our own age even Utopias may affect the spirit of legislation, and the 
philosopher may be allowed sometimes to feast his imagination with 
speculations which he never hopes to see realized. 

The objections that would be generally urged against Plato’s com- 
munity of property, are the old ones of Aristotle, that motives for exer- 
tion would be taken away, and that disputes would arise when each was 
dependent upon all. Mankind could never become disinterested, or 
regard the interests of the community as the interests of the individual. 
But it may be doubted whether our present individualism is not rather an 
artificial result of the industrial state of modern Europe. Moral and 
political feelings seem from time to time to rise up and reassert them- 
selves, even in a world bound hand and foot in the chains of economic 
necessity. And if we cannot expect the mass of mankind to become 
disinterested, at any rate we seem to observe in them the growth of 
a spirit of party and a power of organization which fifty years ago would 
never have been suspected. The same forces which have revolutionized 
the political system of Europe, may affect a similar change in the social 
and industrial relations of mankind. And if we suppose the influence of 
some good as well as neutral motives working in the community, there 

INTRODUCTION . 

H 3 

will be no absurdity in expecting that the mass of mankind having the 
power in their own hands, and becoming enlightened about the higher 
possibilities of human life, when they come to see how much more is 
attainable for all than is at present the possession of a favoured few, may 
pursue the common interest with an intelligence and persistency which 
the world has not yet seen. 

Neither to the mind of Plato or Aristotle did the doctrine of com- 
munity of property at all present the same difficulty, or appear the same 
violation of the common Hellenic sentiment, as the paradox of the com- 
munity of wives and children. This he prefaces by another proposal, 
that the pursuits of men and women shall be the same, and that to this 
end they shall have a common training and education. Male and female 
animals have the same pursuits — why not also the two sexes of man ? 

But here we seem to have fallen into a contradiction with our former 
principle, that different natures should have different pursuits. Men 
and women differ : are they capable then of the same pursuits ? Is 
not this inconsistent with our notion of the division of labour? The 
objection is no sooner raised than answered, for there is no organic 
difference between men and women, but only the accidental difference of 
the one bearing and the other begetting children. Following the analogy 
of the other animals, Plato contends that all the natural gifts are scattered 
about indifferently among men and women, though there may be a 
superiority of degree on the part of the men. The objection on the 
score of delicacy to men and women partaking of the same gymnastic 
exercises, is met by Plato’s assertion that the existing feeling is a matter 
of habit. 

In no former age of the world would Plato’s ideas on this subject have 
received so much assent as in our own. That he should have emanci- 
pated himself from the customs of his own country and from the example 
of the East, is a wonderful proof of philosophical insight. He is as much in 
advance of modern nations as they are in advance of the customs of Greek 
society. Greek wromen had certainly noble conceptions of womanhood in 
the goddesses Athene and Artemis, and in the heroines Antigone and 
Andromache. But these poetical ideals had no counterpart in actual life. 
The Athenian woman was in no respect the equal of her husband ; she 
was not the entertainer of his guests or the mistress of his house, but 
only his housekeeper and the mother of his children. She took no part 
in military or political matters; nor is there any instance in the later 

144 

THE REPUBLIC. 

ages of Greece of a woman becoming famous as an authoress. ‘ Hers is 
the greatest glory who has the least renown among men,’ is the historian's 
conception of feminine excellence. A very different ideal of woman- 
hood is held up by Plato to the world; she is to be the companion 
of the man, and to share with him in the toils of war and in the cares of 
the government. She is to be similarly trained both in bodily and mental 
exercises. She is to lose as far as possible the incidents of maternity 
and the characteristics of the female sex. 

The modem antagonist of the equality of the sexes would argue that 
the differences between men and women are not confined to the single 
point urged by Plato ; that sensibility, softness, feeling, are the qualities 
of women, while energy, strength, higher intelligence, are to be looked 
for in men. And this is true : the differences affect the whole nature, 
and are not, as Plato supposes, confined to a single point. But neither 
can we say how much of this difference is due to education and the 
opinions of mankind, or physically inherited from the habits and opinions 
of former generations. Women have been always taught, not exactly that 
they are slaves, but that they are in an inferior position, which is also sup- 
posed to have compensating advantages ; and to this position they have 
conformed. Add to this that the physical form may easily change in the 
course of generations through the mode of life; and the weakness or 
delicacy, which was once a matter of opinion, may pass into a physical 
fact. The difference between the two sexes varies greatly in different 
countries and ranks of society, and at different ages in the same indi- 
viduals. And Plato may have been right in denying that there was any 
ultimate difference in the sexes other than that which exists in animals, 
because all other differences may be conceived to disappear in other 
states of society, or under different circumstances of life and training. 

( 'p ) The first wave is past, and we proceed to the second — community 
of wives and children. ‘ Is it possible ? Is it desirable ?’ For as Glaucon 
intimates, and as we far more strongly assert, * Great doubts may be 
entertained about both these points.’ Any free discussion of the question 
is impossible, and mankind are perhaps right in not allowing the ultimate 
bases of social life to be examined. Still, the manner in which Plato 
arrived at his conclusions should be considered. For here, as Mr. Grote 
has remarked, is a wonderful thing, that one of the wisest and best of 
men should have entertained ideas of morality which are wholly at vari- 
ance with our own. And if we would do Plato justice, we must examine 

INTRODUCTION . 

145* 

carefully the character of his proposals. First, we may observe that the 
relations of the sexes supposed by him are the reverse of licentious; 
they seem rather to aim at an impossible strictness. There is no senti- 
ment or imagination in the connections which they are supposed to form ; 
human nature is reduced as nearly as possible to the level of the animals, 
neither exalting to heaven, nor yet abusing and over-indulging the na- 
tural instincts. All that world of poetry and fancy which the passion of 
love has called forth in modern literature and romance would have been 
banished by Plato. The arrangements of marriage in the Republic of 
Plato aimed at one object only, the improvement of the race. In suc- 
cessive generations a great development both of bodily and mental 
qualities might be possible. The experience of animals showed that 
mankind could within certain limits receive a change of nature. And 
as in animals we should commonly select the best for breeding, and 
destroy the others, so there must be a selection made of the human 
beings whose lives are worthy to be preserved. 

We start back horrified from this Platonic ideal, in the belief, first, that 
the instincts of human nature are far too strong to be crushed out in this 
way ; secondly, that if the plan could be carried out, we should be poorly 
recompensed by improvements in the breed for the loss of the best things 
in life. The greatest regard for the least and meanest things of humanity 
— the deformed infant, the culprit, the insane, the idiot — truly seems 
to us one of the noblest results of Christianity. Such views are com- 
paratively recent in modern times, and were foreign to the age of Plato, 
as they have very different degrees of strength in different parts of the 
world, even among Christians. To the Greek the family was a sort of 
customary institution binding the members together by a tie far inferior 
in strength to that of friendship, and having a far less solemn and sacred 
sound than that of country. That which existed on the lower level 
of custom, Plato imagined that he was raising to the higher level of 
nature and reason ; while from the modern and Christian point of view 
we regard him as sanctioning murder and destroying the first principles 
of morality. And we remark with surprise that, while repudiating all the 
ordinary feelings of men, he is singularly careful to avoid pollution of 
blood. 

Yet, on the other hand, we cannot deny that Christianity, or any other 
form of religion and society, has hitherto not been able to cope with this 
greatest and most difficult of social problems, and that the side from 

*L 

VOL. II. 

i46* 

THE REPUBLIC. 

which Plato regarded it is that from which we habitually turn away. For 
our physical seem in some respects to be at war with our moral interests. 
The state physician hardly likes to uncover or probe the wound : this is 
a matter which is beyond his art ; which he cannot safely let alone, but 
which he dare not touch. The late Dr. Combe is said by his biographer 
to have resisted the temptation to marriage, because he knew that he was 
subject to hereditary consumption. This little fact suggests the reflection, 
that one person in a thousand did from a sense of duty what the other 
nine hundred and ninety-nine ought to have done, if they had not been 
regardless of all the misery which they were likely to bring into the world. 
If we could prevent such marriages without any violation of feeling or 
propriety, we clearly ought ; and the prohibition in the course of time 
would be protected by a ‘ horror naturalis’ similar to that which, in all 
civilized ages and countries, has prevented the marriage of near relations 
by blood. But a free agent cannot have his fancies regulated by law ; 
and the execution of the law would be rendered impossible, owing to the 
uncertainty of the cases in which marriage was to be forbidden. Nor is 
there any reason to suppose that marriages are to any great extent 
influenced by considerations of this sort, which seem too distant to be 
able to make any head against the irresistible impulse of individual attach- 
ment. Lastly, no one can have observed the first rising flood of the 
passions in youth, the difficulty of regulating them, and the effects on the 
whole mind and nature which follow from them, the stimulus which the 
mere imagination gives to them, without feeling that there is something 
unsatisfactory in our method of treating them. That the most important 
influence on human life should be wholly left to chance or shrouded in 
mystery, and instead of being disciplined or understood, should be required 
to conform only to an external standard of propriety — cannot be regarded 
by the philosopher as a safe or satisfactory condition of human things. 

Nor is Plato wrong in asserting that family attachments may interfere 
with higher aims. If there have been those who ‘ to party gave up what 
was meant for mankind/ there have certainly been those who to family 
gave up what was meant for mankind or for their country’. The cares 
of children, the necessity of procuring money for their support, the flat- 
teries of the rich by the poor, the exclusiveness of caste, the pride of 
birth or wealth, the tendency of family life to divert men from the pursuit 
of the ideal or the heroic, are as lowering in our own age as in that of 
Plato. And if we prefer to look at the gentle influences of home, the 

INTRODUCTION. 

147* 

development of the affections, the amenities of society, the devotion of 
one member of a family for the good of the others, which form one side 
of the picture, we must not quarrel with him, or perhaps ought rather to 
be grateful to him, for having presented to us the reverse. Without 
attempting to defend Plato on grounds of morality, we may allow that 
his conception of the relation of the sexes takes rank among the great 
original thoughts of mankind. 

(y) But Plato has an equal, or, in his own estimation, even greater 
paradox in reserve, which is summed up in the famous text, ‘ Until kings 
are philosophers or philosophers are kings, cities will never cease from ill/ 
And by philosophers he explains himself to mean those who are capable 
of apprehending ideas, especially the idea of good ; and to the attain- 
ment of this the second education is to be directed. Through a process 
of training which has already made them good citizens, they are now to 
be made good legislators. We find with some surprise (not unlike the 
feeling which Aristotle in a well-known passage describes the hearers of 
Plato's lectures as experiencing, when they went to a discourse on the 
idea of good, expecting to be instructed in moral truths, and received 
instead of them arithmetical and mathematical formulae) that Plato does 
not propose for his future legislators any study of finance or law or 
military tactics, but only of abstract mathematics, as a preparation for the 
still more abstract conception of good. We ask, with Aristotle, what 
is the use of a man knowing the idea of good, if he does not know and 
has never understood what is good for this man, this state, this condition 
of society ? We do not understand how Plato’s legislators or guardians 
are to be fitted for their work of statesmen by the bare study of the five 
mathematical sciences. Nothing can appear to modern ideas more in- 
appropriate or absurd. 

The discovery of a great metaphysical conception seems to ravish the 
mind with a prophetic consciousness of the new power which has been 
imparted to man. No metaphysical enquirer has ever seen the real value 
of his own speculations, nor understood that what appeared to him to 
be absolute truth may reappear in the next generation as a form of logic 
or an instrument of thought. And posterity have also sometimes equally 
misunderstood the real value of his speculations. They seem to them to 
have contributed nothing to the stock of human knowledge. The idea 
of good is apt to be regarded by the modern thinker as an unmeaning 
abstraction ; but he forgets that this abstraction is waiting ready for use, 

i48* 

THE REPUBLIC. 

and will hereafter be filled up by the divisions of knowledge. When 
mankind do not as yet know that the world is subject to law, the intro- 
duction of the mere conception of law or design or final cause, or the far- 
off anticipation of the unity of knowledge, are great steps onward. Even 
the crude generalization of the unity of all things leads men to view the 
world with different eyes, under an aspect of harmony which may easily 
affect their conception of human life and of politics, and even their own 
conduct and character. We can well imagine how a great mind like 
that of Pericles might derive a sort of elevation from his intercourse with 
Anaxagoras. To be struggling towards a higher but unattainable con- 
ception is a more favourable condition of mind than to rest satisfied in a 
narrow portion of ascertained fact. And the earlier, which have some- 
times been the greater conceptions of science, are often lost sight of at a 
later period. Nor is there anything unnatural in the hasty application of 
these vast metaphysical conceptions to practical and political life. In 
the first enthusiasm of ideas men see them everywhere, and apply them 
in the most remote sphere. They do not understand that the experience 
of ages is required to enable them to fill up * the intermediate axioms.' 
Plato himself seems to have imagined that the truths of psychology, like 
those of astronomy and harmonics, would be arrived at by a process of 
deduction, and that the method which he has pursued in the Fourth 
Book, of inferring them from experience and the use of language, was 
imperfect and only provisional. But when, after having arrived at the 
idea of good, which is the end of the science of dialectic, he is asked, 
What is the nature, and what are the divisions of the science ? he refuses 
to answer, and seems to imply that the state of knowledge which then 
existed in the world was not such as would allow the philosopher to 
enter into his final rest. The previous sciences must first be studied, 
and will, we may add, continue to be cultivated till the end of time, 
although in a sense far other than Plato could have conceived. But we 
may observe, that while he is aware of the vacancy of his own ideal, he 
is full of enthusiasm in the contemplation of it. Looking into the orb of 
light, he sees nothing, but he is warmed and elevated. The Hebrew 
prophet believed that faith in God was enough to enable him to govern 
the world ; the Greek philosopher imagined that contemplation of the 
good would make a legislator. There is as much to be filled up in the 
one case as in the other, and the one mode of conception is to the 
Israelite what the other is to the Greek. Both find a repose in a divine 

INTRODUCTION. 

1 49* 

perfection, which, whether in a more personal or impersonal form, exists 
without them and independently of them, as well as within them. 

The question has been asked, In what relation did Plato suppose the 
idea of good to stand to the nature of God ? Is God above or below 
the idea of good ? Or is the idea of good another mode of conceiving 
God ? The latter seems to be the true answer. To the Greek philosopher 
the perfection and unity of God was a far higher conception than his 
personality, which he hardly found a word to express, and which to 
him would have seemed to be borrowed from mythology. To the 
Christian, or to the modern thinker in general, it is difficult if not 
impossible to attach reality to what he terms mere abstraction ; whereas 
to Plato this very abstraction is the truest and most real of all things. 
Hence, from a difference in forms of thought, Plato appears to be 
resting on a creation of his own mind only. But if we may be allowed 
to paraphrase the idea of good by the words * intelligent principle of 
law and order in the universe, embracing equally man and nature/ we 
find a meeting point between him and ourselves. 

The question whether the ruler or statesman should be a philosopher 
is one that has not lost interest in modern times. In most countries 
of Europe and Asia there has been some one in the course of ages 
who has truly united the power of command with the power of thought 
and reflection, as there have been also many false combinations of these 
qualities. Some kind of speculative power is necessary both in prac- 
tical and political life ; like the rhetorician in the Phaedrus, men require 
to have a conception of the varieties of human character, and to be raised 
on great occasions above the commonplaces of ordinary life. Yet the 
idea of the philosopher-statesman has never been popular with the 
mass of mankind; partly because he cannot take the world into his 
confidence or make them understand the motives from which he acts ; 
and also because they are jealous of a power which they do not under- 
stand. The revolution which human nature desires to effect step by 
step in many ages is likely to be precipitated by him in a single year 
or life. They fear too that in the pursuit of his greater aims he may 
disregard the common feelings of humanity. He is too apt to be 
looking into the distant future or back into the remote past, and unable 
to see actions or events which, to use an expression of Plato's, ‘are 
tumbling out at his feet.’ Besides, as Plato would say, there are other 
corruptions of these philosophical statesmen. Either ‘the native hue 

THE REPUBLIC . 

1 5°* 

of resolution is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought/ and at the 
moment when action above all things is required he is undecided, 
or general principles are enunciated by him in order to cover some 
change of policy; or his ignorance of the world has made him more 
easily fall a prey to the arts of others ; or in some cases he has been 
converted into a courtier, enjoying the luxury of liberal opinions and 
accompanying them with illiberal actions. No wonder that mankind 
have been in the habit of calling statesmen of this class pedants, 
sophisters, doctrinaires, visionaries. For, as we may be allowed to say, 
a little parodying the words of Plato, ‘ they have seen bad imitations 
of the philosopher-statesman.’ But a man in whom the power of 
thought and action are perfectly balanced, equal to the present, reaching 
forward to the future, * such a one,’ ruling in a constitutional state, ‘ they 
have not seen.’ 

But as the philosopher is apt to fail in the routine of political life, 
so the ordinary statesman is also apt to fail in extraordinary crises. 
When the face of the world is beginning to alter, he is still guided by 
his old maxims, and is the slave of his inveterate party prejudices; he 
cannot perceive the signs of the times: instead of looking forwards he 
looks back ; he learns nothing and forgets nothing ; writh ‘ wise saws 
and modern instances' he would stem the rising tide of revolution. 
He lives more and more within the circle of his own party, as the 
world without him becomes stronger. This seems to be the reason 
why the old order of things makes so poor a figure when confronted 
with the new, why churches can never reform, why most political 
changes are made blindly and convulsively. The great crises in the 
history of nations have often been met by a sort of feminine positive- 
ness, and a more obstinate reassertion of principles which have lost 
their hold upon a nation. The fixed ideas of a reactionary statesman 
may be compared to madness; he grows more and more convinced 
of the truth of his notions as he becomes more isolated, and would 
rather await the inevitable than in any degree yield to circumstances. 

(6) Plato labouring under wrhat, to modern readers, would appear to 
be a confusion of ideas, identifies the individual and the state — ethics 
with politics. Pie thinks that, most of a state which is most like one 
man, and in which the citizens have the greatest uniformity of character. 
He does not see that the analogy of the individual and the state is 
partly fallacious, and that the will or character of a state or nation is 

INTRODUCTION. 

151* 

really the balance or rather the surplus of individual wills, which are 
limited by the condition of having to act in common. The movement 
of a body of men can never have the pliancy or facility of a single 
man ; the freedom of the individual, which is limited, becomes an im- 
perfect necessity when transferred to a nation. The power of action 
and feeling is necessarily weaker and more uncertain when they are 
diffused through a community ; hence arises the often discussed 
question, ‘ Whether a nation, like an individual, can have a conscience ? ’ 
We hesitate to say that the characters of nations are nothing more than 
the sum of the characters of the individuals who compose them; be- 
cause there may be tendencies in individuals which react upon one 
another ; or a whole nation may be wiser than any one man ; or may 
be animated by some common opinion or feeling which could not 
equally have affected the mind of a single individual. Plato does not 
appear to have analysed the complications which arise out of the 
collective action of mankind. He is capable of discerning many of 
the illusions of language and logic, but he is not capable of seeing that 
analogies, though specious as arguments, might often have no foundation 
in fact, or of distinguishing between what is intelligible or vividly present 
to the mind, and what is true. In this respect he is far below Aristotle, 
who is comparatively seldom imposed upon by false analogies. In like 
manner Plato cannot see the difference between the arts and the 
virtues — at least he is always arguing from one to the other. His 
notion of music is transferred from harmony of sounds to harmony 
of life: in this he is assisted by the ambiguities of language as well 
as by the prevalence of Pythagorean notions. And having once 
identified the individual with the state, he imagines that he will find the 
succession of states paralleled in the lives of individuals. 

Still, through this fallacious medium, a real enlargement of ideas is 
attained. When the virtues as yet presented no distinct conception to 
the mind, a great advance was made by the comparison of them with 
the arts ; for virtue is partly art, and has an outward form as well as 
an inward principle. The harmony of music affords a lively image 
of the harmony of the world and of human life, and may be regarded 
as a splendid illustration which was naturally mistaken for a real 
analogy. In the same way the identification of ethics with politics 
has' a tendency to give definiteness to ethics, and also to elevate and 
ennoble men’s notions of the aims of government and of the duties 

THE REPUBLIC. 

152* 

of citizens : for ethics from one point of view may be conceived as an 
idealized law and politics ; and politics, as ethics reduced to the con- 
ditions of human society. There have been evils which have arisen 
out of the attempt to identify them, and this has led to the separation 
or antagonism of them, which has been introduced by modern political 
writers. But we may also feel that something has been lost in their 
separation, and that the ancient philosophers who regarded the moral 
and intellectual wellbeing of mankind first, and the wealth of nations 
and individuals second, may have a salutary influence on some of the 
speculations of modem times. Many political maxims originate in a 
reaction against the opposite error ; and when the errors against which 
they were directed have passed away, in their turn become errors. 

III. Plato’s views of education are in several respects remarkable; 
like the rest of the Republic they are partly Greek and partly ideal, 
beginning with the ordinary curriculum of the Greek youth, and ex- 
tending to after life. Plato is the first writer who distinctly expresses 
the thought that education is to comprehend the whole of life, and to be 
a preparation for another in which education is to begin again. This 
is the continuous thread which runs through the whole of the Republic, 
and which more than any other of his ideas admits of an application 
to modern life. 

He has long given up the notion that virtue cannot be taught ; and 
he is disposed to modify the thesis of the Protagoras, that the virtues 
are one and not many. Neither is he unwilling to admit the sensible 
world into his scheme of truth. Nor does he positively assert in the 
Republic the involuntariness of vice, which reappears, however, in the 
Timaeus, Sophist, and Laws. Nor do the so-called Platonic ideas 
recovered from a former state affect his theory of mental improvement. 
Still we trace in him the remains of the old Socratic doctrine, that true 
knowledge must be elicited from within, and is to be sought for in 
ideas, not in particulars of sense. Education will implant a principle 
of intelligence which is better than ten thousand eyes. There is also 
a trace of his old doctrine that the virtues are one, and of the Socratic 
notion that all virtue is knowledge ; this is seen in the supremacy given 
to justice over the rest, and in the tendency to absorb the moral virtues 
in the intellectual, and to centre all goodness in the contemplation of 
the idea of good. The world of sense is still depreciated and identified 
with opinion, though admitted to be a shadow of the true, and to be 

INTRODUCTION. 

J53* 

the source from which the figures of geometry are derived. And in 
the Republic he has not altogether given up the involuntariness of vice ; 
as is shown in the feeling that evil arises chiefly from ignorance, and 
the tone in which the multitude is regarded as hardly responsible for 
what they do. A faint allusion to the doctrine of remininiscence occurs 
in the Tenth Book (p. 621); but Plato’s views of education have no 
more real connection with a previous state of existence than our own ; 
he only proposes to elicit from the mind that which is there already. 
His conception of education is represented, not like many modern 
views, under the image of filling a vessel, but of turning the eye of 
the soul towards the light. 

He begins with music or literature, which he divides into true and 
false, and then goes on to gymnastics ; he takes no notice of infancy 
in the Republic, though in the Laws he gives sage counsels about 
the nursing of children and the management of the mothers; and 
would have an education which is even prior to birth. But in the 
Republic he begins with the age at which the child is capable of per- 
ceiving ideas, and boldly asserts, in language which sounds paradoxical 
to modern ears, that he must be taught the false before he can 
learn the true. The modern and ancient philosophical world are not 
agreed in their conceptions of truth and falsehood; the one identifies 
truth almost exclusively with fact, the other with ideas. There is a 
like difference between ourselves and Plato, which is, however, partly 
a difference of words. For we too should admit that a child must 
learn many things which he cannot understand; he must be taught 
some things in a figure only, and some perhaps which he can hardly 
be expected to believe when he grows older ; but we should limit the 
use of fiction by the necessity of the case. Plato would draw the line 
somewhat differently; according to him the aim of early education 
is not truth as a matter of fact, but truth as a matter of principle ; the 
child is to be taught first simple religious truths, and then simple 
moral truths, and insensibly to learn the lesson of good manners and 
good taste. He proposes an entire reformation of the old mythology ; 
like Xenophanes and Heracleitus he is sensible of the deep chasm 
which separates his own age from Homer and Hesiod, whom he quotes, 
and invests with an imaginary authority, but only for his own purposes. 
The lusts and treacheries of the gods are to be banished ; the terrors 
of the world below are to be dispelled; the misbehaviour of the 

THE REPUBLIC. 

»54* 

Homeric heroes is not to be a model for youth. But there is another 
strain heard in Homer which may teach our youth endurance; and 
something may be learnt in medicine from the simple practice of the 
Homeric age. The principles on which religion is to be based are 
two only : first, that God is true ; secondly, that he is good. Modern 
and Christian writers have often fallen short of these ; they can hardly 
be said to have got beyond them. 

Education, according to Plato, is to place youth in happy circum- 
stances, in which no sights or sounds of evil, or allurements of passion, 
can hurt the character or vitiate the taste. They are to live in an 
atmosphere of health ; the breeze is always to be wafting to them the 
impressions of truth and goodness. Could such an education be realized, 
or even could religious education be bound up with truth and virtue and 
good manners and good taste, that would perhaps be the best hope of 
human improvement. Plato, like ourselves, is looking forward to changes 
in the moral and religious world, and is preparing for them. He recog- 
nizes the danger of unsettling young men’s minds, and doing away with 
the sacredness of one set of ideas before we have anything to put in 
their place which has an equal hold on the mind. There is to be an 
absence of excitement in the Platonic Republic, and for this reason 
dramatic representations are excluded. Plato does not wish to have his 
children taken to the theatre ; he thinks that the effect on the spectators 
is bad, and on the actors still worse. His idea of education is that of 
harmonious growth, in which are learnt the lessons of temperance and 
endurance, and the body and mind develope in equal proportions. The 
great principle which is to be recognized in all art and nature, and is to 
hold sway in education, is simplicity. 

The next stage of education is gymnastic, which answers to the period 
of muscular growth and development. The simplicity which is enforced 
in music is extended to gymnastics ; Plato is aware that the training of 
the body may be inconsistent with the training of the mind, and that 
bodily exercise may be easily overdone. Men are apt to have a headache 
or go to sleep at a lecture on philosophy, and this they attribute not to 
the true cause, which is the excess of bodily training, but to the nature 
of the subject. Two points are noticeable in Plato’s theory of gym- 
nastic : — First, that the time of learning them is entirely separated from 
the time of literary education. He seems to have thought that two 
things of an opposite and different nature could not be learnt at the 

INTRODUCTION. 

same time. We can hardly agree with him in this, judging by expe- 
rience of the effect on the mind of spending three years between the 
ages of fourteen and seventeen in mere bodily exercise. Secondly, he 
regards gymnastic not primarily as a training of the body, but of the 
mind, which is to discipline the passionate element, as music restrains 
the appetitive and calls forth the rational. His whole idea is based upon 
the notion that the body depends upon the mind, and is to be trained to 
its service. And doubtless the mind may exercise a very great and 
almost paramount influence over the body, if exerted not only at a 
particular moment, but in making preparation for the whole of life. 
Other writers had seen the error of Spartan discipline. Plato was the 
first who asserted that music and gymnastic are not, as common opinion 
affirms, the one intended for the cultivation of the mind, the other of the 
body ; but that they are both equally designed for the improvement of 
the mind. 

The subject of gymnastic leads Plato to the sister subject of medicine, 
and this he further illustrates by the parallel of law. The modern dis- 
belief in medicine has led in this, as in some other departments of 
knowledge, to a demand for greater simplicity; physicians are be- 
coming aware that they often make diseases ‘greater and more com- 
plicated ’ by their treatment of them. In 2000 years their art has made 
but slender progress ; what they have gained in the analysis of the parts 
is partly lost by their feebler conception of the human frame as a whole. 
They have attended more to the cure of diseases than to the conditions 
of health ; and the improvements in medicine have been probably counter- 
balanced by the disuse of gymnastics. Until lately they have hardly 
thought of air and water, the importance of which was well understood 

by the ancients ; as Aristotle remarks, ‘ air, being the element which we 

• 

most use, has the greatest effect upon us/ For ages physicians have 
been under the dominion of prejudices which have only recently given 
way ; there are as many opinions in medicine as in theology, and almost 
as much scepticism about them. Plato has several good notions about 
medicine ; — according to him, ‘ the eye cannot be cured without the 
rest of the body, nor the body without the mind.' (Charm. 156 E.) 
Yet we can hardly praise him when, in obedience to the authority of 
Homer, he depreciates diet, or approves of the inhuman spirit in which he 
would get rid of invalid and useless lives by leaving them to die. He 
does not seem to have considered that the ‘ bridle of Theages ' might be 

THE REPUBLIC. 

156* 

accompanied by qualities which were of far more value to the State than 
the health or strength of the citizens. The physician himself (this is a 
delicate and subtle observation) should not be a man in robust health ; he 
should have experience of disease in his own person, because by this 
his powers of observation are likely to be quickened in the case of 
others. 

The perplexity of medicine is paralleled by the perplexity of law ; in 
which, again, Plato would have men follow the golden rule of simplicity. 
Greater matters are to be determined by the legislator, but lesser matters 
are to be left to the temporary regulation of the citizens themselves. 
Plato is aware that laissez faire is an important element of government. 
The diseases of a State are like the heads of a hydra, which multiply 
when they are cut off. He raises a curious question whether the judge 
should have the same experience of crime in his own person, which the 
physician is supposed to have of disease. But he does not answer the 
question with equal truth to human nature. He does not seem to have 
observed that the knowledge of evil, even in youth, may be quite con- 
sistent with the abhorrence of it. 

When the first education is completed, there follows the first trial of 
active life. But soon education is to begin again from a new point of 
view. In the interval between the Fourth and Seventh Books, we have 
discussed the nature of knowledge, and have thence been led to form a 
higher conception of education. For true knowledge, according to 
Plato, is of abstractions, and has to do not with particulars or individuals, 
but with universals only ; not with the beauties of poetry, but with the 
ideas of philosophy. And the great aim of education is the cultivation 
of the habit of abstraction. This is to be acquired through the study of 
the mathematical sciences. They alone are capable of giving ideas of 
relation, and of arousing the dormant energies of thought. 

Mathematics in Plato’s age comprehended a very small part of that 
which is now included in them ; but they also bore a much larger pro- 
portion to the sum of human knowledge. They were the only organon 
of thought which the human mind at that time possessed, and the only 
measure by which the chaos of particulars could be reduced to rule and 
order. The faculty which they trained was naturally at war with the 
poetical or imaginative ; and hence to Plato the difference between him 
who knew and who did not know mathematics, is like the difference 
between an educated and uneducated man. They gave a new sense of 

INTRODUCTION. 

*57* 

power and seemed to have an inexhaustible application, partly because 
their true limits were not yet understood. These Plato himself is begin- 
ning to investigate ; though not aware that numbers and figures are the 
abstractions of sense, he recognized that the figures of geometry borrow 
their forms from the sensible world. Pie also seeks to find the ultimate 
ground of mathematical ideas in the idea of good ; though in his concep- 
tion of the relation of ideas to number, he falls very far short of the 
definiteness attributed to him by Aristotle (Met. i. 84, ix. 17). But if he 
failed to recognize the true limits of mathematics, he has also reached a 
point beyond them ; in his view, ideas of number became secondary to 
a higher conception of knowledge. The one, the self-proving, is the 
only perfect truth to which all things ascend, and in which they finally 
repose. 

This self-proving unity or idea of good is a mere vision of which no 
distinct explanation can be given, relative only to a particular stage in 
Greek philosophy. And yet this vision may have an immense effect. 
Although the method of science cannot anticipate science, the idea of 
science in the future may be a great and inspiring principle in the mind. 
For in the pursuit of knowledge we are always pressing forward to some- 
thing beyond us ; and as a false conception of knowledge may lead men 
astray during many ages, for example the scholastic philosophy, so the 
true ideal, though vacant, may draw all their thoughts in a right direction. 
Whether the general expectation of knowledge, as this indefinite feeling 
may be termed, conforms truly to the laws of the mind, is of great import- 
ance; for a true conception of what knowledge ought to be may be 
often combined with a slender experience of facts. The correlation of 
the sciences, the consciousness of the unity of knowledge, the sense of 
the importance of classification, the unwillingness to stop short of cer- 
tainty or to confound probability with truth, are important principles of 
the higher education. Although Plato could tell us nothing, and perhaps 
knew that he could tell us nothing, of the absolute truth, he has exercised 
an influence on human thought which even at the present day is not 
exhausted ; and political and social questions may yet arise in which 
the thoughts of Plato may be read anew and receive a fresh meaning. 

This vision of truth or good is represented in the Symposium under 
the aspect of beauty, and is supposed to be attained there by stages of 
initiation, as here by regular gradations of knowledge. Viewed from the 
intellectual side, the vision of good is the process or science of dialectic. 

THE REPUBLIC. 

158* 

This is the science which, according to the Phaedrus, is the true basis of 
rhetoric, which alone is able to distinguish the natures and classes of 
men and things — which divides a whole into the natural parts, and 
reunites the scattered parts into a natural or organized whole; which 
defines the abstract essences or universal ideas of all things and connects 
them ; which pierces the veil of hypotheses and reaches the final cause 
or first principle of all ; which regards the sciences in relation to the 
idea of good. This ideal science resembles the natural process of 
thought, and may be described as the mind talking to herself, and in 
another form is the everlasting question and answer — the ceaseless inter- 
rogative of Socrates. The dialogues of Plato are themselves the best 
examples of the nature and method of dialectic. 

If now we ask whether this science which Plato only half reveals to us 
is more akin to logic or to metaphysics, the answer is that they are not 
as yet distinguished in his mind. Nor has he determined whether this 
science of dialectic is at rest or in motion, concerned with the contem- 
plation of absolute being, or with the process by which this is to be 
attained. Modern metaphysics may be described as the science of . 
abstractions, or as the science of the evolution of thought ; modem logic, 
when passing beyond the bounds of mere Aristotelian forms, may be 
defined as the science of method. The germ of both of them is con- 
tained in the Platonic dialectic; all metaphysicians have something in 
common with the ideas of Plato ; all logicians have derived something 
from the method of Plato. But the nearest approach in modem philo- 
sophy to the universal science of Plato, is to be found in the Hegelian 
‘ succession of moments in the unity of the idea/ There is, however, a 
difference between them : for whereas Hegel is thinking of all the minds 
of men as one mind, which developes the stages of the idea in different 
countries or at different times in the same country, with Plato these 
gradations are regarded only as an order of thought or ideas ; the history 
of the human mind had not yet dawned upon him. The education of 
Plato is really the ideal life of the philosopher or man of genius, inter- 
rupted for a time by the application to practical duties — a life not for the 
many, but for the few. And he has already told us that the world could 
not be a philosopher, and that a very few such natures at all existed. 
Whether the combination of politics and philosophy is possible, is a 
question which has been much debated, and may perhaps be resolved by 
saying that the great practical leaders of mankind must have some 

INTRODUCTION. 

159* 

element of philosophy. But we do Plato injustice when we apply to his 
theories the test of practicability, for in his conception of education he is 
really describing his ideal of a philosopher, and in his ideal of a philo- 
sopher he is embodying his principles of knowledge. We may read the 
Republic as a work of art, and measure it by the test of dramatic or 
poetical consistency, but when regarded as a treatise on philosophy 
we must endeavour to separate the substance from the form, and 
sometimes ask ourselves what Plato really meant by all this, and how 
far we are to regard him as speaking seriously or as only dramatizing 
a thesis. 

IV. Others as well as Plato have chosen an ideal Republic as the form 
of conveying thoughts which they could not definitely express, or 
which were beyond the horizon of their own age. The classical 
writing which approaches most nearly to the Republic is the * De 
Republica' of Cicero; but neither in this nor in any other of his 
dialogues docs he rival the art of Plato. He would confine the terms 
King or State to the rule of reason and justice, and he will not concede 
that title either to a democracy or to a monarchy. But under the 
rule of reason and justice he is willing to include the natural superior 
ruling over the natural inferior, which he compares to the soul ruling 
over the body. The two images of the just and the unjust are depicted 
by him and transferred to the state — Philus maintaining against his 
will the necessity of injustice as a principle of government, while 
Laelius supports the opposite thesis. His views of language and 
number are derived from Plato ; like him, in the person of Scipio, he 
denounces the drama, and declares that if his life were to be twice as 
long he would have no time to read the lyric poets. The picture of 
democracy is translated by him word for word, though he has hardly 
shown himself able to ‘ carry the jest ’ of Plato. But his most remark- 
able imitation of Plato is the adaptation of the vision of Er, which 
is converted by Cicero into the * Somnium Scipionis ; ' he has 
* romanized ' the myth of the Republic, adding an argument for the 
immortality of the soul taken not from the Republic but from the 
Phaedrus, and some other touches derived from the Phaedo and the 
Timaeus. Though a beautiful tale and containing splendid passages, 
the * Somnium Scipionis ’ is very inferior to the vision of Er in dramatic 
power, and hardly allows the reader to suppose that the writer believes 
in his own description. Whether, as he says, his dialogues were 

]6o* 

THE REPUBLIC . 

framed on the model of the lost dialogues of Aristotle, or of Plato, to 
which they bear so many superficial resemblances, the orator always 
appears in them; he is not conversing, but making speeches, and is 
never able to mould the intractable Latin to the grace and ease of 
the Greek Platonic dialogue. 

Plato’s Republic has been said to be a church and not a state ; and 
such an ideal of a city in the heavens has always hovered over the 
Christian world, and is embodied in St. Augustine’s ‘ De Civitate Dei/ 
which is suggested by the decay and fall of the Roman Empire, much 
as the Republic of Plato is, by the decline of Greek politics. He 
stands in much the same relation to cotemporary Rome as Plato did 
to his cotemporaries in Greece. In all such parallels there is a 
certain degree of resemblance and also of difference, and the Christian 
church is even more an ideal than the Republic of Plato and further 
removed from any existing institution. In many other respects the 
resemblance between the Republic and the great work of St. Augustine 
is merely nominal. The ‘ Civitas Dei ’ is a controversial treatise which 
maintains the thesis that the destruction of the Roman Empire is due 
not to the rise of Christianity but to the corruption of paganism. He 
has no sympathy with the old Roman life as Plato has with Greek 
life, nor has he any idea of the ecclesiastical kingdom which was to 
arise out of the ruins. The work of St. Augustine is a curious repertory 
of antiquarian learning and quotations, feeble in reasoning and criticism ; 
entering little into the spirit of the ancient Roman life, but deeply 
penetrated with Christian ethics. He has no power such as Plato 
possessed of conceiving a different state of the world, or of feeling or 
understanding anything external to his own theology. Of all the 
ancient philosophers he is most attracted by Plato, though he is very 
slightly acquainted with his writings. He is inclined to believe that 
the idea of creation in the Timaeus is derived from the narrative in 
Genesis ; and he is strangely taken with the coincidence (?) of Plato’s 
saying that ‘ the philosopher is the lover of God/ and the words of the 
Book of Exodus in which God reveals himself to Moses. (Ex. iii. 14.) 

The ‘ Utopia ’ of Sir Thomas More is a surprising monument of his 
genius, and shows a reach of thought far beyond his cotemporaries. 
He is possessed of far greater dramatic art than any one who succeeded 
him, with the exception of Swift He is as free as Plato from the 
scruples of his age, and has as exalted a notion of religion. His 

INTRODUCTION. 

161* 

views of toleration ; his dislike of capital punishment, and plans for the 
reformation of offenders; his evident detestation both of priests and 
of great men ; his remark that ‘ although every one may hear of ravenous 
dogs and wolves and cruel man-eaters, it is not easy to find states that 
are well and wisely governed,’ curiously disagree with the notions of 
his age and with his own life. There are many points in which he 
shows a modem feeling and a prophetic insight like Plato. He is 
a sanitary reformer; he maintains that civilized states have a right 
to the soil of waste countries ; he is inclined to the opinion which places 
happiness in pleasure. His ceremonies before marriage; his humane 
proposal that war should be carried on by assassinating the leaders of 
the enemy may be compared to some of the paradoxes of Plato. He 
has a charming fancy w'orthy of the Timaeus that the Utopians learnt 
the language of the Greeks with the more readiness because they were 
originally of the same race with them. In several passages he alludes to 
Plato and quotes or adapts thoughts both from the Republic and from 
the Timaeus. He declares himself strongly in favour of the community 
of property, though aware of the arguments which may be urged on 
the other side1. He is full of satirical reflections on the governments 
of mankind and on the state of the world. He quotes the words of 
Plato describing the philosopher ‘ standing out of the way under 
a wall until the driving storm of sleet and rain be overpast ; ’ which 
admit of a singular application to More’s own fate; although writing 
twenty years before (about the year 1514), he can hardly be supposed 
to have foreseen this. There is no touch of satire which strikes deeper 
than his quiet remark that the greater part of the precepts of Christ 
are more at variance with the lives of ordinary Christians than the 
discourse of Utopia2. The ‘Utopia’ is also very interesting as illustrating 

1 ‘ When, I say, I balance all these things in my thoughts, I grow more favourable to 
Plato, and do not wonder that he resolved not to make any laws for such as would 
not submit to a community of all things ; for so wise a man as he was could not but 
foresee that setting all upon a level was the only way to make a nation happy, which 
cannot be attained so long as there is property.’ (Utopia, Phoenix Library, p. 49.) 

2 ‘The greatest part of his precepts are more disagreeing to the lives of the men 
of this age than any part of my discourse has been ; but the preachers seemed to have 
learned that craft to which you advise me; for they, observing that the world would 
not willingly suit their lives to the rules that Christ has given, have fitted his doctrine 
as if it had been a leaden rule to their lives, that so, some way or other, they might 
agree with one another.’ 

VOL. II. * M 

Digitized by Google 

THE REPUBLIC. 

162* 

Sir Thomas More's character, which has been deeply affected by the 
study of Plato. 

The ‘ New Atlantis’ is only a fragment, and far inferior in merit to the 
' Utopia.’ The work is full of ingenuity but wanting in creative fancy, 
and by no means impresses the reader with a sense of credibility. In 
some places Lord Bacon is characteristically different from Sir Thomas 
More, as, for example, in the external state which he attributes to the 
governor of Solomon’s House, whose dress he minutely describes, 
while to Sir Thomas More such external trappings appear simply 
ridiculous. Yet, after this programme of dress, Bacon adds the beautiful 
trait, ‘ that he had a look as though he pitied men.’ Several things 
are borrowed from the Timaeus ; but he has injured the unity of style 
by adding thoughts and passages which are taken from the Hebrew 
Scriptures. 

Other writings on ideal States, such as the ‘ De Monarchia ’ of Dante, 
which is a dream of another Roman Empire, existing by the side of the 
Papacy, and like that deriving authority immediately from God; — the 
divine right of this second power is established in true scholastic form, 
and by quotations from Scripture and the Classics; the ‘Oceana’ of 
Harrington in which the Lord Archon, meaning Cromwell, is 
described not as he was but as he ought to have been; the 
* Argenis ’ of Barclay, which is a political allegory of his own 
time, are too unlike Plato to be worth mentioning. The change 
of government in the time of the Commonwealth set men thinking 
about first principles, and gave rise to many works of this class. 
In the ‘ City of the Sun,’ by Campanella, who wrote in the year 
1623, a community of women and goods is established, and the prin- 
cipal magistrate, who is called the Sun, is elected after a strict examination 
in all kinds of science 3. There are no traces in Swift of an acquaintance 
with Plato. Nor do I observe any knowledge of Plato in Dante’s * De 
Monarchia,’ which is in many ways the most remarkable of these 
modem works, though he is well acquainted with the Nicomachean 
Ethics and with Augustine’s ‘ De Civitate Dei.' 

Human life and conduct are affected by ideals in the same way that 
they are affected by the examples of eminent men. Neither the one 
nor the other are immediately applicable to practice, but there is a 

3 See Hallam’s Lit. of Europe, vol. iii. p. 166. 

INTRODUCTION. 

163* 

virtue flowing from them which tends to raise individuals above the 
common routine of society or trade, and to elevate States above the 
mere interests of commerce or the necessities of self-defence. Like 
the ideals of art they are partly framed by the omission of particulars ; 
they require to be viewed at a certain distance, and are apt to fade 
away if we attempt to approach them. They gain an imaginary 
distinctness when embodied in a State or an individual, but still 
remain the visions of ‘ a world unrealized.’ Most men live in a 
corner and see but a little way beyond their own home or place of 
occupation ; they ‘ do not lift up their eyes to the hills ; ' they are not 
awake when the dawn appears. But in Plato as from some * tower of 
speculation' we look into the distance and behold the future of 
the world and of philosophy. The ideal of the State and of the life 
of the philosopher; the ideal of an education continuing through life 
and extending equally to both sexes; the ideal of the unity and cor- 
relation of knowledge ; the faith in good and immortality — are the vacant 
forms of light on which Plato is seeking to fix the eye of mankind. 

^ M 1 

THE REPUBLIC. 

BOOK I. 

PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE . 

SOCRATES, who is tlx narrator. 

Glaucon. 

Adf.imantus. 

POLEMARCHUS. 

Cephalus. 

THRASYMACHI'S. 

Cleitophok. 

And others who are mute auditors. 

The scene is laid in the house of Cephalus at the Piraeus; and the whole 
discourse is narrated the day after it actually took place to Titnaeus, 
Hermocrates, Critias, and a nameless person, who all reappear in the 
Timaeus. 

Steph. T WENT down to the Piraeus yesterday with Glaucon the 
327 -I- son of Ariston, that I might offer up a prayer to the goddess; 
and also because I wanted to see in what manner they would 
celebrate the festival of Bendis1, which was a new thing. I was 
delighted with the procession of the inhabitants; this, however, 
was equalled or even exceeded in beauty by that of the Thracians. 
When we had finished our prayers and the spectacle was over, 
we turned in the direction of the city; and at that instant, 
Polemarchus the son of Cephalus, who had caught sight of us at 
a distance as we were departing homewards, told his servant to 
run and bid us wait for him. The servant took hold of me by 
the cloak behind, and said : Polemarchus desires you to wait. 

I turned round, and asked him where his master was. 

He is coming, said the youth, if you will only wait. 

Certainly we will, said Glaucon; and in a few minutes Pole- 
marchus appeared, and with him Adeimantus, Glaucon’s brother, 

VOL. n 

1 The Thracian Artemis. 
L 

146 

THE REPUBLIC 

Niceratus the son of Nicias, and several others who had been at 
the procession. 

Polemarchus said to me: I perceive, Socrates, that you and 
your companion are already on your way to the city. 

That is a good guess, I said. 

But do you see, he said, how many we are ? 

I do. 

And are you stronger than all these ? for if not, you will have to 
remain where you are. 

May there not be yet another possibility, I said, that we may 
persuade you to let us go ? 

But can you persuade us, if we refuse to listen to you ? he said. 

No indeed, replied Glaucon. 

Then we are not going to listen ; of that you may be assured. 

Adeimantus added : Has no one told you that there is to be 328 
an equestrian torch-race in the evening in honour of the goddess? 

Indeed, that is a novelty, I replied. Will the horsemen carry 
torches and pass them to one another during the race ? 

Yes, he said; and there will also be a festival at night which is 
well worth seeing. If we rise from supper in good time we shall 
see this, and we shall find youths enough there with whom we may 
discourse. Stay then, and do not be perverse. 

Glaucon said : I suppose that we must stay. 

Well, as you please, I replied. 

Accordingly we went with Polemarchus to his house ; and there 
we found his brothers Lysias and Euthydemus, and with them 
Thrasymachus the Chalcedonian, Charmantides the Paeanian, and 
Cleitophon the son of Aristonymus. There too was their father 
Cephalus, whom I had not seen for a long time, and I thought him 
very much aged. He was seated on a cushioned chair, and had 
a garland on his head, for he had been holding a sacrifice in 
the court ; and we sate down by him on other chairs, which were 
arranged in a circle around him. He welcomed me eagerly, and 
then he said : — 

You don’t come to see me, Socrates, as often as you ought. 

For if I were able to go to you I would not ask you to come to 
me. But at my age 1 can hardly get to the city, and therefore 
you ought to come oftener to the Piraeus. For, indeed, I find that 
at my time of life, as the pleasures and delights of the body fade 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK I. 

i47 

away, the love of discourse grows upon me. I only wish therefore 
that you would come oftener, and be with your young friends here, 
and make yourself altogether at home with us. 

I replied : There is nothing which I like better, Cephalus, than 
conversing with aged men like yourself; for I regard them as 
travellers who have gone a journey which I too may have to go, 
and of whom I ought to enquire, whether the way is smooth and 
easy, or rugged and difficult. And this is a question which I should 
like to ask of you who have arrived at that time which the poets 
call the ‘threshold of old age’ — Is life harder towards the end, 
or what report do you give of it ? 

329 I will tell you, Socrates, he said, what my own feeling is. Old 
men flock together; they are birds of a feather, as the proverb 
says; and at our meetings the tale of my acquaintance commonly 
is — I cannot eat, I cannot drink ; the pleasures of youth and love 
are fled away : there was a good time once, but that is gone, and 
now life is no longer life. Some of them lament over the slights 
which are put upon them by their relations, and then they tell you 
plaintively of how many evils old age is the cause. But I do 
not believe, Socrates, that the blame is where they say ; for if old 
age were the cause, I too being old, and every other old man 
would have felt the same. This, however, is not my own experi- 
ence, nor that of others whom I have known. How well I 
remember the aged poet Sophocles, when in answer to the ques- 
tion, How does love suit with age, Sophocles, — are you still the 
man you were ? Peace, he replied ; most gladly have I escaped 
that, and I feel as if I had escaped from a mad and furious master. 
That saying of his has often come into my mind since, and seems 
to me still as good as at the time when I heard him. For 
certainly old age has a great sense of calm and freedom ; when the 
passions relax their hold, then, as Sophocles says, you have escaped 
from the control not of one master only, but of many. And of 
these regrets, as well as of the complaint about relations, Socrates, 
the cause is to be sought, not in men’s ages, but in their characters 
and tempers; for he who is of a calm and happy nature will hardly 
feel the pressure of age, but he who is of an opposite disposition 
will find youth and age equally a burden. 

I was delighted at his words, and wanting to draw him out I 
went on to say: Yes, Cephalus; but I suspect that people in 

l 2 

Digitized by Google 

148 

THE REPUBLIC. 

general do not believe you when you say this; they think that old 
age sits lightly upon you, not because of your happy disposition, 
but because you are rich, and wealth is well known to be a great 
comforter. 

That is true, he replied ; they do not believe me : and there is 
something in what they say; not, however, so much as they 
imagine. I might answer them as Themistocles answered the 
Seriphian who was abusing him and saying that he was famous, 
not for his own merits but because he was an Athenian : c If 330 
you had been an Athenian and I a Seriphian, neither of us would 
have been famous/ And to those who are not rich and are im- 
patient of old age, the same reply may be made ; for neither can 
a good poor man lightly bear age, nor can a bad rich man ever be 
at peace with himself. 

May I ask, Cephalus, whether you inherited or acquired the 
greater part of your wealth ? 

How much did I acquire, Socrates ? he replied, — is that your 
question ? Well, the property which Cephalus, my grandfather, 
originally inherited was nearly of the same value as my own is 
at present ; this he doubled and trebled, but my father Lysanias 
reduced below the original amount; and I, who am neither a 
spender of money like the one, nor a gainer of money like the 
other, shall be satisfied if I leave my sons a little more than I 
received. 

That was why I asked you the question, I said, because I saw 
that you were not fond of money, which is a characteristic rather 
of those who have inherited their fortunes than of those who have 
acquired them; for the latter have a second or extraordinary love 
of money as a creation of their own, resembling the affection of 
authors for their own poems, or of parents for their children, besides 
that other love of money for the sake of use and enjoyment which 
is common to them and all men. And hence they are very bad 
company, for they talk about nothing but the praises of wealth. 

That is true, he said. 

Yes, that is very true, I said ; but may I ask you one more 
question ? which is this — What do you consider to be the greatest 
blessing which you have reaped from wealth ? 

Not one, he said, of which I could easily convince others. For 
let me tell you, Socrates, that when a man thinks himself to be 

BOOK /. 

149 

near death he has fears and cares which never entered into his 
mind before; the tales of a life below and the punishment 
which is exacted there of deeds done here were a laughing matter 
to him once, but now he is haunted with the thought that they 
may be true : either because of the feebleness of age, or from the 
nearness of the prospect, he seems to have a clearer view of the 
other world ; suspicions and alarms crowd upon him, and he be- 
gins to rcqjcon up in his own mind what wrongs he has done to 
others. And when he finds that the sum of his transgressions is 
great he will many a time like a child start up in his sleep for 
fear, and he is filled with dark forebodings. But he who is con- 
1 scious of no sin has in age a sweet hope which, as Pindar 
charmingly says, is a kind nurse to him. 

‘ Hope/ as he says, ‘ cherishes the soul of him who lives in holiness and 
righteousness, and is the nurse of his age and the companion of his journey ; — 
hope which is mightiest to sway the eager soul of man.’ 

That is an expression of his which wonderfully delights me. And 
this is the great blessing of riches, I do not say to every man, but 
to a good man, that he has had no occasion to deceive another, 
cither intentionally or unintentionally; and when he departs to 
the other world he is not in any apprehension about offerings due 
to the gods or debts which he owes to men. Now the posses- 
sion of wealth has a great deal to do with this ; and therefore I 
say that, setting one thing against another, this, in my opinion, is 
to a man of sense the greatest of the many advantages which 
wealth has to give. 

That is excellent, Cephalus, I replied; but then is justice no 
more than this— to speak the truth and pay your debts ? And are 
there not exceptions even to this ? If I have received arms from 
a friend when in his right mind and he asks for them when he is 
not in his right mind, ought I to give them back to him? No 
one would say that I ought, any more than they would say that 1 
ought always to speak the truth to one who is in that condition. 

You arc quite right, he replied. 

But then, I said, speaking the truth and paying your debts is 
not a correct definition of justice. 

And yet, said Polemarchus, that is the definition which has the 
authority of Simonides. 

THE REPUBLIC. 

I5° 

I fear, said Cephalus, that I must look to the sacrifices; and 
therefore I now take leave of this argument, which I bequeath to 
you and Polemarchus. 

Is not Polemarchus your heir ? I said. 

To be sure, he answered, and went away laughing to the 
sacrifices. 

Tell me then, O thou heir of the argument, what did Simonides 
say, and according to you truly say, about justice ? 

He said that the return of a debt is just, and in that he appears 
to me to be right. 

I should be sorry to doubt the word of such a wise and inspired 
man, I said, but I cannot understand his meaning, which though 
probably clear to you is the reverse of clear to me. For he 
certainly does not mean, as we were just now saying, that I 
ought to return a deposit of arms or anything else to one who is 
not in his right senses; and yet a deposit cannot be denied to be a 332 
debt. 

True. 

Then when the person who asks me is not in his right mind I 
am not to make the return ? 

Certainly not. 

Then Simonides did not mean to include that case when he 
said that justice was the payment of a debt ? 

Certainly not ; for he would say that a friend is under an 
obligation to do good to a friend and not evil. 

I understand, I said, that the return of a deposit of gold to the 
injury of the receiver, if the two parties are friends, is not the 
return of a debt, — that is what you would imagine him to say ? 

Yes. 

And are enemies also to have their debt or due ? 

Yes, he said, they are to have what is due to them, and what is 
really due from an enemy to an enemy is that which is appropriate 
to him, — that is to say, evil. 

Simonides, then, after the manner of poets, would seem to have 
spoken of the nature of justice in a parable ; for he meant to say 
that justice would give each man what is appropriate to him, and 
this he termed his debt or due. 

That must have been his meaning, he said. 

By Zeus ! I replied ; and if he were asked what due or appro- 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK /. 

151 

priatc thing is given by medicine, and to whom, what answer do 
you think he would make ? 

He would surely reply that medicine gives drugs and meat and 
drink to human bodies. 

And what due or appropriate thing is given by cookery, and to 
whom ? 

Seasoning to food. 

And what is that which justice gives, and to whom ? 

If, Socrates, we are to be guided at all by the analogy of the 
preceding instances, then justice is the art which gives good and 
evil to friends and enemies. 

That is his meaning then ? 

Yes. 

And who is best able to do good to his friends and evil to his 
enemies in time of sickness? 

The physician. 

Or when they are on a voyage and amid the perils of the sea ? 

The pilot. 

And in what sort of actions is the just man most able to do 
them good ? 

In wars and alliances. 

But in time of health there is no need of a physician ? 

No. 

And he who is not on a voyage has no need of a pilot ? 

No. 

Then in time of peace justice will be of no use ? 

I hardly think that. 

333 Then you think that justice may be of use in peace as well as war? 

Yes. 

Like husbandry which acquires corn, or like shoemaking which 
acquires shoes, — that is what you would say ? 

Yes. 

And what similar use or power of acquisition has justice in 
time of peace ? 

In contracts, Socrates, justice is of great use. 

And by contracts you mean partnerships ? 

Exactly. 

But is the just man or the skilful player a more useful or better 
partner at a game of draughts ? 

152 

THE REPUBLIC. 

The skilful player. 

And in the laying of bricks and stones is the just man a more 
useful or better partner than the builder ? 

Quite the reverse. 

Then in what sort of partnership is the just man a better 
partner than the harp-player, as the harp-player is certainly a 
better partner than the just man in playing the harp ? 

In a money partnership. 

But surely not in the use of money, Polemarchus; for you do 
not want a just man to be your counsellor in the purchase or sale 
of a horse ; a man who is knowing about horses would be better 
for that, would he not ? 

Certainly. 

And when you want to buy a ship, the shipwright or the pilot 
would be better? 

True. 

Then in what common use of silver or gold is the just man to 
be preferred ? 

When you want a deposit to be kept safely. 

You mean when money is not wanted, but allowed to lie? 

Precisely. 

That is to say, justice is useful when money is useless ? 

That is the inference. 

And when you want to keep a pruning-hook safe, then justice is 
useful to the individual and to the state; but when you want to 
use it, then the art of the vine-dresser? 

Clearly. 

And when you want to keep a shield or a lyre, and not 
to use them, you would say that justice is useful; but when 
you want to use them, then the art of the soldier or of the 
musician ? 

Certainly. 

And so of all other things ; — justice is useful when they are 
useless, and useless when they are useful ? 

That is the inference. 

Then justice is not of much use. But let us consider this 
further point: Is not he who can strike any kind of blow also 
able to ward any kind of blow ? 

Certainly. 

BOOK /. 

i53 

And he who can prevent or elude2 a disease is best able to 
create one? 

True. 

And he is the best guard ofa position who is best able to steal 
334 a march upon the enemy ? 

Certainly. 

Then he who is a good keeper of anything is also a good thief? 

That, I suppose, is to be inferred. 

Then if the just man knows how to keep, he knows how to 
steal money ? 

That is what the argument implies. 

Then after all the just man has turned out to be a thief. And 
this is a lesson which I suspect you must have learnt out of 
Homer; for he, speaking of Autolycus, the maternal grandfather 
of Odysseus, affirms that he was excellent above all men in theft 
and perjury — this is the way in which he praises one of his 
favourites. And so, then, you and Homer and Simonides are 
agreed that justice is a thief j though I must not forget to add c for 
the good of friends and for the harm of enemies/ — that was what 
you were saying ? 

No, indeed, anything but that; though I really do not know 
what I did say, but I still stand by the latter words. 

Well, there is another question : Are friends to be interpreted 
as real or seeming, enemies as real or seeming ? 

Surely, he said, a man may be expected to love those whom he 
thinks good, and to hate those whom he thinks evil. 

Yes, but do not persons often err in their judgment of good 
and evil ? 

That is true. 

Then to them the good will be enemies and the evil will be 
their friends ? 

True. 

And still the principle holds, that it is just for men to do good 
to the evil and evil to the good ? 

Apparently. 

But the good are just and would not do an injustice ? 

True. 

2 Reading (f>v\a£a<r&ai koi Xaddv. 

154 

THE REPUBLIC . 

Then according to your argument it is just to injure those who 
do no wrong ? 

Certainly not, Socrates ; that would be immoral. 

Then I suppose that they ought to do good to the just and 
harm to the unjust ? 

I like that better. 

But see the consequence : — Many a man who is ignorant of the 
world has bad friends, and then he ought to do harm to them ; 
and he has good enemies whom he ought to benefit ; and thus we 
arrive at the exact converse of the proposition of Simonides. 

That is true, he said , and I think that we had better correct an 
error into which we have fallen in the use of the words c friend* 
and c enemy.* 

, What was the error, Polemarchus? I replied. 

The error lay in the assumption that he is a friend who seems 
or is thought good. 

And how is the error to be corrected ? 

We should rather say that he is a friend who is, as well as 
seems, good; and that he who seems only, and is not good, only 335 
seems to be and is not a friend ; and of an enemy the same may 
be said. 

You would argue that the good are our friends and the bad 
our enemies ? 

Yes. 

And instead of saying as we did at first that it is just to do 
good to your friends and harm to your enemies, you would rather 
say now, It is just to do good to your friends when they are good 
and harm to your enemies when they are evil ? 

Yes, that appears to me to be the truth. 

But then ought the just to injure any one at all ? 

Undoubtedly he ought to injure the wicked who are his enemies. 

And when horses or dogs are injured, are they improved or 
deteriorated ? 

The latter. 

Deteriorated, that is to say, in the good qualities of horses, 
not of dogs? 

Yes, of horses. 

And dogs are deteriorated in the good qualities of dogs, and not 
of horses ? 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK /. 

i55 

Of course. 

And will not men who are injured be deteriorated in their 
proper human virtue ? 

Certainly. 

And that human virtue is justice ? 

Yes, certainly. 

Then men who are injured cannot but be rendered unjust ? 

That is the result. 

But can the art of the musician make men unmusical ? 

Certainly not. 

Or the art of horsemanship make bad horsemen ? 

Impossible. 

And can the just by justice make men unjust, or the good by 
virtue make them bad ? 

Assuredly not. 

Nor can heat produce cold ? 

No. 

Nor drought moisture ? 

Never. 

Nor can the good harm, any but only the evil ? 

Clearly. 

And the just is the good ? 

Certainly. 

Then to injure a friend or any one else is not the act of a just 
man, but of the opposite, who is the unjust ? 

I think that what you say is quite true, Socrates. 

Then if a man says that justice consists in repaying a debt, 
meaning that a just man ought to do good to his friends and injure 
his enemies, he is not really wise j for he says what is not true, 
if, as has been clearly shown, the injuring of another can be in no 
case just. 

I agree with you, said Polemarchus. 

Then you and I are prepared to take up arms against any one 
who attributes such a saying to Simonides or Bias or Pittacus, or 
any other sage or saint ? 

I am quite ready to join with you, he said. 

336 Shall I whisper in your ear whose I believe the saying to be ? 

Whose is the saying ? 

I believe that Periander or Perdiccas or Xerxes or Ismenias 

THE REPUBLIC. 

156 

the Theban, or some other rich and mighty man, who had a great 
opinion of his own power, first said that justice is doing good to 
your friends and harm to your enemies. 

Most true, he said. 

Yes, I said; but if this definition of justice also breaks down, 
what other can be offered ? 

Several times in the middle of our discourse Thrasymachus had 
made an attempt to get the argument into his own hands by 
interrupting us, and had been put down by the rest of the com- 
pany, who wanted to hear the end. But when I had done speaking 
and there was a pause, he could no longer hold his peace ; and, 
gathering himself up, he came at us like a wild beast seeking to 
devour us, and Polemarchus and I quaked with fear. 

What folly has possessed you, Socrates? he said, with a roar. 
Why do you drop down at one another's feet in this silly way ? 

I say that if you want to know what justice really is, you should 
answer and not ask, and you shouldn't pride yourself in refuting 
others, but have your own answer ; for there is many a one who 
can ask and cannot answer. And don't tell me that justice is duty 
or advantage or profit or gain or interest, for that sort of watery 
stuff won’t do for me; I must and will have a precise answer. 

I was panic-stricken at these words, and trembled at the very 
look of him; and I verily believe that if I had not caught his eye 
first, I should have been deprived of utterance : but now, when I 
saw his fury rising, I had the presence of mind to keep my eye 
upon him, and this enabled me to reply to him. 

Thrasymachus, I said, with a quiver, have mercy on us. Our 
error, if we were guilty of any error, was certainly unintentional; 
and therefore you, in your wisdom, should have pity upon us, and 
not be angry with us. If we were seeking for gold, you would not 
imagine that we were pretending only, or dropping down, as you 
say, out of foolish complaisance, at one another's feet. Do not 
imagine, then, that we are pretending to seek for justice, which is 
a treasure far more precious than gold. 

How characteristic of Socrates! he replied, with a bitter laugh; 337 
— that’s your ironical way ! Did I not foresee — did I not tell you 
all, that he would refuse to answer, and try irony or any other 
shift in order that he might avoid^ answering ? 

You arc a philosopher, Thrasymachus, I replied, and well know 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK I . 

1 57 

that if you ask what numbers make up twelve, taking care to 
prohibit the person whom you ask from answering twice six, or 
three times four, or six times two, or four times three, c for this 
sort of nonsense won’t do for me/ — then obviously, if that is your 
way of putting the question to him, neither he nor any one can 
answer. And suppose he were to say, c Thrasymachus, what do 
you mean ? And if the true answer to the question is one of 
these numbers which you interdict, am I to say some other num- 
ber which is not the right one? — is that your meaning?’ How 
would you answer him ? 

Yes, said he; but how remarkably parallel the two cases are? 

Very likely they are, I replied ; but even if they are not, and 
only appear to be parallel to the person who is asked, can he to 
whom the question is put avoid saying what he thinks, even 
though you and I join in forbidding him? 

Well, then, I suppose you are going to make one of the inter- 
dicted answers? 

I dare say that I may, notwithstanding the danger, if upon 
reflection I approve of any of them. 

But what if I give you a new and better answer, he said, than 
any of these ? What do you deserve to have done to you ? 

Done to me ! I can but suffer the penalty of ignorance ; and 
the penalty is to learn from the wise— and that is what I deserve 
to have done to me. 

What, and no payment ! that’s a pleasant notion ! 

I will pay when I have the money, I replied. 

But you have, Socrates, said Glaucon ; and you, Thrasymachus, 
need be under no anxiety about money, for we will all make a 
contribution for Socrates. 

Yes, he replied, and I know what will happen; Socrates will do 
as he always does — not answer, but take and pull the argument 
to pieces. 

Why, my good friend, I said, how can any one answer who 
knows, and says that he knows, just nothing ; and who, even if he 
has some faint notions of his own, is told by a man of authority 
not to utter them? The natural thing is, that the speaker should 
be one who knows, like yourself; and I must earnestly request that 
you will kindly answer for the edification of the company and of 
myself. 

153 

THE REPUBLIC . 

Glaucon and the rest of the company joined in my request, and 
Thrasymachus, as any one might see, was really eager to speak ; 
for he thought that he had an excellent answer, and would distin- 
guish himself. But at first he affected to insist on my answering; 
at length he consented to begin. Behold, he said, the wisdom of 
Socrates; he refuses to teach himself, and goes about learning 
of others, to whom he never even says Thank you. 

That I learn of others, I replied, is quite true ; but that I am 
„ ungrateful I wholly deny. Money I have none, and therefore 
I pay in praise, which is all I have; and how ready I am to 
praise any one who speaks well you will very soon find out when 
you answer, for I expect that you will answer well. 

Listen, then, he said ; I proclaim that might is right, justice the 
interest of the stronger. But why don’t you praise me ? 

Let me first understand you, I replied. Justice, as you say, 
is the interest of the stronger. Now what, Thrasymachus, is the 
meaning of this? You cannot mean to say that because Poly- 
damas, the pancratiast, who is stronger than we are, finds the 
eating of beef for his interest, that this is equally for our interest 
who are weaker than he is ? 

That’s abominable of you, Socrates ; why you are just taking 
the words in the way which is most damaging to the argument. 

Not at all, my good sir, I said ; I am trying to understand 
them ; and I wish that you would be a little clearer. 

Well, he said, I suppose you know that forms of government 
differ ; there are tyrannies, and there are democracies, and there 
are aristocracies? 

Yes, I know that. 

And the government is that which has power in each state ? 

Certainly. 

And the different forms of government make laws democratical, 
aristocratical, tyrannical, with a view to their several interests ; 
and these laws, which are made by them for their interests, they 
deliver to their subjects as justice, and punish him who trans- 
gresses them as a breaker of the law, and unjust. And that is 
what I mean when I say that in all states there is the same prin- 
ciple of justice which is neither more nor less than the interest 
of the government ; and as the government must be supposed to 339 
have power, the reasonable conclusion is, that everywhere there is 
one principle of justice which is the interest of the stronger. 

BOOK /. 

*59 

Now I understand you, I said ; and whether you are right or not 
I will try to learn. But let me first remark, that you have your- 
self said ‘ interest/ although you forbade me to use that word in 
answer. I do not, however, deny that in your definition the 
words are added c of the stronger.’ 

A slight addition, that you must allow, he said. 

Great or small, never mind that; the simple question is, whe- 
ther what you are saying is the truth. Now we are both agreed 
that justice is interest of some sort, but we are not agreed as to 
the additional words c of the stronger/ and this is the point which 
I will now examine. 

Proceed. 

That I will ; and first tell me, Do you admit that it is just for 
subjects to obey their rulers ? 

I do. 

But are the rulers of states absolutely infallible, or are they 
sometimes liable to err? 

To be sure, he replied ; they are liable to err. 

Then in making their laws they may sometimes make them 
rightly, but they are not always right ? 

True. 

When they make them rightly, they make them agreeably to 
their interests ; when they are mistaken, contrary to their in- 
terests,— that is what you would say ? 

Yes. 

And the laws which they make must be obeyed by their sub- 
jects,— and that is what you call justice ? 

Doubtless. 

Then justice, according to your argument, is not only the in- 
terest of the stronger but the reverse ? 

What are you saying ? he asked Hurriedly. 

I am only saying what you were saying, I believe. But let us 
consider. Have we not admitted that the rulers may be mistaken 
about their own interest in what they command, and also that to 
obey them is justice ? Has not that been admitted ? 

Yes. 

Then you must also have acknowledged that justice is not the 
interest of the stronger, when the rulers who are stronger unin- 
tentionally command that which is to their own injury. For if, 

i6o 

THE REPUBLIC. 

as you say, justice is the obedience which the subject renders to 
their commands, then in the case supposed, O thou wisest of 
men, is there any escape from the conclusion that justice is the 
injury and not the interest of the stronger, which is imposed on 
the weaker? 

Nothing can be clearer, Socrates, said Polemarchus. 

Yes, said Cleitophon, interposing, if you are admitted as his 34° 
witness. 

But there is no need of any witness, said Polemarchus, for 
Thrasymachus himself acknowledges that rulers command what 
is not for their own interest, and that to obey them is justice. 

Yes, Polemarchus, — Thrasymachus said that for subjects to do 
what was commanded by the rulers was just. 

Yes, but he also said that justice was the interest of the 
stronger, and, while admitting both these propositions, he further 
admitted that the stronger commands what is not for his own 
interest j whence follows that justice is the injury quite as much 
as the interest of the stronger. 

But, said Cleitophon, he meant by the interest of the stronger 
what the stronger thought to be for his interest. 

That was not the statement, said Polemarchus. 

Never mind, I said; let us accept the new statement, if 
Thrasymachus has changed his opinion. 

Tell me then, I said, Thrasymachus, did you mean by justice 
what the stronger thought to be his interest, whether really so 
or not? 

Certainly not, he said. Do you suppose that I call him who 
is mistaken the stronger at the time when he is mistaken ? 

Yes, I said, that I supposed to be your meaning when you ad- 
mitted that the ruler was not infallible and might be mistaken. 

You are a sharper, Socrates, in argument. Pray do you imagine 
that he who is mistaken about the sick is a physician in that he 
is mistaken and at the time that he is mistaken ? or that he who 
errs in arithmetic or grammar is an arithmetician or grammarian 
in that he is mistaken and at the time that he is mistaken? 
True, we say that the arithmetician or grammarian or physician 
has made a mistake, but this is only a way of speaking ; for the 
fact is that neither the grammarian nor any other person of skill 
ever makes a mistake in as far as he is what his name implies: 

BOOK L 

161 

they all of them err only when their skill fails them. No 
craftsman or sage or ruler errs at the time when he is what he 
is called, though he is commonly said to err; and after this 
manner I answered you. But the more precise expression, since 
you will have precision, is that the ruler, as ruler, is unerring, 
341 and, being unerring, always commands that which is for his own 
interest ; and the subject is required to execute this : and therefore, 
as I said at first and now repeat, justice is the interest of the 
stronger. 

Indeed, Thrasymachus, and do you really think that I am a 
sharper ? 

Certainly, he replied. 

And do you think that I ask these questions with any special 
design of injuring you? 

Nay, he replied, I am quite sure of it; and your dishonesty 
shall do you no good, for I shall detect you, and in a fair argu- 
ment you will not be able to overthrow me. 

I shall certainly not attempt that; but to avoid anything of 
the kind occurring between us again, please to say, when you 
speak of a ruler or stronger whose interest the weaker is re- 
quired to execute, do you speak of a ruler in the popular or in 
the strict sense of the term ? 

The ruler in the strictest of all senses, he said. And now cheat 
and deceive if you can ; I ask no quarter at your hands. But you 
won’t be able. 

And do you imagine, I said, that I am such a madman as to 
try and cheat Thrasymachus ? I might as well try to shave a lion. 

Why, he said, you made the attempt a minute ago, although 
you failed, as you will again. 

Well, I said, I will not continue these civilities. I would 
rather ask you a question : Is the physician, in that strict sense 
of which you are speaking, a healer of the sick or a maker of 
money? And remember that I am now speaking of the true 
physician. 

A healer of the sick, he replied. 

And the pilot — that is to say, the true pilot — is he a captain 
of sailors or a mere sailor ? 

A captain of sailors. 

The circumstance that he sails in the ship is not to be 

VOL. II. M 

Digitized by Google 

162 

THE REPUBLIC. 

reckoned ; this is an accident only, and has nothing to do with 
the name pilot, which is significant of his skill and of his authority. 

Very true, he said. 

Now, I said, each of these has an interest ? 

Certainly. 

And the art has to find and provide for this interest ? 

Yes, that is the aim of the art. 

And the interest of each of the arts is the perfection of each 
of them ; nothing but that ? 

What do you mean ? 

I mean what I may illustrate negatively by the example of the 
body. Suppose you were to ask me whether the body is self- 
sufficing or has wants, I should reply: Certainly the body has 
wants ; for the body may be ill and require to be cured, and has 
therefore interests to which the art of medicine ministers; and 
this is the origin and intention of medicine, as you will acknow- 
ledge. Am I not right in saying that ? 

Quite right, he replied. 342 

But is the art of medicine or any other art faulty or deficient 
in any quality in the same way that the eye may be deficient in 
sight or the ear fail of hearing, and, in consequence of this 
defect, require another art to provide for the interest of seeing 
and hearing ? Has art, I say, any similar liability to fault or defect, 
and does every art require another supplementary art to provide 
for its interests, and that another and another without end ? Or 
may the arts be said to look after their own interests? Or have 
they no need of either? — having no faults or defects, they have 
no need to correct them, either by the exercise of their own art 
or of any other — that is not required of them for the preservation 
of their interests ; they have only to consider the interest of their 
subject-matter, for every art remains pure and faultless while re- 
maining true — that is to say, while perfect and unimpaired? Is 
not all this clear? And I would have you take the words in 
your precise manner. 

Yes, that is clear. 

Then medicine does not consider the interest of medicine, but 
the interest of the body ? 

True, he said. 

Nor does farriery consider the interests of farriery, but the in- 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK /. 

163 

terests of the horse ; neither do any other arts care for themselves, 
for they have no needs, but they care only for that which is the 
subject of, their art ? 

True, he said. 

But surely, I added, the arts are the superiors and rulers of 
their own subjects; you will admit that, Thrasymachus ? 

To this he assented with a good deal of reluctance. 

Then, I said, no science or art considers or enjoins the interest 
of the stronger or superior, but only the interest of the subject 
and weaker? 

He acquiesced in this after a feint of resistance. 

Then, 1 continued, no physician, in as far as he is a physician, 
considers his own good but the good of the patient ; for the 
true physician is also a ruler having the human body as a subject, 
and is not a mere money-maker ; that has been admitted ? 

Yes. 

And the pilot likewise, in the strict sense of the term, is a ruler 
of sailors and not a mere sailor ? 

That has been admitted. 

And such a pilot and ruler will provide and prescribe for the 
interest of the sailor who is under him, and not for his own or 
the ruler’s interest ? 

\ 

He gave a very reluctant c Yes.’ 

Then, I said, Thrasymachus, there is no one in any rule who, 
in as far as he is a ruler, considers or enjoins that which is for 
his own interest, but always that which is for the interest of his 
subject and of his art; to that he looks, and that alone he con- 
siders in everything which he says and does. 

343 When we had got to this point in the argument, and every 
one saw that the definition of justice had been completely re- 
versed, Thrasymachus, instead of replying to me, said : I want 
to know, Socrates, whether you have a nurse ? 

Why do you ask such a question, I said, instead of answering 
as you ought ? 

Why, he said, because she lets you go about running at the 
nose like a drivelling idiot, and has never taught her baby how 
to know the shepherd from the sheep. 

What makes you say that ? I replied. 

Because you fancy that the shepherd or neatherd fattens or 

M 2 

Digitized by Google 

164 

TIIE REPUBLIC. 

tends the sheep or oxen with a view to their own good and 
not to the good of himself or his master; and you further imagine 
that the rulers of states, who are true rulers, never think of their 
subjects as sheep, and that they are not studying their own ad- 
vantage day and night. Oh, no ; and so entirely astray are you in 
the very rudiments of justice and injustice as not even to know 
that justice and the just are in reality another’s good ; that is to 
say, the interest of the ruler and stronger, and the loss of the 
subject and servant ; whereas the reverse holds in the case of 
injustice ; for the unjust is lord over the truly simple and just : 
he is the stronger, and his subjects do what is for his benefit, 
and minister to his happiness, which is very far from being their 
own. Consider further, most foolish Socrates, that the just is 
always a loser in comparison with the unjust. First of all in 
their private dealings: wherever the unjust is the partner of the 
just the conclusion of the affair always is that the unjust man 
has more and the just less. Next, in their dealings with the 
State : when there is an income-tax, the just man will pay more 
and the unjust less on the same amount of income; and when 
there is anything to be received the one gains nothing and the 
other much. Observe also that when they come into office, there 
is the just man neglecting his affairs and perhaps suffering other 
losses, but he will not compensate himself out of the public purse 
because he is just; moreover he is hated by his friends and 
relations for refusing to serve them in unlawful ways. Now all 
this is reversed in the case of the unjust man. I am speaking of 
injustice on a large scale in which the advantage of the unjust is 344 
most apparent, and my meaning will be most clearly seen in that 
highest form of injustice the perpetrator of which is the happiest 
of men, as the sufferers or those who refuse to do injustice are the 
most miserable — I mean tyranny, which by fraud and force takes 
away the property of others, not retail but wholesale; compre- 
hending in one, things sacred as well as profane, private and 
public ; for any one of which acts of wrong, if he were detected 
perpetrating them singly he would be punished and incur great 
dishonour ; for they who arc guilty of any of these crimes in 
single instances are called robbers of temples, and man-stealers 
and burglars and swindlers and thieves. But when a man has 
taken away the money of the citizens and made slaves of them, 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK I. 

then, instead of these dishonourable names, he is called happy and 
blessed, not only by the citizens but by all who hear of his having 
achieved the consummation of injustice. For injustice is censured 
because the censurers are afraid of suffering, and not from any 
fear which they have of doing injustice. And thus, as I have 
shown, Socrates, injustice, when on a sufficient scale, has more 
strength and freedom and mastery than justice ; and, as I said 
at first, justice is the interest of the stronger, whereas injustice 
is a man’s own profit and interest. 

Thrasymachus, when he had thus spoken, having, like a bathman, 
deluged our ears with his words, had a mind to go away. But the 
company would not allow this, and they compelled him to remain 
aud defend his position ; and I myself added my own humble request 
that he would not leave us. Thrasymachus, I said to him, ex- 
cellent man, how suggestive are your words! And are you going 
away before you have fairly taught or learned whether they are 
true or not ? Is the attempt to determine the way of man’s life 
such a small matter in your eyes — the attempt to determine the 
way in which life may be passed by each one of us to the greatest 
advantage ? 

My reason is that I do not agree with you, he replied. 

I should rather think, Thrasymachus, that you have no feeling 
about us, I said ; you don’t seem to care whether we live better 
or worse from not knowing what you say you know. Prithee, 
friend, be obliging and impart your wisdom to us; any benefit 
which is conferred on a large party such as this is will not be 
345 unrewarded. For my own part I frankly admit that I am not 
convinced, and that I do not believe injustice to be more gainful 
than justice, even if uncontrolled and allowed to have free play. 
For, granting that there may be an unjust man who is able to 
commit injustice either by fraud or force, still this does not 
convince me of the superior advantage of injustice, and there 
may be others who are in the same predicament as myself. 
Perhaps we may be wrong ; if so, you should convince us that 
we are mistaken in preferring justice to injustice. 

And how am I to convince you, he said, if you are not already 
convinced by what I have just said ; what more can I do for you ? 
Would you have me put the proof bodily into your souls ? 

Heaven forbid ! I said ; I would only ask you to be consistent ; 

Digitized by Google 

THE REPUBLIC. 

1 66 

or, if you change, change openly and let there be no deception. 

For I must observe, Thrasymachus, if you will look back at what 
preceded, that you began by defining the true physician in an 
exact sense, but did not think it necessary to observe the same 
exactness when speaking of the shepherd, whom you regard as 
a shepherd, and yet maintain that he tends the sheep not with 
a view to their own good, but as a mere feaster or diner with 
a view to the pleasures of the table ; or, again, as a trader with 
a view to the market, not as a shepherd. Yet surely the art of 
the shepherd is concerned only with the good of his subjects ; he 
has only to provide the best for them, since what is best for his 
art has been already provided when the duties of the shepherd 
are adequately fulfilled. And that was what I was saying just 
now about the ruler. I imagined that the art of the ruler, con- 
sidered as ruler, could only regard the good of his flock or subjects 
both in his public and private conduct; whereas you seem to think 
that the rulers — and those of whom you speak are the true rulers 
— enjoy being in authority. 

Think ! Nay, I am sure of that. 

Then why in lesser offices of command do they never volun- 
tarily hold office but always demand payment, unless under 
the idea that they govern for the advantage of others and have 346 
no interest of their own ? Let me ask you a question : Does 
not the difference of arts consist in their having different func- 
tions ? And, my dear illustrious friend, do say what you think, 
that we may make a little progress. 

Yes, that is the difference, he replied. 

And each art gives us a particular good and not merely a 
general one — health, for example, is the good of medicine ; safety 
at sea is the good of navigation ? 

Yes, he said. 

And the art of payment has the special function of giving 
pay : but we do not confuse these with one another ; because 
the health of the pilot may be improved by a sea voyage, you 
would not say that navigation is the art of medicine — that is to 
say, if language is to be used in your exact manner ? 

Certainly not, he said. 

Or because a man is in good health when he receives pay you 
would not say that medicine is the art of payment ? 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK I. 

1 67 

No, he said. 

Nor would you say that medicine is the art of receiving pay 
because a man takes fees when he is engaged in healing ? 

Certainly not. 

And we have admitted, I said, that the good of each art is 
specially confined to the art ? 

Yes. 

Then, if there be any good which all artists have in common, 
that is to be attributed to something of which they all have the 
common use ? 

True, he replied. 

And when the artist is benefitted by receiving pay the ad- 
vantage is gained by a use of the additional art of pay, which 
is not the art which he professes ? 

He gave a reluctant assent to this. 

Then the pay is not derived by the artists from their respective 
arts. But the truth is, that while the art of medicine gives health, 
and the art of the builder builds a house, another art attends them 
which is the art of pay. The various arts may be doing their 
own business and benefitting that over which they preside, but 
would the artist receive any benefit from his art unless he were 
paid ? 

I suppose not. 

But does he therefore confer no benefit when he works for 
nothing ? 

I admit that he does. 

Then now, Thrasymachus, there is no longer any doubt that 
neither arts nor governments provide for their own interests ; but, 
as we were before saying, for the interests of their subjects who 
are the weaker and not the stronger — to those attending and 
ordering them and not to those of the superior. And that is the 
reason, my dear Thrasymachus, why, as I was just now saying, 
no one is willing to govern; because no one likes to take in 
hand the reformation of evils which are not his concern without 
an equivalent ; for the true artist in proceeding according to his 
art does not do the best for himself, nor consult his own interest, 
but that of his subjects; and this is why men must be paid 
for being willing to govern in one of the three modes of payment, 
money, or honour, or a penalty for refusing to govern. 

THE REPUBLIC. 

168 

How is that, Socrates ? said Glaucon. The two first modes 
of payment are intelligible enough, but what the penalty is I 
do not understand, or how a penalty can be a payment. 

You mean that you do not understand the nature of this pay- 
ment which to the best men is the great inducement to rule ? 
Of course you know that ambition and avarice are deservedly 
discredited ? 

True, he said. 

And for this reason money and honour have no attraction for 
them ; they do not wish to be directly paid for governing and so 
get the name of hirelings, nor by indirectly helping themselves 
out of the public revenues to get the name of thieves. And not 
being ambitious they do not care about honour ; and therefore 
necessity must be laid upon them and they must be induced 
to serve from the fear of punishment. And this, as 1 imagine, 
is the reason why the forwardness to take office instead of 
awaiting the call of necessity has been thought disgraceful. 
Now he who refuses to rule is liable to be ruled by one who 
is worse than himself, than which no punishment can be greater. 
And the fear of this, as I conceive, induces the good to take office, 
not because they would but because they cannot help; nor under 
the idea that they are going to have any benefit or enjoyment 
themselves, but as a necessity, and because they are not able 
to commit the task of ruling to any one who is better than them- 
selves, or indeed as good. For the probability is that if a city were 
composed entirely of good men, then to avoid office would be 
as much an object of ambition as to obtain office is at present; 
then we should have plain proof that the true ruler is not meant 
by nature to regard his own interest, but that of his subjects; 
and he who is aware of this will therefore choose rather to 
receive a benefit from another than to have the trouble of con- 
ferring one. So far am I from agreeing with Thrasymachus that 
justice is the interest of the stronger. That, however, is a question 
which I will not now further discuss; but when Thrasymachus 
says that the life of the unjust is more advantageous than that 
of the just, this new statement of his appears to me to be a far 
more serious matter. Which of us is right, Glaucon ? And which 
sort of life do you deem the most advantageous ? 

The life of the just, he answered. 

BOOK /. 

169 

Did you hear all the advantages of the unjust which Thra- 
symachus was rehearsing ? 

Yes, I heard him, but 1 was not convinced by him. 

And would you desire to convince him, if we can only find a 
way, that he is saying what is not true ? 

Most certainly, he replied. 

If, I said, he makes a set speech and we make another set 
speech and tell our friend all the good of being just, and he 
answers and we rejoin, there must be a numbering and measuring 
of the goods that are claimed on either side, and the end will be 
that we shall want judges to decide ; but if we proceed in our 
enquiry as we lately did, by a method of mutual agreement, 
we shall unite the office of judge and advocate in our own 
persons. 

Very good, he said. 

And which method do I understand you to prefer ? I said. 

That which you propose. 

Well then, Thrasymachus, I said, suppose that you begin at 
the beginning and answer me. Your statement is that perfect 
injustice is more gainful than justice ? 

Yes, that is my statement, the grounds of which I have also 
stated. 

And you would call one of them virtue and the other vice ? 

Certainly. 

I suppose that you would call justice virtue and injustice 
vice ? 

That is a charming notion and so likely, seeing that I affirm 
injustice to be profitable and justice not. 

What else then ? 

The opposite, he replied. 

And would you call justice vice ? 

No, I would rather say sublime simplicity. 

And would you call injustice malignity ? 

No; I would rather say discretion. 

And do the unjust appear to you to be wise and good? 

Y es he said ; at any rate this is true of those who are able to 
be perfectly unjust, and who have the power of subduing states 
and nations; but I dare say that you imagine me to be talking 
of cut-purses. Even that, if undetected, has advantages, though 

170 

THE REPUBLIC. 

they are hardly worth mentioning when compared with the 
other. 

I do not think that I misapprehend your meaning, Thrasymachus, 

I replied; but still I cannot hear without amazement that you 
class injustice with wisdom and virtue, and justice with the 
opposite. 

Certainly, that is the way in which I do class them. 

Now, I said, you are on more substantial and almost unanswer- 
able ground ; for if the injustice which you were maintaining to 
be profitable had been admitted by you or by other men to be vice 
and deformity, an answer might have been given to you on re- 
ceived principles ; but now I perceive that you will call injustice 
strong and honourable, and to the unjust you will assign all the 
qualities which were assigned by us before to the just, seeing 349 
that you do not hesitate to place injustice on the side of wisdom 
and virtue. 

That is exactly the truth, he replied. 

Now, I said, I see that you are speaking your mind, and there- 
fore I do not shrink from the argument ; for I do believe, Thrasy- 
machus, that you are in earnest and are not amusing yourself at 
our expense. 

What is it to you, he said, whether I am in earnest or not ? 
your business is to refute the argument. 

Very true, I said ; and will you be so good then as to answer 
another question ? — Does the just man try to gain any advantage 
over the just ? 

Far otherwise ; if he did he would not be the simple amusing 
creature which he is. 

And does he try to gain more than his just share in action ? 

He does not. 

And how would he regard the attempt to gain an advantage 
over the unjust man or action ; would that be considered by him 
as just or unjust ? 

He would think that just, and would try to gain the advantage. 

But he could not. 

Whether he could or could not, I said, is not the question. I 
simply asked whether the just man, while refusing to have more 
than another just man, would wish and claim to have more than 
the unjust ? 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK f. 

171 

Yes, he would. 

And what of the unjust — does he claim more than the just man 
and more than the just action ? 

Of course, he said, he claims to have more than all men. 

And the unjust man will desire more than the unjust man and 
action, and will strive to get more than all ? 

True. 

Let us put the matter thus, I said ; the just does not desire 
more than his like but more than his unlike, whereas the unjust 
desires more than both like and unlike. 

Nothing, he said, can be better than that statement. 

And the unjust is good and wise, and the just is neither ? 

Good again, he said. 

And is not the unjust like the wise and good and the just unlike 
them ? 

Of course, he said, he who is just is like the just, and the 
unjust is like the unjust. 

Each of them, I said, is such as his like is ? 

Certainly, he replied. 

Then now, Thrasymachus, I said, let us try these statements 
by the analogy of the arts. You would admit that one man is a 
musician and another not a musician ? 

Yes. 

And the musician is wise, and he who is not a musician is 
unwise ? 

True. 

And in that he is wise he is good, and in that he is unwise 
he is bad ? 

Yes. 

And you would say the same sort of thing of the physician ? 

Yes. 

And do you think, my excellent friend, that a musician when 
he adjusts the lyre would desire or claim to be in excess of a 
musician in the tightening or loosening the strings ? 

I do not think that he would. 

But he would claim to be in excess of the non-musician ? 

Of course. 

350 And what would you say of the physician? In prescribing 

Digitized by Google 

172 

THE REPUBLIC. 

meats and drinks would he wish to go beyond another physician 
or beyond the art of medicine ? 

He would not. 

But he would wish to exceed the non-physician ? 

Yes. 

And about knowledge and ignorance in general ; see whether 
you think that any man of intelligence whatsoever would wish to 
have the choice of saying or doing more than another man of 
intelligence. Would he not rather say or do the same as his like 
in the same case ? 

That, I suppose, is not to be denied. 

And what would you say of the unintelligent ? would he 
not desire to have more than either intelligent or unin- 
telligent ? 

That, I suppose, must be as you say. 

And the intelligent is wise ? 

Yes. 

And the wise is good ? 

True. 

Then the wise and good will not desire to gain more than his 
like, but more than his unlike ? 

That is evident. 

Whereas the bad and ignorant will desire to gain more than 
both ? 

Yes. 

But were you not saying, Thrasymachus, that the unjust exceeds 
both his like and unlike ? 

Yes, I did say that. 

And you also said that the just will not exceed his like but his 
unlike ? 

Yes, he said. 

Then the just is like the wise and good, and the unjust like 
the evil and ignorant ? 

That is the inference. 

And each of them is such as his like is? 

That was admitted. 

Then the just has turned out to be wise and good and the 
unjust evil and ignorant. 

Thrasymachus made all these admissions, not readily, as I 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK I. 

i73 

repeat them, but with infinite pains and effort, and oceans of 
perspiration, for the weather was hot ; and then 1 saw what I had 
never seen before, Thrasymachus blushing. As we were agreed 
that justice was virtue and wisdom, and injustice vice and igno- 
rance, I proceeded to another point. Well, I said, Thrasymachus, 
that is now settled; but were we not also saying that injustice 
had strength ; do you remember ? 

Yes, I remember, he said, but do not suppose that I approve 
of what you are now saying or have no answer ; if I do 
not answer, that is because I know you would accuse me of 
haranguing j therefore either permit me to have my say out, 
or if you would rather ask, do so, and I will answer ‘Very 
good' as they say to story-telling old women, and will nod and 
shake my head. 

Surely not, I said, if contrary to your real opinion. 

Yes, he said, I will, to please you, since you will not let me 
speak. What else would you have ? 

Nothing in the world, I said ; and if you are so disposed I will 
ask and you shall answer. 

Proceed. 

Then I will repeat the question which I asked before, in order 
351 that our examination of the relative nature of justice and injustice 
may be carried on regularly. A statement was made to the effect 
that injustice is more powerful than justice, but now I say that 
justice having been identified with wisdom and virtue is easily 
shown to be stronger than injustice, if injustice is ignorance; 
every one must acknowledge that. But I want to view the matter, 
Thrasymachus, in a new way. You would not deny that a state 
may be unjust and may unjustly attempt to enslave other states, 
or may have already enslaved them, and may be holding many 
of them in subjection. 

True, he replied; and I will add that the best and most per- 
fectly unjust state will be most likely to do this. 

I know, I said, that such was your notion ; but what I would 
further consider is, whether this power can be exercised with 
justice only or without justice. 

If you are right in your view, and justice is wisdom, then with 
justice only ; but if I am right, then without justice. 

I am delighted, Thrasymachus, to see you not only nodding 

174 

THE REPUBLIC. 

and shaking your head, but making answers that are quite 
excellent. 

That is out of courtesy to you, he replied. 

And very good of you too, I said ; and I wish you would have 
the goodness also to inform me whether you think that an army, 
or a band of robbers and thieves, or any other gang of evil-doers 
could act at all if they injured one another ? 

No indeed, he said, they could not. 

But if they abstained from injuring one another, then they 
might act better ? 

Yes. 

And this is because from injustice spring divisions and hatreds 
and fighting, as from justice harmony and friendship ; is not that 
true, Thrasymachus ? 

I grant that, he said, because I do not wish to quarrel with 
you. 

Thank you, I said; and I should like to know also, if the effect 
of injustice is to cause hatred then will not injustice, whether 
existing among slaves or freemen, make them hate one another 
and set them at variance and render them incapable of common 
action ? 

Certainly. 

And even if injustice be found in two only, will they not quar- 
rel and fight, and become enemies to one another and to the 
just? 

They will. 

And suppose, my brave sir, injustice abiding in a single person, 
will the injustice lose or retain her natural power? 

Let us say that she retains her power. 

Yet is not the power which injustice exercises of such a nature 
that the subject in which injustice takes up her abode, whether 
city or army or family or any other body, is in the first place 
rendered incapable of united action by reason of sedition and 35 
distraction and becomes its own enemy and at variance with all 
that opposes it, and with the just ? Is not this as I say ? 

Yes, certainly. 

And is not injustice equally suicidal when existing in an indi- 
vidual; in the first place rendering him incapable of action 
because he is not at unity with himself, and in the second place 

BOOK /. 

i75 

making him an enemy to himself and the just ? Is not that true, 
Thrasymachus ? 

Yes. 

And O my friend, I said, surely the gods arc just ? 

Let us say that they are. 

Then, as the gods are just, he will also be the enemy of the 
gods, and the just will be the friend of the gods ? 

Take your fill of the argument, and be of good cheer; I will 
not oppose you, lest I should displease the company. 

Well then, proceed with your answers, and let me have the rest 
of my feast. For that the just are clearly wiser and better and 
abler than the unjust, and that the unjust are incapable of com- 
mon action — this has been already shown; nay more, when we 
speak thus confidently of gangs of evil-doers acting together, this 
is not strictly true, for if they had been perfectly unjust, they 
would have laid hands upon one another; but there must evi- 
dently have been some remnant of justice in them, or they 
would have injured one another as wdl as their victims, and then 
they would have been unable to act together; they were but 
semi-villainous, for had they been whole villains, wholly unjust, 
they would have been wholly incapable of action. That, as I 
believe, is the truth of the matter, and not what you said at 
first. But whether the just have a better and happier life than 
the unjust is a further question which we also proposed to con- 
sider. I think that they have, and for the reasons which I have 
given; but still I should like to examine further, for this is no 
light matter, concerning nothing less than the true rule of life. 

Proceed. 

I will proceed by asking a question: Would you not think that 
a horse has some end or use ? 

I should. 

And that would be the end or use of a horse or anything which 
could not be accomplished, or not so well accomplished, by any 
other thing? 

I do not understand, he said. 

Let me explain then. Can you see, except with the eye ? 

Certainly not. 

Or hear, except with the ear ? 

No. 

176 

THE REPUBLIC. 

These then are the uses or ends of these faculties ? 

They are. 

But you can cut off a vine-branch with a carving-knife or with 353 
a chisel ? 

Of course. 

And yet not so well as with a pruning-hook made for the 
purpose ? 

True. 

May we not say, then, that this is the use of the pruning-hook ? 

We may. 

Then now I think you will have no difficulty in understanding 
my meaning when 1 said that the end or use of anything was 
that which could not be accomplished, or not so well accomplished, 
by any other thing ? 

I understand your meaning, he said, and assent. 

And as all things have ends, have they not also excellences ? 
Need I ask again whether the eye has an end? 

It has. 

And has not the eye an excellence ? 

Yes. 

And the ear has an end and an excellence also ? 

True. 

And the same is true of all other things ; they have each of 
them an end and a special excellence ? 

That is so. 

Well, and can the eyes fulfil their end if they are wanting in 
their own proper excellence and have a defect instead ? 

How can they, he said, if they are blind ? 

You mean to say, if they have lost their proper excellence, 
which is sight ; but I have not arrived at that point yet. I would 
rather ask the question more generally, and only enquire whether 
the things which fulfil their ends fulfil them by their own proper 
excellence, and fail of fulfilling them by their proper defect ? 

Yes, I assent to that, he replied. 

I might say the same of the ears ; when deprived of their own 
proper excellence they cannot fulfil their end ? 

True. 

And the same may be said of all other things ? 

I agree. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK I. 

*77 

And has not the soul an end which nothing else can fulfil? 
for example, to provide and command and advise and the like. 
Arc not these peculiar to the soul, and can they rightly be as- 
signed to any other ? 

To no other. 

And is not life to be reckoned among the ends of the soul ? 

Assuredly, he said. 

And has not the soul an excellence also ? 

Yes. 

And can she or can she not fulfil her ends or uses when deprived 
of that excellence ? 

She cannot. 

Then an evil soul must necessarily be an evil ruler, and a good 
soul a good ruler ? 

Yes, that must be as you say. 

And we have admitted that justice is the excellence of the soul, 
and injustice the defect of the soul ? 

That has been admitted. 

Then the just soul and the just man will live well, and the un- 
just man will live ill ? 

That is involved in your argument. 

354 And he who lives well will be blessed and happy, and he who 
lives ill the reverse of happy ? 

Certainly. 

Then the just is happy, and the unjust miserable ? 

Granted. 

But happiness and not misery is profitable. Then, my blessed 
Thrasymachus, injustice can never be more profitable than jus- 
tice. 

Let this, Socrates, be your entertainment at the Bendidea. 

And for this I am indebted to you, I said, now that you have 
grown gentle towards me and have left off scolding. Never- 
theless, I have not been well entertained ; but that was my own 
fault and not yours. I may liken myself to an epicure who 
snatches a taste of every dish which is successively brought to 
table before he has fairly enjoyed the one before; and this has 
been the case with me. For before I discovered the nature of 
justice, I left that and proceeded to enquire whether justice was 
virtue and wisdom or evil and folly ; and then arose a further 

N 

VOL. II. 

i78 

THE REPUBLIC. 

question about the comparative advantages of justice and in- 
justice, and I could not refrain from passing on to that. And 
the result of all is that I know nothing at all. For I know not 
what justice is, and therefore I am not likely to know whether it 
is or is not a virtue, nor can I say whether the just is happy or 
unhappy. 

BOOK II. 

357 With these words I was thinking that I had made an end 
of the discussion; but the end, in truth, proved to be only a 
beginning. For Glaucon, who is at all times the boldest of men, 
was dissatisfied at Thrasymachus, retirement ; he wanted to have 
the battle out. So he said to me : Socrates, do you wish really to 
persuade us, or only to seem to have persuaded us, that to be just 
is always better than to be unjust ? 

I should wish really to persuade you, I replied, if I could. 

Then you certainly have not succeeded. And will you tell me, 
he said, how you would arrange goods ; is there not one class of 
goods which are desirable in themselves, and independently of 
their results, as, for example, mere innocent pleasures and enjoy- 
ments, upon which nothing follows ? 

I think that there is such a class, I replied. 

What would you say to a second class of goods which are 
desirable not only in themselves, but also for their results, such 
as knowledge, sight, health ? 

To that likewise I assent. 

Thirdly, would you recognize a class of goods troublesome in 
themselves, yet profitable to us ; such, for example, as gymnastic 
exercises, or the healing and treatment of disease, and the business 
of money-making, which no one would choose for their own sakes, 
but only for the sake of some reward or result of them ? 

There is, I said, this third class also. But why do you ask ? 

Because I want to know in which of the three classes you 
would place justice ? 

358 In the highest and noblest class, I replied, of goods, which he 
who is to be happy desires for their own sakes as well as for their 
results. 

Then the many are of another mind ; they think that justice is 
of the troublesome class of goods, which are to be pursued for the 

N 2 

i8o 

TIIE REPUBLIC. 

sake of rewards and reputation, but in themselves are rather to be 
avoided. 

I know, I said, that this is their doctrine, and this was also 
the sentiment of Thrasymachus, when originally he blamed justice 
and praised injustice; but I appear not to understand him. 

I wish, he said, that you would hear me as well as him, and 
then I shall see whether you and I agree. For Thrasymachus 
seems to me to have been charmed by your voice, like a snake, 
sooner than he ought to have been; and I am not yet satisfied 
with the account which has been given of the nature of justice 
and injustice. Leaving the rewards and results of them, I want 
to know what they, cither of them, are in themselves, and what 
power they have in the soul. If you please, then, I will revive 
the argument of Thrasymachus. And first I will speak of the 
nature and origin of justice according to the common view of 
them. Secondly, I will show that all men who practise justice do 
so against their will, and not as a good, but as a necessity. And 
thirdly, I will maintain that there is reason in this, for in their 
view, the life of the unjust is better far than the life of the just. 
That is only what they say, Socrates, for I myself am not of their 
opinion. But still I acknowledge that I am perplexed when I hear 
the voices of Thrasymachus and myriads of others dinning in my 
ears ; and, on the other hand, I have never yet heard the thesis 
that justice is better than injustice maintained in a satisfactory 
way. If I could hear the praises of justice and injustice con- 
sidered in themselves, then I should be satisfied, and you are 
the person from whom I expect to hear this; and therefore I 
will praise the unjust life to the utmost of my power, and the 
manner in which I speak will indicate also the manner in which 
I desire to hear you praising justice and censuring injustice. Will 
you say whether you approve of this ? 

Indeed I do; nor can I imagine any theme about which a man 
of sense would oftener wish to converse. 

1 am delighted, he replied, to hear you say that, and shall 
begin by speaking of the nature and origin of justice. 

They say that to do injustice is, by nature, good; to suffer 
injustice, evil ; but that the evil is greater than the good. And 
when men have done and suffered and had experience of both, 
not being able to avoid the one and obtain the other, they think 359 

BOOK II. 

1 8 1 

that they had better agree with one another to have neither, 
and thence arise laws and covenants among them; and that 
which is ordained by law they term lawful and just. This, as 
they affirm, is the origin and nature of justice arising out of a 
mean or compromise, between the best of all which is to do 
and not to suffer injustice, and the worst of all which is to suffer 
without the power of retaliation; and justice, being in a mean 
between the two, is tolerated not as a good, but as the lesser evil, 
and honoured by reason of the inability of men to do injustice. 
For no man who is worthy to be called a man would submit 
to such an agreement if he were able to resist ; he would be 
mad if he . did. This, Socrates, is the received account of the 
nature and origin of justice. 

Now that justice is only the inability to do injustice will best 
appear if we imagine something of this kind: suppose we give 
both the just and the unjust entire liberty to do what they will, 
and let us attend and see whither desire will lead them; then 
we shall detect the just man in the very act ; the just and unjust 
will be found going the same way — following their interest, 
which all natures conceive to be their good, and are only diverted 
into the path of justice by the force of law. The liberty which 
we are supposing may be most conveniently given to them in 
the form of such a power as is said to have been possessed by 
Gygcs, the ancestor of Croesus the Lydian1. For Gyges, ac- 
cording to the tradition, was a shepherd and servant of the king 
of Lydia, and, while he was in the field, there was a storm 
and earthquake which made an opening in the earth at the place 
where he was feeding his flock. He was amazed at the sight 
and descended into the opening where, among other marvels, he 
beheld a hollow brazen horse, having doors, at which he stooping 
and looking in saw a dead body of stature, as appeared to him, 
more than human, and having nothing on but a gold ring; 
this he took from the finger of the dead and reascended out of 
the opening. Now the shepherds met together, according to 
custom, that they might send their monthly report concerning 
the flock to the king ; and into their assembly he came having 
the ring on his finger, and as he was sitting among them 4ie 
chanced to turn the collet of the ring towards the inner side 

1 Reading Tvyy ref> Kpoiaov tov .\v8ov npoyova. 

182 

THE REPUBLIC. 

of the hand, when instantly he became invisible, and the others 
began to speak of him as if he were no longer there. He was 
astonished at this, and again touching the ring he turned the 
collet outwards and reappeared; thereupon he made trials 
of the ring, and always with the same result ; when he 
turned the collet inwards he became invisible, when outwards 
he reappeared. Perceiving this, he immediately contrived to 
be chosen messenger to the court, where he no sooner 
arrived than he seduced the queen, and with her help conspired 
against the king and slew him, and took the kingdom. Suppose 
now that there were two such magic rings, and the just put on 
one of them and the unjust the other; no man is of such ada- 
mantine temper that he would stand fast in justice — that is 
what they think. No man would dare to be honest when he 
could safely take what he liked out of the market, or go into 
houses and lie with any one at his pleasure, or kill or release 
from prison whom he would, and in all respects be like a God 
among men. Then the actions of the just would be as the 
actions of the unjust; just or unjust would arrive at last at 
the same goal. And this is surely a great proof that a man is 
just, not willingly or because he thinks that justice is any good 
to him individually, but of necessity, for wherever any one thinks 
that he can safely be unjust, there he is unjust. For all men 
believe in their hearts that injustice is far more profitable to 
the individual than justice, and he who takes this line of 
argument will say that they are right. For if you could 
imagine any one having such a power and never doing any 
wrong or touching what was another’s, he would be thought 
by the lookers on to be a most wretched idiot, although they 
would praise him to one another’s faces, and keep up appearances 
with one another from a fear that they too might be sufferers 
of injustice. Enough of this. 

Now, if we are to form a real judgment of the life of the 
just and unjust, we must isolate them ; there is no other way ; 
and how is the isolation to be effected ? I answer : Let the 
unjust man be entirely unjust, and the just man entirely just ; 
nctthing is to be taken away from cither of them, and both 
are to be perfected for the fulfilment of their respective parts. 
First, let the unjust be like other distinguished masters of crafts; 

BOOK II. 

183 

361 like the skilful pilot or physician, who knows his own powers and 
attempts only what is within their limits, and who, if he fails 
at any point, is able to recover himself. So let the unjust make 
his unjust attempts in the right way, and keep in the dark if he 
means to be great in his injustice : (he who is detected is nobody :) 
for the highest reach of injustice is, to be deemed just when you 
are not. Therefore, I say that to the perfectly unjust man we 
must attribute the most perfect injustice ; there is to be no 
deduction, and we must allow him, while doing the most unjust 
acts, to have won for himself the greatest reputation for justice. 
If he has taken a false step he must be able to retrieve himself, 
being one who can speak with effect, if any of his deeds come 
to light, and force his way where force is required, and having 
gifts of courage and strength, and command of money and friends. 
And at his side let us place the just man in his nobleness and 
simplicity, being, as Aeschylus says, and not seeming. There 
must be no seeming, for if he seem to be just he will be honoured 
and rewarded, and then we shall not know whether he is just 
for the sake of justice or for the sake of honours and rewards ; 
therefore, let him be clothed in justice only, and have no other 
covering; and he must be imagined in a state of life very different 
from that of the last. Let him be the best of men, and be 
esteemed to be the worst; then let us see whether his virtue 
is proof against infamy and its consequences. And let him 
continue thus to the hour of death ; being just, let him seem 
to be unjust. Then when both have reached the uttermost 
extreme, the one of justice and the other of injustice, let 
judgment be given which of them is the happier of the two. 

Heavens! my dear Glaucon, I said, how energetically you 
polish them up for the decision, first one and then the other, 
as if they were two statues. 

I do my best, he said. And now that we know what they 
are like there is no difficulty in tracing out the sort of life which 
awaits either of them. But as you may think the description 
of this a little too coarse, I will ask you to fancy, Socrates, that 
the words which follow are not mine. Let me put them into 
the mouths of the eulogists of injustice. They will tell you that 
in the case described the just man will be scourged, racked, bound 
— will have his eyes burnt out; and, at last, after suffering every 

184 

THE REPUBLIC . 

kind of evil, he will be impaled. This will teach him that he ought 
to seem only, and not to be, just ; and that the words of Aeschylus 36 
may be more truly spoken of the unjust than of the just. For 
the unjust, as they will say, is pursuing a reality; at any rate, 
he docs not live with a view to appearances, he wants to be really 
unjust, and not to seem only : — 

‘ His mind is like a deep and fertile soil 
Out of which his prudent counsels spring1.* 

In the first place, he is thought just, and therefore bears rule; 
he can marry whom he will, and give in marriage to whom he 
will; also he can trade and deal where he likes, and always to his 
own advantage, because he has no misgivings about injustice ; and 
in every contest, whether public or private, he gets the better 
of his antagonists ; and has gains, and is rich, and out of his 
gains he can benefit his friends, and harm his enemies; moreover, 
he can offer sacrifices, and dedicate gifts to the gods abundantly 
and magnificently, and can honour the gods and any man whom 
he wants to honour in far better style than the just, which is 
a very good reason why he should be dearer to the gods than 
the just. Thus they make to appear, Socrates, that the life of 
the unjust is so ordered both by gods and men as to be more 
blessed than the life of the just. 

I was going to say something in answer to Glaucon, when 
Adcimantus his brother interposed : Socrates, he said, you don’t 
suppose that there is nothing more to be urged? 

Why, what else is there ? I answered. 

The strongest point of all has not been even mentioned, 
he replied. 

Well, then, according to the proverb, cLet brother help 
brother ;’ and if he fails in any part do you assist him ; although 
I must confess that Glaucon has already said quite enough to lay 
me in the dust, and take from me the power of helping justice. 

Nonsense, he replied ; I want you to hear the converse of 
Glaucon’s argument, which is equally required in order to bring 
out what I believe to be his meaning; I mean the argument 
of those who praise justice and censure injustice, with a view 
to their consequences only. Parents and tutors are always telling 

3 Seven against Thebes, 574. 

BOOK ir. 

185 

their sons and their wards that they arc to be just ; but why ? not 
363 for the sake of justice, but for the sake of character and reputa- 
tion; in the hope of obtaining some of those offices and marriages 
and other advantages which Glaucon was enumerating as accruing 
to the unjust from a fair reputation. More, however, is made 
of appearances by this class than by the others ; for they throw 
in the good opinion of the gods, and will tell you of a shower 
of benefits which the heavens, as they say, rain upon the pious ; 
and this accords with the testimony of the noble Hesiod and 
Homer, the first of whom says, that for the just the gods make — 

‘ The oaks to bear acorns at their summit, and bees in the middle ; 

And the sheep are bowed down with the weight of their own fleeces3,’ 

and many other blessings of a like kind are provided for them. 
And Homer has a very similar strain ; for he speaks of one whose 
fame is — 

1 As the fame of some blameless king who, like a god, 

Maintains justice; to whom the black earth brings forth 
Wheat and barley, whose trees are bowed with fruit, 

And his sheep never fail to bear, and the sea gives him fish4.’ 

Still grander are the gifts of heaven which Musaeus and his son 
offer the just; they take them down into the world below where 
they have the saints feasting on couches with crowns on their 
heads, and passing their whole time in drinking; their idea seems 
to be that an immortality of drunkenness is the highest meed 
of virtue. Some extend their rewards to the third and fourth 
generation; the posterity, as they say, of the faithful and just 
shall survive them. This is the style in which they praise justice. 
But about the wicked there is another strain ; they bury them in 
a slough, and make them carry water in a sieve ; that is their 
portion in the world below, and even while living they bring 
them to infamy, and inflict upon them the punishments which 
Glaucon described as the portion of the just, who are reputed 
unjust; nothing else does their invention supply. Such is their 
manner of praising the one and censuring the other. 

Again, Socrates, let me mention another way of speaking 
about justice and injustice, which is not confined to the poets, but 
364 is also found in prose writers. The universal voice of mankind 
is saying that justice and virtue are honourable, but grievous and 

3 Hesiod, Works and Days, 230. 4 Homer, Od. xix. 109. 

1 86 

THE REPUBLIC . 

toilsome j and that the pleasures of vice and injustice are easy 
of attainment, and are only censured by law and opinion. They 
say also that honesty is generally less profitable than dishonesty ; 
and they are quite ready to call wicked men happy, and to honour 
them both in public and private when they are rich or have other 
sources of power, while they despise and neglect those who may 
be weak and poor, even though acknowledging that these are 
better than the others. But the most extraordinary of all their 
sayings is about virtue and the gods : they say that the gods 
apportion calamity and evil to many good men, and good and 
happiness to the evil. And mendicant prophets go to rich men’s 
doors and persuade them that they have a power committed to 
them of making an atonement for their sins or those of their 
fathers by sacrifices or charms, with rejoicings and games; and 
they promise to harm an enemy, whether just or unjust, at a small 
charge ; with magic arts and incantations binding the will of 
heaven to do their work. And the poets are the authorities to 
whom they appeal, some of them dispensing indulgences out 
of them, as when the poet sings : — 

‘ Vice may be easily found, and many are they who follow after her ; the 
way is smooth and not long. But before virtue the gods have set toil V 

and a path which they describe as tedious and steep. Others, 
again, cite Homer as a witness that the gods may be influenced 
by men, as he also says : — 

‘The gods, too, may be moved by prayers; and men pray to them and 
turn away their wrath by sacrifices and entreaties, and by libations and the 
odour of fat, when they have sinned and transgressed V 

And they produce a host of books written by Musaeus and Orpheus, 
who are children of the Moon and the Muses — that is what they say 
— according to which they perform their ritual, and persuade not 
only individuals, but whole cities, that expiations and atonements 
for sin may be made by sacrifices and amusements which fill 
a vacant hour, and are equally at the service of the living and the 
dead ; the latter they call mysteries, and they redeem us from 365 
the pains of hell, but if we neglect them no one knows what 
awaits us. 

He proceeded : And now when the young hear all this said . 

3 Hesiod, Works and Days, 287. 6 Homer, Iliad, ix. 493. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK II. 

187 

about virtue and vice, and the manner in which gods and men 
regard them, how are they likely to be affected, my dear Socrates ; 
those of them, I mean, who are quickwitted, and, like bees on the 
wing, light on everything which they hear, and thence gather infer- 
ences as to the character and way of life which arc best for them ? 
Probably the youth will say to himself in the words of Pindar — 

‘ Can I by justice or by crooked ways of deceit ascend a loftier tower, 
which shall be a house of defence to me all my days ? ' 

For what men say is that, if I am really just without being 
thought just, this is no good, but evident pain and loss. But if, 
though unjust, I acquire the character of justice, a heavenly life is 
to be mine. Since then, as philosophers say, appearance is 
master of truth and lord of bliss, to appearance I must wholly 

devote myself. Around and about me I will draw the simple 

• 

garb of virtue, but behind I will trail the subtle and crafty fox, 
as Archilochus, first of sages, counsels. But I hear some one 
exclaiming that wickedness is not easily concealed; to which I 
answer that nothing great is easy. Nevertheless, this is the road 
to happiness ; and the way by which we must go, following in the 
steps of the argument ; and as to concealment, that may be secured 
by the co-operation of societies and political clubs. And there 
are professors of rhetoric who teach the philosophy of persuading 
courts and assemblies; and so, partly by persuasion and partly by 
force, I shall make unlawful gains and not be punished. Still I 
hear a voice saying that the gods cannot be deceived, neither 
can they be compelled. But what if there are no gods ? or, suppose 
that the gods have no care about human things — in either case 
the result is the same, that we need not trouble ourselves with 
concealment. And even if there are gods, and they have a care 
of us, yet we know about them only from the traditions and 
genealogies of the poets; and these are the very persons who 
say that they may be influenced by prayers and offerings. Let 
us be consistent then, and either believe both or neither. And 
if we believe them, why then we had better be unjust, and offer 
366 of the fruits of injustice ; for if we are just we shall indeed 
escape the vengeance of heaven, but we shall lose the gains of 
injustice; whereas, if we are unjust, we shall keep the gains, and 
by our sinning and praying, and praying and sinning, the gods 
will be propitiated, and we shall be forgiven. c But there is a 

1 88 

THE REPUBLIC. 

world below in which either we or our children will suffer for 
our deeds/ Yes, my friend, will be the reply, but there are 
mysteries and atoning deities, and these have great power. That 
is what mighty cities declare; and the children of the gods, who 
are their poets and prophets, affirm the same. 

On what principle, then, shall we choose justice rather than the 
worst injustice ? when, if we only unite the latter with a deceitful 
regard to appearances, we shall fare to our mind both with gods 
and men, here as well as hereafter, as say the most numerous and 
the highest authorities. Knowing all this, Socrates, how can any 
one who has any advantage of mind or person or rank or wealth, be 
willing to honour, or indeed refrain from laughing at the praises 
of justice ? For even if there should be any one who is able to 
disprove my words, and who is satisfied that justice is best, still 
h£ is not angry with the unjust ; he is very ready to forgive them, 
knowing as he also does that men are not just of their own 
free will ; unless, peradventurc, there be some one whom the 
divinity within him has inspired with a hatred of injustice, or 
who abstains because he has found knowledge — but no other man. 

He only blames injustice who, owing to cowardice or age or some 
weakness, is incapable of being unjust. And this is proved by the 
fact that those who are incapable when they have the power, and 
in as far as they have the power, are the first to be unjust. 

Now all this simply arises out of the circumstance which you 
may remember, Socrates, that my brother and I both mentioned 
' to you at the beginning of the argument. We told you how 
astonished we were to find that of all the professing panegyrists 
of justice — beginning with the heroes of old, of whom any 
memorial has been preserved to us, and ending with the men 
of our own time — no one has ever blamed injustice or praised 
justice except with a view to the glories, honours and benefits 
which flow from them. No one has ever adequately described 
either in verse or prose the true essential nature of cither of these 
immanent in the soul, and invisible to any hurmfh or divine eye; 
or shown that of all the things of a man’s soul which he has 
within him, justice is the greatest good, and injustice the greatest 
evil. Had this been the universal strain, had you sought to per- 367 
suadc us of this from our youth upwards, we should not have been 
on the watch to keep 'one another from doing wrong, but every 

. — Google 

BOOK II. 

189 

one would have been his own watchman, because afraid, if he did 
wrong, of having the greatest evil dwelling with him. I dare say 
that Thrasymachus and others would seriously hold the language 
which I have been only repeating, and more of the same sort 
about justice and injustice, grossly, as I conceive, perverting their 
true nature. But I am speaking with all my might, as I must 
confess, only because I want to hear you speak on the opposite 
side; and I would ask you to show not only the superiority of 
justice over injustice, but what they do to the possessors of them 
that makes the one to be a good and the other an evil to him. 
And please, as Glaucon said, to exclude reputation ; for unless you 
clothe the just in the garb of injustice, and the unjust in that of 
justice, we shall say that you do not praise justice, but the appear- 
ance of justice ; we shall think that you are only exhorting us to 
keep injustice dark, and that you really agree with Thrasymachus 
in thinking that justice is another’s good and the interest of 
the stronger, and that injustice is a man’s own profit and 
interest, though injurious to the weaker. Now as you have 
admitted that justice is one of that highest class of goods 
which arc desired as well for their results as, in a far greater 
degree, for their own sakes — just as sight or knowledge or 
health, or any other real and natural and not merely conven- 
tional goods, are desired for their own sakes-1-! would ask you 
to direct your praises to that one point only: I mean to the 
essential good of justice and evil of injustice. Let others praise 
the rewards and appearances of justice ; that is a manner of 
arguing which, as coming from them, I am ready to tolerate, but 
from you who have spent your whole life in thinking of this, 
unless I hear the contrary from your own lips, I expect something 
better. And therefore, I say, not only prove to us that justice 
is better than injustice, but show what they either of them do to 
the possessors of them, which makes the one to be good and the 
other an evil, whether seen or unseen by gods and men. 

I had always admired the genius of Glaucon and Adeimantus, 
368 but when I heard this I was quite charmed, and said : That was 
not a bad beginning of the Elegiacs in which the admirer of 
Glaucon addressed you as your father’s sons after you distinguished 
yourselves at the battle ofMegara: — 

‘Sons of Ariston, divine offspring of a glorious hero/ 

190 

THE REPUBLIC . 

The epithet is very appropriate, for there is something truly 
divine in being able to argue as you have done for the superiority 
of injustice and remaining uninfluenced by your own arguments. 
And I do believe that you are not influenced ; this I infer from 
your general character, for had I judged only from your speeches 
I should have mistrusted you. But now trusting you I have all 
the greater mistrust of myself. For I am in a strait between two ; 
on the one hand I feel my own inability to maintain the cause of 
justice — your unwillingness to accept the answer which I made 
to Thrasymachus about the superiority of justice over injustice 
proves to me that I am unequal to the task ; and yet on the other 
hand I cannot refuse to help, for I fear that there may be a sin 
when justice is evil spoken of in standing by and failing to offer 
help or succour while breath or speech remain to me. And 
therefore I must give such help as I can. Glaucon and the rest 
entreated me by all means not to let the question drop, but to 
proceed in the investigation. They wanted to arrive at the truth, 
first, about the nature of justice and injustice, and secondly, about 
their relative advantages. I told them, what I really thought, 
that the search would be no easy one, and would require very good 
eyes. Seeing then, I said, we are no great wits, I think that we 
had better adopt a method which might be recommended to those 
who are short-sighted, and are bidden by some one to read small 
letters a long way off; one of the party recollects that he has 
seen the very same letters elsewhere written larger and on a 
larger scale — if they were the same and we could read the larger 
letters first, and then proceed to the lesser — that would be thought 
a rare piece of good fortune. 

Very true, said Adeimantus; but how does this apply to our 
present enquiry ? 

I will tell you, I replied ; justice, which is the subject of our 
enquiry, is, as you know, sometimes spoken of as the virtue of an 
individual, and sometimes as the virtue of a State. 

True, he replied. 

And is not a State larger than an individual? 

It is. 

Then in the larger the quantity of justice will be larger and 
more easily discernible. I propose therefore that we enquire into 
the nature of justice and injustice as appearing in the State first. 

BOOK IL 

191 

369 and secondly in the individual, proceeding from the greater to the 
lesser and comparing them. 

That, he said, is an excellent proposal. 

And suppose we imagine the State as in a process of creation, 
and then we shall see the justice and injustice of the State in 
process of creation also. 

Very likely. 

When the State is completed there may be a hope that the 
object of our search will be more easily discovered. 

Yes, more easily. 

And shall we make the attempt ? I said ; although I cannot 
promise you as an inducement that the task will be a light one. 
Reflect therefore. 

I have reflected, said Adeimantus, and am anxious that you 
should proceed. 

A State, I said, arises, as I conceive, out of the needs of man- 
kind ; no one is self-sufficing, but all of us have many wants. 
Can any other origin of a State be imagined ? 

None, he replied. 

Then, as we have many wants, and many persons are needed 
to supply them, one takes a helper for one purpose and another for 
another ; and when these helpers and partners are gathered together 
in one habitation the body of inhabitants is termed a State. 

True, he said. 

And they exchange with one another, and one gives, and 
another receives, under the idea that the exchange will be for 
their good. 

Very true. 

Then, I said, let us begin and create a State ; and yet the true 
creator is necessity, who is the mother of our invention. 

True, he replied. 

Now the first and greatest of necessities is food, which is the 
condition of life and existence. 

Certainly. 

The second is a dwelling, and the third clothing and that sort 
of thing. 

True. 

And now let us see how our city will be able to supply this 
great demand. We may suppose that one man is a husbandman. 

192 

THE REPUBLIC. 

another a builder, some one else a weaver — shall we add to them 
a shoemaker, or perhaps some other purveyor to our bodily wants ? 

Quite right. 

The barest notion of a State must include four or five men. 

Clearly. 

And how then will they proceed? Will each give the result 
of his labours to all ? — the husbandman, for example, producing for 
four, and labouring in the production of food for himself and 
others four times as long and as much as he needs to labour; or 
shall he leave others and not be at the trouble of producing for 
them, but produce a fourth for himself in a fourth of the time, 3} 
and in the remaining three fourths of his time be employed in 
making a house or a coat or a pair of shoes? 

Adeimantus thought that the former would be the better way. 

I dare say that you are right, I replied, for I am reminded as 
you speak that we are not all alike; there are diversities of 
natures among us which are adapted to different occupations. 

Very true. 

And will you have a work better done when the workman has 
many occupations, or when he has only one ? 

When he has only one. 

Further, there can be no doubt that a work is spoilt when not 
done at the right time ? 

No doubt of that. 

For business is not disposed to wait until the doer of the busi- 
ness is at leisure ; but the doer must be at command, and make 
the business his first object. 

He must. 

Thus then all things are produced more plentifully and easily 
and of a better quality when one man does one thing which is 
natural to him and is done at the right time, and leaves other 
things. 

Undoubtedly. 

Then more than four citizens will be required, for the husband- 
man will not make his own plough or mattock, or other imple- 
ments of agriculture, if they are to be good for anything. Neither 
will the builder make his tools — and he too, needs many ; and 
the same may be said of the weaver and shoemaker. 

True. 

BOOK II. 

i93 

Then carpenters, and smiths, and other artisans, will be sharers 
in our little State, which is already beginning to grow ? 

True. 

Yet even if we add neatherds, shepherds, and other herdsmen, 
in order that our husbandmen may have oxen to plough with, and 
builders as well as husbandmen have the use of beasts of burden 
for their carrying, and weavers and curriers of their fleeces and 
skins, — still our State will not be very large. 

That is true ; yet neither will that be a very small State which 
contains all these. 

Further, I said, to place the city on a spot where no imports 
are required is wellnigh impossible. 

Impossible. 

Then there must be another class of citizens who will bring 
the required supply from another city? 

There must. 

371 But if the trader goes empty-handed, taking nothing which those 
who are to supply the need want, he will come back empty-handed. 

That is certain. 

And therefore what they produce at home must be not only 
enough for themselves, but such both in quantity and quality 
as to accommodate those from whom their wants are supplied. 

That is true. 

Then more husbandmen and more artisans will be required ? 

They will. 

Not to mention the importers and exporters, who are called 
merchants. 

Yes. 

Then we shall want merchants ? 

We shall. 

And if merchandise is to be carried over the sea, skilful sailors 
will be needed, and in considerable numbers? 

Yes, in considerable numbers. 

Then, again, within the city, how will they exchange their pro- 
ductions ? and this, as you may remember, was the object of our 
society. 

The way will be, that they will buy and sell. 

Then they will need a market-place, and a money-token for 
purposes of exchange. 

vol. 11. o 

Digitized by Google 

194 

THE REPUBLIC . 

Certainly. 

Suppose now that a husbandman, or possibly an artisan, brings 
some production to market, and he comes at a time when there 
is no one to exchange with him, — is he to leave his work and 
sit idle in the market-place? 

Not at all ; he will find people there who, seeing this want, take 
upon themselves the duty of sale. In well-ordered states they are 
commonly those who are the weakest in bodily strength, and 
therefore unable to do anything else ; for all they have to do is 
to be in the market, and take money of those who desire to buy 
goods, and in exchange for goods to give money to those who 
desire to sell. 

This want, then, will introduce retailers into our State. Is not 
c retailer 9 the term which is applied to those who sit in the 
market-place buying and selling, while those who wander from 
one city to another are called merchants ? 

Yes, he said. 

And there is another class of servants, who are intellectually 
hardly on the level of companionship ; still they have plenty of 
bodily strength for labour, which accordingly they sell, and are 
called, if I do not mistake, hirelings, hire being the name which 
is given to the price of their labour. 

True. 

Then hirelings will help to make our population. 

And now, Adeimantus, is our State matured and perfected ? 

Surely. 

Where, then, is justice, and where is injustice, and in which 
part of the State are they to be found ? 

Probably in the relations of these citizens with one another. 37 
I cannot imagine any other place in which they are more likely 
to be found. 

I dare say that you are right in that suggestion, I said ; still, we 
had better consider the matter further, and not shrink from the task. 

First, then, let us consider what will be their way of life, now 
that we have thus established them. Will they not produce corn, 
and wine, and clothes, and shoes, and build houses for themselves ? 
And when they are housed, they will work in summer commonly 
stripped and barefoot, but in winter substantially clothed and shod. 
They will feed on barley and wheat, baking the wheat and knead- 

BOOK II. 

*95 

ing the flour, making noble puddings and loaves ; these they will 
serve up on a mat of reeds or clean leaves, themselves reclining 
the while upon beds of yew or myrtle boughs. And they and their 
children will feast, drinking of the wine which they have made, 
wearing garlands on their heads, and having the praises of the 
gods on their lips, living in sweet society, and having a care that 
their families do not exceed their means ; for they will have an 
eye to poverty or war. 

But, said Glaucon, interposing, you have not given them a 
relish to their meal. 

True, I replied, I had forgotten that; of course they will have 
a relish — salt, and olives, and cheese, and onions, and cabbages 
or other country herbs which are fit for boiling; and we shall 
give them a dessert of figs, and pulse, and beans, and myrtle- 
berries, and beech-nuts, which they will roast at the fire, drinking 
in moderation. And with such a diet they may be expected to 
live in peace to a good old age* and bequeath a similar life to 
their children after them. 

Yes, Socrates, he said, and if you were making a city of pigs, 
how else would you feed the beasts? 

But what would you have, Glaucon ? I replied. 

Why, he said, you should give them the proprieties of life. 
People who are to be comfortable are accustomed to lie on sofas, 
and dine off tables, and they should have dainties and dessert 
in the modern fashion. 

Yes, said I, now I understand; the question which you would 
have me consider is, not only how a State, but how a luxurious 
State is to be created ; and possibly there is no harm in this, for 
in such a State we shall be more likely to see how justice and 
injustice grow up. I am certainly of opinion that the true State, 
and that which may be said to be a healthy constitution, is the one 
which I have described. But if you would like to see the inflamed 
constitution, there is no objection to this. For I suppose that 
373 many will be dissatisfied with the simpler way of life. They will 
be for adding sofas, and tables, and other furniture ; also dainties, 
and perfumes, and incense, and courtesans, and cakes, not of one 
sort only, but in profusion and variety; our imagination must 
not be limited to the necessaries of which I was at first speaking, 
such as houses, and clothes, and shoes; but the art of the painter 

o 2 

Digitized by Google 

196 

THE REPUBLIC. 

and embroiderer will have to be set in motion, and gold and 
ivory and other materials of art will be required. 

True, he said. 

Then we must enlarge our borders ; for the original healthy 
State is too small. Now will the city have to fill and swell with a 
multitude of callings which go beyond what is required by any 
natural want ; such as the whole tribe of hunters and actors, of 
which one large class have to do with figures and colours, another 
are musicians; there will be poets and their attendant train of 
rhapsodists, players, dancers, contractors; also makers of divers 
kinds of utensils, not forgetting women’s ornaments. And we 
shall want more servants. Will not tutors be also in request, 
and nurses wet and dry, tirewomen and barbers, as well as con- 
fectioners and cooks ; and swineherds, too, who were not needed 
and therefore not included in the former edition of our State, but 
needed in this ? They must not be forgotten : and there will be 
hosts of animals, if people are to eat them. 

Certainly. 

And living in this way we shall have much greater need of 
physicians than before? 

Much greater. 

And the country which was enough to support the original 
inhabitants will be too small now, and not enough ? 

Quite true. 

Then a slice of our neighbours’ land will be wanted by us for 
pasture and tillage, and they will want a slice of ours, if, like 
ourselves, they exceed the limit of necessity, and give themselves 
up to the unlimited accumulation of wealth ? 

That, Socrates, will be unavoidable. 

And then we shall go to war, Glaucon, — that will be the next 
thing. 

So we shall, he replied. 

Then, without determining as yet whether war does good or 
harm, thus much we may affirm, that now we have discovered war 
to be derived from causes which are also the causes of almost all 
the evils in States, private as well as public. 

Undoubtedly. 

Then our State must once more enlarge ; and this time the 
enlargement will be nothing short of a whole army, which will 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK II. 

197 

374 have to go out and fight with the invaders for all that we have, 
as well as for the precious souls whom we were describing above. 

Why? he said ; are they not capable of defending themselves? 

No, I said ; not if you and all of us were right in the principle 
which was acknowledged at the first creation of the State : that 
principle was, as you will remember, that one man could not 
practise many arts. 

Very true, he said. 

But is not war an art ? 

Certainly. 

And an art requiring as much attention as shoemaking? 

Quite true. 

And the shoemaker was not allowed to be a husbandman, or 
a weaver, or a builder — in order that we might have our shoes 
well made ; but to him and to every other worker one work was 
assigned by us for which he was fitted by nature, and he was to 
continue working all his life long at that and at no other, and 
not to let opportunities slip, and then he would become a good 
workman. And is there any more important work than to be 
a good soldier? But is war an art so easily acquired that a man 
may be a warrior who is also a husbandman, or shoemaker, or 
other artisan- although no one in the world would be a good dice 
or draught player who merely took up the game as a recreation, 
and had not from his earliest years devoted himself to this and 
nothing else ? The mere handling of tools will not make a man 
a skilled workman, or master of defence, nor be of any use to him 
who knows not the nature of each, and has never bestowed any 
attention upon them. How then will he who takes up a shield 
or other implement of war all in a day become a good fighter, 
whether with heavy-armed or any other kind of troops ? 

Yes, he said, the tools which would teach their own use would 
be of rare value. 

And the greater the business of the guardian is, I said, the 
more time, and art, and skill will be needed by him? 

That is what I should suppose, he replied. 

Will he not also require natural gifts ? 

Certainly. 

We shall have to select natures which are suited to their task 
of guarding the city ? 

198 

THE REPUBLIC . 

That will be our duty. 

And anything but an easy duty, I said ; but still we must 
endeavour to do our best as far as we can ? 

We must. 

The dog is a watcher, I said, and the guardian is also a 
watcher ; and regarding them in this point of view only, is not 
the noble youth very like a well-bred dog? 

How do you mean ? 

I mean that both of them ought to be quick to observe, and 
swift to overtake the enemy- and strong too if, when they have 
caught him, they have to fight with him. 

All these qualities, he replied, will certainly be required. 

Well, and your guardian must be brave if he is to fight well ? 

Certainly. 

And is he likely to be brave who has no spirit, whether horse 
or dog or any other animal ? Did you never observe how the 
presence of spirit makes the soul of any creature absolutely fearless 
and invincible? 

Yes ; I have observed that. 

Then now we have a clear idea of both the bodily qualities 
which are required in the guardian. 

True. 

And also of the mental ones; his soul is to be full of spirit? 

Yes. 

But then, Glaucon, those spirited natures are apt to be furious 
with one another, and with everybody else. 

That is a difficulty, he replied. 

Whereas, I said, they ought to be gentle to their friends, and 
dangerous to their enemies; or, instead of their enemies de- 
stroying them, they will destroy themselves. 

True, he said. 

What is to be done then, I said ; how shall we find a gentle 
nature which has also a great spirit, for they seem to be incon- 
sistent with one another ? 

True. 

And yet he will not be a good guardian who is wanting in 
either of these two qualities ; and, as the combination of them 
appears to be impossible, this is equivalent to saying that to be 
a good guardian is also impossible. 

BOOK II. 

199 

I am afraid that is true, he replied. 

Here feeling perplexed I began to think over what preceded. 
My friend, I said, we deserve to be in a puzzle ; for if we had 
only kept the simile before us, the perplexity in which we are 
entangled would never have arisen. 

What do you mean ? he said. 

I mean to say that there are natures gifted with those opposite 
qualities, the combination of which we are denying. 

And where do you find them ? 

Many animals, I replied, furnish examples of them; our friend 
the dog is a very good one : you know that well-bred dogs are 
perfectly gentle to their familiars and acquaintances, and the 
reverse to strangers. 

I know that. 

Then there is nothing impossible or out of the order of 
nature in our finding a guardian who has a similar combination 
of qualities? 

Certainly not. 

Would you not say that he should combine with the spirited 
nature the qualities of a philosopher ? 

I do not apprehend your meaning. 

376 The trait of which I am speaking, I replied, may be also seen 
in the dog, and is very remarkable in an animal. 

What trait ? 

Why a dog, whenever he sees a stranger, is angry ; when an 
acquaintance, he welcomes him, although the one has never done 
him any harm, nor the other any good. Did this never strike 
you as curious ? 

I never before made the observation myself, though I quite 
recognize the truth of your remark. 

And surely this instinct of the dog is very charming ; — your dog 
is a true philosopher. 

Why? 

Why, because he distinguishes the face of a friend and of 
an enemy only by the criterion of knowing and not knowing. 
And must not the creature be fond of learning who determines 
what is friendly and what is unfriendly by the test of knowledge 
and ignorance? 

Most assuredly. 

200 

THE REPUBLIC . 

And is not the love of learning the love of wisdom, which 
is philosophy ? 

They are the same, he replied. 

And may we not say confidently of man also, that he who is 
likely to be gentle to his friends and acquaintances, must by 
nature be a lover of wisdom and knowledge ? 

That we may safely affirm. 

Then he who is to be a really good and noble guardian of 
the State will require to unite in himself philosophy and spirit 
and swiftness and strength ? 

Undoubtedly. 

Then we have found the desired natures \ and now that we have 
found them, how are they to be reared and educated ? Is this 
,an enquiry which may be fairly expected to throw light on 
the greater enquiry which is our final end — How do justice and 
injustice grow up in States ? for we do not want to admit 
anything which is superfluous, or leave out anything which is 
really to the point. 

Adeimantus thought that the enquiry would be of use to us. 

Then, I said, my dear friend, the task must not be given up, 
even if somewhat long. 

Certainly not. 

Come then, and like story-tellers, let us be at leisure, and our 
story shall be the education of our heroes. 

By all means. 

And what shall be their education? Can we find a better 
than the old-fashioned sort ? — and this has two divisions, gymnastic 
for the body, and music for the soul. 

True. 

Music is taught first, and gymnastic afterwards. 

Certainly. 

And when you speak of music, do you rank literature under 
music or not ? 

I do. 

And literature may be either true or false ? 

Yes. 

And the young are trained in both kinds, and in the false 377 
before the true ? 

I do not understand your meaning, he said. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK II. 

201 

You know, I said, that we begin by telling children stories 
which, though not wholly destitute of truth, are in the main 
fictitious ; and these stories are told them when they are not of 
an age to learn gymnastics. 

Very true. 

That was my meaning in saying that we must teach music 
before gymnastics. 

Quite right, he said. 

You know also that the beginning is the chicfest part of any 
work, especially in a young and tender thing ; for that is the time 
at which the character is formed and most readily receives the 
desired impression. 

Quite true. 

And shall we just carelessly allow children to hear any casual 
tales which may be framed by casual persons, and to receive into 
their minds notions which are the very opposite of those which 
are to be held by them when they are grown up ? 

We cannot allow that. 

Then the first thing will be to have a censorship of the writers 
of fiction, and let the censors receive any tale of fiction which 
is good, and reject the bad ; and we will desire mothers and 
nurses to tell their children the authorised ones only. Let them 
fashion the mind with these tales, and not the tender frame with 
the hands only. At the same time, most of those which are now 
in use will have to be discarded. 

Of what tales are you speaking ? he said. 

You may find a model of the lesser in the greater, I said; for 
they are necessarily cast in the same mould, and there is the 
same spirit in both of them. 

That may be very true, he replied ; but I don’t as yet know 
what you would term the greater. 

Those, I said, which are narrated by Homer and Hesiod, and 
the rest of the poets, who have ever been the great story-tellers of 
mankind. 

But which are the stories that you mean, he said; and what 
fault do you find with them ? 

A fault which is most serious, I said; the fault of telling a lie, 
and a bad lie. 

But when is this fault committed ? 

202 

THE REPUBLIC . 

Whenever an erroneous representation is made of the nature of 
gods and heroes, — like the drawing of a limner which has not the 
shadow of a likeness to the truth. 

Yes, he said, that sort of thing is certainly very blameable; 
but what are the stories which you mean ? 

First of all, I said, there was that greatest of all lies in high 
places, which the poet told about Uranus, and which was an 
immoral lie too, — I mean what Hesiod says that Uranus did, and 
what Cronus did to him'. The fact is, that the doings of Cronus, 378 
and the sufferings which his son inflicted upon him, even if they 
were true, ought not to be lightly told to young and simple 
persons ; if possible, they had better be buried in silence. But 
if there is an absolute necessity for their mention, a very few 
might hear them in a mystery, and then let them sacrifice not 
a common (Eleusinian) pig, but some huge and unprocurable 
victim; this would have the effect of very greatly reducing the 
number of the hearers. 

Why, yes, said he, those stories are certainly objectionable. 

Yes, Adeimantus, they are stories not to be narrated in our 
State ; the young man should not be told that in committing the 
worst of crimes he is far from doing anything outrageous, and 
that he may chastise his father when he does wrong in any 
manner that he likes, and in this will only be following the 
example of the first and greatest among the gods. 

I quite agree with you, he said ; in my opinion those stories arc 
not fit to be repeated. 

Neither, if we mean our future guardians to regard the habit of 
quarrelling as dishonourable, should anything be said of the wars 
in heaven, and of the plots and fightings of the gods against one 
another, which are quite untrue. Far be it from us to tell them of 
the battles of the giants, and embroider them on garments ; or of 
all the innumerable other quarrels of Gods and heroes with their 
friends and relations. If they would only believe us we would 
tell them that quarrelling is unholy, and that never up to this time 
has there been any quarrel between citizens ; this is what old 
men and old women should begin by telling children, and the 
same when they grow up. And these are the sort of fictions 

7 Hesiod, Theogony, 154, 459. 

BOOK II. 

203 

which the poets should be required to compose. But the narrative 
of Hephaestus binding Here his mother, or how on another oc- 
casion Zeus sent him flying for taking her part when she was 
being beaten, — such tales must not be admitted into our State, 
whether they are supposed to have an allegorical meaning or not. 
For the young man cannot judge what is allegorical and what is 
literal, and anything that he receives into his mind at that age is 
apt to become indelible and unalterable; and therefore the tales 
which they first hear should be models of virtuous thoughts. 

There you are right, he replied ; that is quite essential : but, 
then, where are such models to be found ? and what arc the tales 
in which they are contained ? when that question is asked, what 
will be our answer ? 

I said to him, You and I, Adeimantus, are not poets in what 
we are about just now, but founders of a State : now the founders 
of a State ought to know the general forms in which poets should 
cast their tales, and the limits which should be observed by them, 
but they are not bound themselves to make the tales. 

That is true, he said; but what are these forms of theology 
which you mean ? 

Something of this kind, I replied God is always to be repre- 
sented as he truly is; that is one form which is equally to be 
observed in every kind of verse, whether epic, lyric, or tragic. 
Right. 

And is he not truly good ? and must he not be represented 
as such ? 

Certainly. 

And no good thing is hurtful ? 

No, indeed. 

And that which is not hurtful hurts not ? 

* 

Certainly not. 

And that which hurts not does no evil ? 

No. 

And that which does no evil is the cause of no evil ? 

Impossible. 

And the good is the advantageous ? 

Yes. 

And the good is the cause of well-being ? 

Yes. 

204 

THE REPUBLIC. 

The good is not the cause of all things, but of the good only, 
and not the cause of evil ? 

Assuredly. 

Then God, if he be good, is not the author of all things, as 
the many assert, but he is the cause of a few things only, and 
not of most things that occur to men ; for few are the goods 
of human life, and many are the evils, and the good only is to 
be attributed to him: of the evil other causes have to be dis- 
covered. 

That appears to me to be most true, he said. 

Then we must not listen to Homer or any other poet who is 
guilty of the folly of saying that 

‘At the threshold of Zeus lie two casks full of lots, one of good, the 
other of evil8,’ 

and that he to whom Zeus gives a mixture of the two 

‘ Sometimes meets with good, at other times with evil fortune ;* 

but that he to whom is given the cup of unmingled ill, 

* Him wild hunger drives over the divine earth.’ 

And again — 

‘ Zeus, who is the dispenser of good and evil to us.’ 

And if any one asserts that the violation of oaths and treaties 
of which Pandarus was the real author 9, was brought about by 
Athene and Zeus, or that the strife and conflict of the gods 
was instigated by Themis and Zeus, he shall not have our ap- 
proval ,0; neither will we allow our young men to hear the words of 
Aeschylus, when he says, that c God plants guilt among men when 380 
he desires utterly to destroy a house/ And if a poet writes of the 
sufferings of Niobe, which is the subject of the tragedy in which 
these iambic verses occur, or of the house of Pelops, or of the 
Trojan war, or any similar theme, either we must not permit him 
to say that these are the works of God, or, if they are of God, 
he must devise some such explanation of them as we are seeking : 
he must say that God did what was just and right, and they were 
the better for being punished ; but that those who are punished 
are miserable, and God the author of their misery;— that the poet * 

8 Iliad, xxiv. 527. 8 lb. ii. 69. 10 lb. xx. 

Digitized tty Google 

BOOK II. 

205 

is not to be permitted to say, though he may say that the wicked 
are miserable because they require to be punished, and are bene- 
fited by receiving punishment from God; but that God being 
good is the author of evil to any one, that is to be strenuously 
denied, and not allowed to be sung or said in any well-ordered 
commonwealth by old or young. Such a fiction is suicidal, ruin- 
ous, impious. 

I agree with you, he replied, about this law, and am ready to 
give my assent. 

Let this then be one of the rules of recitation and invention, — 
that God is not the author of evil, but of good only. 

That will do, he said. 

And what do you think of another principle? Shall 1 ask you 
whether God is a magician, that he should appear insidiously 
now in one shape, and now in another — sometimes himself 
changing and becoming different in form, sometimes deceiving 
us with the appearance of such transformations ; or is he one and 
the same immutably fixed in his own proper image ? 

I cannot answer you without more thought. 

Well, I said; but if we suppose a change in God or in anything 
else, that change must be effected either by another or by himself? 

That is most certain. 

And things which are at their best arc also least liable to be 
altered or discomposed ; for example, when healthiest and strongest 
the human frame is least liable to be affected by meats, and 
drinks and labours, and the plant which is in the fullest vigour 
also suffers least from heat or wind, or other similar accidents. 

Of course. 

And this is true of the soul as well as of the body; the bravest 
and wisest soul will be least affected by any external influence. 

True. 

And further, I conceive that this principle applies to all works 
of art — vessels, houses, garments; and that when well made and in 
good condition, they are least altered by time and circumstances. 

That is true. 

Then everything which is well made by art or nature, or both, 
is liable to receive the least change at the hands of others? and 
God and his attributes are absolutely perfect ? 

Of course. 

206 

THE REPUBLIC. 

He is therefore least likely to take many forms. 

He is. 

But suppose again that he changes and transforms himself? 
Clearly, he said, that must be the case if he is changed at all. 
And will he then change himself for the better, or for the 
worse ? 

If he change at all he must change for the worse, for we 
cannot suppose that he is deficient in virtue or beauty. 

Very true, Adeimantus ; but then, would any one, whether God 
or man, desire to change for the worse? 

That cannot be. 

Then God too cannot be willing to change ; being, as is sup- 
posed, the fairest and best that is conceivable, he remains ab- 
solutely and for ever in his own form. 

That necessarily follows, he said, in my judgment. 

Then, I said, my dear friend, let none of the poets tell us 
that 

‘The gods, in the disguise of strangers, prowl about cities having diverse 
forms 1 1 

and let no one slander Proteus and Thetis, neither let any one, 
either in tragedy or any other kind of poetry, introduce Here dis- 
guised in the likeness of a priestess, 

‘asking an alms for the life-giving daughters of the river Inachus;’ 

let us have no more lies of that sort. Neither must we have 
mothers under the influence of the poets scaring their children 
with abominable tales 

‘of certain gods who go about by night in the likeness, as is said, of 
strangers from every land;’ 

let them beware lest they blaspheme against the gods, and at the 
same time make cowards of their children. 

That ought certainly to be prohibited, he said. 

But still you may say that although God is himself unchange- 
able, he may take various forms in order to bewitch and de- 
ceive us. 

Suppose that, he replied. 

11 Horn. Od. xvii. 485. 

BOOK IL 

207 

Well, but can you imagine that God will be willing to lie, 
whether in word or action, by making a false representation of 
himself? 

I cannot say, he replied. 

Do you not know, I said, that the true lie, if I may use such 
an expression, is hated of gods and men ? 

What do you mean ? he said. 

I mean this, I said, — that no one is willing to be deceived in 
that which is the truest and highest part of himself, or about the 
truest and highest matters ; there he is most afraid of a lie having 
possession of him. 

Still, he said, I do not comprehend you. 

The reason is, I replied, that you attribute some grand meaning 
to me ; whereas all that I am saying is, that deception, or being 
deceived or uninformed about true being in the highest faculty, 
which is the soul, and in that part of them to have and to hold 
the lie, is what mankind least like; — that, I say, is what they 
utterly detest. 

There is nothing more hateful to them. 

And, as I was just now saying, this ignorance in the soul of 
the lie within may be called the true lie ; for the lie in words is 
only a kind of imitation and shadowy image of a previous affec- 
tion of the soul, not pure unadulterated falsehood. Am I not 
right in saying this? 

Perfectly right. 

The true lie is hated not only by the gods, but also by men. 

Yes. 

Whereas the lie in words is in certain cases useful and not 
hateful ; in dealing with enemies — that would be an instance ; or 
again, as a cure or preventive of the madness of so-called friends ; 
also in the tales of mythology, of which we were just now speak- 
ing— because we do not know the truth about ancient traditions, 
we make falsehood as much like truth as we can, and there is 
use in this. 

Very true, he said. 

But can any of these reasons apply to God. Can we suppose 
that he is ignorant of antiquity, and therefore has recourse to 
invention ? 

That would be ridiculous, he said. 

208 

THE REPUBLIC. 

The lying poet then has no place in God ? 

I should say not. 

But peradventure he may tell a lie because he is afraid of 
enemies ? 

That is inconceivable. 

But he may have friends who are senseless or mad ? 

But no mad or senseless person can be a friend of God. 

Then no motive can be imagined why God should lie? 

None. 

* 

Then the superhuman and divine is absolutely incapable of 
falsehood ? 

Yes. 

Then is God perfectly simple and true both in deed and word ; 
he changes not; he deceives not, either by dream or waking 
vision, by sign or word. 

Your words, he answered, are the very expression of my own 
feelings. 

You agree with me, I said, that this is the second type or 
mould in which we are to cast our ideas about divine things; the 
Gods are not magicians who transform themselves, neither do 
they deceive mankind in word or deed. 

I grant that. 

Then, although we are lovers of Homer, we do not love the 
lying dream which Zeus sends to Agamemnon ; neither will we 
praise the verses of Aeschylus in which Thetis says that Apollo 
at her nuptials 

* Was celebrating in song her fair progeny whose days were to be long, and 
to know no sickness. And gathering all in one he raised a note of triumph 
over the blessedness of my lot, and cheered my soul. And I thought that the 
word of Phoebus being prophetic and divine would not fail. And now he 
himself who uttered the strain, he who was present at the banquet, and who 
said this — he was the very one who slew my son/ 

These are the kind of sentiments about the Gods which will 
arouse our anger ; and he who utters them shall be refused a 
chorus; neither shall we allow them to enter into education, 
meaning, as we do, that our guardians, as far as men can be, 
should be true worshippers of the Gods and like them. 

I entirely agree, he said, in the propriety of these principles, 
and promise to make them my laws. 

BOOK III. 

Such then, I said, are our principles of theology — some tales 
are to be told, and others are not to be told to our disciples from 
their youth upwards, if we mean them to honour the gods and 
their parents, and to value friendship with one another. 

Yes y and I think that our principles are right, he said. 

Well, I said, and if they are to be courageous, must they not 
learn, besides these, other lessons also, such as will have the 
effect of taking away the fear of death? Can any man be 
courageous who has the fear of death in him ? 

Certainly not, he said. 

And can he be fearless of death, or will he choose death in 
battle rather than defeat and slavery, who believes in the reality 
and the terror of the world below ? 

Impossible. 

Then we must assume a control over this class of tales as 
well as over the others, and beg the relators of them not simply 
to revile, but rather to commend the world below, intimating to 
them that their descriptions are untrue, and will do no good to 
our future warriors. 

That will be our duty, he said. 

Then, I said, we shall have to obliterate obnoxious passages, 
beginning with the verse, — 

‘ I would rather be a serf on the land of a poor portionless man who is not 
well to do, than rule over all the dead who have come to nought *.* 

We must also expunge the verse, — 

{ He feared lest the mansions grim and squalid which the Gods abhor should 
be seen both of mortals and immortals2.’ 

Or again : — 

*0 heavens! is there in the house of Hades soul and ghostly form but no 
mind3?* 

1 Od. xi. 489. 2 II. xx. 64. 3 lb. xxiii. 103. 

VOL. II. P 

Digitized by Google 

210 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Again : — 

‘To him (Teiresias) alone had the Gods given wisdom; the other souls do 
but flit as shadows4/ 

Again : — 

‘ The soul flying from the limbs had gone to Hades, lamenting her fate, 
leaving strength and youth5/ 

Again : — 

‘ And the soul, with shrilling cry, passed like smoke beneath the earth6/ 3^7 
And, — 

‘ As bats in hollow of mystic cavern, whenever any of them dropping out 
of the string falls from the rock, fly shrilling and hold to one another, so did 
they with shrilling cry hold together as they moved7/ 

And we must beg Homer and the other poets not to be angry if 
we strike out these and similar passages, not because they are 
unpoetical, or unattractive to the popular ear, but because the 
greater the charm of them as poetry, the less are they meet for 
the ears of boys and men who are to be sons of freedom, and are 
to fear slavery more than death. 

Undoubtedly. 

Also we shall have to reject all the terrible and appalling 
names which describe the world below — Cocytus and Styx, ghosts 
under the earth, and sapless shades, and any other words of the 
same type, the very mention of which causes a shudder to pass 
through the inmost soul of him who hears them. I do not say 
that these tales may not have a use of some kind; but there 
is a danger that the nerves of our guardians may become affected 
by them. 

We have reason to fear that, he said. 

Then there must be no more of them. 

True. 

Another and a nobler strain will be ours. 

Clearly. 

And shall we proceed to get rid of the weepings and wailings 
of famous men ? 

4 Od. x. 495. 5 II. xvi. 856. 6 lb. xxiii. xoo. 7 Od. xxiv. 6. 

BOOK in ; 

21 I 

They will go with the others. 

But shall we be right in getting rid of them ? Reflect : our 
principle is that the good man will not consider death terrible to 
a good man. 

Yes ; that is our principle. 

And therefore he will not sorrow for his departed friend as 
though he had suffered anything terrible ? 

He will not. 

Such an one, as we further maintain, is enough for himself and ’ 
his own happiness, and therefore is least in need of other men. 

True, he said. 

And for this reason the loss of a son or brother, or the depriva- 
tion of fortune is to him of all men least terrible. 

Assuredly. 

And therefore he will be least likely to lament, and will bear 
with the greatest equanimity any misfortune of this sort which 
may befall him. 

Yes, he will feel such a misfortune less than another. 

Then we shall be right in getting rid of the lamentations of 
famous men, and making them over to women (and not even to 
388 women who are good for anything), or to men of a baser sort, 
that those who are being educated by us to be the defenders of 
their country may scorn to do the like. 

We shall be very right. 

Then we will once more entreat Homer and the other poets not 
to depict Achilles8, who is the son of a goddess, as first lying on 
his side, then on his back, and then on his face; then starting up 
again in a frenzy and in full sail upon the shores of the barren 
sea, nor again taking the dusky ashes in both his hands9 and 
pouring them over his head, or bewailing and sorrowing in the 
various modes which Homer has delineated. Nor should he de- 
scribe Priam the kinsman of the gods, 

* Rolling in the dirt, calling each man loudly by his name 10.’ 

Still more earnestly will we beg of him not to introduce the gods 
lamenting and saying, 

‘Alas! my misery! Alas! that I bore the bravest to my sorrow11.’ 

But if he must introduce the gods, at any rate let him not dare 

8 II. xxiv. ro. 9 lb. xviii. 23. 10 lb. xxii. 414. 11 lb. xviii. 45. 

212 

THE REPUBLIC. 

to represent the greatest of the gods in words so unlike the truth 
as these, — 

* O heavens ! with my eyes I behold a dear friend of mine driven round 
and round the city, and my heart is sorrowful ,2.’ 

Or again : — 

‘Woe is me that I am fated to have Sarpedon, dearest of men to me, 
subdued at the hands of Patroclus the son of Menoetius ,3.’ 

For if, my sweet Adeimantus, our youth seriously believe in such 
unworthy representations of the gods, instead of laughing at 
them as they ought, hardly will any of them deem that he him- 
self, being but a man, can be dishonoured by similar actions; 
neither will he rebuke any inclination that may arise in his 
mind to say and do the like. And instead of having any shame 
or self-control, he will be always whining and lamenting on slight 
occasions. 

Yes, he said, that is very certain. 

Yes, I replied; but that, as we are arguing, is just what ought 
not to be : and this will remain our conviction until we find a 
better. 

True. 

Neither ought our guardians to be given to laughter. For a fit 
of laughter which has been indulged to excess almost always 
occasions an equally violent reaction. 

That I believe. 

Then persons of worth, even if only mortal, must not be re- 
presented as overcome by laughter, and still less must such a 
representation of the gods be allowed. 

Still less of the gods, as you say, he replied. 389 

Then we shall not suffer such expressions to be used about 
the gods as that in which Homer describes how 

‘Inextinguishable laughter arose among the blessed gods, when they saw 
Hephaestus bustling about the mansion14.’ 

On your views, we must not admit them. 

On my views, if you like to father them on me ; that we must 
not admit them is certain. 

12 II. xxii. 168. 13 lb. xvi. 433. 14 lb. i. 599. 

BOOK III ; 

213 

Again, truth should be highly valued; if, as we were say- 
ing, a lie is useless to the gods, and useful only as a medicine 
to men, then the use of such medicines will have to be re- 
stricted to physicians ; private individuals have no business with 
them. 

Clearly not, he said. 

Then the rulers of the State are the only persons who ought to 
have the privilege of lying, either at home or abroad ; they may be 
allowed to lie for the good of the State. But nobody else is to 
meddle with anything of the kind ; and for a private man to lie 
in return to the rulers is to be deemed a more heinous fault 
than for a patient or the pupil of a gymnasium not to speak the 
truth about his own bodily illnesses to the physician or trainer, 
or for a sailor not to tell the captain truly how matters are going 
on in a ship. 

Most true, he said. 

If, then, the ruler catches anybody beside himself lying in the 
State, 

‘An 7 of the craftsmen, whether he be priest or physician or carpenter 'V 

he will punish him for introducing a practice which is equally 
subversive of ship or State. 

Yes, he said, if our principle is to be consistently carried out. 

Next, will not our youth require temperance? 

Certainly. 

Under temperance, speaking generally, are included obedience 
to commanders and command of self in sensual pleasures. 

True. 

Then would you praise or blame the injunction of Diomede in 
Homer, 

‘Friends, sit still and obey my word16,’ 
and the verses which follow, 

‘ The Greeks marched breathing prowess l7, 

In silent awe of their leaders18,’ 

and other sentiments of the same kind ? 

They are good. 

1A Od. xvii. 383 sq. 16 II. iv. 412. 17 lb. iii. 8. 18 lb. iv. 431. 

Digitized by Google 

214 

THE REPUBLIC. 

What again of this line, 

‘0 heavy with wine, who hast the eyes of a dog and the heart of a stag19,’ 

and of the verses which follow? Would you say that these, or 390 
any other impertinent words which private men arc supposed to 
address to their rulers, whether in verse or prose, arc well or ill 
spoken ? 

They are ill spoken. 

They may very possibly afford some amusement, but they do not 
conduce to temperance. And therefore they are likely to do harm 
to our young men — you would agree with me in that ? 

Yes. 

And then, again, to make the wisest of men say that nothing 
in his opinion is more glorious than 

‘ When the tables are full of bread and meat, and the cup-bearer carries 
round wine which he draws from the bowl and pours into the cups 20 

is this fit or improving for a young man to hear ? Or that other 
verse which affirms that 

‘Hunger is the worst way of encountering destiny and death21?’ 

What would you say again to the talc of Zeus, who, while other 
gods and men were asleep (observe, that he was the only person 
awake), lay devising plans, but forgot them all in a moment 
through his lust, and was so completely overcome at the sight 
of Here that he would not even go into the tent, but wanted 
to lie with her on the ground, declaring that he had never been 
in such a state of rapture before, even when they first met one 
another without the knowledge of their parents22; or that other 
tale of how Hephaestus, in consequence of a similar piece of 
work, bound Ares and Aphrodite23? 

Indeed, he said, I am strongly of opinion that they ought not 
to hear that sort of thing. 

But any deeds of endurance which are acted or told by famous 
men, these they ought to see and hear ; as, for example, what is 
said in the verses, 

‘ He smote his breast, and thus reproached his soul, 

Endure, my soul, thou hast endured worse 24.’ 

19 II. i. 225. 20 Od. ix. 8. 21 lb. xi. 342. 

22 II. xiv. 291. 2a od. viii. 266. 24 lb. xx. 17. 

I 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK III. 

215 

Certainly, he said. 

In the next place, we must not let them be receivers of gifts 
or lovers of money. 

Certainly not. 

Neither must we sing to them of 

‘Gifts persuading gods, and persuading reverend kings2-'.’ 

Neither is Phoenix, the tutor of Achilles, to be approved or re- 
garded as having given his pupil good counsel when he told him 
that he should assist the Greeks and take their gifts26, but that 
without a gift he should not be reconciled to them. Neither 
will we allow that Achilles himself was such a lover of money 
that he took Agamemnon’s gifts, or required a price as the ransom 
of the dead27. 

39 1 Undoubtedly, he said, these are not sentiments which ought to 
be approved. 

Loving Homer as I do, I hardly like to say what I must say, 
nevertheless, that in speaking thus of Achilles, or in believing 
these words when spoken of him by others, there is downright 
impiety. As little can I credit the narrative of his insolence to 
Apollo, where he says, 

* Thou hast wronged me, O far-darter, most abominable of deities. Verily 
I would be even Math thee, if I had only the power28; 

or his insubordination to the river-god29, on whose divinity he is 
ready to lay hands ; or the dedication to the dead Patroclus of 
his own hair30, which had been previously dedicated to the other 
river-god Spercheius ; or his dragging Hector round the tomb of 
Patroclus31, and his slaughter of the captives at the pyre32; all 
this I cannot believe, any more than I can believe that he, 
Cheiron’s pupil, the son of a goddess and of Peleus who was the 
gentlest of men and third in descent from Zeus, was in such 
rare perturbation of mind as to be at one time the slave of two 
seemingly inconsistent passions, meanness, not untainted by 
avarice, combined with overwhelming contempt of gods and 
men. 

You are quite right, he replied. 

2ft Quoted by Suidas as attributed to Hesiod. 28 II. ix. 515. 

27 lb. xxiv. 175. 28 Ib.xxiii.151. 29 lb. xxi. 223. 

30 lb. xxiii. 151. 31 lb. xxii. 394. 32 lb. xxiii. 175. 

Digitized by Google 

216 

THE REPUBLIC . 

And let us equally refuse to believe, or allow to be repeated, 
the tale of Theseus son of Poseidon, or of Peirithous son of Zeus, 
going forth to perpetrate such a horrid rape ; or of any other hero 
or son of a god desiring to do such impious and horrible things 
as they falsely ascribe to them in our day: and let us compel 
the poets to declare either that these acts were not done by them, 
or that they were not the sons of gods ; — both in the same breath 
they shall not be permitted to affirm. We will not have them 
teaching our youth that the gods are the authors of evil, and that 
heroes are no better than men; for, as we were saying, these 
sentiments are neither pious nor true, being at variance with our 
demonstration that evil cannot come from God. Also they are 
likely to have a bad effect on those who hear them ; for everybody 
will begin to excuse his own vices when he is convinced that 
similar wickednesses are always being perpetrated by the kindred 
of the gods, 

‘ The relatives of Zeus, whose paternal altar is in the heavens and on the 
mount of Ida,’ 

and who have 

1 the blood of deity yet flowing in their veins.’ 

And therefore let us put an end to such tales, lest they engender 
laxity of morals among the young. 39 2 

Most certainly, he replied. 

And now, is there any class of subjects which still remains to 
be considered ? About gods and demigods and heroes and the 
world below we have already made regulations. 

Very true. 

And what shall we say about men ? That is clearly the re- 
maining portion of our subject. 

True. 

But we are not in a condition to settle this at present. 

And why not ? 

Because, if I am not mistaken, we shall have to say that 
poets and story-tellers make the gravest misstatements about men 
when they say that many wicked men are happy, and good men 
miserable; and we shall forbid them to utter these things, and 
command them to sing and say the opposite. 

I am sure that we shall, he replied. 

BOOK III. 

21 7 

But if you admit that I am right in this, then I shall say that 
you have admitted the point which we have been all along trying 
to determine, viz. whether justice is in itself good. 

You are right in reminding me of that, he said. 

Well then, I said, we must defer coming to final agreement 
about this subject until we have discovered what justice is, and 
how naturally advantageous to the possessor, whether seen to be 
just or not. 

Most true, he said. 

Enough of the subjects of poetry : let us now speak of the style ; 
and when this has been considered, both matter and manner will 
have been completely treated. 

I don’t know what you mean, said Adeimantus. 

Then I must endeavour to explain. I suppose you are aware 
that all mythology and poetry is a narration of events, either past, 
present, or to come ? 

Certainly, he replied. 

And narration may be either simple narration, or imitation, or 
a union of the two ? 

That again, he said, I do not quite understand. 

I fear, I said, that I must be a ludicrous teacher not to make 
myself better understood. Like a bad speaker, therefore, I will 
not take the whole of the subject, but will break a piece off as an 
illustration of my meaning. I dare say that you remember the 
first lines of the Iliad, in which the poet says that Chryses begs 
393 Agamemnon to release his daughter, and Agamemnon flies into 
a passion with Chryses, who invokes the anger of the gods against 
the Achaeans. As far as these lines, 

‘ And he prayed all the Greeks, but especially the two sons of Atreus, the 
chiefs of the people/ 

the poet is speaking in his own person ; he never leads us to sup- 
pose that he is any one else. But in what follows he takes the 
person of Chryses, and then he does all that he can to make 
us believe that the speaker is not Homer, but the aged priest 
himself. And this is the general form of the narrative both in 
the Iliad and the Odyssee. 

Yes. 

And it is narrative when the poet recounts both the speeches 
and the passages between ? 

2l8 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Quite true. 

But when the poet speaks in the person of another, may we not 
say that he assimilates his style to that of the person who, as he 
informs you, is going to speak ? 

Certainly. 

And this assimilation of himself to another is the imitation, 
either by voice or gesture, of the person whose character he 
assumes ? 

Of course. 

Then in this case the narrative of the poet may be said to 
proceed by way of imitation ? 

Very true. 

Or, if the poet everywhere appears and never conceals himself, 
then again the imitation is dropped, and his poetry becomes 
simple narration. However, in order that I may make my mean- 
ing quite clear, I will return to my example. Suppose that Homer 
had said, £The priest came, having his daughter’s ransom in his 
hands, the suppliant of the Achaeans, and above all of the 
kings;’ and then, instead of speaking in the person of Chryses, 
suppose that he had continued in his own person, the imitation 
would have passed into narration. He would have said (I am no 
poet and therefore I drop the metre), c Chryses came and prayed 
the gods on behalf of the Greeks that they might take Troy and 
return in peace, if Agamemnon would only give him back his 
daughter, taking the ransom, and reverencing the gods. Thus 
he spoke, and the other Greeks respected him and consented. 

But Agamemnon was wroth, and bade him depart and not come 
again, lest the sceptre and crown of the god should be of no 
avail to him — the daughter of Chryses, he said, should not be 
released until she had first grown old with him in Argos. And 
then he told him to go away and not to provoke him, if he in- 
tended to get home safely. And the old man went away in fear 394 
and silence, and, having left the camp, he called upon Apollo by 
his many names, and said if ever in building his temple or 
offering sacrifice to him he had done anything grateful to him, 
his prayer was that this might be returned to him, and that the 
Achaeans might expiate his tears by the arrows of the god,’ — 
and so on. In this way the whole becomes narrative. 

That I understand, he said. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK in : 

219 

Or you may suppose that the intermediate pieces of narration are 
omitted, and the dialogue only remains; this is the opposite case. 

That again, he said, I understand ; you mean, for example, as 
in tragedy. 

That is my meaning; and I believe that you now see clearly 
what you did not see before, that poetry and mythology are, in 
some cases, wholly imitative — instances of this are supplied by 
tragedy and comedy ; of the opposite style, in which the poet is 
the only speaker, the dithyramb is the best example; and the 
combination of both is found in epic poetry, and in some other 
styles of poetry. Do I take you with me ? 

Yes, he said; I now understand what you meant to say. 

I will beg you also to recall what I began by saying that we 
had done with the subject, and might proceed to the style. 

Yes, I remember. 

In saying this, I meant to imply that we must come to an 
understanding about the mimetic art, — whether the poets, in 
narrating their stories, are to be allowed to imitate, and if so, 
whether in whole or in part, and if the latter, in what parts ; or 
should all imitation be prohibited ? 

You mean, I suspect, to ask whether tragedy and comedy shall 
be admitted into our State ? 

Yes, I said; but there may be more than this in question: I 
really do not know as yet, but whither the wind carries the argu- 
ment, thither we go. 

And go we will, he replied. 

Then, I said, Adeimantus, let me ask you whether our guardians 
ought to be imitators, or whether in fact this question has not 
been already answered by our previous recognition of the principle 
that one man can only do one thing well, and not many; and 
that if he attempt many, he will altogether fail of gaining much 
reputation in any ? 

Certainly. 

And this is equally true of imitation ; no one man can imitate 
many things as well as he would imitate a single one ? 

He cannot. 

395 Then the same person will hardly be able to play the serious 
part of life, and at the same time be an imitator and imitate 
many other parts as well ; for even when two species of imitation 

220 

THE REPUBLIC. 

are nearly allied, the same persons cannot succeed in both, as is 
plain in the case of tragedy and comedy, which are imitations as 
you were just now terming them ? 

Yes I did; and you are right in supposing that the same per- 
sons cannot succeed in both. 

Any more than they can be rhapsodists and actors at once. 

True. 

Neither are actors the same as comic and tragic poets; yet all 
these are imitations. 

Yes, they are imitations. 

And human nature, Adeimantus, appears to have been coined 
into yet smaller pieces, and to be as incapable of imitating many 
things well, as of performing well the actions of which the imita- 
tions are likenesses. 

Quite true, he replied. 

If then we would retain the notion with which we began, that 
our guardians are to be released from every other art, and to be 
the special artificers of freedom, and to minister to this and no 
other end, they ought not to practise or imitate anything else ; 
and, if they imitate at all, they should imitate the characters 
which are suitable to their profession — the temperate, holy, free, 
courageous, and the like ; but they should not depict or be able to 
imitate any kind of illiberality or other baseness, lest from imita- 
tion they should come to be what they imitate. Did you never 
observe how imitations, beginning in early youth, at last sink 
into the constitution and become a second nature of body, voice, 
and mind ? 

Yes, certainly, he said. 

Then, I said, we will not allow those for whom we profess a 
care and desire that they should be good men, to imitate a woman, 
whether young or old, quarrelling with her husband, or striving and 
vaunting against the gods in conceit of her happiness, or when 
she is in affliction, or sorrow, or weeping ; and certainly not one 
who is in sickness, love, or labour. 

Very right, he said. 

Neither must they represent slaves, male or female, doing the 
offices of slaves ? 

They must not. 

And surely not rogues or cowards, or any who do the reverse 

BOOK III . 

221 

of what we have prescribed— jesting, scolding, reviling, in drink 
or out of drink- misbehaving either to themselves or others in 
word or deed, as the manner of such is. Neither should they be 
trained to imitate madmen either in word or deed, for madness, 
like vice, is to be known only to be avoided. 

Very true, he replied. 

Any more than they may imitate smiths or other artificers, or 
oarsmen, or boatswains, or any similar actions ? 

Impossible, he said ; how can they imitate that of which the 
very pursuit is not permitted to them ? 

And would you have them imitate the neighing of horses, the 
bellowing of bulls, the murmur of rivers and roll of the ocean, 
thunder, and all that sort of thing ? 

Nay, he said, if madness is forbidden, then neither may they 
copy the behaviour of madmen. 

You mean, I said, if I understand you rightly, that there is one 
sort of narration which may be used or spoken by a truly good 
man, and that there is another sort which will be exclusively 
adapted to a man of another character and education. 

And which are these two sorts ? he asked. 

Suppose, I answered, that a just and good man in the course 
of narration comes on some saying or action of another good 
man, — I should imagine that he will like to impersonate him, and 
will not be ashamed of this sort of imitation : he will be most 
ready to play the part of the good man when he is acting firmly 
and wisely ; in a less degree when his steps falter owing to sick- 
ness or love, or again from intoxication or any other mishap. 
But when he comes to a character which is unworthy of him, he 
will not make a study of that ; he will disdain to wear the like- 
ness of his inferiors, unless indeed during some brief interval 
when they may be doing any good ; at other times he will be 
ashamed to play a part which he has never practised, nor will he 
like to fashion and frame himself after the baser models; he feels 
that this would be beneath him, when carried beyond a pastime. 

That is what I should expect, he replied. 

Then he will adopt a mode of narration such as we have illus- 
trated out of Homer, that is to say, his style will be both imitative 
and narrative ; but there will be very little of the former, and a 
great deal of the latter. Do you agree ? 

222 

THE REPUBLIC \ 

Certainly, he said ; that is the model which such a speaker must 
necessarily take. 

But another sort of character will narrate anything, and the 
worse he is the more unscrupulous he will be; nothing will be 397 
beneath him : moreover he will be ready to imitate anything, not 
as a joke, but in right good earnest, and before a large audience. 

As I was just now saying, he will attempt to represent the roll 
of thunder, the rattle of wind and hail, or the various sounds of 
pulleys, of pipes, of flutes, and all sorts of instruments; also he 
will bark like a dog, bleat like a sheep, and crow like a cock; his 
entire art will consist in imitation of voice and gesture, and there 
will be very little narration. 

That, he said, is sure to be his way. 

Then these, I said, are the two kinds of style. 

Yes, he said. 

And you would agree with me in saying that one of them is 
simple and has but slight changes; and if the harmony and rhythm 
are also chosen for their simplicity, the result is that the speaker, 
if he speaks correctly, is always pretty much the same in style, 
and keeps within the limits of a single harmony (for the changes 
are not great), and also keeps pretty nearly the same rhythm ? 

That is quite true, he said. 

Whereas the other style requires all sorts of harmonies and all 
sorts of rhythms, if the music is to be expressive of the variety and 
complexity of the words ? 

That is also perfectly true, he replied. 

And do not the two styles, or the mixture of the two, compre- 
hend all poetry, and every form of expression in words ? No one 
can say anything except in one or other or both of them ? 

They include all, he said. 

And shall we receive them all, or only one of the two pure 
styles ? or would you include the mixed ? 

I should prefer only to admit the pure imitator of virtue. 

Yes, I said, Adcimantus; but the mixed style is also very 
charming : and indeed the pantomimic style, which is the opposite 
of the one which you have chosen, is the most popular with chil- 
dren and their instructors, and with the world in general. 

I admit that. 

But I suppose you mean to say that such a style is unsuitable to 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK III ; 

223 

our State, in which human nature is not twofold or manifold, for 
one man plays one part only ? 

Yes; quite unsuitable. 

And this is the reason why in this State, and in this State only, 
we shall find a shoemaker to be a shoemaker and not a pilot also, 
and a husbandman to be a husbandman and not a dicast also, 
and a soldier a soldier and not a trader also, and the same of all 
the other citizens ? 

True, he said. 

398 And therefore when any one of these clever multiform gentle- 
men, who can imitate anything, comes to our State, and proposes 
to exhibit himself and his poetry, we will fall down and worship 
him as a sweet and holy and wonderful being ; but we must also 
inform him that there is no place for such as he is in our State, — 
the law will not allow them. And so when we have anointed him 
with myrrh, and set a garland of wool upon his head, we shall 
send him away to another city. For we mean to employ for our 
souls’ health the rougher and severer poet and story-teller, who will 
imitate the style of the virtuous only, and will follow those models 
which we prescribed at first when we began to speak of the 
education of our soldiers. 

That, he said, we certainly will do, if we have the power. 

Then now, my friend, I said, that part of music or literary 
education which relates to the story or myth may be considered to 
be finished, for the matter and manner have both been discussed. 

I think so too, he said. 

Next in order will follow melody and song. 
r That is plain. 

Every one can say what has to be said about them, now that he 
has the principle. 

I fear, said Glaucon, laughing, that the word c every one’ hardly 
includes me, for I cannot at the moment say, though I may guess. 

At any rate you can tell that a song or ode has three parts, — 
the words, the melody, and the rhythm — that degree of knowledge 
I may suppose ? 

Yes, he said; so much as that you may. 

And as for the words, there will be no difference between 
words that are and are not set to music ; both will conform to the 
same laws, and these have been already determined by us ? 

224 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Yes. 

Also the melody and rhythm will go with the subject ? 

Certainly. 

And we were saying, as you may remember, in speaking of the 
words, that we had no need of strains of sorrow and lamen- 
tation ? 

True. 

And which are the harmonies expressive of sorrow? As you 
are a musician, I wish that you would tell me. 

The harmonies which you mean are the mixed or tenor Lydian, 
and the full-toned or bass Lydian, and others which are like 
them. 

These then, I said, must be banished ; even to women of virtue 
and character they are of no use, and much less to men. 

Certainly. 

In the next place, drunkenness and softness and indolence are 
utterly at variance with the character of our guardian. 

Of course. 

Then I must ask you again, which are the soft or drinking 
harmonies ? 

The Ionian, he replied, and the Lydian; they are termed 399 
c solute/ 

Well, and are these of any military use ? 

Quite the reverse, he replied ; but then the Dorian and the 
Phrygian appear to be the only ones which remain. 

I answered : Of the harmonies I know nothing, but I want to 
have one warlike, which will sound the word or note which a 
brave man utters in the hour of danger and stern resolve, or when 
his cause is failing and he is going to wounds or death or is over- 
taken by some other evil, and at every such crisis meets fortune 
with calmness and endurance ; and another which may be used by 
him in times of peace and freedom of action, when there is no 
pressure of necessity — expressive of entreaty or persuasion, of 
prayer to God, or instruction of man, or again, of willingness to 
listen to persuasion or entreaty and advice ; and which represents 
him when he has accomplished his aim, not carried away by success, 
but acting moderately and wisely, and acquiescing in the event. 
These two harmonies I ask you to leave ; the strain of necessity 
and the strain of freedom, the strain of the unfortunn*'' "'d the 

BOOK III. 

225 

strain of the fortunate, the strain of courage, and the strain of 
temperance • these, I say, leave. 

And these, he replied, are the very ones of which I was 
speaking. 

Then, I said, if only the Dorian and Phrygian harmonies are 
used in our songs and melodies, we shall not want multiplicity of 
notes or a panharmonic scale ? 

That is evident. 

Then we shall not maintain the artificers of lyres with three 
corners and complex scales, or of any other many-stringed curi- 
ously-harmonized instruments ? 

Certainly not. 

But what do you say to flute-makers and flute-players ? Would 
you admit them, when you reflect that in this composite use of 
harmony the flute is worse than all the stringed instruments put 
together, for even the panharmonic music is only an imitation 
of the flute? 

Clearly not. 

There remain then, only the lyre and the harp for use in the 
city, and you may have a pipe in the country. 

Yes, that will be quite in accordance with our principles. 

That we should prefer Apollo and his instruments to Marsyas 
and his instruments is not at all strange, I said. 

Not at all, he replied. 

And so, by the dog of Egypt, I swear that we have been 
unconsciously purging the State, which not long ago we termed 
luxurious. 

That is very wise of us, he replied. 

And now let us finish the purgation, I said. Next in order to 
harmonies, rhythms will naturally follow, and they should be 
subject to the same rules, for we ought not to have complex or 
manifold systems of metre, but rather to discover what rhythms 
do are the expressions of a courageous and harmonious life ; and the 
words should come first, and the rhythms should be adapted to 
them, not the rhythms first and the words afterwards. To say 
what rhythms they are will be your business, as you have already 
taught me the harmonies. 

But, indeed, he replied, I cannot tell you. I only know that 
some three principles of rhythm ($, f) out of which 

Q 

•*r* 

226 

THE REPUBLIC . 

metrical systems are framed, just as in sounds there are four 
elements33 into which the harmonies are resolved; that is an 
observation which I have made. But what is the character of 
these metres I am unable to say. 

Then, I said, we shall have to take Damon into our counsels ; 
and he will tell us what rhythms arc expressive of meanness, or 
insolence, or fury, or other un worthiness, and what there are 
remaining for the expression of opposite feelings. And I think 
that I have an indistinct recollection of his mentioning a com- 
plex Cretic rhythm ; also a dactylic and heroic, which he arranged, 
I know not how, so as to compensate in the rise and fall, passing 
into short and long times ; and, unless I am mistaken, he spoke 
of an iambic, as well as of a trochaic rhythm, and assigned to 
them short and long quantities34. Also in some cases he appeared 
to praise or censure the movement of the foot quite as much 
as the rhythm ; at any rate, his words were applicable to both, 
and I cannot be certain which he meant. This, however, as I 
was saying, had better be referred to him, for the subject is 
difficult — you would allow that? 

Certainly. 

But you have no difficulty in discerning that grace or the 
absence of grace is the effect of good or bad rhythm, accom- 
panying good and bad style, and the same is true of good and bad 
harmony ; as our principle is that rhythm and harmony are regu- 
lated by the words, and not the words by them. 

Certainly, he said, they should follow the words. 

And the words and the character of the style should depend on 
the temper of the soul ? 

Yes. 

And everything else on the words ? 

Yes. 

Then good language and harmony and grace and rhythm depend 
on simplicity, — I mean the simplicity of a truly and nobly or- 

83 i. e. the four notes of the tetrachord. 

34 It is not possible to explain accurately what Socrates professes not to 
describe accurately. In the first part of the sentence he appears to be 
speaking of paeonic rhythms, in the ratio of § ; in the second part of the 
sentence of dactylic rhythms, which are in the ratio of {■ ; in the last clause 
of iambic and trochaic rhythms, which are in the ratio of £ or 

BOOK III. 

22 7 

dered mind, not that other simplicity which is only a euphemism 
for folly ? 

Very true, he replied. 

And if our youth are to do their work in life, must they not 
make these their perpetual aim ? 

They must. 

401 And all life is full of them, as well as every creative and con- 
structive art; the art of painting, weaving, and embroidery, and 
building, and the manufacture of vessels, as well as the frames of 
animals and of plants ; in all of them there is grace or the 
absence of grace. And absence of grace and inharmonious 
movement and discord are nearly allied to ill words and ill 
nature, as grace and harmony are the sisters and images of good- 
ness and virtue. 

That is quite true, he said. 

But is our superintendence to go no further, and are Ihe poets 
only, to be required by us to impress a good moral on their poems 
as the condition of writing poetry in our State ? Or is the same 
control to be exercised over other artists, and are they also to 
be prohibited from exhibiting the opposite forms of vice and 
intemperance and meanness and indecency in sculpture and 
building and the other creative arts; and is he who does not 
conform to this rule of ours to be prohibited from practising his 
art in our State, lest the taste of our citizens be corrupted by him ? 
We would not have our guardians grow up amid images of moral 
deformity, as in some noxious pasture, and there browse and feed 
upon many a baneful herb and flower day by day, little by little, 
until they silently gather a festering mass of corruption in their 
own soul. Let our artists rather be those who are gifted to 
discern the true nature of beauty and grace; then will our youth 
dwell in a land of health, amid fair sights and sounds; and 
beauty, the effluence of fair works, will meet the sense like a 
breeze, and insensibly draw the soul even in childhood into 
harmony with the beauty of reason. 

There can be no nobler training than that, he replied. 

Is not this, I said, the reason, Glaucon, why musical training is 
so powerful, because rhythm and harmony find their way into the 
secret places of the soul, on which they mightily fasten, bearing 
grace in their movements, and making the soul graceful of him 

Digitized by Google 

228 

THE REPUBLIC. 

who is rightly educated, or ungraceful if ill-educated; and also 
because he who has received this true education of the inner 
being will most shrewdly perceive omissions or faults in art and 
nature, and with a true taste, while he praises and rejoices over, 
and receives into his soul the good, and becomes noble and good, 4°2 
he will justly blame and hate the bad, now in the days of his 
youth, even before he is able to know the reason of the thing ; 
and when reason comes he will recognize and salute her as a 
friend with whom his education has made him long familiar. 

Yes, he said, I quite agree with you in thinking that these 
are the reasons why there should be a musical education. 

Just as in learning to read, I said, we want to know the various 
letters in all their recurring sizes and combinations; not slighting 
them as unimportant whether they be large or small, but every- 
where eager to make them out ; and are not supposed to be 
perfect in the art until we recognize them wherever they are found : 

True — 

Or, as we recognize the reflection of letters in the water, or 
in a mirror, only when we know the letters themselves ; the same 
art giving us the knowledge of both : 

Exactly — 

Even so, I have no hesitation in saying that neither we nor 
our guardians, whom we have to educate, can ever become musical 
until we know the essential forms of temperance, courage, libe- 
rality, magnificence, as well as the cognate and contrary forms, in 
all their combinations, and can recognize them and their images 
wherever they are found, not slighting them either in small things 
or great, but believing them all to be within the sphere of one 
art and study. 

Most assuredly. 

And when a beautiful soul harmonizes with a beautiful form, 
and the two are cast in one mould, that will be the fairest of 
sights to him who has the eye to contemplate the vision ? 

The fairest indeed. 

And the fairest are also the loveliest? 

That may be assumed. 

And the man who has music in his soul will be most in love 
with the loveliest; but if they are inharmonious in soul he will 
not love them ? 

Digitized by G^fcle 

BOOK III. 

229 

That is true, he replied, if the deformity be in the soul, but 
any merely personal defect he will be willing to regard with 
complacency. 

I perceive, I said, that you have had experiences of that sort, 
and I agree. But let me ask you another question. Have tem- 
perance and the excess of pleasure any affinity ? 

Nay, he said, for pleasure deprives a man of the use of his 
faculties as much as pain. 

But has pleasure no affinity to any other virtue ? 

4°3 None whatever. 

Any to wantonness and intemperance ? 

Yes, the greatest. 

And is there any greater or keener pleasure than that of bodily 
love ? 

None, certainly ; and there is none which is more irrational. 

Whereas true love is a love of beauty and order — temperate 
and harmonious ? 

Quite true, he said. 

Then nothing violent or irrational must be allowed to approach 
true love ? 

Nothing. 

Then no irrational pleasure must be allowed to approach the 
lover and his beloved, for they can have no affinity with such 
pleasure if their mutual love is to be a right love ? 

No, indeed, Socrates, it must never come near them. 

Then I suppose that in the city which we are founding you 
would make a law that a friend should use no other familiarity 
to his love than a father would use to his son, and this only for a 
virtuous end, and he must first have the other’s consent ; and this 
rule is to limit him in all his intercourse, and he is never to go 
further, or, if he exceeds, he is to be deemed guilty of coarseness 
and bad taste. 

I quite agree, he said. 

Thus much then is said of music which makes a fair ending, for 
what should be the end of music if not the love of beauty ? 

I agree, he said. 

After music comes gymnastic, in which our youth are next to 
be trained. 

Certainly. 

230 

THE REPUBLIC . 

And gymnastic as well as music should receive careful attention 
in childhood, and continue through life. Now my belief is, — and 
this is a matter upon which I should like to have your opinion, 
but my own belief is, — not that the good body improves the soul, 
but that the good soul improves the body. What do you say ? 

Yes, I agree. 

Then, if we have educated the mind, the minuter care of the 
body may properly be committed to the mind, and we need only 
indicate general principles for brevity's sake. 

Very good. 

That they must abstain from intoxication has been already 
remarked by us, for of all persons a guardian should be the last to 
get drunk and not know where in the world he is. 

Yes, he said • that a guardian should require another to guard 
him is ridiculous indeed. 

But next, what shall we say of their food ; for the men are 
athletes in the great contest of all, are they not ? 

Yes, he said. 

And will gymnastic exercises be a suitable training for them ? 404 

I cannot say. 

I am afraid, I said, that such exercise is but a sleepy sort of 
thing, and rather perilous to health. Do you not observe that 
athletes sleep away their lives, and are liable to most dangerous 
illnesses if they depart, in ever so slight a degree, from their 
customary regimen? 

Yes, I observe that. 

Then, I said, a finer sort of training will be required for our 
warrior athletes, who are to be like wakeful dogs, and to see and 
hear with the utmost keenness ; they will have to endure many 
changes of water and also of food, of summer heat and winter 
cold, and yet they must not be liable to break down in health. 

That is quite my view, he said. 

The really excellent gymnastic is twin sister of that simple 
music which we were just now describing. 

How is that ? 

Why, I conceive that there is a gymnastic also which is simple 
and good ; and that such ought to be the military gymnastic. 

What do you mean ? 

My meaning may be learned from Homer j he, you know, feeds 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK III. 

23J 

his heroes when they are campaigning on soldiers’ fare ; they 
have no fish, although they are on the shores of the Hellespont, 
and they are allowed nothing but roast meat — which only requires 
fire, and is therefore the most convenient diet for soldiers — and not 
boiled, as this would involve a carrying about of pots and pans. 

True. 

And I can hardly be mistaken in saying that sweet sauces are 
not even mentioned by him. In this, however, he is not sin- 
gular, as all professional athletes know that a man who is to be 
in good condition should take nothing of that sort. 

Yes, he said ; and knowing this, they are quite right in not 
taking them. 

Then you would not approve of Syracusan dinners, and the 
refinements of Sicilian cookery? 

I think not. 

Nor, if a man is to keep his health, would you allow him to 
have a Corinthian girl as his fair friend ? 

Certainly not. 

Neither would you approve of the delights, as they are 
esteemed, of Athenian confectionary? 

I should not. 

Such a way of feeding and living may be likened to the com- 
position of melody and song in the panharmonic style, and in all 
the rhythms. 

Exactly. 

There complexity engendered licence, and here disease ; whereas 
simplicity in music was the parent of temperance in the soul, and 
simplicity in gymnastic, of health in the body. 

Most true, he said. 

405 But when intemperance and diseases multiply in a State, halls 
of justice and medicine are always being opened ; and the arts of 
the doctor and the lawyer begin to give themselves airs, finding 
how keen is the interest which the very freemen of a city take 
about them. 

Most true. 

And yet what greater proof can there be of a bad and dis- 
graceful state of education than this, that not only the meaner 
classes and the artisans are in need of the high skill of phy- 
sicians and judges, but also those who would tell us that they have 

232 

THE REPUBLIC. 

had a liberal education ? Is not this disgraceful, and a great sign 
of the want of education, that a man should have to go abroad for 
his law and physic because he has none of his own at home, and 
must therefore surrender himself into the hands of others ? 

Nothing, he said, can be more disgraceful. 

Would you say that, I replied, when you consider that there 
is a further stage of the evil in which a man is not only a life- 
long litigant, passing his days always in the courts either as 
plaintiff or defendant, but is led by his bad taste even to pride 
himself on this ; he is ready to fancy that he is a master in 
cunning; and he will take every crooked turn and wriggle into 
and out of every hole, bending like a withy36 and getting away, 
and all for what? in order that he may gain small points not 
worth mentioning, not knowing that so to order his life as to 
be able to do without a nodding judge is a far higher and nobler 
sort of thing. Is not that still more disgraceful ? 

Yes, he said, that is still more disgraceful. 

Well, I said, and to require the help of medicine, not when 
a wound has to be cured, or on occasion of an epidemic, but just 
because, by their lives of indolence and luxury, men fill themselves 
like pools with waters and winds, compelling the ingenious sons 
of Asclepius to give diseases the names of flatulence and catarrh ; 
is not this, too, a disgrace? 

Yes, he said, those are certainly strange and newfangled names 
of diseases. 

Yes, I said, and I do not believe that there were such diseases 
in the days of Asclepius ; and this I infer from the circumstance 
that the hero Eurypylus, after he has been wounded in Homer, 
drinks a posset of Pramnian wine besprinkled with flour and 
cheese, which are certainly rather inflammatory, and yet the sons 406 
of Asclepius who were at the Trojan war do not blame the 
damsel who gives him the drink, or rebuke Patroclus, who is 
treating his case. 

Well, he said, there is something strange in a person who 
was in his condition having such a drink given to him. 

Not strange, I replied, if you bear in mind that in former days, 
as is commonly said, before the time of Herodicus, the guild 
of Asclepius did not practise our present system of medicine, 

36 Reading Avyifd/^i'or. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK III . 

233 

which may be said to educate diseases. But Herodicus, being a 
trainer, and himself of a sickly constitution, by a happy com- 
bination of training and doctoring, found out a way of torturing 
first and principally himself, and secondly the rest of the world. 

How was that ? he said. 

By the invention of lingering death; for he had a mortal disease 
which he perpetually tended, and as recovery was out of the 
question, he passed his entire life as a valetudinarian; he could 
do nothing but attend upon himself, and he was in constant 
torment whenever he departed in anything from his usual 
regimen, and so dying hard, by the help of science he struggled 
on to old age. 

What a noble reward of the physician’s skill ! 

Yes, I said; such a reward as a man might fairly expect who 
knew not the wisdom of Asclepius, and did not consider that, if 
he failed to instruct his descendants in these arts, this arose 
not from ignorance or inexperience of such a department of medi- 
cine, but because he knew that in all well-ordered states every 
individual has an occupation to which he must attend, and there- 
fore has no leisure to spend in continually being ill. This we 
remark in the case of the artisan, but, ludicrously enough, fail to 
apply the same rule to people of the richer sort. 

How is that ? he said. 

I replied; when a carpenter is ill he asks the physician for 
a rough and ready remedy; an emetic or a purge or cautery or 
the knife, — these are his remedies. And if any one tells him that 
he must go through a course of dietetics, and swathe and swaddle 
his head, and all that sort of thing, he replies at once that he 
has no time to be ill, and that he sees no good in a life which 
is spent in nursing his disease to the neglect of his ordinary 
calling ; and therefore saying good-bye to this sort of physician, 
he resumes his customary diet, and either gets well and lives and 
does his business, or, if his constitution fails, he dies and has 
done with it. 

Yes, he said, and a man in his condition of life ought to use 
this summary art of medicine. 

407 Has he not, I said, an occupation; and what profit would there 
be in his life if he were deprived of his occupation ? 

Very true, he said. 

234 

THE REPUBLIC. 

But the rich man, as we say, is a gentleman who lias no work 
which he ought to do or die ? 

He is generally supposed to have nothing to do. 

Then you never heard of the saying of Piiocylides, that as soon 
as a man has a livelihood he should practise virtue ? 

Nay, he said, I think that he need not wait for that. 

I don’t want to raise that question, I replied; I want rather to 
know whether the practice of virtue is obligatory on the rich, 
and ought to be a necessity of life to him; and, if so, whether 
this dieting of disorders, which is an impediment to the appli- 
cation of the mind in carpentering and the mechanical arts, does 
not equally stand in the way of the maxim of Phocylides ? 

Of that, he replied, there can be no doubt ; such excessive care 
of the body, when carried beyond the rules of gymnastic, is most 
inimical to the practice of virtue, and equally incompatible with 
the management of a house, an army, or an office of state. 

Yes, and even more incompatible, I replied, with any kind of 
study or thought or self-reflection ; and this is the worst part of 
the affair — there is apt to be a suspicion that a headache or 
swimming has arisen from this cause, and hence a complete stop 
is put to any such higher cultivation30 or essay of virtue; for a 
man is always fancying that he is ill, and has some bodily pain 
or other. 

Yes, likely enough. 

And may not this have been the reason why our politic 
Asclepius exhibited the power of his art only to persons who, being 
generally of healthy constitution and habits of life, had a definite 
ailment; such as these he cured by purgations and operations, 
and bade them live as usual, and in this consulted the interests 
of the State ; but bodies which disease had penetrated through and 
through he would not have attempted to cure by gradual processes 
of evacuation and infusion : he did not want to lengthen out 
useless lives, or to raise up puny offspring to an enfeebled sire; — 
if a man was not able to live in the ordinary way he had no 
business to cure him; this was all in the interest of the State. 

Then, he said, you regard Asclepius as a statesman. 

Clearly, I said ; and this is shown also by the example of his 
sons who, as you may observe, were heroes as well as physicians 408 

35 Reading <o(TT( oirt) Taxrrrj <i()(T )] uoKfirai k.t.X. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK III . 

235 

at the siege of Troy. I dare say that you remember how, when 
the arrow of Pandarus wounded Mcnelaus, they 

‘ Sucked the blood out of the wound, and sprinkled soothing remedies 37,’ 
but they never prescribed what the patient was afterwards to eat or 
drink in the case of Mcnelaus, any more than in the case of Eury- 
pylus ; the remedies, as they conceived, were enough to heal any 
man who was healthy and sound ; and even though he did chance 
to drink a sack posset, he might get well all the same. But they 
would have nothing to do with unhealthy and intemperate subjects, 
whose lives were of no use either to themselves or others ; the 
art of medicine was not designed for their good, and though they 
were as rich as Midas, the sons of Asclepius would have declined 
to attend them. 

There was much good sense, he said, in those sons of Asclepius. 

Why, yes, I replied ; and you would expect to find that in them. 
Nevertheless, the tragedians and Pindar, in violation of our 
principles, although they say that Asclepius was the son of 
Apollo, say also that he was bribed into healing a rich man who 
was at the point of death, and this was the reason why he was 
struck by lightning. But we, in accordance with our previously- 
declared rule, will not believe both; — if he was the son of a 
god, we maintain that he was not avaricious; or, if he was 
avaricious, he was not the son of a god. 

All that, Socrates, he said, is excellent ; but I should like to put 
a question to you. Ought there not to be good physicians in a 
State, and are not the best those who have the greatest experience 
of constitutions good and bad, just as good judges are those who 
are acquainted with all sorts of moral natures ? 

Yes, I said, I quite agree about the necessity of having good 
judges and good physicians. But do you know whom I think good ? 

Will you inform me ? 

Yes, if I can. Let me however note that in the same question 
you join two things which are not the same. 

How is that ? he said. 

Why, I said, you join physicians and judges. Now skilful 
physicians are those who, besides knowing their art, have from 
their youth upwards had the greatest experience of disease ; they 
had better not be in robust health, and should have had all manner 

37 Iliad, iv. 218. 

236 

THE REPUBLIC . 

of diseases in their own persons. For the body, as I conceive, is 
not the instrument with which they cure the body; in that case 
we would not allow them ever to be sickly; but they cure the 
body with the mind, and the mind which is or has become sick 
can cure nothing. 

That is very true, he said. 

But with the judge the case is different ; he governs mind by 4°9 
mind, and he cannot be allowed therefore to have been reared 
among vicious minds, and to have associated with them from 
youth upwards, in order that, having gone through the whole 
calendar of crime, he may infer the crimes of others like their 
diseases from the knowledge of himself; but the honourable mind 
which is to form a healthy judgment ought rather to have had no 
experience or contamination of evil habits when young. And 
this is the reason why in youth good men often appear to be 
simple, and are easily practised upon by the evil, because they 
have no samples of evil in their own souls. 

Yes, he said, that very often happens with them. 

Therefore, I said, the judge should not be young; he should 
have learned to know evil, not from his own soul, but from late 
and long observation of the nature of evil in others : knowledge, 
and not his own experience, should be his guide. 

Yes, he said, that is the ideal of a judge. 

Yes, I replied, and he will be good too (and this answers your 
question) ; for he is good whose soul is good ; now your cunning 
and suspicious character, who has committed many crimes, when 
he is among men who are like himself, is wonderful in his pre- 
cautions against others, because he judges of them by himself: 
but when he gets into the company of men of virtue, who have 
the experience of age, he appears to be a fool again, owing to his 
unseasonable suspicion : he cannot recognize an honest man, 
because he has nothing in himself at all parallel to judge from ; at 
the same time, as the bad are more numerous than the good, and 
he meets with them oftener, he thinks himself, and others think 
him, rather wise than foolish. 

Most true, he said. 

Then the good and wise judge whom we are seeking is not this 
man ; the other is better suited to us ; for vice cannot know virtue, 
but a virtuous nature, educated by time, will acquire a knowledge 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK III. 

237 

both of virtue and vice : the virtuous, and not the vicious man 
has wisdom ; that is my view. 

And mine also. 

This is the sort of medicine, and this is the sort of law, which 
you will sanction. They will be healing arts to better natures in 
o their souls and in their bodies ; but the worse nature or constitu- 
tion they will in the case of the body leave to die, and the diseased 
and incurable soul they will put to death themselves. 

That is clearly best for them and for the State. 

And thus our youth, having been educated only in that simple 
music which infuses temperance, will be reluctant to go to law. 

That is evident. 

And in the same way simple gymnastic will incline him to 
have as little as possible to do with medicine. 

That I quite believe. 

The very exercises and toils he will undertake in order to 
stimulate the spirited element of his nature, rather than with a 
view of increasing his strength ; he will not, like common 
athletes, use exercise and regimen to develope his muscles. 

Very right, he said. 

Neither are the two arts of music and gymnastic really de- 
signed, the one for the training of the soul, the other for the 
training of the body. 

But what is the real object ? 

I believe, I said, that the teachers of both have in view chiefly 
the improvement of the soul. 

How is that ? he asked. 

Did you never observe, I said, the effect on the mind of exclu- 
sive devotion to gymnastic, or the opposite effect of an exclusive 
devotion to music ? 

In what is that shown ? he said. 

In producing a temper of hardness and ferocity, or again of 
softness and effeminacy, I replied. 

Yes, he said, I am quite aware that your mere athlete becomes 
too much of a savage, and that the musician is melted and 
softened beyond what is good for him. 

Moreover, I said, that fierce quality gives spirit, and, if educated 
rightly, will be valiant, but, if overstrained, is likely to become 
hard and brutal. 

238 

THE REPUBLIC. 

That I quite think. 

The philosopher is the type of the gentler character. This, if 
too much relaxed, will turn to softness, but, if educated, will be 
gentle and modest. 

True. 

And our view is that the guardians ought to have both these 
qualities ? 

They ought. 

They should be harmonized ? 

Beyond question. 

And the harmonious soul is both temperate and valiant? 41 1 

Yes. 

And the inharmonious is cowardly and boorish ? 

Very true. 

And, when a man allows music to play and pour over his soul 
through his ears, which are the funnel, those sweet and soft and 
melancholy airs of which we were just now speaking, and his 
whole life is passed in warbling and the delights of song; in the 
first stage of the process the passion or spirit which is in him is 
tempered like iron, and made useful, instead of brittle and useless. 

But, if he carries on the softening process, in the next stage he 
begins to melt and consume, until the passion of his soul is 
melted out of him, and what may be called the nerves of his soul 
are cut away, and he makes but a feeble warrior. 

Very true. 

If the element of spirit is naturally weak in him this is soon 
accomplished, but if he have a good deal, then the power of 
music weakening the spirit renders him excitable; — he soon 
flames up, and is speedily extinguished; instead of having spirit 
he becomes irritable and violent and very discontented. 

Exactly. 

Thus in gymnastics also, if a man works hard and is a great 
feeder, and the reverse of a great student of music and philosophy, 
at first the high condition of his body fills him with pride and 
spirit, until he is twice the man that he was. 

Certainly. 

But if he.do nothing else, and never cultivates the Muses, even 
that intelligence which there may be in him, having no taste of 
any sort of learning or enquiry or thought or music, becomes 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK III. 

239 

feeble and dull and blind, because never roused or sustained, and 
because the senses are not purged of their mists. 

True, he said. 

And he ends by becoming a hater of philosophy, uncultivated, 
never using the weapon of persuasion, — he is like a wild beast, all 
violence and fierceness, and knows no other way of dealing; and 
he lives in all ignorance and evil conditions, and has no sense of 
propriety and grace. 

That is quite true, he said. 

And as there are two principles of human nature, one the spirited 
and the other the philosophical, my belief is that God has given 
mankind two arts answering to them (and only indirectly to the 
soul and body), in order that these two principles may be duly 
412 attuned and harmonized with one another. 

That I am disposed to believe. 

And he who mingles music with gymnastic in the fairest pro- 
portions, and best attempers them to the soul, may be called the 
true musician and harmonist in a far higher sense than the tuner 
of the strings. 

I dare say, Socrates. 

And such a presiding genius will be always required in our 
State if the government is to last. 

Yes, he will be absolutely necessary. 

Such, then, are our principles of nurture and education. There 
would be no use in going into further details about their dances, 
their hunting or chasing with dogs, their gymnastic and equestrian 
contests; for these all follow the general principle, and there will 
be no longer any difficulty in discovering them. 

I dare say that there will be no difficulty. 

, Very well, I said; and what is the next question? Must we 
not ask who are to be rulers and who subjects ? 

Certainly. 

There can be no doubt that the elder sort must rule the younger. 

Clearly. 

And that the best of the elder sort must rule. 

That is also clear. 

Now, are not the best husbandmen those who arc most devoted 
to husbandry ? 

Yes. 

Digitized by Google 

240 

THE REPUBLIC. 

And as we must have the best guardians for our city, must they 
not be those who have most the character of guardians ? 

Yes. 

And to this end they ought to be wise and efficient, and to have 
a special interest about the State ? 

True. 

And a man will be most likely to care about that which he 
happens to love ? 

That may be truly inferred. 

And he will be most likely to love that which he regards as 
having the same interests with himself, and anything the good or 
evil fortune of which he imagines to involve as a result his own 
good or evil fortune, and to be proportionably careless when he is 
less concerned ? 

Very true, he replied. 

Then there must be a selection. Let us note among the guar- 
dians those who in their whole life show the greatest desire to do 
what is for the good of their country, and will not do what is 
against her interests. 

Those are the right men. 

They will have to be watched at every turn of their lives, in 
order that we may see whether they preserve this resolution, and 
never, under the influence either of force or enchantment, forget 
or let go their duty to the State. 

I do not understand, he said, the meaning of the latter words. 

I will explain them to you, I replied. A resolution may go out 
of a man’s mind either with his will or against his will ; with his 
will when he gets rid of a falsehood, against his will whenever he 4*3 
is deprived of a truth. 

I understand, he said, the willing loss of a resolution; th^ 
meaning of the unwilling I have yet to learn. 

Why, I said, do you not see that men are unwillingly deprived 
of good, and willingly of evil ? Is not to have lost the truth an 
evil, and to have the truth a good ? and you would allow that to 
conceive things as they are is to have the truth ? 

Yes, he replied ; I agree with you in thinking that mankind are 
deprived of truth against their will. 

And do they not experience this involuntary effect owing either 
to theft, or force, or enchantment ? 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK III. 

241 

Still, he replied, I do not understand you. 

I fear that I must have been talking darkly, like the tragedians. 
All that I mean is that some men change and others forget ; 
persuasion steals away the hearts of the one class, and time of the 
other ; and this I call theft. Now you understand me ? 

Yes. 

Those again who are forced, are those whom the violence of 
some pain or grief compels to change their opinion. 

That, he said, I understand, and you are quite right. 

And you would also acknowledge with me that those are en- 
chanted who change their minds either under the softer influence 
of pleasure, or the sterner influence of fear ? 

Yes, he said; everything that deceives may be said to enchant. 

Therefore, as I was just now saying, we must enquire who are 
the best guardians of their own conviction that the interest of the 
State is to be the rule of all their actions. We must watch them 
from their youth upwards, and propose deeds for them to perform 
in which they are most likely to forget or to be deceived, and he 
who remembers and is not deceived is to be selected, and he who 
fails in the trial is to be rejected. That will be the way. 

Yes. 

And there should also be toils and pains and conflicts prescribed 
for them, in which they will give further proof of the same 
qualities. 

Very right, he replied. 

And then, I said, we must try them with enchantments — that is 
the third sort of test — and see what will be their behaviour: like 
those who take colts amid noises and cries to see if they are of a 
timid nature, so must we take our youth amid terrors of some kind, 
and again pass them into pleasures, and try them more thoroughly 
than gold is tried in the fire, in order to discover whether they 
are armed against all enchantments, and of a noble bearing 
always, good guardians of themselves and of the music which they 
have learned, and retain under all circumstances a rhythmical 
and harmonious nature, such as will be most serviceable to the 
man himself and to the State. And he who at every age, as boy 
and youth and in mature life, has come out of the trial victorious 
414 and pure, shall be appointed a ruler and guardian of the State; he 
shall be honoured in life and death, and shall receive sepulture and 

VOL. 11. R 

242 

THE REPUBLIC. 

other memorials of honour, the greatest that we have to give. And 
as he is chosen his opposite is rejected. I am inclined to think 
that this is the sort of way in which our rulers and guardians 
should be chosen. I speak generally, and not with any pretension 
to exactness. 

And, speaking generally, I agree with you, he said. 

And perhaps the word c guardian" in the fullest sense ought to 
be applied to this class only who are our warriors abroad and our 
peacemakers at home, and who save us from those who might 
have the will or the power to injure us. The young men whom 
we before called guardians may be more properly designated 
auxiliaries and allies of the principles of the rulers. 

In that I agree with you, he said. 

How then may we devise one of those falsehoods in the hour 
of need, I said, which we lately spoke of — just one royal lie which 
may deceive the rulers, if that be possible, and at any rate the 
rest of the city ? 

What sort of lie ? he said. 

Nothing new, I replied ; only an old Phoenician tale of what 
has often occurred before now in other places, (as the poets say, 
and have made the world believe,) though not in our time, and 
which is indeed not very likely to occur again, and still more 
unlikely to be believed. 

Your words, he said, seem to hesitate on your lips. 

You will not wonder, I replied, at my hesitation when you have 
heard. 

Speak, he said, and fear not. 

Well then, I will speak, although I really know not how to look 
you in the face, or in what words to utter the audacious fiction, 
which I propose to communicate gradually, first to the rulers, then 
to the soldiers, and lastly to the people. They are to be informed 
that their youth was a dream, and the education and training 
which they received from us an appearance only; in reality during 
all that time they were in process of formation and nourishment 
in the womb of the earth, where they themselves and their arms 
and appurtenances were manufactured; and when they were com- 
pleted, the earth, their mother, sent them up ; and, their country 
being their mother and also their nurse, they are therefore bound 
to advise for her good, and to defend her against attacks, and 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK III. 

243 

her citizens they are to regard as children of the earth and their 
own brothers. 

I cannot wonder, he said, at your feeling ashamed of uttering 
the lie. 

5 Nay, I replied, there is more yet; I have not told you all. 
Citizens, we shall say to them in our tale, you are brothers, 
yet God has framed you differently. Some of you have the power 
of command, and these he has composed of gold, wherefore also 
they have the greatest honour ; others of silver, to be auxiliaries ; 
others again who are to be husbandmen and craftsmen he has 
made of brass and iron ; and the species will generally be pre- 
served in the children. But as you are of the same original family, 
a golden parent will sometimes have a silver son, or a silver 
parent a golden son. And God proclaims to the rulers, as a first 
principle, that before all they should watch over their offspring, 
and see what elements mingle in their nature ; for if the son of 
a golden or silver parent has an admixture of brass and iron, then 
nature orders a transposition of ranks, and the eye of the ruler 
must not be pitiful towards his child because he has to descend 
in the scale and become a husbandman or artisan, just as there 
may be others sprung from the artisan class who are raised to 
honour, and become guardians and auxiliaries. For an oracle says 
that when a man of brass or iron guards the State, it will then 
be destroyed. Such is the tale ; is there any possibility of making 
our citizens believe in it ? 

Not in the present generation, he replied; I do not see any 
way of accomplishing this; but their sons may be made to believe, 
and their sons* sons, and posterity after them. 

I see the difficulty, I replied ; yet even this amount of belief may 
make them care more for the city and for one another. Enough, 
however, of the fiction, which may now be borne on the wings 
of rumour, while we arm our earth-born heroes, and lead them 
forth under the command of their rulers. Let them look around 
and select a spot whence they can best prevent insurrection, 
if any prove refractory within, and also defend themselves against 
enemies, who like wolves may come down on the fold from 
without ; there let them encamp, and when they have encamped, 
let them sacrifice and prepare their dwellings. 

And what sort of dwellings are they to have ? 

244 

THE REPUBLIC . 

Dwellings that will shield them against the cold of winter and 
the heat of summer. 

I suppose that you mean houses, he replied. 

Yes, I said; but they must be the houses of soldiers, and not 
of shop-keepers. 

What is the difference ? he said. 

That I will endeavour to explain, I replied. To keep watch- 41 
dogs, who, from want of discipline or hunger, or some evil habit 
or other, would turn upon the sheep and worry them, and behave 
not like dogs but wolves, would be a foul and monstrous thing ? 

Truly monstrous, he said. 

And, therefore, every care must be taken lest our auxiliaries, as 
they are stronger than our citizens, should prevail over them, and 
become savage tyrants instead of gentle allies to them ? 

Yes, care should be taken. 

And would not education be the best preparation and safeguard 
of them? 

But they are well-educated, he replied ; that is a safeguard which 
they already have. 

I cannot be so confident of that, my dear Glaucon, I said ; 

1 am much more certain that they ought to be, and that true 
education, whatever that may be, will greatly tend to civilize and 
humanize them in their relations to one another, and to those 
who are under their protection. 

True, he replied. 

And not only their education, but their habitations, and also 
their means of subsistence, should be such as will neither impair 
their virtue as guardians, nor tempt them to prey upon the other 
citizens. Any man of sense will say that. 

He will. 

Such is our conception of them ; and now let us consider what 
way of life will correspond with this conception. In the first 
place, none of them should have any property beyond what is 
absolutely necessary ; neither should they have a private house 
with bars and bolts closed against any one who has a mind to 
enter; their provisions should be only such as are required by 
trained warriors, who are men of temperance and courage; their 
agreement is to receive from the citizens a fixed rate of pay, 
enough to meet the expenses of the year and no more, and they 

BOOK III. 

240 

will have common meals and live together, like soldiers in a 
camp. Gold and silver we will tell them that they have from God ; 
the diviner metal is within them, and they have therefore no 
need of that earthly dross which passes under the name of gold, 
and ought not to pollute the divine by earthly admixture, for that 
4 11 commoner metal has been the source of many unholy deeds; but 
their own is undefiled. And they alone of all the citizens may 
not touch or handle silver or gold, or be under the same roof with 
them, or wear them, or drink from them. And this will be their 
salvation, and the salvation of the State. But should they ever 
acquire homes or lands or moneys of their own, they will become 
housekeepers and husbandmen instead of guardians, enemies and 
tyrants instead of allies of the other citizens; hating and being 
hated, plotting and being plotted against, they will pass through 
life in much greater terror of internal than of external enemies, 
and the hour of ruin, both to themselves and to the rest of the 
State, will be at hand. For all which reasons may we not say that 
these are to be the regulations of our guardians respecting houses 
and all other things, and that such shall be our laws ? 

Yes, said Glaucon. 

BOOK IV. 

Here Adcimantus interposed a question. He said : How would 
you answer, Socrates, if a person were to say that you make your 
citizens miserable, and all by their own doing; for they are the 
actual owners of the city, and yet they reap no advantage from 
this; whereas other men acquire lands, and build large and 
handsome houses, and have everything handsome about them; 
offering sacrifices to the gods on their own account, and practising 
hospitality; and also, as you were saying only just now, they 
have gold and silver, and all that is usual among the favourites of 
fortune, while our poor citizens are no better than mercenaries 
who are fixed in the city and do nothing but mount guard? 

Yes, I said; and you may add that they are only fed, and not 420 
paid, in addition to their food, like other men; and therefore 
they cannot make a journey of pleasure, they have no money to 
spend on a mistress or any other luxurious fancy, which, as the 
world goes, is thought to be happiness ; and many other accu- 
sations of the same nature might be added. 

But, said he, let us suppose all that included in the charge. 

You mean to ask, I said, what is to be our answer? 

Yes, he replied. 

If we proceed along the path which we are already going, I said, 
my belief is that we shall find the answer. Even if our guardians 
were such as you describe, there would not be anything wonderful 
in their still being the happiest of men ; but let that pass, for 
our object in the construction of the State is the greatest happiness 
of the whole, and not that of any one class ; and in a State which 
is ordered with a view to the good of the whole, we think that we 
are most likely to find justice, and in the ill-ordered State injustice : 
and, having found them, we shall then be able to decide which of 
the two is the happier. At present we are constructing the happy 
State, not piecemeal, or with a view of making a few happy 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IV. 

247 

citizens, but as a whole ; and by-and-bye we will proceed to 
view the opposite kind of State. If we were painting a statue, 
and some one were to come and blame us for not putting the 
mast beautiful colours on the most beautiful parts of the body — 
for the eyes, he would say, ought to be purple, but they are black 
— in that case we should seem to excuse ourselves fairly enough 
by saying to him, c Pray, Sir, do not have the strange notion that 
we ought to beautify the eyes to such a degree that they are no 
longer eyes; but see whether, by giving this and the other features 
their due, we make the whole beautiful. And, I say again, in 
like manner do not compel us to assign to the guardians a sort of 
happiness which will make them anything but guardians; for we 
also should have no difficulty in clothing our husbandmen in fine 
linen, and setting crowns of gold on their heads, bidding them 
till the ground no more than they like. Neither is ignorance the 
reason why we do not allow our potters to repose on couches, and 
feast by the fireside, passing round the glittering bowl, while their 
wheel is conveniently at hand, and working at pottery as much 
as they like, and no more; or, why we do not make every class 
happy in this way— and then, as you imagine, the whole State 
would be happy. But do not suggest this; for, if we listen to 
421 you, the husbandman will be no longer a husbandman, the potter 
will cease to be a potter, and nobody will have any distinct 
character. Now this is not of much importance where the cor- 
ruption of society, and pretension to be what you are not extends 
only to cobblers ; but when the guardians of the laws and of the 
government are only seemers and not real guardians, that, as 
you will observe, is the utter ruin of the State: for they alone 
are the authors of happiness and order in a State. If we are 
right in depicting our guardians as the saviours and not the 
destroyers of the State, and the author of the other picture is 
representing peasants at a festival, happy in a life of revelry, 
rather than fulfilling the duties of citizens, we mean different 
things, and he is speaking of something which is not a State. 
And therefore we must consider whether we appoint our guardians 
with a view to their greatest happiness, or whether this principle 
of happiness does not rather reside in the State as a whole ; but 
if so, the guardians and auxiliaries, and all others equally with 
them, must be compelled or induced to do their own work in the 

248 

THE REPUBLIC . 

best way ; and then the whole State growing up in a noble order, 
the several classes will only have to receive the proportion of 
happiness which nature assigns to them. 

1 think that you are quite right. 

I wonder whether you will agree with another remark which 
occurs to me. 

What may that be ? 

There seem to be two causes of the deterioration of the arts. 

What are they ? 

Wealth, I said, and poverty. 

How do they act ? 

The process is as follows. When a potter becomes rich he no 
longer takes the same pains with his art ? 

Certainly not. 

He grows more and more indolent and careless ? 

Very true. 

And the result is that he becomes a worse potter ? 

Yes ; he greatly deteriorates. 

But, on the other hand, if he has no money, and is unable to 
buy tools or instruments, he will not work equally well himself, 
nor will he teach his sons or apprentices to work equally well. 

Certainly not. 

Then workmen and also their works are apt to degenerate 
under the influence both of poverty and of wealth ? 

That is evident. 

Here, then, is a discovery of new evils, I said, which the guar- 
dians will have to watch, or they will creep into the city un- 
observed. 

What evils ? 

Wealth, I said, and poverty; for the one is the parent of luxury 42 
and indolence, and the other of meanness and viciousness, and 
both of discontent. 

That is very true, he replied ; but still I should like to know, 
Socrates, how our city will be able to go to war, especially 
against an enemy who is rich and powerful, if deprived of the 
sinews of war. 

There may possibly be a difficulty, I replied, in going to war 
with one such enemy ; but there is no difficulty where there are 
two of them. 

BOOK IV. 

249 

How is that ? he asked. 

In the first place, I said, our side will be trained warriors 
fighting against a number of wealthy individuals. 

That is true, he said. 

And do you not suppose, Adeimantus, that a single boxer who 
was perfect in his art would easily be a match for two stout 
and well-to-do gentlemen who were not boxers ? 

Hardly, if they came upon him at once. 

What, not, I said, if he were able to run away and then turn 
and strike at the one who first came up ? And supposing he were 
to do this several times under the heat of a scorching sun, do 
not you think that he might overturn more than one stout 
personage ? 

Certainly, he said, there would be nothing wonderful in that. 

And yet rich men are probably not so inferior to others in 
boxing as they are in military qualities. 

That is very likely. 

Then probably our athletes will be able to fight with three or 
four times their own number? 

I believe that you are right, he said. 

And suppose that, before engaging, our citizens send an embassy 
to one of the two cities, telling them the truth : Silver and gold we 
neither have nor are permitted to have ; in that we are not like 
you; do you therefore come and help us in war, and take the 
spoils of the other city. Who, on hearing these words, would 
choose to fight the lean wiry dogs, rather than, with the dogs on 
their side, to fight fat and tender sheep? 

Very true; but still there might be a danger to the poor State 
if the wealth of many States were to coalesce in one. 

States ! I said ; why, what simplicity is this, that you should use 
the term c state * of any but our own State ! Other States may indeed 
be spoken of more grandiloquently in the plural number, for they 
are many in one — a game of cities at which men play. Any 
ordinary city, however small, is in fact two cities, one the city of 
the poor, the other of the rich, at war with one another; and in 
423 either division there are many smaller ones, and you would make 
a great mistake if you treated them as single States ; but if you 
deal with them as many, and give the money or means or persons 
of the one to the others, you will always have a great many 

Digitized by Google 

250 

THE REPUBLIC. 

friends, and not many enemies. And your State, while the wise 
order which has now been prescribed continues to prevail in her, 
will be the greatest of States, not in reputation or appearance only, 
but in deed and truth, though she number not more than a thou- 
sand defenders. A State which is her equal you will hardly find, 
either among Hellenes or barbarians, though many that appear to 
be as great and many times greater. 

That is most true, he said. 

And this, I said, will be the best limit for our rulers to fix when 
they are considering the size of the State and the amount of terri- 
tory which they are to include, and beyond which they will not go. 

What limit ? 

I think, I said, that the State may increase to any size which is 
consistent with unity ; that is the limit. 

Yes, he said ; that is excellent. 

Here then, I said, is another order which will have to be con- 
veyed to our guardians, — that our city is to be neither large nor 
small, but of such a size as is consistent with unity. 

And surely, said he, this is not a very severe order which we 
impose upon them. 

And this, said I, is lighter still of which we were speaking 
before, — I mean the duty of degrading the offspring of the guar- 
dians when inferior, and of elevating the offspring of the lower 
classes, when naturally superior, into the rank of guardians. The 
intention was, that, in the case of the citizens generally, we should 
put each individual man to that use for which nature designed 
him, and then every man would do his own business, and be one 
and not many, and the whole city would be one and not many. 

Yes, he said ; there will be even less difficulty in that. 

These things, my good Adeimantus, are not, as might be sup- 
posed, a number of great principles,, but trifling all of them, if 
care be taken, as the saying is, of the one great thing, — a thing, 
however, which I would rather call not great, but enough for our 
purpose. 

What may that be ? he asked. 

Education, I said, and nurture. For if they are well educated, 
and grow into sensible men, they will easily see their way through 
all this as well as other matters which I do not mention ; such, for 
example, as the possession of women and marriage and the pro- 

BOOK IV. 

2=11 

424 creation of children, which will all follow the general principle 
that friends have all things in common, as the proverb says. 

That will be excellent, he replied. 

Also, I said, the State, if once started well, goes on with accu- 
mulating force like a wheel. For good nurture and education 
implant good constitutions, and these good constitutions having 
their roots in a good education improve more and more, and this 
improvement affects the breed in man as in other animals. 

True, he said. 

Then to sum up. This is the point to which, above all, the 
attention of our rulers should be directed, — that music and gym- 
nastic be preserved in their original form, and no innovation 
made. They must do all they can to maintain this. And when 
any one says that mankind most regard 

‘The song which is the newest that the singers have1,’ 

they will be afraid that he may be praising, not new songs, but a 
new kind of song ; and this ought not to be praised, nor is this 
to be regarded as the meaning of the poet ; for any musical in- 
novation is full of danger to the State, and ought to be prevented. 
This is what Damon tells me, and I can quite believe him- — he 
says that when modes of music change, the fundamental laws of 
the State always change with them. 

Yes, said Adeimantus; and you may add my suffrage to Da- 
mon’s and your own. 

Then, I said, our guardians must lay the foundations of the 
fortress in music ? 

Yes, he said; and licence easily creeps in; there can be no 
doubt of that. 

Yes, I replied, in a kind of play, and at first sight appears 
harmless. 

Why, he said, and there is no harm; but the evil is, that 
little by little this spirit of licence, finding a home, penetrates 
into manners and customs; thence, issuing with greater force, 
invades agreements between man and man, and from agreements 
proceeds to laws and constitutions, in utter recklessness, and ends 
by an overthrow of things in general, private as well as public. 

Is all that true? I said. 

1 Od. i. 351. 

Digitized by Google 

252 

THE REPUBLIC . 

That is my belief, he replied. 

Then, as I was saying, our youth should be educated in a stricter 
rule from the first, for if education becomes lawless, and the youths 
themselves become lawless, they can never grow up into well- 425 
conducted and virtuous citizens. 

Very true, he said. 

And the education must begin with their plays. The spirit of 
law must be imparted to them in music, and the spirit of order, 
instead of disorder, will attend them in all their actions, and 
make them grow, and if there be any part of the State which has 
fallen down, will raise that up again. 

Very true, he said. 

Thus educated, they will have no difficulty in rediscovering any 
lesser matters which have been neglected by their predecessors. 

What do you mean ? 

I mean such things as these : — when the young are to be silent 
before their elders ; how they are to show respect to them by 
sitting down and rising up; what honour is due to parents; what 
garments or shoes are to be worn ; what mode of wearing the 
hair is to be the pattern; and the fashions of the body, and 
manners in general. You would agree with me in that ? 

• Yes. 

You think, as I am disposed to think, that there would be small 
. wisdom in legislating about them ; for that is never done, nor are 
any precise verbal enactments about them likely to be lasting. 

Impossible. 

We may assume, Adeimantus, that the direction in which edu- 
cation starts a man will determine his future life. Does not like 
always invite like ? 

No question. 

Ending, as you may say, at last in some one rare and grand 
result, which may be good, and may be the reverse of good. 

That is not to be denied, he answered. 

And for this reason, I said, I shall not attempt further to 
legislate about them. 

Naturally enough, he replied. 

Well, I said, and about the business of the agora, or about bar- 
gains and contracts with artisans ; about insult and injury, or the 
order in which causes are to be tried, and how judges are to 

BOOK IV. 

253 

be appointed; there may also be questions about impositions and 
exactions of market and harbour dues, and in general touching 
the administration of markets or towns or harbours and the like. 
But, oh heavens ! shall we condescend to legislate on any of these 
particulars ? 

I think, he said, that there is no need to impose them by law 
on good men; most of the necessary regulations they will find 
out soon enough for themselves. 

Yes, I said, my friend, if God will only guard the laws that we 
have given them. 

And without divine help, said Adeimantus, they will go on for 
ever making and mending their laws and their lives in the hope of 
attaining perfection. 

You would compare them, I said, to those invalids who, having 
no self-restraint, will not leave off their habits of intemperance ? 

Exactly. 

Yes, I said ; and how charming those people are 1 they are always 
doctoring and increasing and complicating their disorders, fancy- 
ing they will be cured by some nostrum which somebody advises 
them to try, — never getting better, but rather growing worse. 

426 That is often the case, he said, with invalids such as you 
describe. 

Yes, I replied ; they have a charming way of going on, and the 
charming thing is that they deem him their worst enemy who tells 
them the truth, which is simply that, unless they give up eating 
and drinking and lusting and sleeping, neither drug nor cautery 
nor spell nor amulet nor anything will be of any avail. 

Charming! he replied. I see nothing charming in going into 
a passion with a man who tells you what is good. 

These gentlemen, I said, do not seem to be in your good graces ? 

No, indeed. 

Nor would a State which acts like them stand high in your esti- 
mation. And are not ill-governed States like them, which begin by 
proclaiming to their citizens that no one, under penalty of death, 
shall alter the constitution of the State, while he who conforms to 
their politics and most sweetly serves them, who indulges them 
and fawns upon them and has a presentiment of their wishes, and is 
skilful in gratifying them, he is esteemed as their good man, and 
the wise and mighty one who is to be held in honour by them ? 

254 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Yes, he said; the States are as bad as the men ; and I am far 
from approving them. 

But do you not admire, I said, the coolness and dexterity of 
these ready ministers of political corruption ? 

Yes, he said, that I do; but not of all of them, for there are 
some whom the applause of the multitude has deluded into the 
belief that they are really statesmen, and they are not much to be 
admired. 

What do you mean ? I said ; you should have more feeling for 
them. When a man cannot measure, and a great many others 
who cannot measure declare that he is four cubits high, can 
he help believing them? 

He cannot. 

Well, then, do not be angry with them ; for are they not as good 
as a play, trying their hand at legislation, and always fancying 
that by reforming they will make an end of the dishonesties and 
rascalities of mankind, not knowing that they are in reality 
cutting away the heads of a hydra ? 

Yes, he said ; that is a very just description of them. 427 

I conceive, I said, that the true legislator will not trouble 
himself with enactments of this sort in an ill-ordered any more 
than in a well-ordered State; for in the former they are useless, 
and in the latter there will be no difficulty in inventing them, and 
many of them will naturally flow out of our institutions. 

What, then, he said, is still remaining to us of the work of 
legislation ? 

Nothing to us, I replied ; but to Apollo, the god of Delphi, there 
remains the ordering of the greatest and noblest and chiefcst of all. 

What is that ? he said. 

The institution of temples and sacrifices, and in general the 
service of gods, demigods, and heroes ; also the ordering of the 
repositories of the dead, and the rites which have to be observed 
in order to propitiate the inhabitants of the world below. For 
these are matters of which we are ignorant, and as founders of a 
city we should be unwise in trusting to any interpreter but our 
ancestral deity. He is the god who sits in the centre, on the 
navel of the earth, and interprets them to all mankind. 

You are right, he said; we will do as you propose. 

But where, amid all this, is justice ? Son of Ariston, tell me 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IV. 

255 

where. Now that our city has been made habitable, light a 
candle and search, and get your brother and Polemarchus, and the 
rest of our friends, to help, and let us see whether we can discover 
the place of justice and injustice, and discern the difference 
between them, and find out which of them the man who would 
be happy should have as his portion, whether perceived or un- 
perceived by gods and men. 

Nonsense, said Glaucon ; did you not promise to search your- 
self, saying that to desert justice in her need would be an impiety ? 

Very true, I said j and as you remind me, I will be as good as 
my word j but you must join. 

That we will, he replied. 

Well, then, I hope to make the discovery in this way. I mean 
to proceed by a method of residues, beginning with the assump- 
tion that our State, if rightly ordered, is perfect. 

That is most certain. 

And being perfect, our State is wise and valiant and tem- 
perate and just. 

That is also clear. 

And of whatever is known, that which is unknown will be the 
residue j this is the next step. 

428 Very good. 

Suppose the number of terms to be four, and we were searching 
for one of them, that one might be known to us at first, and there 
would be no further trouble ; or, if we knew the other three first, 
and could eliminate them, then the fourth would clearly be the 
remainder. 

Very true, he said. 

And is not this the method to be pursued about the virtues, 
which are also four in number? 

Clearly. 

First among the virtues found in the State wisdom comes into 
view, and in this I detect a certain peculiarity. 

What is that? 

The State that we have been describing is said to be wise as 
being good in counsel : that is true ? 

Yes. 

And good counsel is clearly a kind of knowledge, for not by 
ignorance, but by knowledge, do men counsel well ? 

256 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Clearly. 

And the kinds of knowledge in a State are many and diverse ? 

Of course. 

There is the knowledge of the carpenter ; but is that the sort of 
knowledge which gives a city the title of wise and good in 
counsel ? 

Certainly not; that would only give a city the reputation of 
skill in carpentering. 

Then a city is not to be called wise because possessed of know- 
ledge which counsels for the best about wooden implements ? 

Certainly not. 

Nor by reason of a knowledge which advises about brazen 
implements, he said, nor as possessing any other similar know- 
ledge ? 

Not by reason of any of them, he said. 

Nor by reason of agricultural knowledge; that would give the 
city the name of agricultural ? 

Yes, that is what I should suppose. 

Well, I said, and is there any knowledge in our recently- 
founded State among any of the citizens which advises, not about 
any particular thing in the State, but about the whole State, and 
considers what may be regarded as the best policy, both internal 
and external? 

There certainly is. 

And what is this knowledge, and among whom found ? I asked. 

This is the knowledge of the guardians, he replied, and is found 
among those whom we were just now describing as perfect 
guardians. 

And is there any name which the city derives from the posses- 
sion of this sort of knowledge ? 

The name of good in counsel and truly wise. 

And do you suppose that there will be as many of these true 
guardians as there are blacksmiths in a city? 

No, he replied ; the blacksmiths will be far more numerous. 

Will they not be the smallest of all the classes who receive a 
name from the profession of some kind of knowledge? 

Much the smallest. 

And by reason of this smallest part or class of a State, which is 
the governing and presiding class, and of the knowledge which 

BOOK IV. 

257 

resides in them, the whole State, being in the order of nature, will 
429 be called wise ; and Nature appears to have ordained that this, 
which has the only knowledge worthy to be called knowledge, 
should be the smallest of all classes. 

Most true, he said. 

Thus, then, I said, the nature and place in the State of one of 
the four virtues has somehow been discovered. 

I am sure, he said, that the discovery is to my mind quite 
satisfactory. 

Again, I said, there is no difficulty in seeing the nature of 
courage, and in what part that quality resides which gives the 
name of courageous to the State. 

How do you mean ? 

Why, I said, every one who calls any State courageous or 
cowardly, will be thinking of that part which fights and goes to 
battle on the State’s behalf. 

No one, he replied, would ever think of any other. 

The rest of the citizens may be courageous or may be cowardly, 
but that, as I conceive, will not have the effect of making the city 
either one or the other. 

Certainly not. 

The city will be courageous in virtue of a portion of the city 
in which there resides a never-failing quality preservative of the 
opinion which the legislator inculcated about the right sort of 
fear ; and this is what you term courage. 

I should like to hear what you are saying once more, for I do 
not think that I perfectly understand you. 

I mean, I said, that courage is a kind of preservation. 

What kind of preservation ? 

The preservation, I said, of the opinion about the nature and 
manner of dangers which the law implants through education ; and 
I mean by the word c never-failing,’ to intimate that in pleasure or 
in pain, or under the influence of desire or fear, a man preserves, 
and does not lose this opinion. Shall I give you an illustration of 
my meaning? 

If you will. 

You know, I said, that the dyers, when they want to dye wool 
for making the true sea-purple, begin by selecting their white 
colour first; this they prepare and dress with no slight circum- 

vol. 11. s 

Digitized by Google 

258 

THE REPUBLIC. 

stance, in order that the white ground may take the purple hue 
in full perfection. The dyeing then proceeds ; and whatever is 
dyed in this manner becomes a fast colour, and no washing with 
lyes or without lyes can take away the bloom of the colour. I 
dare say that you know how these, or indeed any colours, look 
when the ground has not been duly prepared ? 

Yes, he said; I know that they have a washed-out and ridi- 
culous appearance. 

Then now, I said, you will understand what our object was in 
selecting our soldiers, and educating them in music and gymnas- 43 
tic ; we were contriving influences which would prepare them to 
take the dye of the laws in perfection, and the colour of their 
opinions about dangers and every other opinion was to be inde- 
libly fixed by their nurture and training, and not to be washed 
away by any such potent lyes as pleasure — mightier agent far 
in washing the soul than any soda or lye; and sorrow, fear, 
and desire mightier solvents than any others. And this sort of 
universal preserving power of true opinion in conformity with 
law about real and false dangers, I call and maintain to be 
courage, unless you can suggest another view. 

But I have no other to suggest, and I suppose that you mean to 
exclude mere uninstructed courage, such as that of a wild beast 
or of a slave — this, in your judgment, is not courage in confor- 
mity with law, and ought to have another name. 

That is as you say. 

Then I may infer that this is courage ? 

Why, yes, said I, that you may infer, and if you add the word 
‘political,’ you will not be far wrong; — hereafter we may pursue 
that enquiry further, but at present we are seeking not for courage 
but justice, and with a view to this there is nothing more wanted. 

You are right, he replied. 

Two virtues remain to be discovered in the State — first, tem- 
perance, and then justice, which is the great object of our search. 

Very true. 

Now, can we find justice without troubling ourselves about 
temperance ? 

I do not know how that can be accomplished, he said, nor do I 
desire that justice should be brought to light, and temperance lost 
sight of; and therefore I wish you would do me the favour of 
considering temperance first. 

BOOK IV. 

259 

Certainly, I replied, I cannot be wrong in granting you a favour. 

Then do as I ask, he said. 

Yes, I replied, I will do as you ask, and next consider temper- 
ance ; this, as far as I can see at present, has more of the nature 
of symphony and harmony than the preceding. 

How is that ? he asked. 

Temperance, I replied, is, as I conceive, a sort of order and 
control of certain pleasures and desires; this is implied in the 
saying of a man being his own master ; and there are other traces 
of the same notion. 

No doubt, he said. 

There is something ridiculous in the expression c master of 
himself;* for the master is also the slave and the slave the master; 
and in all these modes of speaking the same person is predicated. 

Certainly. 

But the real meaning of the expression, I believe, is that the 
human soul has a better principle, and has also a worse principle ; 
and when the better principle controls the worse, then a man is 
said to be master of himself ; and this is certainly a term of praise : 
but when, owing to evil education or association, the better prin- 
ciple, which is less, is overcome by the worse principle, which is 
greater, this is censured ; and he who is in this case is called the 
slave of self and unprincipled. 

Yes, he said, there is reason in that. 

And now, I said, look at our newly-created State, and there you 
will find one of these two conditions realized; for the State, 
as you will acknowledge, may be justly called master of self, if 
the words temperance and self-mastery truly express the rule of 
the better over the worse. 

Yes, he said, I have looked, and perceive the truth of what 
you say. 

Moreover, I said, the pleasures and desires and pains, which 
are many and various, are found in children and women and ser- 
vants, and in the lower classes of the free citizens. 

Certainly, he said. 

Whereas the simple and moderate desires which follow reason, 
and are under the guidance of mind and true opinion, are con- 
fined to a few, being those who are the best born and the best 
educated. 

26o 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Very true, he said. 

And these also, I said, as you may perceive, have a place in our 
State, but the meaner desires of the many are held down by the 
virtuous desires and wisdom of the few. 

That I perceive, he said. 

Then if there be any city which may be described as master 
of pleasures and desires, and master of self, ours may claim that 
designation ? 

Certainly, he replied. 

And also that of temperate, and for the same reasons ? 

Yes, he said. 

And if there be any State in which rulers and subjects will be 
agreed about the question who are to rule, that again will be 
our State? 

No doubt at all of that. 

And the citizens being thus agreed among themselves, in 
which class will temperance be found, — in the rulers or in the 
subjects ? 

In both, as I should imagine, he replied. 

Do you observe, I said, that we were pretty right in our 
anticipation that temperance was a sort of harmony ? 

Why do you say that ? 

Why, because temperance is unlike courage and wisdom, each 
of which resides in a portion of the State only, which the one 
makes wise and the other valiant ; but that is not the way with 432 
temperance, which extends to the whole, and runs through the 
notes of the scale, and produces a harmony of the weaker and 
the stronger and the middle class, whether you suppose them 
to be stronger or weaker in wisdom or strength or numbers or 
wealth, or whatever else may be the measure of them. Most 
truly, then, do we describe temperance as the natural harmony 
of master and slave, both in states and individuals, in which 
the subjects are as willing to obey as the governors are to rule. 

I entirely agree with you. 

And so, I said, three of the virtues have been discovered in 
our State, and this is the form in which they appear. There 
remains the last element of virtue in a State, which must be 
justice, if we only knew what that was. 

That, he said, is obvious. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IV ; 

261 

The time then has arrived, Glaucon, when, like huntsmen, we 
should surround the cover, and look sharp that justice does not slip 
away, and pass out of sight, and get lost ; for there can be no 
doubt that we are in the right direction ; only try and get a sight 
of her, and if you come within view first, let me know. 

• I wish that there were any chance of that, he said; but I 
believe that you will find in me a follower who has just eyes 
enough to see what you show him; that is as much as I am 
good for. 

Offer up a prayer, I said, and follow. 

I will follow, he said, but you must show me the way. 

Here is no path, I said, and the wood is dark and perplexing ; 
still we must push on. 

Let us push on then. 

Halloo ! I said, I begin to perceive indications of a track, and 
I believe that the quarry will not escape. 

That is good news, he said. 

Truly, I said, we are very stupid. 

Why so ? 

Why, my good Sir, I said, when we first began, ages ago, there 
lay justice rolling at our feet, and we, fools that we were, failed 
to see her, like people who go about looking for what they have 
in their hands: And that was the way with us; we looked away 
into the far distance, and I suspect this to have been the reason 
why we missed her. 

What do you mean ? 

I mean to say that we have already had her on our lips and in 
our ears, and failed to recognize her. 

I get impatient at the length of your exordium. 

433 Well, then, say whether I am right or not ; you will remember 
the original principle of which we spoke at the foundation of the 
State, that every man, as we often insisted, should practise one 
thing only, that being the thing to which his nature was most 
perfectly adapted ; — now justice is either this or a part of this. 

Yes, that was often repeated by us. 

Further, we affirmed that justice was doing one’s own business, 
and not being a busybody ; that was often said by us, and many 
others have said the same. 

Yes, that was said by us. 

/ 

262 THE REPUBLIC. 

Then this doing one’s own business in a certain way may be 
assumed to be justice. Do you know why I say this ? 

I do not, and should like to be told. 

Because I think that this alone remains in the State when the 
other virtues of temperance and courage and wisdom are ab- 
stracted; and this is the ultimate cause and condition of the 
existence of all of them, and while remaining in them is also 
their preservative; and we were saying that if the three were 
discovered by us, justice would be the fourth or remaining one. 

That follows of necessity* 

Still, I said, if a question should arise as to which of these four 
qualities contributed most by their presence to the excellence of 
the State, whether the agreement of rulers and subjects, or the 
preservation in the soldiers of the opinion which the law ordains 
about the true nature of dangers, or wisdom and watchfulness in 
the rulers would claim the palm, or whether this which I am 
about to mention, and which is found in children and women, 
bond and free, artisan, ruler, subject, is not the one which con- 
duces most to the excellence of the State, — this quality, I mean, 
of every one doing his own work, and not being a busybody, — 
the question would not be easily determined. 

Certainly, he replied, that would be difficult to determine. 

Then the power of each individual in the State to do his own 
work appears to compete in the scale of political virtue with 
wisdom, temperance, and courage ? 

Yes, he said. 

And the virtue which enters into this competition is justice ? 

Exactly. 

Look at this in another light. Are not the rulers in a State 
those to whom you would entrust the office of determining causes? 

Certainly. 

And they will decide on the principle .that individuals are 
neither to take what is another’s, nor to be deprived of what 
is their own ; that will be the principle at which they will aim ? 

Yes; that will be their principle. 

And that is a just principle ? 

Yes. 

Then on this view also justice will be admitted to be the 
having and doing what is a man’s own, and belongs to him ? 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IV. 

263 

434 That is true. 

Think, now, and say whether you agree with me. Suppose a 
carpenter to be doing the business of a cobbler, or a cobbler 
of a carpenter; and suppose them to exchange implements or 
prerogatives, or the same person to be doing the work of both; 
do you think that any great harm would happen to the State ? 

Not at all, he said. 

But when the cobbler leaves his last, and he or any other 
whom nature designed to be a trader and whose heart is lifted 
up by wealth or strength or numbers, or any like advantage, 
attempts to force his way into the class of warriors, or a warrior 
into that of legislators and guardians, for which he is unfitted, or 
when one man is trader, legislator, and warrior all at once, then 
I think you will agree with me that this interchange of duties 
and implements and this meddling of one with another is the ruin 
of the State. 

Most true. 

Then, said I, as there are three distinct classes, any meddling of 
them with one another, or the change of one into another, is the 
greatest harm to the State, and may be most justly termed evil-doing? 

Precisely. 

And the greatest degree of evil-doing to one’s own city you 
would characterize as injustice? 

Certainly. 

This then is injustice ; and let us once more repeat the thesis 
in the opposite form. When the trader, the auxiliary, and the 
guardian do their own business, that is justice, and will make 
the city just. 

I think that is true, he said. 

Let us not, I said, be overpositive as yet ; but if, on trial, this 
conception of justice be verified in the individual as well as 
in the State, then there will be no longer any room for doubt; 
but, if not, there must be another enquiry. At present, however, 
let us finish the old investigation, which we began, as you re- 
• member, under the impression that, if we could first examine 
justice on the larger scale, there would be less difficulty in re- 
cognizing her in the individual. That larger example appeared 
to be the State, and we made the best that we could, knowing 
well that in the good State justice would be found to exist. Let 

THE REPUBLIC . 

264 

% 

us now apply what we found there to the individual, and if they 
agree, well and good - or, if there be a difference in the indi- 
vidual, we will come back to the State and have another trial 
of the theory. The friction of the two when rubbed together may 
possibly strike a light in which justice will shine forth, and the 435 
vision which is then revealed we will fix in our souls. 

That is the right way, he said ; let us do as you say. 

I proceeded to ask: When two things, a greater and less, are 
called by the same name, are they like or unlike in so far as they 
are called the same ? 

Like, he replied. 

The just man then, in being just, and in reference to the mere 
principle of justice, will be like the just State ? 

He will. 

And a State was thought by us to be just when the three classes 
in the State did their own business; and also thought to be tem- 
perate and valiant and wise by reason of certain other affections 
and qualities of these same classes ? 

True, he said. 

And so of the individual; we shall be right in arguing that he 
has these same principles in his own soul, and may fairly receive 
the same appellations as possessing the affections which correspond 
to them ? 

Certainly, he said. 

Once more then, O my friencj, we have alighted upon an easy 
question — whether the soul has these three principles or not ? 

An easy question! Nay, rather, Socrates, the proverb holds 
that hard is the good. 

Very true, I said ; and I confess that the method which we are 
employing, in my judgment, seems to be altogether inadequate to 
the accurate solution of this question; for the true method is 
another and a longer one. Still we may arrive at a solution not 
below the level of the previous enquiry. 

May we not be satisfied with that ? he said ; — under the circum- 
stances, I am quite content. 

I too, I replied, shall be extremely well satisfied. 

Then faint not in pursuing the speculation, he said. 

Can I be wrong, 1 said, in acknowledging that in the individual 
there are the same principles and habits which there are in the 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IV. 

265 

State ; for if they did not pass from one to the other, whence did 
they come ? Take the quality of spirit or passion ; — there would 
be something ridiculous in thinking that this quality, which is 
characteristic of the Thracians, Scythians, and in general of the 
northern nations, when found in States, does not originate in the 
individuals who compose them; and the same may be said of the 
love of knowledge, which is the special characteristic of our part 
of the world, or the love of money, which may, with equal truth, 
436 be attributed to the Phoenicians and Egyptians. 

Exactly, he said. 

There is no difficulty in understanding this. 

• None whatever. 

But the difficulty begins as soon as we raise the question whether 
these principles are three or one; whether, that is to say, we learn 
with one part of our nature, are angry with another, and with a 
third part desire the satisfaction of our natural appetites; or 
whether the whole soul comes into play in each sort of action — to 
determine that is the difficulty. 

Yes, he said, that is the difficulty. 

Then let us now try and determine whether they are the same 
or different. 

How shall we do that ? he asked. 

I replied as follows: The same thing clearly cannot act or be 
acted upon in the same part in the same relation, at the same time, 
in contrary ways; and therefore whenever this occurs in things 
apparently the same, we shall know that they are not really the 
same, but different. 

Good. 

For example, I said, can the same thing be at rest and in motion 
at the same time and in the same part ? 

That is impossible. 

Still, I said, let us have a more precise understanding, that we 
may not hereafter have a misunderstanding. Imagine the case 
of a man who is standing and also moving his hands and his 
head, and suppose a person to say that one and the same person 
is in motion and at rest at the same moment — to such a mode of 
speech we should object, and should rather say that one part of 
him is in motion while another is at rest. 

Very true. 

266 

THE REPUBLIC. 

And suppose the objector to refine still further, and draw the 
nice distinction that not only parts of tops, but whole tops, . 
when they are borne round with their centre fixed on the same 
spot, are at rest and in motion at the same time (and he may say 
the same of anything which revolves in the same spot), this would 
not be admitted by us, because in such cases things are not at 
rest and in motion in the same parts of themselves ; but we should 
say rather that they have inhering in them a circular and a per- 
pendicular direction, and that they stand in the perpendicular 
line which admits of no deviation, and move in the circle. But 
if, while revolving, the axis inclines either to the right or left, 
forwards or backwards, then in no point of view can they be at rest. 

That is the correct mode of describing them, he replied. 

Then none of these objections will confuse us, nor incline us 
to the belief that the same thing at the same time, in the same 
part or the same relation, can be or act or be acted upon in con- 437 
trary ways. 

That I shall never believe, he said. 

Yet, I said, that we may not be compelled to examine all such 
objections, and prove at length that they are untrue, let us assume 
this proposition, and proceed on the understanding that hereafter, 
if the assumption turn out to be untrue, the consequences which 
follow shall be withdrawn. 

Yes, he said, that will be the best way. 

Well, I said, would you not allow that assent and dissent, desire 
and refusal, attraction and repulsion, are all of them opposites, 
whether they are regarded as active or passive, (for that makes no 
difference in the fact of their opposition) ? 

Yes, he said, they are opposites. 

Well, I said, and hunger and thirst, and the desires in general, 
including willing and wishing, — all those you would refer to the 
classes already mentioned. You would say — would you not ? — that 
the soul of him who desires is seeking after the object of desire; or . 
that he draws to himself the thing which he wishes to possess; or 
again, when a person wills anything to be given him, his mind 
longing for the realization of his desire makes a sign of willing- 
ness to have the thing, as if in assent to a question ? 

1 should agree to that. 

And what would you say of unwillingness and dislike and the 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IV. 

267 

absence of desire ; would you not refer these to the opposite class 
of repulsion and rejection ? 

Certainly. 

Admitting this to be true of desire generally, let us now pro- 
ceed to single out a particular class of desires, — shall we say those 
desires which are the most evident to sense, and which are termed 
hunger and thirst ? 

Let us take that class, he said. 

The object of one is food, and of the other drink ? 

Yes. 

And here comes the point : is not thirst the desire which the 
soul has of drink, and of drink only; not of drink qualified by 
anything else; for example, warm or cold, or much or little, or, 
in a word, drink of any particular sort : but if the thirst be accom- 
panied by heat, then the desire is of cold drink ; or, if accompanied 
by cold, then of warm drink ; or, if the thirst be excessive, then 
the drink which is desired will be excessive ; or, if not great, the 
quantity of drink will also be small : but thirst, regarded as thirst, 
will only desire drink which is the natural satisfaction of thirst, 
as hunger too will only desire food ? 

Yes, he said, in every case the simple desire is of the simple 
object, and the qualified desire of the qualified object ; that is as 
you say. 

438 But here, I said, I should wish to guard against an objection. 
Some one may argue that no man desires drink only, but good 
drink, or food only, but good food; for good is the universal 
object of desire, and therefore thirst will necessarily be thirst 
after good drink ; and this will hold equally of every other desire. 

Yes, he said, that objection does appear to raise a difficulty. 

Nevertheless, I said, relatives may be correctly divided into 
compounds which have a quality attached to either term of the 
relation, and into simples whose correlative is simple. 

I do not know what you mean, he said. 

Well, I said, you know that the greater is relative to the less ? 

Yes. 

And the much greater to the much less ? 

Yes. 

And the sometimes greater to the sometimes less, and the 
greater that is to be to the less that is to be ? 

268 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Certainly, he said. 

And this applies generally to the greater and less, and also 
to other correlative terms, such as the double and the half, or 
again to the heavier and the lighter, the swifter and the slower, 
to hot and cold, and any other relatives ; — is not this true ? 

Yes. 

And does not the same hold with the sciences ? The object of 
science is knowledge (assuming that to be the true definition), 
but the object of a particular science is a particular kind of 
knowledge; I mean, for example, that the building of a house 
is a kind of knowledge which is defined and distinguished from 
other kinds of knowledge as house-building. 

Certainly. 

Because having a particular quality which no other has ? 

Yes. 

And having this particular quality or nature, because having an 
object of a certain kind; and this is true of the other arts and 
sciences ? 

Yes. 

Now, then, if I have made myself clear, you will understand 
my original meaning in what I said about relatives. My meaning 
was, that if the first term of a relation is taken alone, the second 
is taken alone ; if the first term is qualified, the second is also 
qualified. I do not say that the two relatives need be cin pari 
materia,* or that the science of health is healthy, or of disease 
necessarily diseased, or that the sciences of good and evil are 
therefore good and evil ; but only that, from having health and 
disease as an object, the science of medicine has come to be 
of a certain nature, and is hence called not merely science, but 
medical science. 

I understand your meaning, and assent to you. 

Would you not say then, I said, that thirst is one of these 439 
relative terms, thirst being obviously 

Yes, thirst is relative, and of drink. 

And a certain kind of thirst is relative to a certain kind of 
drink; but thirst taken alone is neither of much nor little, nor 
of good nor bad, nor of any particular kind of drink, but of drink 
only ? 

Certainly. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IV. 

269 

Then the soul of the thirsty one, in that he thirsts, desires only 
drink, and feels an impulse towards drink ? 

That is plain. 

And if you suppose something which pulls a thirsty soul away 
from drink, that must be different from the thirsty principle 
which draws him like a beast to drink ; for, as we were saying, 
the same thing cannot at the same time with the same part act 
in contrary ways about the same. 

Impossible. 

No more than you can say of the archer that his hands push 
and pull the bow at the same time, but what you say is that one 
hand pushes and the other pulls. 

Exactly, he replied. 

And might a man be thirsty, and yet unwilling to drink ? 

Yes, he said, that often happens. 

And in such a case what is one to say ? Would you not say that 
there is one principle in the soul bidding a man to drink, and 
a second forbidding him, which is other and stronger than that 
which bids him ? 

That is my view, he replied. 

And the forbidding principle is derived from reason, and the 
bidding and attracting principles are the effects of passion and 
disorder? 

Clearly. 

Then we may fairly infer that they are two, and that they differ 
from one another ; one of them we may call the rational principle 
of the soul, the other, which accompanies certain pleasures and 
satisfactions, is that with which a man loves and hungers and 
thirsts and feels the emotions of desire, and may be rightly termed 
irrational or appetitive ? 

Yes, he said, we shall not be far wrong in that. 

Then let these be marked out as the two principles which there 
are existing in the soul. 

And what shall we say of passion, or spirit ? Is that a third, or 
akin to one of the preceding? 

I should be inclined to say — akin to desire. 

Well, I said, there is a story which I remember to have heard, 
and on which I rely. The story is that Leontius, the son of 
Aglaion, was coming up from the Piraeus, under the north wall 

270 

THE REPUBLIC. 

on the outside, and observed some dead bodies lying on the 
ground by the executioner. He felt a longing desire to see them, 
and also a disgust and abhorrence of them ; for a time he turned 
away and averted his eyes, and then, suddenly overcome by the 440 
impulse, forced them open, and ran up, saying (to his eyes), Take 
your fill, ye wretches, of the fair sight. 

I have heard the story myself, he said. 

Now this seems to imply that anger differs from the desires, 
and is sometimes at war with them. 

That is implied, he said. 

And are there not many other cases in which we observe 
that, when a man’s desires violently prevail over his reason, he 
reviles himself, and is angry at the violence within him, and 
that in this struggle, which is like the struggle of factions in a 
State, his spirit is on the side of his reason ; — but that the pas- 
sionate or spirited element should side with the desires when 
reason decides that she is not to be opposed2, this sort of thing, 

I believe, you will say that you never observed occurring in your- 
self, nor, as I think, in any one else ? 

Certainly not, he said. 

Suppose, I said, that a man thinks he has done a wrong to 
another, the nobler he is the less able he is to get into a state 
of righteous indignation ; his anger refuses to be excited at the 
hunger or cold or other suffering, which he deems that the injured 
person may justly inflict upon him ? 

True, he said. 

But when he thinks that he is the sufferer of the wrong, then 
he boils and chafes, and is on the side of what he believes to 
be justice; and because he suffers hunger or cold or other pain 
he is only the more determined to persevere and conquer; he 
must do or die, and will not desist, until he hears the voice of 
the shepherd, that is, reason, bidding his dog bark no more. 

That is a very good illustration, he replied ; and in our State, as 
we were saying, the auxiliaries were to be dogs, and to hear the 
voice of the rulers, who are their shepherds. 

I perceive, I said, that you quite understand me ; there is, 
however, a further point which I would wish you to consider. 

2 Reading pfj 8f7p dvrinparTtiv, without a comma after 8ttv. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IV . 

27 1 

What may that be ? 

You remember that passion or spirit appeared at first sight to be a 
sort of desire, but now we should say the contrary ; for in the con- 
flict of the soul spirit is arrayed on the side of the rational principle. 

Most assuredly. 

But a further question arises. Is spirit different from reason 
also, or only a sort of reason; in which case, instead of three 
principles in the soul, there will be only two, the rational and 
441 the concupiscent; or rather, as the State was composed of three 
classes, traders, auxiliaries, counsellors, so may there not be in the 
individual soul a third element which is passion or spirit, and which 
is the auxiliary of reason when not corrupted by education ? 

Yes, he said, there must be a third. 

Yes, I replied, if passion, which has already been shown to 
be different from desire, turn out also to be different from 
reason. 

But that is obvious, he said, and is proved in the case of 
young children, who are full of spirit almost as soon as they 
are born, whereas some of them never seem to attain to the 
use of reason, and a good many only late in life. 

Excellent I said, and the same thing is seen in brute animals, 
which is a further proof of the truth of what you are saying. And 
Homer, whose words we have already quoted, may be again 
summoned as a witness, where he says, 

‘He smote his breast, and thus rebuked his soul3;’ 

for in those lines Homer has clearly supposed the power which 
reasons about the better and worse to be different from the 
unreasoning principle which is the subject of the rebuke. 

That is true, he said. 

And now, after much tossing in the argument, we have reached 
land, and are fairly agreed that the principles which exist in 
the State, like those in the individual, are three in number, and 
the same with them. 

Exactly. 

And must we not infer that the individual is wise in the 
same way, and in virtue of the same quality which makes the 
State wise ? 

3 Od. xx. 17. 

272 

THE REPUBLIC . 

Certainly. 

And the same quality which constitutes bravery in the State 
constitutes bravery in the individual, and the same is true of 
all the other virtues ? 

Assuredly. 

And the individual will be acknowledged by us to be just in 
the same way that the State was just ? 

That will also follow of course. 

And the justice of the State consisted, as we very well remem- 
ber, in each of the three classes doing the work of that class ? 

We are not very likely to forget that, he said. 

And we must also remember that the individual whose several 
principles do their own work will be just, and will do his 
own work ? 

Yes, he said, we must remember that. 

And ought not the rational principle, which is wise, and has 
the care of the whole soul, to rule, and the passionate or spirited 
principle to be the subject and ally ? 

Certainly. 

And, as you were saying, the harmonizing influence of music 
and gymnastic will bring them into accord, nerving and educating 
the reason with noble words and lessons, and softening and 
consoling and civilizing the wildness of passion with harmony 442 
and rhythm ? 

Quite true, he said. 

And these two, thus nurtured and educated, and having learned 
truly to know their own functions, will set a rule over the con- 
cupiscent part of every man, which is the largest and most in- 
satiable; over this they will set a guard, lest, waxing great with 
the fulness of bodily pleasures, as they are termed, and no longer 
confined to her own sphere, the concupiscent soul should attempt 
to enslave and rule those who are not her natural-born subjects, 
and overturn the whole life of man ? 

Very true, he said. 

The two will be the defenders of the whole soul and the 
whole body against attacks from without; the one counselling, 
and the other fighting under the command of their leader, and 
courageously executing his counsels. 

True. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IV. 

273 

And he is to be deemed courageous who, having the clement 
of passion working in him, preserves, in the midst of pain and 
pleasure, the notion of danger which reason prescribes ? 

Right, he replied. 

And he is wise who has in him that little part which rules 
and gives orders ; that part being supposed to have a knowledge of 
what is for the interest of each and all of the three other parts ? 

Assuredly. 

And would you not say that he is temperate who has these 
same elements in friendly harmony, in whom the one ruling 
principle of reason, and the two subject ones of spirit and 
desire are equally agreed that reason ought to rule, and do 
not rebel? 

Certainly, he said, that is the true account of temperance 
whether in the State or individual. 

And surely, I said, a man will be just in the manner of which 
we have several times already spoken and no other ? 

That is very certain. 

And is the edge of justice blunted in the individual, or is 
there any reason why our definition of justice should not apply 
equally to the individual and to the State ? 

None in my judgment, he said. 

Because, I said, if any doubt is still lingering in our minds, 
a few commonplace instances will satisfy us of the truth of 
this. 

What sort of instances do you mean ? 

Why, for example, I said, who would imagine that the just 
State, or the man who is trained in the principles of such a 
443 State, would be more likely than the unjust to make away with 
a deposit of gold or silver ? 

No one, as I should suppose, he replied. 

Will such an one, I said, ever be guilty of sacrilege or theft, 
or treachery either to his friends or to his country ? 

That will be far from him. 

Neither will he ever break faith where there have been oaths 
or agreements ? 

Impossible. 

No one will be less likely to commit adultery, or to dishonour 
his father and mother, or to fail in his religious duties? 

VOL. 11. t 

Digitized by Google 

274 

THE REPUBLIC . 

No one. 

And the reason of this is that each part of him is doing his 
own business, whether in ruling or being ruled? 

That is the truth. 

Are you satisfied then that the quality which makes such 
men and such states is justice, or do you hope to discover some 
other ? 

Not I, indeed. 

Then our dream has been realized; and as we were saying 
at the beginning of our work of construction, some tivine 
power must have conducted us to a sort of first principle 
or form of justice — that suspicion of ours has been now 
verified ? 

Yes, certainly. 

And the division of labour which required the carpenter and 
the shoemaker and the rest of the citizens to be doing each his 
own business, and not another’s, was a kind of shadow of justice, 
and therefore of use ? 

Clearly. 

And justice was the reality of which this was the semblance ; 
dealing, however, not with the outward man, but with the 
inward, which is the true self and concernment of a man : for 
the just man does not permit the several elements within him 
to meddle with one another, or any of them to do the work 
of others, but he sets in order his own inner life, and is his 
own master, and at peace with himself; and when he has bound 
together the three principles within him, which may be compared 
to the middle, higher, and lower divisions of the scale, and the 
intermediate intervals — when he has bound together all these, 
and is no longer many, but has become one entirely temperate 
and perfectly adjusted nature, then he will begin to act, if he 

has to act, whether in a matter of property, or in the treatment 

* 

of the body, or some affair of politics or private business; in 
all which cases he will think and call just and good action 
that which preserves and co-operates with this condition, and the 
knowledge which presides over this wisdom; and unjust action, 
that which at any time destroys this, and the opinion which 444 
presides over unjust action, ignorance. 

That is the precise truth, Socrates. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IV. 

2 75 

Very good ; and if we were to say that we had discovered the 
just man and the just State, and the place of justice in each of 
them, that would not be a very vain boast ? 

No, indeed. 

May we be so bold then as to say this ? 

Let us be so bold, he replied. 

And now, I said, injustice has to be considered. 

That is evident 

Then, assuming the threefold division of the soul, must not 
injustice be a kind of quarrel between these three — a meddlesome- 
ness, and interference, and rising up of a part of the soul against 
the whole soul, an assertion of unlawful authority, which is made 
by a rebellious subject against a true prince, of whom he is the 
natural vassal — that is the sort of thing ; the confusion and error 
of these parts or elements is injustice and intemperance and 
cowardice and ignorance, and in general all vice ? 

Exactly so, he said. 

And if the nature of justice and injustice be known, then the 
meaning of acting unjustly and being unjust, or, again, of acting 
justly, will also be perfectly clear? 

What do you mean ? he said. 

Why, I said, they are like disease and health; being in the 
soul just what disease and health are in the body. 

How is that ? he said. 

Why, I said, that which is healthy causes health, and that which 
is unhealthy causes disease. 

Yes. 

And just actions cause justice, and unjust actions cause in- 
justice ? 

That is certain. 

And the creation of health is the creation of a natural order 
and government of one another in the parts of the body ; and the 
creation of disease is the creation of a state of things in which 
they are at variance with this natural order ? 

True. 

And is not this equally true of the soul ? Is not the creation 
of justice the creation of a natural order and government of 
one another in the parts of the soul, and the creation of injustice 
the opposite ? 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Exactly, he said. 

Then virtue is the health and beauty and well-being of the 
soul, and vice is the disease and weakness and deformity of the 
soul ? 

True. 

And good practices lead to virtue, and evil practices to vice ? 

Assuredly. 

Still our old question of the comparative advantage of justice 445 
and injustice has not been answered : Which is the more profit- 
able, to be just and do justly, and practise virtue, whether seen 
or unseen of gods and men, or to be unjust and do unjustly, if 
only unpunished and unimproved ? 

In my judgment, Socrates, the question has now become ridicu- 
lous. If, when the bodily constitution is gone, life is no longer 
endurable, though pampered with every sort of meats and drinks, 
and having all wealth and all power, shall we be told that life 
is worth having when the very essence of the vital principle is 
undermined and corrupted, even though a man be allowed to do 
whatever he pleases, if at the same time he is forbidden to escape 
from vice and injustice, or attain justice and virtue, seeing that 
we now know the true nature of each ? 

Yes, I said, that is ridiculous, as you say. Still, as we are near 
the spot at which we may see the truth with our own eyes, let us 
not faint by the way. 

Certainly not, he replied. 

Come hither then, I said, ascend the hill which overhangs the 
city, and see the various forms of vice. 

I am following you, he replied : proceed. 

I said, We seem to have reached a summit of speculation from 
which you may look down and see the single form of virtue, and 
the forms of vice innumerable j there being four special ones 
which are deserving of note. 

What do you mean ? he said. 

I mean, I replied, that there appear to be as many forms of 
the soul as there are forms of the State. 

How many? 

There are five of the State, and five of the soul, I said. 

What are they ? 

The first, I said, is that which we have been describing, and 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IV. 

277 

which may be said to have two names, monarchy and aristocracy, 
according as rule is exercised by one or many. 

True, he replied. 

But I regard this as one form only ; for whether the government 
is in the hands of one or many, if the governors have been 
trained in the manner which we have described, the fundamental 
laws of the State will not be subverted. 

That is true, he replied. 

BOOK V. 

Such is the good and true State, and the good and true man 449 
is of the same pattern ; and if this is right every other is wrong ; 
and the error is one which affects not only the ordering of the 
State, but also the regulation of the individual soul. There are 
four forms of this evil. 

What are they ? he said. 

I was proceeding to tell the order in which the four evil forms 
appeared to me to succeed one another, when Polemarchus began 
to whisper to his neighbour Adcimantus, who was sitting just 
beyond him on the further side. He put out his hand, and took 
him by the coat at the upper part, by the shoulder, and drew him 
towards him, leaning forward himself and saying something, of 
which I only caught the words, ‘Shall we let him offj or what?’ 

Certainly not, said Adeimantus, raising his voice. 

What is that, I said, which you refuse to let off? 

You, he said. 

Still I asked for an explanation *. 

Why, he said, we think that you arc lazy and mean to cheat us 
out of the best part of the story ; and you have a notion that you 
will not be detected in passing lightly over an entire and very 
important division of the subject, — that which relates to women 
and children, — as if there could be no manner of doubt in this 
instance also that ‘friends will have all things in common/ 

And am I not right, Adcimantus ? 

Yes, he said; but the word ‘right/ like everything else, has to 
be explained ; for this community may be of many kinds. Please, 
therefore, to say which you mean ; for we have been expecting 
that you would tell us something about their family life — how 

1 Reading in iyo> rf nov. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK v ; 

279 

they would bring children into the world, and rear them when 
they arrived, and, in general, what is the nature of this com- 
munity of women and children — as we are of opinion that the 
right or wrong management of these matters will have a great 
and paramount influence on the State for good or for evil. And 
now, as you are taking in hand another State, without having 
determined these points, we have resolved, as you heard, not to 
45° let you go until you give a satisfactory explanation of all this, as 
of the rest. 

In that resolution, said Glaucon, you may regard me as con- 
sentient. 

And without more ado, you may take that, said Thrasymachus, 
as the decision of us all. 

I said, You do not know what you are doing in thus assailing 
me. What an argument are you raising ! Just as I thought that I 
had finished, and was only too glad that I had laid this question to 
sleep, and was reflecting how fortunate I was in your acquiescence 
in what I then said, you begin again, ignorant of what a hornet’s 
nest of words you are arousing. Now I foresaw this coming 
trouble, and this was the reason why I made the omission. 

What, said Thrasymachus ; do you think that we are come to 
look for the philosopher’s stone, or to hear discourse ? 

Yes, said I, but discourse should have a limit. 

Yes, Socrates, said Glaucon, and the whole of life is the only 
limit which wise men assign to the hearing of such discourses. 
But do not regard that; only in your own way answer the question: 
What sort of community of women and children is this which is 
to prevail among the guardians? and how are their children to be 
brought' up in infancy, which is apparently the most difficult part 
of education ? Tell us how these things will be. 

Yes, my simple friend, but the answer is the reverse of easy; 
for many more doubts arise about this than about our previous 
enquiries. For the practicability of what is said may be doubted ; 
and looked at in another point of view, whether the scheme, if 
ever so practicable, will be for the best, is also doubtful. Hence 
there arises a fear, as we draw near, lest our aspiration should 
be a dream only. 

Fear not, he replied, for your audience are not exacting, any 
more than they are sceptical or hostile. 

28o 

THE REPUBLIC . 

I said : My good friend, I suppose that you mean to encourage 
me by these words. 

Yes, he said. 

Then let me tell you that you are doing just the contrary ; the 
consolation would have been good had I believed myself that I 
knew what I was talking about: for to know and to declare the 
truth in matters of high interest which a man loves among wise 
men who love him is a safe thing and gives confidence ; but to 
carry on an argument when you are yourself only a doubting 
enquirer, which is my case, that is a dangerous and slippery thing; 45 
and the danger is not that I shall be laughed at (the fear of that 
would be childish), but that I shall miss my footing when I ought 
to be surest of the truth, and drag my friends after me in my fall. 
And I pray Nemesis not to visit upon me the words which I am 
going to utter. For I do indeed believe that to be an involuntary 
homicide is a less crime than to be a deceiver about the beautiful, 
the good, and the just in institutions. And that is a risk which 
I would rather run among enemies than among friends, and there- 
fore you do well to console me ‘2. 

Glaucon laughed and said: Well then, Socrates, in case you and 
your argument do us any serious injury you shall be acquitted 
beforehand, as though you were a homicide, and shall not be held 
to be a deceiver ; take courage then and speak. 

Well, I said, the law says that when a man is acquitted he is 
free from guilt, and if in that case then also in this. 

Then why should you mind ? 

Well, I replied, I suppose that I must retrace my steps and 
say what I perhaps ought to have said before. The men have 
played out their part, and now comes the women’s turn ; of whom 
I will proceed to speak, and the more so as I am invited by you. 
For men born and educated like our citizens, the only way, in 
my opinion, of arriving at a right conclusion about the possession 
and use of women and children is to follow the principle which 
has been already laid down about the men ; that principle was that 
they were to be the guardians and watchdogs of the herd. 

True. 

Let us proceed then to give the women a similar training and 
education, and see how far that accords with our design. 

a Reading Sxttc (v irapap.v8u. 

BOOK V. 

281 

What do you mean ? he said. 

What I mean may be put into the form of a question, I said : Do 
we divide dogs into hcs and shes, and take the masculine gender 
out to hunt, or have them to keep watch and ward over the flock, 
while we leave the females at home, under the idea that the 
bearing and suckling their puppies hinder them from sharing in 
the labours of the males ? 

No, he said, they share alike; the difference between them is 
only one of strength and weakness. 

But can you use different animals for the same purpose, unless 
they are fed and bred in the same way ? 

You cannot. 

Then, if women are to have the same duties as men, they must 
2 have the same education ? 

Yes. 

The education which was assigned to the men was music and 
gymnastic. 

Yes. 

Then women must be taught music and gymnastic and also the 
art of war, which they must practise like the men ? 

I suppose that is the inference. 

1 should rather expect, I said, that several of our proposals, if 
they are carried out, being unusual, may appear ridiculous. 

No doubt of that. 

Yes, I said, and the most ridiculous thing of all will be the 
sight of women naked in the palaestra, exercising with the men, 
especially when they get old ; they certainly will not be a vision 
of beauty any more than the wrinkled old men who have anything 
but an agreeable appearance when they take to gymnastics; this, 
however, does not deter them. 

Yes, indeed, he said : according to present notions the proposal 
would appear ridiculous. 

But then, I said, as we have determined to speak our minds, 
we must not fear the jests of the wits which will be directed 
against this sort of innovation; how they will talk of women’s 
attainments in music as well as in gymnastic, and above all 
about their wearing armour and riding upon horseback! 

Very true, he replied. 

Yet having begun we must go on and attack the difficulty; 

282 

THE REPUBLIC. 

at the same time begging of these gentlemen for once in their life 
to be serious. Not long ago, as we shall remind them, the Greeks 
were of the opinion, which is still generally received among the 
barbarians, that the sight of a naked man was ridiculous and im- 
proper; and when first the Cretans and then the Lacedaemonians 
introduced naked exercises, the wits of that day might have 
ridiculed all this equally. 

. No doubt. 

But when experience showed that to let all things be seen was 
far better than to cover them up, and the ludicrous effect to the 
outward eye vanished before the approval of reason, that showed the 
man to be a fool who laughs or directs the shafts of his ridicule at 
any other sight but that of folly and vice, or seriously inclines to 
measure the beautiful by any other standard but that of the good. 

That is very true, he replied. 

First then, whether a man likes to put the question in jest or 
in earnest, let us ask about the nature of woman: Is she capable 453 
of sharing either wholly or partially, or not at all, in the actions of 
men ? And is the art of war one of those arts in which she can 
or can not share? That will be the best way of commencing 
the enquiry, and will probably lead to the fairest conclusion. 

That will be best. 

Suppose that we take the other side and begin by arguing against 
ourselves, in order that the adversary’s position may be fairly 
defended. 

You may as well do that, he said. 

Then let us put a speech into the mouths of our opponents. 
They will say : c Socrates and Glaucon, no adversary need convict 
you, for you are self-convicted by the admission which you 
originally made of the principle that every one was to do his own 
work according to his nature.’ And certainly, if I am not mis- 
taken, there was such an admission made by us. Then he will 
proceed to say : c Is there not the greatest difference between the 
natures of men and women ? ’ And we shall reply : Of course, 
there is. And he will ask c whether men and women ought not to 
have different tasks imposed upon them, such as are agreeable to 
their different natures ? ’ Certainly they ought. c Have you not 
then fallen into a great inconsistency in saying that men and 
women, who are entirely different, ought to perform the same 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK V. 

283 

tacions?’ — What defence will you make for us, my good Sir, against 
any one who offers these objections ? 

That, he said, is not an easy question to answer on the instant ; 
and I shall and 1 do beg of you to draw out the case on our side. 

There, Glaucon, I said, is just the difficulty which made me 
hesitate in having anything to do with the law about the con- 
dition of women and children; and that is not the only difficulty. 

Why yes, he said, there is something of a difficulty. 

Yes, I said, but the fact is that when a man is out of his 
depth, whether he has fallen into a swimming bath, or into a 
mighty ocean, he has to swim all the same. 

Very true. 

And must not we swim and make for some haven, in the hope 
that Arion’s dolphin or some other miraculous help may save us? 

That must be the way, I suppose, he said. 

Well then, let us see if we can discover a way of escape. 
Our principle was that different natures ought to have different 
pursuits, and that men’s and women’s natures are different. And 
now what are we saying? — that different natures ought to have 
the same pursuits, — this is the inconsistency which is charged 
upon us. 

Precisely. 

454 Verily, Glaucon, I said, glorious is the power of the art of 
contradiction ! 

Why do you say that ? 

Because I think that many a man falls into this practice 
against his will. When he thinks that he is reasoning he is 
really disputing, just because he is unable to define and divide 
that of which he is speaking; and he will pursue a merely verbal 
opposition in the spirit of contention and not of fair discussion. 

Yes, he replied, that is very often the case; but what has that 
to do with us and our argument ? 

A great deal; for there is certainly a danger of our getting 
unintentionally into a verbal opposition. 

In what way? 

Why we valiantly and pugnaciously insist upon the verbal 
truth, that the same natures ought to have the same pursuits'*. 

3 Reading to rrjv (ivttjv (frvaiv on riv qvt a>v k. t. X. 

284 

THE REPUBLIC . 

but we never considered at all what is the difference of nature 
implied in the words ‘same’ and c other/ or what was our 
meaning in defining them and assigning different pursuits to 
different natures. 

Why, no, he said, that was never considered by us. 

I said: Suppose that by way of illustration we were to ask 
the question whether there is not an opposition in nature between 
bald men and hairy men ; and if there is, why then, if bald men 
are cobblers, forbid the hairy men, or if the hairy men are 
cobblers, then forbid the bald men to be cobblers ? 

That would be a famous jest, he said. 

Yes, I said, a jest; and why? the absurdity only arises from 
the circumstance that our original idea of differences of nature 
entering into the construction of the State did not extend in 
each case to every difference, but only to those differences which 
affected the pursuit in which the individual is engaged ; thus, for 
example, a man or a woman who has the soul4 of a physician 
may be said to be essentially the same. 

True. 

Whereas the physician and the carpenter are different ? 

Certainly. 

And if, I said, the male and female sex appear to differ in 
their fitness for any art or pursuit, we should say that such 
pursuit or art ought to be assigned to one or the other of them ; 
but if the difference consists only in women bearing and men 
begetting children, this does not amount to a proof that a 
woman differs from a man in that respect of which we are 
speaking; and we shall therefore continue to maintain that our 
guardians and their wives ought to have the same pursuits. 

That is true, he said. 

The next step will be to desire our opponent to show how, in 
reference to any of the pursuits or arts of citizens, the nature of 455 
a woman differs from that of a man? That will be very fair; 
and perhaps he, like yourself, will reply that to give an answer 
on the instant is not easy ; a little reflection is needed. 

Yes, perhaps. 

Suppose then that we invite him to come along with us in the 

4 Reading larpiKov piv Ka\ larpiKijv Tt]v ovrat. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK v ; 

285 

argument, and then we may hope to show him that there is 
no special function which a woman has in the administration of 
the State. 

By all means. 

Let us say to him : Come now, and we will ask you a question: 
— when you say that one man has natural gifts and another not, 
was this your meaning? — that the former will acquire a thing 
easily which the latter will have a difficulty in acquiring; a 
little learning will lead the one to discover a great deal; 
whereas the other, after a great deal of learning and application, 
will only forget what he has learned ; or again, you may mean, 
that the one has a body which is a good servant to his mind, 
while the body of the other is at war with his mind : — these 
would be the sort of differences which distinguish the man of 
capacity from the man who is wanting in capacity ? 

That, he said, will be universally allowed. 

Can you mention any pursuit of man in which the male sex 
has not all these qualities in a far higher degree than the female ? 
Need I waste time in speaking of the art of weaving, and 
the management of pancakes and preserves, in which woman- 
kind does really appear to be great, and in which the supe- ’ 
riority of the other sex is the most laughable thing in the 
world ? 

You are quite right, he replied, in maintaining the general 
inferiority of the female sex; at the same time many women 
are in many things superior to many men, though, speaking 
generally, what you say is true. 

And so, I said, my friend, in the administration of a State 
neither a woman as a woman, nor a man as a man has any 
special function, but the gifts of nature are equally diffused in 
both sexes; all the pursuits of men are the pursuits of women 
also, and in all of them a woman is only a lesser man. 

Very true. 

Then are we to impose all our enactments on men and none 
of them on women ? 

That will never do. 

One woman has a gift of healing, another not; one is a 
musician, and another is not a musician ? 

Very true. 

286 

THE REPUBLIC. 

And one woman has a turn for gymnastic and military exercises, 
while another is unwarlike and hates gymnastics ? 

Beyond question. 

And one woman is a philosopher, and another is an enemy of 
philosophy ; one has spirit, and another is without spirit ? 

That is also true. 

Then one woman will have the temper of a guardian, and 
another not; for was not the selection of the male guardians 
determined by these sort of differences? 

That is true. 

Then the woman has equally with the man the qualities which 
make a guardian ; she differs only in degrees of strength ? 

That is obvious. 

And those who have such qualities are the women who are to be 
selected as the companions and colleagues of our guardians, and 
who will resemble them in ability and character ? 

Very true. 

And being of the same nature with them, ought they not to 
have the same pursuits ? 

They ought. 

Then, as we were saying before, there is nothing unnatural 
in assigning music and gymnastic to the wives of the guardians. 
To that we come round again. 

Very good. 

The law which enacted this instead of being an impossibility 
or mere aspiration was agreeable to nature, and the contrary prac- 
tice, which prevails at present, is in reality a violation of nature. 

That appears to be true. 

There was, first, the possibility, and secondly, the advantage of 
such an arrangement, which had to be considered ? 

Yes. 

And the possibility has been allowed ? 

Yes. 

And the advantage has next to be acknowledged ? 

That is the next question. 

You would admit that the same education which makes a 
man a good guardian will make a woman a good guardian ; for 
their original nature is the same ? 

Yes. 

BOOK V. 

287 

I should like to ask you a question : Would you say that all 
men are equal in excellence, or is one man better than another? 

The latter. 

And in our imaginary commonwealth which do you reckon 
the better, the guardians who have been brought up on our 
model system or the cobblers whose education has been cobbling? 

What a ridiculous question ! 

That is your answer, I replied. Well, and may we not further 
say that these are the best of our citizens ? 

Far the best. 

And will not these be the best women? 

Yes, again I say the very best. 

And can there be anything better for the interests of the State 
than that the men and women of a State should be as good as 
possible ? 

There can be nothing better. 

And our course of music and gymnastic will accomplish this ? 

Certainly. 

Then we have made an enactment not only possible but in 
the highest degree advantageous to the State ? 

True. 

Then let the wives of our guardians strip, having virtue for 
their robe, and share in the toils of war and the defence of their 
country; only in the distribution of labour the lighter labours are 
to be assigned to the women, as being the weaker vessels, but in 
other respects their duties are to be the same. And as for the 
man who laughs at naked women exercising in gymnastics for the 
sake of the highest good, his laughter is, 

‘A fruit of unripe wisdom,’ 

which he gathers, and he himself is ignorant of what he is laugh- 
ing at, or what he is about; — for that is, and ever will be, the best 
of sayings, that the useful is the noble and the hurtful the base. 

Very true. 

Here, then, is one difficulty in our law about women which we 
have escaped ; the wave has not swallowed us up alive for enact- 
ing that the guardians of either sex should have all their pursuits 
in common; to the utility and possibility of this the argument is 
its own witness. 

I 

288 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Yes, he said; that was a mighty wave which you have escaped. 

Yes, I said, but a much greater is coming; you will not think 
much of this when you see the next. 

Go on, he said ; let me see. 

The law, I said, which is the sequel of this and of all that has 
preceded, is to this effect, — c that the wives of these guardians 
are to be common, and their children also common, and no parent 
is to know his own child, nor any child his parent/ 

Yes, he said, that is a much greater wave than the other; and 
the utility as well as the possibility of such a law is far more 
doubtful. 

I do not think, I said, that there can be any dispute about the 
very great utility of having wives and children in common; 
the possibility is quite another matter, and will be very much 
disputed. 

I think, he said, that a good many doubts may be raised about 
both questions. 

You insist on joining the two questions, I said. Now I meant 
that you should admit the utility ; and in this way, as I thought, 

I should escape from one of them, and then there would remain 
only the possibility. 

But that little attempt is detected, and therefore you will please 
to give a defence of both. 

Well, I said, I submit to my fate, yet grant me a little favour: 
let me feast my mind as day-dreamers are in the habit of feasting 45® 
themselves with their own dreams when they are walking alone ; 
for before they have discovered any means of effecting their 
wishes — that is a matter which never troubles them — they would 
rather not tire themselves by thinking about possibilities; but 
assuming that what they desire is already theirs, they pursue their 
plan, and delight in detailing what they are going to do when their 
wish has come true — that is a way which they have of not doing 
much good to a capacity which was never good for much. And 
1 too am beginning to lose heart, and would wish to reserve the 
question of possibility; and assuming this, for the present only, 
if you will allow me I will proceed to enquire what measures the 
rulers will take for the execution of the plan, which, if executed, 

I will prove to be of the greatest use to the State and to the guar- 
dians. I will ask you, if you have no objection, to assist me, first 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK V. 

289 

of all, in considering the advantages of this, and then I will return 
to the question of possibility. 

I have no objection ; proceed. 

First, I think that if our rulers and their auxiliaries are to be 
worthy of the name which they bear, there must be willingness to 
obey in the one and the power of command in the other; the 
guardians must themselves obey the laws and imitate their spirit 
in the details which are entrusted to them. 

That is right, he said. 

You, I said, in the capacity of their legislator, having selected the 
men, will now select the women who are most akin to them and 
give them to them, and they will live in common houses and meet 
at common meals. None of them will have anything specially 
his or her own ; and they will be together and associate at gym- 
nastic exercises, and be brought up together. And so they will be 
drawn by a necessity of their natures to have intercourse with 
each other : necessity is not too strong a word I think ? 

Yes, he said; — necessity, not geometrical, but another sort of 
necessity which lovers know, and which is far more convincing- 
and constraining to the mass of mankind. 

True, I said; and this, Glaucon, like all the rest, must proceed 
after an orderly fashion, — in a city of the blessed, licentiousness 
is an unholy thing which the rulers will forbid. 

Yes, he said, and so they ought. 

Then clearly our plan will be to make matrimony as holy as 
possible, and the most beneficial marriages will be the most 
holy? 

459 Exactly. 

And how can marriages be made most beneficial? — that is a 
question which I put to you, because I observe in your house 
hunting dogs and of the nobler sort of birds not a few. Now, do 
tell me, did you ever attend to their pairing and breeding? 

In what respect ? 

Why, in the first place, although they are all of a good sort, are 
not some better than others ? 

True. 

And do you breed from them all indifferently, or do you take 
care to breed from the best only ? 

From the best. 

vol. ir. u 

Digitized by Google 

290 

THE REPUBLIC. 

And do you take the oldest or the youngest, or only those that 
are of ripe age ? 

I choose only those of ripe age. 

And if none of this care was taken in the breeding, your dogs 
and birds would deteriorate ? 

Certainly. 

And the same principle holds of horses and of animals in 
general ? 

Undoubtedly. 

Good heavens ! my dear friend, I said, what consummate skill 
will our rulers need if the same principle holds of the human 
species ! 

Certainly, the same principle holds; but why does this involve 
such a high requirement ? 

Because, I said, our rulers will have to practise upon the body 
corporate with medicines. Now you know that when patients do 
not require medicines, but have only to be put under a regimen, 
the inferior sort of practitioner is deemed to be good enough; 
but when medicine has to be given, then the doctor should be 
more of a man. 

That is quite true, he said ; but what do you mean ? 

I mean, I replied, that our rulers will find a considerable dose 
of falsehood and deceit necessary for the good of their subjects : we 
were saying that they might be used with advantage as medicines. 

True, he said. 

And this lawful use of them seems likely to be often needed in 
the regulations of marriages and births. 

How will that be ? 

Why, I said, the principle has been already laid down that 
the best of either sex should be united with the best as often as 
possible, and the inferior with the inferior; and they are to rear 
the offspring of the one sort of union, but not of the other ; for 
this is the only way of keeping the flock in prime condition. Now 
these goings on must be a secret which the rulers only know, or 
there will be a further danger of our herd, as the guardians may 
be termed, breaking out into rebellion. 

Very true, he said. 

Had we not better appoint certain festivals at which the brides 
and bridegrooms will meet, and there will be sacrifices offered 

BOOK V ; 

291 

4^0 and suitable hymeneal songs composed by our poets : the number 
of weddings is a matter which must be left to the discretion of 
the rulers, whose aim will be to preserve the average of population ; 
and there are many things which they will have to consider, such 
as the effects of wars and diseases and any similar agencies, in 
order to prevent the State becoming either too large or too small. 

Very true, he replied. 

We shall have to invent some ingenious kind of lots which the 
less worthy may draw on each occasion of meeting, and then he 
will accuse his own ill-luck and not the rulers. 

To be sure, he said. 

And I think that our braver and better youth, besides their 
other honours and rewards, might have greater facilities of inter- 
course with women given them ; their bravery is a good pretext, 
and such fathers ought to have as many sons as possible. 

True. 

And the proper officers, whether male or female or both, for 
offices are to be held by women as well as by men — 

Yes. 

The proper officers will take the offspring of the good parents to 
the pen or fold, and there they will deposit them with certain 
nurses who dwell in a separate quarter; but the offspring of the 
inferior, or of the better when they chance to be deformed, they 
will conceal in some mysterious, unknown place. Decency will 
be respected. 

Yes, he said, that will require to be done if the breed of the 
guardians is to be kept pure. 

They will provide for their nurture, and will bring the mothers 
to the fold when they are full of milk, taking the greatest possible 
care that no mother recognizes her own child ; and other wet- 
nurses may be had if any more are required. Care will also be 
taken that the process of suckling shall not be tedious to them; 
and they will have no trouble or getting up at night, but will 
hand over all this to the nurses and attendants. 

You suppose the wives of our guardians to have a fine easy 
time of it when they are having children. 

Why, said I, and so they ought. Let us, however, proceed with 
our scheme. As we were saying, the parents should be in the 
prime of life. 

292 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Very true. 

And what is the prime of life ? May not that be defined as 
a period of about twenty years in a woman’s life, and thirty in 
a man’s ? 

Which years do you mean to include ? 

A woman, I said, may begin to bear children to the State at 
twenty years of age, and continue to bear until forty ; a man may 
begin at five-and-twenty, when he has passed the point at which 
the speed of life is greatest, and continue to beget children until 
he be fifty-five. 

Certainly, he said, both in men and women that is the prime 46 
of physical as well as of intellectual vigour. 

Any one above or below those ages who takes part in the public 
hymeneals shall be said to have done an unholy and unrighteous 
thing ; he is the father of a child who, if he steals into life, will 
have been conceived under other auspices than those of sacrifice 
and prayers, which at each hymeneal priestesses and priests and 
the whole city will offer, that the new generation may be better 
and more useful than their good and useful parents: instead of 
this his child will be the offspring of darkness and strange 
lust. 

Very true, he replied. 

And the same law will apply to any one of those within the 
prescribed age who forms a connection with any woman in the 
prime of life without the sanction of the rulers; for we shall 
say that he is raising up a bastard to the State, uncertified and 
unconsecrated. 

Very true, he replied. 

This applies, however, only to those who are within the speci- 
fied age : after that we allow them to range at will, except that 
a man may not marry his daughter or his daughter’s daughter, or 
his mother or his mother’s mother; and women, on the other 
hand, are prohibited from marrying their sons or fathers, or son’s 
son or father’s father, and so on in either direction. And we grant 
all this, accompanying the permission with strict orders to them 
to do all they can to prevent any embryo which may come into 
being from seeing the light ; and if any force a way to the birth, 
they must understand that the offspring of such an union cannot 
be maintained, and make their arrangements accordingly. 

BOOK V. 

293 

That also, he said, is a reasonable proposition. But how will 
they know who are fathers and daughters, and so on ? 

They will never know. The way will be this: — dating from 
the day of the hymeneal, the bridegroom who was then married will 
call all the male children who are born ten and seven months after- 
wards his sons, and the female children his daughters, and they 
will call him father, and he will call their children’s children his 
grandchildren, and they will call the elder generation grandfathers 
and grandmothers. And those who were born at the same time 
with them they will term brothers and sisters, and they are not to 
intermarry. This, however, is not to be understood as an abso- 
lute prohibition of such marriages ; if the lot favours them, and 
they have the sanction of the Pythian oracle, the law will still 
allow them. 

Quite right, he replied. 

Such is the scheme according to which the guardians of our 
State are to have their wives and families in common. I must 
now make the argument prove that this community is consistent 
with the rest of our polity, and also that nothing can be better — 
that is what you want ? 

462 Yes, certainly. 

And shall we begin by asking ourselves what we conceive to be 
the greatest good, and what ought to be the chief aim of the 
legislator in the organization of a State, and what is the greatest 
evil, and then consider whether our previous description has the 
mark and stamp of the good or of the evil ? 

By all means. 

And can there be any greater evil than discord and distraction 
and plurality where unity ought to reign? or any greater good 
than the bond of unity ? 

There cannot. 

And there is unity where there is community of pleasures and 
pains — where all the citizens are glad or sorry on the same 
occasions ? 

No doubt. 

Yes ; and where there is no common but only private feeling, 
that disorganizes a State — when you have one half of the world 
triumphing and the other sorrowing at the same events happening 
to the city and the citizens ? 

2Q4 

THE REPUBLIC . 

Certainly. 

Such differences commonly originate in a disagreement about 
the use of the terms c meum * and c tuum,’ mine and his. 

Exactly. 

And is not that the best-ordered State in which the greatest 
number of persons apply the terms ‘ mine’ and cnot mine’ in the 
same way to the same thing? 

True, very true. 

Or that again which most nearly approaches to the condition 
of the individual — as in the body, when but a finger is hurt, the 
whole frame, drawn towards the soul and forming one realm under 
the ruling power therein, feels the hurt and sympathizes all together 
with the part affected, and then we say that the man has a pain 
in his finger; or again, in any other part, when there is a sensation 
of pain or pleasure at suffering or alleviation of suffering, the 
same expression is used ? 

Yes, he replied, that is as you say; and I agree with you that 
in the best-ordered State there is the nearest approach to this 
common feeling which you describe. 

Then when any one of the citizens experiences any good or 
evil, the whole State will make his case their own, and either 
rejoice or sorrow with him ? 

Yes, he said, that will be true in a well-ordered State. 

It will now be time, I said, for us to return to our State and see 
whether this or any other form is most in accordance with these 
principles. 

Very good. 

Our State like every other has rulers and subjects. 

That is true. 

All of whom will call one another citizens? 

Of course. 

But is there not another name which people give to their rulers 
in other States ? 

Generally they call them masters, but in democratic States they 
simply call them rulers. 

And what name besides that of citizens do the people give the 
rulers in our State ? 

The name of preservers and auxiliaries, he replied. 

And what do the rulers call the people ? 

BOOK V. 

295 

Their maintainers and foster-fathers. 

And what do they call them in other States ? 

Slaves. 

And what do the rulers call one another in other States ? 

Fellow-rulers. 

And what in ours ? 

Fellow-guardians. 

Did you ever know an example in other States of a ruler who 
would speak of one of his colleagues as a friend and of another 
as alien to him ? 

Yes, that is very common. ' 

And the friend he describes and regards as one in whom he has 
an interest, and the other as one in whom he has no interest. 

Exactly. 

But would any of your guardians speak of one of their fellows 
as a friend and of another as alien to him ? 

Certainly not ; for every one whom they meet will be regarded 
by them either as a brother or sister, or father or mother, or son 
or daughter, or as the child or parent of those who arc thus 
connected with him. 

That is an admirable answer, I said; but let me ask you one 
small question: Will you give them the names of family ties 
only, or are they in all their actions to conform to these names ? 
For example, in the use of the word c father’, would the care of a 
father be implied and the filial reverence and duty and obedience 
to him which the law commands? and is the violator of these 
duties to be regarded as an impious and unrighteous person who 
is not likely to receive much good either from the hands of God or 
man? Are these to be the strains which the children will hear 
repeated in their ears by all the citizens about their parents and 
kindred when they are pointed out to them ? 

These, he said, and none other; for what can be more ridiculous 
than for them to utter the names of family ties with the lips only 
and not to act upon them ? 

Then in our city the language of harmony and concord will be 
more often heard than in any other. As I was describing before, 
when any one is well or ill, the universal word will be c mine is 
well’ or c mine is ill.* 

Most true. 

296 

THE REPUBLIC. 

And were we not saying also that they would have their 
pleasures and pains in common, and that their mode of thinking 
or speaking would coincide with the fact ? 

Yes, and that is true. 

And they will have a common interest in the same which they 
will call cmy own/ and having this common interest they will 
have a common feeling of pleasure and pain? 

Yes, they will have a far greater community of feeling.. 

And the reason of this, over and above the general constitution 
of the State, will be that the guardians have a community of 
women and children ? 

That will be the chief reason. 

And that this unity of feeling will be the greatest good was 
implied in our own comparison of a well-ordered State to the 
relation of the body and the members, when affected by pleasure 
or pain ? 

That was acknowledged, and very rightly. 

Then the community of wives and children is clearly the source 
of the greatest good to the State ? 

Certainly. 

And this agrees with the other principle which we were 
affirming, — that the guardians were not to have houses or lands 
or any other property ; their pay was to be their food, which they 
were to receive from the other citizens, and they were only to 
spend in common: that was all designed to preserve their true 
character of guardians. 

Right, he replied. 

Both the community of property and the community of families, 
as I am saying, tend to make them more truly guardians; they will 
not tear the city in pieces by differing about ‘meum’ and c tuum ;* 
the one dragging any acquisition which he has made into a private 
house which is his, and which has a separate wife and separate 
children and private pleasures and pains; but all are affected as 
far as may be by all the same pleasures and pains because they are 
all of one opinion about what is near and dear to them, and 
therefore all tend towards a common end. 

Certainly, he replied. 

And as they have nothing but their persons which they can call 
' their own, suits and complaints will have no existence among 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK V. 

297 

them; they will be free from all those quarrels of which money or 
children or relations are the occasion. 

That of course follows. 

Neither can trials for assault or insult ever be expected to occur 
among them. For that equals should defend themselves against ' 
equals we shall surely maintain to be fair and right; and in this 
way we shall oblige them to keep themselves in condition. 

465 That is good, he said. 

Yes; and there is this further good in the law — that if a man 
has cause of offence against another he will satisfy his resentment 
and be less likely to make a commotion in the State. 

Certainly. 

To the elder shall be assigned the duty of ruling and chastising 
the younger. 

Clearly. 

Nor can there be a doubt that the younger will not strike or do 
any other violence to an elder, unless the magistrates command 
him ; nor is he likely to be disrespectful to him in any way. For 
there are two guardians, shame and fear, mighty to prevent him : 
shame, which makes men refrain from laying hands on those who 
are to them in the relation of parents ; fear, that the injured one 
will be succoured by the others who are his brothers, sons, fathers. 

That is true, he replied. 

Then in every way the laws will help the citizens to keep peace 
with one another. 

Yes, there will be a certainty of peace. 

And as the guardians will never quarrel among themselves there 
will be no danger of the rest of the city being divided either 
against them or against one another. 

None whatever. 

I hardly like to speak of the little meannesses of which they 
will be rid, for they are beneath mention. Such, for example, as 
the flattery of the rich by the poor, and all the pains and pangs of 
bringing up a family, finding the money to buy the necessaries of 
their household, borrowing and then repudiating, getting how they 
can, and giving the money into the hands of women and slaves to 
keep: what people suffer in this way is mean enough and obvious 
enough, and not worth speaking of. 

Yes, he said, a man has no need of eyes in order to perceive that. 

2q8 

THE REPUBLIC. 

And from all that they will be delivered, and their life will be 
blessed as the life of Olympic victors and yet more blessed. 

How can that be ? 

Why, I said, they are counted happy in receiving a part only of 
the happiness which is the lot of our citizens, who have won a 
more glorious victory and have a more complete maintenance at 
the public cost. For the victory which they have won is the 
salvation of the whole State ; and the crown with which they and 
their children are crowned is the fullness of all that life needs; 
they receive rewards from the hands of their country while living 
and after death have an honourable burial. 

Yes, he said, they are indeed glorious rewards. 

Do you remember, I said, how in the course of the previous 
discussion5 some one who shall be nameless accused us of making 466 
our guardians unhappy — they had nothing and might have pos- 
sessed all things — to whom we replied that on some future . 
occasion we might perhaps consider the question, but that, as 
at present advised, we would make our guardians truly guardians, 
and that we were not fashioning any particular class with a 
view to their happiness, but in order that the whole State might 
be the happiest possible ? 

Yes, I remember. 

And what do you say now that the life of our protectors is 
made out to be far better and nobler than that of Olympic 
victors; will you compare such a life with that of shoemakers, 
or any other artisans, or of husbandmen ? 

Certainly not. 

At the same time I ought to repeat what I was then saying, 
that if any of our guardians shall get into his head the youthful 
conceit, that he being a guardian ought to have a happiness which 
would make him no longer a guardian, and is not content with 
this safe and harmonious life, than which, in our judgment, there 
never was a better, but shall proceed to monopolize the State, 
then he will have to learn out of Hesiod, that he verily was a 
wise man who said c half is better than the whole.’ 

If he were to consult me, I should say to him: Stay where 
you are, having the promise of such a life. 

5 Pages 419, 420. 

BOOK V. 

299 

And you agree then, I said, that men and women are to have 
a common way of life such as we have described — common 
education, common children; and they are to watch over the 
citizens in common whether abiding in the city or going out 
to war; they are to guard together, and to hunt together like 
dogs; and always and in all things women are to share with 
the men ? And this will be for the best, and in doing this they 
will not violate the natural relation ? 

I agree with you, he replied. 

The enquiry, I said, has yet to be made, whether such a 
community will be found possible — as among other animals so 
also among men — and if possible, in what way possible? 

That, he said, is just the question which I was going to ask. 

•As to war, I said, there is no difficulty in seeing how that 
will be managed. 

How will that be ? he asked. 

Why, of course they will go on expeditions together; and will 
take with them any of their children who are strong enough, 
that, like the children of artisans in general, they may look on 
at the work, which they will have to do when they are grown 
467 up; and besides looking on they will be able to help and be 
of use in war, and to wait upon their fathers and mothers. Did 
you never observe in the arts how the potters’ boys look on and 
help, long before they touch the wheel ? 

Certainly. 

And shall potters be more careful than our guardians in 
educating their children and giving them the opportunity of 
seeing and practising their duties ? 

That would be ridiculous, he said. 

There is another thing; which is the effect on the parents, 
with whom, as with other animals, the presence of their cubs 
will be the greatest incentive to valour. 

That is quite true, Socrates ; and yet if they are defeated, which 
may often happen in war, how great the danger is ! the children will 
be lost as well as their parents, and the State will never recover. 

True, I said ; but would you never allow them to run any risk ? 

I am far from saying that. 

Well, but if they are ever to run a risk should they not run 
the risk when there is a chance of their improvement ? 

300 

THE REPUBLIC . 

Clearly. 

Whether the future soldiers do or do not see war in the days 
of their youth is a very important matter, for the sake of which 
some risk may fairly be incurred. 

Yes, that is very important. 

Then, in the first place, we must provide that the children 
should see war, and then contrive a way of safety for them; 
thus all will be well. 

True. 

Their parents may be supposed to have ordinary common 
sense and understanding of the risks of war ; they will know what 
expeditions are safe and what dangerous ? 

That may be supposed. 

And they will take them on the safe expeditions and be cautious 
about the dangerous ones ? 

True. 

And they will give them as commanders experienced veterans 
who will be their leaders and teachers ? 

Yes, that is very proper. 

Still, the dangers of war cannot always be foreseen ; there is a 
good deal of chance about them? 

True. 

Then against such chances the children must be at once 
furnished with wings, in order that in the hour of need they 
may fly away and escape. 

What do you mean ? he said. 

I mean that we must mount them on horses in their earliest 
youth and take them on horseback to see war, in order that they 
may learn to ride 6 ; the horses must not be spirited and warlike, 
but the most tractable and yet the swiftest that can be had. 

In this way they will get an excellent view of what is hereafter 
to be their business; and if there is danger they have only to 468 
follow their elder leaders and escape. 

I believe that you are right, he said. 

Next, as to war; what are to be the relations of your soldiers 
to one another and to their enemies? I should be inclined to 
propose that the soldier who leaves his rank or throws away 

6 Reading &ida£ofitvovc. 

Digitized by Google 

\ 

BOOK V . 301 

his arms, or is guilty of any other act of cowardice, should be 
degraded into the rank of a husbandman or artisan. What do 
you think? 

By all means, I should say. 

And he who allows himself to be taken prisoner may even be 
made a present of to his enemies; he is their prey and they 
may do as they like with him. 

Certainly. 

But the hero who has distinguished himself, what shall be done 
to him ? In the first place, he shall receive honour in the army 
from his youthful comrades; every one of them in succession shall 
crown him. What do you say to that ? 

I approve. 

And what do you say to his receiving the right hand of 
fellowship ? 

To that too, I agree. 

But I suspect that you will hardly agree to my next proposal. 

What is that ? 

That he should kiss and be kissed by them. 

That I entirely approve, and should be disposed to add another 
clause: Let no one whom he has a mind to kiss refuse to be 
kissed by him while the expedition lasts. So that if there be 
a lover in the army, whether his love be youth or maiden, he 
may be more eager to win the prize of valour. 

That is good, I said. That the brave man is to have more 
wives than others has been already determined; and he is to 
have first choices in such matters more than others, in order that 
he may have as many children as possible. 

That was agreed. 

And the propriety of thus honouring brave youths may be 
proved out of Homer ; who tells how Ajax 7, after he had dis- 
tinguished himself in battle, was rewarded with long chines, which 
seems to be a complement appropriate to a hero in the flower of 
his age, being not only a tribute of honour but also a very 
strengthening thing. 

Very true, he said. 

Then in this, I said, Homer will be our teacher; and we too, at 

7 Iliad, vii. 321. 

Digitized by Google 

302 

THE REPUBLIC. 

sacrifices and on the like occasions, will honour the brave with hymns 
‘and seats of precedence, and meats and flowing goblets8;’ 

not only honouring them, but also exercising them in virtue. 

That, he replied, is excellent. 

Good, I said ; and when a man dies gloriously in war shall we 
not say, in the first place, that he is of the golden race ? 

To be sure. 

Nay, have we not the authority of Hesiod for affirming that 
when they are dead 

‘They are holy angels upon the earth, authors of good, averters of ill, the 469 
guardians of speaking men9?’ 

And we shall believe him. 

And suppose that we enquire of the god how we are to order 
the sepulture of divine and heroic personages, and do as he bids ? 

By all means. 

In ages to come we will do service to them and worship at 
their shrines as heroes. And not only they but all other bene- 
factors who die from age, or in any other way, shall be admitted 
to the same honours. 

That is very right, he said. 

Next, how shall our soldiers treat their enemies? What do 
you say about this ? 

In what respect do you mean ? 

I mean, shall they be made slaves ? Do you think that Hellenes 
ought to enslave Hellenes, or allow others to enslave them, as far 
as they can help ? Should not their custom be to spare them, con- 
sidering the danger which there is that the whole race may one 
day fall under the yoke of the barbarians ? 

To spare them is infinitely better. 

Then no Hellene should be owned by them as a slave ; that is 
a rule which they will observe and advise the other Hellenes to 
observe. 

Certainly, he said; that is the way to unite them against the 
barbarians and make them keep their hands off one another. 

Next as to the slain; ought the conquerors, I said, to take 
anything but their armour? Does not the practice of despoiling 
an enemy afford an excuse for not facing the battle ? They skulk 

8 Iliad, viii. 162. 9 Works and Days, no. 

/ 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK v ; 

303 

about the dead, pretending to be executing a duty, and many an 
army before now has been lost from this love of plunder. 

Very true. 

And is there not illiberality and avarice, and a degree of mean- 
ness and womanishness, in robbing a corpse and making the dead 
body an enemy when the real enemy has walked away and left 
only his fighting gear behind him, — is not this rather like a dog 
who cannot get at his assailant, quarrelling with the stones which 
strike him instead ? 

That is exactly parallel, he said. 

Then we must abstain from spoiling the dead or hindering their 
burial ? 

Yes, he replied, that we must. 

Neither, as our object is to preserve good feeling among the 
470 Hellenes, shall we offer up the arms of Hellenes at any rate, at the 
temples of the gods ; nay, we have some reason to be afraid that 
such an offering may be a pollution unless commanded by the god 
himself. 

Very true. 

Again, as to the devastation of an Hellenic territory or the 
burning of houses, what is to be the practice ? 

Will you let me have the pleasure, he said, of hearing your 
opinion upon this? 

Both should be forbidden, in my judgment ; I would take the 
annual produce and no more. Would you wish to know why 
I say this ? 

Very much. 

Why, I imagine that as there is a difference in the names 
‘discord’ and ‘war,’ there is also a difference in their natures; 
the one is expressive of what is internal and domestic, the other 
of what is external and foreign ; and the first of these is properly 
termed discord, and only the second, war. 

That is a very just distinction, he replied. 

Shall I further add that the Hellenic race is all united by ties 
of blood and friendship and alien and strange to the barbarians ? 

Very good, he said. 

And therefore when Hellenes fight with barbarians and bar- 
barians with Hellenes, they will be described by us as being at 
war when they fight, and by nature in a state of war, and this 

304 

THE REPUBLIC . 

kind of antagonism is to be called war ; but when Hellenes fight 
with one another we shall say that they are by nature friends, 
and at such a time Hellas is in a state of disorder and distrac- 
tion, and enmity of that sort is to be called discord. 

In that view, I agree. 

Consider then, I said, when that which is now acknowledged by 
us to be discord occurs, and a city is divided, if both parties destroy 
the lands and burn the houses of one another, how wicked does 
the strife appear — how can either of them be a lover of his country ? 
for no true lover of his country would tear in pieces his nurse and 
mother: there might be reason in the conqueror depriving the 
conquered of their harvest, but still they would have the idea of 
peace in their hearts and not of everlasting war. 

Y es, he said, that is a better temper than the other. 

And when you found a state, are you not intending to found an 
Hellenic state ? 

Of course, he replied. 

Then will not the citizens be good and civilized ? 

To be sure. 

And will they not be lovers of Hellas, and think of Hellas as 
their own land, and share in the common temples ? 

Most certainly. 

And any difference that arises among Hellenes will be regarded 
by them as discord only — a quarrel among friends, which is not 47 
to be called a war? 

Certainly not. 

Then they will quarrel as those who intend some day to make 
up their quarrel ? 

Certainly. 

Correcting them in love, not punishing them with a view to 
enslaving or destroying them ; as correctors, not as enemies ? 

That is very true. 

And as they are Hellenes themselves they will not devastate 
Hellas, nor will they burn houses, nor ever suppose that the whole 
population of a city — men, women, and children — are equally 
their enemies, for they know that the guilt of war is always 
confined to a few persons and that the many are their friends. 
And for all these reasons they will be unwilling to waste 
their lands and rase their houses; their enmity to them will 

BOOK V. 

305 

only last until the many innocent sufferers have compelled the 
guilty few to give satisfaction ? 

I agree, he said, in thinking that these are the sort of rules 
which our citizens ought to observe towards their (Hellenic) 
adversaries ; in their wars with barbarians the present practice of 
the Hellenes to one another will afford a sufficient rule. 

Let this then be enacted for the observance of our guardians : — 
that they are neither to devastate the ground or to burn houses. 

Yes, let that be enacted; and we may safely maintain that this 
and all our previous enactments are excellent. 

But still, Socrates, I must say, that if you are allowed to go on 
in this way you will entirely forget the other question which in 
entering on this discussion you put aside, viz. the enquiry as to 
whether such an order of things is possible, and if possible, in 
what way possible? For, admitting the possibility, I am quite 
ready to acknowledge that the plan has every sort of advantage. 
I will add, what you have omitted, that they will be the bravest 
of warriors, ever exhorting one another by the names of fathers, 
brothers, and sons, and therefore never leaving their ranks; and if 
you suppose the women to join their armies, whether in the same 
rank or in the rear, cither as a terror to the nemy, or as auxiliaries 
in case of need, I know that this will make them altogether 
invincible; and there are many domestic advantages which might 
be mentioned as well, and these also I fully acknowledge. But, as I 
admit all these advantages and as many more as you please, if this 
State of yours were to come into being, say no more of that; and 
let us now come to the question of possibility and ways and 
means — all the rest may be left. 

472 If I loiter10 for a moment, you instantly make a raid upon me, I 
said, and have no mercy; I have hardly escaped the first and second 
waves, and you don’t seem to be aware that you are now bringing 
upon me the third, which is the greatest. When you have seen 
this, and heard the roar, I think you will acknowledge that some 
fear and hesitation was natural, considering the marvellous nature 
of the proposal which I have to offer for consideration. 

The more appeals of this sort which you make, he said, the 
more determined are we that you should tell us how such a State 
is possible : speak out and at once. 

10 Reading aTpayy(vofi(va>. 

VOL. II.. X 

Digitized by Google 

306 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Let me begin by reminding you that we found our way hither 
in the search after justice and injustice. 

True, he replied ; but what makes you say this ? 

I was only going to ask whether, if we have discovered them, 
we are to require that the just man should in nothing fail of abso- 
lute justice ; or may we be satisfied with an approximation, and 
the attainment of a higher degree of justice than is to be found in 
other men ? 

The approximation will be enough. 

Then the nature of justice and the perfectly just man, and of 
injustice and the perfectly unjust, was only an ideal ? We were to 
look at them in order that we might judge of our own happiness 
and unhappiness according to the standard which they exhibited 
and the degree in which we resembled them, not with any view 
of demonstrating the possibility of their existence ? 

That is true, he said. 

How would a painter be the worse painter because, after having 
minutely painted an ideal of a perfectly beautiful man, he was 
unable to show that any such man could ever have existed ? 

He would not. 

Well, and were we not creating an ideal of a perfect State ? 

To be sure. 

And is our theory a worse theory because we are unable to prove 
the possibility of a city being ordered in the manner described ? 

Surely not, he replied. 

That must be acknowledged, I said. But if, at your request, 

I am to try and show how and under what condition the possi- 
bility is highest, I must ask you, having this in view, to repeat 
your former admissions. 

What admissions ? 

I want to know whether words do not surpass realities; and 473 
whether the actual, whatever a man may think, does not fall short 
of the truth ? What do you say ? 

I admit that. 

Then you must not insist on my proving that the actual State 
will in every respect agree with the description of the ideal : if 
we are only able to discover how a city may be governed nearly 
in the way that we propose, you will admit that we have dis- 
covered the possibility which you demand ; and that will content 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK V. 

307 

you. I am sure that I should be contented with that — will not 
you ? 

Yes, I will. 

Then let me next endeavour to show what is that fault in States 
which is the cause of their present maladministration, and what 
is the least change which will enable a State to pass into the 
truer form ; and let the change, if possible, be of one thing only, 
or, if not, of two; at any rate, let the changes be as few and 
slight as possible. 

Certainly, he replied. 

I think then, I said, that there might be a revolution if there 
were just one change, which is not a slight or easy though still 
a possible one. 

What is that ? he said. 

Now then, I said, I go to meet that which I liken to the greatest 
of waves, yet shall the word be spoken, even though the running 
over of the laughter of the wave shall just sink me beneath the 
waters of laughter and dishonour ; and do you attend to me. 

Proceed, he said. 

I said: Until, then, philosophers are kings, or the kings and 
princes of this world have the spirit and power of philosophy, and 
political greatness and wisdom meet in one, and those commoner 
natures who follow either to the exclusion of the other are com- 
pelled to stand aside, cities will never cease from ill — 110, nor 
the human race, as I believe — and then only will this our State 
have a possibility of life and behold the light of day: this was 
what I wanted but was afraid to say, my dear Glaucon ; for to see 
that there is no other way either of private or public happiness 
is indeed a hard thing. 

Socrates, he said, what a speech is this! I would have you 
consider that the word which you have uttered is one at which 
numerous persons, and very respectable persons too, will in a 
moment pull off their coats, as I may in a figure say, and in light 
474 array, taking up any weapon that comes to hand, they will run at 
you might and main, intending to do heaven knows what; and 
if you don't prepare an answer, and put yourself in motion, you 
will be c pared by their fine wits,' and no mistake. 

You got me into the scrape, I said. 

And I was quite right, he said; however, I will do all I can to 

3°8 

TIIE REPUBLIC. 

get you out; but I can only give you wishes and exhortations, 
and also, perhaps, I may be able to fit answers into your questions 
better than another — that is all. And now, having such an 
auxiliary, you must do your best to show the unbelievers that 
you are right. 

I ought to try, I said, as I have an offer of such valuable assist- 
ance. And I think that, if there is to be a chance of our escaping, 
we must define who these philosophers are who, as we say, are to 
rule in the State ; then we shall be able to defend ourselves : there 
will be discovered to be some natures who ought to rule and to 
study philosophy ; and others who are not born to be philosophers, 
and are meant to be followers rather than leaders. 

Then now for a definition, he said. 

Follow me, I said, and I hope that I may somehow or other 
be able to give you a satisfactory explanation. 

Proceed, he replied. 

I daresay that you remember, and therefore I need not remind 
you, that a lover, if he is worthy of the name, ought to show his 
love, not to one part of a class rather than another, but to the 
whole. 

I believe that I must ask you to explain, for I really do not 
understand. 

I do not think, I replied, that you should say that; a man of 
pleasure like you ought to know that all who are in the flower 
of their youth do in a manner raise a pang or emotion in a lover's 
breast, and seem to be worthy of his affectionate regards. Is 
not this a way which you have with the fair : one, because he has 
a snub nose, has the epithet c naive' used in his praise; another's 
beak, as you say, has a royal look ; while he who is neither snub 
nor hooked has the grace of regularity : the dark visage is manly, 
and the white are angels ; and as to the sweet, ‘ honey pale,' as 
they are called, what is the very name but the invention of a lover 
who uses these pet names, and is not averse to paleness on the 
cheek of youth ? In a word, there is no excuse which you will 
not make, and nothing which you will not say, in order to pre- 475 
serve for your use every flower that has the bloom of youth. 

If you are determined to make me play the part of a lover, I 
am ready to be your illustration, if I can be of any service to 
the argument. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK V. 

309 

And what do you say of lovers of wine? Do you not see them 
doing the same ? They are glad of any pretext of drinking any 
wine. 

Very good. 

And the same is true of ambitious men; if they cannot be 
generals, they are willing to be captains; and if they cannot be 
honoured by really great and important persons, they are glad to 
be honoured by inferior people, — but honour of some kind they 
must have ? 

Exactly. 

Once more let me ask : Does he who desires any class of goods, 
desire the whole class or a part only ? 

The whole. 

And may we not say of the philosopher that he is a lover, not 
of a part of wisdom only, but of the whole ? 

True. 

Then he who dislikes knowledge, especially in youth, when he 
has no power of judging what is good and what is not good, such 
an one we maintain not to be a philosopher or a lover of know- 
ledge, just as he who refuses his food is not hungry, and may be 
said to have a bad appetite and not a good one ? 

And in that we are right, he said. 

Whereas he who has a taste for every sort of knowledge and 
who is curious to learn and is never satisfied, may be justly termed 
a philosopher? Is not that true ? 

Glaucon said: If curiosity makes a philosopher, you will find 
many a strange being claiming the name. For all the lovers of 
sights have a delight in learning, and will therefore have to be 
included. Musical amateurs, too, are a folk wonderfully out of 
place among philosophers, as they are the last persons in the world 
who would come to anything like a philosophical discussion, if 
they could help, while they run about at the Dionysiac festivals 
as if their ears were under an engagement to hear every chorus ; 
whether the performance is in town or country — that makes no 
difference — they are there. Now are we to maintain that all 
these and any who have similar tastes, as well as the professors of 
minor arts, are philosophers? 

. Certainly not, I replied, they are only an imitation. 

He said: But who are the true philosophers? 

3io 

THE REPUBLIC . 

•Those, I said, who are lovers of the sight of truth. 

That is also good, he said ; but I should like to know what you 
mean ? 

To another, I replied, I might have a difficulty in explaining; 
but I am sure that you will admit a proposition which I am about 
to state. 

What is that ? 

That beauty is the reverse of ugliness; they are two and not one ? 

Certainly. 

And as they are two, each of them is one ? 47 6 

True again. 

And the same holds of every class — just and unjust, good and 
evil : taken singly, each of them is one ; but in all the various 
combinations of them with things and persons and with one 
another, they are seen in various lights and appear many ? 

That is true. 

And this is the distinction which I draw between the sight- 
loving, art-loving, practical class and those of whom I am speak- 
ing, and who are alone worthy of the name of philosophers. 

How do you distinguish them ? he said. 

The lovers of sounds and sights, I replied, are, as I conceive, 
fond of fine tones and colours and forms and all the artificial 
products that are made out of them, but their mind is incapable 
of seeing or loving absolute beauty. 

That is true, he replied. 

Few are they who are able to attain the sight of absolute beauty. 

Very true. 

And he who, having a sense of beautiful things has no sense 
of absolute beauty, or who, if another lead him to a knowledge of 
that beauty is unable to follow — of such an one I ask, Is he awake 
or in a dream only ? Reflect : is not the dreamer, either awake 
or asleep, one who puts the resemblance in the place of the real 
object ? 

1 should certainly say that such an one was dreaming. 

But take the case of the other, who recognizes the existence of 
absolute beauty and is able to distinguish the idea from the 
objects which participate in the idea, neither putting the objects 
in the place of the idea nor the idea in the place of the objects — 
is he a dreamer, or is he awake ? 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK V. 

3ii 

He is the reverse of a dreamer, he replied. 

And may we not say that the mind of the one has knowledge 
and that the mind of the other has opinion only ? 

Certainly. 

But suppose that the latter quarrels with us and disputes our 
statement, can we administer any soothing cordial or advice to him, 
without revealing to him that there is sad disorder in his wits? 

That is what is wanted, he replied. 

Come, then, and let us think of something to tell him. Suppose 
we begin by assuring him that he is welcome to any knowledge 
he may have, and that we rejoice to see him in possession of such 
a blessing. But we should like to ask him a question: Does he 
who has knowledge know something or nothing ? (You must 
answer for him.) 

I answer that he knows something. 

Something that is or is not ? 

Something that is* for how can that which is not ever be 
known ? 

477 And are we assured, after looking at the matter in every point 
of view, that perfect existence is or may be perfectly known, but 
that the absolutely non-existent is utterly unknown and un- 
knowable ? 

Nothing can be more certain. ' 

Good. But if there be anything which is of such a nature as 
to be and not to be, that will have a place intermediate between 
pure being and the absolute negation of being ? 

Yes, between them. 

And, as knowledge corresponded to being and ignorance to not 
being, for that intermediate between being and not being there 
has to be discovered a corresponding intermediate between ig- 
norance and knowledge, if there be such ? 

Certainly. 

Do we admit the existence of opinion ? 

Undoubtedly. 

As being the same with knowledge, or another faculty ? 

Another faculty. 

Then opinion and knowledge have to do with different kinds 
of matter corresponding to this difference of faculties ? 

Yes. 

312 

THE REPUBLIC . 

And knowledge is relative to existence and knows existence : 
but I will first make a division. 

What division ? 

I will begin by placing faculties in a class by themselves : they 
are powers in us and in all things by which we do as we do. 
Sight and hearing, for example, I should call faculties. Have 1 
clearly explained the class which I mean ? 

Yes, I quite understand. 

Then let me tell you my view about them. I do not see them, 
and therefore the distinctions of figure, colour, and the like, which 
enable me to discern the differences of some things, do not apply 
to them. In speaking of a faculty I think only of the end and 
working ; and that which has the same end and the same opera- 
tion I call the same faculty, but that which has another end and 
another operation I call different. Would that be your way of 
speaking ? 

Yes. 

To return. Would you place knowledge among faculties, or in 
some other class ? 

Certainly knowledge is a faculty and the most powerful of all 
faculties. 

And is opinion also a faculty ? 

Certainly, he said ; for opinion is that with which we are able 
to form an opinion. 

And yet you were surely admitting a little while ago that know- 
ledge is not the same as opinion ? 

Why, yes, said he : for how can any reasonable being ever 
identify that which is infallible with that which errs? 

That is very good, I said, and clearly shows that there is a 
distinction between them which is admitted by us ? 

Yes. 

Then knowledge and opinion having distinct powers have also 
distinct ends or subject-matters ? 

That is certain. 

Being is the end or subject-matter of knowledge, and knowledge 
is the knowledge of being ? 

Yes. 

And opinion is to have an opinion ? 

Yes. 

BOOK V. 

3i3 

And is the subject-matter of opinion the same as the subject- 
matter of knowledge ? 

Nay, he replied, that is already disproven; if difference in 
faculty implies difference in the end or subject-matter, and opinion 
and knowledge are equally faculties and also distinct faculties, 
the subject-matter of knowledge cannot be the same as the subject- 
matter of opinion. 

Then if being is the subject-matter of knowledge, something else 
must be the subject-matter of opinion ? 

Yes, something else. 

Well then, is not-being the subject-matter of opinion ? or, 
rather, how can there be an opinion at all about not-being? 
Reflect: when a man has an opinion, has he not an opinion about 
something ? Can he have an opinion which is an opinion about 
nothing ? 

Impossible. 

He who has an opinion has an opinion about some one thing ? 

Yes. 

And not-being is not one thing but, properly speaking, nothing ? 

True. 

1 

Of not-being, ignorance was assumed to be the necessary 
correlative ; of being, knowledge? 

True, he said. 

Then opinion is not concerned either with being or with not- 
being ? 

Not with either. 

And can therefore neither be ignorance nor knowledge ? 

That seems to be true. 

Then is opinion to be sought without and beyond either of 
them in a greater clearness than knowledge, or in a greater 
darkness than ignorance? 

Neither. 

Then I suppose that opinion appears to you darker than know- 
ledge, but lighter than ignorance ? 

Both ; and in no small degree. 

And also to be within and between them ? 

Yes. 

Then you would infer that opinion is intermediate ? 

No question. 

3*4 

THE REPUBLIC. 

But were we not saying before, that if anything appeared to be 
of a sort which is and is not at the same time, that sort of thing 
would appear also to lie in the interval between pure being and 
absolute not-being; and that the corresponding faculty is neither 
knowledge nor ignorance, but will also be discovered in the 
interval between them? 

True. 

And in that interval there has now been discovered a thing 
which we call opinion ? 

There has. 

Then what remains to be discovered is the object which par- 
takes equally of the nature of being and not-being, and cannot 
rightly be termed the pure form of either; this unknown term, 
when discovered, we may justly hail as the subject of opinion, 
and assign to each their due — to the extremes the faculty of the 
extreme, and to the mean the faculty of the mean. 

True. 

This being premised, I would ask the gentleman who is of 479 
opinion that there is no absolute or unchangeable idea of beauty 
— in whose opinion the beautiful is diverse — he, I say, your lover 
of beautiful sights, who cannot bear to be told that the just is 
one, or the beautiful is one, or that anything is one— to him I 
would appeal, saying, Best of men, of all these beautiful things is 
there one which will not also appear ugly; or of the just, which 
will not appear to be unjust ; or of the holy, which will not also 
be unholy ? 

No, he replied ; they must in some way appear both beautiful 
and ugly : and the same is true of the rest. 

And may not the many which are doubles be also halves ? — 
doubles, that is, of one thing, and halves of another ? 

Yes. 

And things great and small, heavy and light, may equally be 
termed either in different points of view? 

Yes; either name will always attach to all of them. - 

And can anything which is called by a particular name be said 
to be this rather than not to be this? 

He replied : They are like the punning riddles which are asked 
at feasts and the children’s puzzle about the eunuch aiming at 
the bat, with what he hit him, as they say in the puzzle, and 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK v . 

315 

what the bat was sitting upon ; for these things are a riddle also, 
and have a double sense : nor can you fix them in your mind, 
either as being or not-being, or both or neither. 

Then what do you do with them? I said. Can they have a 
better place than between being and not-being? For they are 
clearly not in greater darkness or negation than not-being, or 
more full of light and existence than being. 

That is quite true, he said. 

Thus then we seem to have discovered that the diverse prin- 
ciples of beauty and the like, which are held by divers men, are 
tossing about in some region which is intermediate between pure 
existence and pure non-existence ? 

That has now been discovered by us. 

Yes; and we have before agreed that anything of this kind 
which we might find was to be described as matter of opinion, 
and not as matter of knowledge; being the intermediate flux 
which is caught and detained by the intermediate faculty. 

That was admitted. 

Then those who see the many beautiful, and who yet neither 
see, nor can be taught to see, absolute beauty ; who see the many 
just, and not absolute justice, and the like, — such persons may be 
said to have opinion but not knowledge ? 

That is certain. 

But those who see the absolute and eternal and immutable may 
be said to know, and not to have opinion only ? 

Neither can that be denied. 

The one love and embrace the subjects of knowledge, the other 
those of opinion ? The latter are the same, as I dare say you will 
480 remember, who listened to sweet sounds and gazed upon fair 
colours, but would not tolerate the existence of absolute beauty. 

Yes, I remember. 

Shall we then be guilty of any impropriety in calling them 
lovers of opinion rather than lovers of wisdom, and will they 
be very angry with us for thus describing them ? 

I shall tell them that they ought not to be angry at a descrip- 
tion of themselves which is true. 

But those who embrace the absolute are to be called lovers of 
wisdom and not lovers of opinion. 

Assuredly. 

BOOK VI. 

And thus, Glaucon, after the argument has gone a weary way, 484 
the true and the false philosophers have at length appeared in 
view. 

I do not think, he said, that the way could have been short- 
ened. 

I suppose not, I said ; and yet I believe that the contrast might 
be made still more striking if there were not many other questions 
awaiting us, which he who desires to see in what the life of the 
just differs from that of the unjust must consider. 

And what question is next in order ? he asked. 

Surely, I said, there can be no doubt about that. Inasmuch 
as philosophers only are able to grasp the eternal and unchange- 
able, and those who wander in the region of the many and variable 
are not philosophers, I must ask you which of the two kinds 
should be the rulers of our State ? 

And what would be a fair answer to that question ? he said. 

Ask yourself, I replied, which of the two are better able to 
guard the laws and institutions of our State; and let them be 
our guardians. 

Very good, he said. 

Neither, I said, can there be any question that the guardian 
who is to keep anything should have eyes rather than no eyes ? 

There can be no question of that. 

And are not those who are deprived of the knowledge of the 
true being of each thing, and have in their souls no clear pattern, 
and are unable as with a painter’s eye to look at the very truth 
and to that original to repair, and having perfect vision of the 
other world to order the laws about beauty, goodness, justice in 
this, and to guard and preserve the order of them — are they 
not, I say, simply blind ? 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VI. 

3i7 

Indeed, he replied, they are much in that condition. 

And shall these be our guardians when there are others who, 
besides being their equals in experience and not inferior to them 
in any particular of virtue, have also the knowledge of the true 
being of everything? 

There can be no reason, he said, for rejecting those who have 
485 this great and pre-eminent quality, if they do not fail in any 
other respect. 

Suppose then, I said, that we determine how far they can unite 
this and the other excellences. 

By all means. 

First of all, as we began by observing, their nature will have 
to be ascertained ; and if we are agreed about that, then, if I am 
not mistaken, we shall also be agreed that such an union of 
qualities is possible, and that those in whom they are united, and 
those only, should be rulers in the State. Let us begin by as- 
suming that philosophical minds always love that sort of know- 
ledge which shows them the eternal nature in which is no 
variableness from generation and corruption. 

Let that be acknowledged. 

And further, I said, let us admit that they are lovers of all 
being; there is no part whether greater or less, or more or less 
honourable, which they are willing to renounce; that has been 
already illustrated by the example of the lover and the man of 
ambition. 

True. 

There is another quality which they will also need if they are 
to be what we were saying. 

What quality is that? 

Truthfulness: they will never intentionally receive falsehood, 
which is their detestation, and they will love the truth. 

Yes, he said, that may be affirmed. 

‘May be,’ my friend, I replied, that is not the word; say 
rather, c must be affirmed:* for he whose nature is amorous of 
anything cannot help loving all that belongs or is akin to the 
object of his affections. 

Right, he said. 

And is there anything more akin to wisdom than truth ? 

Impossible, he said. 

3 1 8 

THE REPUBLIC . 

Or can the same nature be a lover of wisdom and a lover 
of falsehood ? 

Never. 

The true lover of learning then must from his earliest youth, 
as far as in him lies, desire all truth ? 

Assuredly. 

But then again, he whose desires are strong in one direction 
will have them v/eaker in others ; they will be like a stream which 
has been drawn off into another channel. 

True. 

He whose desires are drawn towards knowledge in every- form 
will be absorbed in the pleasures of the soul, and will hardly 
feel bodily pleasure — I mean, if he' be a true philosopher and not 
a sham one. 

That is most certain. 

Such an one is sure to be temperate and the reverse of covetous; 
for the motives which make another man covetous and also 
profuse in expenditure, are no part of his character. There is 
another criterion of the philosophical nature which has also to 486 
be considered. 

What is that ? 

There should be no secret corner of meanness; for meanness 
is entirely opposed to a soul that is always longing after the whole 
of things both divine and human. 

Most true, he replied. 

Can the soul then, which has magnificence of conception and 
is the spectator of all time and all existence, think much of 
human life ? 

Impossible, he replied. 

Or can such an one account death fearful ? 

No indeed. 

Then the cowardly and mean nature has no part in true 
philosophy ? 

I should say not. 

Or again: can he who is harmoniously constituted, who is 
not covetous or mean, or a boaster, or a coward — can he, I say, 
ever be unjust or hard in his dealings ? 

Impossible. 

You will note also whether a man is righteous and gentle, 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VI. 

319 

or rude and unsociable ; these are the signs which distinguish 
even in youth the philosophical nature from the unphiloso- 
> phical. 

True. 

And there is another point which should be remarked. 

What is that ? 

Whether he has or has not a pleasure in learning ; for no 
one will love that which gives him pain, and in which after 
much toil he makes little progress. 

Certainly not. 

And again, if he is forgetful and retains nothing of what he 
learns, will he not be an empty vessel ? 

That is certain. 

Labouring in vain, he must end in hating himself and his 
fruitless occupation ? 

Yes. 

Then the forgetful soul cannot be ranked among philosophers; 
a philosopher ought to have a good memory ? 

Certainly. 

But the inharmonious and unseemly nature can only tend to 
disproportion ? 

No doubt of that. 

And do you consider truth to be akin to proportion or dis- 
proportion ? 

To proportion. 

Then, besides other qualities, let us seek for a well-proportioned 
and gracious mind whose own nature will of herself be drawn 
to the true being of everything. 

Certainly. 

Well, and do not all these qualities go together, and are they 
not necessary to a soul, which is to have a full and perfect par- 
ticipation of being ? 

487 They are absolutely necessary, he replied. 

And must not that be a blameless study which he only can 
pursue who has a good memory, and is quick to learn, noble, 
gracious, the friend of truth, justice, courage, temperance, who 
are his kindred ? 

The god of jealousy himself, he said, could find no fault with 
such a study. 

320 

THE REPUBLIC . 

And to these, I said, when perfected by years and education, 
and to these only you will entrust the State. 

Here Adeimantus interposed and said: To this, Socrates, no 
one can offer a reply; but there is a feeling which those who 
hear you talk as you are now doing often experience, and which 
I may describe in this way: they fancy that they are led astray 
a little at each step in the argument, owing to their own want 
of skill in asking and answering questions; these littles accu- 
mulate, and at the end of the discussion they are found to have 
sustained a dire reverse and to be at the antipodes of their 
former selves. And as unskilful players of draughts are at last 
shut up by their skilled adversaries and have no piece to move, 
so they find themselves at last shut up and have no word to say 
in this new game of which words are the counters; and yet all 
the time they are in the right. This observation is suggested 
to me by what is now occurring. For at this instant any one 
will say, that although in words he is not able to meet you at 
each step in the argument, as a fact he sees that the votaries 
of philosophy who carry on the study, not only in youth with 
a view to education, but as the pursuit of their maturer years 
— that these men, I say, for the most part grow into very 
strange beings, not to say utter rogues, and that the result 
with those who may be considered the best of them is, that 
they are made useless to the world by the very study which you 
extol. 

Well, I said ; and do you think that they are wrong ? 

I cannot tell, he replied; but I should like to know what is 
your opinion. 

Let me tell you then that I think they are quite right. 

Then how can you be justified in saying that cities will not 
cease from evil until philosophers rule in them, when philosophers 
are acknowledged by us to be of no use to them ? 

You ask a question, I said, which I can only answer in a 
parable. 

Yes, said he; and that is a way of speaking to which you are 
not accustomed, I suppose. 

I perceive, I said, that you are vastly amused at having got me 
to speak on such an impossible theme ; and now you shall hear 
the parable in order that you may judge better of the meagreness 488 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VI. 

321 

of my imagination: for the treatment which the best men ex- 
perience from their States is so grievous that no single thing on 
earth can be compared with them; and therefore in defending 
them I must have recourse to fiction, and make a compound of 
many things, like the fabulous unions of goats and stags which 
are found in pictures. Imagine then a fleet or a ship in which 
there is a captain who is taller and stronger than any of the crew, 
but he is a little deaf and has a similar infirmity in sight, and 
-his knowledge of navigation is not much better. Now the sailors 
are quarrelling with one another about the steering; every one is 
of opinion that he ought to steer, though he has never learned and 
cannot tell who taught him or when he learned, and will even 
assert that the art of navigation cannot be taught, and is ready to 
cut in pieces him who says the contrary. They throng about the 
captain, and do all that they can to make him commit the helm 
to them ; and then, if they fail on some occasion and others pre- 
vail, they kill the others or throw them overboard, and having 
first chained up the noble captain’s senses with drink or some 
narcotic drug, they mutiny and take possession of the ship and 
make themselves at home with the stores ; and thus, eating and 
drinking, they continue their voyage with such success as might 
be expected of them. Him who is their partisan and zealous in 
the design of getting the ship out of the captain’s hands into their 
own, whether by force or persuasion, they compliment with the 
name of sailor, pilot, able seaman, and abuse the other sort of 
man and call him a good-for-nothing ; but they have not even a 
notion that the true pilot must pay attention to the year and 
seasons and sky and stars and winds, and whatever else belongs to 
his art, if he intends to be really qualified for the command of a 
ship; at the same time that he must and will be the steerer, 
whether people like him to steer or not ; and they think that the 
combination of this with the art of navigation is impossible1. 
Now in vessels and among sailors, whose condition is such 
489 as this, how will the true pilot be regarded? Will he not be called 
by the mutineers useless, prater, star-gazer ? 

Of course, said Adeimantus. 

1 Or, applying onus fie *vj3epvq<m to the mutineers, ‘ But determined to rule 
in spite of other people, and not believing that the practice of this can be 
combined with the pilot’s art.' 

VOL. 11. Y 

Digitized by Google 

322 

THE REPUBLIC. 

I do not suppose, I said, that you would care to hear the interpre- 
tation of the figure, which is an allegory of the true philosopher in 
his relation to the State ; for you understand already. 

Certainly. 

Then suppose you now take the parable to the gentleman who 
is surprised at finding that philosophers have no honour in their 
cities, and explain to him and try to convince him that their 
having honour would be far more extraordinary. 

I will. 

Say to him, that, in deeming the best of the votaries of philo- 
sophy to be useless to the rest of the world, he is right ; but he 
ought to attribute their uselessness to the fault of those who will 
not use them, and not to themselves. The pilot should not humbly 
beg the sailors to be commanded by him— that is not the order of 
nature ; neither are the wise to go to the doors of the rich (the 
ingenious author of this told a lie), for the truth is, that, when a 
man is ill, whether he be rich or poor, he must go to the phy- 
sician’s door — the physician will nof come to him, and he who is 
asking to be governed, to the door of him who is able to govern. 
No ruler who is good for anything ought to ask his subjects to 
obey him; he is not like the present governors of mankind who 
may be compared to the mutinous sailors, and the true helmsman 
to those whom they call useless and star-gazers. 

' Precisely, he said. 

For these reasons, and among men like these, the noblest 
pursuit of all is not likely to be much esteemed by those who are 
of the opposite persuasion; not that the greatest and most lasting 
injury is done to philosophy by them, but by her own professing 
followers, the same of whom you suppose the accuser to say, that 
the greater number of them are arrant rogues, and the best are 
useless ; in which opinion I agreed. 

Yes. 

And the reason why the good are useless has been now explained ? 

True. 

Then shall we now endeavour to show that the corruption of 
the greater number is also unavoidable, and that this is not to be 
laid to the charge of philosophy any more than the other ? 

By all means. 

And let us ask and answer in turn, first going back to the 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VI. 

323 

490 description of the gentle and noble nature. Truth, as you will 
remember, was his captain, whom he followed always and in all 
things j failing in this, he was an impostor, and had no part or lot 
in true philosophy. 

Yes, that was said. 

Well, and is not this quality alone greatly at variance with our 
present notions of him ? 

Certainly, he said. 

And have we not a right to say, in his defence, that the true 
lover of knowledge is always striving after being — that is his 
nature j he will not rest in the fanciful multiplicity of individuals, 
but will go on — the keen edge will not be blunted, neither the 
force of his desire abate until he have attained the knowledge of 
the true nature of every essence by a kindred power in the soul, 
and by that power drawing near and mingling incorporate with 
very being, having begotten mind and truth, he will know and 
live and grow truly, and then, and not till then, will he cease 
from his travail. 

Nothing, he said, can be more just than such a description 
of him. 

And will the love of a lie be any part of a philosopher’s nature ? 
Will he not utterly hate a lie? 

That he will. 

And when truth is the captain, we cannot suspect any evil of 
the band which he leads ? 

Impossible. 

Justice and health will be of the company, and temperance will 
follow after. 

True, he replied. 

Neither is there any reason why I should again set in array 
the philosopher’s virtues, as you will doubtless remember that 
courage, magnanimity, apprehension, memory, were his natural 
gifts. And you objected that, although no one could deny what I 
then said, still, if you leave words and look at facts, the persons 
who are thus described are some of them useless, and the greater 
number wholly depraved; and this led us to enquire into the 
grounds of these accusations, and we had arrived at the point of 
asking why are the many bad, which question of necessity brought 
us back to the examination and definition of the true philosopher. 

324 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Exactly. 

And now we have to consider the corruptions of this nature, 
why so many are spoiled and so few escape spoiling — those, I 
mean, whom you call useless but not wicked ; and after that we 
will consider the imitators who turn into philosophers, what 49 
manner of natures are they who aspire after a profession which is 
above them and of which they are unworthy, and then, by their 
manifold inconsistencies, bring upon philosophy, and upon all 
philosophers, that universal reprobation of which we speak. 

But what, he said, is the nature of these corruptions ? 

That I will try to explain to you, I said, if I can. Every one 
will admit that a nature thus gifted, and having all the supposed 
conditions of the philosophic nature perfect, is a plant that rarely 
grows among men — there are not many of them. 

They are very rare. 

And what numberless causes may tend utterly to destroy these 
rare natures ! 

What causes ? 

In the first place there are their own virtues, their courage, 
temperance, and the rest of them, every one of which praiseworthy 
qualities (and this is a most singular circumstance) destroys and 
distracts from philosophy the soul which is the possessor of them. 

That is very singular, he replied. 

Then there are all the ordinary goods of life — beauty, wealth, 
strength, rank, and great connections in the State — on which I 
need not enlarge, having given you a general Outline of them j 
these also have the effect of corrupting and distracting them. 

I know the goods which you mean, and I should like to know 
what you mean about them. 

Grasp the truth, then, as a whole, I said, and in the right way, 
and you will have no difficulty in understanding the preceding 
remarks, and they will not appear strange to you. 

And how am I to do that ? he asked. 

Why, I said, we know that when any seed or plant, whether 
vegetable or animal, fails to meet with proper nutriment or 
climate or soil, the greater the vigour, the greater the need also 
of suitable conditions, because, as I imagine, evil is a greater 
enemy to good than to the not-good. 

Very true. 

BOOK VI. 

325 

There is reason in supposing that the finest natures, when under 
alien conditions, receive more injury than the inferior, because the 
contrast is greater. 

That is true. 

And may we not say, Adeimantus, that the most gifted minds, 
when they are ill-educated, become the worst ? Do not great crimes 
and the spirit of pure evil spring out of a fullness of nature ruined 
by education rather than from any inferiority, whereas weak 
natures are scarcely capable of any very great good or very great 
evil ? 

There I think that you are right. 

492 And our philosopher follows the same analogy — he is like a 
plant which, having proper nurture, grows and matures into all 
virtue, but, if sown and planted in an alien soil, becomes the most 
noxious of all weeds, unless saved by some divine help. Do you 
really think, as people are fond of saying, that our youth are cor- 
rupted by the Sophists, or that individual Sophisters corrupt them 
in any degree worth speaking of? Are not the public who say 
these things the greatest of all Sophists? And do they not educate 
to perfection alike young and old, men and women, and fashion 
them after their own hearts ? 

When is this accomplished ? he said. 

When they meet together, and the world sits down at an as- 
sembly, or in a court of law, or a theatre, or a camp, or at some 
other place of resort, and there is a great uproar, and they praise 
some things which are being said or done, and blame other 
things, equally exaggerating in both, shouting and clapping their 
hands, and the echo of the rocks and the place in which they 
are assembled redoubles the sound of the praise or blame — at 
such a time will not a young man’s heart leap within him ? Will 
the influences of education stem the tide of praise or blame, and 
not rather be carried away in the stream ? And will he not have 
the notions of good and evil which the public in general have — 
he will do as they do, and as they are, such will he be ? 

Yes, Socrates; necessity will compel him. 

And yet, I said, there is a still greater necessity, which lias not 
been mentioned. 

What is that ? 

The ‘gentle force’ of attainder or exile or death, which, as you 

326 

THE REPUBLIC . 

are aware, these new Sophists and educators, who are the public, 
apply when their words are powerless. 

Indeed they do, and no mistake. 

Now what opinion of any other Sophist, or of any private man, 
can be expected to overcome in such an unequal contest ? 

None, he replied. 

No, indeed, I said, even to make the attempt is a piece of folly ; 
for there neither is, has been, nor ever can be, as I think, another 
type of character, trained to virtue independently of them — I 
speak, my friend, of man only; what is more than man, as the 
proverb says, is not included : for I would not have you ignorant 
that, in the present evil state of governments, whatever is saved and 
comes to good is saved by the power of God, as you may truly say. 493 

To that I quite assent, he replied. 

Then let me beg your assent also to a further observation. 

What is that ? 

Why, that all those mercenary adventurers, whom the world 
calls Sophists and rivals, do but teach the collective opinion of the 
many, which are the opinions of their assemblies ; and this is their 
wisdom. I might compare them to a man who should study the 
tempers and desires of a mighty strong beast who is fed by him — 
he would learn how to approach and handle him, also at what 
times and from what causes he is dangerous or the reverse, and 
what is the meaning of his several cries, and by what sounds, 
when another utters them, he is soothed or infuriated ; and you 
may suppose further that when, by constantly living with him, he 
has become perfect in all this which he calls wisdom, he makes 
a system or art, which he proceeds to teach, not that he has any 
real notion of what he is teaching, but he names this honourable 
and that dishonourable, or good or evil, or just or unjust, all in 
accordance with the tastes and tempers of the great brute, when 
he has learnt the meaning of his inarticulate grunts. Good he 
pronounces to be what pleases him and evil what he dislikes; and 
he can give no other account of them except that the just and 
noble are the necessary, having never himself seen, and having 
no power of explaining to others, the nature of either, or the 
immense difference between them. Would not he be a rare 
educator ? 

Indeed, I think that he would. 

BOOK VI. 

327 

And in what respect does he differ from him who thinks that 
wisdom is the discernment of the tastes and pleasures of the 
assembled multitude, whether in painting or music, or, finally, in 
politics? For I suppose you will agree that he who associates 
with the many, and exhibits to them his poem or other work 
of art or political service, making them his judges, except under 
protest2, will also experience the fatal necessity of producing what- 
ever they praise. And yet the reasons are utterly ludicrous which 
they give in confirmation of their notions about the honourable 
and good. Did you ever hear any of them which were not ? 

No, nor am I likely to hear. 

You recognize the truth of what has been said ? Then let me 
ask you to consider further whether the world will ever be induced 
to believe in the existence of absolute beauty rather than of the 
494 many beautiful, or of the absolute in each kind rather than of the 
many in each kind ? 

Certainly not. 

Then the world cannot possibly be a philosopher ? 

Impossible. 

And therefore philosophers must inevitably fall under the 
censure of the world? 

They must. 

And of individuals who consort with the mob and seek to 
please them ? 

That is evident. 

Then, do you see any way in which the philosopher can be 
preserved in his calling to the end ? and remember what we were 
saying of him, that he was to have knowledge and memory and 
courage and magnanimity — these were admitted by us to be the 
true philosopher’s gifts. 

Yes. ' 

Now, will not such an one be, from the first, in all things first 
among all, especially if his bodily endowments are like his mental 
ones ? 

Certainly, he said. 

And his friends and fellow-citizens will want to use them as 
he gets older for their own purposes ? 

No question. 

2 Putting a comma after r<av avaytcaiip. 

328 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Falling at his feet, they will make requests to him and do him 
honour and flatter him, because they want to get into their hands 
the power which he will one day possess. 

That is often the way, he said. 

And what will he do under such circumstances, especially if he 
be a citizen of a great city, rich and noble, and a tall proper 
youth? Will he not be full of boundless aspirations, and fancy 
himself able to manage the affairs of Hellenes and of barbarians, 
and in the thought of this he will dilate and elevate himself in 
the fullness of vain pomp and senseless pride ? 

Very true, he said. 

Now, when he is in this state of mind, if some one gently 
comes to him and tells him that he is without sense, which he 
must have, and that the missing sense is not to be had without 
serving an apprenticeship, do you think that, under such adverse 
circumstances, he will be easily induced to listen to him ? 

That would be very unlikely. 

But suppose further that there is one person who has feeling, 
and who, either from some excellence of disposition or natural 
affinity, is inclined or drawn towards philosophy, and his friends 
think that they are likely to lose the advantages which they were 
going to reap from his friendship, what will be the effect upon 
them? Will they not do and say anything to prevent his learning 
, and to render the teacher powerless, using to this end private 
intrigues as well as public prosecutions ? 

There can be no doubt of that. 

And how can one who is thus circumstanced ever become a 
philosopher ? 

Impossible. 

Then, were we not right in saying that even the very qualities 
which make a man a philosopher may, if he be ill-educated, serve 
to divert him from philosophy, no less than riches and their 
accompaniments and the other so-called goods of life ? 

That was quite true. 

Thus, my excellent friend, is brought about the ruin and failure 
of the natures best adapted to the best of all pursuits, who, as we 
assert, are rare at any time ; and this is the class out of whom 
come those who are the authors of the greatest evil to States and 
individuals ; and also of the greatest good when the tide carries 

495 

BOOK VI. 

329 

them in the direction of good; but a small man never was the 
doer of any great thing either to individuals or States. 

That is most true, he said. 

They fall away, and philosophy is left desolate, with her marriage- 
rite incomplete : for her own have forsaken her, and while they are 
leading a false and unbecoming life, she, like an orphan bereft 
of her kindred, is dishonoured by other unworthy persons, who 
enter in and fasten upon her the reproaches which her reprovers 
utter ; by whom, as you say, her votaries are affirmed, some of them 
to be good for nothing, and the greater number deserving of every- 
thing that is bad. 

That is certainly what is said. 

Yes; and what else would you expect, I said, when you think 
of the puny creatures who, seeing this land open to them — a land 
well stocked with fair names and showy titles — like prisoners who 
run away out of prison into a sanctuary, take a leap out of the 
arts into philosophy; those who do so being probably the cleverest 
hands at their own miserable crafts ? for, although philosophy be 
in this evil case, still there remains a dignity about her which 
is not found in the other arts. And many are thus attracted by 
her whose natures are imperfect and whose souls are marred and 
enervated by their meannesses, as their bodies also are disfigured 
by their arts and crafts. Is not that true ? 

Yes. 

Are they not exactly like a bald little tinker who has just 
got out of durance and come into a fortune; he washes the dirt 
off him and has a new coat, and is decked out as a bridegroom 
going to marry his master's daughter, who is left poor and desolate ? 

496 The figure is exact. 

And what will be the issue of such marriages? Will they not be 
vile and bastard ? 

There can be no question of that. 

And when persons who are unworthy of education approach 
philosophy and make an alliance with her who is in a rank above 
them, what sort of ideas and opinions are likely to be gene- 
rated? Will they not be sophisms captivating to the ear, yet 
having nothing in them genuine or worthy of or akin to true 
wisdom ? 

No doubt, he said. 

330 THE REPUBLIC. 

Then there is a very small remnant, Adeimantus, I said, of 
worthy disciples of philosophy : perchance some noble nature, 
brought up under good influences, and in the absence of temp- 
tation, who is detained by exile in her service, which he refuses 
to quit; or some lofty soul born in a mean city, the politics of 
which he contemns or neglects ; and perhaps there may be a few 
who, having a gift for philosophy, leave other arts, which they 
justly despise, and come to her ; — and peradventure there are 
some who are restrained by our friend Theages* bridle (for 
Theages, you know, had everything to divert him from philo- 
sophy ; but his ill-health kept him from politics). My own case of 
the internal sign is indeed hardly worth mentioning, as very 
rarely, if ever, has such a monitor been vouchsafed to any one else. 
Those who belong to this small class have tasted how sweet 
and blessed a possession philosophy is, and have also seen and 
been satisfied of the madness of the multitude, and known that 
there is no one who ever acts honestly in the administration of 
States, nor any helper who will save any one who maintains the 
cause of the just. Such a saviour would be like a man who has 
fallen among wild beasts — unable to join in the wickedness of his 
fellows, neither would he be able alone to resist all their fierce 
natures, and therefore he would be of no use to the State or to his 
friends, and would have to throw away his life before he had done 
any good to himself or others. And he reflects upon all this, and 
holds his peace, and does his own business. He is like one who 
retires under the shelter of a wall in the storm of dust and sleet 
which the driving wind hurries along; and when he sees the rest 
of mankind full of wickedness, he is content if only he can live 
his own life and be pure from evil or unrighteousness, and depart 
in peace and good will, with bright hopes. 

And he who does this, he said, will have done a great work 
before he departs. 

Yes, I said, a great work, but not the greatest, unless he find 
a State suitable to him; for in a State which is suitable to him, 497 
he will have a larger growth and be the saviour of his country, as 
well as of himself. 

Enough, then, of the causes why philosophy is in such an evil 
name; how unjustly, has been explained: and now is there any- 
thing more which you wish to say? 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VI. 

33i 

Nothing more of that, he replied ; but I should like to know which 
of the existing governments you deem suitable to philosophy. 

Not any of them, I said ; and that is the very accusation which 
I bring against them : not one of them is worthy of the philosophic 
nature; and hence that nature is warped and alienated from 
them; — as the exotic seed which is sown in a foreign land be- 
comes denaturalized, and assimilates to the character of the soil, 
which gets the better, even so this growth of philosophy, instead 
of persisting, receives another character. But if philosophy ever 
finds that perfection in the State which she herself is, then will 
be seen that she is in truth divine, and that all other things, 
whether natures of men or institutions, are but human; — and 
now, I know, that you are going to ask what that State is. 

No, he said; there you are wrong, for 1 was going to ask 
another question — whether this is the State of which we are the 
founders and inventors, or another? 

Yes, I replied, ours in most respects; but you may remember 
our saying before that some living authority would always be 
required in the State whose idea of the constitution would be the 
same which guided you originally when laying down the laws. 

That was said, he replied. 

Yes, but imperfectly said; you frightened us with objections, 
which certainly showed that the discussion would be long and 
difficult; and even what remains is the reverse of easy. 

What is that ? 

The question how the study of philosophy may be so ordered as 
to be consistent with the preservation of the State; for all great 
things are attended with risk; as the saying is, chard is the good/ 

Still, he said, let us clear that point up and the enquiry will then 
be complete. 

I shall not be hindered, I said, by any want of will, but, if at 
all, by a want of power: of my zeal you shall have ocular demon- 
stration ; and please to remark how bold I am just now in ven- 
turing to assert that a State ought not to have philosophy studied 
after the present fashion. 

How do you mean ? 

At present, I said, even those who study philosophy in early 
youth, and in the intervals of money-making and house-keeping, 
do but make an approach to the most difficult branch of the study, 

332 

THE REPUBLIC . 

and then take themselves off — (I am speaking of those who have 
the most training, and by the most difficult branch I mean dia- 
lectic) ; and in after-life they perhaps go to a discussion which is 
held by others, and to which they are invited, and this they deem 
a great matter, as the study of philosophy is not regarded by them 
as their proper business: then, as years advance, in most cases 
their light is quenched more truly than Heracleitus’ sun, for they 
never rise again3. 

But what ought to be their course ? 

Just the opposite. In childhood and youth their study, and 
what philosophy they learn, should be suited to their tender 
age: let them take care of their bodies during the period of 
growth, and thus philosophy will have her instruments ready ; as 
the man advances to mature intelligence, increasing the gymnas- 
tics of the soul; but when their strength fails and is past civil and 
military duties, then let them range at will and have no other 
serious employment, as we intend them to live happily here, and, 
this life ended, to have a similar happy destiny in another. 

How truly in earnest you are, Socrates! he said; I am sure of 
that ; and yet I believe that most of your hearers are likely to be 
still more earnest in their opposition to you, and will never be 
converted ; Thrasymachus least of all. 

Don’t raise a quarrel, I said, between Thrasymachus and me, 
who have just become friends, although, indeed, we were never 
enemies; for I shall go on using every effort until I either con- 
vert him and other men, or do something which avails against 
the day when they live again, and hold the like discourse in 
another existence. 

That will be a long time hence. 

Say rather, I replied, a time which is not to be reckoned in 
comparison with eternity. That the world will not believe my 
words is quite natural ; for they never saw that of which we are 
now speaking realized ; what they saw was a conventional imitation 
of philosophy, which consisted of words artificially brought toge- 
ther, not like these agreeing of their own accord, but a human 
being who in word and work is perfectly moulded, as far as he can 
be, into the proportion and likeness of virtue ; such an one ruling 

8 Heracleitus said the sun was extinguished every evening and new every 
morning. 

BOOK VI. 

333 

499 in a city which bears the same image they have never yet seen, in 
the case of one any more than of many — do you think they ever did ? 

No, indeed. 

No, my friend, nor have they often heard the words of beauty 
and freedom ; such words as those, which men use when they are 
earnestly and in every way seeking after truth, for the sake of 
knowledge, while they look coldly on the subtleties of controversy, 
the end of which is opinion and strife, whether they meet with 
them in the courts of law or in society. 

They are strangers, he said, to the words of which you speak. 

And this was what we foresaw, and this was the reason why 
truth forced us to admit that there is no chance of perfection, 
either in cities or governments or individuals, until a necessity 
was laid upon the second small class of philosophers (not the 
rogues, but those whom we termed useless), of taking care of the 
State and obeying the call of the State; or until kings them- 
selves, or the sons of kings or potentates, were inspired with a 
true love of philosophy. Now I maintain that there is no reason 
in saying that either of these alternatives, or both of them, is 
impossible ; if they were, we might indeed be justly ridiculed as 
dreamers and visionaries. Am I not right ? 

Quite right. 

If then, in the countless ages of the past, or at the present hour 
in some foreign clime which is far away and beyond our ken, the 
perfected philosopher is or has been or shall be hereafter compelled 
by a superior power to have the charge of the State, we are ready 
to assert to the death, that this our constitution has been, is, yea, 
and will be at any time, when the Muse of Philosophy is queen. 
Neither is there any impossibility in this; the difficulty is not 
denied by us. 

I agree with you, he said. 

But you will say that mankind in general are not agreed ? 

That is what I should say, he replied. . 

O my friend, I said, do not have such a bad opinion of man- 
kind: they will surely be of another mind, if gently and with 
the view of soothing them and removing the evil name of too much 
learning, you show them the philosopher as just now described, 
500 according to his true character and profession, and then they will 
see that you are not speaking of those whom they supposed; if 

334 

THE REPUBLIC. 

they view him in this light, they will surely change their mind, 
and answer in another strain4. Who can be at enmity with one 
who loves them, who that is himself gentle and free from envy 
will be jealous of one in whom there is no jealousy ? Nay, let me 
answer for you, that a few such there may be, but not many who 
have so harsh a temper. 

I entirely agree with you, he said. 

And do you not agree with me also as to the cause of the harsh 
feeling which the many have towards philosophy? This originates 
in the pretenders, who enter in, like a band of revellers, where 
they have no business, and are always abusing and quarrelling 
with them, who make persons instead of things the theme of 
their conversation ; and this is most unbecoming in philosophers. 

Most unbecoming. 

For he, Adeimantus, whose mind is fixed upon true being has 
no time to look down upon the affairs of men, or to be filled 
with jealousy and enmity in the struggle against them; his eye is 
ever directed towards fixed and immutable principles, which he 
sees neither injuring nor injured by one another, but ail in order 
moving according to reason ; these he imitates, and to these he 
would, as far as he can, conform himself. Can a man help 
imitating that with which he holds reverential converse ? 

Impossible. • 

And the philosopher also, conversing with the divine and im- 
mutable, becomes a part of that divine and immutable order, as for 
as nature allows; but all things arc liable to detraction. 

Certainly. 

And if a necessity be laid upon him of fashioning, not only 
himself, but human nature generally, whether in States or indi- 
viduals, into that which he there beholds, think you that he will be 
an unskilful artificer of justice, temperance, and every civil virtue ? 

Anything but unskilful. 

And if the world perceives that we are speaking the truth about 
him, will they be angry with philosophy? Will they disbelieve us, 
when we tell them that the State can only be happy which is 
planned by artists who make use of the heavenly pattern ? 

4 Reading tj xai tav ovra dtcovrai with a question. Or, taking aWoiav 8o£«v 
in a new sense : * Do you mean to say, that, even viewing him in this light, 
they will be of another mind from yours, and answer in another strain ? * 

BOOK VI. 

335 

They will not be angry if they only understand, he replied. But 
5° 1 what do you mean about the plan ? 

I mean, I replied, that they will take a State and human nature 
for their tablet and begin by making a clean surface. Now this is 
not an easy thing to do; and this is the mark which at once 
distinguishes them from every other legislator, — they will have 
nothing to do, either with individual or State, and will inscribe 
no laws, until they have either found, or themselves made, a clean 
surface. 

They will be very right, he said. 

Having effected this, they will proceed to make an outline of 
the constitution. 

No doubt. 

And in the course of the work, as I conceive, they will often 
turn their eyes first towards one, then towards the other. I 
mean that they will look at justice and beauty and temperance as 
they are in nature, and again at the corresponding quality in 
mankind, and they will inlay the true human image, moulding 
and selecting out of the various forms of life ; and this they will 
conceive according to that other image, which, when existing 
among men, Homer calls the form and likeness of God. 

That is true, he said. 

And one feature they will erase, and another they will in- 
scribe, until they have made the ways of men, as far as possible, 
agreeable to the ways of God ? 

Indeed, he said, in no other way could they make a fairer picture. 

And now, I said, do you think that we are beginning to persuade 
those whom you said were rushing at us with might and main, 
that the painter of constitutions is such an one as we were 
praising, — he, I mean, at whom they were so much infuriated, 
because into his hands we committed the State, or are they 
growing calmer at what they hear? 

Much calmer, if there is any sense in them. 

Why, where can they still find any ground for objection? Will 
they doubt that the philosopher is a lover of truth and being? 

That would be monstrous. 

Or that his nature, being such as we have delineated, is akin 
to the highest good ? 

Neither can they doubt that. 

336 

THE REPUBLIC. 

But again, will they tell us that such a nature, if properly 
trained, will not be perfectly good and wise as much as any that 
ever was ? Or will they prefer those whom we have set aside ? 

Surely not. 

Then will they still be angry at our saying, that, until philoso- 
phers bear rule in States, the evils of States and individuals will 
never cease, nor will this our imaginary State ever be realized ? 

I think that they will be less angry. 

Shall we assume that they are not only less angry but quite 
gentle, and that they have been converted and for very shame 502 
cannot refuse to come to terms ? 

Certainly, he said. 

Then now we may assume that they have been converted. And 
will any one deny the other point, that there may be sons of 
kings who are philosophers ? 

No one will doubt that, he said. 

And when they have come into being will any one say that 
they must of necessity be destroyed; for that they can hardly 
be saved is not denied even by us, but all will allow that, in 
the whole course of ages, peradventure a single one may be 
saved ? 

Surely. 

But, said I, one is enough ; let there be one man who has a 
city obedient to his will, and he might bring the ideal polity 
into being. 

Yes, one is enough. 

When the ruler has framed these laws and institutions, the 
citizens may possibly be willing to obey them? 

Certainly. 

And that others should approve, of what we approve, is no 
miracle or impossibility ? 

I think not. 

But we have sufficiently shown, in what has preceded, that all 
this, if only possible, is assuredly for the best. 

Yes, that has been proved. 

The conclusion is then, that our laws are best, and, though 
difficult of attainment, are not wholly unattainable. 

Very good. 

And now that this difficulty is ended another arises ; how and 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VI. 

337 

by what studies and pursuits, will saviours of the constitution 
be formed, and at what ages are they to apply themselves to their 
several studies ? — that has now to be discussed. 

Yes, certainly. 

I omitted the troublesome business of the possession of women, 
and the procreation of children, and the appointment of the rulers, 
because I knew that the perfect State would be eyed with jealousy 
. and was difficult of attainment ; but that piece of cleverness 
was not of much use to me, for I had to discuss them all the 
same. And now, having done with the women and children, I 
must pursue the other question of the rulers, beginning at the 
beginning. * We were saying, as you will remember, that they 
503 were to be lovers of their country, tried amid the influences of 
pleasures and pains, and neither in labours, nor fears, nor any 
other change of circumstances were to lose their patriotism ; 
he who failed in this was to be rejected, but he who always came 
forth pure, like gold tried in the refiners* fire, was to be made 
a ruler, and to receive honours and rewards in life and after 
death. That was the sort of thing which was being said, and 
then the argument turned aside and veiled her face; not liking 
to stir the question which has now arisen. 

I perfectly remember that, he said. 

Yes, my friend, I said, and I then shrank from hazarding the 
bold word ; but now let me dare to say — that the perfect guardian 
- must be a philosopher. 

Yes, he said, let that be proclaimed. 

And consider, I said, that there will not be many of them — 
that is not to be expected; for the gifts which we said were 
essential rarely grow together; they are mostly found in shreds 
and patches. 

What do you mean ? he said. 

You are aware, I replied, that persons who have quick in- 
telligence, memory, sagacity, shrewdness, and all that sort of 
thing, are not often of a nature which is willing at the same 
time to live orderly and in a peaceful and settled manner; and 
this is equally true of the high-spirited and magnanimous; they 
are driven any way by their impetuosity, and all their solid prin- 
ciple goes out of them. 

That is true, he said. 

VOL. 11. 

z 

338 

TIIE REPUBLIC. 

On the other hand, those steadfast, immovable natures upon 
which you can rely, and which have not the wit to run away 
in a battle, are equally immovable when there is anything to be 
learned; they seem to be in a torpid state, and are apt to yawn 
and go to sleep over any intellectual toil. 

That is true. 

And yet we were saying that both qualities were necessary 
in those to whom the higher education is to be imparted, and 
who are to share in any office or command. 

True, he said. 

And will they be a class which is rarely found ? 

Yes, indeed. 

Then the aspirant must be tested in those labours and dangers 
and pleasures which we mentioned before ; and there is another 
kind of probation which we did not mention — they must be 
exercised also in many kinds of knowledge, to see whether the 
soui will be able to endure the highest of all, or will faint under 
them, as many do amid the toils of the games. , 5°4 

Yes, he said, that is the way in which we ought to regard 
them. But what do you mean by the highest of all knowledge ? 

You may remember, I said, that we divided the soul into 
three parts; and the several natures of justice, temperance, 
courage, and wisdom were compared and defined by us ? 

Indeed, he said, if I had forgotten that, I should not deserve 
to hear more. 

And do you remember, I said, what preceded the discussion 
of them? 

What was that ? 

We spoke, if I am not mistaken, of a perfect way, which was 
longer and more circuitous, at the end of which they were to 
appear in full view ; this however, as we said, need not prevent 
our offering an exposition of a popular sort, in character like what 
had preceded. And you replied that such an exposition would 
be enough for you, and so the enquiry was continued in what 
appeared to me to be a very imperfect manner ; but whether you 
were satisfied or not is for you to say. 

Yes, he said, I thought and the others thought that you gave 
us a fair measure of truth. 

But, my friend, I said, a measure of such things which in any 

\ 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VI. 

339 

degree falls short of the truth is not fair measure ; for nothing 
imperfect is the measure of anything, although persons are too 
apt to be contented and think that they need search no further. 

Yes, that is not uncommon when people are indolent. 

Yes, I said ; and there cannot be any worse fault in the guardian 
of a State and the laws. 

True. 

The guardian then, I said, must be required to take the longer 
route, and toil at learning as well as at gymnastics, or he 
will never reach the height of that knowledge which is his 
proper calling. 

What, he said, is there a knowledge still higher than these — 
higher than justice and the other virtues ? 

Yes, I said, there is. And of these too we must behold not 
the outline merely, as at present — nothing short of the most perfect 
representation should satisfy us. When little things are elabo- 
rated with an infinity of pains, in order that they may appear in 
full clearness and precision, how ridiculous that the highest truths 
should not be held worthy of the greatest exactness ! 

Yes, said he, and that is a right noble thought; but do you 
suppose that we shall refrain from asking you which are the 
highest ? 

Nay, I said, ask if you will ; but I am certain that you have 
often heard the answer, and now you either do not understand 
or you are disposed to be troublesome; I incline to think the 
5°5 latter, for you have been often told that the idea of good is the 
highest knowledge, and that all other things become useful and 
advantageous only by their use of this. And you must be quite 
aware that of this I am about to speak, concerning which, as I 
shall say, we know so little ; and, wanting which, any other know- 
ledge or possession of any kind will profit us nothing. Do you 
think that the possession of the whole world is of any value with- 
out the good ? or of all wisdom, without the beautiful and good ? 

No, indeed, he said. 

You are doubtless aware that most people call pleasure good, 
and the finer sort of wits say wisdom ? And you are aware that 
the latter cannot explain the nature of wisdom, but are obliged 
after all to say that wisdom is of the good ? 

That is very ridiculous, he said. 

340 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Yes, I said, that they should begin by reproaching us with 
our ignorance, and then presume our knowledge of good — for 
wisdom, as they say, is of the good, which implies that we under- 
stand them when they use the term ‘good* — is certainly 
ridiculous. 

Most true, he said. 

And those who make pleasure their good are in equal perplexity ; 
for they are compelled to admit that there are bad pleasures as 
well as good. 

Certainly. 

And therefore to acknowledge that bad and good are the same ? 

True. 

There can be no doubt about the numerous difficulties in which 
this question is involved. 

There can be none. 

Well, and is not this an obvious fact, that many are willing to 
possess, or to do, or to wear the appearance of the just and 
honourable without the reality ; but no one is satisfied to possess 
the appearance of good — the reality is what they seek ; the appear- 
ance in the case of the good is despised by every one. 

Very true, he said. 

This then, which every man pursues and makes his end, having 
a presentiment that there is such an end, and yet hesitating be- 
cause neither knowing the nature nor having the same sure proof 
of this as of other things, and therefore having no profit in other 506 
things, — is this, I would ask, a principle about which those who 
are called the best men in the State, and to whom everything is 
to be entrusted, ought to be in such darkness ? 

Certainly not, he said. 

I am sure, I said, that he who does not know how the beautiful 
and the just are likewise good will not * be w'orth much as a 
guardian of them: and I suspect that no one will have a true 
knowledge of them without this knowledge. 

That, he said, is a shrewd suspicion of yours. 

And if we only have a guardian who has this knowledge our 
State will be perfectly ordered ? 

Of course, he replied ; but I wish you would tell me whether 
you conceive this supreme principle of the good to be knowledge 
or pleasure, or different from either ? 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VI. 

34i 

Aye, I said, I knew quite well that a fine gentleman 5 like you 
would not be contented with the thoughts of other men. 

True, Socrates; and I must say that you have no right to be 
always repeating the opinions of others, and never to tell your 
own, and this after having passed a lifetime in the study of 
philosophy. 

Well, but has any one a right to say, positively, what he does 
not know? 

Not, he said, with the positiveness of knowledge; he has no 
right to do that : but he ought to say what he thinks, as a matter 
of opinion. 

But do you not know, I said, that opinions are bad all, and the 
best of them blind ? You would not deny that those who have any 
true notion without intelligence are only like blind men finding 
their way along a straight road r 

Very true. 

And do you wish to behold what is blind and crooked and base, 
when brightness and beauty are within your reach ? 

Still, I must implore you, Socrates, said Glaucon, not to turn 
away just as you are reaching the goal — if you will only give 
such an explanation of the good as you have already given about 
justice and temperance and the other virtues, that will satisfy us. 

Yes, my friend, I said, and that will satisfy me too extremely 
well, but I cannot help fearing that I shall fail, and that in my 
zeal I shall make a fool of myself. No, sweet sirs, let us not at 
present ask what is the actual nature of the good, for to reach what 
is in my thoughts now is too much for me in my present mood. 
But of the child of the good who is likest him, I would fain speak, 
if I could be sure that you wished to hear — otherwise, not. 

Nay, he said, speak; the child shall be the interest6, and 
you shall remain in Qur debt for an account of the parent or 
principal. 

507 I do indeed wish, I replied, that I could pay, and you receive, 
the parent or principal account, and not, as now, the interest or 
child only; take, however, the child, which is the interest, and at 
the same time have a care that I do not render a false account, 
although I have no intention of deceiving you. 

5 Reading dvrjfi ko\6s. 

TOKOS. 

342 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Yes, we will take all the care that we can: proceed. 

Yes, I said, but I must first come to an understanding with you, 
and remind you of what I have mentioned in the course of this 
discussion, and at many other times. 

What is that ? he said. 

The old story, that there is a many beautiful and a many good, 
and so of other things which we describe and define; to all of 
them the term ‘many* is applied. 

True, he said. 

And there is an absolute beauty and an absolute good, and so 
of other things to which the term c many’ is applied ; they may be 
brought under a single idea, which is called the essence of each. 

That is true. 

The many, as we say, are seen but not known, and the ideas 
are known but not seen. 

Exactly. 

And what is the organ with which we see the visible things ? 

The sight, he said. 

And with the hearing, I said, we hear, and with the other 
senses perceive the other objects of sense ? 

True. 

But have you remarked that sight is by far the most costly 
and complex piece of workmanship which the artificer of the 
senses ever contrived ? 

No, I never have, he said. 

Then reflect: does the ear hear, and is the voice heard by 
virtue of some other nature which is required as a third condition 
before they can meet ? 

Nothing of the sort. 

No, indeed, I replied ; and the same is true of most, if not all, 
the other senses : you would not regard any of them as requiring 
such an addition ? 

Indeed not. 

But you see that without such an addition there is no seeing or 
being seen ? 

How do you mean ? 

Sight being, as I conceive, in the eyes, and the possessor 
making use of his vision, and colour being also present in them, 
unless there is a third nature at hand designed for this special 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VI. 

343 

purpose, you know that the sight will see nothing and the colours 
will be invisible ? * 

And of what nature are you speaking ? 

Of that which you term light, I replied. 

True, he said. 

508 Noble, then, is the bond which links together sight and visi- 
bility, and great beyond other bonds by no small difference of 
nature ; for light is their bond, and light is no ignoble thing. 

Nay, he said, the reverse of ignoble. 

And which, I said, of the gods in heaven would you say was 
the lord of this element ? Whose is that light which makes the 
eye to see perfectly and the visible to appear ? 

You mean the sun, as you and all mankind say. 

May not the relation of sight to this deity be described as 
follows ? 

How ? 

Neither sight nor the eye in which sight resides is the sun ? 

No. 

Yet of all the organs of sense the eye is likest the sun ? 

Far the likest. 

And the power which the eye possesses is a sort of effluence 
which is dispensed from the sun ? 

Exactly. 

Then the sun is not sight, but the author of sight who is recog- 
nized by sight ? 

True, he said. 

And this is he whom I call the child of the good, whom the 
good begat in his own likeness, to be in the visible world, in 
relation to sight and the things of sight, what the good is in the 
intellectual world in relation to mind and the things of mind ? 

Will you be a little more explicit? he said. 

Why, you know, I said, that the eyes, when a person no longer 
directs them towards those objects on the colours of which the 
light of day is shining, but the moon and stars only, see dimly, 
and are nearly blind ; they seem to have no clearness of vision in 
them ? 

Very true. 

But when they are directed towards objects on which the sun 
shines, they see clearly and there is sight in them ? 

344 

THE REPUBLIC . 

Certainly. 

And the soul is like the eye: when resting upon that on which 
truth and being shine, the soul perceives and understands, and is 
radiant with intelligence; but when turning towards the twilight 
of generation and destruction, then she has opinion only, and goes 
blinking about, and is first of one opinion and then of another, 
and seems to have no intelligence ? 

Yes. 

Now, that which imparts truth to the object and knowledge to 
the subject is what I would have you term the idea of good, and 
that you will regard as the cause of science 7 and of truth, as 
known by us; beautiful too, as are both truth and knowledge, 
you will be right in esteeming this other nature as more beautiful 
than either; and, as in the previous instance, light and sight may 509 
be truly said to be like the sun, and yet not to be the sun, so in 
this other sphere, science and truth may be deemed like the good, 
but not the good : the good has a place of honour yet higher. 

What a wonder of beauty that must be, he said, which is the 
author of science and truth, and yet surpasses them in beauty; 
for you surely cannot mean to say that the good is pleasure ? 

Speak not of that, I said ; but please to consider the image in 
another point of view. 

What is that ? 

Why, you would say that the sun is not only the author of 
visibility in all visible things, but of generation and nourishment 
and growth, though not himself a generation ? 

Certainly. 

In like manner the good may be said to be not only the author 
of knowledge in all things known, but of their being and essence, 
and yet the good is not essence, but far exceeds essence in dignity 
and power. 

Glaucon said, with a ludicrous earnestness: By the light of 
heaven, how amazing! 

Yes, I said, and that all comes of you, for you made me utter 
my fancies. 

Nay, he said, but do not leave off ; at any rate let us hear if 
there is anything more to be said about the similitude of the sun. 

7 Reading diavoov. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VI. 

345 

Yes, I said, there is a great deal more. 

Then omit nothing, however slight. 

I will do my best; but I fancy, I said, that a great deal will have 
to be omitted. 

I hope not, he said. 

You have to imagine, then, that there are two ruling powers, 
and that one of them is set over the intellectual world, the 
other over the visible. I do not say heaven, lest you should fancy 
that I was refining about the name (o^aw's, oparos). May I sup- 
pose that you have this distinction of the visible and intelligible 
fixed in your mind ? 

I have. 

Now fake a line which has been cut into two unequal8 parts, 
and divide each of them again in the same proportion, and suppose 
the two main divisions to answer, one to the visible and the other 
to the intelligible, and then compare the subdivisions as to their 
relative clearness and want of clearness, and you will find that 
the first section in the sphere of the visible consists of images. 

510 And by images I mean, in the first place, shadows, and in the 
second place, reflections in water and in solid, smooth and polished 
bodies, and all that sort of thing, as you understand. 

Yes, I understand. 

Imagine, now, the other section, of which this is only the 
resemblance, to include ourselves and the animals, and everything 
in nature and everything in art. 

Very good. 

Would you not admit that this latter section has a different 
degree of truth, and that the copy is to the object which is copied 
as the sphere of opinion is to the sphere of knowledge ? 

Most undoubtedly. 

Next proceed to consider the manner in which the sphere of 
the intellectual is to be divided. 

In what manner ? 

As thus: — There are two subdivisions, in the lower of which 
the soul uses the figures given by the former division as images ; 
the enquiry can only be hypothetical, and instead of going up- 
wards to a principle descends to the other end; in the higher of 

8 Reading nviaa. 

34& 

THE REPUBLIC. 

the two, the soul passes out of hypotheses, and goes up to a 
principle which is above hypotheses, making no use of images 9 
as in the former case, but proceeding only in and by the ideas 
themselves. 

I do not quite understand your meaning, he said. 

I will try again, I said ; for you will understand me better now 
that I have made these preliminary remarks. You are aware that 
students of geometry, arithmetic, and the kindred sciences assume 
the odd and the even and the figures and three kinds of angles 
and the like in their several branches of science; these are their 
hypotheses, which everybody is supposed to know, and of which 
therefore they do not deign to give any account either to them- 
selves or others; but they begin with these, and go on until they 
arrive at last, and in a consistent manner, at their conclusion ? 

Yes, he said, I know that. 

And do you not know also that although they use and reason 
about the visible forms, they are thinking not of these, but of 
the ideals which they resemble ; not of the figures which they 
draw, but of the absolute square and the absolute diameter, and so 
on: and, while using as images these very forms which they 
draw or make, and which in turn have their shadows and re- 
flections in the water, they are really seeking for the things them- 
selves, which can only be seen with the eye of the mind ? 

That is true. 5 

And of this kind I still spoke as intelligible, although in 
enquiries of this sort the soul is compelled to use hypotheses ; not 
proceeding to a first principle because unable to ascend above 
hypotheses, but using as images the objects of which the shadows 
are resemblances in a still lower sphere, they having in relation 
to the shadows a higher value and -distinctness 10. 

I understand, he said, that you are speaking of geometry and 
the sister arts. 

And when I speak of the other division of the intellectual, you 
will also understand me to speak of that knowledge which reason 
herself attains by the power of dialectic, using the hypotheses 
not as first principles, but only as hypotheses — that is to say, as 

9 Reading bvntp intlvo (Ik6vu>v. 

10 Or, * they, in relation to the ideas, being valued and esteemed for their 
distinctness.’ 

BOOK VI. 

347 

steps and points of departure into a region which is above 
hypotheses, in order that she may soar beyond them to the first 
principle of the whole; and clinging to this and then to that 
which depends on this, by successive steps she descends again 
without the aid of any sensible object, beginning and ending in 
ideas. 

I understand you, he replied ; not perfectly, for the matter of 
which you speak is too great for that ; but, at any rate, I under- 
stand you to say that knowledge and being, which the science of 
dialectic contemplates, are clearer than the notions of the arts, as 
they are termed, which proceed from hypotheses only : these are 
also contemplated by the understanding, and not by the senses : 
yet, because they start from hypotheses and do not ascend to a 
principle, those who contemplate them appear to you not to 
exercise the higher reason upon them, although when a first 
principle is added to them they are cognizable by the higher 
reason. And the habit which is concerned with geometry and 
the cognate sciences I suppose that you would term understanding 
and not reason, as being intermediate between opinion and 
reason. 

You have quite conceived me, I said ; and now, corresponding 
to these four sections, let there be four faculties in the soul — 
reason answering to the highest, understanding to the second, 
faith or persuasion to the third, and knowledge of shadows to the 
last — and let there be a scale of them, and let us suppose that the 
several faculties have clearness in the same degree that their 
objects have truth. 

I understand, he replied, and give my assent, and will arrange 
them as you say. 

BOOK VII. 

After this, I said, imagine the enlightenment or ignorance of 
our nature in a figure: — Behold! human beings living in a sort of 
underground den, which has a mouth open towards the light and 
reaching all across the den; they have been here from their 
childhood, and have their legs and necks chained so that they 
cannot move, and can only see before them; for the chains are 
arranged in such a manner as to prevent them from turning round 
their heads. At a distance above and behind them the light 
of a fire is blazing, and between the fire and the prisoners there 
is a raised way; and you will see, if you look, a low wall built 
along the way, like the screen which marionette players have 
before them, over which they show the puppets. 

I see, he said. 

And do you see, I said, men passing along the wall carrying 
vessels, which appear over the wall; also figures of men and 
animals, made of wood and stone and various materials ; and 
some of the passengers, as you would expect, are talking, and 5*5 
some of them are silent? ' 

That is a strange image, he said, and they are strange 
prisoners. 

Like ourselves, I replied ; and they see only their own shadows, 
or the shadows of one another, which the fire throws on the 
opposite wall of the cave ? 

True, he said; how could they see anything but the shadows 
if they were never allowed to move their heads ? 

And of the objects which are being carried in like manner they 
would only see the shadows ? 

Yes, he said. 

And if they were able to talk with one another, would they not 
suppose that they were naming what was actually before them 1 ? 

Very true. 

1 Reading napovra. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VII. 

349 

And suppose further that the prison had an echo which came 
from the other side, would they not be sure to fancy that the voice 
which they heard was that of a passing shadow? 

No question, he replied. 

There can be no question, I said, that the truth would be to 
them just nothing but the shadows of the images. 

That is certain. 

And now look again, and see how they are released and cured 
of their folly. At first, when any one of them is liberated 
and compelled suddenly to go up and turn his neck round and 
walk and look at the light, he will suffer sharp pains; the glare 
will distress him, and he will be unable to see the realities of 
which in his former state he had seen the shadows; and then 
imagine some one saying to him, that what he saw before was 
an illusion, but that now he is approaching real being and has 
a truer sight and vision of more real things, — what will be his 
reply? And you may further imagine that his instructor is 
pointing to the objects as they pass and requiring him to name 
them, — will he not be in a difficulty? Will he not fancy that the 
shadows which he formerly saw are truer than the objects which 
are now shown to him ? 

Far truer. 

And if he is compelled to look at the light, will he not have 
a pain in his eyes which will make him turn away to take refuge 
in the objects of vision which he can see, and which he will 
conceive to be clearer than the things which are now being shown 
to him ? 

True, he said. 

And suppose once more, that he is reluctantly dragged up a 
steep and rugged ascent, and held fast and forced into the 
presence of the sun himself, do you not think that he will be 
516 pained and irritated, and when he approaches the light he will 
have his eyes dazzled, and will not be able to see any of the 
realities which are now affirmed to be the truth ? 

Not all in a moment, he said. 

He will require to get accustomed to the sight of the upper 
world. And first he will see the shadows best, next the re- 
flections of men and other objects in the water, and then the 
objects themselves; next he will gaze upon the light of the 

350 

THE REPUBLIC. 

moon and the stars; and he will see the sky and the stars by 
night, better than the sun, or the light of the sun, by day ? 

Certainly. 

And at last he will be able to see the sun, and not mere reflec- 
tions of him in the water, but he will see him as he is in his own 
proper place, and not in another; and he will contemplate his nature. 

Certainly. 

And after this he will reason that the sun is he who gives 
the seasons and the years, and is the guardian of all that is 
in the visible world, and in a certain way the cause of all things 
which he and his fellows have been accustomed to behold ? 

Clearly, he said, he would come to vthe other first and to this 
afterwards. 

And when he remembered his old habitation, and the wisdom 
of the den and his fellow-prisoners, do you not suppose that he 
would felicitate himself on the change, and pity them ? 

Certainly, he would. 

And if they were in the habit of conferring honours on those 
who were quickest to observe and remember and foretell which of 
the shadows went before, and which followed after, and which 
were together, do you think that he would care for such honours 
and glories, or envy the possessors of them ? Would he not say 
with Homer, 

‘Better to be a poor man, and have a poor master,’ 
and endure anything, rather than to think and live after their 
manner ? 

Yes, he said, I think that he would rather suffer anything than 
live after their manner. 

Imagine once more, I said, that such an one coming suddenly 
out of the sun were to be replaced in his old situation, is he not 
certain to have his eyes full of darkness ? 

Very true, he said. 

And if there were a contest, and he had to compete in 
measuring the shadows with the prisoners who have never moved 
out of the den, during the time that his sight is weak, and before 5 
his eyes are steady (and the time which would be needed to 
acquire this new habit of sight might be very considerable), would 
he not be ridiculous? Men would say of him that up he went 
and down he comes without his eyes; and that there was no 

BOOK VII. 

35i 

use in even thinking of ascending : and if any one tried to loose 
another and lead him up to the light, let them only catch the 
offender in the act, and they would put him to death. 

No question, he said. 

This allegory, I said, you may now append to the previous 
argument; the prison is the world of sight, the light of the fire is 
the sun, the ascent and vision of the things above you may truly 
regard as the upward progress of the soul into the intellectual 
world; that is my poor belief, to which, at your desire, I have 
given expression: Whether I am right or not God only knows ; 

but, whether true or false, my opinion is that in the world of 
knowledge the idea of good appears last of all, and is seen only 
with an effort; and, when seen, is also inferred to be the universal 
author of all things beautiful and right, parent of iight and the 
lord of light in this world, and the source of truth and reason 
in the other : this is the first great cause which he who would act 
rationally either in public or private life must behold. 

I agree, he said, as far as I am able to understand you. 

I should like to have your agreement in another matter, I said. 
For I would not have you marvel that those who attain to this 
beatific vision are unwilling to descend to human affairs; but 
their souls are ever hastening into the upper world in which 
they desire to dwell; and this is very natural, if our allegory 
may be trusted. 

Certainly, that is quite natural. 

And is there anything surprising in one who passes from 
divine contemplations to human things, misbehaving himself in 
a ridiculous manner; if, while his eyes are blinking and before 
he has become accustomed to the darkness visible, he is com- 
pelled to fight in courts of law, or in other places, about the 
images or shadows of images of justice, and is endeavouring 
to meet the conceptions of those who have never yet seen the 
absolute justice ? 

There is nothing surprising in that, he replied. 

8 Any one who has common sense will remember that the 
bewilderments of the eyes are of two kinds, and arise from two 
causes, either from coming out of the light or from going into 
the light, which is true of the mind’s eye, quite as much as of 
the bodily eye; and he who remembers this when he sees the 

352 

THE REPUBLIC. 

soul of any one whose vision is perplexed and weak, will not 
be too ready to laugh; he will first ask whether that soul has 
come out of the brighter life, and is unable to see because 
unaccustomed to the dark, or having turned from darkness to 
the day is dazzled by excess of light. And then he will count 
the one happy in his condition and state of being, and he will 
pity the other; or, if he have a mind to laugh at the soul which 
comes from below into the light, there will be more reason 
in this than in the laugh which greets the other from the den. 

That, he said, is a very just remark. 

But if this is true, then certain professors of education must 
be mistaken in saying that they can put a knowledge into the 
soul which was not there before, like giving eyes to the blind. 

Yes, that is what they say, he replied. 

Whereas, 1 said, our argument shows that the power is already 
in the soul; and that as the eye cannot turn from darkness to 
light without the whole body, so too, when the eye of the soul 
is turned round, the whole soul must be turned from the world 
of generation into that of being, and become able to endure 
the sight of being, and of the brightest and best of being — that 
is to say, of the good. 

Very true. 

And this is conversion ; and the art will be how to accomplish 
this as easily and completely as possible; not implanting eyes, 
for they exist already, but giving them a right direction, which 
they have not. 

Yes, he said, that may be assumed. 

And hence while the other qualities seem to be akin to 
the body, being infused by habit and exercise and not originally 
innate, the virtue of wisdom is part of a divine essence, and 
has a power which is everlasting, and by this conversion is 
rendered useful and profitable, and is also capable of becoming 
hurtful and useless. Did you never observe the narrow intel- 519 
ligence flashing from the keen eye of a clever rogue — how eager 
he is, how clearly his paltry soul sees the way to his end; he 
is the reverse of blind, but his keen eye-sight is taken into the 
service of evil, and he is dangerous in proportion to his intel- 
ligence ? 

Very true, he said. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VII. 

353 

But what if there had been a circumcision of such natures 
in the days of their youth ; and they had been severed from the 
leaden weights, as I may call them, with which they are born 
into the world, which hang on to sensual pleasures, such as those 
of eating and drinking, and drag them down and turn the vision 
of their souls about the things that are below — if, I say, they 
had been released from them and turned round to the truth, 
the very same faculty in these very same persons would have 
seen the other as keenly as they now see that on which their 
eye is fixed. 

That is very likely. 

Yes, I said; and there is another thing which is likely, or 
rather a necessary inference from what has preceded, that neither 
the uneducated and uninformed of the truth, nor yet those who 
never make an end of their education, will be able ministers of 
State: not the former, because they have no single aim of duty 
which is the rule of their actions, private as well as public ; nor 
the latter, because they will not act at all except upon compul- 
sion, fancying that they are already in the islands of the blest. 

Very true, he replied. 

Then, I said, the business of us who arc the founders of the 
State will be to compel the best minds to attain that knowledge 
which has been already declared by us to be the greatest of all — 
to that eminence they must ascend and arrive at the good, and 
when they have ascended and seen enough we must not allow 
them to do as they do now. 

What do you mean ? 

I mean that they remain in the upper world: but this must 
not be allowed; they must be made to descend again among 
the prisoners in the den, and partake of their labours and honours, 
whether they are worth having or not. 

But is not this unjust? he said; ought we to give them an 
inferior life, when they might have a superior one ? 

You have again forgotten, my friend, I said, the intention of 
the legislator; he did not aim at making any one class in the 
State happy above the rest; the happiness was to be in the 
whole State, and he held the citizens together by persuasion and 
necessity, making them benefactors of the State, and therefore 
520 benefactors of one another; to this end he created them, not 

VOL. 11. a a 

Digitized by Google 

354 

THE REPUBLIC . 

that they should please themselves, but they were to be his 
instruments in binding up the State. 

True, he said, I had forgotten that. 

Observe then, I said, Glaucon, that there will be no injustice 
in compelling our philosophers to have a care and providence 
of others; we shall explain to them that in other States, men 
of their class are not obliged to share in the toils of politics: 
and this is reasonable, for they grow up at their own sweet 
will, and the government would rather not have them. Now 
the wild plant which owes culture to nobody, has nothing to 
pay for culture ; but we have brought you into the world expressly 
for this end, that you may be rulers of the hive, kings of your- 
selves and of the other citizens. And you have been educated 
far better and more perfectly than they have, and are better able 
to share in the double duty. And therefore each of you, when 
his turn comes, must go down to the general underground abode, 
and get the habit of seeing in the dark; for all is habit; and 
when you are accustomed you will see ten thousand times better 
than those in the den, and you will know what the images are, 
and of what they are images, because you have seen the beautiful 
and just and good in their truth. And thus the order of our 
State will be a waking reality, and not a dream, as is commonly 
the manner of States; in most of them men are fighting with one 
another about shadows and are distracted in the struggle for power, 
which in their eyes is a great good. But the truth is, that the State 
in which the rulers are most reluctant to govern is best and most 
quietly governed, and that in which they are most willing, the 
worst. 

Quite true, he replied. 

And will our pupils, when they hear this, refuse to share in 
turn the toils of State, when they arc allowed to spend the greater 
part of their time with one another in the heaven of ideas ? 

Impossible, he answered ; for they are just men, and the com- 
mands which we impose upon them are just; there can be no 
doubt that every one of them will take office as a stern necessity, 
and not like our present ministers of state. 

Yes, my friend, I said; and that is just the truth of the case. 

If you contrive for your future rulers another and a better life than 52 
that of a ruler, then you may have a well-ordered State ; for only in 

BOOK VII. 

355 

the State which offers this will they rule who are truly rich, not 
in silver and gold, but in virtue and wisdom, which are the true 
blessings of life. Whereas if they go to the administration of 
public affairs, poor and hungering after their own private advan- 
tage, thinking that hence they are to snatch the good of life, order 
there can never be; for they will be fighting about office, and the 
civil and domestic broils which thus arise will be the ruin of the 
rulers themselves and of the whole State. 

Most true, he replied. 

And the only life which looks down upon the life of political 
ambition is that of true philosophy ? Do you know of any other ? 

No, indeed, he said . 

And those who govern ought not to be lovers of the task ? If 
they are there will be rival lovers, and they will fight. 

No question. 

Whom then would you choose rather than those who are wisest 
about affairs of State, and who at the same time have other 
honours and another and a better life ? 

They are the men, and I will choose them, he replied. 

Would you like us then to consider in what way such guardians 
may be called into existence, and how they are to be brought 
from darkness to light, — as some are said to have ascended from 
the world below to the gods ? 

Certainly I should, he replied. 

The process, I said, is not the spinning round of an oyster-shell, 
but the conversion of a soul out of darkness visible to the real 
ascent of true being2, which is true philosophy. Now what sort 
of knowledge has the power of effecting this? that is a question 
which has to be considered. 

Certainly. 

Then what sort of knowledge is there which would draw the 
soul from becoming to being ? At the same time there is another 
thing which occurs to me. You will remember that our young 
men are to be warrior athletes ? 

Yes, that was said. 

Then this new kind of knowledge must have another quality ? 

What quality ? 

a Reading oZcrav tiru voZnv. 
A a 2 

356 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Usefulness in war. 

Yes, if possible. 

There were two parts in our former scheme of education, were 
there not? 

True. 

There was gymnastic which presided over the growth and decay 
of the body, and may therefore be regarded as having to do with 
generation and corruption ? 

True. 

Then that is not the knowledge which we are seeking to 5 
discover ? 

No. 

But what do you say of music, as far as that entered into our 
scheme ? 

That, he said, as you will remember, was the counterpart of 
gymnastic, and trained the guardians by the influences of habit, 
giving them, not science, but a sort of harmonical composition, 
and a kind of rhythmical movement ; and the words, whether true 
or false, had kindred elements of rhythm and harmony in them ; 
but musical knowledge was not of a kind which tended to that 
good which you are now seeking. 

You are most accurate, I said, in your recollection ; for there 
certainly was nothing of that kind in our previous education. 
But then what branch of knowledge is there, my dear friend, 
which is of the desired nature ? For the useful arts were rejected 
by us as mean. 

Undoubtedly; and yet if music and gymnastic are excluded, 
and the arts are also excluded, what remains ? 

Well, I said, there may be nothing left; and then we shall have 
to take something which is of universal application. 

What is that ? 

A something which all arts and sciences and intelligences use 
in common, and which every one ought to learn among the 
elements of education. 

What is that ? 

The little matter of distinguishing one, two, and three, which I 
may sum up under the name of number and calculation, — of that 
all arts and sciences are necessarily partakers. 

Very true. 

BOOK VII. 

357 

Then the art of war partakes of them ? 

To be sure. 

Then Palamcdes, when he appears in the play, proves Agamem- 
non ridiculously unfit to be a general. Did you never remark 
how he declares that he had invented number, and had numbered 
and set in array the ranks of the army at Troy; which implies 
that they had never been numbered before, and Agamemnon must 
be supposed literally to have been incapable of counting his own 
feet — how could he if he was ignorant of number ? And if that 
is true, what sort of general must he have been ? 

I should say a very strange one, certainly. 

Must not a warrior then, I said, in addition to his military 
skill have a knowledge of arithmetic ? 

Certainly he must, if he is to have the slightest knowledge 
of military tactics, or indeed, I should rather say, if he is to be 
a man at all. 

I should like to know whether you have the same notion which 
I have of this study ? 

What is that ? 

I am of opinion that this is a study of the kind which we 
523 are seeking, and which leads naturally to reflection, but one which 
has never been rightly used as simply conducting towards being. 

Will you explain your meaning? he said. 

I will try, I said; and I wish you would consider and help me, 
and say ‘yes’ or cno* when I attempt to distinguish in my own 
mind what branches of knowledge have this conducting power, in 
order that we may have clearer proof that this is one of them. 

Explain, he said. 

I mean to say that objects of sense are of two kinds ; some of 
them do not excite thought because the sense is an adequate 
judge of them; while in the case of other objects there is a 
mistrust of the senses which only stimulates enquiry. 

You must be referring, he said, to the manner in which the 
senses are imposed upon by distance, and by painting in light and 
shade. 

No, I said, that is not my meaning. 

Then what is your meaning ? 

When speaking of unexciting objects, I mean those which 
do not pass out of one sensation into an opposite one ; exciting 

358 

THE REPUBLIC. 

objects are those which give opposite sensations; as when the 
sense coming upon the object, and this not only at a distance but 
near, gives no more vivid idea of any particular object than of 
its opposite. An illustration will make my meaning clearer: — 
here are three fingers — a little finger, a second finger, and a 
middle finger. 

Very good. 

You may suppose that they are seen quite close. And here 
comes the point. 

What is that ? 

Each of them equally appears a finger, whether seen in the 
middle or at the extremity, whether white or black, or thick or 
thin — that makes no difference; a finger is a finger all the same. 
And in all these cases the question what is a finger? is not 
presented to the ordinary mind; for the sight never intimates 
to the soul that a finger is other than a finger. 

That is true. 

And therefore, I said, there is nothing here which excites or 
quickens intelligence. 

There is not, he said. 

* « 

But is this equally true of the greatness and smallness of the 
fingers ? Can sight adequately perceive them ? and is no differ- 
ence made by the circumstance that one of the fingers is in the 
middle and another at the extremity? And in like manner does 
the touch adequately perceive the qualities of thickness or thin- 
ness, or softness or hardness? And so of the other senses; do 
they give perfect intimations of such matters ? Is not their mode 
of operation rather on this wise — the sense which is concerned 
with the quality of hardness is necessarily concerned also with 
the quality of softness, and only intimates to the soul that the 
same thing is felt to be hard and soft ? 

Very true, he said. 

And must not the soul be perplexed at this intimation of a 
hard which is also soft? What again, is the meaning of light 
and heavy, if that which is light is also heavy, and that which 
is heavy, light ? 

Yes, he said, these intimations are very curious and have to 
be explained. 

Yes, I said, and in these perplexities the soul naturally sum- 

524 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VII. 

359 

mons to her aid calculation and intelligence, that she may see 
whether the several objects announced are one or two. 

True. 

And if they turn out to be two, is not each of them one, and 
different ? 

Certainly. 

And if each is one, and both are two, she will conceive the 
two as in a state of division, for if they were undivided they 
could only be conceived of as one ? 

True. 

Moreover the eye beheld both small and great, but only in an 
indistinct, confused fashion. 

Yes. 

But the thinking mind, intending to introduce clearness into 
this chaos of sense, was compelled to reverse the process, and 
look at small and great as separate and not confused. And this 
was the beginning of the enquiry c What is great?’ and £ What 
is small ? * 

Very true. 

And thus arose the distinction of the visible and the intel- 
ligible. 

Most true. 

And that is an illustration of my meaning in describing im- 
pressions as stimulating to the intellect, or the reverse — the 
stimulating impressions are simultaneous with opposite impres- 
sions. 

I understand, he said, and agree with you. 

And to which class do unity and number belong ? 

I do not know, he replied. 

Think a little and you will see that what has preceded will 
supply the answer; for if absolute unity be perceived by the sight 
or any other sense, then, as we were saying in the case of the 
fingers, their will be nothing to attract towards being; but when 
there is some contradiction always present, and one is the reverse 
of one and involves the conception of plurality, then thought 
begins to be aroused within, and the soul perplexed and wanting 
to arrive at a decision asks c What is absolute unity ? * And this 
is the way in which the study of the one has a power of drawing 
and converting the mind to the contemplation of true being. 

THE REPUBLIC. 

360 

And surely, he said, this occurs notably when we look at one, 
for the same thing is seen by us as one and as infinite in 
multitude ? 

Yes, I said; and this being true of one must be equally true 
of all number ? 

Certainly. 

And all arithmetic and calculation have to do with number ? 

Yes. 

And they are conductors to truth ? 

Yes, in an eminent degree. 

Then this is the sort of knowledge of which we are in search, 
having a double use, military and philosophical ; for the man of 
war must learn the art of number that he may know how to 
array his troops, and the philosopher also, because he has to rise 
out of the sea of change and lay hold of true being, if he would 
be an arithmetician. 

That is true. 

And our guardian is both warrior and philosopher ? 

Certainly. 

Then this is a kind of knowledge which legislation may fitly 
prescribe; and we must endeavour to persuade the principal men 
of our State to go and learn arithmetic, not as amateurs, but they 
must carry on the study until they see the nature of numbers in 
the mind only; nor again, in the spirit of merchants or traders, 
with a view to buying or selling, but for the sake of their military 
use, and of the soul herself; and because this will be the easiest 
way for her to pass from generation to truth and being. 

That is excellent, he said. 

Yes, I said, and how ingenious the science is! the very mention 
of it suggests that: and how conducive, in many ways, to our 
desired end, if pursued in the spirit of a philosopher, and not of a 
shop-keeper ! 

How do you mean ? 

I mean, as I was saying, that arithmetic has a very great and 
elevating effect, compelling the soul to reason about abstract 
number, and if visible or tangible objects are obtruding upon the 
argument, refusing to be satisfied. You know how steadily the 
masters of the art repel and ridicule any one who attempts to 
divide absolute unity when he is calculating, and if you divide. 

BOOK VII. 

361 

they multiply3, taking care that the unit shall not cease to be a 
unit and become lost in fractions. 

That is very true. 

Now, suppose a person were to say to them : O my friends, what 
are these wonderful numbers about which you are reasoning, in 
which, as you say, there is a unity such as you require, and each 
unit is equal, invariable, indivisible, what would they answer ? 

They would answer, as I suppose, that they are speaking of 
those numbers which are only realized in thought. 

Then you see that this knowledge may be truly called necessary, 
as necessitating the use of the pure intelligence in the attainment 
of pure truth ? 

Yes; that is a marked characteristic. 

And have you further remarked, that those who have a natural 
talent for calculation are generally quick at every other kind of 
knowledge; and even the dull, if they have had an arithmetical 
training, gain in quickness, if not in any other way? 

That is true, he said. 

And indeed, you will not easily find a more difficult study, and 
not many as difficult. 

You will not. 

And, for all these reasons, arithmetic must not be given up; and 
this is a kind of knowledge in which the best natures should 
be trained. 

I agree. 

Let this then be made one of our subjects of education. And next, 
shall we enquire whether the kindred science also concerns us ? 

You mean geometry ? 

Yes. 

Certainly, he said ; that part of geometry which relates to war 
is clearly our concern; for in pitching a camp, or taking up a 
position, or closing or extending the lines of an army, or any 
other military manoeuvre, whether in actual battle or on a march, 
there will be a great difference in a general, according as he is or 
is not a geometrician. 

3 Meaning either (1) that they integrate the number because they deny the 
possibility of fractions; or (2) that division is regarded by them as a 
process of multiplication, and thus the unity and indivisibility of one is still 
maintained. 

362 

THE REPUBLIC. 

-Yes, I said, but for that purpose a very little of either geometry 
or calculation will be enough ; the question is rather of the higher 
and greater part of geometry, whether that tends towards the great 
end — I mean towards the vision of the idea of good ; and thither, 
as I was saying, all things tend which compel the soul to turn her 
gaze towards that place, where is the full perfection of being, of 
which she ought, by all means, to attain the vision. 

True, he said. 

Then if geometry compels us to view essence, it concerns us; 
if generation only, it does not concern us ? 

Yes, that is what we assert. 

Yet, at present, I said, the science is in flat contradiction to the 527 
language which geometricians use, as will hardly be denied by 
those who have any acquaintance with their study : for they speak 
of finding the side of a square, and applying and adding as though 
they were doing something and had a practical end in view; their 
c necessity* is cil faut vivre,’ which is ridiculous; whereas know- 
ledge is the real object of the whole science. 

Certainly, he said. 

Then must not a further admission be made ? 

What admission ? 

The admission that this knowledge at which geometry aims is 
of the eternal, and not of the perishing and transient. 

That, he replied, may be readily allowed, and is true. 

Then, my noble friend, geometry will draw the soul towards 
truth, and create the mind of philosophy, and raise up that which 
is now unhappily allowed to fall down. 

Nothing will be more effectual. 

Then nothing should be more effectually enacted, than that the 
inhabitants of your fair city should learn geometry. Moreover the 
science has indirect effects, which are not small. 

Of what kind are they ? he said. 

There are the military advantages of which you spoke, I said ; 
and in all departments of study, as experience proves, any one 
who has studied geometry is infinitely quicker of apprehension. 

Yes, he said, the difference between a geometrician and one 
who is not a geometrician is very great indeed. 

Then shall we propose this as a second branch of knowledge 
which our youth will study? 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VII. 

363 

Let us make the proposal, he replied. 

And suppose we make astronomy the third — what do you say ? 

I am strongly inclined to that, he said ; the observation of the 
seasons and of months and years is quite essential to husbandry 
and navigation, and not less essential to military tactics. 

I am amused, I said, at your fear of the world, which makes you 
guard against the appearance of insisting upon useless studies; 
and I quite admit the difficulty of convincing men that in every 
soul there is an organ which is purified and illumined by these 
studies, when by other pursuits lost and dimmed; and this eye 
of the soul is more precious far than ten thousand bodily ones, for 
this alone beholds the vision of truth. Now there are two classes 
of persons: one class who will agree in this and will take your 
words as a revelation; another class who have no perception of 
the thing meant, to whom they will naturally seem to be idle and 
528 unprofitable tales. And you had better decide at once with which 
of the two you are arguing, or whether without regard to either 
you would not prefer to carry on the argument chiefly for your own 
sake ; not that you have any jealousy of others, who may benefit if 
they please. 

I think that I should prefer to carry on the argument on my 
own behalf. 

Then take a step backward, for we have gone wrong in the 
order of the sciences. 

What was the mistake ? he said. 

After plane geometry, I said, we took solids in revolution, 
instead of taking solids in themselves; whereas after the second 
dimension the third, which is concerned with cubes and dimen- 
sions of depth, ought to have followed. 

That is true, Socrates; but these subjects seem to be as yet 
hardly explored. 

Why, yes, I said, and for two reasons: — in the first place, no 
government patronises them, which leads to a want of energy 
in the study of them, and they are difficult ; in the second place, 
students cannot learn them unless they have a teacher. But 
then a teacher is hardly to be found, and even if one could be 
found, as matters now stand, the students of these subjects, who 
are very conceited, would not mind him. That, however, would 
be otherwise if the whole State patronised and honoured them ; then 

Digitized by Google 

3<4 

THE REPUBLIC. 

they would listen, and there would be continuous and earnest 
search, and discoveries would be made; since even now, disre- 
. garded as they are by the world, and maimed of their fair pro- 
portions, and although none of their votaries can tell the use of 
them, still these studies force their way by their natural charm, 
and very likely they may emerge into light. 

Yes, he said, there is a remarkable charm in them. But I do not 
clearly understand the change in the order. First you began with 
a geometry of plane surfaces ? 

Yes, I said. 

And you placed astronomy next, and then you made a step 
backward ? 

Yes, I said, the more haste the less speed ; the ludicrous state 
of solid geometry made me pass over this branch and go on to 
astronomy, or motion of solids. 

True, he said. 

Then regarding the science now omitted as supplied, if only 
encouraged by the State, let us go on to astronomy. 

That is the natural order, he said. And now, Socrates, as you 
rebuked the vulgar manner in which I praised astronomy before, 
my praises shall accord with the method of your enquiry. For 529 
every one, as I think, must feel that astronomy compels the soul 
to look upwards and leads us from this world to another. 

I am an exception then, for I should rather say that those who 
elevate astronomy into philosophy make us look downwards and 
not upwards. 

Why, how is that? he asked. 

You, I replied, have evidently a sublime conception of the know- 
ledge of the things above. And I dare say that if a person were to 
throw his head back and study the fretted ceiling, you would still 
think that his mind was the percipient, and not his eyes. And 
you are very likely right, and I may be a simpleton r for, in my 
opinion, only that knowledge which is of being and the unseen 
can make the soul look upwards, and whether a man gapes at the 
heavens or blinks on the ground, seeking to learn some particular 
of sense, I would deny that he can learn, for nothing of that sort 
is matter of science ; his soul is looking, not upwards, but down- 
wards, whether his way to knowledge is by water or by land, and 
he may float on his back in either element. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VII. 

365 

I acknowledge, he said, the justice of your rebuke. Still, I 
should like to know how astronomy can be learned in any other 
way more conducive to that knowledge of which we speak ? 

In this way, I answered : the embroidery of heaven is wrought 
upon a visible ground, and therefore, although the fairest and 
most perfect of visible things, must necessarily be deemed infe- 
rior far to the true motions of absolute swiftness and absolute 
slowness, which are relative to each other, and carry with them 
that which is contained in them, in the true number and in every 
true figure. Now, these are to be apprehended by reason and 
intelligence, but not by sight. 

True, he replied. 

The starry heavens are to be used as the patterns of that higher 
knowledge ; their beauty is like the beauty of figures or pictures 
wrought by the hand of Daedalus, or some other great artist, 
which we may chance to behold ; any geometrician who saw them 
would appreciate the exquisiteness of their workmanship, but he 
would never dream of thinking that in them he could find the 
30 true equal or the true double, or the truth of any other proportion. 

No, he said, that would be ridiculous. 

And will not a true astronomer have the same feeling when 
he looks at the movements of the stars? Will he not think that 
heaven and the things in heaven are framed by the Creator in the 
most perfect manner ? But when he reflects that the proportions 
of night and day, or of both to the month, or of the month to the 
year, or of the other stars to these and to one another, are but 
visible and material, he will never fall into the error of supposing 
that they are eternal and liable to no deviation — that would be 
monstrous ; he will rather seek in every possible way to discover 
the truth of them. 

I quite agree when I hear you say this. 

Then, I said, astronomy, like geometry, should be pursued by 
the method of problems — let alone the heavens — if astronomy is 
to become a real part of education improving the natural use of 
reason. 

That, he said, is a work infinitely beyond our present astronomers. 

Yes, I said; and there are many other things which must also 
have a similar extension given to them, if our legislation is to be 
of any use. 

366 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Can you tell me of any other suitable study ? 

No, he said, not without thinking. 

Motion, I said, has many forms, and not one only; two of 
them are obvious enough ; and there are others, as I imagine, which 
may be left to wiser heads than ours. 

But where are the two ? 

There is a second, I said, which is the counterpart of the one 
already named. 

And what may that be ? 

It would seem, I said, that one is to the ears what the other 
is to the eyes ; for I conceive that as the eyes are appointed to 
look up at the stars, so are the ears to hear harmonious motions, 
and these are sister sciences ? that is what the Pythagoreans say, 
and we, Glaucon, assent to them ? 

Yes, he replied. 

But this, I said, is a laborious study, and therefore we had better 
go and learn of them ; and they will tell us whether there are any 
other applications of these sciences. At the same time, we must 
not lose sight of our own higher object. 

What is that ? 

There is a perfection which all knowledge ought to reach, and 
which our pupils ought also to attain, and not to fall short of this, 
as I was saying that they did in astronomy. For in the science of 
harmony, as I dare say you know, they are equally empirical. The 
sounds and consonances which they compare are those which are 53 
heard only, and their labour, like that of the astronomers, is in vain. 

Yes, by heaven ! he said ; and ’tis as good as a play to hear them 
talking about a sort of condensed notes, as they call them; they 
put their ears alongside of their neighbours as if to get a sound 
out of them — one set of them declaring that they catch an inter- 
mediate note and have found the least interval which should be 
the unit of measurement; the others maintaining the opposite 
theory that the two sounds have passed into the same — either 
party setting their ears before their understanding. 

You mean, I said, those gentlemen who tease and torture the 
strings and rack them on the pegs of the instrument: I might 
carry on the metaphor and speak after their manner of the blows 
which the plectrum gives, and the accusations against the strings, 
both of backwardness and forwardness to sound ; but this would 

BOOK VII. 

367 

be tedious, and therefore I will only say that these are not the 
men, but that I am speaking of the Pythagoreans, of whom I was 
just now proposing to enquire about harmony. For they too are in 
error, like the astronomers ; they investigate the numbers of the 
harmonies which are heard, but they never attain to problems — 
that is to say, they never reach the natural harmonies of number, 
or reflect why some numbers are harmonious and others not. 

That, he said, is a thing of more than mortal knowledge. 

A thing, I replied, which I would rather call useful ; that is, if 
pursued with a view to the beautiful and good ; but if pursued in 
any other spirit, useless. 

There is reason in that, he said. 

Now, when all these studies reach the point of intercommunion 
and connection with one another, and come to be considered in 
their mutual affinities, then, I think, but not till then, will the 
pursuit of them have a value for our objects ; otherwise they are 
useless. 

That, Socrates, is also my own notion ; but it is a vast work of 
which you speak. 

What do you mean ? I said : the prelude or "what ? Are we not 
advised that this is but the prelude of the actual strain which we 
have to learn? For I imagine that you would not regard the 
skilled mathematician as a dialectician ? 

No, indeed, he said; very few mathematicians whom I have 
ever known are reasoners in that sense. 

But do you imagine that men who are unable to give and take 
532 a reason will have the knowledge which we require of them? 

Neither can this be said any more than the other. 

Thus, Glaucon, I said, we have arrived at the end; and this 
is the strain of which dialectic is the performer — the intellectual 
strain which the faculty of sight did but imitate: that, as you may 
remember, was finally imagined by us to behold real animals and 
the stars, and last of all the sun himself; and, in like manner, 
when a person begins dialectics, and starts on the discovery of the 
absolute by the light of reason only, and without any assistance of 
sense, and does not rest until by pure intelligence he attains pure 
good, he finds himself at the end of the intellectual world, as in 
the other case at the end of the visible. 

Exactly, he said. 

368 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Then this is the progress which you call dialectic ? 

True. 

But the release of the prisoners from chains, and their trans- 
lation from the shadows to the images and to the light, and the 
ascent from the underground den to the sun, while their eyes are 
weak and they are unable to look on animals and plants and the 
light of the sun, but are able to look upon the divine images4 in 
the water and the shadows of true existence (not shadows of 
images cast by a light of fire, which is likewise only the image of 
the sun) — this power of raising the highest principle in the soul 
to the contemplation of that which is best in existence, as in the 
figure, of the most luminous of the senses to the sight of that 
which is brightest in the visible world — this power is given, as I 
was saying, by all that study and pursuit of the arts which has 
been described. 

I agree in what you are saying, he replied, which may be hard 
to believe, yet, from another point of view, is harder still to 
deny. But whether proven or not, let us assume all this, which 
may be the theme of many another discussion ; and now proceed 
at once from the prelude or preamble to the chief strain or law, 
and describe that in like manner. Say, then, what is the nature 
and what are the divisions of dialectic, and what are the paths 
that lead thither; for these paths will also lead to our final rest. 

Dear Glaucon, I said, you will not be able to follow me here, 5^3 
though I would do my best, and you should behold not an image 
only but the absolute truth, according to my notion. I cannot 
indeed be confident that this is the exact truth, but that some- 
thing like this is the truth I am confident. 

Certainly, he replied. 

And further, I must tell you that the power of dialectic alone 
can reveal this, and only to one who is a disciple of the previous 
sciences. 

Of that too, he said, you may be confident. 

And no one, I said, will argue that there is any other process 
or way of comprehending all true existence ; for the arts in general 
are referable to the wants or opinions of men, or are cultivated 
for the sake of production and construction, or fbr the care of 

4 Omitting tvravOa bt rrpbs (fxnrrao-paTn. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VII. 

369 

such productions and constructions ; and as to the mathematical 
arts which, as we were saying, have some apprehension of true 
being — geometry and the like — they only dream about being, 
but never can they behold the waking reality so long as they leave 
the hypotheses which they use undisturbed, and are unable to 
give an account of them. For when a man knows not his own 
first principle, and when the conclusion and intermediate steps 
are also constructed out of he knows not what, how can he ima- 
gine that such an arbitrary agreement will ever become science ? 

Impossible, he said. 

Then dialectic, and dialectic alone, goes to a principle, and 
is the only science which does away hypotheses in order to estab- 
lish them ; the eye of the soul, which is literally buried in some 
outlandish slough, is by her taught to look upwards ; and she uses as 
handmaids, in the work of conversion, the sciences which we have 
been discussing. Custom terms them sciences, but they ought to 
have some other name, implying greater clearness than opinion 
and less clearness than science : and this, in our previous sketch, 
was called understanding. But there is no use in our disputing 
about names when we have realities of such importance to 
consider. 

No, he said ; any name will do which expresses the thought 
clearly. 

At any rate, we are satisfied, as before, to have four divisions ; 
two for intellect and two for opinion, and to call the first divi- 
sion science, the second understanding, the third belief, and the 
fourth knowledge of shadows: opinion being concerned with 
534 generation, and intellect with true being; and then to make a 
proportion — 

As being : generation : : pure intellect : opinion. 

As science : belief : : understanding : knowledge of shadows. 

But let us leave the further distribution and division of the objects 
of opinion and of intellect, which will be a long enquiry, many 
times longer than this has been. 

As far as I understand, he said, I agree. 

And do you also agree, I said, in describing the dialectician as 
one who has a conception of the essence of each thing? And may 
he who is unable to acquire and impart this conception, in what- 

vol. 11. b b 

37° 

THE REPUBLIC . 

ever degree he fails, in that degree also be said to fail in intelli- 
gence? Will you admit that? 

Yes, he said; how can I deny that? 

And you would say the same of the conception of the good ? 
Until a person is able to abstract and define the idea of good, and 
unless he can run the gauntlet of all objections, and is ready to 
disprove them, not by appeals to opinion, but to true existence, 
never faltering at any step of the argument — unless he can do all 
this, you would say that he knows neither absolute good nor any 
other good; he apprehends only a shadow, which is given by 
opinion and not by knowledge ; — dreaming and slumbering in this 
life, before he is well awake, here he arrives at the world below, 
and finally has his quietus? 

All that I should most certainly say. 

And surely you would not have the children of your ideal State, 
whom you are nurturing and educating — if the ideal ever becomes 
a reality — you would not allow the future rulers to be like posts5, 
having no reason in them, and yet to be set in authority over the 
highest matters ? 

Certainly not. 

Then you will enact that they shall have such an education as 
will enable them to attain the greatest skill in asking and answer- 
ing questions ? 

Yes, he said, I will, with your help. 

Dialectic, then, as you will agree, is the coping-stone of the 
sciences, and is placed over them ; no other can be placed higher : 
the nature of knowledge can go no further ? 

I agree, he said. 

But to whom are we to assign these studies, and in what way 535 
are they to be assigned ? — that is a question which remains to be 
considered. 

Yes, plainly. 

You remember, I said, how the rulers were chosen before? 

Certainly, he said. 

The same natures must still be chosen, and the preference again 
given to the surest and the bravest, and, if possible, to the fairest ; 
and, having noble and manly tempers, they should also have the 
natural gifts which accord with their education. 

6 ypapnas, literally lines, probably the starting-point of a race-course. 

BOOK VII . 

37 1 

And what are they ? 

Such gifts as keenness and ready powers of acquisition; for the 
mind more often faints from the severity of study than from the 
severity of gymnastics: the toil is more entirely the mind’s own, 
and is not shared with the body. 

Very true, he replied. 

Further, he of whom we are in search should have a good 
memory, and be an unwearied, solid man who is a lover of labour 
in any line, or he will never be able to undergo the double toil 
and trouble of body and mind. 

Certainly, he said ; a man must have some natural gifts. 

The mistake at present is, I said, that those who study philo- 
sophy have no vocation, and this, as I was before saying, is the 
reason why she has fallen into disrepute : her true sons should 
study her and not bastards. 

How do you mean ? 

In the first place, her votary should not have a lame or one- 
legged industry — I mean, that he should not be half industrious 
and half idle: as, for example, when a man is a lover of gym- 
nastic and hunting, and all other bodily exercises, but a hater 
rather than a lover of the labour of learning or hearing or en- 
quiring. Or a man may be lame in another way, and the love of 
labour may take an opposite form. 

That is quite true, he said. 

And as to truth, I said, is not a soul to be deemed halt and 
lame who hates voluntary falsehood and is extremely indignant 
at himself and others when they tell lies, and yet receives in- 
voluntary falsehood, and does not mind wallowing like a swinish 
beast in the mire of ignorance, and has no shame at being 
detected ? 

Most certainly, he said. 

And, again, as to temperance and courage and magnanimity, 
and every other virtue, should they not observe the ways of the 
true son and of the bastard ? for wherever States and individuals 
have no eye for these sort of qualities, they unconsciously make a 
friend or perhaps a ruler of one who is in a figure a lame man 
or a bastard, from a defect in some one of these qualities. 

That is very true, he said. 

All these things, then, will have to be carefully considered, and 

b b 2 

372 

THE REPUBLIC . 

those whom we introduce to this vast system of education and 
training must be sound in limb and mind, and then justice her- 
self will have nothing to say against us, and we shall be the 
saviours of the State ; but, if our pupils arc men of another stamp, 
the reverse will happen, and we shall pour a still greater flood 
of ridicule on philosophy. 

That would be discreditable. 

Yes, I said, that is quite true; and yet, perhaps, in thus turning 
jest into earnest I am equally ridiculous. 

In what respect ? 

I had forgotten, I said, that we were not in earnest, and spoke 
with too much excitement. For when I saw philosophy trampled 
under foot of men 1 could not help feeling a sort of indignation 
at the authors of her disgrace: and my anger made me ve- 
hement. 

Indeed ; I did not observe that you were more vehement than 
was right. 

But I felt that I was. And now let me remind you that, although 
.in our former selection we chose old men, that will not do in this. 
Solon was under a delusion when he said that a man as he is 
growing older may learn many things — for he can no more learn 
than he can run ; youth is the time of toil. 

That is certainly true. 

And, therefore, calculation and geometry and all the other 
elements of instruction, which are a preparation for dialectic, 
should be presented to the mind in childhood; not, however, 
under any notion of forcing them. 

Why not ? 

Because a freeman ought to be a freeman in the acquisition 
of knowledge. Bodily exercise, when compulsory, does no harm ; 
but knowledge which is acquired under compulsion has no hold 
on the mind. 

Very true, he said. 

Then, my good friend, I said, do not use compulsion, but let 
early education be a sort of amusement; that will better enable 537 
you to find out the natural bent. 

There is reason in that, he said. 

Do you remember our saying that the children, too, must be 
taken to see the battle on horseback ; and if there were no danger 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VII. 

373 

they might be led close up and, like young hounds, have a taste 
of blood given them ? 

Yes, I remember. 

Now that may be practised, I said, in other things — labours, 
lessons, dangers — and he who appears to be most ready ought 
to be enrolled in a select number. 

At what age ? 

At the age when the necessary gymnastics are over : the 
period whether of two or three years which passes in this sort 
of training is useless for any other purpose ; for sleep and exer- 
cise are unpropitious to learning; and the trial of who is first in 
gymnastic exercises is one of the most important tests to which 
they are subjected. 

Certainly, he replied. 

After that time those who are selected from the class of twenty 
years old will be promoted to higher honour, and the sciences 
which they learned without any order in their early education 
will now be brought together, and they will be able to see the 
correlation of them to one another and to true being. 

Yes, he said, that is the only kind of knowledge which is ever- 
lasting. 

Yes, I said; and the capacity for such knowledge is the great 
criterion of dialectical talent : the speculative or comprehensive 
mind is always the dialectical. 

I agree in that, he said. 

These, I said, are the points which you must consider; and 
those who have most of this comprehension, and who are most 
steadfast in their learning, and in their military, and generally in 
their public duties, when they arrive at the age of thirty will 
have to be chosen by you out of the select class, and elevated 
to higher honour; and you will have to prove them by the help 
of dialectic, in order to learn which of them is able to give up 
the use of sight and other senses, and in company with truth to 
attain absolute being. And here, my friend, great caution is 
required. 

Why great caution ? 

Do you not remark, I said, how great the evil is which dialectic 
has introduced ? 

What is that ? he said. 

374 

THE REPUBLIC. 

The lawlessness of which the professors of the art are full. 

That is true, he said. 

Do you think that there is anything unnatural in their case? 
or shall I ask you to make allowance for them ? 

What sort of allowance ? 

I want you, I said, by way of parallel, to imagine a supposititious 
son who is brought up in great wealth ; he is one of a large and 
numerous family, and has many flatterers. When grown up he 538 
learns that his alleged are not his real parents ; but who the real 
ones are he is unable to discover. Can you tell me how he will 
be likely to behave towards his flatterers and his supposed parents, 
first of all during the period when he was ignorant of the false 
relation, and then again when he knew ? Or would you like to 
hear my suspicion ? 

Very much. 

I suspect, then, that while he was ignorant of the truth he would 
be likely to honour his father and his mother and his supposed 
relations more than the flatterers; he would be less willing to see 
them in want, or to do any violence to them, or say anything evil 
of them, and in important matters less willing to disobey them. 

That might be expected. 

But when he has made the discovery, I should imagine that he 
would diminish his honour and regard for them, and would become 
more devoted to the flatterers; their influence over him would 
greatly increase ; he would now live after their ways, and openly 
associate with them, and, unless he were of an unusually good 
disposition, he would think no more of his parents or other sup- 
posed friends. 

Well, that is extremely probable. But how is the image ap- 
plicable to the disciples of philosophy? 

In this way : you know that there are certain principles about 
justice and good, which were taught us in childhood, and under 
their parental authority we have been brought up, obeying and 
honouring them. 

That is true. 

And there are also opposite maxims and habits of pleasure 
which flatter and attract our soul, but they do not influence those 
who have any sense of right, and who continue to honour the 
maxims of their fathers and obey them. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VII. 

375 

True. 

Now, when a man is in this state, and the questioning spirit 
asks what is fair or honourable, and he answers as the law directs, 
and then arguments come and refute the word of the legislator, 
and he is driven into believing that nothing is fair any more than 
foul, or just and good any more than the opposite, and the same 
of all his time-honoured notions, do you think that he will still 
honour and obey them ? 

That is impossible. 

And when he ceases to think them honourable and natural as 
539 heretofore, and he fails to discover the true, can he be expected 
to pursue any life other than that which flatters his desires ? 

He cannot. 

And from being an observer of the law he is converted into a 
lawless person ? 

Unquestionably. 

Now all this is very natural in those who study philosophy in 
this manner, and also, as I was just now saying, most excusable. 

Yes, he said, and, as I may add, pitiable. 

Therefore, that your feelings may not be moved to pity about 
our thirty-years-old citizens, every care must be taken in intro- 
ducing them to dialectic. 

Certainly. 

They must not be allowed to taste the dear delight too early ; 
that is one thing specially to be avoided ; for young men, as you 
may have observed, when they first get the taste in their mouths, 
argue for amusement, and are always contradicting and refuting 
others in imitation of those who refute them ; they are like puppy- 
dogs, who delight to tear and puli at all who come near them. 

Yes, he said, that is their great delight. 

And when they have made many conquests and received defeats 
at the hands of many, they violently and speedily get into a way 
of not believing anything that they believed before, and hence, 
not only they, but philosophy generally, has a bad name with the 
rest of the world. 

That is very true, he said. 

But when a man begins to get older, he will no longer be 
guilty of that sort of insanity; he will follow the example of the 
dialectician who is seeking for truth, and not of the eristic, who 

376 

THE REPUBLIC. 

is contradicting for the sake of amusement; and the greater 
moderation of his character will increase and not diminish the 
honour of the pursuit. 

Very true, he said. 

And did we not make special provision for this, when we 
said that the natures of those to whom philosophy was to be 
imparted were to be orderly and steadfast, not, as now, any chance 
aspirant or intruder ? 

Very true, he said. 

Suppose, I said, that the study of philosophy be continued 
diligently and earnestly and exclusively for twice the number of 
years which were passed in bodily exercise — will that be enough? 

Would you say six or four years? he asked. 

Suppose five years to be the time fixed, I replied ; after that they 
must be sent down into the den and compelled to hold any 
military or other office which young men are qualified to hold: 
in this way they will get their experience of life, and there will be 
an opportunity of trying whether, when they are drawn all manner 
of ways by temptation, they will stand firm or stir at ail. 

And how long is this stage of their lives to last ? 

Fifteen years, I answered; and when they have reached fifty 
years of age, then let those who still survive and have dis- 
tinguished themselves in every deed and in all knowledge come 
at last to their consummation : the time has now arrived at which 
they must raise the eye of the soul to the universal light which 
lightens all things, and behold the absolute good; for that is 
the pattern according to which they are to order the State and the 
lives of individuals, and the remainder of their own lives also, 
making philosophy their chief pursuit ; but, when their turn comes, 
also toiling at politics and ruling for the public good, not as if 
they were doing some great thing, but of necessity; and when 
they have brought up others like them and left them in their 
place to be governors of the State, then they will depart to the 
Islands of the Blest and dwell there ; and the city will give them 
public memorials and sacrifices and honour them, if the Pythian 
oracle consent, as demigods, and at any rate as blessed and divine. 

You are a statuary, Socrates, and have made our governors 
perfect in beauty. 

Yes, I said, Glaucon, and our governesses too; for you must 

BOOK VII. 

377 

not suppose that what I have been saying applies to men only and 
not to women as far as their natures can go. 

There you are right, he said, if, as we described, they are to have 
all things in common with the men. 

Well, I said, and you would agree (would you not ?) that what 
has been said about the State and the government is not a mere 
dream, and although difficult not impossible, but only possible 
in the way that has been supposed ; that is to say, when the true 
philosopher kings, one or more of them, are born in a State, 
despising the honours of this present world which they deem 
mean and worthless, above all esteeming right and the honour 
that springs from right, and regarding justice as the greatest and 
most necessary of all things, whose ministers they are, and whose 
principles will be extended by them when they set in order their 
own city? 

How will they do that ? he said. 

They will begin by sending out into the country all the inhabit- 
ants of the city who are more than ten years old, and will take 
possession of their children, who will be unaffected by the habits of 
their parents ; they will then train them in their own habits and 
laws, that is to say, in those which we have given them : and in 
this way the State and constitution of which we were speaking 
will soonest and most easily succeed, and the nation which has 
such a constitution will be most benefited. 

Yes, that will be the best way. And I think, Socrates, that 
you have very well described the way in which such a constitution 
might come into being. 

And have we not said enough of the State, and of the man who 
corresponds to the State, for there is no difficulty in seeing how 
we shall describe him ? 

There is no difficulty, he replied, and I say with you, enough. 

BOOK VIII. 

And so, Glaucon, we have arrived at the conclusion that in 543 
the perfect State wives and children are to be in common; and 
education and the arts of war and peace are also to be common, 
and the best philosophers and the bravest warriors are to be their 
kings ? 

That, replied Glaucon, is acknowledged. 

Yes, I said; and we have further acknowledged that the gover- 
nors, when appointed themselves, would take their soldiers and 
place them in houses such as we were describing; nor would 
any one say that anything which he had was his own — their 
houses were to be common ; and as for their property, you remem- 
ber about that ? 

Yes, I remember that no one was to have any of the ordinary 
possessions of mankind; they were to be a sort of warrior 
athletes and guardians, receiving from the other citizens, in lieu 
of annual payment, only their maintenance, and they were to take 
care of themselves and of the whole State. 

True, I said; and now that this division of our work is con- 
cluded, let us find the point at which we digressed, that we may 
return into the old path. 

There is no difficulty in doing that, he replied ; you appeared 
then, as now, to have finished the description of the State ; and 
you said that such a State was good, and the man was good who 
answered to the State, although you had more excellent things to 
relate both of State and man. And you said further, that if this 544 
was the true form, then the others were false ; and of the false forms, 
you said, as I remember, that there were four principal ones, and . 
that the defects of them, and of the individuals corresponding to 
them, were worth examining: when we had seen them all, and 
finally agreed as to who was the best and who was the worst 
of them, we might consider, as you said, whether the best was 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VIII . 

379 

not also the happiest, and the worst the most miserable. And 
when I asked you what the four forms of government were of 
which you spoke, then Polemarchus and Adeimantus put in their 
word ; and you began again, and have found your way to the point 
at which we have now arrived. 

Your recollection, I said, is most exact. 

Then, like a wrestler, he replied, you must put yourself again in 
the same position ; and let me ask the same questions, and do 
give me the same answer which you were about to give me then. 

Yes, if I can, I will, I said. 

I shall particularly wish to hear what were the four constitu- 
tions of which you were speaking. 

That, I said, is easily answered : the four governments of which 
I spoke, so far as they have distinct names, are, first, the Cretan 
and Spartan, which are generally applauded : next, there is oli- 
garchy; this is not equally approved, and is a form of government 
which has many evils : thirdly, democracy, which naturally follows 
oligarchy, although different : and lastly comes tyranny, great and 
famous, which is different from them all, and is the fourth and 
worst disorder of a State. I do not know of any other constitution 
which can be said to have a distinct form, but there are lordships 
and principalities which are bought and sold, and some other 
intermediate forms of government; and these nondescripts are 
found among barbarians oftener than among Hellenes. 

Yes, he replied, there are said to be many curious forms of 
government among them. 

Do you know, I said, that governments vary as the characters 
of men vary, and that there must be as many of the one as there 
are of the other ? Or perhaps you suppose that States are made 
of c oak and rock/ and not out of the human natures which are in 
them, and which turn the scale and draw other things after them ? 

Nay, he said, the States are as the men are ; they do but grow 
out of human characters. 

Then if the constitutions of States are five, the disposition of 
individual minds will also be five ? 

Certainly. 

Him who answers to aristocracy, and whom we rightly call 
545 just anc* g°°d> wc have already described ; and now we have to 
describe the inferior sort of natures, being the contentious and 

380 

THE REPUBLIC . 

ambitious, who answer to the Spartan polity ; also the oligar- 
chical, democratical, and tyrannical man. Let us place the most 
just by the side of the most unjust, and then we shall be able to 
compare the relative happiness or unhappiness of pure justice and 
pure injustice : this will complete the enquiry. And then we 
shall know whether we are to pursue injustice, as Thrasymachus 
advises, or justice, as the present argument counsels. 

Certainly, he replied, that will be the way. 

Suppose, then, following our old plan, which we adopted as 
being clearer, of taking the State first and then proceeding to 
the individual, we begin with the government of honour (for I 
know of no name for such a government other than timocracy, 
or perhaps timarchy); and then we will view the like character 
in the individual; and, after that, consider oligarchy and the 
oligarchical man; and then again we will turn our attention to 
democracy and the democratical man ; and lastly, we will go and 
view the city of tyranny, and there take a look into the tyrant’s 
soul, and try to arrive at the final decision. 

That way of viewing and judging of the matter will be very 
rational. 

First, then, I said, let us enquire how timocracy (or the govern- 
ment of honour) arises out of aristocracy (or the government of 
the best). Clearly, all political changes originate in divisions of 
the actual governing power; for a government which is united, 
however small, cannot be moved. 

That is true, he said. 

In what way, then, will our city be moved, and in what manner 
will the two classes of auxiliaries and rulers disagree among them- 
selves or with one another ? Shall we, after the manner of Homer, 
pray the muses to tell us c how strife was first kindled ? ’ Shall 
we imagine them, in tragic style, pretending to be in earnest, 
playing with us as with children in solemn words ? 

How would they address us ? 

After this manner: — A city which is thus constituted can hardly 546 
be shaken; but, seeing that everything which has a beginning has 
also an end, even this constitution will in time perish and come 
to dissolution. And this is the dissolution : — In plants that grow 
on the earth, as well as in animals that move on the earth’s 
surface, fertility and sterility of soul and body occur when the 

BOOK VIII . 

381 

circles are completed, in short-lived existences passing over a 
short space, in long-lived ones over a long space. But, to the 
knowledge of human fecundity and sterility all the wisdom and 
education of your rulers will not attain ; the laws which regulate 
them will not be discovered by an intelligence which is alloyed 
with sense, but will escape them, and they will bring children 
into the world when they have no business. Now that which is of 
divine birth has a period which is contained in a perfect number 
(i. e. a cyclical number, such as 6, which is equal to the sum of 
its divisors 1, 2, 3, so that when the circle or time represented 
by 6 is completed, the lesser times or rotations represented by 
1, 2, 3 are also completed), but that which is of human birth is 
contained in a number in which first (i. e. declining from the per- 
fect cycle) increments by involution and evolution giving three 
intervals and four terms of approximating and differentiating 
and increasing and waning numbers make all agreeable and com- 
mensurable1. The base of these (3) with a third added (4) when 
joined with a figure of five (20) and raised to the third power fur- 
nishes two harmonies; 2the first a square which is a hundred 
times as great (400=4 x 100), and the other a figure having one 
side equal to the former, which, taken one way, is equilateral, but 
also oblong, consisting of a hundred numbers squared upon rational 
diameters of a square (i. e. in which fractions are omitted), the side 
of which is five (7 x 7 = 49 x 100=4900), each of them being less 
by one (than the perfect square which includes the fractions 
sc. 50) or less by two perfect squares of irrational diameters (of 
a square the side of which is five = 50 4- 50= 100) ; and a hundred 
cubes of three (27x100 = 27004-4900 + 400 = 8000). Now this 
number represents a geometrical figure which has control over 
the good and evil of births. For when our guardians arc ignorant 
of the right seasons, and unite bride and bridegroom out of due 
time, the children will not be happy or goodly. And though the 
best of them will be appointed by their predecessors, still they 
will be unworthy to hold their fathers’ places, and when they come 
into power as guardians, they will soon be found to fail in taking 
care of us, the Muses, first by undervaluing music, and secondly 

1 Perhaps 3, 9, 27, 81; or 1 + 2 + 4 + 8 + 8 + 4 + 2 + 1 = 30. 

2 Or the first a square which is 100 x 100= 10,000. The whole number will 
then be 17500 = 3 square of 100, and an oblong of 100 by 75. 

382 

THE REPUBLIC. 

gymnastic ; and hence our young men will be less cultivated. 

In the succeeding generation rulers will be appointed who have 
none of the qualities of guardians. In order to put to the test 
the metal of your different races, which, like Hesiod’s, are of 
gold and silver and brass and iron, iron will be mingled with 547 
silver, and brass with gold, and hence there will arise inequality 
and irregularity, which always and in all places are causes of 
enmity and war. Such is the origin of strife, wherever arising; 
and this is the answer of the Muses to us. 

Yes, he said, and we may assume that they answer truly. 

Why, yes, I said, of course they answer truly ; the Muses cannot 
do otherwise. 

And what do the Muses say next ? 

When strife arose, then the two races were drawn different ways : 
the iron and brass fell to acquiring money and land and houses 
and gold and silver; but the gold and silver races, having the 
true riches in their own nature, inclined towards virtue and the 
ancient order of things. There was a battle between them, 
and at last they agreed to assign their land and houses to the 
possession of individuals; and they enslaved their friends and 
maintainers, whom they had formerly protected in the condition 
of freemen, and made of them subjects and servants ; while they 
themselves were occupied with war and the watching of them. 

That, he replied, will probably be the origin of the change. 

And the new government which thus arises will be of a form 
intermediate between oligarchy and aristocracy. 

Very true. 

And now, after the change has been made, what will be their 
way of life ? Clearly, the new State, being in a mean between 
oligarchy and the perfect State, will partly follow one and partly 
the other, and will also have some peculiarities. 

That is true, he said. 

In the honour given to rulers, in the abstinence of the warrior 
class from agriculture, handicrafts, and other trades, in the insti- 
tution of common meals, attention to gymnastics and military 
training — in all these the citizen will resemble the perfect State. 

True. 

But in the fear of admitting philosophers to power, because 
their philosophy is no longer simple and earnest, but made up of 

1 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VIII. 

383 

mixed elements; and in turning from them to passionate and 
simpler characters, who are by nature fitted for war rather than 
548 peace ; and in the value which they set upon military stratagems 
and contrivances, and in their everlasting wars— this State will 
be for the most part peculiar. 

Yes. 

Yes, I said; and men of this stamp will be covetous of money, 
like those who live in oligarchies; they will have a fierce secret 
longing after gold and silver, which they will hoard in dark places, 
having magazines and treasures of their own for the deposit and 
concealment of them ; also castles which are just nests for their 
eggs, and in which they will spend large sums on their wives, or 
on any others whom they please. 

That is most true, he said. 

And they are miserly because they have no means of openly 
acquiring the money which they prize; they will spend that which 
is another man’s in their lust; stealing their pleasures and run- 
ning away like children from the law their father : they have been 
schooled not by gentle influences but by force; for they have no 
thought of the true muse of reason and philosophy, and gymnastic 
is preferred by them to music. 

Undoubtedly, he said, the form of government which you de- 
scribe is a mixture of good and evil. 

Why, there is a mixture, I said; but one thing, and one thing 
only, is predominantly seen, — the spirit of contention and ambi- 
tion; and these are due to the prevalence of the passionate or 
spiritual element. 

Assuredly, he said. 

Such is the origin and such the character of this State, of which 
the outline only has been given; the more perfect execution of 
the sketch was not required, because the outline is enough to show 
the type of the most perfectly just and unjust ; and to go through 
all the States and all the characters of men, leaving none of them 
out, would be an interminable labour. 

Very true, he replied. 

Who answers to this form of government — how did he come 
into being, and what is he like ? 

I think, said Adeimantus, that in the spirit of contention which 
characterizes him, he is not unlike our friend Glaucon. 

3«4 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Perhaps, I said, he may be like him in that one point ; but there 
are other respects in which he is very different. 

In what respects ? 

He should have more of self-assertion and be somewhat less 
favoured by the Muses, yet not other than a lover of the Muses ; 
and he should be a good listener, but not a speaker. A man of 549 
this sort may be imagined to be rough with slaves, not like the 
educated man, who is too proud for that ; and he will also be 
courteous to freemen, and remarkably obedient to authority ; he is 
a lover of power and a lover of honour ; claiming to be a ruler, not 
because he is a speaker, or on any ground of that sort, but because 
he is a soldier, and, as a soldier, has performed feats of arms; — 
he is also a lover of gymnastic exercises and of the chase. 

Yes, he said, that is the character of timocracy. 

Such an one will despise riches only when he is young; but as 
he gets older he will be more and more attracted to them, because 
he has a piece of the avaricious nature in him, and is not single- 
minded towards virtue, having lost his best guardian. 

Who is that ? said Adeimantus. 

Philosophy, I said, tempered with music, who comes and takes 
up her abode in a man through life, and is the only saviour of his 
virtue. 

Good, he said. 

Such, I said, is the timocratical youth, and he is like the timo- 
cratical State. 

Exactly. 

His origin is as follows : — He is often the son of a brave father, 
who dwells in an ill-governed city, the honours and offices of 
which he declines, and will not go to law, but is ready to waive 
his rights in order that he may escape trouble. 

And how does the son come into being ? 

The character of the son begins to develope when he hears his 
mother grumbling at her husband for not having a seat in the 
government, the consequence of which is that she loses prece- 
dence among other women. Further, when she sees her husband 
not very eager about money, and instead of battling and railing 
in the law courts or assembly, taking everything of that sort 
quietly; and when she observes that his thoughts always centre 
in himself, while he treats her with very considerable indiffer- 

i 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VIII. 

385 

ence, she is annoyed at all this, and says to her son that his father 
is only half a man and far too easy-going : not to mention other 
similar complaints which women love to utter. 

Yes, said Adeimantus, they give us plenty of them, and in their 
own characteristic style. 

And you know, I said, that the old servants of the family, who 
are supposed to be attached, talk privately in the same strain to 
the sons ; and if they see any one who owes money to their father, 
or is wronging him in any way, and he fails to prosecute them, 
they tell the youth that when he grows up he must retaliate upon 
550 his injurers, and be more of a man than his father. He has only 
to walk abroad and he hears and sees the same sort of thing: 
those who do their own business in the city are called simple, and 
held in no esteem, while the busy-bodies are honoured and ap- 
plauded. The result is that the young man, hearing and seeing all 
these things — hearing, too, the words of his father, and having 
a nearer view of his way of life, and making comparisons of him 
and others — is drawn opposite ways : while his father is watering 
and nourishing the rational principle in his soul, the others are 
encouraging the passionate and appetitive ; and he being not 
originally of a bad nature, but having kept bad company, is 
brought by their joint influence to a middle point, and gives up 
the kingdom which is within him to the middle principle of 
contentiousness and passion, and becomes proud and ambitious. 

You seem to me to have described his origin perfectly. 

Then we have now, I said, the second form of government and 
the second type of character ? 

We have. 

Next, let us look at another man who, as Aeschylus says, is set 
over against another State; or rather, as our plan requires, begin 
with the State. 

By all means. 

I believe that oligarchy follows next in order. 

And what manner of government do you term oligarchy ? 

A government resting on a valuation of property, in which the 
rich have power and the poor are deprived of power. 

I understand, he replied. 

Shall I describe how the change from timocracy to oligarchy 
arises ? 

VOL. 11. c c 

Digitized by Google 

386 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Yes. 

Well, I said, no eyes are required in order to see how that 
comes about. 

How? 

That private hoard of theirs is the source of the evil ; the accu- 
mulation of gold ruins timocracy : they invent some extravagance 
which is in open contravention of the law, but neither they nor 
their wives care about this. 

That might be expected. 

And then one seeing another prepares to rival him, and thus the 
whole body of the citizens acquires a similar character. 

Likely enough. 

After that they get on in trade, and the more they think of this 
the less they think of virtue ; for when riches and virtue are 
placed together in the scales of the balance, the one always rises 
as the other falls. 

True. 

And in proportion as riches and rich men are honoured in the 55 
State, virtue and the virtuous are dishonoured. 

Clearly. 

And what is honoured is cultivated, and that which has no 
honour is neglected. 

That is the case. 

And so at last, instead of loving contention and glory, men 
become lovers of trade and money, and they honour and reverence 
the rich man, and make a ruler of him, and dishonour the poor 
man. 

Certainly. 

Then they proceed to make a law which fixes a sum of money 
as the qualification of citizenship* the money fixed is more or less 
as the oligarchy is more or less exclusive ; and they forbid any one 
whose property is below the amount fixed to share in the govern- 
ment : these changes in the constitution they effect by force of 
arms, if intimidation has not already done the work. 

Very true. 

And this, speaking generally, is the way in which oligarchy is 
established. 

Yes, he said; but what are the characteristics of this form of 
government, and what are the supposed defects ? 

BOOK VIII. 

387 

First of all, I said, consider the nature of the qualification. 
Just think what would happen if the pilots were to be chosen 
according to their property, and a poor man refused permission to 
steer, even though he were a better pilot ? 

You mean that they would shipwreck ? 

Yes; and is not this true of the government of anything3? 

Yes, that is what I should imagine. 

And would you say this of a city also, or do you make an ex- 
ception in favour of a city ? 

Nay, he said, the case of a city is still stronger, in proportion 
as the rule of a city is greater and more difficult. 

This, then, will be the first great defect of oligarchy? 

Clearly. 

And here is another defect which is quite as bad. 

What defect ? 

The inevitable division; such a State is not one, but two 
States, the one of poor men, the other of rich men, who are living 
on the same spot and ever conspiring against one another. 

Yes, that is equally bad. 

Another discreditable feature is the impossibility of carrying on 
any war, because if they arm and use the multitude they are more 
afraid of them than of the enemy : that is unavoidable. If they 
do not use them, then, in the hour of battle, they appear oligarchs 
indeed, few to fight and few to rule: and at the same time their 
fondness for money makes them unwilling to pay taxes. 

That is not creditable. 

And what do you say of our former charge that, under such a con- 
552 stitution, the same persons are busy at many things, and are husband- 
men, tradesmen, warriors, all in one ? Does that seem well ? 

Anything but well. 

There is another evil which is, perhaps, the greatest of all, and 
to which this State first begins to be liable. 

What is the evil ? 

The evil is that a man may sell all that he has, and another 
may possess his property, yet after the sale he may dwell in the 
city of which he is no longer a part, being neither trader, nor 
artisan, nor horseman, nor hoplite, but only poor and helpless. 

3 Omitting f} rtvos. 

C C 2 

Digitized by Google 

388 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Yes, that begins in this State. 

An oligarchy offers no security against this; for oligarchies have 
both the extremes of great wealth and utter poverty. 

True. 

But think again: what sort of a gentleman is this? In his 
wealthy days, while he was spending his money, was he a whit 
more good to the State for the purposes of which we were just now 
speaking ? Or did he only seem to be a member of the ruling body, 
being really no more a ruler than he was a subject, but just a 
spendthrift ? 

As you say, he seemed to be a ruler, but was only a spendthrift. 

May we not say that this is the drone in the house who is like 
the drone in the honeycomb, and that the one is the plague of the 
city as the other is of the hive ? 

Just so, Socrates. 

And God has made the flying drones, Adeimantus, all without 
stings, whereas of the walking drones he has made some without 
stings and others with dreadful stings : of the stingless class are 
those who in their old age end by dying paupers ; of the stingers 
come all the criminal class, as they are termed. 

Most true, he said. 

Clearly then, whenever you see paupers in a State, somewhere 
in that neighbourhood there are hidden away thieves and cut- 
purses and robbers of temples, and other malefactors. 

That is clear. 

Well, I said, and in oligarchical States do you not find paupers? 

Yes, he said; nearly everybody is a pauper who is not a ruler. 

And may we be so bold as to suppose that there are also 
many criminals to be found in them, rogues who have stings, and 
whom the authorities are careful to restrain by force ? 

Certainly, we may be so bold. 

The existence of such persons is to be attributed to want of 
education, ill-training, and an evil constitution of the State ? 

True. 

Such, then, is the form and such are the evils of oligarchy ; and 
there may be other evils. 

That is pretty much the truth. 

Then now oligarchy, or the form of government in which the 553 
rulers are elected for their wealth, may be regarded as dismissed. 

DiqitizetUj^joogle 

BOOK VIII. 

389 

Let us next proceed to consider the nature and origin of the in- 
dividual who answers to the State. 

Yes, by all means. 

Is not this the manner of the change from the timocratical to 
the oligarchical ? Suppose the representative of timocracy to have 
a son : at first he begins by emulating his father and walking in 
his footsteps, but presently he sees him strike all in a moment 
on a sunken reef, which is the State, and he and all that he has 
are lost ; he may have been a general or some other high officer 
who is brought to trial under a prejudice raised by informers, 
and either put to death, or exiled, or deprived of the privileges of 
a citizen, and all his property taken from him. 

That is very likely to happen. 

And the son has seen and known all this — he is a ruined man, 
and his fear has taught him to knock ambition and passion head- 
foremost from his bosom’s throne : humbled by poverty he takes 
to money-making and by mean and small savings and doings gets 
a fortune together. Is not this man likely to seat the concu- 
piscent and covetous elements on that vacant throne ? They will 
play the great king within him, and he will array them with tiara 
and collar and scimitar. 

Likely! Yes, he replied. 

And when he has made the reasoning and passionate faculties 
sit on the ground obediently on either side, and taught them to 
know their place, he compels the one to think only of the method 
by which lesser sums may be converted into larger ones, and 
schools the other into the worship and admiration of riches and 
rich men ; no ambition will he tolerate except the ambition of 
getting rich and the means which lead to this. 

Of all conversions, he said, there is none so speedy or so sure 
as when the ambitious youth changes into the avaricious one. 

And the avaricious, I said, is the oligarchical youth ? 

Yes, he said ; at any rate the individual out of whom he came 
is like the State out of which oligarchy came. 

Let us then consider whether there is any likeness between 
them. 

554 Very good- 

First, then, they resemble one another in the value which they 
set upon wealth ? 

Digitized by Google 

390 

THE REPUBLIC . 

Certainly. 

Also in their penurious, laborious character ; the individual only 
satisfies his necessary appetites, and confines his expenditure to 
them ; his other desires he subdues, under the idea that there is 
no use in them ? 

True. 

He is a shabby fellow, I said, who saves something out of every- 
thing and makes a purse for himself; and this is the sort of man 
whom the vulgar applaud. Is he not like the State which he 
represents ? 

That would be my view of him, he replied ; at any rate, money 
is highly valued by him as well as by the State. 

Why, he is not a man of cultivation, I said. 

I imagine not, he said ; had he been educated be would never 
have made a blind god director of his chorus, or given him chief 
honour4. 

Excellent! I said. Yet consider this: Will there not be found 
in him, owing to his want of cultivation, dronelike desires as of 
pauper and rogue, which are forcibly kept down by his general 
habit of life ? 

True. 

Do you know where you will have to look if you want to discover 
his rogueries ? 

Where must I look ? 

Let him be the guardian of an orphan, or have some other 
great opportunity of acting dishonestly, and then he will show 
that, in sustaining the reputation of uprightness which attaches 
to him in his dealings generally, he coerces his other bad passions 
by an effort of virtue ; not that he convinces them of evil, or exerts 
over them the gentle influence of reason, but he acts upon them 
by necessity and fear, and because he trembles for his possessions. 

That is clear. 

Yes, indeed, I said, my dear friend, you will find that the 
natural desires of the drone commonly exist in him all the same, 
whenever he has the spending of another’s goods. 

No mistake about that. 

4 Reading «al irifia fiaXtcrra. Ey, fjv 8’ cya>, according to Schneider’s emen- 
dation. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VIII. 

391 

This sort of man, then, will be at war with himself; he will be 
two men, and not one ; but, in general, his better desires will be 
found to prevail over his inferior ones. 

True. 

For these reasons such an one will be more decent than many 
are ; yet the true virtue of a unanimous and harmonious soul will 
be far out of his reach. 

That I believe. 

555 And surely, in his private capacity, the miser will be an ignoble 
competitor in a State for any prize of victory, or other object 
of honourable ambition ; he is too much afraid of awakening his 
expensive appetites and inviting them to help and join in the 
struggle; in true oligarchical fashion he fights with a small part 
only of his resources, and the result commonly is that he loses 
the prize and saves his money. 

Very true. 

Can we any longer doubt, then, that the miser and money- 
maker answers to the oligarchical State ? 

Certainly not. 

Next comes democracy and the democratical man ; the origin 
and nature of them we have still to learn, that we may compare 
the individual and the State, and so pronounce upon them. 

That, he said, is our method. 

Well, I said, is not this the way in which the change from 
oligarchy into democracy arises? — they are insatiable of wealth 
which they propose to themselves as their end; and the rulers, 
who are aware that their own power rests upon property, refuse 
to curtail by law the extravagance of the spendthrift youth because 
they will gain by their ruin; they lend them money and buy 
them out of their land and grow in wealth and honour ? 

Exactly. 

There can be no doubt that in a State you cannot have in 
the citizens the love of wealth and the spirit of moderation; 
one or the other will have to be disregarded. 

That is tolerably clear. 

And in oligarchical States, from carelessness and the indulgence 
of their extravagance, men of good family have often been 
reduced to beggary ? 

Yes, often. 

Digitized by Google 

392 

THE REPUBLIC. 

And still they remain in the city; there they are, and they 
have stings and arms, and some of them owe money, some are 
no longer citizens: a third class are in both predicaments, and 
they hate and conspire against those who have got their property, 
and anybody else, and are eager for revolution. 

That is true. 

On the other hand, the men of business, stooping as they walk, 
and pretending never so much as to see those whom they have 
already ruined, insert the sting — that is, their money — into any- 
body else who is not on his guard against them, and recover the 
parent or principal sum many times over multiplied into a family 
of children : this is the way in which they make drone and pauper 
to abound in the State. 

Yes, he said, there are plenty of them, that is certain. 55^ 

The evil is like a fire which is blazing up and which they 
will not extinguish either by placing restrictions on the dispo- 
sition of property or — 

What is the other solution of the difficulty ? 

One which is about as good, and has the advantage of com- 
pelling the citizens to look to their characters : — Let there be an 
ordinance that every one shall enter into voluntary contracts 
at his own risk, and there will be less of this scandalous money- 
making, and the evils of which we were speaking will be greatly 
lessened in the State. 

Yes, they will be greatly lessened. 

At present the governors, induced by the motives which I have 
named, treat their subjects badly ; while they and their adherents, 
especially the young men of the governing class, lead a life of 
luxury and idleness both of body and mind; they do nothing, 
and are incapable of holding out against pleasure and pain. 

Very true. 

They care only for making money, and are as indifferent as the 
pauper to the cultivation of virtue. 

Yes, quite indifferent. 

Now in this state of things the rulers and their subjects come 
in one another’s way, whether on a journey or some other occa- 
sion of meeting, or on a pilgrimage or march as fellow-soldiers 
or fellow-sailors; they observe each other in the moment of 
danger (and where danger is there is no fear that the poor will 

BOOK VIII. 

393 

be despised by the rich), and very likely the wiry sunburnt poor 
man may be placed in battle at the side of a wealthy one who 
has never spoilt his complexion, and has plenty of superfluous 
flesh — when he sees such an one puffing and at his wits’- end, 
can he avoid drawing the conclusion that men of this sort are 
only rich because no one has the courage to despoil them ? And 
when they meet in private will they not be saying to one another 
that our c warriors are nothing worth ? * 

Yes, he said, I am quite aware that this is their way of 
talking. 

And, as where a body is weak the addition of a touch from 
without may bring on illness, and sometimes even when there 
is no external provocation a commotion may arise within, in 
the same way where there is weakness in the State there is also 
likely to be illness, the occasion of which may be very slight, 
one party introducing their democratical, the other their oli- 
garchical allies, and the State may fall sick, and be at war with 
herself and in a state of distraction, even when there is no 
557 external cause ? 

Yes, surely. 

And then democracy comes into being after the poor have 
conquered their opponents, slaughtering some and banishing 
some, while to the remainder they give an equal share of freedom 
and power; and this is the form of government in which the 
magistrates are commonly elected by lot. 

Yes, he said, that is the nature of democracy, whether estab- 
lished by arms or by fear, and the withdrawal of the opposite party. 

And now what is their manner of life, and what sort of a go- 
vernment is this ? for as the government is such will be the man. 

Clearly, he said. 

In the first place, are they not free? and the city is full of 
freedom and frankness — there a man may do as he likes. 

Yes, that is often said, he replied. 

And where this freedom is, there every man is clearly able 
to order his life as he pleases ? 

Clearly. 

Then in this kind of State there will be the greatest variety of 
human natures? 

There will. 

394 

THE REPUBLIC. 

This, then, is likely to be the fairest of States and may be 
compared to an embroidered robe which is spangled with flowers ; 
and being in like manner spangled with the manners and charac- 
ters of mankind will appear to be the fairest of them all. And 
just as women and children think variety charming, so there 
are many men who will deem this the fairest of States. 

Yes. 

Yes, I said, my noble Sir, and a good place in which to go and 
look for a government. 

Why? 

' Because of the liberty which reigns there : they have a complete 
assortment of constitutions ; and if a man has a mind to establish 
a State, as we are doing, he must go to a democracy as he would 
go to a bazaar, where they sell them, and pick out one that suits 
him j then, when he has made his choice, he may lay the founda- 
tion of his State. 

He will be sure, he said, to have patterns enough. 

And there being no necessity, I said, for you to govern in this 
State, even if you have the capacity, or to be governed unless 
you like, or to go to war when the others go to war, or to be at 
peace when others are at peace, unless you are disposed — there 
being no necessity also because some law forbids you to hold office 
or be a dicast, that you should not hold office or be a dicast, if 
you have a mind yourself — is not that a way of life which for the 558 
moment is supremely delightful ? 

Yes, for the moment, that is true. 

And is not the calmness of those6 against whom sentence has 
been given often quite charming? Under a government of this 
sort there are men who, when they have been condemned to death 
or exile, stay where they are and walk about the world ; the gen- 
tleman parades like a hero, as though nobody saw or cared. 

Yes, he replied, I have often remarked that. 

Yes, I said; and the forgiving spirit of democracy, and the 
‘don’t care’ about trifles, and the disregard which she shows of 
all the fine principles which we were solemnly affirming at the 
foundation of the city — as when we said that, except in the case 
of some rare natures, never will there be a good man who from 

Digitized by Google 

5 Or, ‘ their good nature about those.’ 

BOOK VIII. 

395 

his early youth has not made things of beauty an amusement and 
also a study — how grandly does she trample all that under foot, 
never giving a thought to the pursuits which make a statesman, 
and is satisfied to honour a man who says that he is the people’s 
friend. 

Yes, he said, that is glorious. 

These and other kindred characteristics are proper to demo- 
cracy, which is a charming form of government, full of variety 
and diversity, and dispensing equality to equals and unequals 
alike. 

That, he said, is sufficiently well known. 

Consider now, I said, what manner of man the individual is, 
or rather consider, as in the case of the State, how he is created. 

Very good, he said. 

Is not this the way — he is the son of the miserly and oligar- 
chical father who has trained him in his own habits ? 

Exactly. 

And, like his father, he keeps under the pleasures which are of 
the spending and not of the getting sort, being those which are 
called by us unnecessary. The argument will be clearer if we here 
distinguish which are the necessary and which are the unnecessary 
pleasures. 

I should like to do that. 

Necessary pleasures are those of which we cannot get rid, and 
which benefit us when they are satisfied • both kinds are rightly 
called necessary, because our nature is necessarily attracted to 
them. 

True. 

And therefore we are not wrong in calling them necessary ? 

We are not. 

Again, as to the desires which a man may get rid of, if he 
makes that his object when young, the presence of which, more- 
over, does no good, and in some cases the reverse of good — shall 
we not be right in saying that all these are unnecessary ? 

Yes, certainly. 

Suppose we select an example of either kind, in order that we 
may have a general notion of them ? 

Very good. 

Will not the desire of eating, that is, of simple food and con- 

THE REPUBLIC . 

diments, as far as they are required for health and strength, be 
of the necessary class ? 

That is what I should suppose. 

The pleasure of eating is necessary in two ways — first as bene- 
ficial, and also as needed for the support of life ? 

Yes. 

But the condiments are only necessary as being good for health ? 

Certainly. 

And the desire which goes beyond this of viands of a less 
simple kind, which might generally be got rid of, if controlled and 
trained in youth, and is hurtful to the body and hurtful to the soul 
in the pursuit of wisdom and virtue, may be rightly called un- 
necessary ? 

Very right. 

May we not say that these spend and the other desires make 
money, because they are of use with a view to production ? 

Certainly. 

And of the pleasures of love, and all other pleasures, the same 
holds good ? 

True. 

And the drone of which we were speaking meant him who was 
surfeited in pleasures and desires of this sort, and was governed 
by the unnecessary desires, whereas he who was governed by the 
necessary was miserly and oligarchical ? 

Very true, he said. 

Again, I said, let us see how the democratical man grows out 
of the oligarchical : the following, as I suspect, is commonly the 
process. 

What? 

When a young man who has been brought up as we were just 
now describing, in a vulgar and miserly way, has tasted drones* 
honey and has come to associate with fierce and cunning natures 
who are able to provide for him all sorts of refinements and 
varieties of pleasure — then, as you may imagine, the change will 
begin of the oligarchical principle within him into the demo- 
cratical. 

That, he said, is the inevitable result. 

And as in the city like was helping like, and the change was 
effected by an alliance from without assisting one division of the 

BOOK VIII . 

397 

citizens, so the young man also changes by a class of desires from 
without assisting a class of those within, that which is akin and 
alike again helping that which is akin and alike. 

Certainly. 

And if there be any ally which aids the oligarchical side, 
560 whether the influence of friends or kindred, advising or rebuking 
him, then there arises a faction and an opposite faction, and the 
result is a civil war. 

Certainly. 

And there are times when the democratical principle gives way 
to the oligarchical, and some of his desires die, and others are 
banished ; a spirit of reverence enters into the young man’s soul 
and order is restored. 

Yes, he said, that sometimes happens. 

And then, again, after the old desires have been driven out 
fresh ones spring up, which are like them; they have never 
known a parent’s discipline, and this makes them fierce and 
numerous. 

Yes, he said, that often occurs. 

They draw him to his old associates, and holding secret inter- 
course with him, breed and muster in him ? 

Very true. 

At length they seize upon the citadel of the young man’s soul, 
which they perceive to be void of all fair accomplishments and 
pursuits and of every true word, which are the best guardians and 
sentinels in the minds of men dear to the gods. 

None better. 

False and boastful words and conceits grow up instead of them, 
and take the same position in him ? 

Yes, he said; indeed they do. 

And so the young man returns into the country of the lotus- 
eaters, and takes up his abode there in the face of all men ; and 
if any help be sent by his friends to the oligarchical part of him, 
the Messieurs Vain Conceit shut the gate of the king’s fastness ; 
they will not allow the new ally to pass. And if ambassadors, 
venerable for their age, come and parley, they refuse to listen to 
them ; there is a battle and they win : then modesty, which they call 
silliness, is ignominiously thrust into exile by them. They affirm 
temperance to be unmanliness, and her also they contemptuously 

Digitized by Google 

39« 

THE REPUBLIC. 

eject ; and they pretend that moderation and orderly expenditure 
are vulgarity and meanness ; and, with a company of vain appetites 
at their heels, they drive them beyond the border. 

Yes, with right good will. 

And when they have made a sweep of the soul of him who is 
now in their power, and is being initiated by them in great 
mysteries, the next thing is to bring back to their house in- 
solence and anarchy and waste and impudence in bright array, 
having garlands on their heads, with a great company, while they 
hymn their praises and call them by sweet names ; insolence they 56 
term breeding, and anarchy liberty, and waste magnificence, and 
impudence courage. In this way the young man passes out of 
his original nature, which was trained in the school of necessity, 
into the freedom and libertinism of useless and unnecessary 
pleasures. 

Yes, he said, that is obviously the way. 

When the change has been made he lives on, spending his 
money and labour and time on unnecessary pleasures quite as 
much as on necessary ones ; but if he be fortunate, and is not too 
much intoxicated with passion, when he gets older, after the 
tumult of freedom has mostly passed away — supposing that he 
then re-admits into the city some part of the exiled virtues, and 
does not wholly give himself up to their successors — in that case 
he balances his pleasures and lives in a sort of equilibrium, 
putting the government of himself into the hands of the one that 
offers and wins the turn; and when he has had enough of that, 
then into the hands of another, and is very impartial in his 
encouragement of them all. 

Very true, he said. 

Neither does he receive or admit into the fortress any true 
word of advice ; if any one says to him that some pleasures are 
the satisfactions of good and noble desires, and others of evil 
desires, and that he ought to use and honour some and curtail 
and reduce others — whenever this is repeated to him he shakes 
his head and says that they are all alike, and that one is as ho- 
nourable as another. 

Why, yes, he said ; that is the sort of man and that is his way 
of behaving. 

Yes, I said, he lives through the day indulging the appetite 

BOOK VIII. 

399 

of the hour ; and sometimes he is lapped in drink and strains of 
the flute ; then he is for total abstinence, and tries to get thin ; 
then, again, he is at gymnastics; sometimes idling and neglecting 
everything, then once more living the life of a philosopher; often 
he is at politics, and starts to his feet and says and does anything 
that may turn up; and, if he is emulous of any one who is a 
warrior, off he is in that direction, or of men of business, once 
more in that. His life has neither order nor law; and this is 
the way of him — this he terms joy and freedom and happiness. 

Yes, he said, there is liberty, equality, and fraternity enough in 
him. 

Yes, I said; he may be described as 

‘A man so various that he seems to be 
Not one, but all mankind’s epitome.’ 

He is, like the State, a rare being, and has many forms. And 
many a man and many a woman will emulate him, and many a 
constitution and many an example of life is contained in him. 

That is true. 

Let him then be set over against democracy ; he may truly be 
called the democratic man. 

Let that be his place, he said. 

And now comes the most beautiful of all, man and State alike, 
tyranny and the tyrant ; these we have to consider. 

Quite true, he said. 

Say then, my friend, how does tyranny arise — out of democracy 
of course ? 

Clearly. 

And does not tyranny spring from democracy in the same way 
as democracy from oligarchy — I mean, after a sort ? 

How is that ? 

The good which oligarchy proposed was excess of wealth; in 
this oligarchy originated. Am I not right ? 

Yes. 

And the insatiable desire of wealth and the neglect of all other 
things for the sake of money-getting, was also the ruin of oli- 
garchy ? 

True. 

And democracy has a notion of good, the insatiable desire of 
which also brought her to an end ? 

400 

THE REPUBLIC. 

What notion of good ? 

Freedom, I replied; that, as people often say, is best in a 
democracy — and, therefore, in a democracy only will the freeman 
of nature deign to dwell. 

Why, said he, that is very often said. 

And, I was going to observe, that the insatiable desire of this 
and the neglect of other things, introduces the change in de- 
mocracy, which occasions a demand for tyranny. 

How is that ? 

When a democracy which is thirsting for freedom has evil 
cup-bearers presiding over the feast, and has drunk too deeply 
of the strong wine of freedom, then, unless her rulers are very 
amenable and give a plentiful draught, she calls them to account 
and punishes them, and says that they are cursed oligarchs. 

Yes, he replied, that is a very common thing. 

Yes, I said; and loyal citizens are insulted by her as lovers of 
slavery and men of naught ; she would have subjects who are like 
rulers, and rulers who are like subjects : these are men after her 
own heart, whom she praises and honours both in private and 
public. Now, in such a State, can liberty have any limit ? 

Certainly not. 

Nay, I said, the anarchy grows and finds a way into private 
houses, and ends by getting among the animals and infecting 
them. 

How do you mean ? 

I mean that the father gets accustomed to descend to the level 
of his sons and to fear them, and the son to be on a level with his 
father, he having no shame or fear of either of his parents ; and this 
is his freedom, and the metic is equal with the citizen and the 
citizen with the metic, and the stranger on a level with either. 563 

Yes, he said, that is true. 

That is true, I said; and, moreover, little things of this sort 
happen : the master fears and flatters his scholars, and the scholars 
despise their masters and tutors; and, in general, young and old 
are alike, and the young man is on a level with the old, and is 
ready to compete with him in word or deed ; and old men con- 
descend to the young and are full of pleasantry and gaiety; they 
do not like to be thought morose and authoritative, and therefore 
they imitate the young. 

BOOK VIII . 

401 

Quite true, he said. 

The last extreme of popular liberty is when the slave bought 
with money, whether male or female, is just as free as his or her 
purchaser; nor must I forget to tell of the liberty and equality of 
the two sexes in relation to each other. 

Why not, he said, as Aeschylus remarks, utter the word which 
. rises to our lips ? 

Yes, I replied; that is what I am now doing; and I must say 
that no one who does not know would believe, how much greater 
is the liberty which animals who are under the dominion of 
men have in a democracy than in any other State: for truly, 
the she-dogs, as the proverb says, are as good as their she-mis- 
tresses, and the horses and asses come to have a way of marching 
along with all the rights and dignities of freemen ; and they will 
run at any body whom they meet in the street if he does not get 
out of their way : and all things are just ready to burst with 
liberty. 

You tell me, he said, my own dream ; for that which you describe 
often happens to me when I am taking a country walk. 

And above all, I said, and as the result of all, see how sensi- 
tive the citizens become; they chafe impatiently at the least 
touch of authority, and at length, as you know, they cease to care 
even for the laws, written or unwritten ; for they will have no 
one over them. 

Yes, he said, that I know quite well. 

And this, my friend, I said, is the fair and glorious beginning 
out of which springs tyranny. 

Glorious indeed, he said. But what is the next step ? 

The ruin of oligarchy is the ruin of democracy ; the same dis- 
order intensified by liberty dominates over democracy, the truth 
being that the excessive increase of anything often causes a 
564 reaction in the opposite direction ; and this is the case not only 
in the seasons and in vegetable and animal forms, but above all 
in forms of government. 

That is very likely. 

For excess of liberty, whether in States or individuals, seems 
only to pass into excess of slavery. 

Yes, that is the natural order. 

Then tyranny naturally arises out of democracy, and the most 
VOL. ir. d d 

402 

THE REPUBLIC . 

aggravated form of tyranny and slavery out of the most extreme 
form of liberty. 

Yes, he said, there is reason in all that. 

That, however, was not, as I believe, your question — you rather 
desired to know what is that disorder which is generated alike in 
oligarchy and democracy, and enslaves both ? 

True, he replied. 

Well, I said, I meant to refer to the class of idle spendthrifts, 
of whom the more courageous are the leaders and the more timid 
the followers, the same whom we were comparing to drones, some 
stingless, and others having stings. 

A very just comparison, he said. 

These two classes are the plagues of every city in which they 
are generated, being what phlegm and bile are to the body. And 
the good physician and lawgiver of the State ought, like the wise 
bee-master, to keep them at a distance and prevent, if possible, their 
ever coming in; and if they have anyhow found a way in, then 
he should have them and their cells cut out as speedily as possible. 

Yes, indeed, he said, that he should. 

Then, in order that we may see more clearly what we are doing, 
let us imagine democracy to be divided into three classes, which 
also exist in fact ; for liberty creates drones quite as much in the 
democratic as in the oligarchical State. 

That is true. 

But in the democracy they are more intensified. 

How is that ? 

The reason is, that in the oligarchical State, as they are dis- 
qualified and driven from power, they cannot train or gather 
strength ; whereas in a democracy they are almost the entire ruling 
power, and the keener sort speak and act, while the rest sit buzz- 
ing about the bema and will not suffer a word to be said on the 
other side; and hence there is hardly anything in these States 
which is not their doing. 

Very true, he said. 

Then there is another class which is divided from the multitude. 

What is that ? 

The richest class, which in a nation of traders is generally the 
most orderly. 

That may be assumed. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK VIII . 

4°3 

They are the most squeezable persons and yield the largest 
amount of honey to the drones. 

Why, he said, there is little to be squeezed out of people who 
have little. 

And this is called the wealthy class, and the drones feed upon 
them. 

5 That is pretty much the case, he said. 

There is also a third class, consisting of working men, who are 
not politicians, and have little to live upon. And this, when 
assembled, is the largest and most powerful class in a democracy. 

Why, that is true, he said ; but then the multitude is seldom 
willing to meet unless they get a little honey. 

And do they not share? I said. Do not their leaders take 
the estates of the rich, and give to the people as much of them as 
they can, consistently with keeping the greater part themselves? 

Why, yes, he said, to that extent the people do share. 

And the persons whose property is taken from them arc com- 
pelled to defend themselves as they best can ? 

Of course. 

And then, although they may have no desire of change, the 
others charge them with plotting against the State and being 
friends of oligarchy ? 

True. 

And the end is that when they see the people, not of their 
own accord, but through ignorance, and because they are deceived 
by slanderers, seeking to do them wrong, then at last they are 
forced to become oligarchs in reality, and this is occasioned by 
the stings of the drones goading them ? 

Exactly. 

Then come impeachments and judgments and trials of one 
another. 

True. 

The people have always some one as a champion whom they 
nurse into greatness. 

Yes, that is their way. 

And this is the very root from which a tyrant springs; when 
he first appears above ground he is a protector. 

Yes, that is quite clear. 

How then does a protector begin to change into a tyrant? 

d d 2 

404 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Clearly when he does what the man is said to do in the tale of 
the Arcadian temple of Lycaean Zeus. 

What tale ? 

The tale is that he who has tasted the entrails of a single 
human victim minced up with the entrails of other victims is 
destined to become a wolf. Did you never hear that ? 

O yes. 

And the protector of the people is like him; having a mob 
entirely at his disposal, he is not restrained from shedding the 
blood of kinsmen ; by the favourite method of false accusation he 
brings them into court and murders them, making the life of 
man to disappear, and with unholy tongue and lips tasting the 
blood of kindred; some he kills and others he banishes, at the 
same time proclaiming abolition of debts and partition of lands : 
and after this, what can be his destiny but either to perish at the 
hands of his enemies, or from being a man to become a wolf — 
that is, c a tyrant?’ 

That is inevitable. 

This, I said, is he who begins to make a party against the rich. 

The same. 

And then he is driven out and comes back, in spite of his 
enemies, a tyrant full made. 

That is clear. 

And if they are unable to drive him out, or get him condemned 
to death by public opinion, they form the design of putting him 
out of the way secretly. 

Yes, he said, that is the usual plan. 

Then comes the famous request of a body-guard, which is made 
by all those who have got thus far in their career, c Let not the 
people’s friend,’ as they say, * be lost to them.’ 

Exactly. 

This the people readily grant; all their fears are for him — 
they have no fear for themselves. 

Very true. 

And when a man who is wealthy and is also accused of being 
an enemy of the people sees this, then, my friend, as the oracle 
said to Croesus, 

‘ By pebbly Hermas’ shore he flees and rests not, and is not ashamed to 
be a coward.’ 

BOOK VIII . 

4t>5 

And quite right too, said he, for, if he were ashamed, he would 
never be ashamed again. 

Yes, I said, and he who is caught is put to death. 

Inevitably. 

And he, the protector of whom we spake, is not fallen in his 
might, but himself the overthrower of many, is to be seen stand- 
ing up in the chariot of State with the reins in his hand, no longer 
protector, but tyrant absolute. 

No doubt, he said. 

And now let us tell of the happiness of the man, and also of 
the State, in which this sort of creature is generated. 

Yes, he said, let us tell of that. 

At first, in the early days of his power, he smiles upon every 
one and salutes every one; — he to be called a tyrant, who is 
making promises in public and also in private! liberating debtors, 
and distributing land to the people and to his followers, and 
wanting to be kind and good to every one. 

That is the regular thing. 

But when he has got rid of foreign enemies, and is recon- 
ciled with some of them and has destroyed others, and there is 
nothing to fear from them, then he is always stirring up some 
567 war or other, in order that the people may require a leader. 

Yes, that may be expected of him. 

Has he not also another object, which is that they may be 
impoverished by payment of taxes, and thus compelled to devote 
themselves to their daily wants and therefore less likely to plot 
against him ? 

Clearly. 

Yes, and if he suspects any of them of having notions of 
freedom, and of being disloyal to him, he has a good pretext for 
destroying them by giving them up to the enemy ; and for all these 
reasons the tyrant is always compelled to be getting up a war. 

That is inevitable. 

Now he begins to grow unpopular. 

That is the necessary result. 

Then some of those who joined in setting him up, and who 
are in power — that is to say, the most courageous of them — 
speak their minds to him and to one another, and cast in his 
teeth the things which are being done. 

Digitized by Google 

406 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Yes, that is to be expected. 

And the tyrant, if he means to rule, must get rid of them ; he 
cannot stop while he has a friend or an enemy who is good for 
anything. 

That is plain. 

And therefore he must use his eyes and see who is valiant, 
who is high-minded, who is wise, who wealthy; happy man, 
he is the enemy of them all, and must seek occasion against 
them whether he will or no, until he has made a purgation of 
the State. 

Yes, he said, and a rare purgation. 

Yes, I said, not the sort of purgation which the physicians 
make of the body; for they take away the worse and leave the 
better part, but he does the opposite. 

I suppose that he cannot help himself, he replied. 

What a blessed alternative, I said, to be compelled to dwell 
only with the many bad, and hated by them, or not to live at all. 

Yes, that is the alternative. 

And the more detestable he is in his actions the more satellites 
and the greater devotion in them will he require? 

Certainly. 

And who are the devoted band, and where will he procure them ? 

They will flock to him, he said, of their own accord, if he 
pays them. 

By the dog ! I said, you are again introducing drones out of 
other lands and of every sort. 

Yes, he said, that I am. 

But will he not desire to get them on the spot ? 

How do you mean ? 

He will emancipate the slaves and enrol them in his body-guard ? 

To be sure, he said, and he will be able to trust them best 
of all. 

What a blessed fellow, I said, must this tyrant be; when he 
has put to death the others he has only these for his trusted 
friends. 

Yes, he said, and they are his friends. 

Yes, I said, and these are the new citizens whom he has called 
into existence, who admire him and live with him, while the good 
hate and avoid him. 

BOOK VIII . 

407 

Of course. 

Verily, then, tragedy is a wise thing and Euripides a great 
tragedian. 

Why do you say that ? 

Why, because he is the author of that rare saying, 

‘Tyrants arc wise by living with the wise;’ 
and he clearly meant to say that they are the wise with whom 
the tyrant lives. 

Yes, he said, and he also praises tyranny as godlike; this and 
many other things of the same kind are said by him and the 
other poets. , 

And therefore, I said, the tragic poets in their wisdom will 
forgive us and others who have a similar form of government, 
if we object to having them in our State, because they are the 
eulogists of tyranny. 

Yes, he said, those who have the wit will doubtless forgive us. 

Yes, I said, and they go about to other cities and attract mobs; 
and have voices fair and loud and persuasive, and draw the cities 
over to tyrannies and democracies. 

Very true. 

Moreover, they are paid for this and receive honour — the 
greatest honour from tyrants, and the next greatest from demo- 
cracies; but the higher they ascend our constitution hill, the 
more their reputation fails, and seems unable from shortness of 
breath to proceed further. 

True. 

But we are digressing. Let us therefore return and enquire 
how the tyrant will maintain that fair and numerous and various 
and ever-changing army of his. 

If, he said, there are sacred treasures in the city, he will spend 
them as far as they go ; that is obvious. And he will then be 
able to diminish the taxes which he would otherwise have to 
impose. 

And when these fail ? 

Why, clearly, he said, then he and his boon companions, 
whether male or female, will be maintained out of his father’s 
estate. 

I see your meaning, I said. You mean that the people who 
begat him will maintain him and his companions? 

Digitized by Google 

408 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Yes, he said ; he cannot get on without that. 

But what if the people go into a passion, and aver that a 
grown-up son ought not to be supported by his father, but that 
the father should be supported by the son ? He did not bring his 5^9 
son into the world and establish him in order that when he was 
grown up he himself might serve his own servants, and maintain 
him and his rabble of slaves and companions; but that, having 
such a protector, he might be emancipated from the government 
of the rich and aristocratic, as they are termed. And now, here 
is this son of his, bidding him and his companions pack, just 
as a father might drive out of his house a riotous son and his 
party of revellers. 

In the end, he said, the parent will be certain to discover what 
a monster he has been fostering in his bosom; and, when he 
wants to drive him out, he will find that he is weak and his son 
strong. 

Why, you do not mean to say that the tyrant will use violence ? 
What! beat his father if he resists? 

Yes, he will; and he will begin by taking away his arms. 

Then he is a parricide, and a cruel unnatural son to an aged 
parent whom he ought to cherish ; and this is real tyranny, about 
which there is no mistake : as the saying is, the people who would 
avoid the slavery of freemen, which is smoke and appearance, has 
fallen under the tyranny of slaves, which is fire. Thus liberty, 
getting out of all order and reason, passes into the harshest and 
bitterest form of slavery. 

Yes, he said, that is true. 

Very well, I said ; and may we not say that we have discussed 
enough the nature of tyranny, and the manner of the transition 
from democracy to tyranny ? 

Yes, quite enough, he said. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IX. 

571 Last of all comes the tyrannical man; about whom we have 
once more to ask how is he formed out of the democratical ? and 
how does he live, in happiness or in misery ? 

Yes, he said, he is the only one remaining. 

There is, however, I said, a previous question which I should 
like to consider. 

What is that ? 

I do not think that we have adequately determined the nature 
and number of the appetites, and until this is accomplished the 
enquiry will always be perplexed. 

Well, but you may supply the omission. 

Very true, I said ; and observe the point which I want to under- 
stand. Certain of the unnecessary pleasures and appetites are 
deemed to be unlawful ; every man appears to have them, only 
in some persons they are controlled by the laws and by reason, 
and the better desires prevail over them, and either they are wholly 
banished or are few and weak ; while in the case of others they 
are stronger, and there are more of them. 

Which appetites do you mean ? 

I mean those which are awake when the reasoning and taming 
and ruling power is asleep ; the wild beast in our nature, gorged 
with meat or drink, starts up and walks about naked, and surfeits 
after his manner, and there is no conceivable folly or crime, how- 
ever shameless or unnatural — not excepting incest or parricide, or 
the eating of forbidden food — of which such a nature may not be 
guilty. 

That is most true, he said. 

But when a man’s pulse is healthy and temperate, and he goes 
to sleep cool and rational, after having supped on a feast of reason 
and speculation, and come to a knowledge of himself; having 

4io 

THE REPUBLIC . 

indulged appetites neither too much nor too little, but just enough 
to Jay them to sleep, and prevent them and their enjoyments and 
pains from interfering with the higher principle — leaving that 57 
in the solitude of pure abstraction, free to contemplate and 
aspire to the knowledge of the unknown, whether in past, present, 
or future: when, again, before going to sleep he has allayed the 
passionate element, if he has a quarrel against any one — I say, 
when, after pacifying the two irrational principles, he rouses up 
the third or rational element before he takes his rest, then, as 
you know, he attains truth most nearly, and is least likely to 
be the sport of fanciful and lawless visions. 

In that opinion I entirely agree. 

In saying this I have been running into a digression ; but the 
point which I desire to note is that in all of us, even in good 
men, there is such a latent wild-beast nature, which peers out 
in sleep. Pray, consider whether I am right, and you agree with 
me in this view. 

Yes, I agree. 

Remember then the character which we assigned to the demo- 
cratic man. He was supposed from his youth upwards to have 
been trained under a miserly parent, and to have encouraged the 
saving appetites, and discountenanced the lighter and more orna- 
mental ones ? 

True. 

And then he got into the company of a more refined, licentious 
sort of people, and he took to wantonness, and began to have a 
dislike of his father’s narrow ways. At last, being a better man 
than his corruptors, he came to a mean, and led a life, not of 
lawless and slavish passion, but of regular and successive indul- 
gence. That was our view of the way in which the democrat 
was generated out of the oligarch ? 

Yes, he said; and that is still our view. 

And now, I said, years will have passed away, and you must 
imagine this man, such as he is, to have a son, who is brought 
up in his father’s principles; and then further imagine the same 
thing to happen to the son which has already happened to the 
father — he is seduced into a perfectly lawless life, which is termed 
perfect liberty; and his father and friends take part with his 
moderate desires, while others assist the opposite ones. At 

BOOK IX. 

411 

length, these dire magicians and tyrant-makers begin to fear 
that they will be unable to hold the youth, and then they con 
trive to implant in him a master passion, to be lord over his 
573 idle and spendthrift desires — like a monster drone having wings. 
That is the only image which will depict him and his lusts. 

Yes, he said, that is the best, the only image of him. 

And while the other lusts amid clouds of incense and perfumes 
and garlands and wines, and all the dissoluteness of social life 
are buzzing around him and flattering him to the utmost, there is 
implanted in him the sting of desire, and then this lord of the 
soul is in a frenzy — madness is the captain of the guard — and if 
he discerns in his soul any opinions or appetites which may be 
regarded as good, and which have any sense of shame remaining, 
he puts an end to them, and casts them forth until he has purged 
away temperance and brought in madness to the full. 

Yes, he said, that is the way in which the tyrannical man is 
generated. 

And is not this the reason why of old love has been called a 
tyrant ? 

Yes, perhaps. 

Further, I said, has not a drunken man also the spirit of a 
tyrant ? 

True. 

And you know that a man who is deranged and not right in his 
mind, will fancy that he is able to rule, not only over men, but 
also over the gods ? 

True. 

And the tyrannical man comes into being just at that point 
when either under the influence of nature, or habit, or both, he 
becomes drunken, lustful, passionate ? 

Exactly. 

Such is the man and such is his origin. And next, how does 
he live ? 

That, as people facetiously say, you may as well tell me. 

I imagine, I said, as the next step in his progress, that there 
will be feasts and carousals and revellings, and courtezans, and 
all that sort of thing; love is the lord of the house within him, 
who orders all the concerns of the soul. 

That is certain. 

412 

THE REPUBLIC . 

Yes; and every day and every night desires grow up many and 
formidable, and their demands are many. 

They are indeed, he said. 

His revenues, if he has any, are soon spent. 

True. 

Then he borrows money, and his estate is taken from him. 

Of course. 

Wien he has nothing left, must not his desires, crowding in 
the nest like young ravens, be crying aloud for food ; he, goaded 
on by them, and especially by love himself on whom they dance 
attendance, is at his wits’ end to discover whom he can defraud or 
despoil of his property, in order that he may gratify them ? 

Yes, that is sure to be the case. 

He must have money, and no matter how, if he is to escape 
horrid pangs and pains. 

He must. 

And as in himself there was a succession of pleasures, and the 
new got the better of the old and took away their rights, so he 
being younger will claim to have more than his father and his 
mother, and if he has spent his own property, he will take a slice 
out of theirs. 

No doubt of that. 

And if his parents will not suffer this, then he will try to cheat 
and deceive them. 

Very true. 

And if he cannot, then he will plunder and force them. 

Yes, probably. 

And if the old man and the old woman hold out against 
him, will he be very careful of doing anything which is tyran- 
nical ? 

Nay, he said, I should not feel at all comfortable about his 
parents. 

But, O heavens! Adeimantus, on account of some new-fangled 
love of a harlot, who is anything but a necessary connection, can 
you believe that he would strike the mother who is his ancient 
friend and necessary to his very existence, and would place her 
under the authority of the other, when she is brought under the 
same roof with her; or that, under like circumstances, he would 
do the same to his withered old father, first and most indispensable 

BOOK IX. 

4i3 

of friends, for the sake of some blooming love of a youth who is 
the reverse of indispensable? 

Yes, indeed, he said; I believe that he would. 

Truly, then, I said, a tyrannical son is a blessing to his father 
and mother. 

Yes, indeed, he replied. 

He first takes their property, and when that fails, and pleasures 
are beginning to swarm in the hive of his soul, then he breaks 
into a house, or steals the garments of some nightly wayfarer, and 
the next thing is that he lifts a temple; and while all this is 
going on, the old opinions about good and evil which he had when 
a child, and which were thought by him to be1 right, are over- 
thrown by those others which have just been emancipated, and are 
now the guard and associates of love, being those which in former 
days, when he was a partisan of democracy and subject to the laws 
and to his father, were only let loose in the dreams of sleep. But 
now that he is under the tyranny of love, he becomes always and 
in waking reality what he was then very rarely and in a dream 
only; he will commit the foulest murder, or eat forbidden food, 
575 or be guilty of any other horrid act. Love is his tyrant, and lives 
lordly in him, and being himself a king emancipated from all 
control, leads him on — like man like State — into the performance 
of reckless deeds in order to maintain himself and his rabble, which 
evil communications have brought in from without, or which he 
himself has allowed to break loose within him by reason of a similar 
character in himself. Is not this a picture of his way of life ? 

Yes, indeed, he said. 

And if there are only a few of them, and the rest of the people 
are well disposed, they go away and become the body-guard or 
mercenary soldiers of some other tyrant who may probably want 
them for a war ; and if there is no war, they stay at home and do 
mischief in the city. 

What sort of mischief? 

For example, they are the thieves, burglars, cut -purses, foot- 
pads, robbers of temples, man-stealers of the community, and if 
they are able to speak they play the part of informers, and bear 
false witness, and take bribes. 

1 Reading ras 81 Katas Troiovfifuas. 

414 

THE REPUBLIC . 

And these, he replied, are not very small evils, even if the per- 
petrators of them are a few in number. 

Yes, I said; but small and great are comparative terms, and all 
these things, in the misery and evil which they inflict upon a 
State, do not come within a thousand miles of the tyrant ; the 
people are fools, and this class and their followers grow numerous 
and are aware of their numbers, and they take him who has most 
of the tyrant in his soul, and make him their leader. 

Yes, he said, that is natural ; for he will be the most tyran- 
nically disposed. 

If the people yield, well and good ; but if they resist him, as he 
began by beating his own father and mother, so now, if he has the 
power, he beats his dear old fatherland and motherland, as the 
Cretans say, and brings in his young retainers to be their rulers 
and masters. And this is the end of his passions and desires. 

Exactly. 

Even in early days and before they get power, this is the 
way of them; they associate only with their own flatterers or 
ready tools ; or, if they want anything from anybody, they them- 
selves are equally ready to fall down before them; there is no 
attitude into which they will not throw themselves, but when 576 
they have gained their point they know them no more. 

Yes, truly. 

They are always either the masters or servants and never the 
friends of anybody; the tyrant never tastes of true freedom or 
true friendship. 

Certainly not. 

And may we not call such men treacherous? 

No question. 

Also they arc utterly unjust, if we were right in our notion of 
justice ? 

Yes, he said, and in that we were perfectly right. 

Let us then sum up in a word, I said, the character of the 
worst man : he is the waking reality of what we dreamed. 

Most true. 

And this is he who being most of a tyrant by nature bears rule, 
and the longer he lives the more of a tyrant he becomes. 

That is certain, said Glaucon, taking his turn to answer. 

And will not he who has been shown to be the wickedest, 

BOOK IX. 

4 1 5 

be also the most miserable? and he most of all and longest 
of all who has tyrannized longest and most, and is most of a 
tyrant — although this may not be the opinion of men in general ? 

Yes, he said, that is inevitable. 

And must not the tyrannical man be like the tyrannical State, 
and the democratical man like the democratical State; and the 
same of the others ? 

Certainly. 

And as State is to State in virtue and happiness, man is to 
man ? 

To be sure. 

Then comparing the former city which was under a king and 
the city which was under a tyrant, how do they stand as to 
virtue ? 

They are the opposite extremes, he said, for one is. the very 
best and the other is the very worst. 

There can be no mistake, I said, as to which is which, and 
therefore I will at once enquire whether you would arrive at a 
similar decision about their relative happiness and misery. And 
here we must not allow ourselves to be panic-stricken at the 
apparition of the tyrant, who is only a unit and may perhaps 
have a few retainers about him; but let us go as we ought and 
view the whole city and look all around, and then we will give 
our opinion. 

A fair invitation, he replied ; and I see, as every one must, 
that a tyranny is the wretchedest form of government, and 
monarchy the happiest. 

And may I not fairly ask in like manner to have a judge of the 
men whose mind can enter into and see through human nature ; 
he must not be a child who looks at the outside and is dazzled 
at the pompous aspect which tyranny assumes to the beholder, 
but let him be one who has a clear insight. May I suppose that 
the judgment is given in the hearing of us all by one who is 
able to judge, and has dwelt in the same place with him, and 
been present at his daily life and known him in his family, in 
which he is seen stripped of his tragedy attire, and again in 
the hour of public danger; he shall tell us about the happiness 
and misery of the tyrant when compared with other men ? 

That again, he said, is a very fair proposal. 

4 1 6 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Let us now assume this able and experienced judge to be 
ourselves, and then we shall have some one who will answer 
our enquiries. 

By all means. 

Let me ask you not to forget the parallel of the individual 
and the State; bearing this in mind, and glancing in turn from 
one to the other of them, will you tell me their respective 
conditions ? 

In what points ? he asked. 

Beginning with the State, I replied, would you say that a 
city which is governed by a tyrant is free or enslaved ? 

Nothing, he said, can be more completely enslaved. 

And yet, as you see, there are masters and there are freemen 
in such a State ? 

Yes, he said, I see that there are — a few; but the people as a 
whole (speaking generally) and the best of them arc disgracefully 
and miserably enslaved. 

Then if the man is like the State, I said, must not the same 
hold of the man ? his soul is full of meanness and serfdom — the 
best elements in him are enslaved; and there is a small ruling 
part, which is also the worst and maddest. 

That is inevitable. 

And would you say that the soul of such an one is the soul of 
a freeman or of a slave ? 

He has the soul of a slave, in my judgment. 

And the State which is enslaved under a tyrant is very far 
from acting voluntarily ? 

Very far, indeed. 

And also the soul which is under a tyrant (I am speaking of 
the soul taken as a whole) is very far from doing as she desires ; 
there is a gadfly which goads her, and she is full of trouble 
and remorse? 

Certainly. 

And is the city which is under a tyrant rich or poor? 

Poor. 

And the tyrannical soul must be always poor and insatiable ? 

True. 

And must not such a State and such a man be always full of 
fear? 

BOOK IX. 

4i7 

Yes, indeed. 

Is there any State in which you will find more of lamentation 
and sorrow and groaning and pain ? 

Certainly not. 

And is there any man in whom you will find more misery of 
the same kind than in the tyrannical man, who is in a fury of 
passions and desires ? 

Impossible. 

Reflecting then upon these and similar evils, you held the 
tyrannical State to be the most miserable of States? 

And I was right, he said. 

Certainly, I said. And when you see the same evils in the 
tyrannical man, what do you say of him ? 

I say that he is by far the most miserable of all men. 

There, I said, I think that you are wrong. 

How is that ? he said. 

I do not think that he has as yet reached the utmost extreme of 
misery. 

Then who is more miserable ? 

One of whom I am about to speak. 

Who is that ? 

He who is of a tyrannical nature, and instead of leading a 
private life is cursed with the further misfortune of being a public 
tyrant. 

I should conjecture from the previous remarks that you are right. 

Yes, I said; but in this high argument of good and evil you 
should not conjecture only — you should have a certainty. 

That is very true, he said. 

Let me then offer you an illustration, which may, I think, 
have an application to this subject. 

What is your illustration? 

The case of rich individuals in cities who possess many slaves: 
from them you may form an idea of the tyrant’s State, for they 
both have slaves ; the only difference is that he has more slaves. 

Yes, that is the difference. 

You know that they live securely and have no fear of their 
servants ? 

What should they fear ? 

Nothing. But do you observe the reason of this ? 

VOL. 11. e e 

4 1 8 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Yes; the reason is, that the whole city is leagued together for 
the protection of each individual. 

That is quite true, I said. But imagine that one of these 
owners is carried off by a god into the wilderness, where there are 
no freemen to help him — he and his household, and he is the 
master say of about fifty slaves — will he not be in an agony of 
apprehension lest he and his wife and children should be put to 
death by his slaves ? 

Yes, he said, he will be in the utmost alarm. 579 

Will he not be compelled to flatter divers of his slaves, and 
make many promises to them of freedom and other things, much 
against his will ? — he will become the servant of his servants. 

Yes, he said, that will be the only way of saving his life. 

And suppose that the same god who carries him off puts him 
down among neighbours who will not allow a man to be the 
master of another, and, if they catch him, are ready to inflict 
capital punishment upon him ? 

Then his case will be even worse, he said, when he is sur- 
rounded and watched by enemies. 

And is not this the sort of prison in which the tyrant will be 
bound ? — he being by nature such as we have described, is full of 
all sorts of fears and lusts. His soul is dainty and greedy, and yet 
he only, of all men, is never allowed to go on a journey, Or to see 
the things which other freemen desire to see, but he lives in his 
hole like a woman hidden in the house, and is jealous of any other 
citizen who goes into foreign parts and sees anything of interest. 

Very true, he said. 

Such being his evil condition, am I not right in saying that 
the tyrannical man, ill-governed in his own person, whom you just 
now described as the most miserable of all, will be yet more miser- 
able in a public station, when, instead of leading a private life, 
he is constrained by fortune to be a tyrant ? He has to be master 
of others when he is not master of himself: he is like a diseased 
or paralytic man who is compelled to pass his life, not in retire- 
ment, but fighting and combating with other men. 

Yes, he said, that is very true, and the similitude is most 
exact. 

Is not his case utterly miserable ? and does not the actual tyrant 
lead a worse life than him whom you determined to be worst? 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IX. 

419 

Certainly. 

He who is the real tyrant, whatever men may think, is the real 
slave, and is obliged to practise the greatest adulation and ser- 
vility, and to be the flatterer of the vilest of mankind. He has 
desires which he is utterly unable to satisfy, and has more wants 
than any one, and is truly poor, if you know how to inspect the 
whole soul of him : all his life long he is beset with fear and is 
full of convulsions and distractions, even as the State which he 
580 resembles ; and surely the resemblance holds ? 

True, he said. 

Moreover, as we were saying, he grows worse from having 
power: he becomes of necessity more jealous, more faithless, 
more unjust, more friendless, more impious ; he entertains and 
nurtures every evil sentiment, and the consequence is that he is 
supremely miserable, and thus he makes everybody else equally 
miserable. 

No man of any sense will dispute that. 

Come then, I said, and as the universal arbiter gives sentence 
in the games, do you also decide who in your opinion is first in 
the scale of happiness, and who second, and in what order the 
others follow : there are five of them in all — they are the royal, 
timocratical, oligarchical, democratical, tyrannical. 

The judgment will be easily given, he replied; they shall be cho- 
ruses entering on the stage, and I will decide the place of each of 
them by the criterion of virtue and vice, happiness and misery. 

Need we hire a herald, or shall I proclaim the result — that the 
son of the best (Ariston) is of opinion that the best and justest 
man is also the happiest, and that this is he who is the most royal 
master of himself ; and that the worst and most unjust man is also 
the most miserable, and that this is he who is the greatest tyrant 
of himself and of his State ? 

Make the proclamation, he said. 

And shall I proclaim further, c whether seen or unseen by gods 
and men’? 

Yes, he said, you had better add that. 

Then this, I said, will be the first proof; and there is another, 
which may also have some weight. 

What is that ? 

The second proof is derived from the nature of the soul : seeing 

e e 2 

420 

THE REPUBLIC. 

that the individual soul, like the State, has been divided by us into 
three principles, the division may furnish a new demonstration. 

Of what nature ? 

There are three pleasures which correspond to the three prin- 
ciples, and also three desires and governing powers. 

How do you mean ? he said. 

There is one principle with which a man learns, another with 
which he is angry ; the third, having many forms, has no single 
name, but is termed appetitive, from the extraordinary strength 
and vehemence of the pleasures of eating and drinking and the 
other sensual appetites; also money loving, because these sort of 
desires C3n only be gratified by the help of money. 58 

That is true, he said. 

If we were to say that the loves and pleasures of this third part 
of the soul were concerned with gain, we should then be able to 
fall back on a single class; and might truly describe this part of 
the soul as loving gain or money. 

Yes, I should say that. 

Again, is not the passionate element wholly set on ruling and 
conquering and getting fame ? 

True. 

Suppose we call that contentious or ambitious — would the term 
be suitable ? 

Extremely suitable. 

On the other hand, every one sees that the principle of know- 
ledge is wholly directed to the truth, and cares less than any of 
the others for gain or fame ? 

Far less. 

‘True lover of wisdom,’ ‘lover of knowledge,’ are titles which 
are rightly applicable to that part of the soul ? 

Certainly. 

One principle prevails in the souls of one class of men, another 
in others, just as may happen ? 

Yes. 

Then we may assume that there are three classes of men — 
lovers of wisdom, lovers of ambition, lovers of gain ? 

Exactly. 

And there are three kinds of pleasures, which are their several 
objects ? 

BOOK IX. 

421 

Very true. 

Now, if you examine the three classes, and ask of them in turn 
which of their lives is pleasantest, each of them will be found 
praising his own and depreciating that of others: the money-maker 
will contrast the vanity of honour or of learning with the solid 
advantages of gold and silver ? 

True, he said. 

And the lover of honour — what will be his opinion ? Will he 
not think that the pleasure of riches is vulgar, while the pleasure 
of learning, which has no meed of honour, he regards as all smoke 
and nonsense? 

True, he said. 

But may we not suppose, I said, that philosophy estimates other 
pleasures as nothing in comparison with the pleasure of knowing 
the truth2 3, and in that abiding, ever learning, in the pursuit of 
truth, not far indeed from the heaven of pleasure ? The other 
pleasures the philosopher disparages by calling them necessary, 
meaning that if there were no necessity for them, he would not 
have them. 

There ought to be no doubt about that, he replied. 

Since, then, the pleasures of each class and the life of each are 
in dispute, and the question is not which life is more or less 
2 honourable, or better or worse, but which is the more pleasant or 
painless — how shall we know ? 

I cannot tell, he said. 

Well, but what ought to be the criterion? Is any better than 
experience and wisdom and reason ? 

There cannot be a better, he said. 

Then, I said, reflect. Of the three individuals, which has the 
greatest experience of all the pleasures which we enumerated ? Has 
the lover of gain greater experience of the pleasure of knowledge 
derived from learning the nature of the truth than the philosopher 
has of the pleasure of gain ? 

The philosopher, he replied, has greatly the advantage; for 
he has always known the taste of the other pleasures from his 
youth upwards: but the lover of gain in all his experience has 

2 Or taking rijs rj8ovr/s ov iraw rropjjto after vopifriv, * to go but a short way 

in pleasure i.e. to be shallow pleasures only in comparison. 

422 

THE REPUBLIC . 

not of necessity tasted — or, I should rather say, could hardly have 
tasted by any process of learning the nature of things — the sweet- 
ness of intellectual pleasures. 

Then the lover of wisdom has a great advantage over the lover 
of gain, for he has a double experience ? 

Very great indeed. 

Again, has the philosopher greater experience of the pleasures 
of honour, or the lover of honour of the pleasures of knowledge ? 

Nay, he said, they are all honoured in proportion as they 
attain their object; for the rich man and the brave man and 
the wise man alike have their crowd of worshippers, and as 
they all receive honour they all have experience of the pleasures 
of honour, but the delight which is to be found in the knowledge 
of true being is known to the philosopher only. 

His experience, then, will enable him to judge better than any 
one? 

Far better. 

And he is the only one who has wisdom as well as experience ? 

Certainly. 

The very faculty which is the instrument of judgment is not 
possessed by the covetous or avaricious man, but only by the 
philosopher ? 

What faculty ? 

Reason, which, as we were saying, ought to have the decision. 

Yes. 

And reasoning is peculiarly his instrument? 

Certainly. 

If wealth and gain were the criterion, then what the lover of 
gain praised and blamed would surely be truest ? 

Assuredly. 

Or if honour or victory or courage, in that case the ambitious 
or contentious would decide best ? 

Clearly. 

But since experience and wisdom and reason are the judges, the 
inference of course is, that the truest pleasures are those which are 
approved by the lover of wisdom and reason. And so we arrive 
at the result, that the pleasure of the intelligent part of the soul 583 
is the pleasantest of the three, and that he in whom this is the 
ruling principle has the pleasantest life? 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IX. 

423 

Unquestionably, he said, the wise man has the fullest right 
to approve of his own life. 

And what does the judge affirm to be the life which is next, 
and the pleasure which is next ? 

Clearly that of the soldier and lover of honour ; that is nearer 
to himself than that of the trader. 

Last comes the lover of gain. 

Very true, he said. 

Twice, then, has the just man overthrown the unjust; and now 
comes the third trial, which is sacred to the Olympic saviour 
Zeus: a sage whispers in my ear that no pleasure except that 
of the wise is quite true and pure — all others are a shadow 
only; and this will surely prove the greatest and most decisive 
of falls ? 

Yes, the greatest; but will you explain how this is? 

If you will answer, I will think, I said, while you are answering. 

Put your questions. 

Say, then, is not pleasure opposed to pain ? 

True. 

And there is a neutral state which is neither pleasure nor pain ? 

There is. 

A state which is intermediate, and a sort of repose of the soul 
about either — that is what you mean ? 

Yes. 

You remember what people say when they are sick? 

What do they say ? 

That after all nothing is pleasanter than health. But then they 
never knew that this was the greatest of pleasures until they 
were ill. 

Yes, I remember, he said. 

And when persons are suffering from acute pain you must 
have heard them say that there is nothing pleasanter than to 
get rid of their pain ? 

I have. 

And there are many other cases of suffering in which the 
mere rest and cessation of pain, and not any positive enjoyment, 
is extolled by them as the greatest pleasure ? 

Yes, he said, at the time, rest is pleasant and delightful to 
them. 

424 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Again, when pleasure ceases, that sort of rest will not be 
pleasant but painful ? 

Doubtless, he said. 

Then the intermediate state of rest will be pleasure and will 
also be pain ? 

That is assumed. 

But can that which is neither become both ? 

I should say not. 

And both pleasure and pain are motions in the soul, are they not ? 

Yes. 

But that which is neither was just now shown to be rest and 584 
not motion, and in a mean between them ? 

Yes. 

How, then, can we be right in saying that the absence of pain 
is pleasure, or that the absence of pleasure is pain ? 

Impossible. 

Then this is an appearance only and not a reality; that is 
to say, the rest is pleasure at the moment and in comparison 
of what is painful, and painful in comparison of what is pleasant ; 
but all these representations, when tried by the test of true 
pleasure, are unsound and a species of imposition ? 

That is the inference. 

Look at the other class of pleasures which have no antece- 
dent pains and you will no longer suppose, as you perhaps may 
at present, that pleasure is only the cessation of pain, or pain of 
pleasure. 

What pleasures, he said, and where shall I find them? 

There are many of them: take as an example the pleasures 
of smell, which are very great and have no antecedent pains; 
they come in a moment, and when they depart leave no pain 
behind them. 

Most true, he said. 

Let us not, then, be induced to believe that pure pleasure is 
the cessation of pain, or pain of pleasure. 

No. 

Still, the more numerous and violent pleasures which reach 
the soul through the body are generally of this sort — they are 
reliefs of pain. 

That is true. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IX. 

425 

And is not this also true of the anticipations of pleasure and 
pain which precede them and are followed by them ? 

Yes. 

Shall I give you an illustration of them ? 

Let me hear. 

You would allow, I said, that there is in nature an upper and 
lower and middle region ? 

I admit that. 

And if a person were to go from the lower to the middle 
region, would he not imagine that he is going up; and he who 
is standing in the middle and sees whence he has come, would 
imagine that he is already in the upper region ? for he has never 
seen the true upper world. 

To be sure, he said; how can he think otherwise? 

But if he were taken back again he would imagine that he 
was descending, and that would be true ? 

No doubt. 

All that would arise out of his ignorance of the true upper and 
middle and lower regions ? 

Yes. 

Then can you wonder that persons who are inexperienced in 
the truth, as they have wrong ideas about many other things, 
should have wrong ideas about pleasure and pain and the inter- 
mediate ; so that when drawn towards the painful they are really 
585 pained and know the truth, but when drawn away from pain . 
to the neutral or intermediate state, they firmly believe that 
they have reached the goal of satiety and pleasure; they, not 
knowing pleasure, err in comparing pain with the absence of 
pain, which is like comparing black with grey instead of white — 
can you wonder, 1 say, at this ? 

No, indeed ; I should be much more disposed to wonder at the 
opposite. 

Look at the matter thus: — Hunger, thirst, and the like, are 
inanitions of the bodily state ? 

Yes. 

And ignorance and folly are inanitions of the soul ? 

True. 

And food and wisdom arc the corresponding satisfactions of 
either ? 

426 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Certainly. 

And is the satisfaction truer of that which has less, or of that 
which has more existence ? 

Clearly, of that which has more. 

Which classes of things are they which, in your judgment, have 
a greater share in pure existence — those of which food and 
drink and condiments and all kinds of sustenance are examples, 
or the class which contains true opinion and mind and, in general, 
all virtue? Put the question in this way: — Which has a more 
real being — that which is concerned with the invariable, the 
immortal, and the true, and is found in the invariable, immortal, 
true; or that which is concerned with the variable and mortal, 
and is found in the variable and mortal ? 

Far more excellent, he replied, is that which is concerned with 
the invariable. 

And does the essence of the invariable partake of knowledge 
as well as of essential being, and in the same degree ? 

Yes, of knowledge in the same degree. 

And of truth in the same degree ? 

Yes. 

And, conversely, that which has less of truth will also have less 
of essence ? 

Necessarily. 

Then, in general, those qualities which are in the service of the 
body have less of truth and being than those which are in the 
service of the soul ? 

Far less. 

And the body has actually less of truth and reality than the soul ? 

Yes. 

That which is filled with more real existence, and actually has 
a more real existence, is more really filled than that which is filled 
with less real existence and is less real ? 

Of course. 

And if there be a pleasure in being filled with that which agrees 
with nature, that which is more really filled with more real being 
will have more real and true joy and pleasure ; whereas that which 
participates in less real being will be less truly and surely satisfied, 
and will participate in a less true and real pleasure ? 

That is not to be doubted. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IX. 

427 

586 Those then who know not wisdom and virtue, and are always 
busy with gluttony and sensuality, go down and up again as far 
as the mean ; and in this space they move at random throughout 
life, but they never pass into the true upper world ; thither they 
neither look, nor do they ever find their way, neither are they truly 
filled with true being, nor do they taste of true and abiding 
pleasure. Like brute animals, with their eyes down and bodies 
bent to the earth or leaning on the dining-table, they fatten and 
feed and breed, and, in their excessive love of these delights, they 
kick and butt at one another with horns and hoofs which are 
made of iron ; and they kill one another by reason of their insa- 
tiable lust. For they fill themselves with that which is not 
substantial, and the part of themselves which they fill is also 
unsubstantial and incontinent. 

Verily, Socrates, said Glaucon, you describe the life of the many 
like an oracle. 

Their pleasures are mixed with pains. How can they be other- 
wise ? For they are mere images and shadows of the true, and 
are coloured only by contrast, and this way of looking at them 
doubly exaggerates them, and implants in the minds of fools in- 
sane desires of them; and they are fought about as Stesichorus 
says that the Greeks fought about the shadow of Helen at Troy 
in ignorance of the truth. 

Yes, inevitably, he said ; that is the way. 

And must not the like happen with the spirited or passion- 
ate element of the soul? Will not the passionate man be in 
the like case, if he carries his passion into act, either because 
he is envious and ambitious, or violent and contentious, or 
angry and discontented and is seeking to attain honour and 
victory and the satisfaction of his anger without reason or 
sense ? 

Yes, he said, the same will happen with the spirited element 
also. 

Then may we not confidently assert that the lovers of money 
and honour, when they seek their pleasures under the guidance 
and in the company of reason, and pursue after and win the 
pleasures which wisdom shows them, will also have the truest 
pleasures in the highest degree which is attainable to them, inas- 
much as they follow truth ; and they will also have those which 

428 

THE REPUBLIC. 

are natural to them, if that which is best to each one is also most 
natural to him ? 

Yes, certainly; the best is the most natural. 

Then, when the whole soul follows the philosophical principle, 
and there is no division, the several parts each of them do their 
own business, and are just, and each of them enjoy their own best 587 
and truest pleasures ? 

Exactly. 

But when either of the other principles prevails, it fails in 
attaining its own pleasure, and compels the others to pursue after 
a shadow of pleasure which is not theirs ? 

True. 

And the greater the interval which separates them from phi- 
losophy and reason, the more strange and illusive will be the 
pleasure ? 

Yes. 

And that is farthest from reason which is at the greatest 
distance from law and order? 

Clearly. 

And the lustful and tyrannical desires are at the greatest 
distance ? 

Yes. 

And the royal and orderly desires are nearest ? 

Yes. 

Then the tyrant will live most unpleasantly, and the king most 
pleasantly ? 

Yes. ' 

Would you know the measure of the interval between them? 

If you will tell me. 

There appear to be three pleasures, one genuine and two 
spurious: now the transgression of the tyrant reaches a point 
beyond the spurious; he has run away from the region of law 
and reason, and taken up his abode with certain slave pleasures 
which are his satellites, and the measure of his inferiority can 
only be expressed in a figure. 

How is that ? he said. 

I assume, I said, that the tyrant is in the third place from the 
oligarch, as the democrat was in the middle ? 

Yes. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IX. 

429 

And if there is truth in what has preceded, he will be wedded 
to an image of pleasure which is thrice removed as to truth 
from the pleasure of the oligarch. 

He will. 

And the oligarch is third from the royal ; for we count as one 
royal and aristocratical ? 

Yes, he is third. 

Then the tyrant is removed from true pleasure by the space of 
a number which is three times three [3x3 = 9]? 

That is manifest. 

The shadow then 3 (or diminishing reflection) of tyrannical 
pleasure, will be a superficial figure, which is determined by the 
number of length [that is, a square of three, the number which is 
called the number of length being 9] ? 

Exactly. 

And if we consider this line [of nine] which represents the 
interval between the tyrannical and true pleasure, in reference to 
the square and third increment, there is no difficulty in seeing 
how vast the interval of distance becomes. 

Yes; the arithmetician will easily do the sum. 

And if a person, instead of going from the tyrant to the king, 
inverts the order, and tells the measure of the interval which 
separates the king from the tyrant in truth of pleasure, he will 
find him, when the multiplication is completed, living 729 times 
588 more pleasantly, and the tyrant more painfully by this same in- 
terval. 

What a wonderful calculation! And how enormous is the 
interval which separates the just from the unjust in regard to 
pleasure and pain ! 

Yet a true calculation, I said, and a number which nearly con- 
cerns human life, if human life is concerned with days and nights 
and months and years4. 

Yes, he said, human life is certainly concerned with them. 

' Then if the good and just man be thus superior in pleasure 
to the evil and unjust, his superiority will be infinitely greater 
in propriety of life and in beauty and virtue ? 

Immeasurably greater, indeed, he said. 

3 The square number suggests a figure which is called a shadow. 

4 729 nearly equals the number of days and nights in the year. 

430 

THE REPUBLIC . 

Well, I said, and now we have arrived at this point I may 
resume the beginning of the argument, which arose out of some 
one saying that injustice was a gain to the perfectly unjust who 
was reputed to be just. Was not that said? 

Yes, that was said. 

Come then, I said, and now that we have determined the 
power and quality of justice and injustice, let us have a word 
with him. 

What shall we say to him ? 

Let us make an image of the soul, that he may have his own 
words presented before his eyes. 

What sort of an image ? 

An ideal image of the soul, like the creations of ancient my- 
thology, such as the Chimera or Scylla or Cerberus, or any other 
in which two or more different natures are said to grow into one. 

There are said to have been such unions. 

Then do you now model the form of a multitudinous, poly- 
cephalous beast, having a ring of heads of all manner of beasts, 
tame and wild, which he is able to generate and metamorphose 
at will. 

That, he said, implies marvellous powers in the artist ; but, as 
language is more pliable than wax or similar substances, I have 
done as you say. 

Suppose now that you make a second form as of a lion, and a 
third of a man, the second smaller than the first, and the third 
smaller than the second. 

That, he said, is an easier task ; and I have made them as you 
say. 

Then now join them, and let the three grow into one. 

That has been accomplished. 

Now fashion the outside into a single image, as of a man, so 
that he who is not able to look within, and sees only the outer hull 
or vessel, may believe the beast to be a single human creature. 

That is completed, he said. 

And now let us say to him who maintains the profitableness of 
justice and the unprofitableness of injustice, that his doctrine 
amounts to this: he is asserting that his interest is to feast and 
strengthen the lion and the lion-like qualities and to starve and 589 
weaken the man ; who in consequence of this is at the mercy of 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK IX, 

43i 

either of the other two, and he is not to attempt to familiarize 
or harmonize them with one another : he ought rather to suffer 
them to fight and bite and devour one another. 

Certainly, he said ; that is what the approver of injustice says. 

To him the supporter of justice makes answer that he ought 
rather to aim in all he says and does at strengthening the man 
within him, in order that he may be able to govern the many- 
headed monster. Like a good husbandman he should be watching 
and tending the gentle shoots, and preventing the wild ones from 
growing; making a treaty with the lion-heart, and uniting the 
several parts with one another and with themselves. 

Yes, he said, that is quite what the maintainer of justice will 
say. 

And in every point of view, whether of pleasure, honour, or 
advantage, the approver of justice is right and speaks the truth, 
and the disapprover is wrong and false, and ignorant ? 

Yes, truly. 

Come, now, and let us reason with the unjust, who is not 
intentionally in error. c Sweet Sir,’ we will say to him, £what 
think you of the noble and ignoble ? Is not the noble that which 
subjects the beast to the man, or rather to the god in man ; and 
the ignoble that which subjects the man to the beast ? * He can 
hardly avoid admitting this — can he now ? 

Not if he has any regard for my opinion. 

But, if he admit this, we may ask him another question : How 
would a man profit if he received gold and silver on the condition 
that he was to enslave the noblest part of him to the worst? 
Who can imagine that a man who sold his son or daughter into 
slavery for money, especially if he sold them into the hands of 
fierce and evil men, would be the gainer, however large might be 
the sum which he received ? And will any one say that he is not 
590 a miserable caitiff who sells his own divine being to that which is 
most atheistical and detestable, and has no pity ? Eriphyle took 
the necklace as the price of her husband’s life, but he is taking a 
bribe in order to compass a worse ruin. 

Yes, said Glaucon, far worse, I will answer for him. 

Is not intemperance censured, I said, because in this condition 
that huge multiform monster is allowed to be too much at large ? 

Clearly. 

432 

THE REPUBLIC. 

And pride and sullenness are blamed as occasioning the growth 
and increase of the lion and serpent element out of proportion ? 

Yes. 

And luxury and softness are blamed, because they relax and 
weaken this same element, and make a man a coward ? 

Very true. 

And is not a man reproached for flattery and meanness who 
subordinates the spirited animal to the unruly monster, and, for 
the sake of money, of which he can never have enough, habituates 
him in the days of his youth to be trampled in the mud, and from 
, being a lion to become a monkey ? 

True, he said. 

And why are vulgarity and handicraft arts a reproach ? Only 
because they imply a natural weakness of the higher principle, 
and the individual is unable to control the creatures within him, 
but has to court them, and his only study is how to flatter them ? 

That appears to be true. 

And, therefore, that he may be under the same rule as the best, 
we say that he ought to be the servant of the best ; not, as Thra- 
symachus supposed, to the injury of him who served, but because 
every one had better be ruled by divine v/isdom dwelling within 
him ; or, if that be impossible, then by an external authority, in 
order that we may be all, as far as possible, under the same 
government ? 

True, he said. 

And this is clearly seen to be the intention of the law, which 
is the ally of the whole city; and is seen also in the authority 
which is exerted over children, and the refusal to allow them 
to be free until the time when, as in a State, we have given them 
a constitution, and by cultivation of the higher element have 59 
established in their hearts a watchman and ruler like our own, 
and when this is done they may go their ways. 

Yes, he said, that is a further proof. 

In what point of view, then, and on what ground shall a man 
be profited by injustice or intemperance or other baseness, even 
though he acquire money or power ? 

There is no ground on which this can be maintained. 

What shall he profit, if his injustice be undetected ? for he who 
is undetected only gets worse, whereas he who is detected and 

BOOK IX: 

433 

punished has the brutal part of his nature silenced and humanized ; 
the gentler element in him is liberated, and his whole soul is 
perfected and ennobled by the acquirement of justice and tem- 
perance and wisdom, more than the body ever is by receiving 
gifts of beauty, strength and health, in proportion as the soul is 
more honourable than the body. 

Certainly, he said. 

The man of understanding will concentrate himself on this as the 
work of life. And in the first place, he will honour studies which 
impress these qualities on his soul, and will disregard others? 

Clearly, he said. 

In the next place, he will keep under his body, and so far will he 
be from yielding to brutal and irrational pleasures, that he will re- 
gard even health as quite a secondary matter; his first object will be 
not that he may be fair or strong or well, unless he is likely thereby 
to gain temperance, but he will be always desirous of preserving 
the harmony of the body for the sake of the concord of the soul ? 

Certainly, he replied, that he will, if he has true music in him. 

And there is a principle of order and harmony in the acqui- 
sition of wealth; this also he will observe, and will not allow 
himself to be dazzled by the opinion of the world and heap up 
riches to his own infinite harm ? 

I think not, he said. 

He will look at the city which is within him and take care to 
avoid any change of his own institutions, such as might arise 
either from abundance or from want; and he will duly regulate 
his acquisition and expense, in so far as he is able ? 

Very true. 

2 And, for the same reason, he will accept such honours as he 
deems likely to make him a better man ; but those which are likely 
to disorder his constitution, whether private or public honours, 
he will avoid ? 

Then, if this be his chief care, he will not be a politician ? 

By the dog of Egypt, he will! in the city which is his own, 
though in his native country perhaps not, unless some providen- 
tial accident should occur. 

I understand; you speak of that city of which we are the 
founders, and which exists in idea only; for 1 do not think that 
there is such an one anywhere on earth ? 

VOL. II. f f 

434 

THE REP BU LIC. 

In heaven, I replied, there is laid up a pattern of such a city, 
and he who desires may behold this, and beholding, govern him- 
self accordingly. But whether there really is or ever will be such 
an one is of no importance to him ; for he will act according to 
the laws of that city and of no other ? 

True, he said. 

BOOK X. 

595 Of the many excellences which I perceive in the order of 
our State, there is none which upon reflection pleases me better 
than the rule about poetry. 

What rule ? 

The rule about rejecting imitative poetry, which certainly 
ought not to be received ; as I see far more clearly now that the 
parts of the soul have been distinguished. 

What do you mean by that ? 

Speaking in confidence, for I should not like to have my words 
repeated to the tragedians and the rest of the imitative tribe — 
but I do not mind saying to you that all poetical imitations are 
a sort of outrage on the understanding of the hearers, and that 
the only cure of this is the knowledge of their true nature. 

Explain the purport of your remark. 

Well, I will tell you : although I have always from my earliest 
youth had an awe and love of Homer, which even now makes 
the words falter on my lips, for he is the great captain and 
teacher of all that goodly band of Tragic writers; but a man 
is not to be reverenced before the truth, and therefore I will 
speak out. 

Very good, he said. 

Listen to me then, or rather, answer me. 

Put your question. 

Can you tell me what imitation is ? for I really do not know. 

A likely thing, then, that I shall know. 

596 Why not ? even supposing that you were dull, may not the duller 
eye often see a thing sooner than the keener? 

That is true, he said ; but in your presence I should not have 
the courage to speak, even if I had anything to say. Will you 
examine for yourself? 

f f 2 

436 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Well then, shall we begin as usual by bringing a number of 
individuals which have a common name under one form or idea? 
that has been our usual plan — do you understand me ? 

I do. 

Let us take any instance; there are beds and tables in the 
world and many of them, are there not ? 

Yes. 

But there are only two ideas or forms of them — one the idea 
of a bed, the other of a table. 

True. 

And the maker of either of them makes a bed or he makes a 
table for our use, in accordance with the idea — that is our way 
of speaking in this and similar instances — but he does not make 
the ideas themselves. 

Certainly not. 

And there is another artist, — I should like to know what you 
would say of him. 

Who is he ? 

One who is the maker of all the works of all other workmen. 

What an extraordinary man ! 

Wait a little, and there will be more reason for your saying 
that. For this is he who makes not only vessels of every kind, 
but plants and animals, himself and all other things — the earth 
and heaven, and the things which are in heaven, or under the 
earth ; he makes the gods also. 

He must be a rare master of his art. 

Oh! you are unbelieving, are you? Do you mean that there 
is no such maker or creator, or that in one sense there might 
be a maker of all these things but not in another? Do you not 
see that there is a way in which you could make them yourself? 

What is this way ? 

An easy way enough ; or rather, there are many ways in which 
the feat might be accomplished, none quicker than that of turning 
a mirror round and round, and catching the sun and the heavens, 
and the earth and yourself, and other animals and plants, and 
all the other creations of art as well as nature, in the mirror. 

Yes, he said, but that is an appearance only. 

Very good, I said, you are coming to the point now; and the 
painter, as I conceive, is just a creator of this sort, is he not ? 

BOOK X . 

437 

That is true. 

But then I suppose you will say that what he creates is untrue. 
And yet there is a sense in which the painter also creates a bed ? 

Yes, he said, but not a real bed. 

597 And what of the maker of the bed? were you not saying that 
he does not make the idea which, according to our view, is the 
essence of the bed, but only a particular bed ? 

Yes, I did say that. 

Then if he does not make that which exists he cannot make 
true existence, but only some semblance of existence; and if 
any one were to say that the work of the maker of the bed, or 
of any other workman, has real existence, he could hardly be 
supposed to be speaking the truth. 

At any rate, he replied, philosophers would say that he was 
not speaking the truth. 

Can we wonder, then, that there is an indistinctness about his 
work too, when compared with truth ? 

No indeed. 

Suppose that we enquire into the nature of this imitator as 
seen in the examples given ? 

If you please. 

Well then, here are three beds; one is natural, which, as I 
think that we may say, is made by God, — no one else can be 
the maker? 

No. 

There is another which is the work of the carpenter ? 

Yes. 

And the work of the painter is a third ? 

Yes. 

Beds, then, are of three kinds, and there are three artists who 
superintend them : God, the maker of the bed, and the painter ? 

Yes, there are three of them. 

God, whether from choice or from necessity, made one bed 
and one only; two or more such ideal beds, neither ever have 
been or ever will be made by God. 

Why is that ? 

Because even if he had made but two, still a third would appear 
behind them in which the idea of both of them would be con- 
tained, and that would be the ideal bed and not the two others. 

438 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Very true, he said. 

God knew this, and He desired to be the real maker of a real 
bed, not a particular maker of a particular bed, and therefore in 
nature He created one bed only. 

Yes, that may be assumed. 

Shall we, then, speak of Him as the natural author or maker of 
the bed ? 

Yes, he replied ; as His nature is so should His name be, and 
His nature is that He is the creator of this and of all other 
things. 

And what shall we say of the carpenter — is not he also the 
maker of the bed ? 

Yes. 

But would you call the painter a creator and maker? 

Certainly not. 

Yet if he is not the maker what is he in relation to the bed ? 

I think, he said, that we may fairly designate him as the 
imitator of that which the others make. 

Good, I said; then you call him an imitator who is third in 
the descent from nature ? 

Certainly, he said. 

And the tragic poet is an imitator, and therefore, like all other 
imitators, he is thrice removed from the king and from the truth ? 

That appears to be the case. 

Then about the imitator we are agreed. And now about the 59s 
painter, I would like to know whether he imitates that which 
originally exists in nature, or only the creations of artists? 

The latter. 

As they are or as they appear? you have still to determine 
this. 

What do you mean? 

I mean, that you may look at a bed from different points of view, 
obliquely or directly or from any other point of view, and the 
bed will appear different, but there is no difference in reality. 

And this is true of all things. 

Yes, he said, they differ, but only in appearance. 

Now let me ask you another question: Which is the art of 
painting — an imitation of things as they are, or as they appear — 
of appearance or of reality ? 

BOOK X . 

439 

Of appearance. 

Then the imitator, I said, is a long way off' the truth, and can 
do all things because he lightly touches on a small part of them, 
and that part an image. For example : a painter will paint a 
cobbler, carpenter, or any other artist, though he knows nothing of 
their arts* and, if he is a good artist, he may deceive children or 
simple persons, when he shows them his picture of a carpenter 
from a distance, and they will fancy that they are looking at 
a real carpenter. 

Certainly. 

And whenever any one informs us that he has found a man who 
knows all the arts, and all things else that everybody knows, and 
every single thing, with a higher degree of accuracy than any other 
man — whoever tells us this, I think that we can only imagine him 
to be a simple creature who is likely to have been deceived by 
some wizard or actor whom he met, and whom he thought all 
knowing, because he himself was unable to analyse the nature of 
knowledge and ignorance and imitation. 

That is very true, he said. 

Or again j when we hear persons saying that the tragedians, 
and Homer, who is at their head, know all the arts and all things 
human, virtue as well as vice, and divine things too, for that the 
good poet must know what he is talking about, and that he who 
has not this knowledge can never be a poet, we ought to consider 
whether in this also there is not a similar illusion. Perhaps they 
599 may have been deceived by imitators, and may never have con- 
sidered when they saw their works that these were but imitations 
thrice removed from the truth, and could easily be made without 
any knowledge of the truth, because they are appearances only and 
not real substances ? Or, after all, they may be in the right, and 
poets do really know the things about which they seem to the 
many to speak well ? 

Yes, that is a matter which has to be considered. 

Now do you suppose that if a person were able to make the 
original as well as the image, he would devote himself to the 
image-making branch? Would he allow this to be the ruling 
principle of his life, when he could do so much better? 

I should say not. 

The real artist who knew what he was imitating would be 

440 

THE REPUBLIC . 

interested in realities and not in imitations; and would leave 
as memorials of himself works many and fair; and, instead of 
being the author of encomiums, he would prefer to be the theme 
of them. 

Yes, he said, that would bring him much greater honour and 
profit. 

Then I think that we must put a question to Homer ; not about 
medicine, or any of the arts to which his poems only incidentally 
refer ; we are not going to ask him, or any other poet, whether he 
has cured patients like Asclepius, or left behind him a school of 
medicine such as were the Asclepiads, or whether he only talks 
about medicine at second-hand, but we have a right to know 
respecting war, military tactics, politics, education, which are the 
chiefest and noblest subjects of his poems, and we may fairly ask 
him about them. ‘Friend Homer/ then, we say, cif you are only 
in the second remove from truth and excellence, and not in the 
third — not an image maker or imitator — and if you are able to 
discern what pursuits make men better or worse in private or 
public life, tell us what State was ever better governed by your 
help ? The good order of Lacedaemon is due to Lycurgus, and 
many other cities great and small have been similarly benefited by 
others ; but who says that you have been a good legislator to them 
and have done them any good ? Italy and Sicily can tell of 
Charondas, and there is Solon who is renowned among us; but 
what city has anything to say about you ? * Is there any city which 
he might name ? 

I think not, said Glaucon ; not even the Homeridae themselves 
pretend that he was a legislator. 

Well, but is there any war which was carried on by him, or 600 
aided by his counsels, when he was alive ? 

There is not. 

Or is there any invention1 of his applicable to the arts, or to 
human life, such as Thales the Milesian, or Anacharsis the 
Scythian, and other ingenious men have made, which is at- 
tributed to him ? 

There is nothing at all of the kind. 

But, if Homer never did any public service, was he privately a 
guide or teacher of any ? Had he in his lifetime friends and 

1 Omitting tls. 

I 

BOOK X. 441 

associates who loved him, and handed down to posterity an 
Homeric way of life, such as that which Pythagoras invented and 
his followers continue, who are still called after his name, and 
seem to have a certain distinction above other men ? 

Neither is there anything of this kind recorded of him. For 
surely, Socrates, Creophylus, the companion of Homer, that child 
of flesh, whose name always makes us laugh, might be more justly 
ridiculed for his want of education, if, as is said, Homer was 
greatly neglected by him and others in his own day when he was 
alive ? 

Yes, I replied, that is the tradition. But can you imagine, 
Glaucon, that if Homer had really been able to educate and 
improve mankind, if he had possessed knowledge and not been a 
mere imitator — can you imagine, I say, that he would not have had 
many followers, and been honoured and loved by them ? Pro- 
tagoras of Abdera, and Prodicus of Ceos, and a host of others, have 
only to suggest to their contemporaries that they will never be 
able to manage either their own house or their State unless they are 
made by them presidents of education ; and for this wisdom of 
theirs they are so much beloved that their companions all but carry 
them about on their heads. And are we to believe that the con- 
temporaries of Homer, or again, of Hesiod, would have allowed 
either of them to beg their way as rhapsodists, if they had really 
been able to improve mankind? Would they not have been as 
unwilling to part with them as with gold, and have compelled 
them to stay at home with them ? Or, if the master would not stay, 
then the disciples would have followed him about whithersoever 
he went, until they had got education enough ? 

Yes, Socrates, that, I think, is quite true. 

Then must we not infer that all the poets, beginning with 
Homer, are only imitators ; they copy images of virtue and the 
6 01 like, but the truth they never reach? The poet is like a painter 
who, as has already been observed, will make a likeness of a 
cobbler though he understands nothing of cobbling ; and this is 
good enough for those who know no more than he does, and judge 
only by colours and figures. Also, the poet lays on certain colours 
of each of the arts in the shape of nouns and verbs, himself under- 
standing their nature only enough to imitate ; and other people, 
who are as ignorant as he is and judge only from his words. 

Digitized by Google 

442 

THE REPUBLIC. 

imagine that if he speaks of cobbling in metre and harmony and 
rhythm, or of military tactics, or of anything else, he speaks 
very well — such is the sweet influence which melody and rhythm 
have naturally. And I think that you must know, for you have 
often seen the quality of poetical compositions when stripped of 
the colours which music puts upon them, and only recited ? 

Yes, he said. 

They are like faces which were never really beautiful, but only 
blooming; and now the bloom of youth has passed away from 
them ? 

Exactly. 

Here is another point : The imitator or maker of the image 
knows nothing of true existence, he knows appearances only. Am 
I not right ? 

Yes. 

Then let us have a clear understanding, and not be satisfied 
with half an explanation. 

Proceed. 

Of the painter we say that he will paint reins, and he will paint 
a bridle ? 

Yes. 

And the worker in leather and brass will make them. But docs 
the painter know the right form of the bridle and reins ? Nay, 
this can hardly be said even of the maker ; only the horseman who 
knows how to use them — he knows their right form. 

Most true. 

And may we not say the same of all things ? 

What ? 

That there are three arts which are concerned with all things : 
one that uses, another that makes, a third that imitates them ? 

Yes. 

The excellence or beauty or truth of each structure, animate or 
inanimate, and of each action of man, has reference to the use of 
them, either natural or artificial ? 

True. 

Then the user of them must have the greatest experience of 
them, and he must intimate to the maker the good or bad qualities 
which develope themselves in use; for example, the flute-player 
will tell the flute-maker which of his flutes answer in playing ; he 

BOOK X. 

443 

will tell him how he ought to make them, and the other will 
attend to him ? 

Of course. 

The one knows and therefore speaks about the goodness and 
badness of flutes, and the other believes and obeys him ? 

True. 

The vessel is the same, but about the good and bad qualities of 
the vessel the maker will only attain belief; and this he will gain 
from him who knows, by talking to him and hearing what he has 
602 to say, whereas the user will have knowledge ? 

True. 

But will the imitator have knowledge, or opinion only? Will he 
know from use whether or no his drawing is straight or beautiful ? 
or will he have right opinion only, and be compelled to depend on 
others who have knowledge, and from whom he takes his orders ? 

Neither. 

Then he will no more have true opinion than he will have 
knowledge about the goodness or badness of that which he imitates ? 

I suppose not. 

Then the imitative artist will be in a brilliant state of in- 
telligence about his own creations ? 

Nay, rather the reverse. 

And yet he will go on imitating good and evil, of which he has 
no knowledge, and will therefore only imitate the appearance 
which good and evil wear to the ignorant and to the vulgar? 

That will be all. 

And so we may fairly conclude that the imitator has no know- 
ledge worth mentioning. Imitation is only a kind of play or sport, 
and the tragic and epic poets are imitators in the highest degree ? 

Very true. 

Come, then, and answer this : Is not imitation concerned with 
that which is thrice removed from truth ? 

Certainly. 

And what is the faculty in man to which imitation is addressed ? 

What do you mean ? 

I will explain my meaning : The body which is large when 
seen near, appears small when seen at a distance ? 

True. 

And the same objects appear straight when looked at out of the 

444 

THE REPUBLIC. 

water, and crooked when in the water; and the convex becomes 
concave, owing to the illusion about colours to which the sight is 
liable. There is no end to this sort of confusion in the mind ; and 
there is a similar deception about painting in light and shade, and 
juggling, and other ingenious devices, which have quite a magical 
power of imposing upon our weakness. 

True. 

And the arts of measuring and numbering and weighing come to 
the rescue of the human understanding — that is the beauty of 
them — and the apparent greater or less, or more or heavier, no 
longer reign in us, but give way before calculation and measure 
and weight ? 

Most true. 

And this, surely, must be the work of the calculating and 
rational principle in the soul ? 

Yes, surely. 

And this is the principle which measures and certifies that some 
things are equal, or that some are greater or less than others, and 
then there is an apparent contradiction ? 

True. 

But were we not saying that such a contradiction is impossible — 
the same cannot have contrary opinions at the same time about 
the same ? 

Yes, and that is true. 

Then that which has an opinion contrary to measure is not the 
same with that which has an opinion in accordance with measure ? 

True. 

But that which trusts to measure and calculation is the best part 
of the soul ? 

Certainly. 

And that which is opposed to them is one of the inferior 
principles of the soul ? 

No doubt. 

That was the conclusion at which I wanted to arrive when I 
said that painting or drawing and imitation in general is remote 
from truth, and is the companion and friend and associate of a 
principle which is remote from reason, and has no true or 
healthy aim. 

Exactly. 

BOOK X 

445 

The imitative art is an inferior who marries an inferior, and has 
inferior offspring. 

Very true. 

And is this confined to the sight only, or applicable to the 
hearing also, in reference to what is termed poetry ? 

Probably the same holds of poetry. 

But do not rely, I said, on the analogy of painting; let us 
further examine and see whether the faculty with which poetical 
imitation is concerned is good or bad. Now imitation imitates 
the action of man, either voluntary or involuntary, in which there 
is expectation of a bad or good event, and present experience of 
pleasure or pain. Is there anything more ? 

No, there is nothing else. 

But in all this is the man at unity with himself — or rather, as 
in the instance of sight there was confusion and opposition, so 
here also is there not strife and inconsistency in human actions ? 
Though I need hardly raise this question again, for, if I am not 
mistaken, all this has been already admitted by us ; the soul has 
been acknowledged to be full of endless oppositions of this sort 
occurring at the same moment ? 

And we were right in admitting that, he said. 

Yes, I said, in that we were right; but there was an omission 
which must now be supplied. 

What was that ? 

Were we not saying that a good man, when he loses his son 
or anything else which is most dear to him, will bear the loss 
with more equanimity than another? 

Yes. 

But we never thought of adding, that although he will sorrow, 
for he cannot help this, he will moderate his sorrow — will he not ? 

Yes, he said, he will. 

604 And now tell me : will he be more likely to struggle and 
hold out against his sorrow when he is seen by his equals, or 
when he is by himself alone in a desert ? 

He will be more likely to hold out when he is in company. 

But when he is left alone he will not mind saying or doing 
many things which he would be ashamed of any one hearing or 
seeing? 

True. 

446 

THE REPUBLIC. 

There is a principle of law and reason in him which bids him 
resist, while passion urges him to indulge his sorrow ? 

True. 

But when a man is drawn in two opposite directions, to and 
from the same object, this, as we affirm, necessarily implies two 
distinct principles in him ? 

Certainly. 

One of them is obedient to the law ? 

How do you mean ? 

The law would say that to be patient under suffering is best, 
and that we should not give way to impatience, as there is no 
knowing whether such things are good or evil; and nothing is 
gained by impatience ; also, because no human thing is of serious 
importance, and grief stands in the way of that which at the 
moment is most required. 

What is that ? he asked. 

Good counsel, I said, which, as at a game of dice, takes the 
measures which reason prescribes, according to the number of the 
dice ; and will not allow us, like children who have had a fall, to 
be keeping hold of the part struck and wasting time in setting up 
a howl, when we should be accustoming the soul forthwith to 
apply a remedy, raising up that which is sickly and fallen, banish- 
ing the cry of sorrow by a real cure. 

Yes, he said, that is the best way of meeting the attacks of 
fortune. 

Yes, I said ; and the higher principle is ready to follow this 
suggestion of reason. 

Clearly. 

And the other principle which inclines us to recollection of 
our troubles and to lamentation, and can never have enough of 
them, we may call irrational, indolent, and cowardly ? 

Indeed, we may. 

And does not the latter — I mean the rebellious principle — fur- 
nish a great variety of materials for imitation ? Whereas the 
wise and calm temperament, being always nearly equable, is not 
easy to imitate or to appreciate when imitated, especially at a 
theatre in which all sorts of men are gathered together. For 
ihe feeling which is represented is one to which they are 
strangers. 

BOOK X. 

447 

Certainly. 

605 Then the imitative poet is not by nature made, nor his art 
intended, to affect or please the rational principle in the soul, if 
his object is to be popular ; but he will prefer the passionate and 
fitful temper, which is easily imitated ? 

That is evident. 

And now we may fairly take him and set him up by the side of 
the painter, for he is like him in two ways: first, inasmuch as his 
creations have an inferior degree of truth — in this, I say, he is 
like him; and he is also like him in being concerned with an 
inferior part of the soul ; and therefore we shall be right in not 
receiving him in a well-ordered State, because he awakens and 
nourishes and strengthens the feelings and impairs the reason. 
As in a city we cannot allow the evil to have authority and 
the good to be put out of the way, even so in the city which is 
within us we refuse to allow the imitative poet to create an evil 
constitution indulging the irrational nature which has no discern- 
ment of greater and less, and thinks the same thing at one time 
great and at another small ; or to manufacture images which are 
very far removed from the truth. 

Very true. 

But we have not yet brought forward the heaviest count in our 
accusation — the power which poetry has of harming even the good 
(and there are very few who are not harmed), which is surely an 
awful thing? 

Yes, certainly, if that is the effect. 

Hear and judge: the best of us, as I conceive, when we listen 
to a passage of Homer, or one of the tragedians in which he re- 
presents some pitiful hero who is drawling out his sorrows in a 
long oration, or possibly singing, and smiting his breast — the best 
of us, I say, as you know, delight in giving way to sympathy, and 
are in raptures at the excellence of the poet who stirs our feelings 
most. 

Yes, of course. 

But when any sorrow happens to ourselves, then you know that 
we pride ourselves on the opposite quality of quietness and en- 
durance ; this is the manly part, and that which then enraptured 
us is now deemed to be the part of a woman. 

I know, he said. 

448 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Now can we be right in praising that in another which a man 
would abominate and be ashamed of in his own person ? 

No, he said, that is certainly not reasonable. 

Yes, I said, but quite reasonable from a certain point of view. 

What point of view ? 

If you consider, I said, that there is in us a natural feeling 
which is just hungering after sorrow and weeping, and desiring to 
be indulged, and that this feeling, which is kept under control in 
our own calamities, is the same which is satisfied and delighted by 
the poets:— the better nature in each of us, not having been suffi- 
ciently trained by reason or habit, is taken unawares because the 
sorrow is another’s ; and the spectator fancies that there can be no 
disgrace to himself in praising and pitying any one who comes 
telling him what a good man he is, and making unseasonable la- 
mentations— he thinks that the pleasure is a gain which he must 
not lose by the rejection of the poem. For the reflection is not often 
made that from the evil of others the fruit of evil is reaped by our- 
selves, or that the feeling of pity which has been nursed, and has 
acquired strength at the sight of the misfortunes of others, will come 
out in our own misfortunes, and cannot easily be controlled. 

That is a very true remark. 

And does not the same hold also of the ridiculous ? There are 
jests which you would be ashamed to make yourself, and yet on 
the comic stage, or again in private, when you hear them, you are 
greatly amused by them, instead of being disgusted at their un- 
seemliness;— the case of compassion recurs; there is a principle 
within which is disposed to raise a laugh, and this was once kept 
in order by you because you were afraid of being thought a buf- 
foon, but is now let loose again and encouraged by the theatre, 

. and you are often unconsciously betrayed into playing the comic 
poet in your own person. 

Quite true, he said. 

And the same may be said of lust and anger and all the other 
affections, of desire and pain and pleasure which are held to be 
inseparable from every action — in all of them poetry feeds and 
waters the passions instead of withering and starving them ; she 
lets them rule instead of ruling them as they ought to be ruled, 
with a view to the happiness and virtue of mankind. 

I cannot deny that. 

606 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK X. 

449 

Therefore, Glaucon, i said, whenever you meet with any of the 
eulogists of Homer declaring that he has been the educator of 
Hellas, and that he is profitable for the management and adminis- 
tration of human things, and that you should take him up and read 
607 him and regulate your whole life according to him, we may love 
and honour the intentions of these excellent people, as far as their 
light extends; and we are ready to acknowledge that Homer is 
the greatest of poets and first of tragedy writers; but we must 
remain firm in our conviction that hymns to the gods and praises 
of famous men are the only poetry which ought to be admitted 
into our State. For if you go beyond this and allow the honeyed 
muse to enter, cither in epic or lyric verse, not law and reason, 
which by the consent of all is ever to be deemed the best, but 
pleasure and pain will be the rulers in our State. 

That is most true, he said. 

Let this then be the explanation which we give of our reasons 
for expelling poetry, that we have only followed the course of the 
argument ; and let us also make an apology to her, that she may 
not charge us with any harshness or want of politeness. We will 
tell her, ‘ that there is an ancient quarrel between philosophy and 
poetry;’ of which there are many proofs, such as the saying of 
‘ the yelping hound howling at her lord,’ or of one c mighty in the 
vain talk of fools,’ and ‘the mob of sages circumventing Zeus,’ 
and the ‘subtle thinkers who are beggars after all;’ and there are 
ten thousand other signs of ancient enmity between them. Not- 
withstanding this, let us assure our sweet friend, and the sister 
arts of imitation, that if she will only prove her title to existence 
in a well-ordered State we shall be delighted to receive her, 
knowing that we ourselves also are very susceptible of her charms; 
but we may not on that account betray the truth. I dare say, 
Glaucon, that you are as much charmed by her as I am, especially 
when you see her in the garb of Homer? 

Yes, indeed, I am greatly charmed. 

Shall I propose, then, that she be allowed to return from exile, 
on this condition— that she is to make a defence of herself in 
lyrical or some other metre ? 

Certainly. 

And I think that we may grant a further privilege to those of 
her defenders who are lovers of poetry and yet not poets; they 

vol. 11. 0 g 

Digitized by Google 

45° 

THE REPUBLIC . 

shall be allowed to speak in prose on her behalf: let them show 
not only that she is pleasant but also useful to States and to 
human life and we will gladly listen, for if this can be proved 
we shall surely be the gainers, that is to say, if there is a use in 
poetry as well as a delight ? 

Certainly, he said, we shall be the gainers. 

If her defence fails, then, my dear friend, though much against 
our will we must give her up, after the manner of lovers who ab- 
stain when they think that their love is not good for them ; for we 
too are inspired by that love of poetry which the education of6°8 
noble States has implanted in us, and therefore we would have 
her appear at her best and truest ; but so long as she is unable 
to make good her defence, even though our ears may listen, our 
souls will be charmed against her by repeating this discourse of 
ours, and into the childish love which the many have of her we 
shall take care not to fall again, for we see that poetry being 
such as she is, is not to be pursued in earnest or regarded se- 
riously as attaining to the truth; and he who listens to her will 
be on his guard against her seductions, fearing for the safety of 
the city which is within him, and he will attend to our words. 

Yes, he said, I quite agree with you. 

Yes, I said, my dear Glaucon, for great is the issue at stake, 
greater than appears, whether a man is to be good or bad. Neither 
under the influence of honour or money or power, aye, or under 
the excitement of poetry, ought he to fail in the observance of 
justice and virtue. 

I agree, he said ; and I think that any one would agree who 
heard the argument. 

And yet, I said, no mention has been made of the greatest prizes 
and rewards of virtue. 

If, he said, there are others greater than these they must be of 
an inconceivable greatness. 

Why, I said, what was ever great in a short time? The whole 
period of three-score years and ten is surely but a little thing in 
comparison with eternity ? 

Say rather ‘nothing/ he replied. 

And should an immortal being seriously think of this little 
space rather than of the whole ? 

Yes, he said, I think that he should. But what do you mean? 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK X. 

45i 

Are you not aware, I said, that the soul is immortal and 
imperishable ? 

He looked at me in astonishment, and said : No, indeed ; you 
do not mean to say that you are able to prove that ? 

Yes, I said, I ought to be able, and you too, for there is no diffi- 
culty. 

I do not see that, he said; and I should like to hear this 
argument of which you make no difficulty. 

Listen then, I said. 

I am attending, he said. 

You speak of good and of evil ? 

Yes, he replied. 

Would you agree that the corrupting and destroying element 
is the evil, and the saving and improving element the good ? 

609 Yes, he said. 

And you admit that everything has a good and also an evil; as 
ophthalmia is the evil of the eyes and disease of the whole body; 
as mildew is of corn, and rot of timber, or rust of iron and steel : 
in everything, or almost everything, I say that there is an inherent 
evil and disease ? 

Yes, he said. 

And anything which is infected by any of these evils is made 
evil, and at last wholly dissolves and dies ? 

True. 

The vice and evil which is inherent in each is the destruction 
of each ; and if this does not destroy them there is nothing else 
that will, for good certainly will not destroy them, nor again, that 
which is neither good nor evil. 

That is impossible. 

If, then, we find any nature which having this inherent corrup- 
tion cannot be dissolved or destroyed, we may be certain that of 
such a nature there is no destruction ? 

That may be assumed, he said. 

Well, I said, and is there no evil which corrupts the soul? 

Yes, he said, there are all the evils of which we were speaking : 
unrighteousness, intemperance, cowardice, ignorance. 

But do any of these dissolve or destroy her ? — and here do not 
let us fall into the error of supposing that the unjust and foolish, 
when they are detected, perish through their injustice, which is an 

G g 2 

Digitized by Google 

452 

THE REPUBLIC . 

evil of the soul. Take the analogy of the body : The evil of the 
body is a disease which wastes and reduces and annihilates the 
body ; and all the things of which we were just now speaking come 
to annihilation through their own inherent evil clinging to them 
and destroying them. Is not this true ? 

Yes, he said. 

Now consider the soul in the same way. Do the injustice and 
other evil that there are in the soul waste and consume the soul? 

Do they, by inhering in her and clinging to her at last, bring her 
to death, and separate her from the body ? 

Nay, he said, that is not at all the case. 

And yet, I said, there is something unreasonable in supposing 
that anything can perish from without through external affection 
of evil, which could not be destroyed from within by any internal 
corruption ? 

Yes, that is unreasonable, he said. 

Consider, I said, Glaucon, that even the badness of food, 
whether staleness, decomposition, or any other kind of badness, 
when confined to the actual food, is not supposed to destroy the 
body ; although, if the corruption of food communicates corruption 
to the body, then we say that the body also suffers from internal 6io 
corruption or disease and perishes ; but that the body, being one 
thing, can be destroyed by the badness of food, which is another thing, 
without any internal infection — that will never be admitted by us ? 

Very true. 

And, on the same principle, unless some bodily evil can produce 
an evil of the soul, we must not suppose that the soul, which is one 
thing, can be dissolved by any external evil which belongs to another? 

Yes, he said, there is reason in that. 

Either, then, let us refute this argument, or, while this argument 
of ours remains unrefuted, let us never say that fever, or any other 
disease, or the knife put to the throat, or even the cutting up of 
the whole body into the minutest pieces, can destroy the soul, 
until the soul also is proved to become more unholy or unrighteous 
in consequence of these things being done to the body ; but that 
the soul, or anything else which is not destroyed by an internal 
evil, can be destroyed by an external one, is not to be supposed. 

No one, he replied, will ever show that the souls of men be- 
come more unjust in consequence of death ; that is certain. 

BOOK X . 

453 

And if some one who would rather not admit the immortality of 
the soul boldly denies this, and says that the dying do really 
become more evil and unrighteous, then, if the speaker is right, I 
suppose that injustice, like disease, must be assumed to be fatal to 
the unjust, and that those who take this disorder die by the natural 
inherent power of destruction which evil has, and which kills them 
sooner or later in quite another way from that in which, at 
present, the wicked receive death at the hands of others as the 
penaltyof their deeds ? 

Nay, he said, then after all injustice, if fatal to the unjust, will 
not be so very terrible to him, for he will be delivered from evil. 
But I rather suspect that this is not the truth, and that injustice 
which murders others keeps the murderer alive — aye, and un- 
sleeping too; so far is she from bringing death where she has 
taken up her abode. 

True, I said ; if the inherent natural vice or evil of the soul is 
unable to kill or destroy her, hardly will that which is appointed 
to be the destruction of the body destroy a soul or anything other 
than the body. 

Yes, he said, that can hardly be. 

But the soul which cannot be destroyed by evil, whether inherent 
or external, must exist for ever, and, if existing for ever, must be 
immortal ? 

That is certain. 

That is the argument, I said ; and, if the argument holds, then 
the souls must always be the same, for if none be destroyed they 
will not diminish in number. Neither will they increase, for the 
increase of the immortal natures must come from something 
mortal, and all things would thus end in immortality. 

Very true. 

But reason cannot admit this any more than we can admit that 
in the truth of nature the soul, in herself, is full of variety and 
difference and dissimilarity. 

What do you mean ? he said 

The soul, I said, being immortal, as is now clear, and also com- 
pounded of many elements, must be the fairest of compositions ? 

Yes, indeed, he said. 

Her immortality may be proven by the previous argument and 
by other arguments; and you should also see her original nature, 

Digitized by Google 

454 

THE REPUBLIC. 

not as we now behold her, marred by communion with the body 
and other miseries, but you should look upon her with the eye of 
reason, pure as at birth, and then her beauty would be discovered, 
and in her image justice would be more clearly seen, and injustice, 
and all the things which we have described. But now, although we 
have spoken the truth concerning her as she appears at present, we 
must remember that we have seen her only in a condition which 
may be compared to that of the sea-god Glaucus, whose original 
image can hardly be discerned because his natural members are 
broken off and crushed and in many ways damaged by the waves, 
and incrustations have grown over them of seaweed and shells and 
stones, so that he is liker to some sea-monster than to his na- 
tural form. And the soul is in a similar condition, disfigured by ten 
thousand ills. But not there, Glaucon, not there must we look. 

Where then ? 

At her love of wisdom. Let us see whom she affects, and what 
converse she seeks in virtue of her near kindred with the immortal 
and eternal and divine ; also how different she would become if 
wholly following this superior principle, and borne by a divine 
impulse out of the ocean in which she now is, and disengaged 
from the stones and shells and things of earth and rock which in 
wild- variety grow around her because she feeds upon earth, and is 6 
crusted over by the good things of this life as they are termed : 
then you would see her as she is, and know whether she have one 
form only or many, or what her nature is. Of her form and 
affections in this present life I have said enough. 

True, he said. 

Thus, I said, have we followed out the argument2, putting aside 
the rewards and glories of justice, such as you were saying that 
Homer and Hesiod introduced ; and justice in her own nature has 
been shown to be best for the soul in her nature : let her do what 
is just, whether she have the ring of Gyges or not, and, besides the 
ring of Gyges, the helmet of Hades. 

That is very true. 

And now, Glaucon, there will be no harm in further enumerating 
how many and how great are the rewards which justice and the 
other virtues procure to the soul from gods and men, both in life 
and after death. 

2 Reading nnt^vrrnfif^a. 

BOOK X . 

455 

Certainly, he said. 

Will you repay me, then, what you borrowed in the argu- 
ment ? 

What was that ? 

I granted that the just man should appear unjust and the unjust 
just : for you were of opinion that even if the true state of the 
case could not possibly escape the eyes of gods and men, still 
this ought to be admitted for the sake of the argument, in order 
that pure justice might be weighed against pure injustice. Do you 
not remember? 

You would have reason to complain of me if I had forgotten. 

Then, as the cause is decided, I demand on behalf of justice that 
the glory which she receives from gods and men be also allowed 
to her by you ; having been shown to have reality, and not to 
deceive those who truly possess her, she may also have appearance 
restored to her, and thus obtain the other crown of victory which 
is hers also. 

The demand, he said, is just. 

In the first place, I said — and this is the first point which you 
will have to give back — the nature both of just and unjust is truly 
known to the gods ? 

I am willing to restore that. 

And if they are both known to them, one must be the friend 
and the other the enemy of the gods, as we admitted at first ? 

True. 

3 And the friend of the gods may be supposed to receive from 
them every good, excepting only such evil as is the necessary 
consequence of former sins ? 

Certainly. 

Then this must be our notion of the just man, that even when 
he is in poverty or sickness, or any other seeming misfortune, all 
things will in the end work together for good to him in life and 
death : for the gods have a care of any one whose desire is to 
become just and to be like God, as far as man can attain his 
likeness, by the pursuit of virtue ? 

Yes, he said; if he is like God he will surely not be neglected 
by him. 

And of the unjust may not the opposite be assumed ? 

Certainly. 

456 

THE REPUBLIC. 

Such, then, is the prize of victory which the gods give the 
just? 

Yes, he said, that is my belief. 

And what do they receive of men? Look at things as they 
really are and you will see that the clever unjust are in the case 
of runners, who run well from the starting-place to the goal, 
but not back again from the goal : they start off at a great pace, 
but in the end only look foolish, slinking away with their ears 
draggling on their shoulders, and without a crown ; but the true 
runner comes to the finish and receives the prize and is crowned. 
And this is the way with the just; he who endures to the end 
of every action and occasion of his entire life has a good report 
and carries off the prize which men bestow. 

True. 

And now you must allow me to repeat the blessings which you 
attributed to the fortunate unjust. I shall say of the just as you 
were saying of the unjust, that as they grow older, if that is their 
desire, they become rulers in their own city; they marry whom 
they like and give in marriage to whomsoever they like; all that 
you said of the others I now say of these. And, on the other hand, 

I say of the unjust that the greater number, even though they 
escape in their youth, are found out at last and look foolish at 
the end of their course, and when they come to be old and 
miserable are flouted alike by stranger and citizen ; they are 
beaten and then come those things unfit for ears polite, as you 
truly term them; they will be racked and burned, as you were 
saying: I shall ask you to suppose that you have heard all that. 
Will you allow me to assume thus much? 

Certainly, he said, for what you say is true. 

These, then, are the prizes and rewards and gifts which are 6 
bestowed upon the just by gods and men in this present life, 
in addition to those other good things which justice of herself 
gives. 

Yes, he said ; and they are fair and lasting. 

And yet, I said, all these things are as nothing either in number 
or greatness in comparison with those other recompenses which 
await both just and unjust after death, which are more and greater 
far. And you ought to hear them, and then both of them will have 
received the perfect meed of words due to them. 

BOOK X. 

457 

Speak, he said ; there are few things which I would more gladly 
hear. 

Well, I said, I will tell you a tale; not one of the tales which 
Odysseus tells to Alcinous, yet this too is a tale of a brave man, 
Er the son of Armenius, a Pamphylian by birth. He was slain in 
battle, and ten days afterwards, when the bodies of the dead were 
brought in already in a state of corruption, he was brought in 
with them undecayed, and carried home to be buried. And on the 
twelfth day, as he was lying on the funeral pile, he returned to life 
and told them what he had seen in the other world. He said 
that when his soul departed he went on a journey with a great 
company, and that they came to a mysterious place at which 
there were two chasms in the earth; they were near together and 
over against them were two other chasms in the heaven above. 
In the intermediate space there were judges seated, who bade the 
just, after they had judged them, ascend by the heavenly way on 
the right hand, having the signs of the judgment bound on their 
foreheads; and in like manner the unjust were commanded by 
them to descend by the lower way on the left hand ; these also 
had the symbols of their deeds fastened on their backs. He drew 
near, and they told him that he was to be the messenger of the 
other world to men, and they bade him hear and see all that was 
to be heard and seen in that place. Then he beheld and saw on 
one side the souls departing at either chasm of heaven and earth 
when sentence had been given on them; and at the two other 
openings other souls, some ascending out of the earth dusty and 
worn with travel, some descending out of heaven clean and bright. 
And always, on their arrival, they seemed as if they had come 
from a long journey, and they went out into the meadow with 
joy and there encamped as at a festival, and those who knew one 
another embraced and conversed, the souls which came from earth 
curiously enquiring about the things of heaven, and the souls 
which came from heaven of the things of earth. And they told 
one another of what had happened by the way, some weeping 
615 and sorrowing at the remembrance of the things which they had 
endured and seen in their journey beneath the earth (now the 
journey lasted a thousand years), while others were describing 
heavenly blessings and visions of inconceivable beauty. There 
is not time, Glaucon, to tell all ; but the sum was this: — He said 

458 

THE REPUBLIC. 

that for every wrong which they had done to any one they suffered 
tenfold ; the thousand years answering to the hundred years which 
are reckoned as the life of man. If, for example, there were any 
who had committed murders, or had betrayed or enslaved cities 
or armies, or been guilty of any other evil behaviour, for each and 
all of these they received punishment ten times over, and the 
rewards of beneficence and justice and holiness were in the same 
proportion. Not to repeat what he had to say concerning young 
children dying almost as soon as they were born; of piety and 
impiety to gods and parents, and of murderers, there were retri- 
butions yet greater which he narrated. He mentioned that he 
was present when one of the spirits asked another, £ Where is 
Ardiacus the Great?’ (Now this Ardiaeus was the tyrant of some 
city of Pamphylia, who had murdered his aged father and his elder 
brother, and had committed many other abominable crimes, and 
he lived a thousand years before the time of Er.) The answer 
was : c He comes not hither, and will never come.’ And, c indeed,’ 
he said, cthis was one of the terrible sights which was witnessed 
by us. For we were approaching the mouth of the cave, and, 
having seen all, were about to re-ascend, when of a sudden Ardiaeus 
appeared and several others, most of whom were tyrants ; and there 
were also besides the tyrants private individuals who had been 
great criminals ; they were just at the mouth, being, as they fancied, 
about to return into the upper world, but the opening, instead 
of receiving them, gave a roar, as was the case when any 
incurable or unpunished sinner tried to ascend ; and then wild 
men of fiery aspect, who knew the meaning of the sound, came 
up and seized and carried off several of them, and Ardiaeus and 616 
others they bound head and foot and hand, and threw them down 
and flayed them with scourges, and dragged them along the road at 
the side, carding them on thorns like wool, and declaring to the 
pilgrims as they passed what were their crimes, and that they were 
being taken away to be cast into hell3. And of all the terrors of 
the place there was no terror like this of hearing the voice; and 
when there was silence they ascended with joy.’ These were the 
penalties and retributions, and there were blessings as great. 

Now when the spirits that were in the meadow had tarried 
seven days, on the eighth they were obliged to proceed on their 

3 Reading «<n oji. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK X . 

459 

journey, and on the fourth day from that time they came to a place 
where they looked down from above upon a line of light, like a 
column extending right through the whole heaven and earth, in 
colour not unlike the rainbow, only brighter and purer ; another 
day’s journey brought them to the place, and there, in the midst of 
the light, they saw reaching from heaven the extremities of the 
chains of it : for this light is the belt of heaven, and holds 
together the circle of the universe, like the undergirders of a 
trireme. And from the extremities of the chains is extended the 
spindle of Necessity, on which all the revolutions turn. The shaft 
and hook of this spindle are made of steel, and the whorl is made 
partly of steel and also partly of other materials. Now the whorl 
is in form like the whorl used on earth ; and you are to suppose, 
as he described, that there is one large hollow whorl which is 
scooped out, and into this is fitted another lesser one, and another, 
and another, and four others, making eight in all, like boxes which 
fit into one another; their edges are turned upwards, and all together 
form one continuous whorl. This is pierced by the spindle, which 
is driven home through the centre of the eighth. The first and 
outermost whorl has the rim broadest, and the seven inner whorls 
narrow, in the following proportions — the sixth is next to the first 
in size, the fourth next to the sixth ; then comes the eighth ; the 
seventh is fifth, the fifth is sixth, the third is seventh, last and eighth 
comes the second. The largest [or fixed stars] is spangled, and 
the seventh [or sun] is brightest ; the eighth [or moon] coloured by 
7 the reflected light of the seventh; the second and fifth [Mercury 
and Saturn] are like one another, and of a yellower colour than the 
preceding ; the third [Venus] has the whitest light ; the fourth 
[Mars] is reddish ; the sixth [Jupiter] is in whiteness second. 
Now the whole spindle has the same motion ; but, as the whole 
revolves in one direction, the seven inner circles move slowly in 
the other, and of these the swiftest is the eighth; next in swift- 
ness are the seventh, sixth, and fifth, which move together; third 
in swiftness appeared to them to move in reversed orbit the 
fourth ; the third appeared fourth, and the second fifth. The 
spindle turns on the knees of Necessity ; and on the upper surface 
of each circle is a siren, who goes round with them, hymning a 
single sound and note. The eight together form one harmony ; and 
round about, at equal intervals, there is another band, three in 

460 

THE REPUBLIC . 

number, each sitting upon her throne : these are the Fates, 
daughters of Necessity, who are clothed in white raiment and have 
garlands upon their heads, Lachesis and Clotho and Atropos, who 
accompany with their voices the harmony of the sirens — Lachesis 
singing of the past, Clotho of the present, Atropos of the future ; 
Clotho now and then assisting with a touch of her right hand the 
motion of the outer circle or whorl of the spindle, and Atropos 
with her left hand touching and guiding the inner ones, and 
Lachesis laying hold of either in turn, first with one hand and then 
with the other. 

Now when the spirits arrived, their duty was to go to Lachesis ; 
but first a prophet came and arranged them in order; then he 
took from the knees of Lachesis lots and samples of lives, and 
going up to a high place, spoke as follows: cHear the word 
of Lachesis, the daughter of Necessity. Mortal souls, behold 
a new cycle of mortal life. Your genius will not choose you, but 
you will choose your genius; and let him who draws the first lot 
have the first choice of life, which shall be his destiny. Virtue is 
free, and as a man honours or dishonours her he will have more or 
less of her; the chooser is answerable — God is justified/ When 
the Interpreter had thus spoken he cast the lots among them, and 
each one took up the lot which fell near him, all but Er himself (he 6 
was not allowed), and each as he took his lot perceived the number 
which he had drawn. Then the Interpreter placed on the ground 
before them the samples of lives; and there were many more lives 
than the souls present, and there were all sorts of lives — of every 
animal and every condition of man. And there were tyrannies 
among them, some continuing while the tyrant lived, others which 
broke off in the middle and came to an end in poverty and exile 
and beggary ; and there were lives of famous men, some who were 
famous for their form and beauty as well as for their strength and 
success in games, or, again, for their birth and the qualities of 
their ancestors ; and some who were the reverse of famous for the 
opposite qualities. And of women likewise ; there was not, how- 
ever, any definite character among them, because the soul must of 
necessity choose another life, and become other. But there were 
many elements mingling with one another, and also with elements 
of wealth and poverty, and disease and health; and there were 
mean states also. And this, my dear Glaucon, is the great danger 

BOOK X. 

461 

of man ; and therefore the utmost care should be taken. Let each 
one of us leave every other kind of knowledge and seek and follow 
one thing only, if peradventure he may be able to learn and find 
who there is who can and will teach him to distinguish the life of 
good and evil, and to choose always and everywhere the better life 
as far as possible. He should consider the bearing of all these 
things which have been mentioned severally and collectively upon 
a virtuous life ; he should know what the effect of beauty is when 
compounded with poverty or wealth in a particular soul, and what 
are the good and evil consequences of noble and humble birth, of 
private and public station, of strength and weakness, of cleverness 
and dullness, and of all the natural and acquired gifts of the soul, 
and study the composition of them; then he will look at the 
nature of the soul, and from the consideration of all this he will 
determine which is the better and which is the worse life, and at 
last he will choose, giving the name of evil to the life which 
will make his soul more unjust, and good to the life which will 
make his soul more just ; all else he will disregard. For this, as 
we have seen, is the best choice both for this life and after death. 

6i9 Such an iron sense of truth and right must a man take with him 
into the world below, that there too he may be undazzled by the 
desire of wealth or the other allurements of evil, lest, coming upon 
tyrannies and similar villanies, he do irremediable wrongs to others 
and suffer yet worse himself; but let him know how to choose the 
mean and avoid the extremes on either side, as far as in him lies, 
not only in this life but in all that which is to come. For this is 
the way of happiness. 

And this was what the Interpreter said at the time, as the mes- 
senger from the other world reported him to have spoken: ‘Even 
for the last comer, if he chooses wisely and will live diligently, 
there is appointed a happy and not undesirable existence. Let 
not the first be careless in his choice, and let not the last de- 
spair/ As he spoke these words he who had the first choice 
drew near and at once chose the greatest tyranny ; his mind, 
having been darkened by folly and sensuality, he did not well 
consider, and therefore did not see at first that he was fated, among 
other evils, to devour his own children. But, when he came to 
himself and saw what was in the lot, he began to beat his breast 
and lament over his choice, forgetting the proclamation of the 

Digitized by Google 

462 

THE REPUBLIC . 

Interpreter; for, instead of blaming himself as the author of his 
calamity, he accused chance and the gods, and everything rather 
than himself. Now he was one of those who came from heaven, 
and in a former life had dwelt in a well-ordered State, but his 
virtue was a matter of habit only, and he had no philosophy. 
And this was more often the fortune of those who came from 
heaven, because they had no experience of life ; whereas, in general, 
the dwellers upon earth, who had seen and known trouble, were not 
in a hurry to choose. And owing to this inexperience of theirs, 
and also because the lot was a chance, many of the souls exchanged 
a good destiny for an evil or an evil for a good. For if a man had 
always from the first dedicated himself to sound philosophy, and 
had been moderately fortunate in the number of the lot, he 
might, as the messenger reported, be happy in this life, and also 
his passage to another life and return to this, instead of being 
rugged and underground, would be smooth and heavenly. Most 
curious, he said, was the spectacle of the election — sad and laugh- 
able and strange ; the souls generally choosing according to their 620 
condition in a previous life. There he saw the soul that was once 
Orpheus choosing the life of a swan out of enmity to the race of 
women, hating to be born of a woman because they had been his 
murderers ; he saw also the soul of Thamyris choosing the life of a 
nightingale; birds, on the other hand, like the swan and other 
musicians, choosing to be men. The soul which obtained the 
twentieth4 lot chose the life of a lion, and this was the soul 
of Ajax the son of Telamon, who would not be a man, remem- 
bering the injustice which was done him in the judgment of 
the arms. The next was Agamemnon, who took the life of 
an eagle, because, like Ajax, he hated human nature on account 
of his sufferings. About the middle was the lot of Atalanta ; she, 
seeing the great fame of an athlete, was unable to resist the 
temptation ; and after her there came the soul of Epeus the son 
of Panopeus passing into the nature of a woman cunning in the 
arts ; and far away among the last who chose, the soul of the jester 
Thersites was putting on the form of a monkey. There came also 
the soul of Odysseus having yet to make a choice, and his lot 
happened to be the last of them all. Now the recollection of 
former toils had disenchanted him of ambition, and he went about 

4 Reading fiKovr^v. 

Digitized by Google 

BOOK X. 

463 

for a considerable time in search of the life of a private man who 
had nothing to do; he had some difficulty in finding this, which 
was lying about and had been neglected by everybody else; and 
when he saw it, he said that he would have done the same had he 
been first instead of last, and that he was delighted at his choice. 
And not only did men pass into animals, but I must also mention 
that there were animals tame and wild who changed into one 
another and into corresponding human natures, the good into the 
gentle and the evil into the savage, in all sorts of combinations. 
All the souls had now chosen their lives, and they went in the order 
of their choice to Lachesis, who sent with them the genius whom 
they had severally chosen, to be the guardian of their lives and 
the fulfiller of the choice ; this genius led the soul first to Clotho, 
and drew them within the revolution of the spindle impelled by 
her hand, thus ratifying the destiny of each; and then, when they 
were fastened, carried them to Atropos, who spun the threads and 
made them irreversible ; whence without turning round they 
621 passed beneath the throne of Necessity; and when they had all 
passed, they marched on in a scorching heat to the plain of 
Forgetfulness, which was a barren waste destitute of trees and 
verdure; and then towards evening they encamped by the river 
of Negligence, the water of which no vessel can hold ; of this 
they were all obliged to drink a certain quantity, and those who 
were not saved by wisdom drank more than was necessary; and 
those who drank forgot all things. Now after they had gone to 
rest, about the middle of the night there was a thunderstorm and 
earthquake, and then in an instant they were driven all manner 
of ways like stars shooting to their birth. He himself was 
hindered from drinking the water. But in what manner or 
by what means he returned to the body he could not say ; only, 
in the morning awaking suddenly, he saw himself lying on the 
pyre. 

And thus, Glaucon, the tale has been saved and has not perished, 
and may be our salvation if we arc obedient to the word spoken ; 
and we shall pass safely over the river of Forgetfulness and our 
soul will not be defiled. Wherefore my counsel is, that we hold 
fast to the heavenly way and follow after justice and virtue always, 
considering that the soul is immortal and able to endure every 
sort of good and every sort of evil. Thus shall we live dear to 

Digitized by Google 

464 

THE REPUBLIC. 

one another and to the gods, both while remaining here and 
when, like conquerors in the games who go round to gather 
gifts, we receive our reward. And it shall be well with us 
both in this life and in the pilgrimage of a thousand years which 
we have been reciting. 

T I M A E U S. 

VOL. II. 

h h 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

Of all the writings of Plato the Timaeus is the most obscure and 
repulsive to the modern reader, and has nevertheless had the greatest 
influence over the ancient and mediaeval world. The obscurity arises 
in the infancy of physical science, out of the confusion of theological, 
mathematical, and physiological notions, out of the desire to conceive 
the whole of nature without any adequate knowledge of the parts, 
and from a greater perception of similarities which lie on the surface 
than of differences which are hidden from view. To bring sense under 
the control of reason ; to find some way through the labyrinth or chaos 
of appearances, either the highway of mathematics, or more devious 
paths suggested by the analogy of man with the world, and of the 
world with man; to see that all things have a cause and are tending 
towards an end — this is the spirit of the ancient physical philosopher. 
But we neither appreciate the conditions of knowledge to which he 
was subjected, nor have the ideas which fastened upon his imagination 
the same hold upon us. For he is hovering between matter and mind ; 
he is under the dominion of abstractions; his impressions are taken 
almost at random from the outside of nature; he sees the light, but 
not the objects which are revealed by the light; and he brings into 
juxtaposition things which to us appear wide as the poles asunder, be- 
cause he finds nothing between them. He passes abruptly from persons 
to ideas and numbers, and from ideas and numbers to persons; he 
confuses subject and object, first and final causes, and is dreaming of 
geometrical figures lost in a flux of sense. And an effort of mind 
is required on our parts in order to understand his double language; 
or appreciate the twilight character of this knowledge, and the genius 

H h 2 

468 

TIM A E US. 

of ancient philosophers, which under such conditions seems by a 
divine power in many instances to have anticipated the truth. 

The influence which the Timaeus has exercised upon posterity is 
partly due to a misunderstanding. In the supposed depths of this 
dialogue the Neo-Platonists found hidden meanings and connections 
with the Jewish and Christian Scriptures, and out of them they elicited 
doctrines quite at variance with the spirit of Plato. Believing that he 
was inspired by the Holy Ghost, or had received his wisdom from 
Moses, they seemed to find in his writings the Christian Trinity, the 
Word, the Church, the creation of the world in a Jewish sense, as 
they really found the personality of God or mind, and the immortality 
of the soul. All religions and philosophies met and mingled in the 
schools of Alexandria, and the Neo-Platonists had a method of 
interpretation which could elicit any meaning out of any words. 
They were really incapable of distinguishing between the opinions of 
one philosopher and another, or between the serious thoughts of Plato 
and his passing fancies. They were absorbed in his theology, and 
under the dominion of his name, while that which was truly great and 
truly characteristic of him, his effort to realize and connect abstractions, 
was not understood by them at all. And yet the genius of Plato and 
Greek philosophy reacted upon the East, and a Greek element of 
thought and language overlaid the deeper and more pervading spirit 
of Orientalism. 

There is no danger of the modern commentators on the Timaeus 
falling into the absurdities of the Neo-Platonists. In the present day 
we are well aware that an ancient philosopher is to be interpreted 
from himself, and by the contemporary history of thought. We know 
that mysticism is not criticism. The fancies of the Neo-Platonists 
are only interesting to us because they exhibit a phase of the human 
mind which prevailed widely in the first centuries of the Christian era, 
and is not wholly extinct in our own day. But they have nothing to 
do with the interpretation of Plato, and in spirit they are opposed to 
him. They are the feeble expression of an age which has lost the 
power not only of creating great works, but even of understanding 
them. They are the spurious birth of a marriage between philosophy 
and tradition, between Hellas and the East — tUo s ytwav v66a teal <£aGAa 
(Rep. VI. 496). Whereas the so-called mysticism of Plato is purely 
Greek, arising out of his imperfect knowledge and high aspirations, 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

469 

and is the growth of an age in which philosophy is not wholly 
separated from poetry and mythology. 

A greater danger with modem interpreters of Plato is the tendency 
to regard the Timaeus as the centre of his system. We do not know 
how Plato would have arranged his own dialogues, or whether the 
thought of arranging any of them, besides the two ‘Trilogies’ which 
he has expressly connected, was ever present to his mind. But, if he 
had arranged them, there are many indications that this is not the 
place which he would have assigned to the Timaeus. We observe, 
first of all, that the dialogue is put into the mouth of a Pythagorean 
philosopher, and not of Socrates. And this is required by dramatic 
propriety for the investigation of nature was expressly renounced by 
Socrates in the Phaedo. Nor does Plato himself attribute any import- 
ance to his guesses at science. He is not at all absorbed by them, 
as he is by the idea of good. He is modest and hesitating, and 
confesses that his words partake of the uncertainty of the subject. 
Again, the dialogue is primarily concerned with the animal creation, 
including under this term the heavenly bodies, and with man only 
as one among the animals. But we can hardly suppose that Plato 
would have preferred the study of nature to man, or that he would 
have deemed the formation of the world and the human frame to 
have the same interest which he ascribes to the mystery of being and 
not being, or to the great political problems which he discusses in 
the Republic and the Laws. There are no speculations on physics 
in the other dialogues of Plato, and he himself regards the consideration 
of them as a rational pastime only. He is beginning to feel the need 
of further divisions of knowledge ; and is becoming aware that besides 
dialectic, mathematics, and the arts, there is another field which has 
been hitherto unexplored by him. But he has not as yet defined this 
intermediate territory which lies somewhere between medicine and 
mathematics, and he would have felt that there was as great an impiety 
in ranking theories of physics first in the order of knowledge, as in 
placing the body before the soul. 

Thus we are led by Plato himself to regard the Timaeus, not as the 
centre or inmost shrine of the edifice, but as a detached building in a 
different style, framed, not after the Socratic, but after some Pythagorean 
model. As in the Cratylus and Parmenides, we are uncertain whether 
Plato is expressing his own opinions, or appropriating and perhaps 

47© 

TIMA E US . 

improving the philosophical speculations of others. In all three dialogues 
he is exerting his dramatic and imitative power; in the Cratylus 
mingling a satirical and humorous purpose with true principles of 
language; in the Parmenides overthrowing Megarianism by a sort of 
ultra-Megarianism, which discovers contradictions in the one as great 
as those which have been previously shown to exist in the ideas. There 
is a similar uncertainty about the Timaeus ; while in the first part of the 
dialogue Plato is filled with a Pythagorean contemplation of the heavens, 
in the latter part he treats in a bald and superficial manner of the 
functions and diseases of the human frame, which he vainly attempts to 
connect with his astronomical theories. 

If we allow for the difference of subject, and for some growth in 
Plato’s own mind, the discrepancy between this and the other dialogues 
will not appear to be great. The relation of the ideas* to God or of God 
to the world was differently conceived by him at different times of his 
life. In all his later dialogues we observe a tendency in him to personify 
mind or God, and he therefore naturally inclines to view creation as the 
work of design. The creator is like a human artist who frames in his 
mind a plan which he executes by the help of his servants. Thus the 
language of philosophy which speaks of first and second causes is 
crossed by another sort of phraseology : * God made the world because 
he was good, and the demons ministered to him.’ The Timaeus is cast 
in a more theological and less philosophical mould than the other 
dialogues, but the same general spirit is apparent; there is the same 
dualism or opposition between the ideal and actual — the soul is prior to 
the body, the intelligible and unseen to the visible and corporeal. There 
is the same distinction between knowledge and opinion which occurs in 
the Theaetetus and Republic, the same enmity to the poets, the same 
combination of music and gymnastics. The doctrine of transmigration 
is still held by him as in the Phaedrus; and the soul has a view of 
the heavens in a prior state of being. The ideas also remain, but they 
have become types in nature, forms of men, animals, birds, fishes. 
And the attribution of evil to physical causes accords with the doctrine 
which he maintains in the Laws respecting the involuntariness of vice. 

The style and plan of the Timaeus differ greatly from that of any 
other of the Platonic dialogues. The language is weighty, abrupt, and 
in some passages sublime. But Plato has not the same mastery over his 
instrument which he exhibits in the Phaedrus or Symposium. Nothing 

INTRODUCTION. 

47 1 

can exceed the beauty or art of the introduction, in which he is using 
words after his accustomed manner. But in the rest of the dialogue the 
power of language seems to fail him. He could write in one style, but 
not in another, and the Greek language had not as yet been fashioned 
by any poet or philosopher to describe physical phenomena. The early 
physiologists had generally written in verse ; Democritus and Anaxagoras 
never attained to a connected or periodic style. And hence we find the 
same sort of clumsiness in the Timaeus of Plato which characterizes the 
philosophical poem of Lucretius. There is a want of flow and often a 
defect of rhythm; the connection is frequently obscure, and there is a 
greater use of apposition and more of repetition than occurs elsewhere in 
Plato. His employment of the particles is sometimes unmeaning ; and he 
places sentences side by side, leaving the relation between them to be 
inferred. The narrative portion of the Timaeus retains several charac- 
teristics of the first Greek prose composition; for the great master of 
language was speaking on a theme with which he was imperfectly 
acquainted, and had no words to express his meaning. The rugged 
grandeur of the opening passage of the speech of Timaeus (Tim. 28-31) 
may be compared with the more harmonious beauty of a similar passage 
in the Phaedrus (p. 245). 

To the same cause we may attribute the want of plan. Plato had not 
that command of his materials which would have enabled him to produce 
a perfect work of art. And he warns his reader, that as is the nature of 
the subject so will the style be — as his knowledge is fragmentary and 
unconnected, his style partakes of the same character. His speculations 
about the Eternal, his theories of creation, his mathematical anticipations, 
are supplemented by desultory remarks on the one immortal and the two 
mortal souls of man, on the functions of the bodily organs in health and 
disease, on sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch. He soars into the 
heavens, and then, as if his wings were suddenly clipped, he walks 
ungracefully and with difficulty upon the earth. The greatest things in 
the world, and the least things in man, are brought within the compass 
of a short treatise. But the intermediate links are missing, and we 
cannot be surprised that there should be a want of unity in a work 
which embraces astronomy, theology, physiology, and natural philosophy 
in a few pages. 

It is not easy to determine how Plato’s cosmos may be presented to 
the reader in a clearer and shorter form; or how we may supply a 

47 2 

TIMAEUS. 

thread of connection to his ideas without giving greater consistency to 
them than they possessed in his mind, or adding on consequences to 
which he would have been a stranger. For he has glimpses of the truth, 
but no comprehensive or perfect vision. There are isolated expressions 
which have a wonderful depth and power ; but we are not justified in 
assuming that they are the keynotes of the whole, or had any greater 
significance to his mind than remarks which to us appear trivial; they 
were, perhaps, truer than he knew. With a view to the illustration of the 
Timaeus I propose to divide this Introduction into sections, of which 
the first will contain an outline of the dialogue : (2) I shall consider the 
aspects of nature which presented themselves to Plato and his age : 
(3) the theology and physics of the Timaeus, including the soul of the 
world, the conception of time and space, and the composition of the 
elements : (4) in the fourth section I shall consider the Platonic astronomy, 
and the position of the earth. There will remain, (5) the psychology, 
(6) the physiology of Plato, and (7) his analysis of the senses to be 
briefly commented upon; (8) lastly, we may examine in what points 
Plato approaches or anticipates the discoveries of modern science. 

§ 1. 

Socrates begins the Timaeus with a summary of the Republic. He 
touches on the composition of the State, and the double nature of the 
guardians, on the community of property and of w^omen and children. 
But he makes no mention of the second education, or of the government 
of philosophers. 

And now he desires that the ideal State should be realized in life 
and action; he would like to see how she behaved in some great 
struggle. But he is incapable of inventing such a narrative himself, 
and he is afraid that the poets are equally incapable ; for, although he 
has nothing to say against them, he remarks that they are a tribe of 
imitators, who can only describe w?hat they have seen. And he fears 
that the Sophists, who are plentifully supplied with graces of speech, 
in their erratic way of life having never had a city or house of their 
own, are as ignorant of statesmanship as they are of philosophy. 
And therefore to you I turn, Timaeus, citizen of Locris, who are at 
once a philosopher and a statesman, and to you, Critias, whom all 
Athenians know to be similarly accomplished, and to Hermocrates, who 

INTRODUCTION. 

473 

is also fitted by nature and education to share in our discourse. 
Her. ‘ We will do our best, and have been already preparing ; for on 
our way home, Critias asked my opinion about a certain ancient 
tradition, which he was thinking of reciting : — I wish, Critias, that you 
would repeat the tale to Socrates/ ‘I will, if Timaeus approves/ 

‘ I approve/ Listen then, Socrates, to a tale of Solon, which he 
narrated to Dropidas my great grandfather, who told me. In this tale 
are recorded ancient famous actions of the Athenian people, and one 
special one, which I will rehearse in honour of you and of the goddess. 
This ancient history was told me by an ancient man, for Critias was 
ninety years old at that time, I being not more than ten. The occasion 
was the festival of the Apaturia or registration of youth, at which our 
parents gave prizes for recitation. Some poems of Solon were recited 
by the boys. They had not at that time gone out of fashion, and the 
recital of them led some one to say, perhaps in compliment to Critias, 
that Solon was not only the wisest of men but also the best of poets. 
The old man brightened at hearing the praises of his friend, and 
said : Had Solon only had the leisure which was required to complete 
the great poem which he brought with him from Egypt he would 
have been as distinguished as Homer and Hesiod. * And what was 
the subject of the poem ? ' said the person who addressed him. The 
subject was a very noble one, descriptive of the most famous action 
in which the Athenian people were ever engaged. But the memory 
of their exploits has passed away owing to the lapse of time and the 
extinction of the actors. ‘ Tell us/ said the other, ‘ the whole story, 
and where Solon heard the story/ He replied — There is at the head 
of the Egyptian Delta, where the river Nile divides, a city and district 
called Sais; the city was the birthplace of King Amasis, and is under 
the protection of the goddess Neith or Athene. The citizens have 
a friendly feeling towards the Athenians, believing themselves to be 
related to them. Hither came Solon, and was received with honour; 
and here he first learnt, by conversing with the Egyptian priests, how 
ignorant he and his countrymen were of antiquity. Perceiving this, 
and with the view of eliciting their stores, he told them the tales of 
Phoroncus and Niobe, and also of Deucalion and Pyrrha, and he 
endeavoured to count the generations which had since passed. There- 
upon an aged priest said to him, O Solon, Solon, you Hellenes are 
ever young, and there is no old man who is an Hellene. ‘What do 

474 

7 IMA E US. 

you mean ? ’ said he. 4 In mind,’ replied the priest, ‘ I mean to say 
that you are children ; there is no opinion or tradition of knowledge 
among you which is white with age; and I will tell you the reason 
of this. Like the rest of mankind you have suffered from convulsions 
of nature, which are chiefly brought about by the two great agencies 
of fire and water. The latter is symbolized in the Hellenic tale of 
young Phaethon who drove his father's horses the wrong way, and 
having burnt up the earth was himself burnt up by a thunderbolt. 
For there occurs from time to time a derangement of the heavenly 
bodies, and then the earth is destroyed by fire. At such times, and 
when fire is the agent, those who dwell by rivers are safer than those 
who dwell upon high and dry places, who in their turn are safer when 
the danger is from water. Now the Nile is our saviour from fire, and 
rising only from below' never does any harm to us by water ; whereas 
the inhabitants of other cities and countries are swept by the rivers 
into the sea. The memorials which your own and other nations have 
once had of the famous actions of mankind perish in the waters at 
certain periods; and the rude survivors in the mountains begin again, 
knowing nothing of the w'orld before the flood. But in Egypt the 
traditions of our own and other lands are by us registered for ever in 
our temples. The genealogies which you have recited to us out of 
your own annals, Solon, are a mere children’s story. For in the first 
place, you remember one deluge only, and there were many of them, 
and you know nothing of that fairest and noblest race of which you 
are a seed or remnant. The memory of them was lost, because there 
was no written voice among you, for in the days before the flood 
Athens was the greatest and best of cities and did the noblest deeds 
and had the best constitution of any under the face of heaven.’ Solon 
marvelled, and desired to be informed of the particulars. 4 You are 
welcome to hear them,’ said the priest, 4 both for your own sake and 
for that of the city, and above all for the sake of the goddess who is 
the common foundress of both our cities. Nine thousand years have 
elapsed since she founded yours, and eight thousand since she founded 
ours, as our annals record. Many laws exist among us which are 
the counterpart of yours as they were in the olden time. I will briefly 
describe them to you, and you shall read the account of them at your 
leisure in the sacred registers. In the first place, there was a caste 
of priests among the ancient Athenians, and another of artisans; also 

INTRODUCTION. 

475 

castes of shepherds, hunters, and husbandmen, and lastly of warriors, 
who, like the warriors of Egypt, were separated from the rest, carrying 
shields and spears; a custom which the goddess first taught you, and 
then the Asiatics, and we among Asiatics first received from her. 
Observe again, what care the law took in the pursuit of wisdom, 
searching out the deep things of the world, and applying them to the 
use of man. The spot of earth which the goddess chose had the best 
of climates, and produced the wisest men ; in no other was she herself, 
the philosopher and warrior goddess, so likely to have votaries. And 
there you dwelt as became the children of the gods, excelling 
all men in virtue, and many famous actions are recorded of you. 
The most famous of them all was the overthrow of the island of 
Atlantis. This was a continent lying over against the Pillars of 
Heracles, in extent greater than Libya and Asia put together, and 
was the passage to other islands and to another continent of which 
the Mediterranean sea was only the harbour; and within the Pillars 
the empire of Atlantis reached to Egypt and Tyrrhenia. This mighty 
power was arrayed against Egypt and Hellas and all the countries 
bordering on the Mediterranean. Then did your city bravely, and 
won renown over the whole earth. For at the peril of her own 
existence, and when the other Hellenes had deserted her, she repelled 
the invader, and of her own accord gave liberty to all the nations within 
the Pillars. A little while afterwards there was a great earthquake and 
your warrior race all sank into the earth; and the great island of 
Atlantis also disappeared in the sea. This is the explanation of the 
shallows which are found in that part of the Atlantic ocean.’ 

Such was the tale, Socrates, which Critias heard from Solon; and 
I noticed when listening to you yesterday, how close the resemblance 
was between your city and citizens and the ancient Athenian State. 
But I would not speak at the time, because I wanted to refresh my 
memory. I had heard the old man when I was a child, and though 
I could not remember the whole of our yesterday's discourse, I was 
able to recall every word of this, which is branded into my mind ; and 
I am prepared, Socrates, to rehearse to you the entire narrative. The 
imaginary State which you were describing may be identified with 
the reality of Solon, and our antediluvian ancestors may be your 
citizens. * That is excellent, Critias, and very appropriate to a 
Panathenaic festival; the truth of the story is a great advantage.' 

4?6 

TIMAEUS . 

‘ Then now let me explain to you the order of our entertainment ; 
first, Timaeus, who is a natural philosopher, will speak of the origin 
of the world, going down to the creation of man, and then I shall 
receive the men whom he has created, and some of whom will have 
been educated by you, and introduce them to you as the lost Athenian 
citizens of whom the Egyptian record spoke. As the law of Solon 
prescribes, we will bring them into court and judge them ourselves.' 
I see, replied Socrates, that I shall be well entertained ; and do you, 
Timaeus, offer up a prayer and begin : 

Tim. All men who have any right feeling at the beginning of any 
enterprise call upon the gods; and he who is about to speak of the 
origin of the universe has a special need of their aid. May my words 
be acceptable to them, and may I speak in the manner which will 
be most intelligible to you and will best express my meaning. 

First, I must distinguish between endless being which has no be- 
coming and is apprehended by reason and reflection, and endless 
becoming which has no being, and is conceived by opinion with the 
help of sense. All that becomes and is created is the work of a 
cause, and that is fair which the artificer makes after an eternal pattern, 
but that which is fashioned after a created pattern is not fair. Is the 
world then created or uncreated? that is the first question. Created, 
I reply, being visible and tangible and having a body, and therefore 
sensible ; and if sensible, then created ; and if created, made by a cause, 
and the cause is the father of all, who had in view an eternal archetype. 
For to imagine that the archetype was created would be blasphemy, 
seeing that the world is the noblest of creations, and God is the best 
of causes. And the world being thus created according to the eternal 
pattern is the copy of something; and we may assume that words 
and ideas are akin to the matter of which they speak. The unchanging 
or intelligible has permanent forms of expression, the created image 
likely or probable ones; essence being to generation as truth is to 
belief. And in the variety of opinions which have arisen about God 
and the nature of the world we must be content to take probability 
for our guide, considering that I who am the speaker, and you who 
are the judges are only men, and to probability we may attain but no 
further. 

Soc. Excellent, Timaeus, I like your manner of approaching the 
subject — proceed. 

INTRODUCTION . 

477 

Tim. Why did the Creator make the world ? He was good, and desired 
that all things should be like himself. Wherefore he set in order the 
visible world, which he found in disorder. Now he who is the best 
could only create the fairest, and reflecting that of visible things the 
intelligent is superior to the unintelligent, he put intelligence in soul and 
soul in body, and framed the universe to be the best and fairest work in 
the order of nature, and the world became a living soul through the 
providence of God. 

In the likeness of what animal was the world made? That is the 
third question. The form of the animal was a whole, and contained 
all intelligible beings, and the visible animal, made after the pattern of 
this, included all visible creatures. 

Were there many heavens or one only? That is the fourth question. 
One only, having no other. For if there had been more than one they 
would have been the parts of a third which would have been the true 
pattern of the world, and therefore there is, and will ever be, one only 
begotten and created heaven. Now that which is created is of necessity 
corporeal and visible and tangible, and because visible lighted by fire, 
and because tangible therefore solid and made of earth. But two terms 
must be united by a third, which is a mean between them, and had the 
earth been a surface only, three would have sufficed, but four terms 
are required in the construction of a solid. And as the world was 
to be solid, between the elements of fire and earth God placed two 
other elements of air and water, and arranged them in a continuous 
proportion, 

fire : air : : water : earth, 

and so put together a visible heaven, which he made palpable to sight 
and touch, having harmony and friendship in the union of the four 
elements. Each of the elements was taken into the universe whole 
and entire ; for he considered that the animal should be perfect, and 
that he should be one, leaving no remnants out of which another animal 
could be created, and that he should be free from age and disease, 
which might be produced by external violence. And as he was to 
contain all, he was himself made in the all-containing form of a sphere, 
round as from a lathe and every way equidistant from the centre, as was 
natural and suitable to him. He was finished and smooth, having 
neither eyes, ears, nor hands ; for there was nothing without him which 
he could see or hear, and he had no need to carry food to his mouth, 

4/8 

TIMA EUS. 

or breathe the outer air, and he did not require hands, for there was 
nothing without him of which he could take hold. All that he did 
was within him ; and he moved in a circle, which was the most 
intellectual of motions, but the other six motions were wanting to him ; 
wherefore the universe had no feet or legs. 

And so the thought of God made a God in the image of a perfect 
body, having intercourse with himself and needing no other, but in 
every part harmonious and self-contained and truly blessed. The soul 
was first made by him — the elder to rule the younger ; not in the order 
in which our wayward fancy has led us to describe them, but the soul 
first and afterwards the body. God took of the unchangeable and 
indivisible essence and also of the divisible and corporeal, and out of 
the two he made a third nature, which was in a mean between them 
and partook of the same and the other, the intractable nature of the 
other being compressed into the same. He then began to divide 
into portions the mass which he had compounded, in the ratios of 

1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 8, 27, and proceeded to fill up the double and triple 
intervals 

[ 2> §> 3> 4> V> 6> 8 ] 

[ *> "> 3> a> 9> V > 18> 2 7 ] 

in which double series of numbers are two kinds of means; the one 
exceeds and is exceeded by equal parts of the extremes, e. g. 3,4,6; 
the other kind of mean is one which is equidistant from the extremes — 

2, 4, 6. In the former intervals he introduced ratios of thirds, 3:2; 
of fourths, 4:3; of ninths, 9:8; and the interval of a fourth he filled 
up with a ninth, leaving a remnant which is in the ratio of 256 : 243. 
The entire compound was divided by him lengthways into two parts, 
which he joined together at the centre like the figure X, and bent them 
into an inner and outer circle, cutting one another at a point over 
against the point of contact. The outer circle was named by him the 
sphere of the same— the inner the sphere of the other or diverse, and the 
one revolved horizontally to the right, the other obliquely to the left. 
To the sphere of the same which was undivided he gave dominion, 
but the sphere of the other or manifold was distributed into seven orbits, 
having intervals in ratios of twros and threes, three of either sort, and 
he bade them move in opposite directions to one another — three of 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

479 

them, the Sun, Mercury, Venus, with equal swiftness, and the remaining 
four — the Moon, Saturn, Mars, Jupiter, with unequal swiftness to 
the three and to one another, but all in due course. 

When the Creator had made the body in the interior of the soul 
he united them, and the soul interfused everywhere from the centre to 
the circumference of heaven began a divine life of everlasting motion. 
The body of heaven is visible, but the soul is invisible, and partakes 
of reason and harmony, and is the best of creations, being made by the 
best And being composed of the same, the other, and the essence, 
these three, and also, divided and bound in harmonical proportion, and 
moving in the circle of herself — the soul when touching anything which 
has essence, whether divided or undivided, is stirred to utter the same- 
ness or diversity of things, and to tell how and when and where 
individuals are affected or related, whether in the world of change or 
of essence. When reason is in the neighbourhood of sense, and the 
circle of the other or manifold is also moving truly, then arise true 
opinions and beliefs; when reason is in the sphere of thought, and 
the circle of the same runs smoothly, then intelligence is perfected. 

When the Father who begat the world saw the image which he had 
made of the Eternal Gods moving and living, he rejoiced ; and he resolved, 
as the archetype was eternal, to make the creature eternal as far as this 
was possible. Wherefore he made an image of eternity which is time, 
having an uniform motion according to number, parted into months 
and days and years, and also having greater divisions of past, present, 
and future. These apply only to generation in time, and have no 
meaning in relation to the eternal nature, which ever is and never will 
be, for the unchangeable is never older or younger, and when we say 
the past is past, the future is future, we are speaking of generation, and 
not of true being. These are the forms of time which imitate eternity 
and move in a circle measured by number. 

Thus was time made in the image of the eternal nature and together 
with the heavens, in order that if they were dissolved time might perish 
with them. And God made the sun and moon and five other wan- 
derers, as they are called, seven in all, and to each of them he gave a 
body moving in an orbit, being one of the seven into which the circle 
of the other was divided. The moon moved in the orbit which was 
nearest to the earth, the sun in that next, the morning star and 
Mercury in the course opposite to the sun, but with equal swiftness, 

Digitized by Google 

480 

TIMA E US. 

which is the reason why they overtake and are overtaken by one 
another. All these bodies became living creatures, and learnt their 
appointed tasks, and began to move, the nearer more swiftly, the 
remoter more slowly, according to the oblique movement of the other, 
which was controlled by the movement of the same. And as the move- 
ment of the other was in an opposite direction, that appeared fastest 
which was slowest, and that which overtook others appeared to be 
overtaken by them. And God lighted a fire in the second orbit which 
is called the sun, to give light over the whole heaven, and to teach 
intelligent beings that knowledge of number which is derived from 
the revolution of the same. Thus arose day and night, which are the 
periods of the most intelligent nature ; a month was created by the 
revolution of the moon, a year by that of the sun. Other periods of 
wonderful length and complexity are not observed by men in general, 
although there is a cycle or perfect year at the completion of which 
they all meet and coincide. For the stars in their revolutions imitate 
the eternal nature. 

Thus far the universal animal was made in the divine image, but 
the other animals were not as yet included in him. And God created 
them according to the patterns or species of them which existed in 
the divine image. There are four of them, one of gods, another of 
birds, a third of fishes, and a fourth of animals. The gods were made 
in the form of a circle, which is the most perfect figure, and the figure 
of the universe. They were created chiefly of fire, that they might 
be bright, and were made to know and follow the best, and to be 
the glory of the heavens. Two kinds of motion were assigned to 
them — first, the revolution on the same and around the same, in peaceful 
unchanging thought of the same ; and to this was added a forward 
motion which was under the control of the same. And for this reason 
the fixed stars were created, being divine and eternal animals, revolving 
on the same spot, and the wandering stars, which also revolve, were 
created after their likeness. The earth, which is our nurse, compacted 
(or circling) round the pole which passes through the universe, he made 
to be the guardian and artificer of night and day, first and eldest of 
gods that are in the interior heaven. Vain would be the labour of 
telling about all the figures of them, moving as in dance, and their 
conjunctions and oppositions, and when and where and behind what 
other stars they appear or disappear and give signs of the future 

INTRODUCTION. 

481 

terrible to man — to tell of all this without looking up at the heavens 
would be labour in vain. 

The knowledge of the other gods is beyond us, and we can only 
accept the traditions of the ancients, who were the children of the gods, 
as they said, and they must surely have known their own ancestors. 
Although they give no proof they seem to be speaking of matters 
familiar to them, and we must believe them as the law requires. They 
tell us that Oceanus and Tethys were the children of earth and heaven ; 
Phorcys, Cronos, and Rhea are in the next generation, and are followed 
by Zeus and Herb, whose brothers and children are known to every- 
body. 

When all of them, both those who show themselves in the sky, 
and those who retire from view, had come into being, the Creator 
addressed them thus — ‘Gods, and sons of gods, my works, if I will, 
are indissoluble. That which is bound may be loosed, but only an 
evil being would loose that which is harmonious and happy. And 
although you are not immortal you shall not die, for I will hold you 
together. Hear me, then : — Three tribes have still to be created, and 
if created by me they might become like gods. Do ye therefore make 
them, as I have made you ; I will implant in them the seed of immor- 
tality, and you shall weave together the mortal and immortal, and 
provide food for them, and receive them again in death.’ Thus he 
spake, and poured the remains of the elements which he had been 
mingling into the cup in which he had made the soul of the universe. 
They were no longer pure as before, but diluted; and when he had 
completed the mixture he distributed souls equal in number to the 
stars; but, first, placing them as in a chariot, he showed them the 
nature of the universe, and told them of their future birth and equal 
human lot. They were to be sown in the vessels of their appointed 
times, that hereafter they might bring forth man the most religious 
of the animals, having two forms, a superior and inferior. The souls 
were implanted in bodies, and when objects approached or receded 
from them, there would arise in them, he said, sensation of some kind ; 
secondly, love, which is a mixture of pleasure and pain; thirdly, fear 
and anger, and the opposite affections: and if they conquered these 
they would live righteously, but if they were conquered by them, un- 
righteously. He who lived well would return to the habitation of his 
star, and would there have a blessed existence; but, if he lived ill, he 

VOL. 11. 1 i 

482 

TIMA E US. 

would pass into the nature of a woman, and if he did not then alter 
his ways, into the likeness of some animal, until he returned to the 
courses of the like and the same, and the reason which was in him 
reasserted her sway over the elements of fire, air, earth, water, which 
had engrossed her, and he regained his first and better nature. Having 
given this law to his creatures that he might be guiltless of their future 
evil, he sowed them, some in the earth, some in the moon, and some 
in the other vessels of time; and he ordered the younger gods to 
frame human bodies for them and to make the necessary additions to 
them, and to avert from them all but self-inflicted evil. 

Meanwhile he remained in his own nature, and his children ful- 
filled his commands. Receiving from him the immortal principle, they 
borrowed portions of earth, air, fire, water, hereafter to be returned, 
which they fastened together, not with the adamantine bonds which 
bound themselves, but by little invisible pegs, making the body one, 
subject to influx and efflux, and containing the courses of the soul. 
These swelling and surging as in a river moved irregularly in all the 
six possible ways, forwards, backwards, right, left, up and down. But 
violent as were the internal and alimentary fluids, the tide became still 
more violent when the body came into contact with the flaming fire, 
or the solid earth, or the gliding waters; the motions produced by 
these impulses pass through the body to the soul and are called 
sensations. They accompany the ever-flowing current, and shake the 
courses of the soul, binding fast the principle of the same and con- 
founding and entangling the harmonical intervals and the mean terms 
which connect them — these are greatly affected by them; though they 
cannot be wholly dissolved except by the creator. You may imagine a 
motion of the body in which the head is knocking against the ground, 
and the legs striking out in the air, and the top is bottom and the left 
right. This is what happens when the motions of the soul come into 
contact with any external thing; they say the same or the other in a 
manner which is the very opposite of the truth, and they become false 
and foolish, and have no guiding principle in them. And when external 
impressions enter into them, though they are really conquered, they 
seem to conquer. 

By reason of these affections the soul is at first without sense, but 
as time goes on the stream of nutriment abates, and the courses of 
the soul have a regular motion which apprehends the same and the 

INTRODUCTION. 

483 

other and gives the use of reason. The soul of him who has education 
is whole and perfect and escapes the worst disease, but, if education 
be neglected, he walks lamely through life and returns good for nothing 
to the world below. This, however, is an after-stage — at present, we 
are only concerned with the creation of the body and soul. 

The two divine courses were encased by the gods in a sphere which 
is called the head, and is the god and lord of us. And to this they 
gave the body to be a vehicle, and the members to be instruments, 
having the power of flexion and extension. This was the origin of legs 
and arms. In the next place, the gods gave a forward motion to the 
human body, because the front part of man was the more honourable 
and had authority. In this front part they inserted organs to minister 
in all things to the providence of the soul. They first contrived the 
eyes, into which they conveyed the gentle light of everyday life, making 
the fire which is within us to flow pure through the pupil of the eye 
and meet the light of day. When the light of the eye is surrounded 
by the light of day then like falls upon like, and there is a union of 
them formed in any direction in which the visual ray strikes upon the 
light coming from an object. And as like is affected by like, whatever 
touches or is touched by this stream of vision is diffused over the 
whole body and finds a way into the soul. But when the visual ray 
goes forth into the darkness, then like falls upon unlike — the eye no 
longer sees, and we go to sleep. The fire, or light which is kept in, 
equalizes the inward motions, and there is rest accompanied by few 
dreams; only when the greater motions remain they engender in us 
corresponding visions of the night. And now we shall be able to 
understand the nature of reflections in mirrors. The fires from within 
and from without meet about the smooth and bright surface of the 
mirror ; and when they meet in a manner contrary to the usual mode 
of meeting, the objects seen in them are inverted in various ways, ac- 
cording to the form and position of the mirrors. 

These are the second causes which God used as his ministers in 
fashioning the world. They are thought by many to be the prime 
causes, but this is not true ; for they are destitute of mind and reason, 
and the lover of mind will not allow that there are any prime causes 
other than the rational and invisible ones — these he investigates first, 
and afterwards those which are visible and are moved by others, and 
work by chance and without order. Of the second or concurrent 

1 i a 

4 84 

TIMA E US. 

causes of sight I have already spoken, and I will now speak of the 
higher purpose of God in giving us eyes. Sight is the source of the 
greatest benefits to us; for if our eyes had never seen the sun, stars, 
and heavens, the very words which we are using would not have been 
uttered. The sight of them and their revolutions has given us the 
knowledge of number and time, and the power of enquiry, and we 
have derived philosophy from them, which is the great blessing of 
human life; not to speak of the lesser benefits which even the vulgar 
can appreciate. God gave us the faculty of sight that we might behold 
the order of the heavens and create a corresponding order in our own 
erring minds. To the like end the gifts of speech and hearing were 
bestowed upon us ; not for the sake of irrational pleasure, but in order 
that we might harmonize the courses of the soul by sympathy with the 
harmony of sound, and reconcile man to himself, and cure him of his 
irregular and graceless ways. 

Thus far we have spoken of the works of mind; and there are 
other works done from necessity, which we must now place beside 
them ; for the creation is made up of both, mind persuading necessity 
as far as possible to work out good. Before the heavens there existed 
the elements of fire, air, water, earth, which we may suppose men to 
know, though no one has explained their nature, and we erroneously 
maintain them to be the letters of the whole, although they cannot 
reasonably be compared to the syllables or first compounds. I am 
not now speaking of the first principles of things, because I cannot 
discover them by our present mode of enquiry. And I will begin anew, 
seeking by the grace of God to attain probability, above all at the 
beginning of my discourse. 

In our former discussion I made two kinds of matter — the un- 
changing or invisible, and the visible or changing. These were suf- 
ficient for my purpose at the time; but now a third kind of being is 
required, which I shall call the receptacle or nurse of generation. There 
is a difficulty in arriving at an exact notion of this third kind, because 
the four elements themselves are of inexact natures and easily pass 
into one another, and are too transient to be detained by any one 
name ; wherefore we are compelled to speak, not of water or fire, but 
of natures such as water or fire. They may be compared to golden 
images which are always changing their forms. Somebody asks what 
they are? — the safest answer is that they are gold. In like manner 

INTRODUCTION. 

4^5 

there is a universal nature from which all things are made, and which 
is like none of them; but they enter into and pass out of her, and 
are made after patterns of the true in a wonderful and inexplicable 
manner. The containing principle may be likened to a mother, the 
source or spring to a father, the intermediate nature to a child; and 
we may also remark that the matter which receives every variety of 
form must originally be formless, like the inodorous liquids which are 
prepared to receive scents, or the smooth and soft materials on which 
figures are impressed. In the same way the original or material sub- 
stance is neither earth nor fire nor air nor water, but is an invisible and 
formless being which receives all things, and in an incomprehensible 
manner attains to a portion of the intelligible. But we may say, 
speaking generally, that fire is the element which bums, water that 
which is moist, and the like. 

Let me ask a question in which a great principle is involved: Is 
there an essence of fire and the other elements, or are there only fires 
visible to sense, and is the rest a mere name? I answer in a word: 
If mind is one thing and true opinion another, then there are self- 
existent essences ; but if mind is the same as opinion, then the visible 
and corporeal is the reality. But they are not the same, and they have a 
different origin and nature. The one comes to us by instruction, the 
other by persuasion ; the one is rational, the other is irrational ; the one 
is moveable by persuasion, the other immoveable ; the one is possessed 
by every man, the other by the gods and by very few men. And we 
must acknowledge that as there are two kinds of knowledge, so there are 
two kinds of being corresponding to them; the one invisible and un- 
created, which is seen by intelligence only ; the other created, which is 
apprehended by opinion and sense, and is always becoming in place and 
vanishing out of place. There is also a third nature — that of space, 
which is indestructible, and is perceived by a kind of spurious reason 
without the help of sense. This is presented to us in a dreamy manner, 
and yet has a kind of necessity, for we say that all things must be in 
some place. But these, although they are the waking realities of nature, 
are seen by us in a dream only, and therefore we are unable to describe 
them. For they are the images of other things and exist only in others, 
and true reason assures us that while two things are different they cannot 
inhere in one another, so as to be one and two at the same time. 

To sum up, being and generation and space, these three, existed 

48 6 

TIMAEUS. 

before the heavens, and the nurse or vessel of generation, moistened 
by water and inflamed by fire, took the forms of air and earth, and 
all the various shapes which are taken by them. When the vessel was 
shaken, the elements were divided, like grain which is winnowed by fans, 
the close and heavy particles settling in one place, the light and airy 
ones in another. At first all things were without reason or measure, but 
when the world began to get into order, the four elements, which in their 
original state had only certain faint traces of themselves, came together 
and were fashioned by form and number. In this, as in every other 
part of creation, I suppose God to have made things, as far as was 
possible, fair and good, out of other things which were not fair and 
good. 

And now I will explain to you the generation of the world by a 
method with which your education will have made you familiar. Fire, air, 
earth, and water are bodies and therefore solids, and solids are made up 
of planes, and the plane rectilinear figure is made up of rectangular 
triangles. They are originally of two kinds, one kind having the oppo- 
site sides equal, the other unequal. These we may fairly assume to be 
the original elements of fire and the other bodies; what principles are 
prior to these God only knows, and he of men whom God loves. Next, 
we must determine what are the four most beautiful figures which are 
unlike one another and capable of resolution into one another. Of 
the two kinds of triangles the equal-sided has one form only, the 
unequat-sided has an infinite variety of forms; and there is none more 
beautiful than that which forms the half of an equilateral triangle. Let 
us then choose two triangles; one, the triangle which has equal sides, 
the other having a longer side of which the square is three times as 
great as the square of the lesser side ; and affirm that, out of these, fire 
and the other elements have been constructed. 

I was wrong in imagining that all the four elements were generated 
from one another. For they are really generated, three of them from 
the triangle which has the sides unequal, the fourth from the triangle 
which has equal sides ; and the three can be resolved into one another, 
but not the fourth. So much for their passage into one another: I 
must now speak of their combinations. Beginning with the triangle 
of which the hypothenuse is twice the lesser side, out of this the three 
first regular solids are formed — first, the equilateral pyramid or tetra- 
hedron ; secondly, the octahedron ; thirdly, the icosahedron ; and from 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION. 

487 

the isosceles triangle is formed the cube; and there is a fifth figure 
which is made out of twelve pentagons, the dodecahedron — this God 
also employed in the construction of the universe. 

Let us now assign the geometrical forms to their respective elements. 
The cube is the most stable of them because resting on a quadrangular 
plane surface, and the equal-sided triangle is more stable than the 
unequal. To the earth then, which is the most stable of bodies and 
the most easily modelled of them, may be assigned the form of a cube ; 
to fire the form of a pyramid, and the remaining forms to the other 
elements ; to air the octahedron, and to water the icosahedron, according 
to their degrees of lightness or heaviness or power or want of power 
of penetration. The single particles of any of the elements are not 
seen by reason of their smallness; they only become visible when col- 
lected. The ratios of their motions, numbers, and other properties, 
are ordered by the gods, who harmonized them as far as necessity 
allowed them. 

The probable result of all this is as follows : — Earth, when dissolved 
by the more penetrating element of fire, whether acting immediately 
or through the medium of air and water, is dispersed but not changed. 
Water, when divided by fire or air, becomes one part fire, and two parts 
air. The volume of air divided becomes a double volume of fire. On 
the other hand, when condensed, two volumes of fire make a volume of 
air; and two and a half parts of air make water. Any element which 
is fastened upon by fire is cut by the sharpness of the triangles, and at 
length, coalescing with the fire, is at rest ; for similars are not affected 
by similars, but inferiors are conquered by their superiors, and only 
cease from their tendency to extinction when they combine with them. 
When two kinds of bodies quarrel with one another, then the tendency to 
decomposition continues until the smaller either escape to their kindred 
element or become one with their conquerors. And this tendency in 
bodies to condense or escape is the source of motion. For where 
there is motion there must be a mover, and where there is a mover 
there must be something to move. These cannot be in equipoise, and 
therefore motion is the want of equipoise. But then why, when things 
are divided after their kinds, do they not cease from motion? The 
answer is, that the circular motion of all things compresses them, and 
as * nature abhors a vacuum,’ the finer and more subtle elements of fire 
and air are thrust into the larger interstices of the heavier, and all the 

488 

TIM A E US. 

elements are on their way up and down everywhere into their own 
places. Hence there is a principle of inequality, and therefore of 
motion, pervading all nature. 

In the next place, we may observe that there are different kinds of 
fire — (i) flame, (2) light that burns not, (3) the red heat of the embers 
of fire. And there are varieties of air, as for example, the pure aether, 
the opaque mist, and other nameless forms which are caused by the 
inequalities of the triangles. Water, again, is of two kinds, liquid and 
fusile. The liquid is composed of small and unequal particles, the 
fusile is composed of larger and more equal particles and is more solid, 
but nevertheless melts at the approach of fire, and then is poured upon 
the earth. When the substance cools, the fire passes into the air, which 
is displaced, and forces together the liquid mass into the place quitted 
by the fire. This process is called cooling and congealment. Of the 
fusile kinds the fairest and heaviest is gold ; this is hardened by filtration 
through rock, and is of a bright yellow colour. The hard and black 
matrix of gold is called adamant. There is another kind called 
brass (P), which is harder and yet lighter because the interstices are 
larger than gold. This is mingled with a fine and small portion 
of earth which comes out in the form of rust. These are a few 
of the conjectures which philosophy forms, when, leaving the eternal 
nature, she turns for innocent recreation to consider the truths of 
generation only. 

To proceed: the water which is mingled with fire is called liquid 
because it rolls upon the earth, and soft, because its bases give way. 
This becomes more equable when separated from fire and air, and is 
compressed into hail or ice, or the looser forms of hoar frost or snow. 
There are other waters which are called juices and are distilled through 
plants, first, wine, which warms the soul as well as the body ; secondly, 
the oily nature which glistens ; thirdly, honey, which diffuses sweetness 
and spreads to the passages of the mouth ; fourthly, there is opium (?), 
which is frothy and has a burning quality and dissolves flesh. Of the 
kinds of earth, that which is filtered through water passes into stone; 
the water which is expelled rises into the air — this in turn presses upon 
the mass of earth, and the earth, compressed into an indissoluble union 
with the remaining water, becomes rock. The rock which is made up 
of equal particles is fair and transparent, but the reverse when of un- 
equal. Earth is converted into pottery when the moisture is suddenly 

INTRODUCTION. 

489 

drawn away; or if the moisture remains, the earth which has been 
fused by fire, when cooled, turns into a stone of a black colour. When 
the earth is finer and of a briny nature then a half-solid body is formed, 
soluble in water, — either nitre or salt. The strong compounds of earth 
and water are not soluble by water, but only by fire ; the weaker either by 
fire or air. Earth, when not thus consolidated, is dissolved by water; 
when consolidated, by fire only. The cohesion of water, when strong, 
is dissolved by fire only; when weak, either by air or fire, the former 
entering the interstices, the latter penetrating even to the triangles. Air 
when strongly condensed is indissoluble by any power which does not 
penetrate to the triangles, and even when not strongly condensed is only 
resolved by fire. Dense substances which are compounded of earth and 
water are unaffected by water while the water occupies the interstices, but 
begin to liquefy when fire enters into the interstices of the water. They 
are of two kinds ; some of them having less water, and some less earth. 

I have now to consider the origin of flesh and of the mortal soul; 
and this is connected with the perceptions of sense. In order that 
I may proceed regularly I will begin by speaking of the affections 
which equally concern body and soul. 

What makes fire burn ? The fineness of the sides, the sharpness of 
the angles, the smallness of the particles, the quickness of the motion. 
Moreover, the pyramid is the original figure of fire, and is more cutting 
than any other figure. The feeling of cold is produced by the larger 
particles in the body trying to eject the smaller ones which they only 
compress, and therefore equalize and coagulate. Shivering is caused 
by the conflict of things naturally at war which are brought together. 
That is hard to which the flesh yields, and soft which yields to the 
flesh. The yielding matter is that which has the slenderest base, 
whereas that which has a rectangular base is the most compact and 
repellent. Light and heavy are wrongly explained with reference to 
a lower and higher in place. For in the universe, which is a sphere, 
there is no opposition of above or below, and that which is to us above 
would be below to a man standing at the antipodes. The effort to 
detach any element from its like is the real cause of heaviness or of 
lightness. If you draw the earth into the dissimilar air, the particles 
of earth cling to their native element, and you more easily detach a 
small portion than a large. There would be the same difficulty in 
drawing down any of the upper elements to the lower. The smooth 

49° 

TIMA E US. 

and the rough are severally explained by the union of evenness with 
compactness, and of hardness with inequality. 

The cause of pleasure and pain is the most important enquiry which 
remains. According to our general doctrine of sensation the body 
which is easily moved and communicates motion, at last reaches the 
mind, but a body which is not easily moved and does not diffuse 
motion has no effect upon the patient. The ordinary affection is not 
accompanied by pleasure or pain, but a violent impression, if contrary 
to nature, causes pain, or if congenial to nature, pleasure. The im- 
pressions of sight are an example of the ordinary affections which are 
unattended either with pleasure or pain, because they are not violent 
or sudden. The replenishments of the body, on the other hand, cause 
pleasure, and cuttings and burnings have the opposite effect. 

These are the general affections of the body: I will now proceed 
to the particular ones. The affections of the tongue appear to be caused, 
like most others, by composition and division, but they have more of 
roughness or smoothness than is found in others. Earthy particles, 
entering into the small veins about the tongue, when rough are 
astringent, or if not so rough, like potash and soda, they are only 
harsh and abstergent, and are termed bitter. Purgatives of a weaker 
sort are called salt and are rather agreeable. Light and inflammatory 
bodies, which are soluble in the mouth and get up into the head, are 
termed pungent. But when these are refined by putrefaction and enter 
the narrow veins, and meet the earthy or airy elements, two kinds 
of globules are formed — one of earthy and impure liquid, which boils 
and ferments, the other of pure and transparent water, which are called 
bubbles; of all these affections the cause is termed acid. When, on 
the other hand, the composition of the deliquescent particles is congenial 
to the tongue, and disposes the parts according to their nature, this 
remedial power in them is called sweet. 

Smells are not divided into kinds; all of them are transitional, and 
arise out of the decomposition of one element into another, for the 
simple air or water is without smell. They are mists or smoke, thinner 
than water and thicker than air : and hence in drawing in the breath, 
when there is an obstruction, the air passes, but there is no smell. 
They have no names, but are distinguished as pleasant and unpleasant, 
and their influence extends over the whole region from the head to 
the navel. 

INTRODUCTION. 

49 1 

Hearing is the effect of a stroke which is transmitted through the 
ears by means of the air, brains, and blood to the soul, beginning at 
the head and extending to the liver. The sound which moves swiftly 
is acute ; that which moves slowly is grave ; that which is uniform is 
smooth, and the opposite is harsh. Loudness depends on the quantity 
of the sound. Of the harmony of sounds I will hereafter speak. 

Colours are a flame which emanates from all bodies, having particles 
corresponding to the sense of sight. Some of the particles are less 
and some greater, and some are equal to the parts of the sight. The 
equal particles are transparent, the larger contract, and the lesser dilate 
the sight ; white is produced by the dilatation, black by the contraction, 
of the particles of sight. There is also a swifter motion of another 
sort of fire which forces a way into the passages of the eyes, and elicits 
from them a union of fire and water which we call tears. The fires 
from without and within meet and are extinguished in the tear-drop, 
and all sorts of colours are generated in the mixture. This affection is 
termed by us dazzling, and is produced by a flash. There is yet another 
sort of fire which mingles with the moisture of the eye without flashing, 
and produces a colour like blood — to this we give the name of red. 
Again, the bright element mingling with the red and white produces 
a colour which we call auburn. The law of proportion, however, in 
which the several colours are formed, cannot be determined scientifically 
or even probably. Red, when mingled with black and white, gives a 
purple hue, which becomes umber when the colours are burnt and 
a greater portion of black is added. Flame-colour is a mixture of 
auburn and dun ; dun of white and black ; pale yellow of white and 
auburn. White and light meeting, and falling upon a full black, become 
dark blue ; dark blue mingling with white becomes a light blue ; the 
union of flame-colour and black makes leek-green. There is no diffi- 
culty in seeing how other colours are probably composed. But he 
who should attempt to test the truth of this in fact, would forget the 
difference of the human and divine nature. God only is able to 
compound and resolve substances; such experiments are impossible 
to man. 

These are the elements of necessity which the Creator received in 
the world of generation when he made the all-sufficient and perfect 
creature, using the secondary causes as his ministers, but himself 
fashioning the good in all things. For there are two sorts of causes, 

492 

T1MAEUS. 

the one divine, the other necessary; and we should seek to discover 
the divine first, and afterwards the necessary, because without them 
the higher cannot be attained by us. 

Having now before us the causes out of which the rest of our dis- 
course is to be framed, let us go back to the point at which we began, 
and add a fair ending to our tale. As I said at first, all things were 
originally a chaos in which there was no order, and nothing had any 
kind or name. The elements of this chaos were arranged by the 
Creator, and out of them he made the world. Of the divine he him- 
self was the author, but committed to his offspring the creation of 
the mortal. They in imitation of him received from him the immortal 
soul, and made the body to be a vehicle of the soul, and constructed 
within another soul which was mortal, and subject to terrible affections — 
pleasure, the inciter of evil ; pain, which deters from good ; rashness 
and fear, foolish counsellors ; anger implacable ; hope deceived by 
sense, and by all-daring love. These they mingled according to 
necessary laws and framed man. But, fearing to pollute the divine 
element, they gave the mortal soul a separate habitation in the breast, 
parted off from the head by a narrow isthmus. And as in a house 
the women are divided from the men, the cavity of the thorax or 
breast-plate was further divided into two parts, a higher and a lower. 
The higher of the two, which is the seat of courage and anger, is in 
the neighbourhood of the head and assists the reason in restraining 
the desires. For the heart is the house of guard in which all the veins 
meet, and through them reason sends her commands to the extremity 
of her kingdom. When the passions are in revolt, or danger approaches 
from without, then the heart beats and swells; and the creating powers, 
knowing this, implanted in the body the soft and bloodless substance 
of the lung, having a porous and springy nature like a sponge, and 
receiving and cooling the heated streams, and they cut the passages of 
the trachea which lead to the lung. 

The desire of the soul for meat and drink was placed by them 
between the midriff and the navel — there to dwell imprisoned like a 
wild beast, out of the way of the council chamber, and not allowed 
to interfere with the good of the whole. For the Creator knew that 
the belly would not listen to reason, and was under the power of idols 
and fancies. Wherefore God framed the liver to connect with the lower 
nature, contriving that it should be compact, and bright, and sweet, 

INTRODUCTION. 

493 

and also bitter, and smooth, in order that the power of thought which 
originates in the mind might there be reflected, terrifying the belly with 
the elements of bitterness and gall, and the suffusion of bilious colours 
when the liver is contracted, and causing pain and misery by twisting 
and dislocating the lobe and other vessels. And the converse happens 
when some gentle inspiration coming from intelligence mirrors the 
opposite fancies, giving rest and sweetness and freedom, and at night, 
moderation and peace accompanied with prophetic insight, when reason 
and sense are asleep. For the authors of our being, in obedience to 
their Father’s will and in order to make men as good as they could, 
gave them prophecy, which never acts when men are awake or in 
health ; but when they are under the influence of some disorder or 
enthusiasm then gives intimations which are interpreted by others who 
are called prophets, but should rather be called interpreters of prophecy ; 
these after death become unintelligible. The spleen which is situated in 
the neighbourhood, on the left-hand side, keeps the liver bright and 
clear like a mirror, and the evacuations of the liver are received into 
the hollows of the spleen, which for a time waxes with impurity, and 
after the body is purged returns to a natural size. 

The truth concerning the soul can only be established by the word 
of God. Still, we may venture to assert what is probable both con- 
cerning soul and body. 

The creative powers were aware of our tendency to excess. And 
so when they made the belly to be a receptacle for food, in order that 
men might not perish by disease, they formed the convolutions of the 
intestines, in this way retarding the passage of food through the body, 
lest mankind should be absorbed in eating and drinking, and the whole 
race become impervious to divine philosophy. 

The creation of bones and flesh was on this wise. The root of 
mortal life is the marrow which binds together body and soul, and the 
marrow is made out of the triangles of the first formation specially 
adapted to produce all the four elements. These God took and mingled 
them in due proportion, making as many kinds of marrow as there 
were hereafter to be kinds of souls. The receptacle of the divine seed 
he made round, and called that portion of the marrow brain, intending 
that the vessel containing this substance should be the head. The 
remaining part he divided into long and round figures, and from these 
as from anchors, casting the bonds of the whole soul, he proceeded 

494 

TIMAEUS. 

to make the rest of the body, first forming for them a covering of bones. 
The bone was formed by sifting pure smooth earth and wetting it with 
marrow. It was then thrust alternately into fire and water, and thus 
rendered insoluble by either. Of bone he made a globe which he 
placed around the brain, leaving a narrow opening, and around the 
marrow of the neck and back he formed the vertebrae like hinges 
which extended from the head through the whole of the trunk. And 
as the bone was brittle and liable to mortify and destroy the marrow 
by too great rigidity and susceptibility to heat and cold, he contrived 
sinews and flesh — the first to give united motion and flexibility, the 
second to guard against heat and cold, and to be a protection against 
falls, containing a moisture which in summer exudes in the form of 
dew, and in winter is a defence against cold. Having this in view, 
the Creator mingled earth with fire and water and put them together, 
making a ferment of acid and salt which he mingled with them, forming 
a pulpy flesh. But the sinews he made of an unfermented mixture 
of bone and flesh, giving them a mean nature between the two, and 
a yellow colour. Hence they were more glutinous than flesh, but softer 
than bone. The bones which have most of the living soul within them 
he covered with the thinnest film of flesh, those which have least he 
lodged deeper. At the joints he diminished the flesh in order not to 
impede the flexure of the limbs, and also to avoid their clogging the 
perceptions of the mind. About the thighs and arms, which have no 
sense because the soul of the marrow does not reach them, and about 
the inner bones for the same reason, he laid the flesh thicker. For where 
the flesh is thicker there is less feeling, except in certain parts which the 
Creator has made solely of flesh, as for example, the tongue. Had the 
combination of solid bone and thick flesh been consistent with acute 
perceptions, the Creator would have given man a sinewy and fleshy 
head, and then he would have lived twice as long. But our creators 
were of opinion that a shorter life which was better was preferable to 
a longer which was worse, and therefore they covered the head with 
thin bone, and placed the sinews at the extremities of the neck, and 
fastened the cheeks to them below the face. And they framed the 
mouth, having teeth and tongue and lips, with a view to the necessary 
and the good, for food is a necessity, and the river of speech is the best 
of rivers. Still, the head could not be left a bare globe of bones on 
account of the extremes of heat and cold, nor be allowed to become dull 

INTRODUCTION . 

495 

and senseless by the overgrowth of flesh. Wherefore it was covered by 
a peel or skin which met and grew by the help of the cerebral humour. 
The sutures of the head were watered and closed up by the moisture, 
which sprang up within, and the diversity of them was caused by the 
struggle of the food against the courses of the soul. The skin was 
pierced by fire, and out of the punctures came forth a moisture, part 
liquid and part of a skinny nature, which was hardened by the pressure 
of the external cold and became hair. And God gave the head of 
man hair to be a shade in summer and shelter in winter, but not to 
interfere with his perceptions. The union of sinews, skin, and bone 
in the structure of the finger, and the nails which are found in many 
creatures, were formed by the creators with a view to the future when, 
as they knew, women and other animals would be framed out of us. 

The gods also mingled natures akin to that of man with other forms 
and perceptions. These are the trees and plants, which were originally 
wild and have been adapted by cultivation to our use. They partake 
of that third kind of life which is seated between the midriff and the 
navel, and is altogether passive and incapable of motion and reflection. 

When the creators had furnished all these natures for our sustenance, 
they cut channels through our bodies to water them like a garden. 
Two were cut down the back, along the back bone, where the skin 
and flesh meet, one on the right and the other on the left, and 
between them flowed the marrow of generation. In the next place, 
they divided the veins about the head and interlaced them about each 
other in order that they might form an additional link between the 
head and the body, and that the sensations from both sides might 
be diffused throughout the body. In the third place, they contrived 
the passage of liquids, which may be explained in this way: — Finer 
bodies contain coarser, but not the coarser the finer, and the belly 
is capable of containing food, but not fire and air. God therefore 
formed a network of fire and air to irrigate the veins, having two 
passages or openings, one of which he made with two heads, and 
stretched cords reaching from both the openings to the extremity of 
the network. The inner parts of the net were made by him of 
fire, the openings and the hollow of air. One of the openings he 
made to pass into the mouth ; this he divided into two, one part 
descending by the air-pipes into the lungs, the other by the side 
of the air-pipes into the belly. The first opening he divided 

496 

TIMA EUS. 

into two parts, and both of these he made to communicate with the 
channels of the nose, that the mouth when closed might still be fed with 
air. The other hollow of the network he caused to flow around the 
hollows of the body, making the entire receptacle which was composed 
of air to flow into and out of the passages of the network, the tissue 
of the lung finding a way into and out of the pores of the body, and the 
rays of fire following them. These, as we affirm, are the phenomena of 
respiration. And all this process took place in order that the body 
might be watered and cooled and nourished, and the meat and drink 
digested and liquefied and carried into the veins. 

The causes of respiration have now to be considered. The exhalation 
of the breath displaces the external air, and at the same time leaves a 
vacuum into which through the pores the air which is displaced enters 
as with the regularity of a wheel. The explanation of this may be 
supposed to be as follows: Every animal has within him a fountain 
of fire, which has been compared by us to a net of fire extended 
through the centre of the body, and having an outer envelopment of 
air. The fire seeks the place of fire, and in doing so finds a way 
in through the body or out at the nostrils, accordingly as the body 
is either hot or cold. When the body is hotter the particles of fire 
find their way out, when cooler the hot element finds a way in, and 
thus by action and reaction, inspiration and expiration are produced. 

The phenomena of medical cupping-glasses and of swallowing, and 
the hurling of bodies, are to be explained on a similar principle ; as also 
sounds, which are sometimes discordant on account of the inequality 
of them, and again, harmonious by reason of equality. The slower 
sounds reaching the swifter, when they begin to pause, by degrees 
assimilate with them: whence arises a pleasure which even the unwise 
feel, and which to the wise becomes a higher sort of delight, being 
an imitation of divine harmony in mortal motions. Streams flow, light- 
nings play, amber and the magnet attract, not by reason of attraction, 
but because ‘ nature abhors a vacuum/ 

I will now return to the phenomena of respiration. The fire minces 
the food and in the process of respiration fills the veins out of the belly 
by drawing from thence the divided portions of food, and thus the 
streams of food are diffused through the body. The fruits or grass 
which are our daily food acquire all sorts of colours when newly cut, 
but the colour of red or fire predominates, and hence the liquid which 

INTRODUCTION . 

497 

we call blood is red, being the nurturing principle of the body whence all 
parts are watered and the empty places filled. 

The process of repletion and depletion is produced by the attraction 
of like to like, after the manner of the universal motion. The elements 
are always entering into the body which is akin to them, and causing us 
to consume away : the particles of blood, too, to which the body is a sort of 
heaven, are attracted towards their kindred nature. When more is taken 
away than flows in, then we decay ; and when less, we grow and increase. 

The young of every animal have the triangles closely locked together, 
and yet the entire frame is soft and delicate, as if made of marrow and 
nurtured on milk. These triangles are sharper than those which enter 
the body from without in the shape of food, and therefore they cut them 
up. But as life advances, the triangles which enclose the marrow wear 
out and are no longer able to assimilate their food ; and at length getting 
unfixed they unloose the bonds of the soul, which is released and flies 
away. And so man without pain, and even with pleasure, passes away 
in the course of nature. 

Hence we may learn the causes of diseases. They are occasioned by 
the disarrangement of the elements out of which the body is framed; 
and they arise in a variety of ways. The dry may become moist, the 
light heavy, the hot cold, and any addition or subtraction or undue 
proportion may produce an estrangement and perturbation of nature. 
This is the origin of many of them, but the worst of all owe their severity 
to the following causes : there is a natural order in the human 

frame according to which the flesh and sinews are made of blood ; 
the sinews out of the fibres which are akin to them, and the blood 
out of the congealed substance which is formed out of the fibres. The 
glutinous matter which comes away from the sinews and the flesh, not 
only binds the flesh to the bones, but nourishes the marrow, being com- 
posed of the smoothest and oiliest of the triangles which alone find 
their way through the solid bone ; and when these processes take place 
in regular order the body is in health. But when the wasting flesh 
returns into the veins there is discoloured blood as well as air in the 
veins, having acid and salt qualities from which are generated all sorts 
of phlegm and bile. All things go the wrong way and cease to give 
nourishment to the body, no longer preserving the natural order of 
the courses, but at war with themselves and destructive of the consti- 
tution of the body. The oldest part of the flesh which refuses to 

VOL. II. k k 

Digitized by Google 

498 

TIMAEUS. 

assimilate blackens from long burning, and from being corroded grows 
bitter, and as the bitter element refines away, becomes acid ; and when 
tinged with blood the bitter substance has a red colour, or when 
mixed with black the hue of grass ; or again, has an auburn colour, 
when the new flesh is melted by the internal flame. To all which 
phenomena some physician or philosopher who was able to see the 
one in many has given the name of bile. Now there are various kinds 
of bile which have names answering to their colours. Lymph is of two 
kinds : first, the whey of blood, which is gentle ; secondly, that which 
is produced by dark and bitter bile mingled under the influence of heat 
with any salt substance; thirdly, there is the white phlegm, which is 
a wasting of young and tender flesh when accompanied by air encased 
in moisture, which emits little invisible bubbles having the appearance 
of foam. The water of tears and perspiration and other similar bodies 
is also the watery part of fresh phlegm. All these humours arise when 
the blood is replenished by irregular ways and not by food or drink, 
and they are the sources of disease. The danger, however, is not so 
great when the foundation remains, for then there is a possibility of 
recovery. But when the bond which unites the flesh and bones is 
diseased, and the blood which is made out of the fibres and sinews 
separates from them, and from being oily and smooth and glutinous 
becomes rough and salt and dry, then the substance which is detached 
crumbles away under the flesh and sinews, and the fleshy part leaves the 
sinews bare and full of brine, and the flesh gets back again into the 
circulation of the blood. There are other and worse diseases which 
precede this ; as when the bone through the density of the flesh does 
not receive sufficient air, and becomes stagnant and gangrened, and 
the bone passes into the food, and the food into the flesh, and the flesh 
returns again into the blood. Worst of all and most fatal is the disease 
of the marrow, by which the whole course of the body is reversed. 
There is a third class of diseases which are produced, some by wind 
and some by phlegm and some by bile. When the lung, which is the 
steward of the air, is obstructed by rheums, and in one part no air, and 
in another too much, enters in, then the parts which are unrefreshed by the 
air corrode, and other parts are distorted by the excess of air ; and in this 
manner painful diseases are produced. The most painful are generated 
when the wind gets about the sinews, and especially when the pressure 
is upon the great sinews of the shoulder — these are termed tetanus. 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION . 

499 

The cure of them is difficult, and they generally end in fevers. The 
white phlegm— though dangerous if kept in, by reason of the air bubbles — 
is not equally dangerous, because capable of relief, and only variegates 
the body, generating divers kinds of leprosies. When phlegm mingling 
with black bile only disturbs the courses of the head in sleep, there is not 
so much danger, but when assailing those who are awake, then the attack 
is far more dangerous, and is called epilepsy or the sacred disease. An 
acid and salt phlegm is the source of catarrh, and is called by various 
names, according to the places into which the phlegm finds a way. 

Inflammations originate in bile, which is sometimes relieved and finds 
an exit in boils and swellings, but when detained, and above all when 
mingled with pure blood, generates many inflammatory disorders, dis- 
turbing the order of the fibres which are scattered about in the blood 
in order to maintain the balance of rare and dense. The manner in 
which this is effected may be seen if any one presses the fibres together 
after death ; for the blood flows out, and the fibres, left to themselves, 
congeal. The fibres are the cause of bile, which is only stale blood, 
and from being flesh is decomposed, and coming in little by little, 
warm and moist, is congealed by the fibres and produces internal cold 
and shuddering. But when it enters with more of a flood it reaches 
the spinal marrow, and then the cables of the ship are cut and the 
soul is set free from the body. When on the other hand the body, 
though wasted, still holds out, then the bile is expelled, like an exile 
from an insurgent state, causing diarrhoeas and dysenteries and similar 
disorders. The body -which is diseased from the effects of fire is in 
a continual fever ; when air is the agent, the fever is quotidian ; when 
water, the fever intermits a day ; when earth, which is the most sluggish of 
agents, the fever intermits three days and is with difficulty shaken off. 

Of mental disorders there are two sorts, one madness, the other 
ignorance, and they may be justly attributed to disease. Excessive 
pleasures or pains are one of the greatest diseases, and literally take 
away the power of sense. When the seed about the spinal marrow 
is too fruitful or productive, the body has too great pleasures and 
pains ; and during a great part of his life a man is more or less mad. 
He is often thought bad, but this is a mistake; for the truth is that 
the intemperance of lust is produced by the flux of a single element 
in the moist and relaxed state of the bones. And this is true of vice 
in general, which is commonly regarded as disgraceful, whereas all vice 

K k 2 

500 

TIMA E US. 

is really involuntary and arises from a bad habit of the body and evil 
education. In like manner the soul is often made vicious by the in- 
fluence of pain ; the briny phlegm and other bitter and bilious humours 
wander over the body and find no exit, but are compressed • within, 
and blend with the motions of the soul, and are carried to the three 
places of the soul, creating infinite varieties of trouble and melancholy, 
of tempers rash and cowardly, and also of forgetfulness and stupidity. 
When men are in this evil plight of body, and evil forms of govern- 
ment and evil discourses are superadded, and there is no education 
to save them — all men turn to evil, through these two causes, but of 
neither of them are they really the authors. For the planters are to 
blame rather than the plants, the educators and not the educated. 
Still, we should endeavour to attain virtue and avoid vice; but this is 
a part of another subject. 

Enough of disease — I have now to speak of the means by which the 
mind and body are to be preserved, a higher theme than the other. 
The good is the beautiful, and the beautiful is the symmetrical, and 
there is no greater or fairer symmetry than that of body and soul, as 
the contrary i3 the greatest of deformities. A leg or an arm too long 
or too short is at once ugly and unserviceable, and the same dispropor- 
tion is discernible in the relation of soul and body. For the soul may 
‘ o’erinform the tenement of clay,’ and so produce diseases and con- 
vulsions. The violence of controversy, or the earnestness of enquiry, 
will often generate rheums and fevers which are not understood, or 
assigned to their true cause by the professors of medicine. And in like 
manner the body may be too much for the soul, obscuring the rational, 
and quickening the animal desires. The only security is to preserve 
the balance of the two, and to this end the mathematician or philosopher 
must practise gymnastics, and the gymnast must practise music, and 
allow the movements of the soul to inform the body. And as the whole 
body should be treated in relation to the whole soul, so are the parts 
of the body to be treated in relation to each other. For the body is 
liable to be heated and cooled by the elements which enter in, and again 
is dried up and moistened by external things, and is therefore injured, 
if given up to motion when at rest. But on the other hand, the use 
of exercise, as in the world, so also in the human body, restores 
harmony and divides the hostile powers from one another. The best 
exercise is the spontaneous motion of the body, as in gymnastics, because 

INTRODUCTION. 

5o1 

most akin to the motion of the mind; not so good is the motion of 
which the source is in another, as in sailing or riding ; least good when 
the body is at rest and the motion is in the parts only, which is a 
species of motion produced by physic. This should only be resorted to 
by men of sense in extreme cases ; lesser diseases are not to be educated 
by medicine. For every disease is akin to the living being and has 
an appointed term, just as life has, which depends on the form of the 
triangles, and cannot be protracted when the triangles are worn out. 
And he who, instead of accepting his destiny, endeavours to prolong 
his life by medicine is likely to multiply and magnify his diseases. 
Regimen and not medicine is the true cure, when a man has time at 
his disposal. . 

Enough of the nature of man and of the body, and of rational 
education, and of self education. The subject is a great one and can- 
not be adequately treated as an appendage to any other. To sum 
up all in a word : there are three kinds of souls located within us, and 
any one of them, if remaining inactive, becomes very weak ; if exercised, 
very strong. Wherefore we should train and exercise the three parts 
of the soul. 

But there is also a divinity within us whom God has lodged in our 
heads, to raise us, like plants which are not of earthly origin, from 
earth to our kindred which is in heaven; for the head is the root in 
which the generation of the soul began, and on which the whole body 
hangs. He who is intent upon the gratification of his desires, has all 
his ideas of mortal birth, and is himself in the truest sense mortal. 
But he who seeks after knowledge and exercises the divine part of him- 
self in godly and immortal thoughts, attains to truth and immortality, 
as far as is possible to man, and also to happiness, while he is training 
up within him the divine principle and indwelling power of order. There 
is only one way in which one person can benefit another ; and that is 
by assigning to him his proper nurture and motion. To the motions 
of the soul answer the motions of the universe, and by the study of 
these the individual is restored to his original nature. 

Thus we have finished the discussion of the universe, which was 
to be brought down to the creation of man. Completeness seems 
to require that something should be briefly said about other animals: 
first of women, who are probably degenerate or effeminate men. And 
when they degenerated, the gods implanted in men the desire of union 

502 

TIMA E US. 

with them, distributing in the two sexes the living being in the following 
manner: — The passage for liquid they connected with the living prin- 
ciple of the spinal marrow, which the man has a desire to emit into 
the fruitful womb of the woman ; this is like a fertile field in which the 
seed is quickened and matured, and at last brought to light. When 
this desire is unsatisfied the man is overmastered by the power of 
the generative organs, and the woman is subjected to disorders from 
the obstruction of the passages of the breath, until the two meet and 
pluck the fruit of the tree. 

The race of birds was created out of innocent, light-minded men, 
who thought to pursue the study of the heavens by sight; these were 
transformed into birds, and grew feathers instead of hair. The race 
of animals were men who had no philosophy, and never looked up to 
heaven or used the courses of the head, but followed only the influ- 
ences of the heart. Naturally they turned to their kindred earth, and 
put their forelegs to the ground, and had their heads crushed into strange 
oblong forms. Some of them have four feet, and some of them more 
than four feet; the latter, who are the more senseless, drawing closer 
to their native element; the most senseless of all have no limbs and 
trail their whole body on the ground. The fourth kind are the in- 
habitants of the waters ; these are made out of the most senseless and 
ignorant and impure of men, whom God placed in the uttermost parts 
of the world in return for their utter ignorance, and caused them to 
respire water instead of the finer elements of air. These are the laws 
by which animals pass into one another, according to their degrees of 
knowledge and ignorance. 

And so the world received animals, mortal and immortal, and was 
fulfilled with them, and became a visible God, as they also were visible, 
made in the image of the Creator, being the one perfect only-begotten 
heaven. 

§ 2- 

Nature in the aspect which she presented to a Greek philosopher 
of the fourth century before Christ is not easily reproduced to modern 
eyes. The associations of mythology and poetry have to be added, 
and the unconscious influence of science has to be subtracted, before 
we can behold the heavens or the earth as they appeared to the Greek. 

INTRODUCTION . 

503 

The philosopher himself was a child and also a man — a child in the 
range of his attainments, but also a great intelligence having an insight 
into nature, and often anticipations of the truth. lie was full of original 
thoughts, and yet liable to be imposed upon by the most obvious 
fallacies. He occasionally confused numbers with ideas, and atoms with 
numbers; his a priori notions were out of all proportion to his 
experience. He was ready to explain the phenomena of the heavens 
by the most trivial analogies of earth. The experiments which nature 
worked for him he sometimes accepted, but he never tried experiments 
for himself which would either prove or disprove his theories. His 
knowledge was unequal; while in some branches, such as medicine 
and astronomy, he had made considerable proficiency, there were others, 
such as chemistry, of which the very names were unknown to him. 
He was the natural enemy of mythology, and yet mythological ideas 
still retained their hold over him. He was endeavouring to form a 
conception of principles, but these principles or ideas were regarded by 
him as real powers or entities, to which the world had been subjected. 
He was always tending to argue from what was near to what was 
remote, from what was known to what was unknown, from man to 
the universe, and back again from the universe to man. While he 
was arranging the world, he was arranging the forms of thought in 
his own mind ; and the light from within and the light from without 
often helped to cross and confuse one another. He might be compared 
to a builder engaged in some great design, who was obliged to dig with 
his hands because he was unprovided with the commonest tools. 

The Hesiodic and Orphic cosmogonies were a phase of thought 
intermediate between mythology and philosophy and had a great in- 
fluence on the beginnings of physical science. They made men think 
of the world as a whole ; they carried the mind back into the infinity 
of past time; they suggested the first observation of the effects of fire 
and water on the earth’s surface. To the ancient physics they stood 
much in the same relation which geology does to modern science. 
The mind of the Greek was not confined to a period of four or six 
thousand years; he was able to speculate freely on the effects of 
infinite ages in the production of physical phenomena. He could 
imagine cities which had existed time out of mind, laws or forms of 
art and music which had lasted, ‘ not in word only but in very truth,’ 
for ten thousand years ; he was aware that natural phenomena like 

5° 4 

TIMA E US. 

the Delta of the Nile might have slowly accumulated in myriads of 
years. But he seems to have supposed that the course of events was 
recurring rather than progressive. To this he was probably led by 
the lateness of Greek history, when compared with the primeval 
antiquity of Egypt. 

The ancient philosophers found in mythology many ideas which, 
whether originally derived from nature or not, were easily transferred 
to her — such, for example, as love or hate, corresponding to attraction 
or repulsion ; or the conception of necessity allied both to the regularity 
and irregularity of nature; or of justice, symbolizing the law7 of com- 
pensation ; or of the Fates and Furies, typifying the fixed order or the 
extraordinary convulsions of nature. Their own interpretations of Homer 
and the poets were supposed by them to be the original meaning. 
Musing in themselves, they were relieved at being able to utter the 
thoughts of their hearts in figures of speech which to them were not 
figures, and were already consecrated by tradition. Hesiod and the 
Orphic poets moved in a region of half-personification in which the 
meaning or principle appeared through the person. In their vaster 
conceptions of Chaos, Erebus, Aether, Night, and the like, the first rude 
attempts at generalization are dimly seen. 

Under the influence of such ideas, perhaps also deriving from the 
traditions of their owrn or of other nations scraps of medicine and 
astronomy, men came to the observation of nature. The Greek looked 
upon the blue circle of the heavens and conceived that all things wrere 
one; the tumult of sense abated, and the mind found repose in 
the thought which former generations had been striving to realize. 
The first expression of this was some element, rarefied by degrees into 
a pure abstraction, and purged from any tincture of sense. Soon an 
inner world of ideas began to be created, more absorbing, more over- 
powering, more abiding than the brightest of visible objects, which 
to the eye of the philosopher looking inward, seemed to pale before 
them, retaining only a faint and precarious existence. At the same 
time, the minds of men parted into the two great divisions of those w7ho 
saw only a principle of motion, and of those w'ho saw only a principle 
of rest, in nature and in themselves; there wrere born Heracliteans or 
Eleatics, as there have been in later ages, born Aristotelians or Platonists. 
Like some philosophers in modern times, who are accused of making 
a theory first and finding their facts afterwards, the advocates of either 

INTRODUCTION . 

5°5 

opinion never thought of applying either to themselves or to their adver- 
saries the criterion of fact. They were mastered by their ideas and 
not masters of them. Like the Heraclitean fanatics whom Plato has 
described in the Theaetetus, they were incapable of giving a reason 
of the faith that was in them, and had all the animosities of a religious 
sect. Yet, doubtless, there was some first impression derived from 
external nature, which, as in mythology, so also in philosophy, worked 
upon the minds of the first thinkers. Though incapable of induction 
or generalization in the modern sense, they caught an inspiration from 
the external world. The most general facts or appearances of nature, 
the circle of the universe, the nutritive power of water, the air which 
is the breath of life, the destructive force of fire, the seeming regularity 
of the greater part of nature and the irregularity of a remnant, the 
solid earth and the impalpable aether, were always present to them. 

The great source of error and also the beginning of truth to them 
was reasoning from analogy ; they could see resemblances, but not 
differences; and they were incapable of distinguishing illustration from 
argument. Analogy in modern times only points the way, and is 
immediately verified by experiment. The dreams and visions, which 
pass through the philosopher’s mind, of resemblances between different 
classes of substances, or between the animal and vegetable world, are 
put into the refiner’s fire, and the dross and other elements which adhere 
to them are purged away. But the contemporary of Plato and Socrates 
was incapable of resisting the power of any analogy which occurred to 
him, and was drawn into any consequences which seemed to follow, fie 
had no methods of difference or of concomitant variations, by the use of 
which he could distinguish the accidental from the essential. He could 
not isolate phenomena, and he was helpless against the influence of 
any word which had an equivocal or double sense. 

Yet without this crude use of analogy the ancient physical philosopher 
would have stood still; he could not have made even ‘one guess 
among many ’ without comparison. The course of natural phenomena 
would have passed unheeded before his eyes, like fair sights or musical 
sounds before the eyes and ears of an animal. Even the fetichism of 
the savage is the beginning of reasoning ; the assumption of the most 
fanciful of causes indicates a higher mental state than the absence of 
all enquiry about them. The tendency to argue from the higher to 
the lower, from man to the world, has led to many errors, but has 

5°6 

TIM A E US. 

also had an elevating influence on philosophy. The conception of the 
world as a whole, a person, an animal, has been the source of hasty 
generalizations; yet this general grasp of nature led also to a spirit 
of comprehensiveness in early philosophy, which has not increased, but 
rather diminished, as the fields of knowledge have become more divided. 
The modern physicist confines himself to one or perhaps two branches 
of science. But he comparatively seldom rises above his own depart- 
ment, and often falls under the narrowing influence which any single 
branch, when pursued to the exclusion of every other, has over the 
mind. Language, too, exercised a spell over the beginnings of physical 
philosophy, leading to error and sometimes to truth ; for many thoughts 
were suggested by the double meanings of words, and the accidental 
distinctions of words often caused the ancients to make corresponding 
differences in things. * If they are the same, why have they different 
names ; or if they are different, why have they the same name ? ’ — is an 
argument not easily answered in the infancy of knowledge. The modern 
philosopher has always been taught the lesson which he still imperfectly 
learns, that he must disengage himself from the influence of words. 
Nor are there wanting in Plato, who was himself too often the victim 
of them, many admonitions that we should regard not words 
but things. But upon the whole, the ancients, though not entirely 
dominated by them, were much more subject to the influence of words 
than the moderns. They had no clear divisions of colours or sub- 
stances ; even the four elements were undefined ; the fields of knowledge 
were not as yet parted off. They were bringing order out of disorder, 
having a small grain of experience mingled in a confused heap of 
a priori notions. And yet, probably, their first impressions, the 
illusions and mirages of their fancy, created a greater intellectual activity 
and made a nearer approach to the truth than any patient investigation 
of isolated facts, for which the time had not yet come. 

There was one more illusion to which the ancient philosophers were 
subject, and against which Plato in his later dialogues seems to be 
struggling — the tendency to mere abstractions ; not perceiving that pure 
abstraction is only negation, they thought that the greater the abstraction 
the greater the truth. Behind any pair of ideas a new idea which 
comprehended them began at once to appear. Two are truer than 
three, one than two. The words ‘ being/ or ‘ unity,' or ‘ essence,’ or 
/good,’ became sacred to them. They did not sec that they had a 

INTRODUCTION. 

5°7 

word only, and in one sense the most unmeaning of words. They 
did not understand that the content of notions is in inverse proportion 
to their universality — the element which is the most widely diffused is 
also the thinnest; or, in the language of the common logic, the greater 
the extension the less the comprehension. But this vacant idea of a 
whole without parts, of a subject without predicates, a rest without 
motion, has been also the most fruitful of all ideas. It is the beginning 
of a priori thought, and indeed of thinking at all. Men were led to 
conceive it, not by a love of hasty generalization, but by a divine 
instinct, a dialectical enthusiasm, in which the human faculties seemed 
to yearn for enlargement. We know that ‘being* is the verb of 
existence, the copula, the most general symbol of relation, the first 
and most meagre of abstractions; but, to some of the ancient philo- 
sophers, this little word appeared to attain divine proportions and to 
comprehend all truth. Being or essence, and similar words, represented 
to them a supreme or divine being, in which they thought that they found 
the containing principle of the universe. In a few years the human mind 
was peopled with abstractions ; a new world was called into existence to 
give law and order to the old. But between them there was still a gulph, 
and no one could pass from one to the other. 

Number and figure were the greatest instruments of thought which 
were possessed by the Greek philosopher ; having the same power 
over the mind which was exerted by abstract ideas, they were also 
capable of practical application. Many curious and, to the early thinker, 
mystical properties of them came to light when they were compared 
with one another. They admitted of infinite multiplication and 
construction ; in Pythagorean triangles or in proportions of i : 2 : 4 : 8 
and 1 : 3 : 9 : 27, or compounds of them, the laws of the world seemed 
to be more than half revealed. They were not like being or essence, 
mere vacant abstractions, but admitted of progress and growth, while 
at the same time they confirmed a higher sentiment of the mind, that 
there was order in the universe. There was a real sympathy between 
the world within and the world without. The numbers and figures 
which were present to the mind’s eye became visible to the eye of 
sense; the laws of nature were mathematical; the other properties of 
objects seemed to reappear only in the light of number. An instrument 
of such power and elasticity could not fail to be ‘a most gracious 
assistance * to the first feeble efforts of human intelligence. 

5°8 

TIMA E US. 

There was another reason why numbers had so great an influence 
over the minds of early thinkers — they were verified by experience. 
Every use of them, even the most trivial, assured men of their truth; 
they were everywhere to be found, in the least things and the greatest 
alike. One, two, three, counted on the fingers were a ‘ trivial matter/ 
a little instrument out of which to create a world ; but from these and 
by the help of these all our knowledge of nature has been developed. 
They were the measure of all things, and seemed to give law to all 
things ; nature was rescued from chaos and confusion by their power ; 
the notes of music, the motions of the stars, the forms of atoms, the 
recurrence and evolutions of days, months, years, the military divisions 
of an army, the civil divisions of a state, seemed to afford a ‘ present 
witness * of them : what would have become of man or of the world if 
deprived of number? The mystery of number and the mystery of 
music were akin. There was a music or rhythm of harmonious motion 
everywhere; and to the real connection which existed between music 
and number, a fanciful or imaginary relation was superadded. 

Two points strike us in the use which the ancient philosophers made 
of number. First, they applied to external nature the relations of them 
which they found in their own minds ; and where nature seemed to be 
at variance with number, as for example in the case of fractions, they 
protested against her (Rep. VII. 525). Having long meditated on the 
properties of 1 : 2 : 4 : 8, or 1 : 3 : 9 : 27, or of 3, 4, 5, they were dis- 
posed to find in them the secret of the universe. Secondly, they applied 
number and figure equally to those parts of physics, such as astronomy 
or mechanics, in which the modern philosopher expects to find them, 
and to those in which he would never think of looking for them, as for 
example, physiology. For the sciences were not yet divided, and there 
was nothing really irrational in arguing that the same laws which regu- 
lated the heavenly bodies were partially applied to the erring limbs or 
brain of man. Astrology was the form which the lively fancy of ancient 
thinkers almost necessarily gave to astronomy. The observation that 
the lower principle, e. g. mechanics, is always seen in the higher, e. g. in 
the phenomena of life, further tended to perplex them. Plato’s doctrine 
of the same and the other ruling the courses of the heavens and of the 
human body is not a mere vagary, but is a natural result of the state 
©f knowledge and thought at which he had arrived. 

When in modem times we look up at the heavens, a certain amount 

INTRODUCTION. 

509 

of scientific truth imperceptibly blends, even with the cursory glance 
of an unscientific person. He knows that the earth is revolving round 
the sun, and not the sun around the earth. He does not imagine the 
earth to be the centre of the universe, and he has some conception of 
chemistry and the cognate sciences. A very different aspect of nature 
would have been present to the mind of the early Greek philosopher. 
He would have beheld the earth a surface only, not mirrored, however 
faintly, in the glass of science, but indissolubly connected with some 
theory of one, two, or more elements. He would see the world 
pervaded by number and figure, animated by a principle of motion, 
immanent in a principle of rest. He would try to construct the world 
on a quantitative principle, seeming to find in endless combinations 
of geometrical figures a sufficient account of the variety of phenomena. 
To these a priori speculations he would add a rude conception of 
matter and his own immediate experience of the supposed causes of 
health and disease. His cosmos would necessarily be imperfect and 
unequal, being the first attempt to impress form and order on the 
primaeval chaos of human knowledge. 

§ 3- 

Plato’s account of the soul is partly mythical or figurative, and partly 
literal. Not that either he or we can draw a line between them, or say, 
‘This is poetry, this is philosophy;’ for the transition from the one 
to the other is imperceptible. There is a further difficulty in explaining 
this part of the Timaeus — the natural order of thought is inverted. We 
begin with the most abstract, and proceed from the abstract to the 
concrete, although at p. 34 (cp. 53 D) Plato acknowledges that this order 
cannot always be maintained. But the abstract is unmeaning to us 
until brought into relation with man and nature. That which is spoken 
of first is really last, and is on the uttermost verge of human know- 
ledge. And yet the priority of this abstract God, and the world which 
he is imagined to have created, gives a kind of awe to them. As in 
other systems of theology and philosophy, that of which we know least 
has the greatest interest to us. 

There is no use in attempting to define or explain the first God in the 
Platonic system, who has sometimes been thought to answer to God 
the Father ; or the first world or eternal soul, in whom the Fathers of 

5 io 

TIMA E US. 

the Church seemed to recognize ‘ the firstborn of every creature/ Nor 
need we discuss how far Plato agrees in the later Jewish conception 
of creation, according to which God made the world out of nothing. 
For the original conception of matter having no qualities is really a 
negation, and might as well be represented by nothing. If we said 
that God took of the same and the other, of the divided and undivided, 
of the finite and infinite, of the positive and negative, and made the 
world, we should find expressions in the Timaeus which would justify 
all these aspects of creation : So various are the forms in which Plato 
describes the works which no tongue can utter — his language, as he 
himself says, partaking of his own uncertainty about the things of which 
he is speaking. 

Yet we may remark in passing, that the Platonic compared with the 
Jewish description of the process of creation has less of freedom or spon- 
taneity. The Creator in Plato, however far removed from us into a 
distant heaven, is still subject to a remnant of necessity which he cannot 
wholly overcome. The reason appears to be that Plato is more sensible 
than the Hebrew prophet of the existence of evil, which he seeks as far 
as possible to put away from God. And he can only accomplish this 
by committing the lesser works of creation to inferior powers. 

Nor can we attach any intelligible meaning to his words when he 
speaks of the visible, being in the image of the invisible. For how can 
that which is divided be like that which is undivided ? or that which is 
changing be the copy of that which is unchanging ? All the old diffi- 
culties about the ideas come back upon us in a slightly altered form. 
We can imagine two worlds, one of which is the mere double of the 

f 

other, or one of which is the vanishing ideal of the other ; but we cannot 
imagine an intellectual world which has no qualities — ‘a thing in itself' — 
a point which has no parts or magnitude, which is nowhere, and nothing. 
This cannot be the archetype according to which God made the world, 
and is in reality, whether in Plato or Kant, a mere negative residuum of 
human thought. 

There is another aspect of the same difficulty which appears to have 
no satisfactory solution. In what relation does the archetype stand to 
the Creator himself? For the idea or pattern of the world is not the 
thought of God, but a separate, self-existent nature, of which creation is 
the copy. We can only reply, (i) that to the mind of Plato the dis- 
tinction between the subject and the object as yet hardly existed ; (2) that 

INTRODUCTION. 

he supposes the process of creation to take place in accordance with 
his own theory of ideas ; and as we cannot give an intelligible account 
of the one, neither can we of the other. He means (3) to say that the 
creation of the world is not a material process of working with legs and 
arms, but ideal and intellectual ; according to his own fine expression, 

‘ the thought of God made God.' He means (4) to draw an absolute 
distinction between the invisible and unchangeable which is the place 
of mind or being, and the world of sense or becoming which is visible 
and changing. 

There are some other questions which we might ask and which can 
receive no answer, or at least only an answer of the same kind as the 
preceding. How can matter be conceived to exist without form ? Or, 
how could there have been motion in the chaos when as yet time was 
not ? Or, how did chaos come into existence, if not by the will of the 
Creator ? Or, how could the Creator have taken portions of an in- 
divisible same ? Or, how could space have been eternal when time is 
only created ? Or, how could the surfaces of geometrical figures have 
formed solids? We must reply again that we cannot follow Plato in 
all his inconsistencies, but that the gaps of thought are probably more 
apparent to us than to him. He would, perhaps, have said that * the 
first things are known only to God and to him of men whom God loves.’ 
And we may say that only by an effort of metaphysical imagination 
can we hope to understand Plato from his own point of viewr ; we must 
not ask for consistency. 

The soul of the wrorld may be conceived as the personification of 
the numbers and figures in w-hich the heavenly bodies move. Imagine 
these as in a Pythagorean dream, stripped of qualitative difference and 
reduced to mathematical abstractions. They are w-hat Plato calls the 
principle of the same, and may be compared with the modern conception 
of laws of nature. They are in space, but not in time, and they are the 
makers of time. They are represented as constantly thinking of the 
same ; for thought in the view of Plato is equivalent to truth or law, and is 
not inseparably bound up with a human consciousness. To this prin- 
ciple of the same is opposed the principle of the other — the principle 
of irregularity and disorder, of necessity and chance, which is only 
partially impressed by mathematical laws and figures. (We may observe 
by the way, that the principle of the other, which is the principle of 
plurality and variation in the Timaeus, has nothing in common with the 

5 12 

TIMA E US. 

* other ' of the Sophist, which is the principle of determination.) The 
element of the same dominates to a certain extent over the other — the 
fixed stars keep the ‘ wanderers’ of the inner circle in their courses, and 
a similar principle of fixedness or order appears to regulate the bodily 
constitution of man. But there still remains a rebellious seed of evil 
derived from the original chaos, which is the source of disorder in 
the world, and of vice and disease in man. 

Before they are immersed in matter the same and the other are 
blended in a third nature which Plato terms the essence. The com- 
pound thus obtained is divided by the Creator into certain proportions 
which he comprehended in a uniform motion around a centre in two 
circles, of which the outer contained the fixed, the inner the wandering 
stars. Thus the essence became the soul of the world, diffused every- 
where from the centre to the circumference. To this God gave a body, 
consisting at first of fire and earth, and afterwards receiving an addition 
of air and water ; because solid bodies, like the world, are always con- 
nected by two middle terms and not by one. The world was made 
in the form of a globe, and all the elements, both material and im- 
material, were exhausted in the work of creation. 

The proportions in which the soul is divided answer to a series of 
numbers i, 2, 3, 4, 9, 8, 27, composed of the two Pythagorean progres- 
sions 1, 2, 4, 8 and 1, 3, 9, 27. This series, of which the intervals are 
afterwards filled up, probably represents (1) the diatonic scale according 
to Plato; (2) the order and distances of the heavenly bodies; and 
(3) may possibly contain an allusion to the music of the spheres, which 
has been already referred to in the myth at the end of the Republic. 
The meaning of the words that ‘ solid bodies are always connected by 
two middle terms’ has been much disputed. The most received ex- 
planation is that of Martin, who supposes that Plato is only speaking 
of surfaces and solids made up of prime numbers (i. e. of numbers not 
made up of two factors, or only measurable by unity). The product 
of two such numbers represents a surface, of three a solid. The 
squares of numbers which are primes (e. g. 22, 32 = 4, 9), have always 
a single mean proportional (e. g. 4 and 9 have the single mean 6), 
whereas cubes which are primes (e. g. 3s and 53) have always two 
mean proportionals, e. g. 27 : 45 : 75 : 125. But to this explanation 
of Martin’s we may object, (1) that Plato nowhere says that his pro- 
portion is to be limited to prime numbers; (2) that the limitation of 

INTRODUCTION . 

.513* 

surfaces to squares is also wanting; (3) that the figures and the ratios 
afterwards assigned to the elements do not correspond to the propor- 
tions between solid numbers which are thus obtained ; (4) that Plato’s 
doctrine of a mean is supposed by him to apply not only to surfaces and 
solids, but to any powers whatever; and he must have known, if Mar- 
tin’s explanation be correct, that there was no single mean between two 
cubes. What Plato chiefly intends to express is that a solid requires a 
stronger bond than a surface ; and that the double bond which is given 
by a proportion of four terms is stronger than the single bond of three 
terms. The vagueness of his language does not allow us to determine 
whether anything more than this was intended by him. 

Leaving the further explanation of these details, which the reader will 
find discussed at length in Boeckh and Martin, we may return to the 
main argument : Why did God make the world ? Like man, He must 
have a purpose; and his purpose is the diffusion of that goodness or 
good which He himself is. The term ‘goodness’ is not to be under- 
stood in this passage as meaning benevolence or love, in the Christian 
sense of the term, but rather law, order, harmony, like the idea of good 
in the Republic. The ancient mythologers, and even the Hebrew 
prophets, had spoken of the jealousy of God ; and the Greek had 
imagined that there was a Nemesis attending always the prosperity of 
mortals. But Plato delights to think of God as the author of order 
in his works, who, like a father, lives over again in his children, and 
can never have too much of good or friendship among his creatures. 
Only, as there is a certain remnant of evil inherent in matter which 
he cannot get rid of, he detaches himself from them and leaves them 
to themselves, that he may be guiltless of their faults and sufferings. 

Between the ideal and the sensible Plato interposes the two natures of 
time and space. Time is conceived by him to be only the shadow or 
image of eternity, which ever is and never has been or will be, but is 
described in a figure only as past or future. This is one of the great 
thoughts of early philosophy, which are still as difficult to our minds 
as they were to the early thinkers ; or perhaps more difficult, because 
we more distinctly see the consequences which are involved in such 
an hypothesis. All the objections which may be urged against Kant’s doc- 
trine of the ideality of space and time at once press upon us. If time 
is unreal, then all which is contained in time is unreal — the succession 

vol. 11. * L 1 

TIMA EUS. 

5*4* 

of human thoughts as well as the flux of sensations ; there is no 
connecting link between <f>atv6iitva and ovra. Yet, on the other hand, 
we are conscious that knowledge is independent of time, that truth is 
not a thing of yesterday or to-morrow, but an ‘eternal now.’ To the 
‘spectator of all time and all existence’ the universe remains at rest. 
The truths of geometry and arithmetic in all their combinations are 
always the same. The generations of men, like the leaves of the forest, 
come and go, but the mathematical laws by which the world is governed 
remain, and seem as if they could never change. The ever-present 
image of space is transferred to time — succession is conceived as 
extension. (We may remark that Plato has done away with the above 
and below in space, as he has done away with the past and future in 
time.) The course of time, unless regularly marked by divisions of 
number, partakes of the indefiniteness of the Heraclitean flux. By such 
reflections we may conceive the Greek to have attained the metaphysical 
conception of eternity, which to the Hebrew was gained by meditation 
on the Divine Being. No one saw that this objective was really a 
subjective, and involved the subjectivity of all knowledge. ‘ Non in 
tempore sed cum tempore finxit Deus mundum,’ says St. Augustine, 
repeating a thought derived from the Timaeus, but apparently un- 
conscious of the results to which his doctrine would have led. 

The conception of space is scarcely distinguishable from what Plato 
terms the ‘ containing vessel or nurse of generation.' Reflecting on the 
simplest kinds of external objects, which to the ancients were the four 
elements, Plato was led to a more general notion of a kind out of which 
they were all fashioned. Thus seems to have arisen the first dim 
perception of uXj; or matter, which has played so great a part in the 
metaphysical philosophy of Aristotle and his followers. Akin to this, 
for we can hardly distinguish between such extreme abstractions, is 
space, which Plato, perhaps inconsistently, regards as eternal. He 
seems, indeed, more willing to admit of the unreality of time than of 
the unreality of space ; because, as he says, we have a notion that 
all things must necessarily exist in space. Yet he admits that our 
knowledge of space is of a dreamy kind, and is attained by a spurious 
reason without the help of sense. (Cp. the hypotheses and images of 
Rep. VI. 5 1 1 .) That two things can be two in a real sense and one 
in an equally real, though not the same, sense, is a truth to which Plato 
has not as yet attained. In his attempt to conceive of space and matter 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION . 

5i5 

* 

we must remember that the two abstract ideas of weight and extension, 
which are familiar to us, had never passed before his mind. 

Thus far God, working according to an eternal pattern, out of his 
goodness has created the same, the other, and the essence (compare 
the three principles of the Philebus — the finite, the infinite, and the 
union of the two), and out of them has formed the outer circle of 
the fixed stars and the inner circle of the planets, divided according 
to certain musical intervals ; he has also created time, the moving 
image of eternity, and space, existing by a sort of necessity and 
hardly distinguishable from matter. The matter out of which the 
world is formed is not absolutely void, but retains in the chaos certain 
germs or traces of the elements. These Plato, like Empedocles, 
supposed to be four in number — fire, air, earth, and water. They 
were at first mixed together, and in the process of creation parted 
company from each other, the more volatile elements of fire and air 
propelling water and earth. They are so far from being elements 
or letters in the higher sense that they are not even syllables or first 
compounds. The real elements are the simplest forms of triangles; 
for all solids are terminated by surfaces, and all surfaces are resolvable 
into triangles. These are of two kinds : the rectangular scalene, which 
is the half of an equilateral triangle and has the hypothenuse double 
the lesser side — this from the greater regularity of its proportions 
is conceived by Plato to be the most beautiful of scalene triangles, 
and is therefore chiefly employed in the creation of the world, 
having, moreover, an infinite variety of forms. There is also the 
rectangular isosceles triangle, which has one form only, and is less 
adapted for construction. 

Out of these triangles Plato proceeds to generate the four first of 
the five regular solids, perhaps forgetting that he is only constructing 
surfaces which have no solidity. The first solid is a regular pyramid, 
of which the base and sides are formed by four equilateral or twenty- 
four scalene triangles. The second solid is composed of the same 
triangles, which unite as eight equilateral triangles, and make one solid 
angle out of four plane angles — six of these angles form a regular 
octahedron. The third solid is a regular icosahedron, having twenty trian- 
gular equilateral bases, and therefore 120 rectangular scalene triangles. 
The fourth regular solid, or cube, is formed by the combination 

* l 1 2 

Digitized by Google 

TIMA ECS. 

5l6* 

of four isosceles triangles into one square and of six squares 
into a cube. The fifth regular solid, or dodecahedron, cannot be 
formed by a combination of either kind of triangle, but each of its 
faces may be regarded as composed of thirty triangles of another kind. 
Probably Plato notices this as the only remaining regular polyhedron, 
which from its approximation to a globe, and possibly because, as 
Plutarch remarks, it is composed of 12x30 = 360 scalene triangles 
(Platon. Quaest. 5), representing thus the signs and degrees of the Zodiac, 
as well as the months and days of the year, God may be said to have 
‘ used in the delineation of the universe.’ According to Plato the earth 
was composed of cubes, the air of regular octahedrons, the water of 
regular icosahedrons, the fire of regular pyramids. The stability of 
the three last increases with the number of figures. 

The elements are supposed to pass into one another. We must 
remember that these transformations are not the transformations of 
real solids, but of imaginary geometrical figures ; in other words, we 
are composing and decomposing the faces and not the forms of the 
triangles. Yet perhaps Plato may regard them as only the forms 
which are impressed on pre-existent matter. It is remarkable that he 
should speak of each of these solids as a possible world in itself, 
though upon the whole he inclines to the opinion that they are one. 
To suppose that these forms are infinite, as Democritus had said, 
would be, as he satirically observes, * the mark of a very indefinite 
mind.' 

The twenty triangular faces of an icosahedron form the faces or sides 
of two regular octahedrons and of a regular pyramid (20 = 8x2 + 4); 
and therefore, according to Plato, a particle of water when decomposed 
is supposed to give two particles of air and one of fire. So because 
an octahedron gives the sides of two pyramids (8 = 4x2), a particle 
of air is resolved into two particles of fire. 

The transformation is effected by the superior power or number 
of the conquering elements. The manner of the change is (1) a 
separation of portions of the elements from the mass in which they 
are collected ; (2) a resolution of them into their own original triangles ; 
and (3) a reunion of them in new forms. The finer natures are those 
which have the fewest bases, and being the most cutting have the 
advantage in any disturbances of matter; they force their way in, but 
are sometimes crushed by the weight or hardness of the surrounding 

INTRODUCTION . 

5>7* 

element. Plato himself proposes the question, why does motion con- 
tinue at all when the elements are settled in their places ? The answer 
is, that although the world has been reduced to order by the Creator, 
the circular motion still retains a condensing power, and thrusts three 
of the elements into each other and into the fourth. Changes can 
only be effected by the greater number or power of dissimilars ; when 
there is assimilation there is rest. Fire, air, water have a decomposing 
effect on all the four, but earth has no similar power over them. No 
single particle of the elements is visible, but only the aggregates of them 
are seen. The different subordinate species which are formed out of 
them depend upon the sizes of the original triangles. The obvious 
physical phenomena from which Plato has gathered his views of the 
relations of the elements seem to be the effect of fire upon air, water, 
and earth, and of water upon earth. The particles are supposed by 
him to be in a perpetual process of circulation caused by inequality. 
This process of circulation does not admit of a vacuum. Yet he 
appears to be inconsistent with himself. For in some of his remarks, 
e. g. in his strange account of the phenomena of respiration, he supposes 
air to be incompressible, as water really is, while in other places he 
supposes air to be condensed. And even the most penetrating element, 
fire, like all the rest, is composed of angles, and therefore cannot find 
a way into other geometrical figures without leaving a void, however 
small. 

Of the phenomena of light and heavy he speaks afterwards, when 
treating of sensation, but they may be more conveniently considered 
by us in this place. They are not, he says, to be explained by ‘above’ 
and 4 below,’ which in the universal globe have no existence, but by the 
attraction of similars towards the great masses of similar substances; 
fire to fire, air to air, earth to earth. Plato’s doctrine of attraction 
implies not only (i) the attraction of smaller bodies to larger ones, but 
(2) of similar elements to one another. Had he stopped at the first 
he would have arrived, though, perhaps, without any further result or 
any sense of the greatness of the discover}', at the modem doctrine 
of gravitation. He does not observe that water has an equal tendency 
towards both water and earth. So easily did the most obvious facts 
which were inconsistent with his theories escape him. 

The general physical doctrines of the Timaeus may be summed up 
as follows: (1) Plato supposes the greater masses of the elements to 

TIMA E US. 

5*8* 

have been settled in. their places at the creation : (2) the four elements 
are formed of rectangular triangles variously combined into regular solid 
figures : (3) three of them, fire, air, and water, admit of transformation 
into one another ; the fourth, earth, cannot be similarly transformed : 
(4) different sizes of the same triangles form the lesser species of each 
element : (5) there is an attraction of the lesser to the greater, and of like 
to like. Like Empedocles, Plato divides the earth from the other 
elements ; with the atomists, he attributes the differences of substances 
to differences in the forms of atoms. But he does not explain the 
process by which geometrical surfaces become solids ; and he charac- 
teristically ridicules Democritus for not seeing that the good and the 
true ‘ are of the nature of the finite.' 

§4. 

The astronomy of Plato is based on the two principles of the same 
and the other, which God combined in the creation of the world. The 
soul which is compounded of the same, the other, and the essence, is 
diffused from the centre to the circumference of the heavens. We speak 
indeed of a soul of the universe; but more truly regarded, the uni- 
verse of the Timaeus is a soul, governed by mind, and holding in solu- 
tion a residuum of matter, which the author of the world is unable to 
expel, and of which Plato cannot tell us the origin. The creation, 
in Plato’s sense, is really the creation of order in the world ; and the 
first step in giving order is the division of the heavens into an inner 
and outer circle of the same and the other, of the indivisible and 
divisible, answering to the spheres of the fixed stars and of the planets, 
all together moving around the earth, which is their centre. To us 
there is a difficulty in apprehending how that which is indivisible can 
be divided by the courses of the fixed stars, or how that which is 
at rest can also be in motion. The whole description is so ideal and 
imaginative, that we can hardly venture to attribute to many of Plato's 
words in the Timaeus any more meaning than to his mythical account 
of the heavens in the Republic and in the Phaedrus. The stars are 
also gods, and the original habitations of the souls of men, from which 
they come and to which they will hereafter return. In attributing to 
them only the most perfect motion — that which is on the same spot 
or circling around the same — he might perhaps have said that to ‘ the 

INTRODUCTION . 

5'9* 

spectator of all existence and all time/ to borrow once more his own 
grand expression, or viewed, in the language of Spinoza, ‘sub specie 
aeternitatis/ they were still at rest, but appeared to move in order 
to teach men the periods of time. Although absolutely in motion, they 
are relatively at rest; or we may conceive of them as resting, while 
the space in which they are contained, or the whole anima mutidi 
revolves. 

A different motion is ascribed to the planets and to the fixed stars. 
The universe revolves around a centre once in twenty-four hours, but 
the orbits of the fixed stars take a different direction from those of 
the planets — the first moving in a circle from left to right, the second 
diagonally from right to left; or, in other words, the first move in 
the path of the equator, the second in the path of the ecliptic. The 
motion of the second is controlled by the first, and hence the oblique 
line in which they are supposed to move becomes a spiral. The 
motion of the same is said to be undivided, whereas the inner motion 
is split into six portions or intervals containing seven unequal orbits — 
three in ratios of two, and three in ratios of three : — the Sun, Mercury, 
Venus moving in one direction with equal swiftness; the remaining 
four, Moon, Saturn, Mars, Jupiter, with equal swiftness to the former 
three and to one another. Thus arises the following progression : — 
Moon 1, Sun 2, Venus 3, Mercury 4, Mars 8, Jupiter 9, Saturn 27. 
This series of numbers is the compound of the two Pythagorean ratios, 
having the same intervals as the mixture which was originally divided 
in forming the soul of the world. 

Plato was struck by the phenomenon of Mercury, Venus, and the Sun 
appearing to overtake and be overtaken by one another. The true 
reason of this, namely, that they lie within the circle of the earth’s 
orbit, was unknown to him, and the reason which he gives — that they 
move in opposite directions to the four other planets — is far from 
explaining the appearance of them in the heavens. All the planets, 
including the sun, are carried round in the daily motion of the circle 
of the fixed stars, and their oblique motion gives the explanation of 
the different lengths of the sun’s course in different parts of the world. 
The fixed stars have two movements — a movement on the same spot 
around an axis, which Plato calls the movement of thought about the 
same ; as well as the forward movement in their orbit which is common 
to the whole circle. 

H sss 

Digitized by Google 

520* 

TIMA E US. 

The revolution of the world around the earth, which is accomplished 
in a single day and night, is described as being the most perfect. Yet 
Plato also speaks of an ‘ annus magnus ’ or cyclical year, in which 
periods wonderful for their complexity are found to coincide in a 
perfect number, i.e. a number which equals the sum of its factors. 
This, although not literally contradictory, is in spirit irreconcileable 
with the perfect revolution of twenty-four hours. The same remark 
may be applied to the complexity of the appearances and occultations 
of the planets, which, if the fixed stars are supposed to be moving 
around the centre once in twenty-four hours, must be confined to 
the effects produced by the seven planets. The truth is that Plato 
seems to confuse the actual observation of the heavens with his desire 
to find in them mathematical perfection. The same spirit is carried 
yet further by him in the Laws, in which he refuses to allow the 
planets or wandering stars to be called by this name, and the common 
opinion about them is deemed blasphemy. 

We have now to consider the much discussed question of the 
rotation or immobility of the earth. Plato’s doctrine on this subject 
is contained in the following words : — ‘ The earth which is our nurse 
compacted (or circling) around the pole which is extended through 
the universe, he made to be the guardian and artificer of night and 
day, first and eldest of gods that are in the interior of heaven.’ There 
is an unfortunate doubt (i) in this passage about the meaning of the 
Greek word which is translated ‘ compacted ’ or * circling/ and is 
equally capable of either sense. A doubt (2) may also be raised 
as to whether the words 1 artificer of day and night ’ are consistent with 
the mere passive causation of them, produced by the immobility of 
the earth in the midst of the circling universe. We must admit, further, 
(3) that Aristotle attributed to Plato the doctrine of the rotation of 
the earth. Yet the reasons which may be urged on the opposite side 
of the argument are far stronger. For, firstly, if the earth goes round 
with the outer heaven and the planets, including among them the sun, 
in twenty-four hours, there is no possibility of accounting for the alter- 
nation of day and night, or for any movement of the heavens ; for the 
equal motion of the earth and heavens would have the effect of 
absolute immobility. Nor, secondly, can we suppose with Mr. Grote, 
that Plato has fallen unawares into this enormous contradiction; for 
though he was ignorant of many things which are familiar to us, and 

INTRODUCTION . 

521* 

often confused in his ideas where we have become clear, we have no 
right to attribute to him a childish want of reasoning about very simple 
facts, or an inability to understand the necessary deductions from 
geometrical figures or movements. Of the causes of day and night 
the pre-Socratic philosophers, and especially the Pythagoreans, gave 
various accounts, and therefore the question can hardly be imagined 
to have escaped him. Thirdly, Mr. Grote supposes, not that tXXofutnjv 
means * circling,' or that this is the sense in which Aristotle understood 
the word, but that the rotation of the earth is necessarily implied in 
its adherence to the cosmical axis. But (a) if Plato did not see that 
the rotation of the earth on its axis and of the heavens around the 
earth in equal times was inconsistent with the alternation of day and 
night, neither need we suppose that he would have seen the immo- 
bility of the earth to be inconsistent with the rotation of the axis. 
And (/3) what proof is there that the axis of the world revolves at all ? 
(y) The comparison of the two passages quoted by Mr. Grote (see 
p. 1 9 of his pamphlet on ‘ The Rotation of the Earth ’) from Aristotle 
De Coelo (c. 13, mot — ylypa-nrai, and c. 1 4, — fiftrov) clearly shows, 

although this is a matter of minor importance, that Auistotle, as Proclus 
and Simplicius supposed, understood tXW&u in the Timaeus to mean 
circling or revolving. For the second passage, in which motion on an 
axis is expressly mentioned, refers to the first, but this would be 
unmeaning unless iWeadai in the first passage meant rotation on an 
axis. (4) The immobility of the earth is more in accordance with 
Plato’s other writings than the opposite hypothesis. For in the Phaedo 
the earth is described as the centre of the world, and is not said to 
be in motion. In the Republic the pilgrims appear to be looking out 
from the earth upon the motions of the heavenly bodies; in the 
Phaedrus, Hestia, who remains immovable in the house of Zeus while 
the other gods go in procession, is probably the symbol of the earth, 
who is here called the first and eldest of the gods. These passages 
are not conclusive, but then, again, the silence of Plato in them is 
more favourable to the doctrine of the immobility of the earth than 
to the opposite. If he had meant to say that the earth revolves on 
her axis, he would probably have expressed this in distinct words, and 
have explained the relation of her movements to those of the other 
heavenly bodies. (5) The meaning of the words * artificer of day and 
night ’ is literally true according to Plato’s view. For the alternation 

TIMA EUS. 

o22* 

of day and night is not produced by the motion of the heavens 
alone, or by the immobility of the earth alone, but by both together ; 
and that which has the inherent force or energy to remain at rest when 
all other bodies are moving, may be truly said to act, equally with them. 
(6) We should not lay too much stress on Aristotle having adopted 
the other interpretation of the words, although Alexander of Aphrodisias 
thinks that he could not have been ignorant either of the doctrine of 
Plato or of the sense which he intended to give to the word tKXofifinjv. 
For the citations of Plato in Aristotle are frequently misinterpreted 
by him ; and he seems hardly ever to have had in his mind the con- 
nection in which they occur. In this instance the allusion is very slight, 
and there is no reason to suppose that the diurnal revolution of the 
heavens was present to his mind. Hence we need not attribute to him 
the error from which we are defending Plato. 

§ 5- 

The soul of the world is framed on the analogy of the soul of man, 
and many traces of anthropomorphism blend with Plato’s highest flights 
of idealism. The heavenly bodies are endowed with thought, the prin- 
ciple of the same is the true law of the human mind as well as of the 
fixed stars. The soul of man is made out of the remains of the cup 
which contained the same, the other, and the essence ; these remains, 
however, are diluted to the third degree ; or, speaking still in a figure, 
there are dregs of necessity which are mingled with them. The human 
soul, like the cosmical, is framed before the body, as the mind is before 
the soul of either — this is the order of the divine work — and the finer parts 
of the body, which are more akin to the soul, such as the spinal marrow, 
are prior to the bones and flesh. The brain, which is the vessel of the 
soul, is (nearly) in the form of a globe, which is the image of the gods 
and the figure of the fixed stars and of the universe. 

There is, however, an inconsistency in Plato’s manner of conceiving 
the soul of man ; he cannot get rid of the element of necessity which is 
allowed to enter. He does not, like Kant, attempt to vindicate for men 
a freedom out of space and time ; but he acknowledges him to be 
subject to the influence of external causes, and leaves hardly any place 
for freedom of the will. The lusts of men are caused by their bodily 
constitution, though they may be increased by bad education and bad 
laws, which implies that they may be decreased by good education and 

INTRODUCTION. 

5*3* 

good laws. He appears to have an inkling of the truth that to the 
higher nature of man evil is involuntary. Still, in the Timaeus, as well 
as in the Laws, he regards vices and crimes as simply involuntary ; 
they are diseases analogous to the diseases of the body, and arising 
out of the same causes. If we draw together the opposite poles of Plato’s 
system, we find that, like Spinoza, he combines idealism with fatalism. 

The soul of man is divided by him into three parts, answering 
roughly to the charioteer and steeds of the Phaedrus, and to the Aoyoy, 
Ovuosy and ciriOvfua of the Republic and Nicomachean Ethics. First, 
there is the immortal part which is seated in the brain, and is alone 
divine, and akin to the soul of the universe. Secondly, there is the 
higher mortal soul which, though liable to perturbations of her own, 
takes the side of reason against the lower appetites. The seat of this 
is the heart, in which courage, anger, and all the nobler affections are 
supposed to reside. There is also a third or appetitive soul, which 
receives the commands of the immortal part, not immediately but 
mediately, through the higher mortal nature, which reflects in the liver 
the admonitions and threats of the reason. 

The liver is imagined by Plato to be a smooth and bright substance, 
having a store of sweetness and also of bitterness, which reason freely 
uses in the execution of her mandates. In this region, as ancient 
superstition told, were to be found intimations of the future. But Plato 
is careful to observe that this knowledge is only given in a measure 
to the inferior parts of man, and then requires to be interpreted by 
the superior. Reason, and not enthusiasm, is the true guide of man; 
he is only inspired when he is demented by some distemper or pos- 
session. The ancient saying, ‘that only a man in his senses can 
judge of his own actions/ is approved by modern philosophy too. 
The same irony which appears in Plato’s remark, ‘that the men of 
old time must surely have known the gods who were their ancestors, 
and we must believe them as the law requires,’ is also manifest in his 
account of divination. 

The appetitive soul is seated in the belly, and there imprisoned like 
a wild beast, far away from the council chamber, as Plato graphically 
calls the head, in order that the animal passions may not interfere 
with the deliberations of reason. Though the soul is independent of 
the body, yet we cannot help seeing that Plato has really modelled the 
soul on the body — this threefold division in fact springing from the head 

TIMA E US. 

524* 

and heart and belly. The human soul differs from the soul of the 
world in this respect, that she is enveloped and finds her expression 
in matter, whereas the soul of the world is the element in which matter 
moves. The breath of man is within him, but the air or aether of 
heaven is the element which surrounds him and all things. 

Pleasure and pain are attributed in the Timaeus to the suddenness 
of our sensations — the first being a sudden restoration, the second a 
sudden violation, of nature (cp. Philebus). The sensations become 
conscious to us when they are exceptional. Sight is not attended 
either by pleasure or pain, but hunger and the appeasing of hunger 
are pleasant and painful because they are extraordinary. 

§6. 

I shall not attempt to connect the physiological speculations of Plato 
either with ancient or modern medicine. What light I can throw on 
them will be derived from the comparison of them with his general 
system. 

There is no principle so apparent in the physics of the Timaeus, 
or in ancient physics generally, as that of continuity. The world is 
conceived of as a whole, and the elements are formed into and out of 
one another ; the infinite substances and processes are hardly known or 
noticed. And so the human body is conceived of as a whole, and the 
different substances of which, to a superficial observer, it appears to be 
composed — the blood, flesh, sinews, and bone — like the elements of 
which they are formed, are supposed to pass into one another in 
regular order, while the infinite complexity of the human frame remains 
unobserved. And the source of diseases is the inversion of this order — 
when the natural proportions of the four elements are disturbed, and 
the secondary substances which are formed out of them, namely, blood, 
flesh, sinews, bone, are generated in an inverse order. 

Plato found heat and air within the human frame, and the blood 
circulating in every part. Pie assumes, in language almost unintelligible 
to us, that an inner network of fire, having openings and an exterior 
envelopment of air, commencing at the passages of the throat, encased 
a great part of the human frame. This case, or network, of fire is 
a figure or fancy, under which Plato describes the internal heat of the 
body, and which he made the containing vessel of some of the organs, 

INTRODUCTION . 

5*5* 

because fire was composed of the finest particles, and was therefore 
impenetrable by the other elements. The entire net has two lesser 
nets or openings, one leading to the stomach, the other to the lungs ; 
and the latter is forked or divided at the upper end into the passages 
which lead to the nostrils and to the mouth. 

Of the anatomy and functions of the body he was almost entirely 
ignorant ; he knew nothing of the uses of the nerves in conveying 
motion and sensation, which he attributes to the veins; he was also 
ignorant of the distinction between veins and arteries ; the spinal 
marrow he conceived to be the seed of generation ; he had absolutely 
no idea of the phenomena of respiration, which he attributes to a 
law of equalization in nature, the air which is breathed out displacing 
other air which finds a way in through the pores ; he was wholly 
unacquainted with the process of digestion. Except the general divi- 
sions into the spleen, the liver, the belly, and the lungs, and the obvious 
distinctions of flesh, bones, and the limbs of the body, we find nothing 
that reminds us of anatomical facts. But we find much which is derived 
from his theory of the universe, and transferred to man. The micro- 
cosm of the human frame is the lesser image of the macrocosm. The 
same equipoise is to be maintained in both ; the animal is a * sort of 
heaven’ to the particles of the blood which circulate in it. Childhood 
is the chaos or first turbid flux of sense prior to the establishment of 
order ; the intervals of time which may be observed in some intermit- 
tent fevers correspond to the intervals of the elements. The human 
frame, like the universe, is formed out of triangles, the very finest sort 
of all being those which are used in making the spinal marrow ; and the 
process of digestion is carried on by the superior sharpness of the 
triangles of the substances of the human body to the substances which 
are introduced into it in the shape of food. The freshest and acutest 
forms of triangles are those that are found in children, but they become 
more obtuse with advancing years ; and when they finally wear out 
and fall to pieces, old age and death supervene. 

As in the Republic, Plato is still the enemy of the purgative treatment 
of physicians, which, except in extreme cases, no man of sense will 
ever adopt. For, as he adds, perhaps with an insight into the truth, 
‘ every disease is akin to the nature of the living being and is only 
irritated by stimulants.’ He is of opinion that nature should be left 
to herself, and is inclined to think that physicians are in vain. As 

Digitized by Google 

TIMA E US. 

526* 

in the Charmides he tells us that the body cannot be cured without 
the soul, so in the Timaeus he strongly asserts the sympathy of soul 
and body, any defect of which is the occasion of the greatest discord 
and disproportion. We cannot deny that his conception of the human 
body falls under the condemnation which Hippocrates, or some one 
writing in his spirit (‘On Ancient Medicine’), has passed upon hypo- 
thetical medicine ; and yet, amid all his extravagance, he is not deserted 
by a true tact. 

§7. 

In Plato’s explanation of sensation we are struck by the fact that 
he has not the same distinct conception of organs of sense which is 
familiar to ourselves. The senses are not instruments, but rather pas- 
sages, through which external objects strike upon the mind. The 
eye is the aperture through which the stream of vision passes, the ear 
is the aperture through which the vibrations of sound pass. But that 
the complex structure of the eye or the ear is in any sense the cause 
of sight and hearing he seems hardly to be aware. 

The process of sight is the most complicated, and consists of three 
elements — the light which is supposed to reside within the eye, the 
light of the sun, and the light emitted from external objects. When 

the light of the eye meets the light of the sun, and both together 

meet the light issuing from an external object, this is the simple act 
of sight When the particles of light which proceed from the object 
are exactly equal to the particles of the visual ray which meet them 
from within, then the body is transparent. If they are larger and 
dilate the visual ray which mingles with them, a white colour is pro- 
duced by them; if they are smaller, a black. Other phenomena are 

produced by the variety and motion of light. A sudden flash of fire 

at once elicits light and moisture from the eye. A more subdued light 
of fire, which touches the surface and mingles with the moisture of 
the eye, produces a red colour. Out of these elements all other colours 
are supposed to be derived. All of them are combinations of light 
and fire with white and black. Plato himself tells us that he does 
not know in what proportions they combine, and he is of opinion 
that such knowledge is granted to the gods only. To have seen the 
affinity of them to each other and their connection with light, is not 
a bad basis for a theory of colours. We must remember that they 

INTRODUCTION. 

5*7* 

were not distinctly defined to his, as they are to our eyes ; he saw 
them, not as they are divided in the prism, or artificially manufactured 
for the painter's use, but as they exist in nature, blended and confused 
with one another. 

We can hardly agree with him when he tells us that smells do not 
admit of kinds. He seems to think that no definite qualities can attach 
to bodies which are in a state of transition or evaporation ; but he 
makes the subtle observation that smells must be denser than air, 
though thinner than water. The proof of this is that air can percolate 
without any accompanying smell. 

The affections peculiar to the tongue are of various kinds, and, like 
many other affections, arise out of composition and division. Some 
of them are produced by astringent, others by abstergent substances, 
stronger or weaker, acting upon the testing instruments of the tongue, 
and producing a more or less disagreeable sensation, while other 
particles congenial to the tongue harmonize them, according to their 
nature. The instruments of taste reach to the heart. Plato has a 
lively sense of the manner in which sensation and motion are com- 
municated from one part of the body to the other, though he confuses 
the affections with the organs. In like manner hearing is a blow’ 
which passes through the ear and ends in the region of the liver, 
being transmitted by means of the air, the brains, and the blood to 
the soul. The swifter sound is acute, the sound which moves slowly 
is grave. A great body of sound is loud, the opposite is low. Discord 
is produced by the swifter and slow'er motions of two sounds, and 
is converted into harmony when the swifter motions begin to pause 
and are overtaken by the slow'er. 

The general phenomena of sensation are partly internal, but the 
more violent are caused by conflict with external objects. Proceeding 
by a method of superficial observation, Plato remarks that the more 
sensitive parts of the human frame are those which are least covered 
by flesh, as is the case w'ith the head and the elbows. Man, if his 
head had been covered with a thicker pulp of flesh, might have been 
a longer lived animal than he is, but could not have had as quick 
perceptions. On the other hand, the tongue is one of the most sensitive 
of organs; but then this is made, not to be a covering to the bones 
which contain the marrow or source of life, but with an express purpose, 
and in a separate mass. 

TIMAEUS. 

5*8* 

§8. 

We have now to consider how far in any of these speculations Plato 
approximated to the discoveries of modern science. The modern 
physical philosopher is apt to dwell exclusively on the absurdities of 
ancient physical science, on the hap-hazard fancies and a priori 
assumptions of the ancient physical teacher, on his ignorance and 
regardlessness of facts. He hardly allows to his notions the merit of 
being ‘ the dead men’s bones ’ out of which he has himself risen to a 
higher knowledge. According to the view taken in these volumes, the 
general notions were necessary to the discovery of the particular facts, 
the metaphysical to the physical. Before men could observe the world, 
they must be able to conceive the world. 

To do justice to the subject, we should consider the physical 
philosophy of the ancients as a whole; we should remember, (1) that 
the nebular theory was the received belief of the early physicists ; 
(2) that the developement of animals out of frogs who came to land, 
and of man out of the animals, was held by Anaximenes in the sixth 
century before Christ; (3) that even by Philolaus and the early Pytha- 
goreans, the earth was held to be a body like the other stars revolving in 
space; they thought (4) that there was a sex in plants as well as in 
animals; (5) that musical notes depended on the relative length or 
tension of the strings from which they were emitted, and were measured 
by ratios of number; (6) that mathematical laws pervaded the world, 
and even qualitative differences were supposed to have their origin in 
number ; (7) the annihilation of matter was denied by several of them, and 
held to be a transformation only. For, although one of these discoveries 
might have been supposed to be a happy guess, we can hardly attribute 
them all to mere coincidences. 

Such reflections, although they cannot be dwelt upon at length in 
this place, lead us to take a favourable view of the speculations of the 
Timaeus. We have to consider not how much Plato actually knew, 
but how far he has contributed to the general ideas of physics, or 
supplied the notions, which, whether true or false, have stimulated the 
minds of thoughtful men in the path of discovery. Some of them may 
seem old-fashioned, and may nevertheless have had a great influence 
in promoting system and assisting enquiry, while in others of them 
we hear the latest word of physical or metaphysical philosophy. There 

INTRODUCTION. 

5 29* 

is also a third class, in which Plato falls short of the truths of modern 
science, though he can hardly be said to be wholly unacquainted with 
them, (i) To the first class belong the teleological theory of creation. 
Whether all things in the world can be explained as the result of natural 
laws, or whether we must not admit of tendencies and marks of design 
also, has been a question much disputed of late years. And if all 
things are the result of natural forces, we must admit that there are 
many more things in heaven and earth ‘than our philosophy dreams 
of/ which are as well expressed under the image of mind or design 
as under any other. At any rate, the language of Plato has been the 
language of natural theology down to our own time, nor can any 
description of the world wholly dispense with it. The notion of first 
and second or co-operative causes, which originally appears in the 
Timaeus, has also survived to our own day, and has been a great 
peace-maker between theology and science. Plato also approaches 
very near to our doctrine of the primary and secondary qualities of 
matter, p. 22. (2) Another popular notion which is found in the 

Timaeus, Is the feebleness of the human intellect — ‘ God knows the 
original qualities of things; man can only hope to attain to prob- 
ability.’ We speak in almost the same words of human intelligence, 
but not in the same manner of the uncertainty of our knowledge of 
nature. The reason is that this is assured to us by experiment, and 
is not contrasted with the certainty of ideal or mathematical know- 
ledge. We are conscious that mathematics are the great interpreter 
of nature; the ancient philosopher was only half conscious of this. 
While he saw one part of nature in harmony with mathematical laws, 
there was another part which seemed to him to have no law, and 
to be a mere residuum of an original chaos. 

But, secondly, besides popular notions, we seem to find also in the 
Timaeus, some true and some new conceptions of physical science. 
First, the doctrine of equipoise. Plato affirms, almost in so many 
words, that nature abhors a vacuum. Wherever there is a void the 
elements are pushing and thrusting one another until equality is 
restored. We must remember that these ideas were not derived from 
any definite experiment, but were the original reflections of man, 
fresh from the first observation of nature. The latest word of modern 
philosophy is continuity and development, but to Plato this is the 
beginning and foundation of science; there is nothing that he is so 
vol. 11. * m m 

TIMAEUS. 

53°* 

strongly persuaded of as that the world is one, and that all the various 
existences which are contained in it are only the transformations of 
the same soul of the world acting on the same matter. He would 
have readily admitted that out of the protoplasm all things were 
formed by the gradual process of creation ; but he would have insisted 
that mind and intelligence — not meaning by this, however, a conscious 
mind or person — was prior to them, and could alone have created 
them. Lastly, there remain two points in which he seems to touch 
great discoveries of modern times — the law of gravitation, and the 
circulation of the blood, (i) The law of gravitation, according to 
Plato, is a law, not only of the attraction of lesser bodies to larger 
ones, but of similar bodies to similar, having a magnetic power as well 
as a principle of gravitation. He observed that the earth, the water, 
and the air, had settled down to their places, and he imagined the fire 
or exterior aether to have a place beyond the air. When air and fire 
seemed to go upwards and solid bodies to go downwards, they were 
seeking their native elements. He did not remark that his own 
explanation did not suit all phenomena; and the simpler explanation, 
which assigns to bodies degrees of heaviness and lightness proportioned 
to the mass and distance of the bodies which attract them, never 
occurred to him. Yet the affinities of similar substances have some 
effect upon the composition of the world, and of this Plato may be 
thought to have had an anticipation. He may be described as con- 
fusing the attraction of gravitation with the attraction of cohesion. 
(2) Plato is perfectly aware — and he could hardly be ignorant — that 
blood is a fluid in constant motion. He also knew that blood is 
partly a solid substance consisting of several elements, which as he 
might have observed in the use of ‘ cupping-glasses ’ decompose and 
die, when no longer in motion. But the specific discovery that the 
blood flows out on one side of the heart through the arteries and 
returns through the veins on the other, which is commonly called the 
circulation of the blood, was absolutely unknown to him. 

ERRATA IN THE TIMAEUS. 

p. 568, 1. 27, for * shoulders ’ read * arms ’ 

p. 571,1. 23. According to Galen’s Commentary on the Timaeus, p. 18 (Frag- 
ments du Commentaire sur le Tim4e par le Ch. D’Aremberg), with which Dr. 
Greenhill has made me acquainted, tovtois refers not to #x*T0< but to it vtu/ia and 
nvp, the antecedents in the preceding sentence. Though the resumption of a previous 
antecedent is in the manner of the Timaeus, I believe that this mode of taking the 
words agrees better with the connection. For ‘ channels ’ read ' elements ’ 

p. 571, 1. 26, for ‘openings' read ‘lesser nets or openings’ 

p. 576, 1. 10, for ‘liquefied’ 1. 28, ‘melted’ p. 577, 1. 4, ‘dissolution’ read ‘decom- 
posed ’ ‘ decomposition ’ — as the same word is used in all three passages. 

P- 577, last line, for ‘ passage ’ read * passages ’ 

p. 578,1. 13, for ‘These, from the intensive nature of the affection, are termed 
tetanus and recurvation.’ read ‘ These are called tetanus and opisthotonus, by reason 
of the tension which accompanies them.’ 

p.578,1. 18, for ‘white leprosies’ read ‘leprous eruptions’ or ‘divers kinds of 
leprosies ’ 

p. 584, 1. 8 from bottom, for * wombs and other organs ’ read ‘the so-called womb 
or matrix ’ 

These corrections have been suggested by remarks which Dr. Greenhill of Hastings 

has kindly sent me. 

T I M A E U S. 

PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE. 

Socrates. Critias. 

Timaeus. Hermocrates. 

Socrates. One, two, three • and where, my dear Timaeus, is the 
fourth of those who were yesterday our guests and are to be our 
entertainers to-day ? 

Timaeus. He has been taken ill, Socrates, or he certainly would 
not have been absent at such a meeting as this. 

Soc. Then, if he is not coming, you and the two others must 
supply his place. 

Ttm. Assuredly we will do all that we can • having been hand- 
somely entertained by you yesterday, we who remain ought gladly 
to entertain you in return. 

Soc. Do you remember how many points there were of which I 
told you that we must speak ? 

Tim. We remember some of them, and you will be able to 
remind us of what we may have forgotten : or rather, if we are 
not troubling you, will you briefly recapitulate the whole, and then 
we shall be more certain ? 

Soc. I was enquiring yesterday how and of what citizens the 
best State would be composed j — that was the main purpose of 
what I was saying. 

Tim. I am sure, Socrates, that your words were very much to 
our mind. 

Soc. Do you remember the part about the husbandmen and the 
artisans ; and how we began by separating them from the class of 
defenders of the State ? 

VOL. II. l 1 

Digitized by Google 

514 

TIMA E US. 

Tim. Yes. 

Soc. And when we had given to each one that single employ- 
ment and particular art which were suited to his nature, we spoke 
of those who were intended to be our warriors, and said that they 
were to be guardians of the city against the attacks of enemies 
internal as well as external, and to have no other employment ; steph. 
with gentleness they were to judge their subjects, of whom they 18 
were by nature friends, but when they came in the way of their 
enemies in battle they were to be fierce with them. 

Tim. Exactly. 

Soc. We said, if I am not mistaken, that the guardians should 
be gifted with a passionate and also with a philosophical temper, 
and that this would be the true way of making them gentle to 
their friends and fierce to their enemies. 

Tim. Certainly. 

Soc . And what did we say of their education ? Were they not 
to be trained in gymnastic, and music, and all other sorts of know- 
ledge which were proper for them ? 

Tim. Very true. 

Soc. Thus trained, our citizens were not to think of gold and 
silver, or any other possession as their own private property ^ they 
were to be hired troops, receiving pay for keeping guard from 
those who were protected by them — the pay was to be no more 
than would suffice for men of simple life y and they were to have 
their expenses in common, and to live together in the continual 
practice of virtue, which was to be their sole pursuit. 

Tim. That also was said. 

Soc. Neither did we forget the women, of whom we said, that 
their natures should be made as nearly as possible like those of 
men, and that they should share with them in their military pur- 
suits and in their general way of life. 

Tim. That, again, was as you describe. 

Soc. And what was said about the procreation of children ? That 
was too singular to be easily forgotten, for the proposal was that 
all wives and children should be in common ; and we devised 
means that no one should ever be able to know his own child, but 
that all should imagine themselves to be of one family, and should 
regard as brothers and sisters those who were within a certain limit 
of age j and those who were of an elder generation they were to 

Digitized by Google 

TIMA E US . 

5 15 

regard as parents and grandparents, and those who were of a 
younger generation as children and grandchildren. 

Tim. Yes, indeed, there is no difficulty in remembering that. 

Soc. And do you also remember how, with a view of having as 
far as we could the best breed, we said that the chief magistrates, 
male and female, were to contrive secretly, by the use of certain 
lots, so to arrange the nuptial meeting, that the bad of either sex 
and the good of either sex should pair with their like, and there 
was to be no quarrelling on this account, for they were to imagine 
that the union was a mere chance, and was to be attributed to the 
lot? 

Tim. I remember. 

Soc. And you remember how we said that the children of the 
19 good parents were to be educated, and the children of bad parents 
secretly dispersed among the other citizens, and when they began 
to grow up the rulers were to be on the look out, and to bring up 
from below in their turn those who were worthy, and those among 
themselves who were unworthy were to take the places of those 
who came up ? 

Tim. True. 

Soc. Then have I now given you a complete summary of our 
yesterday’s discussion? Or is there anything, dear Timaeus, that 
has been omitted ? 

Tim. No, Socrates, those were precisely the heads of the discussion. 

Soc. Then let me now proceed to tell you my own feeling about 
the State which we have described. I might compare myself to a 
person who, on beholding beautiful animals either created by the 
painter’s art, or really alive but at rest, is seized with a desire of 
beholding them in motion or engaged in some struggle or conflict 
to which their forms appear suited. This is my feeling about the 
State which we have described : there are conflicts which all 
cities undergo, and I should like to hear some one tell of our own 
city carrying on a struggle against her neighbours, and how she 
went out to war in a fitting manner, and when at war showed a 
result answerable to her training and education, both in her modes 
of action and fashions of speech, when dealing with other cities. 
Now I, Critias, and Hermocrates, am conscious that I myself 
should never be able to set forth the city and her citizens in proper 
terms of praise, and I am not surprised at my own incapacity ; to 

l 1 2 

Digitized by Google 

TIMAEUS. 

516 

me the wonder is rather that the poets present as well as past are 
no better — not that I mean to depreciate them, but every one can 
see that they are a tribe of imitators, and will imitate best and 
most easily that in which they have been brought up; whereas that 
which is beyond the range of a man’s education can hardly be 
imitated by him in action, and with still more difficulty in speech. 

I am aware that the Sophists have plenty of brave words and fair 
devices, but I am afraid that being only wanderers from one city 
to another, and having never had homes of their own to manage, 
they may err in their ideas of philosophers and statesmen, and may 
fail to know what they do and say in their dealings with mankind 
on all the various occasions of peace and war. And thus people of 
your class are the only ones remaining who are fitted by nature and 
education to take part at once in politics and philosophy. Here 
is Timaeus, of Locris in Italy, a city which has excellent laws, and 20 
who is himself in wealth and rank the equal of any of his fellow- 
citizens ; he has held the most important and honourable offices in 
his own State, and, as I believe, has scaled the heights of philo- 
sophy ; and here is Critias, whom every Athenian knows to be well 
acquainted with the things of which we are speaking; and as to 
Hermocrates, I am assured by many witnesses that he is by nature 
and education well suited to philosophical enquiries. And there- 
fore yesterday when I saw that you wanted me to discuss the 
formation of the State I readily complied, being very well aware, 
that, if you only would, none were better qualified to carry the dis- 
cussion further, and that when you had engaged our city in a 
suitable war, you of all men living could best exhibit her playing 
her part in that situation. Having now completed my task, I in 
return impose this other task upon you. There was an agreement 
that you were to entertain me as I have entertained you. Here 
am I in festive array, and no man can be more ready for the pro- 
mised banquet. 

Her. And we too, Socrates, as Timaeus says, willdo our ut- 
most; there would be no excuse for our refusal to comply. As 
soon as we arrived yesterday at the guest-chamber of Critias, with 
whom we are staying, or rather on our way thither, we talked the 
subject over, and he told us an ancient tradition, which I wish, 
Critias, that you would repeat to Socrates, and then he will be able 
to judge whether it fulfils his requirements. 

TIMA E US. 

5i7 

Crit. That I will, if Timaeus, who is our partner, approves. 

Tim. I approve. 

Crit. Then listen, Socrates, to a strange tale which is, however, 
certainly true, as Solon, who was the wisest of the seven sages, 
declared. He was a relative and a great friend of my great-grand- 
father, Dropidas, as he himself says in several of his poems ; and 
Dropidas told Critias, my grandfather, who remembered and told 
us : — That there were of old great and marvellous actions of the 
Athenians, which have passed into oblivion through time and the 
destruction of the human race, and one in particular, which was 
1 the greatest of them all, the recital of which will be a suitable 
testimony of our gratitude to you, and also a hymn of praise 
true and worthy of the goddess, which may be sung by us at the 
festival in her honour. 

Soc. Very good. And what is this ancient famous action of 
which Critias spoke not as a mere legend, but as a veritable action 
of the Athenian state, which Solon recounted ? 

Crit. I will tell an old-world story which I heard from an aged 
man • for Critias was, as he said, at that time nearly ninety years 
of age, and I was about ten years of age. Now the day was that 
day of the Apaturia which is called the registration of youth, at 
which, according to custom, our parents gave prizes for recitations, 
and the poems of several poets were recited by us boys, and many 
of us sang the poems of Solon, which were new at the time. One 
of our tribe, either because this was his real opinion, or because he 
thought that he would please Critias, said that in his judgment 
Solon was not only the wisest of men, but also the noblest of poets. 
The old man, as I very well remember, brightened up at this and 
said, smiling: Yes, Amynander, if Solon had only, like other 
poets, made poetry the business of his life, and had completed the 
tale which he brought with him from Egypt, and had not been 
compelled, by reason of the factions and troubles which he found 
stirring in this country when he came home, to attend to other 
matters, in my opinion he would have been as famous as Homer 
or Hesiod, or any poet. 

And what was the poem about, Critias ? said the person who 
addressed him. 

About the greatest action which the Athenians ever did, and 
which ought to have been the most famous, but which, through the 

TIMA E US. 

518 

lapse of time and the destruction of the actors, has not come down 
to us. 

Tell us, said the other, the whole story, and how and from whom 
Solon heard this veritable tradition. 

He replied: — At the head of the Egyptian Delta, where the 
river Nile divides, there is a certain district which is called 
the district of Sais, and the great city of the district is also 
called Sais, and is the city from which Amasis the king was 
sprung. And the citizens have a deity who is their foundress; 
she is called in the Egyptian tongue Neith, and is asserted by 
them to be the same whom the Hellenes called Athene. Now the 
citizens of this city are great lovers of the Athenians, and say that 
they are in some way related to them. Thither came Solon, who 22 
was received by them with great honour; and he asked the priests, 
who were most skilful in such matters, about antiquity, and made 
the discovery that neither he nor any other Hellene knew any- 
thing worth mentioning about the times of old. On one occasion, 
when he was drawing them on to speak of antiquity, he began to 
tell about the most ancient things in our part of the world — about 
Phoroneus, who is called £ the first,’ and about Niobe ; and after the 
Deluge, to tell of the lives of Deucalion and Pyrrha ; and he traced 
the genealogy of their descendants, and attempted to reckon how 
many years old were the events of which he was speaking, and to 
give the dates. Thereupon, one of the priests, who was of a very 
great age, said : O Solon, Solon, you Hellenes are but children, and 
there is never an old man who is an Hellene. Solon hearing this, 
said, What do you mean ? I mean to say, he replied, that in mind 
you are all-young ; there is no old opinion handed down among you 
by ancient tradition ; nor any science which is hoary with age. And 
I will tell you the reason of this. There have been, and will be 
again, many destructions of mankind arising out of many causes ; 
the greatest have been brought about by the agencies of fire and 
water, and other lesser ones by innumerable other causes. There 
is a story, which even you have preserved, that once upon a time 
Phaethon, the son of Helios, having yoked the steeds in his father’s 
chariot, because he was not able to drive them in the path of his 
father, burnt up all that was upon the earth, and was himself 
destroyed by a thunderbolt. Now, this has the form of a myth, 
but really signifies a declination of the bodies moving around the 
earth and in the heavens, and a great conflagration of things upon 

TIMA BUS. 

5i9 

the earth recurring at long intervals of time ; when this happens, 
those who live upon the mountains and in dry and lofty places are 
more liable to destructions than those who dwell by rivers or on 
the seashore. And from this calamity the Nile, who is our never- 
failing saviour, saves and delivers us. When, on the other hand, 
the gods purge the earth with a deluge of water, among you, herds- 
men and shepherds on the mountains are the survivors, whereas 
those of you who live in cities are carried by the rivers into the 
sea. But in this country, neither at that time nor at any other, 
does the water come from above on the fields, having always a 
tendency to come up from below, for which reason the things pre- 
served here are said to be the oldest. The fact is, that wherever 
the extremity of winter frost or of summer sun does not prevent, 
the human race is always increasing at times, and at other times 
23 diminishing in numbers. And whatever happened either in your 
country or in ours, or in any other region of which we are in- 
formed— if any action which is noble or great or in any other 
way remarkable has taken place, all that has been written down 
of old, and is preserved in our temples; whereas you and other 
nations are just being provided with letters and the other things 
which States require; and then, at the usual period, the stream 
from heaven descends like a pestilence, and leaves only those of 
you who are destitute of letters and education ; and thus you have 
to begin all over again as children, and know nothing of what 
happened in ancient times, either among us or among yourselves. 
As for those genealogies of yours which you have recounted to us, 
Solon, they are no better than the tales of children ; for in the first 
place you remember one deluge only, whereas there were many of 
them ; and in the next place, you do not know that there dwelt 
in your land the fairest and nobiest race of men which ever lived, 
of whom you and your whole city are but a seed or remnant. And 
this was unknown to you, because for many generations the sur- 
vivors of that destruction died and made no sign. For there was 
a time, Solon, before the great deluge of all, when the city which 
now is Athens, was first in war and was pre-eminent for the 
excellence of her laws, and is said to have performed the noblest 
deeds and to have had the fairest constitution of any of which 
tradition tells, under the face of heaven. Solon marvelled at this, 
and earnestly requested the priest to inform him exactly and in 
order about these former citizens. You are welcome to hear 

520 

TIMAEUS . 

about them, Solon, said the priest, both for your own sake and 
for that of the city, and above all, for the sake of the goddess who 
is the common patron and protector and educator of both our 
cities. She founded your city a thousand years before ours, re- 
ceiving from the Earth and Hephaestus the seed of your race, 
and then she founded ours, the constitution of which is set down 
in our sacred registers as 8000 years old. As touching the citizens 
of 9000 years ago, I will briefly inform you of their laws and of 
the noblest of their actions ; and the exact particulars of the whole 
we will hereafter go through at our leisure in the sacred registers 24 
themselves. If you compare these very laws with your own you will 
find that many of ours are the counterpart of yours as they were in 
the olden time. In the first place, there is the caste of priests, 
which is separated from all the others • next there are the arti- 
ficers, who exercise their several crafts by themselves and without 
admixture of any other ; and also there is the class of shepherds 
and that of hunters1, as well as that of husbandmen ; and you will 
observe, too, that the warriors in Egypt are separated from all the 
other classes, and are commanded by the law only to engage in war j 
moreover, the weapons with which they are equipped are shields and 
spears, and this the goddess taught first among you, and then in 
Asiatic countries, and we among the Asiatics first adopted. Then 
as to wisdom, do you observe what care the law took from the 
very first, searching out and comprehending the whole order of 
things down to prophecy and medicine (the latter with a view to 
health) ; and out of these divine elements drawing what was 
needful for human life, and adding every sort of knowledge 
which was connected with them. All this order and arrangement 
the goddess first imparted to you when establishing your city ; and 
she chose the spot of earth in which you were born, because she 
saw that the happy temperament of the seasons in that land would 
produce the wisest of men. Wherefore the goddess who was a 
lover both of war and of wisdom, selected and first of all settled 
that spot which was the most likely to produce men likest herself. 
And there you dwelt, having such laws as these and still better 
ones, and excelled all mankind in all virtue as became the chil- 
dren and disciples of the gods. 

1 Reading to tS>v OrjpevrStv. 

TIMA £ US, . 

521 

Many great and wonderful deeds are recorded of your State in 
our histories. But one of them exceeds all the rest in greatness 
and valour. For these histories tell of a mighty power which was 
aggressing wantonly against the whole of Europe and Asia, and to 
which your city put an end. This power came forth out of the 
Atlantic Ocean, for in those days the Atlantic was navigable ; and 
there was an island situated in front of the straits which you call 
the columns of Heracles; the island was larger than Libya and 
Asia put together, and was the way to other islands, and from the 
25 islands you might pass to the whole of the opposite continent 
which surrounded the true ocean ; for this sea which is within the 
Straits of Heracles is only a harbour, having a narrow entrance, 
but that other is a real sea, and the surrounding land may be most 
truly called a continent. Now in this island of Atlantis there 
was a great and wonderful empire which had rule over the whole 
island and several others, as well as over parts of the continent, 
and, besides these, they subjected the parts of Libya within the 
columns of Heracles as far as Egypt, and of Europe as far as 
Tyrrhenia. The vast power thus gathered into one, endeavoured 
to subdue at one blow our country and yours and the whole of 
the land which was within the straits; and then, Solon, your 
country shone forth, in the excellence of her virtue and strength, 
among all mankind; for she was first in courage and military skill, 
and was the leader of the Hellenes. And when the rest fell off from 
her, being compelled to stand alone, after having undergone the 
very extremity of danger, she defeated and triumphed over the inva- 
ders, and preserved from slavery those who were not yet subjected, 
and freely liberated all the others who dwell within the limits of 
Heracles. But afterwards there occurred violent earthquakes and 
floods ; and in a single day and night of rain all your warlike men 
in a body sank into the earth, and the island of Atlantis in like 
manner disappeared, and was sunk beneath the sea. And that is 
the reason why the sea in those parts is impassable and impene- 
trable, because there is such a quantity of shallow mud in the 
way ; and this was caused by the subsidence of the island. 

I have told you shortly, Socrates, the tradition which the aged 
Critias heard from Solon. And when you were speaking yesterday 
about your city and citizens, this very tale which I am telling you 
came into my mind, and I could not help remarking how, by some 

TIMAEUS. 

coincidence not to be explained, you agreed in almost every par- 
ticular with the account of Solon ; but I did not like to speak at 26 
the moment. For as a long time had elapsed, I had forgotten too 
much, and I thought that I had better first of all run over the 
narrative in my own mind and then I would speak. And for this 
reason I readily assented to your request yesterday, considering 
that I was pretty well furnished with a theme such as the audience 
would approve, and to find this is in all such cases the chief 
difficulty. 

And therefore, as Hermocrates has told you, on my way home 
yesterday I imparted my recollections to my friends in order to 
refresh my memory, and during the night I thought about the 
words and have nearly recovered them all. Truly, as is often 
said, the lessons which we have learned as children make a won- 
derful impression on our memories, for I am not sure that I could 
remember all that I heard yesterday, but I should be much surprised 
if I forgot any of these things which I have heard very long ago. I 
listened to the old man telling them, when a child, with great interest 
at the time ; he was very ready to teach me, and I asked him about 
them a great many times, so that they were branded into my mind 
in ineffaceable letters. As soon as the day broke I began to repeat 
them to my companions, that they as well as myself might have a 
material of discourse. And now, Socrates, I am ready to tell you 
the whole tale of which this is the introduction. I will give you 
not only the general heads, but the details exactly as I heard them. 
And as to the city and citizens, which you yesterday described to 
us in fiction, let us transfer them to the world of reality; this shall 
be our city, and we will suppose that the citizens whom you 
imagined, were our veritable ancestors — the same of whom the 
priest was telling; they will perfectly agree, and there will be no 
inconsistency in saying that the citizens of your republic are these 
ancient Athenians. Let us distribute the discussion amongst us, 
and all endeavour as far as we can to carry out your instructions. 
Consider then, Socrates, if this narrative is suited to the purpose, 
or whether we should seek for some other instead. 

Soc. And what other, Critias, can we find that will be better 
than this which is natural and suitable to the festival of the 
goddess; and has the very great advantage of being a fact and 
not a fiction ? How or where shall we find others if we abandon 

Digitized by Google 

TIM A E US. 

523 

this ? There are none to be had, and therefore you must tell the 
2 7 tale, and good luck to you ; and I in return for my yesterday's dis- 
course will now rest and be a listener. 

Crit. Let me proceed to explain to you, Socrates, the order in 
which we have arranged our entertainment. The intention is 
that Timaeus, who is the most of an astronomer amongst us, and 
has made a special study of the nature of the universe, should 
speak first, beginning with the generation of the world and going 
down to the creation of man ; next, I am to receive the citizens of 
whom he is the imaginary parent, and some of whom will have 
profited by the excellent education which you have given them ; 
and then, in conformity with the law of Solon, we will bring the 
heroes of his tale into court and judge them ourselves, as if they 
were those very Athenians whom the sacred Egyptian record has 
recovered from oblivion, and we shall thenceforward be entitled to 
speak of them as Athenians and fellow-citizens. 

Soc. I see that I shall receive in my turn a perfect and noble 
feast of reason. And now, Timaeus, you I suppose are to follow, 
first offering up a prayer to the gods as is customary. 

Tim. All men, Socrates, who have any degree of right feeling do 
this at the beginning of every enterprise great or small — they 
always call upon the gods. And we, too, who are going to dis- 
course of the nature of the universe, whether created or uncreated, 
if we be not altogether out of our wits, must invoke and pray the 
gods and goddesses that we may say all things in a manner 
pleasing to them and consistent with ourselves. Let this, then, 
be our invocation to the gods, to which I add an exhortation to 
myself that I may set forth this high argument in the manner 
which will be most intelligible to you, and will most accord with 
my own intent. 

First, if I am not mistaken, we must determine, What is that 
which always is and has no becoming ; and what is that which is 
always becoming and has never any being. That which is appre- 
hended by reflection and reason always is, and is the same ; that, 
28 on the other hand, which is conceived by opinion with the help of 
sensation and without reason, is in a process of becoming and 
perishing, but never really is. Now everything that becomes or is 
created must of necessity be created by some cause, for nothing can 
be created without a cause. That of which the artificer looks always 

524 

TIMA E US. 

to the same and unchangeable, and of which he works out the form 
and nature after an unchangeable pattern, must of necessity be 
made fair and perfect ; but that of which the artificer looks to the 
created only, and fashions after a created pattern, is not fair or 
perfect. Was the heaven then or the world, — whether called by 
this or any other more appropriate name — the question which I 
am going to ask has to be asked about the beginning of everything 
— was the world, I say, always in existence and without begin- 
ning ? or created and having a beginning ? Created, I reply, being 
visible and tangible and having a body, and therefore sensible ; 
and all sensible things which are apprehended by opinion and 
sense are in process of creation and created. Now that which is 
created must of necessity be created by a cause. But how can we 
find out the father and maker of all this universe ? Or when we 
have found him how shall we be able to speak of him to all men ? 
And there is still another question to be asked about him. Which 
of the patterns had the artificer in view when he made the world, 
the pattern which is unchangeable, or that which is created ? If 
the world be indeed fair and the artificer good, then, as is plain, 
he must have looked to that which is eternal. But if what I may 29 
not venture to say is true, then he looked to the created pattern. 
Every one will see that he must have looked to the eternal, for 
the world is the fairest of creations and He is the best of causes. 
And being of such a nature the world has been framed by him 
with a view to that which is apprehended by reason and mind 
and is unchangeable, and if this be admitted must of necessity 
be the copy of something. Now that the beginning of every- 
thing should be according to nature is a great matter. Let us 
then assume about the copy and original that the words are 
akin to the matter which they describe, and that when they 
relate to the lasting and permanent and intelligible, they ought 
to be lasting and unfailing, and as far as is in the nature of 
words irrefutable and immovable, and nothing less than this. 
But the words which are the expression of the imitation of the 
eternal things, which is an image only, need only be likely and 
analogous to the former words. What essence is to gene- 
ration, that, truth is to belief. If then, Socrates, amid the many 
opinions about the gods and the generation of the universe, we 
are not able to give notions that are in every way exact and 

Digitized by Google 

TIMAEUS . 

525 

consistent with one another, do not wonder at that. If only we 
adduce probabilities as likely as any others, that ought to be 
enough for us, when we remember that I who am the speaker, and 
you who are the judges are only mortal men, and we ought to 
accept the tale which is probable and not enquire further. 

Soc. Excellent, Timaeus, your words shall be taken as you mean 
them. We have heard your prelude with the greatest pleasure, 
and now beg you to proceed to the strain which follows. 

Tim. Let me tell you then, why the creator of the world gene- 
rated and created this universe. He was good, and no goodness 
can ever have any jealousy of anything. And being free from 
jealousy, he desired that all things should be as like himself as 
possible. This is the true beginning of creation and of the world, 
30 which we shall do well in receiving on the testimony of wise men : 
God desired that all things should be good and nothing bad as far 
as this could be accomplished. Wherefore also finding the whole 
visible sphere not at rest, but moving in an irregular and dis- 
orderly manner, out of disorder he brought order, considering that 
this was far better than the other. Now he who is the best 
neither creates nor ever has created anything but the fairest, and 
reflecting upon the visible works of nature, he found that no unin- 
telligent creature taken as a whole was fairer than the intelligent 
taken as a whole ; and that intelligence could not exist in any- 
thing which was devoid of soul. For these reasons he put intel- 
ligence in soul, and soul in body, and framed the universe to be 
the best and fairest work in the order of nature. And therefore 
using the language of probability, we may say that the world became 
a living soul and truly rational through the providence of God. 

This being supposed, let us next proceed to consider the further 
question, in the likeness of what animal did the Creator make the 
world ? Certainly we cannot suppose that the form was like that 
of beings which exist in parts only ; for nothing can be beautiful 
that is like any imperfect thing ; but we may regard the world as 
the very likeness of that of which all other animals, both indivi- 
dually and as tribes are portions. For the pattern of the universe 
contains in itself all intelligible beings, just as this world contains 
us and all other visible creatures. For the Deity intending to 
make this world like the fairest and most perfect of intelligible 
beings, framed one visible animal comprehending within all other 

526 

TIMAEUS. 

animals of a kindred nature. Are we right in saying that there is 31 
one heaven, or shall we rather say that they are many and infinite? 
There is one, if the created heaven is to accord with the pattern. 
For that which includes all other intelligible creatures cannot have 
a second or companion; in that case there would be need of 
another living being which would include those two, and of which 
they would be parts, and the likeness would be more truly said to 
resemble not those two, but that other which included them. In 
order then that the world might be like the perfect animal in 
unity, he who made the worlds made them not two or infinite in 
number; but there is and ever will be one only-begotten and 
created heaven. 

Now that which is created is of necessity corporeal, and also 
visible and tangible. And nothing is visible when there is no 
fire, or tangible which is not solid, and nothing is solid without 
earth. Wherefore also, God in the beginning of creation made 
the body of the universe to consist of fire and earth. But two 
things cannot be held together without a third ; they must have 
some bond of union. And the fairest bond is that which most 
completely fuses and is fused into the things that are bound; 
and proportion is best adapted to effect such a fusion. For 
whenever in three numbers, whether solids or of any other power, 
there is a mean, and the mean is to the last term what the first 3a 
term is to the mean ; and again, when the mean is to the first 
term as the last term is to the mean, then the mean becoming 
first and last, and the first and last both becoming means, all 
things will of necessity come to be the same, and being the same 
with one another will all be one. If now the universal frame 
had been created a surface only and had no depth, one mean 
would have sufficed to bind together itself and the other terms ; 
but now, as the world must be solid, and solid bodies are always 
compacted not by one mean but by two, God placed water and 
air in the mean between fire and earth, and made them to have 
the same proportions as far as was possible (as fire is to air so is 
air to water, and as air is to water so is water to earth), and thus 
he bound and put together a visible and palpable heaven. And 
for these reasons, and out of these elements, which are in number 
four, the body of the world was created in the harmony of pro- 
portion, and therefore having the spirit of friendship ; and being 

TIMA E US. 

5 27 

at unity with itself, was indissoluble by the hand of any other 
than the framer. 

Now the creation took up the whole of each of the four 
elements; for the Creator compounded the world out of all the 
fire and all the water and all the air and all the earth, leaving 
no part of any of them nor any power of them outside. He 
intended, in the first place, that the whole animal should be perfect, 
as far as possible, and that the parts of which he was formed should 
33 be perfect; and that he should be one, leaving no remnants out of 
which another such world might be created: and, also, that he 
should be free from old age and unaffected by disease. And, con- 
sidering that hot and cold and other powerful forces which unite 
bodies are apt to surround and attack them from without when they 
are unprepared, and by bringing diseases and old age upon them, 
make them to dissolve and die — for this cause and on these grounds, 
he fabricated the world whole and of whole elements, perfect and not 
liable to old age and disease. And he gave to the world the figure 
which was suitable and also natural. But, to the animal which 
was to comprehend all animals, that figure was suitable which com- 
prehends within itself all other figures. Wherefore also he made 
the world in the form of a globe, round as from a lathe, in every 
direction equally distant from the centre to the extremes, the most 
perfect and the most like itself of all figures; for he considered that 
the like is infinitely fairer than the unlike. This he finished all 
round, and made the outside quite smooth for many reasons ; in 
the first place, because eyes would have been of no use to him 
when there was nothing remaining without him, or which could 
be seen; and there would have been no use in ears when there was 
nothing to be heard ; nor was there any surrounding atmosphere 
to be breathed ; nor would there have been any use of implements 
by the help of which he might receive his food or get rid of 
what he had already digested ; for there was nothing which went 
from him or came to him, seeing that there was nothing beside 
him. And he himself provided his nutriment to himself through 
his own decay, and all that he did or suffered was done in himself 
and by himself, according to art. For the Creator conceived that 
a being which was self-sufficient would be far more excellent than 
one that lacked anything; and, as he had no need to take any- 
thing or defend himself against any one, he had no need of hands, 

TIMA BUS. 

and the Creator did not think necessary to furnish him with them 
when he did not want them : nor had he any need of feet, nor 
of the whole apparatus of walking ; but he assigned to him the 34 
motion appropriate to his spherical form, being that of all the 
seven which is most appropriate to mind and intelligence, and 
so he made him move in the same manner and on the same spot, 
going round in a circle turning within himself. All the other 
six motions he took away from him, and made him incapable of 
being affected by them. And as this circular movement required 
no feet, he made the universe without feet or legs. 

Such was the whole scheme of the eternal God about the god 
that was to be, to whom he for all these reasons gave a body, 
smooth, even, and in every direction equi-distant from a centre, 
entire and perfect, and formed out of perfect bodies. And in 
the centre he put the soul, which he diffused through the whole, 
and also spread over all the body round about ; and he made one 
solitary and only heaven a circle moving in a circle, having 
such excellence as to be able to hold converse with itself, and 
needing no other friendship or acquaintance. Having these pur- 
poses in view he created the world to be a blessed god. 

Now God did not make the soul after the body, although we 
have spoken of them in this order ; for when he put them together 
he would never have allowed that the elder should serve the 
younger, but this is what we say at random, because we our- 
selves too are very largely affected by chance. Whereas he made 
the soul in origin and excellence prior to and older than the 
- body, to be the ruler and mistress, of whom the body was to be 
the subject. And the soul he made out of the following elements 
and on this manner:— he took of the unchangeable and indivisible 35 
essence, and also of the divisible and corporeal which is generated, 
and he made a third sort of intermediate essence out of them 
both, partaking of the nature of the same and of the other, and 
thus he compounded a nature which was in a mean between the 
indivisible and the divisible and corporeal. These three elements 
he took and mingled them all in one form, compressing the 
reluctant and unsociable nature of the other into the same. And 
when he had mixed them with the essence and out of all the three 
made one, he again divided this whole into as many portions as 
was fitting, each of them containing an admixture of the same 

TIMA E US, . 

529 

and of the other and of the essence. And he began to divide 
on this wise : — first of all, he took away one part of the whole, 
and then he separated 

a second part which was double the first, and then he took away 
a third part which was half as much again as the second and 
three times as much again as the first, and then he took a fourth 
part which was twice as much as the second, and a fifth part which 
was three times as much as the third, and a sixth part which was 
eight times as much as the first, and a seventh part which was 
twenty-seven times the first. After this he filled up the double 
36 and triple intervals [i. e. 1, 2, 4, 8, and 1, 3, 9, 27], cutting off 
portions from the whole and placing them between the intervals, 
so that in each interval there were two kinds of means — 

the one exceeding and exceeded by equal parts of the respective 
extremes [as for example 1, £, 2, in which the mean £ is one- 
third more than 1 and one-third less than 2], the other being 
that kind of mean which exceeds and is exceeded by an equal 
number. Where there are intervals of f and of £ and of £, 
made by the connecting terms in the former intervals, he 
filled up all the intervals of £ with the intervals of £, leaving 
a part of each, of which the interval was in the ratio of 256 to 
243 2. And thus the whole mixture out of which he cut these 
portions was all exhausted by him. This entire compound he 
divided lengthways into two parts, which he joined to one 
another at the centre like the figure of a X, and bent them into 
a circular form, connecting them with themselves and each other 
at the point opposite to that of contact ; and, comprehending them 
in an uniform motion on the same spot around a centre, he made 
the one the outer and the other the inner circle. Now the 

[ 2, 3, 4, 9, 8, 27, ] 

[ f> 2, £, 3, 4, y , a, 8, ] 

[ 4? 2J 3? 9> Vj 1 85 27, 3 

243 81 8 243 81 16 

* ~ • A • • ____ • __ •• ' * • . • • - • 

A • " • • • -5 » 4 ♦ # / • 

128 32 3 64 16 3 

2~ : 8. (Martin.) 

vol. 11. 

m m 

Digitized by Google 

530 

TIMA E US . 

motion of the outer circle he called the motion of the same; 
and the motion of the inner circle the motion of the other. The 
motion of the same he made to proceed round by the side to 
the right, and the motion of the other diagonally to* the left. 
And he gave dominion to the motion of the same and the like, 
for that he left single and undivided; but the inner motion he 
split into six portions and made seven unequal orbits, having their 
intervals in ratios of two and three, three of each, and bade their 
orbits move in a direction opposite to one another; and three 
[Sun, Mercury, Venus] he made to move with equal swiftness, 
and the remaining four [Moon, Saturn, Mars, Jupiter] to move 
with unequal swiftness to the three and to one another, but all 
in due course. 

Now when the Creator had framed the soul according to his 
will, he formed within the mind the corporeal universe, and 
brought them together, and united them centre to centre. The 
soul, interfused everywhere from the centre to the circumference 
of heaven, of which she is the external envelopment, herself 
turning in herself, began a divine beginning of never-ceasing 
and rational life enduring throughout all time. The body of 
heaven is visible, but the soul invisible, and partakes of reason 37 
and harmony, and being made by the best of intelligible and ever- 
lasting beings, is the best of things created. And as, being com- 
posed of the nature of the same and of the other and of the essence, 
these three, and divided and bound together in proportion, and 
revolving in the circle of herself, the soul, when touching anything 
which has essence, whether dispersed in parts or undivided, is 
stirred throughout her being to declare the sameness and diversity 
of things, and as to what and in what way and how and when 
individuals are related or affected, both in the world of generation 
and in the world of immutable being. And when reason, which 
works with equal truth both in the circle of the other and of the 
same, — in the sphere of the self-moved in voiceless silence 
moving, — when reason, I say, is in the neighbourhood of sense, 
and the circle of the other also moving truly3 imparts the inti- 
mations of sense to the whole soul, then arise fixed and true 
opinions and beliefs. But when reason is in the sphere of the ra- 
tional, and the circle of the same moving smoothly indicates this, 

s Reading avr6. 

TIMAEUS. 

53i 

then intelligence and knowledge are of necessity perfected. And 
if any one affirms that in which these are found to be other than 
the soul, he will say the very opposite of the truth. 

When the father and creator saw the image that he had made 
of the eternal gods moving and living, he was delighted, and in 
his joy determined to make his work still more like the pattern ; 
and as the pattern was an eternal creature, he sought to make the 
universe the same as far as might be. Now the nature of the 
intelligible being is eternal, and to bestow eternity on the creature 
was wholly impossible. But he resolved to make a moving image 
of eternity, and as he set in order the heaven he made this eternal 
image having a motion according to number, while eternity rested 
in unity ; and this is what we call time. For there were no days 
and nights and months and years before the heaven was created, 
but when he created the heaven he created them also. All these 
are the parts of time, and the past and future are created species 
of time, which we unconsciously but wrongly transfer to the 
eternal essence ; for we say indeed that he was, he is, he will be, 
38 but the truth is that c he is’ alone truly expresses him, and that 
c was’ and ‘will be7 are only to be spoken of generation in time, for 
they are motions, but that which is immovably the same cannot 
become older or younger by time, nor ever did or has become, or 
hereafter will be, older, nor is subject at all to any of those states 
of generation which attach to the movements of sensible things. 
These are the forms of time when imitating eternity and moving 
in a circle measured by number. Moreover, when we say that 
what has become has become, and what is becoming is becoming, 
and that what will become will become, and that what is not is not, 
— all these are inaccurate modes of expression. But perhaps this is 
not the place in which we should discuss minutely these matters. 

Time, then, was created with the heaven, in order that being 
produced together they might be dissolved together, if ever there 
was to be any dissolution of them ; and was framed after the 
pattern of the eternal nature, that it might, as far as possible, 
resemble it, for that pattern exists throughout all ages, and the 
created heaven has been, and is, and will be in all time. Such 
was the mind and thought of God in the creation of time. And 
in order to accomplish this creation, he made the sun and moon 
and five other stars, which are called the planets, to distinguish 

Mm2 

532 

TIMAEUS. 

and preserve the numbers of time, and when God made the bodies 
of these several stars he gave them orbits in the circle of the 
other. There were seven orbits, as the stars were seven; first, 
there was the moon in the orbit nearest the earth, and then the 
sun in the next nearest orbit beyond the earth, and the morning 
star and the star sacred to Hermes, which revolve in their orbits 
as swiftly as the sun, but with an opposite principle of motion, 
which is the reason why the sun and Hermes and Lucifer meet or 
overtake, and are met or overtaken by each other. To enumerate 
the places which he assigned to the other stars, and the reasons of 
them, if they were all to be counted, though a secondary matter, 
would give more trouble than the primary ones. These things at 
some future time, when we are at leisure, may have the considera- 
tion which they deserve, but not at present. 

Now, when all the stars which were needed to make time had 
attained a motion suitable to them, and their bodies fastened by 
vital chains, had come into being as living creatures, and learnt 
their appointed task according to the motions of the other, which 
is oblique, and passes through and is overruled by the motions of 
the same, they revolved, some in a larger and some in a lesser 39 
orbit, — those which have the lesser orbit revolving faster, and 
those which have the larger moving more slowly. But in the 
movement of the same, those which revolved fastest appeared to 
overtake and be overtaken by those which moved slower ; for all 
the orbits of the same moved in a spiral, because they went two 
ways in opposite directions, and hence that which receded most 
slowly from the sphere of the same, which was the swiftest, ap- 
peared to follow it most nearly. That there might be some visible 
measure of their relative swiftness and slowness as they proceeded 
in their eight courses, God lighted a fire, which we now call the 
sun, in the second of these orbits, that it might give light to the 
whole of heaven, and that the animals, who were by nature fitted, 
might participate in number; this was the lesson which they 
were to learn from the revolutions of the same and the like. 
Thus, then, and by these means the night and the day were 
created, being the period of the one most intelligent revolution. 
And the month was created when the moon had completed her 
orbit and overtaken the sun, and the year when the sun had com- 
pleted his own orbit. The periods of the other stars have not 

Digitized by Google 

TIMA E US. 

533 

been understood by men in general, but only by a few, and they 
have no name for them, and do not estimate their comparative 
length by the aid of number, and hence they are hardly aware that 
their wanderings, which are infinite in number and admirable for 
their variety, make up time. And yet there is no difficulty in 
seeing that the perfect number of time completes the perfect year 
when all the eight revolutions, having their relative degrees of 
swiftness, are accomplished together and again meet at their 
original point of departure, measured by the circle of the same 
moving equally. Thus, and to this end, came into existence such 
of the stars as moved and returned through the heaven, in order 
that the created heaven might be as like as possible to the perfect 
and intelligible animal, and imitate the eternal nature. 

Until the creation of time, all things had been made in the 
likeness of that which was their pattern, but in so far as the 
universe did not as yet include within itself all animals, there 
was a difference. This defect the creator supplied by fashioning 
them after the nature of the pattern. And as the mind perceives 
ideas or species of a certain nature and number in the ideal 
animal, he thought that this created world ought to have them of a 
like nature and number. There are four such ; one of them is the 
40 heavenly race of the gods; another, the race of birds moving in the 
air; the third, the watery species; and the fourth, the pedestrian 
and land animals. Of the divine, he made the greater part out of 
fire, that they might be the brightest and fairest to the sight, and 
he made them after the likeness of the universe in the form of a 
circle, and gave them to know and follow the best, distributing 
them over the whole circumference of the heaven, which was to 
be a true cosmos or glory spangled with them. And he bestowed 
on each of them two motions; first, the motion in the same, 
because they ever continue thinking about the same things, and 
also a forward motion, in that they are controlled by the revo- 
lution of the same and the like ; but the other five motions were 
wanting in them: and thus each of them was the best pos- 
sible. And for this reason also the fixed stars were created, being 
divine and eternal animals, ever-abiding and revolving after the 
same manner and on the same spot; and the other stars which 
revolve and also wander, as has been already described, were 
created after their likeness. The earth, which is our nurse, 

534 

TIMA E US. 

compacted (or circling) around the pole which is extended through 
the universe, he made to be the guardian and artificer of night 
and day, first and eldest of gods that are in the interior of heaven. 
Vain would be the labour of telling about all the figures of them 
moving as in a dance, and their meetings with one another, and 
the return of their orbits on themselves, and their approximations, 
and to say which of them in their conjunctions meet, and which 
of them are in opposition, and how they get behind and before 
one another, and at what times they are severally eclipsed to our 
sight and again reappear, sending terrors and intimations of things 
about to happen to those who can calculate them — to attempt 
to tell of all this without looking at the models of them would 
be labour in vain. Let what we have said about the nature of the 
created and visible gods be deemed sufficient and have an end. 

To tell of other divinities, and to know their origin, is beyond 
us, and we must accept the traditions of the men of old time who 
affirm themselves to be the offspring of the gods, and they must 
surely have known the truth about their own ancestors. How can 
we doubt the word of the children of the gods ? Although they 
give no probable or certain proofs, still, as they declare that they 
are speaking of family traditions, we must believe them in obe- 
dience to the law. In this manner, then, according to them, the 
genealogy of these gods is to be received and narrated : — 

Oceanus and Tethys were the children of Earth and Heaven, 
and from these sprang Phorcys and Cronos and Rhea, and many 
more with them; and from Cronos and Rhea sprang Zeus and 
Here, and all those whom we know as their brethren, and others 4 
who were their children. 

Now, when ail of them, both those who visibly appear in their 
revolutions as well as those other gods who are of a more retiring 
nature, had come into being, the creator of the universe spoke as 
follows : — Gods and sons of gods who are my works, and of whom 
I am the artificer and father, my creations are indissoluble, if so I 
will. All that is bound may be dissolved, but only an evil being 
would wish to dissolve that which is harmonious and happy. And 
although being created, ye are not altogether immortal and indis- 
soluble, ye shall certainly not be dissolved, nor be liable to the 
fate of death ; having in my will a greater and mightier bond than 
those which bound you when ye were created. And, now, listen 

TIMA E US. 

535 

to my instructions : — Three tribes of mortal beings remain to be 
created, — without them the universe will be incomplete, for it 
will not have in it every kind of animal which a perfect world 
ought to have. On the other hand, if they were created and 
received life from me, they would be on an equality with the 
gods. In order then that there may be mortals, and that this 
universe may be truly universal, do ye, according to your natures, 
betake yourselves to the formation of animals, imitating the 
power which 1 showed in creating you. The divine and im- 
mortal part of them, which is the guiding principle of those who 
are willing to follow justice and the gods — of that divine part I 
will myself give you the seed and beginning. And do you then 
weave together the mortal and immortal, and make and beget 
living creatures, and give them food, and make them to grow and 
receive them again in death. Thus he spake, and once more and 
in the same manner poured the remains of the elements into the 
cup in which he had previously mingled the soul of the universe, 
no longer, however, pure as before, but diluted to the second and 
third degree. And when he had framed the universe he distributed 
souls equal in number to the stars, and assigned each soul to a 
star; and having placed them as in a chariot, he showed them the 
nature of the universe, and the decrees of destiny appointed for 
them, and told them that their first birth would be one and the 
same for all, and that no one should suffer at his hands ; and that 
they must be sown in the vessels of the times severally adapted to 
them, and then there would come forth the most religious ot 
42 animals ; and as human nature was of two kinds, the superior race 
would hereafter be called man. Now, as they were implanted in 
bodies by necessity, and objects were always approaching or re- 
ceding from them, in the first place there was a necessity that 
they should have one natural mode of perceiving external force; 
in the second place, they must have love, which is a mixture ot 
pleasure and pain ; also fear and anger, and the feelings which are 
akin or opposite to them ; if they conquered these they would live 
righteously, and if they were conquered by them, unrighteously. 
Also, he said, that he who lived well during his appointed time 
would return to the habitation of his star, and there have a 
blessed and suitable existence. But if he failed in attaining this, 
in the second generation he would pass into a woman, and should 

536 

TIMA BUS. 

he not cease from evil in that condition, he would be changed 
into some brute who resembled him in his evil ways, and would 
not cease from his toils and transformations until he followed the 
original principle of sameness and likeness within him, and over- 
came, by the help of reason, the later accretions of turbulent and 
irrational elements composed of fire and air and water and 
earth, and returned to the form of his first and better nature. 
When he had given all these laws to his creatures, that he might 
be guiltless of their future evil, he sowed some of them in the 
earth, and some in the moon, and some in the other stars which 
are the measures of time ; and when he had sown them he com- 
mitted to the younger gods the fashioning of their mortal bodies, 
and desired them to furnish what was still lacking to the human 
soul, and make all the suitable additions, and rule and pilot 
the mortal animal in the best and wisest manner that they could, 
and avert all but self-inflicted evils. 

When the creator had given all these commands he remained 
in his own nature, and his children heard and were obedient to 
their father’s command, and receiving from him the immortal 
principle of a mortal creature, in imitation of their own creator 
they borrowed portions of fire, and earth, and water, and air from 43 
the world which were hereafter to be returned — these they took 
and welded together, not with the indissoluble chains by which 
they were bound themselves, but with numerous pegs invisible on 
account of their smallness which they welded together, forming 
out of them all one body which was subject to influx and efflux, 
and fastened the courses of the immortal soul in the body. Now 
these courses, detained as in a vast river, neither overcame nor 
were overcome ; but bore and were borne along violently, so that 
the whole animal was moved and progressed, irregularly however 
and irrationally, and in any direction, wandering and coursing 
according to the six kinds of motion backwards and forwards, and 
right and left, and up and down, and every way according to the 
six directions of place. For great as was the advancing and retiring 
flood which provided nourishment, the affections produced by ex- 
ternal contact caused still greater tumult— when the body met and 
came into collision with external fire, or with the solid earth or 
the gliding waters, or was caught in the whirlwind hurried along 
by the air, and the motions produced by any of these impulses 

Digitized by Google, 

TIMA E US. 

537 

were carried through the body to the soul. All such motions 
have consequently received the general name of ‘ sensations/ which 
they still retain. And these at the moment occasion a very great 
and mighty movement ; they accompany the ever-flowing current, 
and stir and shake the courses of the soul, and altogether bind 
fast the course of the same with their opposing flux and hinder 
it from ruling and proceeding ; and the nature of the other they 
so shake, that the three intervals which formed a progression of 
doubles (i, 2, 4, 8), and also of triples (i, 3, 9, 27), together with 
the mean terms and connecting links of the ratios of 3 : 2, and 
4 : 3, and of 9 : 8, which cannot be wholly dissolved except by him 
who tied them together, they twist in all sorts of ways, and bend 
and disorder the circles as far as they can, so that they are tum- 
bling to pieces, and move irrationally, at one time in' the opposite 
direction, and then again obliquely, and then upside down, as you 
might imagine a person who is upside down and has his head 
leaning upon the ground and his feet up against something in the 
air; and when he is in such a condition, both he and the spec- 
tators fancy that the right of the other, is his left, and the left 
right. This and the like of this is what violently moves the 
44 courses when they meet with some external thing, either of the 
class of the same or of the other; and they speak of it as the 
same with something or the other of something in a manner 
which is the very opposite of the truth; and they become false 
and foolish, and there is no course or revolution in them which 
has a guiding or directing power; and if again any sensations 
enter in violently from without and drag after them the whole * 
vessel of the soul, then though they seem to conquer they are really 
conquered. 

And by reason of all these affections, the soul when enclosed in 
a mortal body is at first without sense ; but when the stream of 
growth and nutriment flows in with diminished speed, and the 
courses of the soul attaining a calm go their own way and become 
steadier as time advances, then the revolutions of the several 
circles return to their natural figure, and call the same and the 
other by their right names, and make the possessor of them a 
rational being. And if these combine in him with any true nur- 
ture or education, he attains the fulness and health of the perfect 
man, and escapes the worst disease of all; but if he neglects 

538 

TIMAEUS. 

education he walks lame throughout existence in this life, and 
returns imperfect and good for nothing to the world below. This, 
however, is an after-stage, and our business now is to treat more 
accurately of our present subject. There are previous matters 
relating to the generation of the body and its members, and as to 
how the soul was created, and from what causes and by what 
foreknowledge of the gods, which have to be discussed ; in this 
enquiry we hold fast to probability — that is the path in which we 
must proceed. 

First, then, the gods, imitating the spherical shape of the uni- 
verse, enclosed the two divine courses in a spherical body, that, 
namely, which we now term the head, being the most divine part 
of us and the lord of all that is in us : to this the gods who put 
together the body gave all the rest to be a servant, contriving that 
it should partake of every sort of motion ; in order then that it 
might not tumble about among the deep and high places of the 
earth, but might be able to get out of the one and over the other, 
they provided the body to be a vehicle and means of locomotion ; 
which consequently had length and was furnished with four limbs 
extended and jointed ; these the gods contrived as instruments of 
locomotion with which it might take hold and find support, and 
so be able to pass through all places, carrying on high the dwelling- 45 
place of the most sacred and divine part of us. This was the 
origin of legs and arms, which were therefore attached to all men ; 
and the gods, esteeming the front part of man as more honourable 
and having more authority than the hinder part, they gave men 
mostly a forward motion. Now it was necessary that man should 
have his front part distinguished and unlike the rest of his body. 
Wherefore also about the vessel of the head, in the first place 
they put in a face in which they inserted organs to minister in all 
things to the providence of the soul, and they assigned to this ante- 
rior part a share of authority. And of the organs they first con- 
trived the eyes to give light, fixing them by a cause on this wise : 
they contrived that as much of fire as would not have the power of 
burning, but would only give a gentle light, the light of every-day 
life, should be formed into a body; and the pure fire which is 
within us and akin to this they made to flow through the eyes 
in a single, entire, and smooth substance, at the same time 
compressing the centre of the eye so as to retain all the denser 

Digitized by Google 

TIMAEUS. 

539 

element, and only to allow this to be sifted through pure. When 
therefore the light of day surrounds the stream of vision, then like 
falls upon like, and there is a union, and one body is formed by 
natural affinity according to the direction of the eyes, wherever 
the light that falls from within meets that which comes from an 
external object. And everything being affected by likeness, what- 
ever touches and is touched by this stream of vision, their motions 
are diffused over the whole body, and reach the soul, producing 
that perception which we call sight. But when the external and 
kindred fire passes away in night, then the stream of vision is cut 
off ; for going forth to the unlike element it is changed and extin- 
guished, being no longer of one nature with the surrounding 
atmosphere which is now deprived of fire : and the eye no longer 
sees, and we go to sleep ; for when the eyelids are closed, which 
the gods invented as the preservation of the sight, they keep in 
the internal fire. And the power of the fire diffuses and equalizes 
the inward motions; and when they are equalized there is rest, 
and when the rest is profound sleep comes with few dreams ; but 
46 wherever the greater motions remain, whatever may be their 
nature and situations, they engender corresponding visions within 
us, and which are remembered by us when we are awake and in 
the external world. And now there is no longer any difficulty in 
understanding the creation of images in mirrors and in all smooth 
and bright surfaces. The fires from within and from without 
communicate about the smooth surface, and form one image 
which is variously refracted. All which phenomena necessarily 
arise by reason of the fire or light about the face combining with 
the fire or ray of light about the smooth and bright surfaces. 
And when the parts of the light within and the light without meet 
and touch in a manner contrary to the usual mode of meeting, 
then the right appears to be left and the left right ; but the right 
again appears right, and the left left, when the position of one of 
the two concurring lights is inverted; and this happens when the 
smooth surface of the mirror, which is convex, repels the right 
stream of vision to the left side, and the left to the right4. Or if 
the mirror be turned longways, then the face appears upside down, 

4 He is speaking of two kinds of mirrors, first the plane, secondly the 
cylindrical ; and the latter is supposed to be placed, first vertically, secondly 
horizontally. 

540 

TIMA E US. 

and the upper part of the rays are driven downwards, and the 
lower upwards. 

These are the works of the second and co-operative causes 
which God uses as his ministers when executing the idea of the 
best as far as possible. They are thought by most men not to be 
the second, but the prime causes of all things, which they cool 
and heat, and contract and dilate, and the like. But [this is not 
true, for] they are incapable of reason or intellect; the only being 
which can properly have mind is the soul, and this is invisible ; 
whereas fire and water, and earth and air, are all of them visible 
bodies. Now the lover of intellect and knowledge ought to 
explore causes of intelligent nature first of all, and, secondly, 
those which are moved of others and of necessity move others. 
And this is what we also must do. Both kinds of causes should 
be considered by us, but a separation should be made of those 
which are endowed with mind and are the workers of things fair 
and good, and those which are deprived of intelligence and 
accomplish their several works by chance and without order. Of 
the second or concurrent causes of sight, which give the eyes the 
power which they now possess, enough has been said. I will 
therefore proceed to speak of the higher use and purpose for which 
God has given them to us. The sight in my opinion is the source 47 
of the greatest benefit to us, for had the eyes never seen the stars, 
and the sun, and the heaven, none of the words which we have 
spoken about the universe would ever have been uttered. But 
now the sight of day and night, and the revolution of the months 
and years, have given us the invention of number, and a concep- 
tion of time, and the power of enquiring about the nature of the 
whole ; and from this source we have derived philosophy, than 
which no greater good ever was or will be given by the gods to 
mortal man. This, I say, is the greatest boon of sight : and of 
the lesser benefits why should I speak, the loss of which even the 
common mind would vainly bewail? Thus much let us say: that 
God invented and gave us sight to this end, — that we might 
behold the courses of intelligence in the heaven, and apply them 
to the courses of our own intelligence which are akin to them, 
the unperturbed to the perturbed ; and that we, learning them and 
being partakers of the true computations of nature, might imitate 
the absolutely unerring courses of God and regulate our own 

Digitized by Google 

TIMA E US. 

54i 

vagaries. The same may be affirmed of speech and hearing; 
they have been given by the gods for the same ends and purposes. 
For speech greatly contributes to this purpose, and this is the chief 
use of musical sound, which is given to the hearing for the sake of 
harmony. And harmony, which has motions akin to the revolu- 
tions of our souls, is not regarded by him who intelligently uses 
the Muses as given by them with a view to irrational pleasure, 
which is the prevailing opinion, but with a view to the inhar- 
monical course of the soul, and as an ally for the purpose of 
reducing this into harmony and agreement with itself; and rhythm 
was given by them for the same purpose, on account of the irregular 
and graceless ways which prevail among mankind generally, and 
to help us against them. 

Thus far in what we have been saying, with small exceptions, 
the works of intelligence have been set forth ; and now we must 
place by the side of them the things done from necessity — for 
48 the creation is mixed, and is the result of a union of necessity 
and mind. Mind, the ruling power, persuaded necessity to bring 
the greater part of created things to perfection, and thus in the 
beginning, when the influence of reason got the better of neces- 
sity, the universe was created. But if a person will truly tell of 
the way in which this came to pass, he must include the other 
influence of the variable cause as well. Wherefore, we must return 
again and find another suitable beginning, as about the former 
matters, so also about these. To which end we must consider the 
nature of fire, and water, and air, and earth, which were prior to 
the generation of the heavens, and what happened before them ; 
for no one has as yet explained their generation, but we speak of 
fire and the rest of them, whatever they mean, as though men 
knew their natures, and we maintain them to be the letters or 
elements of the whole, when they cannot reasonably be compared 
by a man of any sense even to the syllables or first compounds. 
And let me say thus much : I will not speak of the first principle 
or principles of all things, or by whatever name they are to be 
called, for this reason, — because it is difficult to set forth my 
opinion according to the mode of discussion which we are at pre- 
sent employing. Do not imagine, any more than I can bring my- 
self to imagine, that I should be right in undertaking so difficult a 
task. I will observe the rule of probability with which I began, 

542 

TIMA E US : 

and I will do my best to speak probably; and above and before 
all5 at the beginning of each and all. Once more, then, I call 
upon God, at the beginning of my discourse, and beg him to be 
our saviour out of a strange and unwonted enquiry, and to bring 
us to probability. And now let us begin again. 

This new beginning of our discussion of the universe requires a 
fuller division than the former; for then we made two classes, now 
a third must be added. For those two classes were sufficient for 
the former discussion : one which was assumed by us to be a 
pattern intelligible and always the same ; and there was a second, 
which was only the imitation of the pattern, generated and visible ; 
the third kind we did not distinguish at the time, conceiving that 49 
the two would be enough. But now the argument seems to require 
that we should make clear another kind, which is difficult of ex- 
planation and dimly seen. What natural power are we to attribute 
to this new kind of being? Such a power as this: — that it is the 
receptacle, and in a manner the nurse, of all generation. I have 
said the truth; but I must give a clearer explanation, and this will 
be an arduous task for many reasons, and in particular because I 
must first raise questions concerning fire and the other elements, and 
say what each of them is ; for example, which of them is properly 
called water as distinct from fire, and by what name any element 
is called as distinguished from each and all of them ; and to give 
a certain or satisfactory proof of this is not easy. How, then, 
and in what way, can we arrive at any probable conclusion in 
this difficulty? 

In the first place, that which we are now calling water, when 
congealed becomes stone and earth, as our sight seems to show us ; 
and this same element, when melted and dispersed, passes into 
vapour and air. Air, again, when burnt up, becomes fire ; and 
again fire, when condensed and extinguished, passes once more 
into the form of air; and once more, air, when collected and con- 
densed, produces cloud and vapour ; and from these, when still 
more compressed, comes flowing water, and from water comes 
earth and stones once more ; and thus generation appears to be 
transmitted from one to the other in a circle. Thus, then, as the 

6 Or taking paWou 8f it.r.X. with the preceding words, ‘but more probably ;* 
or laying the stress on an apxrje, * but above and before all, I will begin at the 
beginning of each and all.’ 

Digitized by Google 

TIMAEUS. 

543 

elements never appear in the same form, how can any one have 
the assurance to maintain strongly that any of them is one thing 
rather than another ? No one can. But much the safest plan is 
to speak of them as follows : — Let us not call that which we see 
to be continually changing c fire/ but rather say, cthat some such 
nature is fire ;* and let us not speak of that other thing as water, 
but rather say that some such nature is water; and let us not 
speak of objects at all as having stability or erroneously ima- 
gine ourselves to indicate any of them by the term c this ^ or 
c that/ for they are too volatile to be detained in any such 
expressions as this, or the nature of this, or the nature be- 
longing to this, or any other form of language which implies 
their permanence. We must not speak of them as individual 
things, but rather say, of each and all of them, that there is 
some such uniform principle which circulates in them; for ex- 
ample, of fire we should say that the general principle is of such a 
nature always, and so of everything that has generation. The place 
in which these principles severally grow up, and appear, and decay, 
50 that alone is to be called by the name c this’ or c that/ but that 
which is of a certain nature, hot or white, or their opposites, and 
all that proceeds from them, are not to be so denominated. Let 
me make one more attempt to explain my meaning more clearly. 
Suppose a person to make all kinds of figures of gold, and never to 
cease transforming out of one form into all the others; — somebody 
points to one of them and asks, What is that ? By far the safest 
and truest answer is, That is gold ; and not to speak of the triangle 
or of any other figures which are formed in the gold as having real 
existence, inasmuch as they are in process of change while he is 
making the assertion; but if he be willing to take the general 
answer, it is enough. And the same may be said of the universal 
nature which receives all bodies — that must be always called the 
same ; for, while receiving all things, she never departs at all from 
her own nature, and never in any way, or at any time, assumes a 
form like that of the things which enter into it, being in fact the 
natural recipient of all impressions, which is moved and fashioned 
by them, and varies in appearance from time to time because of 
them. Now the images of realities which enter in and go out are 
modelled after their patterns in a wonderful and inexplicable man- 
ner, which shall be hereafter investigated by us. But for the 

544 

TIMA E US. 

present we have only to conceive of three natures: first, that 
which is in process of generation; secondly, that in which the 
generation takes place; and thirdly, that of which the thing 
generated is the natural resemblance. Moreover, we may liken 
the receiving principle to a mother, and the source or spring to a 
father, and the intermediate nature to a child ; and may remark 
further, that if the model is to take every variety of form, then the 
matter in which the model is fashioned, when duly prepared, must 
be formless, and the forms must come from without. For if the 
matter were like any of the supervening forms, then when any 
opposite or entirely different nature was impressed the representa- 
tion would be a bad one, because the matter would shine through. 
Wherefore, that which is to receive all forms should have no form ; 
as in making perfumes they first contrive that the liquid substance 
which is to receive the scent shall be as inodorous as possible. 
Or as those who wish to impress figures on soft substances do not 
allow any previous impression to remain, but make the surface as 5 
even and smooth as possible. In the same way that which is to 
receive perpetually and through its whole extent the resemblances 
of eternal beings ought to be destitute of any particular form. 
Wherefore, the mother and receptacle of all created and visible, 
and in any way sensible things, is not to be termed earth, or air, 
or fire, or water, or any of their compounds, or any of the elements 
out of which they are composed, but is an invisible and formless 
being which receives all things and attains in an extraordinary 
way a portion of the intelligible, and is most incomprehensible. 
In saying this we shall not be far wrong ; as far, however, as we 
can attain to a knowledge of her from the previous considerations, 
we may truly say that fire is that part of her nature which is inflamed, 
and water that which is moist, earth and air being also parts, as far 
as the mother substance receives the impressions of them. 

Let us consider this question more precisely. Is there any self- 
existent fire? and are all those things of which we speak self- 
existent ? or are only those things which we see, or in some way 
perceive through the bodily organs, truly existent, and no others 
besides them ? And^ is all that which we call an intelligible essence 
nothing at all, and only a word ? Here is a question which we 
must not leave unexamined or undetermined, or affirm too confi- 
dently that there can be no decision ; neither must we interpolate in 

TIMA BUS. 

545 

/ 

our present long discourse a digression as long, but if there be a 
way in which a great principle may be set forth in a few words, 
that will be just what we want. 

Thus I state my view : — If mind and true opinion are two dis- 
tinct classes, then I say that there certainly are these self-existent 
ideas unperceived by sense, and apprehended only by the mind; 
but if, as some say, true opinion differs in no respect from mind, 
then everything that we perceive through the body is to be con- 
sidered as most real and certain. But we must affirm them to be 
distinct, for they have a distinct origin and are of a different 
nature, and the one is implanted in us by instruction, and the 
other by persuasion, and the one is always accompanied by true 
reason, and the other is without reason ; the one is not to be 
moved by persuasion, but the other may be moved; and lastly, 
every man may be said to share in the one, but mind is shared 
only by the gods and by very few men. Wherefore, also, we must 
acknowledge that there is one kind of being which is always the 
5 2 same, uncreated and indestructible, never receiving anything into 
itself from without, nor itself going out to any other, but invisible 
and imperceptible by any sense, and of which the sight is granted 
to intelligence only. And there is another nature of the same 
name with it, and like to it, perceived by sense, generated, always 
in motion, becoming in place and again vanishing out of place, 
which is apprehended by opinion and sense. And there is a third 
nature, which is space, and is eternal, and admits not of destruc- 
tion, and provides a home for all created things, and is perceived 
without the help of sense, by a kind of spurious reason, and is 
hardly matter of belief, which we behold as in a dream, and say, 
that all existence must of necessity be in some place and occupy a 
space, and that what is neither in heaven nor in earth has no 
existence. These things, and others akin to these, relating to the 
true and waking reality of nature, we, having only this dreamlike 
sense of them, are unable to arouse ourselves truly to describe or 
to determine. For an image, not possessing that of which the 
image is, and existing ever as the changing shadow of some other, 
must for this reason be in another [i. c. in space], and in some 
way take hold of essence, or not be at all. But true and exact 
reason vindicating the nature of true being, maintains that while 
two things (i. e. the idea and the image) are different they cannot 
vol. 11. n n 

546 

TIMAEUS. 

exist one of them in the other so as to become one and also two at 
the same time. 

Thus have I concisely given the result of my thoughts ; and my 
opinion is that being and space and generation, these three, in 
their three manners existed before the heaven ; and that the nurse 
of generation, moistened by water and inflamed by fire, and re- 
ceiving the various forms of earth and air, and experiencing all 
the other accidents that attach to them, took a variety of shapes ; 
and being full of powers which were neither similar nor equally 
balanced, was never in any part in a state of equipoise, but 
swaying unevenly to and fro, was shaken by them, and by its 
motion again shook them, and the elements when moved were 
divided like the grain shaken and winnowed by fans and other in- 
struments used in the threshing of corn, when the close ancWheavy 
particles are borne away and settle in one direction, and the loose 53 
and light particles in another. In this manner the four kinds or 
elements were then shaken by the recipient matter which was itself 
moved, and like a winnowing machine separated off the elements 
most unlike from one another, and thrust the similar elements 
together. Wherefore also these had different places before the 
universe that was arranged out of them came into being. And 
at first all things were without reason and measure. But when the 
world began to get into order, first fire and water and earth and 
air, having only certain faint traces of themselves, and being 
altogether such as everything may be expected to be in the absence 
of God — this, I say, being their nature, God fashioned them by 
form and number. Let us always, and in all that we say, hold 
that God made them as far as possible the fairest and best, out 
of things which were not fair and good. And now I will en- 
deavour to show you the disposition and "generation of them by 
an unaccustomed argument, which however you will be able to 
follow, for the methods which I must use will be those with which 
your education has made you familiar. 

In the first place, then, as is evident to all, fire and earth and 
water and air are bodies. And every sort of body possesses 
solidity, and every solid must necessarily be contained in planes; 
and the plane rectilinear figure is composed of triangles ; and all 
triangles are originally of two kinds, both of which are made up 
of one right and two acute angles; one of them has at either 

Digitized by Google 

TIMA E US. 

547 

end of the base the half of a right angle which is divided by equal 
sides, while in the other unequal parts of a right angle are 
divided by unequal sides. These, then, we assume tovbe the 
original elements of fire and the other bodies, as we affirm, pro- 
ceeding by a combination of probability with demonstration ; but 
the principles which are prior to these God only knows, and he 
of men whom God loves. And next we have to determine what 
are the four most beautiful bodies which are unlike one another, 
and yet in some instances capable of resolution into one another ; 
and when we have discovered this, we shall know the true origin 
of earth and fire and the proportionate and intermediate elements. 
And then we shall not be willing to allow that there are visible 
bodies fairer than these having distinct kinds. Wherefore we 
must endeavour to join together these four forms of bodies which 
excel in beauty, and be able to say that we have sufficiently 
apprehended their nature. Of the two triangles, the isosceles has 
54 one form only; the scalene or unequal-sided has an infinite 
number. Of the infinite forms we must select the most beautiful, 
if we are to proceed in due order. But if any one can shew a 
more beautiful form for the composition of these bodies, he shall 
carry off the palm, not as an enemy, but as a friend. Now, the 
one which we maintain to be the most beautiful of all the many 
figures of triangles (and we need not speak of the others) is that 
of which the double forms an equilateral triangle ; the reason 
of this would be long to tell ; he who disproves the fact and proves 
that this is otherwise is entitled to a friendly victory. Then let 
us choose two triangles, out of which fire and other, bodies have 
been constructed, the one isosceles, the other having a longer 
side the square of which is three times as great as the square of 
the lesser side. 

Now is the time to explain what was before obscurely said : 
there was an error in imagining that all the four elements might 
be generated by and into one another ; this, I say, was wrong, for 
there are generated from the triangles which we have taken four 
kinds — three from the one which has the sides unequal ; the fourth 
alone is framed out of the isosceles triangle. Hence they cannot 
all be resolved into one another, or compounded into larger out 
of smaller bodies, or the reverse. But three of them can be 
thus resolved and compounded, for they all spring from one, and 

n n 2 

Digitized by Google 

54« 

TIMA E US. 

when the greater bodies are dissolved, many small bodies will 
spring up out of them and take their own proper figures ; or, 
again, when many small bodies are distributed in triangles, 
a single number will unite them into one large mass of another 
kind. So much for their passage into one another. I have now to 
speak of their several kinds, and show out of what combinations 
of numbers each of them was formed. The first kind will be 
that which is smallest, and its element is that triangle which has 
its hypotenuse twice the lesser side. When two such triangles 
are joined at the diagonal, and this is repeated three times, 
and the triangles rest their diagonals and shorter sides on the 
same point as a centre, a single equilateral triangle is formed 
out of six triangles ; and four equilateral triangles, if put together, 
make out of every three plane angles one solid angle [=two right 
angles], which is nearest to the most obtuse of plane angles ; 55 
and out of the combinations of these four angles arises the first 
solid form which distributes into equal and similar parts the whole 
surface. The second species of solid is formed out of the same 
triangles, which unite as eight equilateral triangles and form one 
solid angle out of four plane angles, and out of six such angles 
the second body is completed. And the third body is made up 
of 1 20 triangular elements, forming twelve solid angles, each of 
them included in five plane equilateral triangles, having altogether 
twenty bases, each of which is an equilateral triangle. The one 
element [that is, the triangle with unequal sides] having generated 
these figures, generates no more ; but the triangle which has equal 
sides produces the fourth elementary figure, which is compounded 
of them by fours, joining their right angles in a centre, and 
forming one equilateral quadrangle. Six of these united form 
eight solid angles, each of which is made by the combination 
of three plane right angles ; the figure of the body thus composed 
is a cube, having six plane quadrangular equilateral bases. There 
was yet a fifth combination which God used in the delineation 
of the universe. 

Now, he who, reflecting on all this, enquires whether the worlds 
are to be regarded as infinite or finite, will be of opinion that 
the notion of their infinity is characteristic of a very indefinite and 
ignorant mind. There is, however, more reason in doubting 
whether they are to be truly regarded as one or five. My opinion 

Digitized by Google 

TIMA E US. 

549 

is that they are one, and this 1 deem probable ; another, regarding 
the question from another point of view, may be of another mind. 
But, leaving this enquiry, let us proceed to distribute the 
elementary forms, which have now been created in idea, among 
the four elements. 

To earth, then, let us assign the cubical form; for earth is 
the most immoveable of the four and the most easily modelled 
of all bodies, and that which has the most stable bases must of 
necessity be of such a nature. Now, of the triangles which we 
mentioned at first, that which is of equal sides is by nature more 
stable than that which has unequal sides; and of the compound 
figures which are formed out of either, the plane equilateral quad- 
rangle has a more stable and necessary basis than the equilateral 
triangle, both in the whole and in the parts. Wherefore, in 
56 assigning this figure to earth, we adhere to probability ; and to 
water we assign that one of the remaining forms which is the 
most immoveable ; and the most moveable to fire ; and to air 
that which is intermediate between them. Also we assign the 
smallest body to fire, and the greatest to water* and the inter- 
mediate body to air; and, again, the acutest body to fire, and the 
next in acuteness to air, and the third to water. Of all these 
elements, that which has the fewest bases must necessarily be the 
most moveable and the acutest and most penetrating in every 
direction ; and must also be the lightest as being composed of the 
smallest number of similar particles: and the second body has 
similar properties in a second degree, and the third body in the 
third degree. Let it be agreed, then, both according to strict 
reason and according to probability, that the solid form of the 
pyramid is the original element and seed of fire ; and let us 
assign the second element in the order of generation to air, and 
the third to water. We must imagine all these to be so small 
that no single particle of any of the four kinds is seen by us on 
account of their smallness : but when many of them are collected 
together the aggregate is seen. And the ratios of their numbers, 
motions, and other properties, everywhere the God, as far as 
necessity consented and allowed, has exactly perfected, and har- 
monized them all in due proportion. 

From all that we have just been saying, the most probable 
result is as follows : — earth, meeting with fire and dissolved 

550 

TIMAEUS. 

by its sharpness, is borne hither and thither, either by dissolution 
in the fire itself or in the air or in the water, until its parts, 
meeting together and mutually harmonizing, again become earth, 
for they can never take any other form. But water, when divided 
by fire or by air, on reuniting, becomes one part fire and two 
parts air ; and a single volume of air divided becomes two of fire. 
Again, when a small body of fire is contained in a larger body of 
air or water or earth, and both are moving, and the fire struggling 
is overcome and decomposed, then two volumes of fire form one 
volume of air; and when air is overcome and cut up into small 
pieces, two and a half parts of air are condensed into one part 
of water. Let us consider the matter in this way again. When 
one of the other elements is fastened upon by the fire, and is 57 
cut by the sharpness of its angles and sides, it coalesces with 
the fire, and then ceases to be cut by them any longer. For 
among bodies which are similar and uniform, none can change 
or be changed by another of the same class and in the same state. 
But in the process of transition, and during the conflict of the 
weaker with the stronger, the dissolution continues. Again, 
smaller bodies detained in larger ones, the few encompassed by 
the many, which are in process of decomposition and extinction, 
only cease from their tendency to extinction when they consent 
to pass into the conquering nature, and fire becomes air and air 
water. But if one kind of bodies goes and does battle against 
bodies of another kind, the process of dissolution continues until 
they are completely ejected and dissolved, and make their escape to 
the kindred element, or else, being overcome and assimilated to the 
conquering power, they remain and dwell with their victors, and 
from being many become one. And owing to these affections, all 
things are changing their place, for the motion of the receiving 
principle distributes the multitude of classes into their natural 
places; but those things which become unlike themselves and 
like other things are hurried by the concussion into the place of 
the things which they resemble. 

Now all unmixed and primary bodies are produced by these 
causes. As to the subordinate species which are included in the 
greater kinds, they are to be attributed to the various constitutions 
of the two original triangles. For these differ in magnitude, and 
are larger and smaller and have as many sizes as there are 

iMMMl'H i llii G'~’°9le 

TIMAEUS. 

55i 

differences of species. Hence when mingled with themselves 
and with one another they are infinite in their diversity, which 
those who would arrive at the probable reason of nature ought 
duly to study. 

Unless a person comes to an understanding about the nature 
and conditions of rest and motion, he will meet with many diffi- 
culties in the discussion which follows. Something has been said 
of this matter already, and something more remains to be said, 
which is, that motion never exists in equipoise. For to conceive 
that anything can be moved without a mover is hard or indeed 
impossible, and equally impossible to conceive that there can be a 
mover without something that will be moved ; — motion cannot 
exist where these are wanting, and for these to be in equipoise is 
impossible, and therefore we assign rest to equipoise and motion 
to the want of equipoise ; and inequality is the cause of the 
58 nature which is wanting in equipoise. Of this inequality we 
have already described the origin. But there still remains the 
question, why things when divided after their kinds do not cease 
from motion and transition from one into another ; this we will 
now proceed to explain. The revolution of the universe in which 
are comprehended all natures, being circular and having a ten- 
dency to unite with itself, compresses all things and will not 
allow any place to be left void. Wherefore, also, fire above all 
things penetrates everywhere, and air next, as being next in rarity 
of the elements ; and the rest in like manner penetrate according 
to their degrees of rarity. For those things which are composed 
of the largest particles have the largest void left in their composi- 
tions, and those which are composed of the smallest particles have 
the least. And the tendency towards condensation thrusts the 
smaller particles into the interstices of the larger. And thus, 
when the small parts are placed side by side with the larger, and 
the lesser divide the greater and the greater unite the lesser, all 
the elements are borne up and down and every way towards their 
own places; for the change in the size of each changes their 
position in space. And these causes generate an inequality which 
is always maintained, and is continually creating a perpetual 
motion of the elements in all time. 

In the next place we have to consider that there are divers kinds 
of fire. There are, for example, first, flame; and secondly, those 

552 

TIMAEUS. 

emanations of flame which do not burn but only give light to the 
eyes ; thirdly, the remains of fire, which are seen in things 
red-hot after the flame has been extinguished. There are similar 
differences in the air; of which the brightest part is called the 
aether, as the most turbid sort of air is called mist and darkness ; 
and there are various other nameless kinds which are formed by 
the inequality of the triangles. Water, again, admits in the first 
place of a division into two kinds ; the one liquid and the other 
fusile. The liquid kind is composed of the small and unequal 
particles of water ; and moves itself and is moved by other bodies 
because of the inequality of the particles and the shape of the 
figure; whereas the fusile kind being formed of large and equal 
elements is more stable than the other, and is solid and compact 
by reason of its equability. But when fire gets in and dissolves 
and destroys the equability, it becomes more moveable, and when 
capable of motion is repelled by the neighbouring air and spread 
upon the earth; and this dissolution of the solid masses is called 
melting, and the spreading out upon the earth is called flowing. 59 
When the fire goes out again it does not pass into a vacuum, but 
into the neighbouring air; and the air which is displaced forces 
together the liquid and still moveable mass into the place which 
was occupied by the fire, and mingles it with itself. Thus com- 
pressed the mass resumes its equability, and is again at unity 
with itself, because the fire which was the author of the inequality 
has retreated; and this departure of the fire is called cooling, and 
the coming together which follows upon it is termed congealment. 

Of all the kinds termed fusile, that which is the densest and is 
formed out of the finest and most equable parts is that most 
precious possession which is called gold, and is hardened by 
filtration through rock ; this is unique in kind, and has a bright 
and yellow colour. A matrix of gold, which is so dense as to be 
very hard, and is blackened, is termed adamant. There is also 
another kind which has parts nearly like gold, and of which there 
are several species; this, which is denser than gold, and contains 
but a small and fine portion of earth, and is therefore harder, and 
yet because of the great interstices within is lighter, is a sort of 
bright and condensed fluid, and when made into a mass is called 
brass (?). There is an alloy of earth mingled with it, and when 
the two parts grow old and are disunited, this comes out in the 

Digitized by Google 

TIMA E US. 

553 

form of what is called rust. The remaining phenomena of the 
same kind there will be no difficulty in reasoning out by the 
method of probabilities. A man may sometimes set aside the 
arguments about eternal things, and for recreation turn to consider 
the truths of generation which are probable only ; thus he attains 
a pleasure not to be repented of, and makes for himself during 
his life a wise and moderate pastime. Let us continue to grant 
ourselves this indulgence, and recount the series of probabilities 
which follows next in order. 

The water which is mingled with fire being of that sort which 
is fine and liquid, is called liquid, because of its motion and the 
way in which it rolls upon the earth; and soft, because its bases 
give way and are less stable than those of earth. This, when 
separated from fire and air and isolated, becomes more equable, 
and by their retirement is compressed into itself; and when thus 
compressed above the earth is called hail, and when on the earth, 
ice ; and that which is congealed in a less degree and is only half 
solid, when above the earth is called snow, and when upon the 
earth, and condensed from dew, hoar-frost. Then, again, there are 
the numerous kinds of water which have been mingled with one 
another, and are distilled through plants which grow in the earth ; 

60 and this class is called by the general name of juices or saps. The 
unequal admixture of these fluids creates a variety of species; 
most of which are nameless, but four which are of a fiery nature 
are clearly distinguished and have names. First, there is wine, 
which warms the soul as well as the body ; — secondly, there is the 
oily nature, which is smooth and divides the light of vision, and 
for this reason is bright and shining and of a glistening appear- 
ance, including pitch, the juice of the castor berry, oil, and other 
things of a like nature ; also, thirdly, there is the diffusive class, 
which produce sweetness extending as far as the passages of the 
mouth ; — these are included under the general name of honey : 
and, lastly, there is opium (?), which differs from all other juices, 
and is a frothy liquid having a burning quality which dissolves the 
flesh. 

As to the kinds of earth, that which is filtered through water 
passes into stone in the following manner: — the water which 
mixes with the earth and is broken up in the process, passes into 
air, and taking this form mounts into its own place. And as 

554 

TIMA £ US. 

there is no vacuum the neighbouring air is thrust out, and this 
being heavy and diffused and coagulated around the mass of earth, 
violently compresses it and drives it into the vacant space from 
whence the new air had come up ; and the earth when compressed 
by the air into an indissoluble union with water becomes rock. 
The fairer sort is that which is made up of equal and similar 
parts and is transparent ; that which has the opposite qualities is 
inferior. But when all the watery part is suddenly drawn out by 
fire, a more brittle substance is formed, to which we give the 
name of pottery. Sometimes also the moisture may remain, and 
the earth which has been fused by fire becomes, when cool, a stone 
of a black colour. A like separation of the water may occur in 
substances composed of finer particles of earth, and of a briny 
nature, and then a half-solid body is formed, soluble in water — 
either nitre which is used for purifying oil and earth, or else 
salt, which harmonizes so well in the combinations of the 
palate, and is, as the law testifies, a substance dear to the gods. 
The compounds of earth and water are not soluble by water, 
but by fire only, and for this reason: — neither fire nor air 
melt masses of earth; this is owing to the smallness of their 
particles, which enables them easily to penetrate the larger 
interstices of earth without violence; and they leave the earth 
unmelted and undissolved, but the particles of water being larger 
force a passage and dissolve and melt the earth. Earth when not 61 
thus consolidated by force is dissolved by water only ; when con- 
solidated, by nothing but fire; this is the only body which can find 
an entrance. The cohesion of water again when very strong is 
dissolved by fire only — when weaker, then either by air or fire — 
the former entering the interstices, and the latter penetrating 
even to the triangles. But nothing can dissolve air when strongly 
condensed, which does not reach the elements or triangles ; or if 
not strongly condensed, then only fire can dissolve it. As to bodies 
composed of earth and water, while the water occupies the vacant 
interstices of the earth and holds them compacted together, the 
circumfluent particles of water finding no entrance leave the entire 
mass unaffected ; but the particles of fire entering into the inter- 
stices of the water, do to the air as the water does to the earth, 
and are the sole causes of the compound body of earth and water 
liquefying and becoming fluid. Now these bodies are of two 

Digitized by Google 

TIMAEUS. 

555 

kinds ; some of them, such as glass and the fusible sort of stones, 
have less water than they have earth; on the other hand, sub- 
stances of the nature of wax and incense have more of water 
entering into their composition. 

I have thus set forth the various forms and classes of bodies 
as they are diversified by their combinations and changes into 
one another, and now I must endeavour to show how the feelings 
are produced with which they impress us. In the first place, the 
bodies which I have been describing are necessarily objects of 
sense. But we have not yet considered the origin of flesh, or 
what belongs to flesh, or that part of the soul which is mortal. 
And these things cannot be explained without also explaining 
the perceptions of sense ; nor can the latter be fully explained 
without these : and yet to explain them together is hardly possible, 
for which reason we must explain one first, and then proceed to 
the other. In order, then, that the enquiry may proceed regularly, 
let us begin by speaking of the affections which equally concern 
body and soul. 

First, let us see why we say that fire is hot, reasoning from 
the dividing or cutting power which it exercises on our bodies. 
We all of us feel that fire is sharp; and we may further consider 
the fineness of the sides, and the sharpness of the angles, and 
the smallness of the particles, and the swiftness of the motion ; 
all this makes the action of fire violent and sharp, and enables 
it to cut whatever it meets. And we must not forget that the 
62 original figure of fire [i. e. the pyramid], more than any other 
form, has a dividing power which cuts our bodies into small 
pieces, and thus naturally produces that affection to which we 
give the name of heat, which is derived from this (Otpi u£y, 
cp. OfpLfa, KepparCCco). Now, the opposite of this is sufficiently 
manifest, yet for the sake of completeness may here be added. 
For in the case of moist natures which have to do with the 
body, the larger particles entering in and driving out the 
lesser, but not being able to take their places, compress the 
moist principle in us, which, from being unequal and disturbed, 
is forced by them into a state of rest and equability, and made 
to coagulate by pressure. Whereas things brought together con- 
trary to nature are naturally at war, and repel one another ; and 
to this war and convulsion the name of shivering and trembling 

556 

TIMA E US. 

is given ; and the whole affection and the cause of the affection 
are both termed cold. That is called hard to which our flesh 
yields, and soft which yields to our flesh; and things are also 
termed hard and soft relatively to one another. That which yields 
has a small base; but that which rests on quadrangular bases is 
firmly posed and offers the greatest resistance, and is also that 
which is the most compact and therefore repellent. The nature 
of the light and the heavy will be best understood when examined 
in connection with our notions of above and below ; for it is quite 
wrong to suppose that the universe is parted into two regions, 
separate from and opposite to each other, the one a lower one 
to which all things tend which have any bulk, and an upper one 
to which things only ascend against their will. For as the uni- 
verse is a globe, all the extremities being equidistant from the 
centre are equally extremities, and the centre which is equidistant 
from them is equally to be regarded as the opposite of them all. 
Such being the nature of the world, when a person says that any- 
thing is above and below, may he not justly be charged with using 
an improper expression ? For the centre of the world cannot be 
rightly called either above or below, but is the centre and nothing 
else ; and the circumference is not the centre, and has in no one 
pait a greater tendency to the centre than in any of the opposite 
parts. Indeed, when the parts are in every direction similar, 
how can one rightly give them names which imply opposition ? 
For if there were any solid body in equipoise at the centre of the 63 
universe, it could not be carried to any of the extremes on account 
of their perfect similarity ; and if a person were to go round it 
in a circle, he would often, when standing at the antipodes, 
speak of the same as above and below ; for, as I was saying just 
now, to speak of the whole which is in the form of a globe as 
having one part above and another below is not like a sensible man. 
The reason why these terms are used, and the cases in which 
they are ordinarily applied by us to the division of the heavens, 
may be elucidated by the following supposition: — If a person were 
to stand in that part of the universe which is the appointed place 
of fire, and where there is the great mass of fire to which fiery 
bodies gather — if, I say, he were to ascend thither, and, having 
the power to do this, were to abstract particles of fire and put 
them in scales and weigh them, and then, raising the balance. 

Digitized by Google 

TIMA E US. 

557 

were to draw the fire by force towards the uncongenial element 
of the air, it would be very evident that the smaller mass would 
yield more readily than the larger ; for when two things are simul- 
taneously raised by one and the same power, the smaller body 
must necessarily yield to the superior power with less reluctance 
than the larger; and the larger body is called heavy and said to 
tend downwards, and the smaller body is called light and said to 
tend upwards. And we may detect ourselves who are upon the 
earth doing precisely the same thing. For we often separate 
earthy natures, and sometimes we draw the earth itself into the 
uncongenial element of air by force and contrary to nature, both 
tending to cling to their native element. But that which is 
smaller yields to the impulse given by us towards the dissimilar 
elements more easily than the larger; and the former we call 
light and the place towards which it is impelled we call above, 
and the contrary state and place we call heavy and below re- 
spectively. These must necessarily differ from one another, 
because the principal masses of the different elements hold oppo- 
site positions ; for that which is light in the one place is opposed 
to that which is light in the other, and the heavy to the heavy, 
and that which is below to that which is below, and that which 
is above to that which is above ; and in their various states of 
being and becoming they will all be found to be contrary and 
transverse and in every way diverse in relation to one another. 
And about all of them this has to be considered :-that the tendency 
of each towards the kindred elements makes the body which is 
moved heavy, and the place towards which the motion tends 
below, and of things which are in a contrary position the 
contrary is true. Such are the causes which we assign to these 
phenomena. As to the soft and the rough, every one who secs 
them will be able to explain the reason of them to another. For 
roughness is hardness mingled with inequality, and smoothness 
is produced by the joint effect of equality and density. 

64 The most important of the affections which concern the whole 
body remains to be considered. This is the cause of pleasure and 
pain in the things which we have mentioned, and in all other 
things which are perceived by sense through the parts of the 
body, and have pleasures and pains consequent upon them. Let 
us imagine the causes of every affection, whether of sense or not. 

558 

TIM A E US. 

to be of the following nature, remembering that we have already 
distinguished between the nature which moves and that which is 
immoveable; for this is the direction in which we must hunt 
the prey which we mean to take. A body which is easily moved 
on receiving any slight impression communicates this to the parts 
affected, and these to other parts in an ever widening circle, until 
at last reaching the principle of mind they announce the power 
of the agent. But a body of the opposite kind, being at rest, and 
having no circular motion, is alone affected, and does not move 
any of the neighbouring parts ; and thus the parts not distributing 
their first impression to other parts, having no effect of motion 
on the whole animal, produce no effect on the patient. This 
is true of the bones and hair and other more earthy parts of the 
human body; whereas what was said above relates mainly to 
sight and hearing, because they have in them the greatest force 
of fire and air. Now, we must conceive of pleasure and pain 
in this way. An impression produced in us contrary to nature 
and violent, if sudden, is painful ; and, again, the sudden return 
to nature is pleasant, and that which is gentle and gradual is 
imperceptible and vice versa. The affection which is easily pro- 
duced is most readily perceived, and not accompanied by pleasure 
• or pain ; as, for example, the affections of sight itself, which has 
been already said to be in the day-time a body in close union 
with us ; for in the use of sight cuttings and burnings and other 
affections do not produce pain, nor, again, is there pleasure when 
the sight returns to its natural state; but the strongest and 
clearest perceptions are produced in as far as the sense is affected 
and in proportion as the sight itself meets objects ; for there is 
no such thing as violence either in the composition or division 
of sight. But bodies which are formed of larger particles yield to 
the agent only with a struggle; and then they impart their motions 
to the whole and cause pleasure and pain — pain when alienated 
from their natural conditions, and pleasure when restored to 
them. Things which experience gradual withdrawings and emp- 65 
tyings of their nature, and great and sudden replenishments, fail 
to perceive the emptying, and do perceive the replenishment; 
these occasion no pain, but the greatest pleasure to the mortal 
part of the human soul, as is manifest in the case of perfumes. 
But things which are changed all of a sudden, and only gradually 

Digitized by Google 

TIMA E US. 

559 

and with difficulty return to their own nature, have all the oppo- 
site effects, as is evident in the case of burnings and cuttings 
of the body. 

Thus have we discussed the general affections of the whole 
body, and the names of the agents which produce them. And 
now I will endeavour to speak of the affections of particular parts, 
and the causes and agents of them, as far as I am able. In the 
first place let us add what was omitted when we were speaking 
of juices, concerning the affections peculiar to the tongue. These, 
like most of the other affections, appear to be caused by certain 
compositions and divisions, but they have also more of roughness 
and smoothness than is found in other affections ; for whenever 
earthy particles enter into the small veins which are the testing 
instruments of the tongue, reaching to the heart, and fall upon the 
moist, delicate portions of flesh — when by the process of melting 
they contract and dry up the little veins, they are astringent if 
they are rougher, but if not so rough then only harsh. Those of 
them which are of an abstergent nature, and wash the parts about 
the tongue, if they do this in excess, and take up into themselves 
and consume away a part of its nature, like potash and soda, are 
all termed bitter. Those, again, which are of a weaker sort, and 
which purge only moderately, are called salt, and have no bitter- 
ness or roughness, but are regarded rather as agreeable. Bodies 
which share in and are softened by the heat of the mouth, and 
which are inflamed, and again in turn inflame that which heats 
them, and whose lightness is such that they are carried upwards to 
the sensations of the head, and cut all that comes in their way, by 
reason of these qualities in them, are all termed pungent. But 
66 when these same particles, refined away by putrefaction, enter 
into the narrow veins, and there meet the earthy and airy particles, 
and set them whirling, and while they are in a whirl cause them 
to interpenetrate with one another and form new hollows exterior 
to the particles which enter — as happens with the hollow drop 
surrounding the air, which is sometimes mixed with earth and 
sometimes pure, in the latter case forming hollow watery vessels of 
air of a circular shape, pure and transparent, which are called 
bubbles, while those composed of the earthy liquid which is in a 
state of general agitation and rising, are called boiling or fer- 
mentation ; — of all these affections the cause is termed acid. 

TIMA E US. 

560 

And there is the opposite affect iom arising from an opposite cause, 
when the composition of the particles which enter dissolved in 
liquid is congenial to the tongue, and smoothes and oils over the 
roughness, and relaxes the parts which are unnaturally contracted, 
and contracts the parts which are relaxed, and disposes them all 
according to their nature ; that sort of remedy of violent affections 
is pleasant and agreeable to every man, and has the name sweet. 
Enough of this. 

As to the faculty of smell, that does not admit of kinds ; for all 
smells are but half-formed substances, and no element is so propor- 
tioned as to have any smell. The veins about the nose are too 
narrow to admit the various kinds of earth and water, and too wide 
to admit those of fire and air; and for this reason no one ever 
smells any of them, but smells always proceed from bodies that are 
damp, or putrefying, or liquefying, or smoking, and are perceptible 
only in the intermediate state, when water is changing into air 
and air into water, and all of them are either smoke or mist. 
That which is passing out of air into water is mist, and that which 
is passing from water into air is smoke ; and hence all smells are 
thinner than water and thicker than air. The proof of this is, that 
when there is any obstruction to the respiration, and a man draws 
in his breath by force, then no smell filters through, but the air 
only without the smell penetrates; and this is the reason why 
there are only two varieties of them, because they are not com- 67 
posed of many simple elements, and they have no name, but are 
distinguished as painful and pleasant, the one irritating and dis- 
turbing the whole cavity which is situated between the head and 
the navel, the other having a soothing influence, and restoring this 
same region to an agreeable and natural condition. 

And now we have to speak of hearing, which is a third kind of 
sense, and of the causes in which this affection originates. We 
may assume speech to be a blow which passes through the ears, and 
is transmitted by means of the air, the brain, and the blood, to the 
soul, and that hearing is the motion of this blow, which begins in 
the head and ends in the region of the liver ; and the sound which 
moves swiftly is acute, and the sound which moves slowly is grave, 
and that which is uniform is equable and smooth, and the reverse 
is harsh. A great body of sound is loud, and the opposite is low. 
Respecting the harmony of sounds I must hereafter speak. 

Digitized by Google 

TIMAEUS. 

56* 

There is a fourth class of sensible things, comprehending many 
varieties, which have now to be distinguished. They are called by 
the general name of colours, and are a flame which emanates from 
all bodies, and has particles corresponding to the sense of sight. 
I have spoken already, in what has preceded, of the causes of the 
generation of sight, and this will be a natural and suitable place in 
which to give some account of colour. 

Of the particles coming from other bodies which fall upon the 
sight, some are less and some are greater, and some are equal to 
the parts of the sight itself. Those which are equal are impercep- 
tible, or transparent, as they are called by us, whereas the larger 
contract, the smaller dilate the sight, having a power akin to that 
of hot and cold bodies on the flesh, or of astringent bodies on the 
tongue, or of those heating bodies which are termed pungent by 
us. White and black, although they are found in another class of 
objects, and for this reason are imagined to be different, are 
affections of the same kind. Wherefore, we ought to term that 
white which dilates the visual ray, and the opposite of this black. 
There is also a swifter motion and impact of another sort of fire 
which dilates the ray of sight and reaches the eyes, forcing a way 
68 through their passages and melting them, and eliciting from them 
a union of fire and water which we call tears, being itself an 
opposite fire which comes to them from without — the one flashes 
forth like lightning, and the other finds a way in and is extin- 
guished in the tear-drop, and all sorts of colours are generated in 
the mixture. This affection we term dazzling, and that which 
produces it is called bright and flashing. There is another sort 
of fire which is intermediate, and which reaches and mingles with 
the moisture of the eye without flashing; and in this, the fire 
mingling with the ray of the tear-drop produces a. colour like 
blood, to which we give the name of red. A bright hue mingled 
with red and white gives the colour called auburn (£a vQov). The 
law of proportion, however, in which the several colours are 
formed, even if a man knew he would be foolish if he attempted 
to tell, as he could not give any necessary reason, nor even any 
tolerable or probable account of them. Again, red, when mingled 
with black and white, gives a purple hue, which becomes umber 
(o pQvwov) when the colours are burnt as well as mingled and 
the black is more thoroughly mixed with them. Flame colour 
vol. 11. 00 

Digitized by Google 

562 

77 MAE US. 

(irvppov) is p.oduced by a union of auburn and dun ( <baioi> ), and 
dun by an admixture of black and white ; pale yellow (d>\pbv) by 
an admixture of white and auburn. White and light meeting, 
and falling upon a full black, become dark blue ( Kvavovv ), and 
when dark blue mingles with white, a light blue (yAavKoi^) 
colour is formed, as leek green {-np&criov) is formed also out of the 
union of flame colour and black. There will be no difficulty in 
seeing how other colours are to be mingled and assimilated in 
accordance with probability. He, however, who should attempt to 
test the truth of them in fact, would forget the difference of the 
human and divine nature. For God only has the knowledge and 
also the power which are able to combine many things into one 
and again dissolve the one into many. But no man either is or 
ever will be able to accomplish either of these operations. 

These are the elements, thus of necessity then subsisting, which 
the creator of the fairest and best received in the world of genera- 
tion, when he made the self-sufficing and most perfect God, using 
the secondary causes as his ministers in the creation of these things, 
but himself fashioning the good in all his creations. Wherefore 
we may distinguish two sorts of causes, the one divine and the 
other necessary, and may seek for the divine in all things, as 
far as our nature admits, for the sake of the blessed life; but the 69 
necessary kind only for the sake of the divine, considering that 
without them and when isolated from them, these higher things 
for which we look cannot be apprehended or received or in any 
way attained by us. 

Seeing, then, that we have now before us the various classes of 
causes which are the material out of which the remainder of our 
discourse is to be framed, just as wood is the material of the car- 
penter, let us recur rapidly to the point at which we began, and 
then let us endeavour to add on a suitable beginning and ending 
to our tale. 

As I said then at first, when all things were in disorder God 
created in each thing, both in reference to itself and to other 
things, certain harmonies in such degree and manner as they are 
capable of having proportion and harmony. For in those days 
nothing had any order except by accident ; nor did any of the 
things which now have names deserve to be named at all — as, 
for example, fire, water, and the rest of the elements. All these 

Digitized by Google 

TIMA BUS. 

563 

the creator first arranged, and out of them he constructed the 
universe, which was a single animal comprehending all other 
animals, mortal and immortal, in itself. Now of the divine, he 
himself was the creator, but committed to his offspring the crea- 
tion of the mortal. And they, imitating him, received from him 
the immortal principle of the soul; and around this they fashioned 
a mortal body, and made the whole body to be a vehicle of the 
soul, and constructed within, a soul of another nature which was 
mortal, subject to terrible and irresistible affections, first of all, 
pleasure, the greatest incitement of evil ; then pain, which deters 
from good; also rashness and fear, foolish counsellors, anger im- 
placable, and hope easily deceived by sense without reason and 
by all-daring love; — these they mingled together according to 
necessary laws, and framed man. Wherefore, fearing to pollute 
the divine any more than is necessary, they separated the mortal 
nature and gave that a habitation in another part of the body, 
placing the neck between them to be the isthmus and boundary 
line, which they constructed between the head and the breast, that 
they might be kept distinct. And in the breast, and in what is 
termed the thorax or breastplate of man, they encased the mortal 
soul, and as one part of this was superior and the other inferior 
70 they divided the cavity of the thorax into two parts, as the women’s 
and men’s apartments are divided in houses; and placed the 
midriff to be a wall of partition between them. That part of the 
inferior soul which is endowed with courage and spirit and loves 
contention they settled nearer the head, in the interval between 
the midriff' and the neck, in order that it might be under the 
control of reason and might join with it in forcing and restrain- 
ing the desires when they are no longer willing of their own 
accord to obey the command of reason issuing from the citadel. 

The heart, which is at once the source3 of the veins and the 
fountain of the blood which is in rapid circulation through all the 
limbs, they placed in the guard-house, that when the spirit was 
roused at the instigation of reason making proclamation of any 
wrong assailing them from without or being perpetrated by the 
desires from within, quickly the whole power of feeling in the 
body, perceiving these, commands and threats, might obey and 
follow through every turn and alley, and thus allow the principle 

s Or reading (7/i/xa, the knot. 

002 

564 

TIMA E US. 

of the best to have the command in all of them. But as the gods 
foreknew that the palpitation of the heart, in the expectation of 
danger or in the excitement of anger, was caused by fire, and that 
this led to the swellings of passion, they formed and implanted the 
lung as a sort of aid to it. Now this was, in the first place, soft 
and bloodless, and also had within hollows like the pores of a 
sponge, in oider that, receiving the breath and the drink and 
cooling them, it might give the power of respiration and alleviate 
the heat. Wherefore also they cut the passages of the trachea 
which lead to the lung, and placed the lung about the heart as a 
soft spring, that, when anger was rife in it, the heart, beating 
against the yielding body, might be refreshed and alleviated, and 
might thus become more ready to accompany passion in the service 
of reason. 

The part of the soul which desires meats and drinks and such 
things as the bodily frame needs, they placed between the midriff 
and the navel, contriving in all this region a sort of manger for 
the food of the body; and there they bound the desires down 
as a wild animal which was chained up with man, and must be 
nourished if man was to exist. In order that this lower creature 
might be always feeding at the manger, and have his dwelling as 
far as possible from the council chamber, making as little noise 
and disturbance as possible, and permitting the best part to advise 
quietly for the good of the whole, they appointed for him this 
place. And knowing that this principle in man would not listen 7 
to reason, and even if attaining to some degree of perception 
would never naturally care for any arguments, and was liable to 
be led away by phantoms and visions of the night and also by day, 
God, considering this, framed the liver, to connect with the lower 
nature and to dwell there, contriving that it should be compact 
and smooth, and bright and sweet, and also bitter, in order that the 
power of thought, which originates in the mind, might be reflected 
as in a mirror which receives and gives back images to the sight. 
And this power, being akin to the bitter part of the liver, by 
the help of that inspires terror, and comes threatening and 
invading, and suddenly mingling with the entire liver produces 
colours like bile, and contracts every part and makes it wrinkled 
and rough ; or, on the other hand, twisting out of their right place 
and contracting the lobe and receptacles and gates, or again, 

TIMAEUS. 

565 

closing and shutting them up — in these and other ways creates pain 
and disgust. And the converse happens when some gentle inspira- 
tion of the understanding pictures images of an opposite character, 
and allays the bile and bitterness by not stirring them, and refuses 
to touch the nature opposed to itself, but by making use of the 
natural sweetness of the liver, straightens all things and makes 
them to be right and smooth and free, and makes the portion of 
the soul which resides about the liver happy and joyful, having in 
the night a time of peace and moderation, and the power of 
divination in sleep when it no longer participates in sense and 
reason. For the authors of our being, remembering the command 
of their father when he bade them make the human race as good 
as they could, thus ordered our inferior parts in order that they 
too might obtain a measure of truth, and in the liver placed their 
oracle, which is a sufficient proof that God has given the art of 
divination to the foolishness of man. For no man, when in his 
senses, attains prophetic truth and inspiration ; but when he 
receives the inspired word either his intelligence is enthralled 
by sleep, or he is demented by some distemper or possession. And 
he who would understand what he remembers to have been said, 
7 2 whether in dream or when he was awake, by the prophetic and 
enthusiastic nature, or what he has seen, must recover his senses ; 
and then he will be able to explain rationally what all such 
words and apparitions mean, and what indications they afford 
to this man or that, of past, present, or future good and evil. 
But, while he continues demented, he cannot judge of the visions 
which he sees or the words which he utters; the ancient saying 
is very true that £ only a man in his senses can act or judge about 
himself and his own affairs/ And for this reason it is customary 
to appoint diviners or interpreters as discerners of the oracles of 
the gods. Some persons call them prophets; they do not know 
that they are only repeaters of dark sayings and visions, and are 
not to be called prophets at all, but only interpreters of prophecy. 

Such is the nature and position of the liver, which is intended 
to give prophetic intimations. During the life of each individual 
these intimations are plainer, but after his death the liver becomes 
blind, and delivers oracles too obscure to be intelligible. The 
spleen is situated in the neighbourhood on the left-hand side, and 
is constructed with a view of keeping the liver bright and pure, 

566 

TIMA BUS. 

like a sponge, always ready prepared and at hand to clean the 
mirror. And hence, when any impurities arise by reason of 
disorders of the body affecting the liver, the loose nature of the 
spleen, which is composed of a hollow and bloodless tissue, 
receives them all and purges them away, and when filled with the 
unclean matter, becomes enlarged and diseased, but, again, when 
the body is purged, settles down into the same place as before, and 
is humble. 

Concerning the soul, as to which part is mortal and which 
divine, and where they exist, and what are their conditions, and 
why they are separated, the truth can only be established, as has 
been said, by the word of God; still, we may venture to assume 
that what has been said by us is probable, and will be rendered 
more probable by investigation. Let us affirm this. 

The creation of the body comes next, and this we may investi- 
gate in a similar manner. And it appears to be very meet that 
the body should be framed on the following principles: — 

The authors of our race were aware that we should be intempe- 
rate in eating and drinking, and take a good deal more than was 
necessary or proper, by reason of gluttony. In order then that 
disease might not quickly destroy us, and lest our mortal race 
should perish and fail of fulfilling its end — intending to provide 73 
against this, the gods made a receptacle for the superfluous meat 
and drink, which is called the lower belly, and formed the convo- 
lution of the bowels, so that the food might be prevented from 
passing quickly through and compel the body to require more food, 
thus producing insatiable gluttony, and making the whole race an 
enemy to philosophy and music, and rebellious against the divinest 
clement within us. 

The bones and flesh, and other similar parts of us, were made 
as follows. The first principle of all of them was the generation 
of the marrow. For the bonds of life which unite the soul with 
the body are made fast there, and they are the root and foundation 
of the human race. The marrow itself is created out of other ele- 
ments: God took such of the triangles as were of the first formation, 
straight and smooth, and specially adapted by their perfection to 
produce fire and water, and air and earth — these, I say, he sepa- 
rated from their kinds, and mingling them in due proportions with 
one another, made the marrow out of them to be a universal seed 

Digitized by Google 

TIMA E US. 

567 

of the whole race of mankind; and after that he planted and 
enclosed in this the various kinds of souls, and in the original 
distribution gave the marrow as many and various forms as there 
were hereafter to be kinds of souls. That which, like a field, was 
to receive the divine seed, he made round every way, and called 
that portion of the marrow, brain, intending that, when an animal 
is perfected, the vessel containing this substance should be the 
head; but as touching the remaining and mortal part of the soul 
— that which was intended to contain this — he divided into round 
and long figures, and he called them all by the name c marrow 
and from these, as from anchors, casting the bonds of the whole 
soul, he proceeded to fashion around them the entire framework 
of our body, constructing for the marrow, first of all, a complete 
covering of bones. 

The bones were composed by him in the following manner. 
Having sifted pure and smooth earth he kneaded it and wetted it 
with marrow, and after that he put it into the fire and then into 
the water, and once more into the fire and again into the water 
— in this way by frequent transfers from one to the other he made 
it insoluble by either. With this bone he fashioned, as in a lathe, 
74 a globe made of bone, which he placed around the brain, and in 
this globe he left a narrow opening; and around the marrow of 
the neck and back he formed the vertebrae like hinges, beginning 
at the head and extending through the whole of the trunk. Thus 
he preserved the entire seed, which he enclosed in a case like 
stone, inserting joints, and using in them the intermediate nature 
of the other, in order to obtain motion and flexion. Then again, 
considering that the bone would be too brittle and inflexible, and 
when inflamed and again cooled would soon mortify and destroy the 
seed within — having this in view, he contrived the sinews and the 
flesh, that so binding all the members together by the sinews, 
which admitted of being stretched and relaxed about the ver- 
tebrae, he might thus make the body capable of flexion and ex- 
tension, while the flesh would serve as a protection against the 
summer heat and against the winter cold, and also against falls, 
like articles made of felt, softly and easily yielding to external 
bodies, and containing in itself a warm moisture which in summer 
exudes in the form of dew, and imparts to the body a natural 
coolness; and again in winter by the help of its own fire forms a 

568 

TIMAEUS. 

very tolerable defence against external and surrounding cold. The 
great moulder and creator considering this, mingled earth with fire 
and water and put them together, making a ferment of acid and 
salt which he mingled with them and formed a soft and pulpy 
flesh ; and as for the sinews, he made them of an unfermented 
mixture of bone and flesh, attempered so as to be in a mean, and 
gave them a yellow colour, and hence the sinews have a firmer 
and more glutinous nature than flesh, but a softer and moister 
nature than the bones. With these God covered the bones and 
marrow, which he bound together with sinews, and then enshrouded 
them all in an upper covering of flesh. The more living and 
sensitive of the bones he enclosed in the smallest film of flesh, 
and those which had the least life he enclosed in the most solid 
flesh. So again on the joints of the bones, where reason indicated 
that no more was required, he placed only a small quantity of flesh, 
that it might not interfere with the flexion of our bodies and make 
them uneasy because difficult to move ; and also that they might 
not by being crowded and pressed and matted in one another, lose 
the power of sensation by reason of their hardness, and make the 
parts which have to do with the mind dull of remembering and 
hearing. Wherefore also the thighs and the legs and the loins, 75 
and the bones of the shoulders and the forearms and other parts 
which have no joints, and the inner bones, which on account of 
the rarity of the soul in the marrow are destitute of reason — all 
these are filled up with flesh ; but such as have feeling are in 
general less fleshy, except where the creator has made some part 
solely of flesh; as, for example, the tongue, in order to give sen- 
sation. But generally this is not the case. For the combination 
of solid bone and much flesh with acute perceptions, is contrary to 
the laws of the composite nature. More than any other part the 
framework of the head would have had them, if they could have 
co-existed, and the human race, having a strong and fleshy and 
sinewy head, would have had a life twice and many times as long, 
and also more healthy and free from pain. But our creators 
considering whether they should make a long-lived race which was 
worse, or a short-lived race which was better, came to the conclu- 
sion that the preference should be given by every one to a shorter 
span of life which was better, rather than to a longer one which 
was worse ; and therefore they covered the head which has no 

TIMAEUS. 

569 

flexure with thin bone, but not with flesh and sinews; and thus 
the head was added, having more wisdom and sensation than the 
rest of the body, but also being in every man far weaker. And 
for a like reason God placed the sinews at the extremity of the 
head, in a circle round the neck, and glued them together and 
fastened the cheeks to them at the extremity underneath the face, 
and other sinews he dispersed throughout the body, fastening limb 
to limb. The framers of our being framed the mouth, as now, 
having teeth and tongue and lips, with a view to the necessary 
and the good, contriving the way in for necessary purposes, the 
way out for the best purposes ; for that is necessary which enters 
in and gives food to the body; but the river of speech which goes 
out of a man and ministers to the intelligence is the fairest and 
noblest of all streams. Still the head could neither be left a bare 
frame of bones, on account of the extremes of heat and cold in the 
different seasons, nor be allowed to be wholly covered, and so 
become dull and senseless by an overgrowth of flesh. The fleshy 
76 nature was not therefore wholly dried up, but a large sort of peel 
was parted off and remained over, which is now called the skin. 
This met and grew by the help of the cerebral humour, and became 
the circular envelopment of the head. And the moisture springing 
up from beneath the sutures watered and closed them at the top, 
fastening them into a knot ; the diversity of the sutures was caused 
by the power of the courses of the soul and of the food, and the 
more these struggled against one another the greater the diversity 
became, and grew less if the struggle diminished. This skin the 
divine power pierced all round with fire, and out of the punctures 
which were thus made the moisture issued forth, part liquid and 
hot which came away pure, and a mixed part which was com- 
posed of the same material as the skin, but was driven upwards 
and outwards, and extended to a great length, having a fineness 
equal to the punctures, and being too slow to find an exit, and 
thrust back by the external air, taking a condensed form, settled 
underneath the skin. And owing to these affections the hair 
sprang up in the skin, being of a skinny and stringy nature, but 
harder and closer through the pressure of the cold, by which each 
hair separated from the skin is compressed and cooled. In this 
manner the creator formed our head all hairy, making use of the 
causes which I have mentioned, and reflecting also that instead of 

570 

TIMAEUS. 

flesh the part about the brain needed the hair to be a light 
covering or guard, which would give shade in summer and shelter 
in winter, and at the same time would not impede our quickness 
of perception. From the combination of sinew, skin, and bone, 
in the structure of the finger, there arises a triple compound which, 
when dried up, takes the form of one hard skin partaking of all 
three natures, and was fabricated by these second causes, but 
designed by the principal mind or cause with an eye to the 
future. For those who formed us well knew that women and 
other animals would some day be framed out of men, and they 
further knew that many animals would require the use of nails 
for many purposes ; wherefore also they stamped in men at their 
first creation the form of nails. From this cause and for these 
reasons they fashioned skin, hair, and nails at the extremities of 
the limbs. 

And now that all the parts and members of the mortal animal 77 
had come together, and their life of necessity consisted of fire and 
spirit, and was liable therefore to melt away and perish from 
exhaustion, the gods contrived the following remedy for this: they 
mingled a nature akin to that of man with other forms and per- 
ceptions, and thus created another kind of living being. These 
are the trees and plants and seeds, which by cultivation are now 
adapted to our use; anciently there were only the wild kinds, 
which are older than the cultivated. For everything that partakes 
of life may be truly called a living being, and this of which we are 
now speaking partakes of the third nature of the soul, which is 
said to be seated between the midriff and the navel, and has no 
part in opinion or reason or mind, but only perception of plea- 
sure and pain and the desires which accompany them. For this 
nature is always in a passive state, and revolving in and about 
itself, repelling the motion from without and using its own, and 
not gifted originally with the power of seeing or reflecting on its 
own concerns. Wherefore it lives and is a living being, but is 
fixed and rooted in the same spot, having no power of self-motion. 

Now, after the superior powers had created all these natures 
to be food for us who are of the inferior nature, they cut various 
channels through our bodies, as in a garden, watering them as 
with a perennial stream. In the first place, they cut two secret 
channels or veins down the back where the skin and the flesh join, 

Digitized by Google 

TIMA E US . 

57i 

corresponding severally to the right and left side of the body. 
These they placed along the backbone, so as to receive between 
them the marrow of generation, the growth of which might be 
thus promoted, and that the descending flood supplied thence to 
other parts might equalize the irrigation. In the next place, they 
divided the veins about the head, and, interlacing them, they sent 
them in opposite directions j those coming from the right side 
they sent to the left of the body, and those from the left they 
turned towards the right, that they as well as the skin might 
bind the head to the body, inasmuch as the head was not enclosed 
at the top by the sinews, and also that the sensations from both 
sides might be distributed over the whole body. And next, they 
ordered the course of liquids in a manner which I will describe, 
and which we shall more readily understand if we begin by 
<78 admitting that all things which are composed of lesser parts 
retain the greater, but the greater cannot retain the lesser. Now, 
of all natures fire has the smallest parts, and therefore penetrates 
through earth and water and air and their compounds, nor can 
anything hold it ; and this is true also of the belly, which is able 
to retain meats and drinks that have passed into it, but is not 
able to retain air and fire, which consist of smaller particles than 
those of which it is composed. 

These channels, therefore, God employed for the sake of dis- 
tributing moisture from the belly into the veins, weaving together 
a network of fire and air like basket nets, at the entrance of which 
he made two openings, the one of which he further formed with 
two branches, and from the openings he extended a sort of cord 
reaching all round to the extremity of the network. All the inner 
parts of the network he made of fire, but the openings and the 
cavity he made of air. The network he took and spread over 
the newly- formed animal in the following manner : — he let one 
of the openings pass into the mouth ; this opening was twofold, 
and he let one part of it descend by the air-pipes into the lungs, 
the other by the side of the air-pipes into the belly. The other 
opening he divided into two parts, both of which he made to 
communicate with the channels of the nose, so that when there 
was no way through the mouth the streams of the mouth were 
replenished from the nostril. But the other cavity of the network 
lie placed around so much of the body as was hollow, and the 

572 

TIMA E US. 

entire receptacle which was composed of air he made to flow into 
the passages of the network, which then flowed back; the tissue 
of the lung found a way in and out of the pores of the body, and 
the rays of fire which were interlaced followed the passage of the 
air either way; this continuing as long as the mortal being holds 
together. These, as we affirm, are the phenomena which the 
imposer of names called respiration and expiration. And all this 
process of cause and effect took place in order that the body 
might be watered and cooled, and thus have nourishment and 
life ; for when the respiration is going in and out, and the fire, which 
follows at the same time, is moving to and fro, and, entering 
through the belly, reaches the meat and drink, it liquefies them, 
and, dividing them into small portions and guiding them through 
the passages where it goes, draws them as from a fountain into 79 
the channels or veins, and makes the stream of the veins flow 
through the body as through a conduit. 

Let us further consider the phenomena of respiration, and 
enquire what are the real causes of it. They are as follows. 
Seeing that there is no such thing as a vacuum into which any 
of those things which are moved can enter, and the breath is 
carried from us into the external air, the next point is, as will 
be clear to every one, that it does not go into a vacant space, 
but pushes its neighbour out of its place, and that which is thrust 
out again thrusts out its neighbour ; and in this way of necessity 
everything at last comes round to that place from whence the 
breath came forth, and enters in there, and follows with the 
breath, and fills up the place; and this goes on like the circular 
motion of a wheel, because there can be no such thing as a 
vacuum. Wherefore also the breast and the lungs, which emit 
the breath, are again filled up by the air which surrounds the body 
and which enters in through the pores of the flesh and comes 
round in a circle; and, again, the air which is sent away and passes 
out through the body forces the breath within to find a way round 
through the passage of the mouth and the nostrils. Now, the 
origin of this may be supposed to be as follows. Every animal 
has his inward parts about the blood and the veins as warm as 
possible; he has within him a fountain of fire, which we com- 
pare to the texture of a net of fire extended through the centre 
of the body, while the outer parts are composed of air. Now, 

Digitized by Google 

TIMA BUS. 

573 

we must admit that heat naturally proceeds outward to its own 
place and to its kindred element ; and as there are two exits for 
the heat, the one through the body outwards, and the other through 
the mouth and nostrils, when it moves towards the one, it drives 
round the other, and that which is driven round falls into the 
fire and is warmed, and that which goes forth is cooled. But 
when the condition of the heat changes, and the particles at the 
other exit grow warmer, the hotter air inclining in that direc- 
tion and carried towards its native element fire, pushes round the 
other; and thus, by action and reaction, there being this circular 
agitation and alternation produced by the two — by this double 
cause, I say, inspiration and expiration are produced. 

The phenomena of medical cupping-glasses and of the swal- 
80 lowing of drink and of the hurling of bodies, whether discharged 
in the air or moving along the ground, are to be explained on a 
similar principle ; as also the nature, of sounds, whether swift or 
slow, sharp or flat, which are sometimes discordant on account of 
the inequality of the motion which they excite in us, and then 
again harmonical on account of their equality; for the slower 
sounds reach the motions of the antecedent swifter sounds 
when these begin to pause and come to an equality, and after a 
while overtake and propel them. When they overtake them they 
do not introduce another or discordant motion, but they make the 
slower motion by degrees correspond with the swifter ; and when 
the motion leaves off, they assimilate them and cause a single 
mixed expression to be produced from sharp and flat, whence 
arises a pleasure which even the unwise feel, and which to the 
wise becomes a higher sort of delight, as being an imitation of 
divine harmony in mortal motions. Moreover, as to the motions 
of water, the thunderbolt, and the marvels that are observed 
about the attraction of amber and the Heraclean stones, — in 
none of these cases is there any attraction ; but, as there is no 
vacuum, these substances thrust one another round and round, all 
severally passing and succeeding to their own places by compo- 
sition and dissolution. Such will appear to the reasonable investi- 
gator to be the causes whose united influence produces these 
wonders. 

I have spoken of the nature and causes of respiration, in which 
our discourse originated. As I before said, the fire divides the 

Digitized by Google 

574 

TIMA E US. 

food and rises within in company with the breath ; in the process 
of respiration filling the veins out of the belly by drawing from 
thence the divided portions of the food, by which means the 
streams of food are diffused through the whole body in all ani- 
mals. The fruits or grass, which are of a kindred nature, and 
which God planted to be our daily food, when newly cut, acquire 
all sorts of colours by reason of their admixture; but the red 
colour for the most part predominates, being a nature made by 
the cutting power of fire leaving a stain in moisture ; and hence 
the liquid which circulates in the body has such a colour as we 
have described, which we call blood, being the nurturing principle 
of the flesh and of the whole body, whence all parts are watered 8 
and the empty places filled. 

Now the process of repletion and depletion is effected after 
the manner of the universal motion of all things, which is due 
to the tendency of kindred natures towards one another. For 
the external elements which surround us are always causing us 
to consume away, and distributing and sending away like to like; 
the particles of blood, too, which are divided and contained within 
the frame of the animal, which is a sort of world to them, are 
compelled to imitate the motion of the universe. Each, therefore, 
of the divided parts within us, being carried to its kindred nature, 
replenishes the void. When more is taken away than flows in, 
then we decay, and when less, we grow and increase. 

The young of every animal has the triangles new, and may be 
compared to the keel of a vessel which is just off the stocks ; they 
are locked closely together and yet the entire frame is soft and deli- 
cate, as if freshly formed of marrow and nurtured on milk. Those 
triangles, therefore, which come in from without and are contained 
in the bodily frame, from which are formed meats and drinks, 
being older and weaker than its own triangles, the frame of the 
body gets the better of them and cuts them up with the new tri- 
angles, and the animal grows and is nourished by the assimilation 
of particles. But when the root of the triangles is relaxed by 
having undergone many conflicts with many things in the course 
of time, they are no longer able to cut or assimilate the food 
which enters into them, but are easily subverted by the new bodies 
which come in from without. In this way the whole animal is 
overcome and decays, and this state of things is called old age. 

TIMAEUS. 

575 

But at last, when the bonds of the triangles which enclose the 
marrow no longer hold, and get unfixed by the toil of which I 
spoke, they unfix also the bonds of the soul, and she, being released, 
in the order of nature joyfully flies away. For that which is not 
in the order of nature is painful, but that which takes place 
according to nature is pleasant. And thus, too, death, if caused 
by disease or produced by wounds, is painful and difficult ; but 
that sort of death which comes of old age and fulfils the debt of 
nature is the least painful of deaths, and is accompanied with 
pleasure rather than with pain. 

Now, every one can see whence diseases arise. There are four 
natures out of which the body is compacted — earth and fire and 
82 water and air, and the unnatural excess and defect of these, 
or the change of any one of them from their own natural place 
into another, or, again, the assumption on the part of these di- 
verse natures of fire and the like of that which is not suitable 
to them, or anything of that sort, produces diseases and disorders ; 
for each being produced or changed in a manner contrary to 
nature, the elements which were previously cool grow warm, and 
those which were dry become moist, and the light become heavy, 
and the heavy light ; all sorts of changes occur. For we affirm 
that only the same, in the same and like manner and proportion 
added or subtracted to or from the same, will allow the body to 
remain in the same state, whole and sound, and that, whatever 
is taken away or added in violation of these rules causes all 
manner of changes and infinite diseases and disorders. But as 
there are secondary compositions which are according to nature, 
he who will understand diseases may also have another or second 
notion of them. For whereas the marrow and the bone and 
the flesh and the sinews are composed of these elements, as 
the blood is likewise composed of them but in a different 
degree, the greater number of them are caused in the way 
which I have already mentioned ; but the worst of all owe 
their severity to the following causes. When the generation of 
them proceeds in an order contrary to nature, then the elements 
are destroyed. For the natural order is that the flesh and sinews 
are made of blood, the sinews out of the fibres to which they 
are akin, and the flesh out of the congealed substance which is 
formed by separation from the fibres. And the glutinous and rich 

576 

TIMAEUS. 

matter which comes away from the sinews and "the flesh not only 
binds the flesh to the bones, but nourishes and impaits growth 
to the bone itself which surrounds the marrow, and by reason of 
the solidity of the bones, that which is filtered through is the 
purest and the smoothest and the oiliest sort of the triangles 
which drops like dew from the bones and waters the marrow. 
And when these are the conditions, health usually ensues ; when 
the conditions are of an opposite nature, disease. For when the 
flesh becomes liquefied and sends back the wasting substance into 
the veins, then there is a great deal of blood of different kinds 
as well as of air in the veins, having various degrees of colour 
and bitterness : and also from its acid and salt qualities it 
generates all sorts of bile and lymph and phlegm. For all things 
go the wrong way and are corrupted, and first of all destroy the 
blood, and then ceasing to give nourishment to the body are 83 
carried along the veins in all sorts of ways, no longer preserving 
the order of their natural courses, but at war with themselves, 
because they have no enjoyment of themselves, and are hostile to 
the abiding constitution of the body, which they destroy and waste. 
The oldest part of the flesh which wastes away, refusing to assimi- 
late, grows black from long burning, and from being corroded in 
every direction becomes bitter, and is injurious to every part of 
the body which is not yet corrupted. And then instead of bitter- 
ness the black part assumes an acidity from the bitter element 
refining away; or, again, the bitter substance being tinged with 
blood has a redder colour; or, when mixed with black, has the4 
hue of grass ; and once again, an auburn colour is mingled with 
the bitter matter when the new flesh is melted by the fire which 
surrounds the internal flame ; — to all which some physician, or some 
philosopher, who had the power of seeing many dissimilar things 
and recognising in them one nature common to them all and 
deserving of a name, has assigned the common name of bile. But 
the kinds of bile have also their peculiar names corresponding to 
their several colours. As for lymph, that sort which is the whey of 
blood is ’gentle, but that which is produced by dark and bitter bile 
is of a fierce nature when mingled by the power of heat with any 
salt substance, and is then called acid phlegm. Again, the dissolution 
of new and tender flesh which is accompanied by air when inflated 

4 Reading \\0cj8fs. 

Digitized by Google 

TIMA E US . 

and encased in liquid producing bubbles which separately are 
invisible owing to their small size, but when collected together 
are of a bulk which is visible, and have a white colour arising 
out of the generation of foam — all this dissolution of tender flesh 
when intermingled with air is termed by us white phlegm. And 
the whey or sediment of phlegm when just formed is sweat and 
tears, and includes the various secretions which arise daily out 
of the purgation of the body. Now all these become the instru- 
ments of disease when the blood is not replenished according to 
nature by meats and drinks but gains bulk from contraries in 
violation of the laws of nature. When the several parts of the 
flesh are separated by disease, if the foundation remains, the trouble 
84 is only half as great, and recovery is still possible; but when that 
which binds the flesh to the bones is diseased, and the blood, 
which is made out of the fibres and sinews, separates from them, 
and no longer gives nourishment to the bone, or is a bond of 
union to flesh and bone, and from being oily and smooth and 
glutinous becomes rough and salt and dry, owing to bad regimen, 
then the substance which is detached, crumbles away under the 
flesh and the sinews, and separates from the bone, and the fleshy 
parts fall away from their foundation and leave the sinews bare 
and full of brine, and the flesh again gets into the circulation 
of the blood and makes the previously-mentioned disorders still 
greater. And if these bodily affections be severe, still worse are 
those which precede them ; as when the bone itself, by reason of 
the density of the flesh, does not receive sufficient air, but becomes 
stagnant and hot and gangrened and receives no nutriment, and 
the natural process is inverted, and the bone crumbling passes 
into the food, and the food into the flesh, and the flesh again 
falling into the blood causes maladies yet more violent than 
those already mentioned. But the worst of all is when the 
marrow is diseased, either from excess or defect ; and this is 
the cause of the very greatest and most fatal disorders in which 
the whole course of the body is reversed. There is a third class 
of diseases which may be conceived of as arising in three ways, 
and are produced sometimes by wind, and sometimes by phlegm, 
and sometimes by bile. When the lung, which is to the body 
the steward of the air, is obstructed by rheums and has the 
passage stopped up, having no egress in one part, while in 

r p 

578 

TIMAEUS. 

another part too much air enters in, then the parts which are 
unrefreshed by the air corrode, while in other parts the excess of 
wind forcing its way through the veins distorts them and consumes 
the body at the centre, and is there shut in and holds fast the 
midriff; thus numberless painful diseases are produced, accom- 
panied by copious sweats. And oftentimes when the flesh is 
dissolved in the interior of the body, wind, generated within and 
unable to get out, is the source of quite as much pain as the air 
coming in from without ; but the greatest pain is when the wind 
gets about the sinews and the veins connected with them, and 
swells them up, especially when the pressure is upon the great 
sinews of the shoulder and twists back the ligaments that fasten 
them. These, from the intensive nature of the affection, are 
termed tetanus and recurvation. The cure of them is difficult, 
and they generally end in fevers. The white phlegm, though 85 
dangerous when detained within by reason of the air-bubbles, 
yet being capable of relief by expiration, is less severe, and only 
discolours the body, generating white leprosies and similar 
diseases. When the phlegm is mingled with black bile and 
dispersed about the courses of the head, which are the divinest 
part of us, and disturbs them in sleep, the attack is not so 
severe ; but when assailing those who are awake it is hard to 
be got rid of, and, being an affection of a sacred part, is most 
justly called sacred. An acid and salt phlegm, again, is the 
source of all those diseases which are of a catarrhal nature, but, 
because the places into which they flow are of various kinds, they 
have all sorts of names. 

Inflammations of the body come from burnings and inflamings, 
and all of them originate in bile. When bile finds a means of dis- 
charge, it boils up and sends forth all sorts of tumours ; but when 
kept down within, it generates many inflammatory diseases, above 
all when mingled with pure blood ; as it then disturbs the order of 
the fibres which are scattered about in the blood and are designed 
to maintain the balance of rare and dense, in order that the blood 
may not by reason of heat perspire through the pores of the body, 
nor again become too dense and thus find a difficulty in circu- 
lating through the veins. The just temperament of these things 
is preserved by the fibres according to the appointment of nature; 
and if any one collects them together when the blood is dead and 

TIMAEUS. 

579 

congealed, then the blood that remains in them flows out, and 
thus left to themselves they also soon congeal with the surround- 
ing cold. Such is the power which the fibres have of acting upon 
the blood ; and from them arises bile, which is only stale blood, 
.and from being flesh is liquefied again, and at the first influx 
comes in little by little warm and moist, and is congealed by the 
power of the fibres; and if congealed and extinguished by force 
produces internal cold and shuddering. But when it enters with 
more of a flood and overcomes the fibres by its heat, and makes 
them boil and bubble in a disorderly manner, if it have power 
enough completely to get the better, it passes into the marrow and 
burns up and unmoors what may be termed the cables of the ship, 
and frees the soul ; but when there is not so much, and the body 
though wasted still holds out, it is either mastered and banished 
from the whole body, or is thrust through the veins into the lower 
or upper belly, and is driven out of the body like an exile out of 
86 an insurgent state, and causes diarrhoeas and dysenteries, and all 
sorts of similar disorders. When the constitution is disordered by 
excess of fire, then the heat and fever are constant ; when air is 
the cause, then the fever is quotidian; when water, which is a 
more sluggish element than either fire or air, then the fever 
intermits a day; when earth is the cause, which is the most 
sluggish of the four, and is only purged away in a four-fold period, 
the result is a quartan fever, which can only with difficulty be 
shaken off. 

Such is the course of the diseases of the body; and the disorders 
of the soul which originate in the body are as follows. The dis- 
order of the mind will be acknowledged to be folly ; but there are 
two kinds of folly — one, madness, and the other ignorance ; and 
whatever affection gives rise to either of them may be called 
disease. Excessive pains and pleasures are justly to be regarded 
as the greatest diseases of the soul, for a man who is in great joy 
or in great pain, in his irrational eagerness to attain the one and 
to avoid the other, is not truly able to see or to hear anything; 
but he is mad, and is at the time quite incapable of any partici- 
pation in reason. For he who has the seed about the spinal 
marrow too fruitful and prolific, like a tree overladen with frtiit, 
has many throes, and also obtains many pleasures in his desires 
and their gratifications, and is for the most part of his life mad, 

p p 2 I 

Digitized by Google 

580 

TIMA E US. 

because his pleasures and pains are so very great; his soul is ren- 
dered foolish and disordered by his body ; and he is regarded not 
as one diseased, but as one who is voluntarily bad, which is a bad 
mistake. For the truth is that the intemperance of love for the 
most part grows into a disease of the soul by reason of the moist, 
and fluid state of one element, and this arises out of the loose con- 
sistency of the bones. And in general, all that which is termed the 
intemperance of pleasure is unjustly charged upon those who do 
wrong, as if they did wrong voluntarily. For no man is voluntarily 
bad ; but the bad become bad by reason of an ill disposition of the 
body and bad education : every man finds these things to be an 
evil and a mischief; and in like manner the soul is often vicious 
through the bodily influences of pain. For where the sharp and 
briny phlegm and other bitter and bilious humours wander over 
the body, and find no exit or escape, but are compressed within 
and mingle their own vapours with the motions of the soul, and 
are blended with them, they produce an infinite variety of diseases 87 
in all sorts of degrees, and being carried to the three places of the 
soul on which any of them may severally chance to alight, they 
create infinite varieties of trouble and melancholy, of tempers rash 
and cowardly, and also of forgetfulness and stupidity. Further, 
when men’s bodies are thus ill made, and evil forms of government 
arc superadded — when in states evil discourses are uttered in pri- 
vate as well as in public, and when from youth upward no sort of 
instruction is given which may heal these ills, here is another 
source of evil ; and these are the two ways in which all of us who 
are bad become bad, through two things which are wholly out of 
our power. And for this the planters are to blame rather than the 
plants, the educators rather than the educated. Still we should 
endeavour as far as we can by education, and studies, and learn- 
ing, to avoid vice and attain virtue; this, however, is part of 
another subject. 

There is a corresponding enquiry concerning the modes in 
which the mind and the body are to be treated, and by what 
means they are preserved, on which I may and ought to enter; 
for it is more our duty to speak of the good than of the evil. 
Everything that is good is fair, and the fair is not without 
measure, and the animal who is fair may be supposed to have 
measure. Now we perceive lesser symmetries and comprehend 

Digitized J^poogle 

TIMA E US. 

581 

them, but about the highest and greatest we have no understand- 
ing ; for with a view to health and disease, and virtue and vice, 
there is no symmetry or want of symmetry greater than that of 
the soul to the body ; and this we do not perceive, or ever reflect 
that when a weaker or lesser frame is the vehicle of a great and 
mighty soul, or conversely, when they are united in the opposite 
way, then the whole animal is not fair, for it is defective in the 
most important of all symmetries ; but the fair mind in the fair 
body will be the fairest and loveliest of all sights to him who has 
the seeing eye. Just as a body which has a leg too long, or some 
other disproportion, is an unpleasant sight, and also, when under- 
going toil, has many sufferings, and makes violent efforts, and often 
stumbles through awkwardness, and is the cause of infinite evil to 
its own self — in like manner we should conceive of the double 
nature which we call the living being ; and when in this com- 
pound there is an impassioned soul more powerful than the body, 
88 that soul, I say, convulses and disorders the whole inner nature of 
man ; and when too eager in the pursuit of knowledge, causes 
wasting; or again, when teaching or disputing in private or 
in public, and strifes and controversies arise, inflames and 
dissolves the composite frame of man and introduces rheums; 
and the nature of this is not understood by most professors of 
medicine, who ascribe the phenomenon to the opposite of the 
real cause. And once more, when a body large and too much for 
the soul is united to a small and weak intelligence, seeing that 
there are two desires natural to man, — one of food for the sake of 
the body, and one of wisdom for the sake of the diviner part of us 
— then, I say, the motions of the stronger principle, getting the 
better and increasing their own power, but making the soul dull, 
and stupid, and forgetful, engender ignorance, which is the greatest 
of diseases. There is one protection against both : — that we 
should not move the body without the soul or the soul without the 
body, and thus they will aid one another, and be healthy and well 
balanced. And therefore the mathematician or any one else who 
devotes himself to some intellectual pursuit, must allow his body 
to have motion also, and practise gymnastic ; and he who would 
train the limbs of the body, should impart to them the motions of 
the soul, and should practise music and all philosophy, if he would 
be called truly fair and truly good. And in like manner should 

Digitized by Google 

582 

TIMA E US. . 

the parts be treated, and the principle of the whole similarly 
applied to them ; for as the body is heated and also cooled within 
by the elements which enter in, and is again dried up and mois- 
tened by external things, and experiences these and the like affec- 
tions from both kinds of motions, the result is that the body if 
given up to motion when in a state of quiescence is overmastered 
and destroyed ; but if any one, in imitation of that which we call 
the foster-mother and nurse of the universe, will not allow the 
body to be at rest, but is always producing motions and shakings, 
which constantly react upon the natural motions both within and 
without, and by shaking moderately the affections and parts which 
wander about the body, brings them into order and affinity with 
one another according to the theory of the universe which we were 
maintaining, he will not allow enemy placed by the side of enemy 
to create wars and disorders in the body, but he will place friend 
by the side of friend, producing health. Now of all motions that 
is the best which is produced in a thing by itself, for it is most 89 
akin to the motion of the intelligent and the motion of the uni- 
verse ; but that motion which is caused by others is not so good, 
and worst of all is that which moves the parts of the body, when 
prostrate and at rest, in parts only and by external means; where- 
fore also that is the best of the purifications and adjustments of 
the body which is effected by gymnastic ; next is that which is 
effected by carrying the body, as in sailing or any other mode of 
conveyance which is not fatiguing ; the third sort of motion may 
be of use in a case of extreme necessity, but in any other will be 
adopted by no man of sense : I mean the purgative treatment of 
physicians ; for diseases which are not attended by great dangers 
should not be irritated by purgatives, for every form of disease is 
in a manner akin to the living being — for the combination out of 
which they were formed has an appointed term of life and of 
existence. And the whole race and every animal has his ap- 
pointed natural time, apart from violent casualties; for the 
triangles are originally framed with power to live for a certain 
time, beyond which no man can prolong his life. And this holds 
also of the nature of diseases, for if any one regardless of their 
appointed time would destroy nature by purgatives, he only in- 
creases and multiplies them. Wherefore we ought always to 
manage them by regimen, as far as a man can spare the time, 

Digitized by Google 

TIMA BUS. 

583 

and not provoke a disagreeable enemy by medical treatment. Let 
this much be said of the general nature of man, and of the body 
which is a part of him, and of the manner in which a man may 
govern himself and be governed best, and live most according to 
reason : and we must begin by providing that the governing prin- 
ciple shall be the fairest and best possible for the purpose of 
government. But to discuss such a subject accurately would be 
a sufficiently long business of itself. As a mere supplement or 
sequel of what has preceded, it may be summed up as follows. 
As I have often said, that there are three kinds of soul located 
within us, each of them having their own proper motions — so I 
must now say in the fewest words possible, that the one part, 
if remaining inactive and ceasing from the natural motion, 
must necessarily become very weak, but when trained and exer- 
cised then very strong. Wherefore we should take care that 
90 the three parts of the soul are exercised in proportion to one 
another. 

Concerning the highest part of the human soul, we should con- 
sider that God gave this as a genius to each one, which was to 
dwell at the extremity of the body, and to raise us like plants, 
not of an earthly but of a heavenly growth, from earth to our 
kindred which is in heaven. And this is most true ; for the divine 
power suspended the head and root of us from that place where the 
generation of the soul first began, and thus made erect the whole 
body. He, therefore, who is always occupied with the cravings 
of desire and ambition, and is eagerly striving after them, must 
have all his opinions mortal, and, as far as man can be, must 
be all of him mortal, because he has cherished his mortal part. 
But he who has been earnest in the love of knowledge and 
true wisdom, and has been trained to think that these are the 
immortal and divine things of a man, if he attain truth, must 
of necessity, as far as human nature is capable of attaining 
immortality, be all immortal, as he is ever serving the divine 
power; and having the genius residing in him in the most per- 
fect order, he must be pre-eminently happy. Now there is 
only one way in which one being can serve another, and this 
is by giving him his proper nourishment and motion. And the 
motions which are akin to the divine principle within us are 
the thoughts and revolutions of the universe. These each man 

5^4 

TIMA E US. . 

should follow, and correct those corrupted courses of the head 
which are concerned with generation, and by learning the har- 
monies and revolutions of the whole, should assimilate the per- 
ceiver to the thing perceived, according to his original nature, and 
by thus assimilating them, attain that final perfection of life, 
which the gods set before mankind as best, both for the present 
and the future. 

Thus the discussion of the universe which, according to our 
original proposition, was to reach to the origin of man, seems to 
have an end. A brief mention may be made of the generation of 
other animals, but there is no need to dwell upon them at length ; 
this would seem to be the best mode of attaining a due proportion. 
On the subject of animals, then, the following remarks may be 
offered. Of the men who came into the world, those who are 
cowards or have led unjust lives may be fairly supposed to change 
into the nature of women in the second generation. Wherefore 
also at the time when this took place the gods created in us the 
desire of generation, contriving in man one animated substance, g 
and in woman another, which they formed respectively in the 
following manner. The passage for the drink by which liquids 
pass through the lung under the kidneys and into the bladder, and 
which receives and emits them by the pressure of the breath, was 
so fashioned as to penetrate also into the body of the marrow, 
which passes from the head along the neck and through the back, 
and which in our previous discussion we have named the seed. 
And the seed having life, and becoming endowed with respiration, 
produces, in that part in which it respires, a lively desire of emis- 
sion, and thus creates in us the love of procreation. Wherefore also 
in men the organ of generation becoming rebellious and masterful, 
like an animal disobedient to reason, seeks, by the raging of the 
appetites, to gain absolute sway ; and the same is the case with 
the wombs and other organs of women ; the animal within them is 
desirous of procreating children, and when remaining without fruit 
long beyond its proper time, gets discontented and angry, and 
wandering in every direction through the body, closes up the pas- 
sages of the breath, and, by obstructing respiration, drives them 
into the utmost difficulty, causing all varieties of disease, until at 
length the desire and love of the man and the woman, as it were 
producing and plucking the fruit from the tree, cause the emis- 

TIMAEUS. 

585 

sion of seed into the womb, as into a field, in which they sow 
animals unseen by reason of their smallness and formless ; these 
they again separate and mature them within, and after that, 
bring them out into the light, and thus perfect the generation 
of animals. 

Thus were created women and the female sex in general. But 
the race of birds was created out of innocent light-minded men 
who, although their thoughts were directed towards heaven, ima- 
gined, in their simplicity, that the clearest demonstration of the 
things above was to be obtained by sight ; these were transformed 
into birds, and they grew feathers instead of hair. The race of wild 
pedestrian animals again came from those who had no philosophy 
in all their thoughts, and never considered at all about the nature 
of the heavens, because they had ceased to use the courses of the 
head, and followed the guidance of those parts of the soul which 
surround the breast. In consequence of these habits of theirs they 
had their forelegs and heads trailing upon the earth to which they 
were akin ; and they had also the crowns of their heads oblong, 
and in all sorts of curious shapes, in which the courses of the 
2 soul were compressed by reason of disuse. And this was the 
reason why quadrupeds and polypods were created : God gave 
the more senseless of them the more support that they might 
be more attracted to the earth. And the most foolish of them, 
who trailed their bodies entirely upon the ground and have no 
longer any need of feet, he made without feet to crawl upon 
the earth. The fourth class were the inhabitants of the water : 
these were made out of the most entirely ignorant and sense- 
less beings, whom the transformers did not think any longer 
worthy of pure respiration, because they possessed a soul which 
was made impure by all sorts of transgression; and instead of 
allowing them to respire the subtle and pure element of air, 
they thrust them into the water and gave them a deep and 
muddy medium of respiration; and hence arose the race of 
fishes and oysters, and other aquatic animals, which have received 
the most remote habitations as a punishment of their extreme 
ignorance. These are the laws by which animals pass into one 
another, both now and ever changing as they lose or gain wisdom 
and folly. 

And now we may say that our discourse about the nature 

586 

TIMA E US. 

of the universe has come to an end. The world has re- 
ceived animals, mortal and immortal, and is fulfilled with 
them, and has become a visible animal comprehending the 
visible — the sensible God who is the image of the intelligible, 
greatest, best, fairest, and most perfect — the one only-begotten 
universe. 

Digitized by Google 

CRITIAS. 

INTRODUCTION. 

The Critias is a fragment which breaks off in the middle of a 
sentence. It was designed to be the second part of a trilogy, which, 
like the other great Platonic trilogy of the Sophist, Statesman, Phi- 
losopher, was never completed. Timaeus had brought down the origin 
of the world to the creation of man, and the dawn of history was now to 
succeed the philosophy of nature. The Critias is also connected with 
the Republic. Plato, as he has already told us, intended to represent 
the ideal state engaged in a patriotic conflict. This mythical conflict is 
prophetic or symbolical of the struggle of Athens and Persia, perhaps 
in some degree also of the wars of the Greeks and Carthaginians, in the 
same way that the Persian is prefigured by the Trojan war to the mind 
of Herodotus ; or as the narrative of the first part of the Aeneid fore- 
shadows the wars of Carthage and Rome. The small number of the 
primitive Athenian citizens (20,000), ‘which is about their present 
number/ is evidently designed to contrast with the myriads and barbaric 
array of the Atlantic hosts. The passing remark in the Timaeus (25 C) 
that Athens was left alone in the struggle, in which she conquered and 
became the liberator of Greece, is also an allusion to the later history. 
Hence we may safely conclude that the entire narrative is due to the 
imagination of Plato, who would easily invent ‘ Egyptians or anything 
else’ (Phaedms), and who has used the name of Solon (of whose poem 
there is no trace in antiquity) and the tradition of the Egyptian priests 
to give verisimilitude to his story. To the Greek such a tale, like that 
of the earth-born men, would have seemed perfectly accordant with the 
character of his mythology, and not more marvellous than the wonders 
of the East narrated by Herodotus and others. The fiction has exer- 
cised a great influence over the imagination of later ages. As many 
attempts have been made to find the great island, as to discover the 
country of the lost tribes. Without regard to the description of Plato, 

59° 

CR1TIAS. 

and without a suspicion that the whole narrative is a fabrication, inter- 
preters have looked for the spot in every part of the globe, America, 
Palestine, Arabia Felix, Ceylon, Sardinia, Sweden. The story had also 
an effect on the early navigators of the sixteenth century. 

Timaeus concludes with a prayer that his words may be acceptable to 
the God whom he has revealed, and Critias, whose turn follows, begs that 
a larger measure of indulgence may be conceded to him, because he has 
to speak of the men whom we know and not of the gods whom we do 
not know. Socrates readily grants this indulgence to him, and antici- 
pating that Hermocrates will make a similar request, is ready to grant 
the same indulgence to him. 

Critias returns to his story, professing only to repeat what Solon was 
told by the priests. The war of which he was about to speak had 
occurred 9000 years ago. (This is slightly inconsistent with the Timaeus, 
which gives the same date for the foundation of the city Tim. 23 E. ; 
the mistake may indicate that the Critias was not written until some time 
afterwards.) One of the combatants was the city of Athens, the other 
was the great island of Atlantis. Critias proposes (after the manner of 
Herodotus and others) to give an account of the various tribes of 
Greeks and barbarians who took part in the war, as they successively 
appear on the scene. But first of all he will speak of the antediluvian 
Athens, and then of the island of Atlantis. 

In the beginning the gods agreed to divide the earth by lot in a 
. friendly manner, and when they had made the allotment (comp. Polit.) 
they settled their several countries, and were the shepherds of man- 
kind, whom they governed by persuasion, which is the helm of the 
soul, and not by blows like other shepherds. Hephaestus and Athene, 
brother and sister deities, in mind and art united, obtained as their lot 
the land of Athens, a land suited to the growth of virtue and wisdom ; 
and there they settled a brave race of children of the soil, in whom they 
implanted a spirit of law and order. The names of some of them remain, 
although the memory of their deeds has passed away, for there were 
many deluges, and the remnant who survived in the mountains lost the 
art of writing, and during many generations were wholly devoted to 
acquiring the means of life. 

But the Egyptian priests had preserved the actions as well as the 
names of the kings before Theseus, such as Erechtheus and Erichthonius, 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION . 

59 1 

and of women in like manner. And the armed image of the goddess 
which was dedicated by the ancient Athenians is an evidence to other 
ages that men and women had in those days, as they ought always to 
have, common virtues and pursuits. There were various classes of citi- 
zens, including handicraftsmen and husbandmen and a superior class of 
warriors who dwelt alone, and were educated, and had all things in 
common like your guardians. The country in those days extended 
southwards to the Isthmus and inland as far as the heights of Pames 
and Cithaeron, but a single night of excessive rain washed away the 
earth and left the rock b^e. The traces of this catastrophe are still 
discernible in the form of the shore, which is a lofty cliff, and goes down 
sheer into the deep sea. The soil was then and still is in some places 
the most fertile in the world and abounded in rich plains and pastures. 
And the inhabitants of this fair land were endowed with intelligence and 
love of beauty. 

The Acropolis of the ancient Athens extended to the Ilissus and 
Eridanus, and included the Lycabettus and Pnyx on the opposite side, 
having a level surface and deep soil. The side of the hill was inhabited 
by the craftsmen and husbandmen; and the warriors dwelt by them- 
selves on the summit, around the temples of Hephaestus and Athene, in 
an enclosure which was like the garden of a single house. In winter 
they retired into houses on the north of the hill, in which they held their 
syssitia. These were modest dwellings, which they bequeathed to their 
children and grandchildren. On the south side they had gardens and 
gymnasia and places for their summer syssitia, and in the midst of the 
Acropolis was a fountain, which gave an abundant supply of cool water 
in winter as well as in summer ; of this there are still some traces. They 
were careful to preserve the number of fighting men at 20,000, which is 
about the present number, and so they passed their lives as guardians 
of the citizens. They were a just and famous race, celebrated for their 
beauty and virtue all over Europe and Asia. 

And now I will speak to you of their adversaries, but first I ought to 
explain that the Greek names were translated by Solon from the Egyp- 
tian; he wrote them down and left them with my grandfather in a 
writing which I still possess. In the division of the earth Poseidon 
obtained as his portion the island of Atlantis, and there he begat chil- 
dren whose mother was a mortal. In the centre of the island towards 
the sea there was a very fair and fertile plain, and about fifty stadia from 

59* 

CRITIAS. 

the centre there was a narrow mountain in which dwelt a man named 
Evenor and his wife Leucippe and their daughter Cleito of whom Poseidon 
became enamoured. He to secure his love enclosed the mountain 
with rings or zones at equal distances, two of land and three of sea, 
which his divine power readily enabled him to excavate, and, as there 
w'as no shipping in those days, no man could get into the place. To 
the interior island he conveyed under the earth springs of water hot and 
cold, and supplied the land with all things needed for the life of man. 
Here he begat a race with five pairs of twins, of whom he made the 
eldest, Atlas, the king of the centre island* while to his twin brother, 
Eumelus or Gadeirus as he was called in the national language, he 
assigned that part of the country which was nearest the Straits. The 
other brothers he made chiefs of the adjacent islands. His own kingdom 
extended as far as Egypt and Tyrrhenia, and he had a fair posterity, and 
abundance of treasures, derived from mines of gold and silver and ori- 
chalcum, and there was abundance of wood, and herds of elephants, and 
pastures for animals of all kinds, and fragrant herbs, and grasses, and 
trees bearing fruit. These they used, and employed themselves in con- 
structing their temples, and palaces, and harbours, and docks, in the 
following manner : — First, they bridged over the zones of sea, and made 
a way to the royal palace which they built in the sacred island. This 
ancient palace was ornamented by successive generations ; and they dug 
a canal which passed through the zones of land from the island to the 
sea. The zones of earth were surrounded by stone walls of divers 
colours, black and white and red, which they sometimes intermingled for 
the sake of ornament; the outermost wall was coated with brass, the 
second with tin, and the third, which was the wall of the citadel, flashed 
with the red light of orichalcum. In the interior of the citadel was a 
holy temple, dedicated to Cleito and Poseidon, and surrounded by an 
enclosure of gold, and there was Poseidon's own temple, which was 
covered with silver, and the pinnacles with gold. The roof was of ivory, 
adorned with gold and silver and orichalcum, and the rest of the interior 
lined with orichalcum. In the centre was the god standing in a chariot 
drawn by six winged horses, and touching the roof with his head ; around 
him were the hundred Nereids, riding on dolphins. Outside the temple 
were placed golden statues of all the ten kings and their wives, and other 
offerings ; there was an altar too, and temples, and palaces, corresponding 
to the greatness of the kingdom. 

INTRODUCTION . 

593 

Also there were fountains of hot and cold water, and trees, and suit- 
able buildings surrounding them, and there were baths both of the king 
and of private individuals, and separate baths for men and for women, 
and also for cattle. The water from the baths was carried to the grove 
of Poseidon, and from thence by aqueducts over the bridges to the outer 
circle. And there were temples in the zones, and in the larger of the 
two there was a racecourse for horses, which ran all round the island. 
The guards were distributed in the zones according to the trust reposed 
in them ; the most trusted of them were stationed in the citadel. The 
table-land which surrounded the city extended three thousand stadia in 
one direction and two thousand in another. The docks were full of 
triremes and naval stores. The citadel was surrounded by a wall, and 
was densely crowded with dwellings, and the canal resounded with the 
din of human voices. 

The plain around the city was highly cultivated and sheltered from 
the north by mountains; it was encompassed by a foss of a hundred 
feet in depth and a stadium in breadth, and ten thousand stadia in 
length. The foss received the streams which came down from the 
mountains, as well as the canals of the interior, and found a way to the 
sea. The entire country was divided into sixty-thousand lots, each of 
which was a square of ten stadia ; and the owner of a lot was bound to 
furnish the sixth part of a war-chariot, two horses, and an attendant 
and charioteer, a light chariot without a seat, two hoplites, two archers, 
two slingers, three stone-shooters, three javelin-men, and four sailors, to 
make up the complement of twelve hundred ships. 

Each of the ten kings was absolute in his own city and island. The 
relations of the different governments to one another were determined by 
the injunctions of Poseidon, which had been inscribed by the first men 
on a column of orichalcum in the temple of Poseidon, at which the 
people wrere gathered together and held a festival every fifth and every 
sixth year. Around the temple ranged the bulls of Poseidon, whom the 
ten kings offered in sacrifice, shedding the blood of the victim over the 
inscription, and vowing not to transgress the laws of their father Poseidon. 
When night came, they put on azure robes and gave judgment against 
offenders. The most important of their laws related to their dealings 
with one another. They were not to take up arms against one another, 
and were to come to the rescue if any of their brethren were attacked. 
They were to deliberate in common, and the king was not to have the 

VOL. ii. Q_q 

594 

CRITJA S. 

power of life and death over his kinsmen, unless he had the assent of the 
majority. 

For many generations, as tradition tells, the people of Atlantis were 
obedient to the laws, and practised gentleness and wisdom in their inter- 
course with one another. They knew that they could only have the true 
use of riches by not caring about them. But gradually the divine portion 
of their souls became diluted with too much of the mortal admixture, and 
they began to degenerate, though to the outward eye they appeared 
glorious as ever at the very time when they were filled with all iniquity. 
The all-seeing Zeus, wanting to punish them, held a council of the gods, 
and when he had called them together, he spoke as follows : — 

No one knew better than Plato how to invent * a noble lie.’ Observe 
(i) the innocent declaration of Socrates, that the truth of the story is 
a great advantage : (2) the manner in which traditional names and indi- 
cations of geography are intermingled (‘ Why, here be truths !’) : (3) the 
extreme minuteness with which the numbers are given, as in the Old 
Epic poetry: (4) the ingenious reason assigned for the Greek names 
occurring in the Egyptian tale: (5) the remark that the armed statue 
of Athene indicated the common warrior life of men and women : (6) the 
particularity with which the last deluge before that of Deucalion is affirmed 
to have been the great destruction: (7) the confession that the depth of 
the ditch, made by the hand of man, was not to be believed, and ‘ yet he 
could only repeat what he had heard ; ’ while the triple zones of water in 
the midst of the country are attributed with greater appearance of proba- 
bility to the supernatural power of the god : (8) the traditional rivalry of 
Poseidon and Athene, and the creation of the first inhabitants out of the 
soil. Plato here, as elsewhere, ingeniously gives the impression that he 
is telling the truth which mythology had corrupted. 

In contrasting the small Greek state numbering about twenty thousand 
inhabitants with the barbaric greatness of the island of Atlantis, Plato had 
evidently intended to show that such a state, though * consisting of only 
a thousand citizens/ was invincible when matched with the hosts of 
Xerxes. Even in a great empire there might be a degree of virtue and 
justice, such as the Greeks believed to have existed under the sway of 
the first Persian kings. But all such empires were liable to degenerate, 
and soon incurred the anger of the gods. Their Oriental wealth, 
and splendour of gold and silver, and variety of colours, seemed also to 

Digitized by Google 

INTRODUCTION . 

595 

be at variance with the simplicity of Greek notions. In the island of 
Atlantis, Plato is describing a sort of Babylonian or Egyptian city, to 
which he opposes the frugal life of the true Hellenic citizen. It is 
remarkable that in his brief sketch of them, he idealizes the husbandmen 
‘ who are lovers of honour and true husbandmen,' as well as the warriors, 
who are his sole concern in the Republic ; and that though he speaks 
of the common pursuits of men and women, he says nothing of the 
community of wives and children. 

It is singular that Plato should have prefixed the most detested of 
Athenian names to this dialogue, and even more singular that he should 
have put into the mouth of Socrates a panegyric on him. Yet we know 
that his character was accounted infamous by Xenophon, and that the 
mere acquaintance with him was made a subject of accusation against 
Socrates. We can only infer that in this, and perhaps in some other 
cases, Plato’s characters have no reference to the actual facts. The 
desire to do honour to his own family, and the connection with Solon, 
may have suggested the introduction of his name. Why the Critias was 
never completed, whether from accident, or from advancing age, or from 
a sense of the artistic difficulty of the design, cannot be determined. 

<^q 2 

Digitized by Google 

C R I T I A S. 

PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE. 

Critias. Timaeus. 

Hermocrates. Socrates. 

Timaeus. How thankful I am, Socrates, that I have arrived at 
last, and, like a weary traveller after a long journey, may now be 
at rest! And I pray the being who always was of old, and has 
now been by me declared, to receive and preserve my words, in so 
far as they have been spoken truly and acceptably to him ; and if 
unintentionally I have said anything wrong, I pray that he will 
impose upon me a fitting retribution, and the proper retribution of 
him who errs is to set him in the right way. Wishing, then, that 
for the future I may speak truly concerning the generation of the 
gods, I pray them to give me knowledge, which of all medicines 
is the most perfect and best. — That is my prayer. And now 
I deliver the argument into the hands of Critias, according to 
our agreement. 

Critias . And I, Timaeus, accept the trusjj. and as you at first 
said that you were going to speak of high matters, and begged that 
Steph. some allowance might be extended to you, I must request the 
107 same or a greater allowance for what I am about to say. And 
although I very well know that I am making an ambitious and 
a somewhat rude request, I must not be deterred by that. For 
will any man of sense deny that you have spoken well ? I can 
only attempt to show that my theme is more difficult, and claims 
more indulgence than yours j and I shall argue that to seem to 
speak well of the gods to men is far easier than to speak well of 
mortals to one another : for the inexperience and utter ignorance 

59« 

CRITIAS. 

of his hearers about such matters is a great assistance to him 
who has to speak of them, and we know how ignorant we are con- 
cerning the gods. But I should like to make my meaning clearer, 
if you will follow me. All that we are any of us saying can only 
be imitation and assimilation. For if we consider how the works 
of the painter represent bodies divine and heavenly, and the dif- 
ferent degrees of gratification with which the eye of the spectator 
receives them, we shall see that we are satisfied with the artist 
who is able in any degree to imitate the earth and its mountains, 
and the rivers, and the woods, and the universe, and the things 
that are and move therein, and further, that knowing nothing 
precise about such matters, we do not examine or analyse the 
painting; all that is required is a sort of indistinct and deceptive 
mode of shadowing them forth. But when a person endeavours to 
paint the human form we are quick at finding out defects, and our 
familiar knowledge makes us severe judges of any one who does 
not render every point of similarity; and this is also true of dis- 
course; we are satisfied with a picture of divine and heavenly 
things which has very little likeness to them; but we are more 
precise in our criticism of mortal and human things. Wherefore 
if at the moment of speaking we cannot suitably express what we 
mean, you must excuse us, considering that to form approved like- 
nesses of human things is the reverse of easy. This is what I want to 108 
suggest to you, and at the same time to beg, Socrates, that 1 may 
have not less, but more indulgence conceded to me in what I am 
about to say. Which favour, if I am right in asking, I hope that 
you will be ready to grant. 

Socrates. Certainly, Critias, we will grant that, and we will grant 
the same by anticipa^on to Hermocrates, who has to speak third ; 
for I have no doubt that when his turn comes a little while hence, 
he will make the same request which you have made. In order, 
then, that he may provide himself with a fresh beginning, and not 
be compelled to say the same things over again, let him under- 
stand that the indulgence is already extended by anticipation to ‘ 
him. And now, friend Critias, I will announce to you the judg- 
ment of the theatre. They are of opinion that the last performer 
was wonderfully successful, and that you will need a great deal of 
indulgence if you are to rival him. 

Hermocrates. The warning, Socrates, which you have addressed to 

CRITIAS. 

599 

him, I must also regard as applying to myself. But remember, Critias, 
that faint heart never yet raised a trophy ; you must go and attack 
the argument like a man. First invoke Apollo and the Muses, and 
then let us hear you sing the praises of your ancient citizens. 

Crit. Friend Hermocrates, you who are stationed last and have 
another in front of you, have not lost heart as yet ; whether you 
are right or not, you will soon know; meanwhile I accept your 
exhortations and encouragements. But in addition to the gods 
whom you have mentioned, I would specially invoke Mnemosyne ; 
for all the important part of what I have to tell is dependent on 
her favour, and if I can recollect and recite enough of what was 
said by the priests and brought hither by Solon, I doubt not that 
I shall satisfy the requirements of this theatre. To that task 
then I will at once address myself. 

Let me begin by observing first of all, that nine thousand was the 
sum of years which had elapsed since the war which was said to 
have taken place between all those who dwelt outside the pillars 
of Heracles and those who dwelt within them ; this war I am now 
to describe. Of the combatants on the one side, the city of Athens 
was reported to have been the ruler and to have directed the con- 
test ; the combatants on the other side were led by the kings of the 
islands of Atlantis, which, as I was saying, once had an extent 
greater than that of Libya and Asia ; and when afterwards sunk by 
an earthquake, became an impassable barrier of mud to voyagers 
109 sailing from hence to the ocean. The progress of the history will 
unfold the various tribes of barbarians and Hellenes which then 
existed, as they successively appear on the scene ; but I must begin 
by describing first of all the Athenians, as they were in that day, 
and their enemies who fought with them ; and I shall have to tell 
of the power and form of government of both of them. Let us 
give the precedence to Athens : 

In former ages, the gods had the whole earth distributed among 
them by allotment ; there was no quarrelling ; and you cannot 
suppose that the gods did not know what was proper for each 
of them to have ; or, knowing this, that they would seek to procure 
for themselves by contention that which more properly belonged 
to others. Each of them obtained righteously by lot what they 
wanted, and peopled their own districts; and when they had 
peopled them they tended us human beings who belonged to them 

6oo 

CRITIAS. 

as shepherds tend their flocks, excepting only that they did not use 
blows or bodily force, as the manner of shepherds is, but governed 
us like pilots from the stern of a vessel, which is an easy way of 
guiding animals, by the rudder of persuasion, taking hold of our 
souls- according to their own pleasure ; — thus did they guide all 
mortal creatures. Now different gods had their inheritance in 
different places which they set in order. Hephaestus and Athene, 
who were brother and sister, and sprang from the same father, 
having a common nature, and being united also in the love of phi- 
losophy and of art, both obtained as their allotted region this land, 
which was naturally adapted for wisdom and virtue ; and there 
they implanted brave children of the soil, and put into their minds 
the order of government ; their names are preserved, but their 
actions have disappeared by reason of the destruction of those who 
had the tradition, and the lapse of ages. For the survivors of each 
destruction, as I have already said, dwelt in the mountains ; they 
were ignorant of the art of writing, and had heard only the names 
of the chiefs of the land, and a very little about their actions. The 
names they gave to their children out of affection, but of the vir- 
tues and laws of those who preceded them, they knew only by 
obscure traditions; and as they themselves and their children were 
for many generations in want of the necessaries of life, they directed 
their attention to the supply of their wants, and of that they dis- 
coursed, to the neglect of events that had happened in times long 
passed; for mythology and the enquiry into antiquity are intro- no 
duced into cities when they have leisure, and when they see the 
necessaries of life already beginning to be provided, but not before. 

And this is the reason why the names of the ancients have been 
preserved to us without their deeds. This I infer because Solon 
said that the priests in their narrative of that war mentioned most 
of the names which are recorded prior to the time of Theseus, 
such as Cecrops, and Erechtheus, and Erichthonius, and Erysichthon, 
and the names of the women in like manner. Moreover, the 
figure and image of the goddess show that at that time military 
pursuits were common to men and women, and that in accordance 
with that custom they dedicated the armed image of the goddess 
as a testimony that all animals, male and female, which consort 
together, have a virtue proper to each class, which they are all able 
to pursue in common. 

Digitized by Google 

r 

CRITIAS. 

601 

Now the country was inhabited in those days by various classes 
of citizens; — there were artizans, and there were husbandmen, 
and there was a warrior class originally set apart by divine men ; 
these dwelt by themselves, and had all things suitable for nurture 
and education ; neither had any of them anything of their own, but 
they regarded all things as common property; nor did they require 
to receive of the other citizens anything more than their necessary 
food. And they practised all the pursuits which we yesterday 
described as those of our imaginary guardians. Also about the 
country the Egyptian priests said what is not only probable but 
also true, that the boundaries were fixed by the Isthmus, and that 
in the other direction they extended as far as the heights of 
Cithaeron and Parnes ; the boundary line came down towards the 
plain, having the district of Oropus on the right, and the river 
Asopus on the left, as the limit towards the sea. The land was 
the best in the world, and for this reason was able in those days 
to support a vast army, raised from the surrounding people. And 
a great proof of this fertility is, that the part which still remains 
may compare with any in the world for the variety and excellence 
of its fruits and the suitableness of its pastures to every sort of 
i animal ; and besides beauty the land had also plenty. How am 1 
to prove this ? and of what remnant of the land then in existence 
may this be truly said? I would have you observe the present 
aspect of the country, which is only a promontory extending far 
into the sea away from the rest of the continent, and the surround- 
ing basin of the sea is everywhere deep in the neighbourhood of the 
shore. Many great deluges have taken place during the nine thou- 
sand years, for that is the number of years which have elapsed since 
the time of which I am speaking; and in all the ages and changes 
of things, there has never been any settlement of the earth flowing 
down from the mountains as in other places, which is worth speak- 
ing of; it has always been carried round in a circle and disappeared 
in the depths below. The consequence is, that in comparison of 
what then was, there are remaining in small islets only the bones 
of the wasted body, as they may be called ; all the richer and softer 
parts of the soil having fallen away, and the mere skeleton of the 
country being left. But in former days, and in the primitive state 
of the country, what are now mountains were only regarded as 
hills ; and the plains, as they are now termed, of Phelleus were 

602 

CRITIAS. 

full of rich earth, and there was abundance of wood in the moun- 
tains. Of this last the traces still remain, for there are some of the 
mountains which now only afford sustenance to bees, whereas not 
long ago there were still remaining roofs cut from the trees growing 
there, which were of a size sufficient to cover the largest houses ; 
and there were many other high trees, bearing fruit and abundance 
of food for cattle. Moreover, the land enjoyed rain from heaven 
year by year, not, as now, losing the water which flows off the 
earth into the sea, but having an abundance in all places, and 
receiving and treasuring up in the close clay soil the water which 
drained from the heights, and letting this off into the hollows, 
providing everywhere abundant streams of fountains and rivers; 
and there may still be observed indications of them in ancient 
sacred places, where there are fountains; and this proves the 
truth of what I am saying. 

Such was the natural state of the country, which was cultivated, 
as we may well believe, by true husbandmen, who were lovers of 
honour, and of a noble nature, and did the work of husbandmen, 
and had a soil the best in the world, and abundance of water, and 
in the heaven above an excellently tempered climate. Now the 
city in those days was arranged on this wise ; in the first place the 
Acropolis was not as now. For the fact is that a single night of i 
excessive rain washed away the earth and laid bare the rock ; at 
the same time there were earthquakes, and then occurred the third 
extraordinary inundation, which immediately preceded the great 
destruction of Deucalion. But in primitive times the hill of the 
Acropolis extended to the Eridanus and Ilissus, and included the 
Pnyx and the Lycabettus as a boundary on the opposite side to 
the Pnyx, and was all well covered with soil, and level at the top, 
except in one or two places. Outside the Acropolis and on the 
sides of the hill there dwelt artizans, and such of the husbandmen 
as were tilling the ground near; at the summit the warrior class 
dwelt by themselves around the temples of Athene and Hephaestus, 
living as in the garden of one house, and surrounded by one enclo- 
sure. On the north side they had common houses, and had pre- 
pared for themselves winter places for common meals, and had all 
the buildings which they needed for the public use, and also 
temples, but unadorned with gold and silver, for these were not in 
use among them; they took a middle course between meanness 

CRITIAS. 

603 

and extravagance, and built moderate houses in which they and 
their children’s children grew old, and handed them down to others 
who were like themselves, always the same. And in summer-time 
they gave up their gardens and gymnasia and common tables and 
used the southern quarter of the Acropolis for such purposes. Where 
the Acropolis now is there was a single fountain, which was extin- 
guished by the earthquake, and has left only a few small streams 
which still exist, but in those days the fountain gave an abundant 
supply of water, which was of equal temperature in summer and 
winter. This was the fashion in which they lived, being the 
guardians of their own citizens and the leaders of the Hellenes, 
who were their willing followers. And they took care to preserve 
the same number of men and women for military service, which 
was to continue through all time, and still is, — that is to say, about 
twenty thousand. Such were the ancient Athenians, and after this 
manner they righteously administered their own land and the rest 
of Hellas; they were renowned all over Europe and Asia for the 
beauty of their persons and for the many virtues of their souls, and 
were more famous than any of their contemporaries. And next, 
if I have not forgotten what I heard when I was a child, I will 
impart to you the character and origin of their adversaries. For 
friends should not keep their stories to themselves, but have them 
in common. 

3 Yet, before proceeding further in the narrative, I ought to warn 
you, that you must not be surprised if you should hear Hellenic 
names given to foreigners. I will tell you the reason of this : 
Solon, who was intending to use the tale for his poem, made an 
investigation into the meaning of the names, and found that the 
early Egyptians in writing them down had translated them into 
their own language, and he recovered the meaning of the several 
names and re-translated them, and copied them out again in our 
language. My great grandfather, Dropidas, had the original 
writing, which is still in my possession, and was carefully studied 
by me when I was a child. Therefore if you hear names such as 
are used in this country, you must not be surprised, for I have told 
you the reason of them. The tale, which was of great length, 
began as follows: — 

I have before remarked in speaking of the allotments of the 
gods, that they distributed the whole earth into portions differing 

CRITIAS. 

604 

in extent, and made themselves temples and sacrifices. And Posei- 
don, receiving for his lot the island of Atlantis, begat children by 
a mortal woman, and settled them in a part of the island, which I 
will proceed to describe. On the side towards the sea and in the 
centre of the whole island, there was a plain which is said to have 
been the fairest of all plains and very fertile. Near the plain 
again, and also in the centre of the island at a distance of about 
fifty stadia, there was a mountain not very high on any side. In 
this mountain there dwelt one of the earth-born primeval men of 
that country, whose name was Evenor, and he had a wife named 
Leucippe, and they had an only daughter who was called Cleito. The 
maiden was growing up to womanhood, when her father and mother 
died ; Poseidon fell in love with her and had intercourse with her, 
and breaking the ground, inclosed the hill in which she dwelt all 
round, making alternate zones of sea and land larger and smaller, 
encircling one another; there were two of land and three of water, 
which he turned as with a lathe, out of the centre of the island, 
equidistant every way, so that no man could get to the island, for 
ships and voyages were not as yet heard of. He himself, as he 
was a god, found no difficulty in making special arrangements for 
the centre island, bringing two streams of water under the earth, 
which he caused to ascend as springs, one of warm water and the 
other of cold, and making every variety of food to spring up abun- 
dantly in the earth. He also begat and brought up five pairs of 
male children, dividing the island of Atlantis into ten portions; 
he gave to the first-born of the eldest pair his mother’s dwelling 114 
and the surrounding allotment, which was the largest and best, and 
made him king over the rest; the others he made princes, and 
gave them rule over many men, and a large territory. And he 
named them all ; the eldest, who was the king, he named Atlas, 
and from him the whole island and the ocean received the name 
of Atlantic. To his twin brother, who was born after him, and 
obtained as his lot the extremity of the island towards the pillars 
of Heracles, as far as the country which is still called the region of 
Gadcs in that part of the world, he gave the name which in the 
Hellenic language is Eumelus, in the language of the country 
which is named after him, Gadeirus. Of the second pair of twins 
he called one Ampheres, and the other Evaemon. To the third 
pair of twins he gave the name Mneseus to the elder, and 

Digitized by Google 

CRITIAS. 

Autochthon to the one who followed him. Of the fourth pair of 
twins he called the elder Elasippus, and the younger Mestor. 
And of the fifth pair he gave to the elder the name of Azaes, and 
to the younger that of Diaprepes. All these and their descendants 
were the inhabitants and rulers of divers islands in the open sea ; 
and also, as has been already said, they held sway in the other 
direction over the country within the pillars as far as Egypt and 
Tyrrhenia. Now Atlas had a numerous and honourable family, 
and his eldest branch always retained the kingdom, which the 
eldest son handed on to his eldest for many generations ; and they 
had such an amount of wealth as was never before possessed by 
kings and potentates, and is not likely ever to be again, and they 
were furnished with everything which they could have, both in the 
city and country. For because of the greatness of their empire 
many things were brought to them from foreign countries, and the 
island itself provided much of what was required by them for the 
uses of life. In the first place, they dug out of the earth whatever 
was to be found there, mineral as well as metal, and that which is 
now only a name and was then something more than a name, 
orichalcum, was dug out of the earth in many parts of the island, 
and with the exception of gold was esteemed the most precious of 
metals among the men of those days. There was an abundance 
of wood for carpenter's work, and sufficient maintenance for tame 
and wild animals. Moreover, there were a great number of ele- 
5 phants in the island, and there was provision for animals of every 
kind, both for those which live in lakes and marshes and rivers, 
and also for those which live in mountains and on plains, and 
therefore for the animal which is the largest and most voracious of 
them. Also whatever fragrant things there are in the earth, 
whether roots, or herbage, or woods, or distilling drops of flowers 
or fruits, grew and thrived in that land; and again, the cultivated 
fruit of the earth, both the dry edible fruit and other species of 
food, which we call by the general name of legumes, and the fruits 
having a hard rind, affording drinks and meats and ointments, and 
good store of chestnuts and the like, which may be used to play 
with, and are fruits which spoil with keeping, and the pleasant 
kinds of dessert, which console us after dinner, when we are full 
and tired of eating — all these that sacred island lying beneath the 
sun, brought forth fair and wondrous in infinite abundance. All 

6o6 

CRITIAS. 

these things they received from the earth, and they employed 
themselves in constructing their temples and palaces and harbours 
and docks; and they arranged the whole country in the following 
manner : — 

First of all they bridged over the zones of sea which surrounded 
the ancient metropolis, and made a passage into and out of the 
royal palace; and then they began to build the palace in the 
habitation of the god and of their ancestors. This they continued 
to ornament in successive generations, every king surpassing 
the one who came before him to the utmost of his power, until 
they made the building a marvel to behold for size and for beauty. 
And beginning from the sea they dug a canal of three hundred feet 
in width and one hundred feet in depth, and fifty stadia in length, 
which they carried through to the outermost zone, making a pass- 
age from the sea up to this, which became a harbour, and leaving 
an opening sufficient to enable the largest vessels to find ingress. 
Moreover, they divided the zones of land which parted the zones of 
sea, constructing bridges of such a width as would leave a passage 
for a single trireme to pass out of one into another, and roofed 
them over ; and there was a way underneath for the ships ; for the 
banks of the zones were raised considerably above the water. 
Now the largest of the zones into which a passage was cut from 
the sea was three stadia in breadth, and the zone of land which 
came next of equal breadth ; but the next two, as well the zone 
of water as of land, were two stadia, and the one which surrounded 
the central island was a stadium only in width. The island in 116 
which the palace was situated had a diameter of five stadia. This 
and the zones and the bridge, which was the sixth part of a 
stadium in width, they surrounded by a stone wall, on either side 
placing towers, and gates on the bridges where the sea passed in. 
The stone which was used in the work they quarried from under- 
neath the centre island, and from underneath the zones, on the 
outer as well as the inner side. One kind of stone was white, 
another black, and a third red, and as they quarried, they at the 
same time hollowed out docks double within, having roofs formed 
out of the native rock. Some of their buildings were simple, 
but in others they put together different stones which they inter- 
mingled for the sake of ornament, to be a natural source of 
delight. The entire circuit of the wall, which went round the 

Digitized^^cLog 

CRITIAS. 

607 

outermost one, they covered with a coating of brass, and the cir- 
cuit of the next wall they coated with tin, and the third, which 
encompassed the citadel, flashed with the red light of orichalcum. 
The palaces in the interior of the citadel were constructed on this 
wise : — In the centre was a holy temple dedicated to Cleito and 
Poseidon, which remained inaccessible, and was surrounded by an 
enclosure of gold ; this was the spot in which they originally begat 
the race of the ten princes, and thither they annually brought the 
fruits of the earth in their season from all the ten portions, and 
performed sacrifices to each of them. Here, too, was Poseidon’s 
own temple of a stadium in length, and half a stadium in width, 
and of a proportionate height, having a sort of barbaric splendour. 
All the outside of the temple, with the exception of the pinnacles, 
they covered with silver, and the pinnacles with gold. In the 
interior of the temple the roof was of ivory, adorned everywhere 
with gold and silver and orichalcum; all the other parts of the 
walls and pillars and floor they lined with orichalcum. In the 
temple they placed statues of gold — there was the god himself 
standing in a chariot — the charioteer of six winged horses — and 
of such a size that he touched the roof of the buildings with 
his head; around him there were a hundred Nereids riding on 
dolphins, for such was thought to be the number of them in that 
day. There were also in the interior of the temple other images 
which had been dedicated by private individuals. And around the 
temple on the outside were placed statues of gold of all the ten 
kings and of their wives, and there were many other great offerings 
both of kings and of private individuals, coming both from the 
city itself and the foreign cities over which they held sway. 
There was an altar too, which in size and workmanship corre- 
17 sponded to the rest of the work, and there were palaces, in like 
manner, which answered to the greatness of the kingdom, and the 
glory of the temple. 

In the next place, they used fountains both of cold and hot 
springs; these were very abundant, and both kinds1 wonderfully 
adapted to use by reason of the sweetness and excellence of their 
waters. They constructed buildings about them and planted suit- 
able trees; also cisterns, some open to the heaven, others which 

1 Reading itcartpov rrpos n )v xpr/anv. 

6o8 

CRITIAS. 

they roofed over, to be used in winter as warm baths ; there were 
the king’s baths, and the baths of private persons, which were kept 
apart ; also separate baths for women, and others again for horses 
and cattle, and to each of them they gave as much adornment as 
was suitable for them. The water which ran off they carried, 
some to the grove of Poseidon, where were growing all manner of 
trees of wonderful height and beauty, owing to the excellence of 
the soil ; the remainder was conveyed by aqueducts which passed 
over the bridges to the outer circles; and there were many temples 
built and dedicated to many gods; also gardens and places of 
exercise, some for men, and some set apart for horses, in both of 
the two islands formed by the zones; and in the centre of the 
larger of the two there was a race-course of a stadium in width, 
and in length allowed to extend all round the island, for horses to 
race in. Also there were guard-houses at intervals for the body- 
guard, the more trusted of whom had their duties appointed to 
them in the lesser zone, which was nearer the Acropolis ; while 
the most trusted of all had houses given them within the citadel, 
and about the persons of the kings. The docks were full of tri- 
remes and naval stores, and all things were quite ready for use. 
Enough of the plan of the royal palace. Crossing the outer har- 
bours, which were three in number, you would come to a wall 
which began at the sea and went all round : this was everywhere 
distant fifty stadia from the largest zone and harbour, and enclosed 
the whole, meeting at the mouth of the channel towards the sea. 

The entire area was densely crowded with habitations ; and the 
canal and the largest of the harbours were full of vessels and 
merchants coming from all parts, who, from their numbers, kept up 
a multitudinous sound of human voices and din of all sorts night 
and day. 

I have repeated his descriptions of the city and the parts about 
the ancient palace nearly as he gave them, and now I must endea- 
vour to describe the nature and arrangement of the rest of the 118 
country. The whole country was described as being very lofty and 
precipitous on the side of the sea, but the country immediately 
about and surrounding the city was a level plain, itself surrounded 
by mountains which descended towards the sea; it was smooth 
and even, but of an oblong shape, extending in one direction three 
thousand stadia, and going up the country from the sea, through 

Digitized by Google 

CRITIAS. 

609 

the centre of the island, two thousand stadia ; the whole region 
of the island lies towards the south, and is sheltered from the 
north. The surrounding mountains he celebrated for their number 
and size and beauty, in which they exceeded all that are now to be 
seen anywhere; having in them also many wealthy inhabited vil- 
lages, and rivers, and lakes, and meadows supplying food enough 
for every animal, wild or tame, and wood of various sorts, abun- 
dant for every kind of work. 

I will now describe the plain, which had been cultivated during 
many ages by many generations of kings. It was rectangular, and 
for the most part straight and oblong ; and what it wanted of the 
straight line followed the line of the circular ditch. The depth, 
and width, and length of this ditch were incredible, and gave the 
impression that such a work, in addition to so many other works, 
could hardly have been wrought by the hand of man. But I must 
say what I have heard. It was excavated to the depth of a hundred 
feet, and its breadth was a stadium everywhere; it was carried 
round the whole of the plain, and was ten thousand stadia in length. 
It received the streams which came down from the mountains, 
and winding round the plain and touching the city at various 
points, was there let off into the sea. From above, likewise, 
straight canals of a hundred feet in width were cut in the plain, 
and again let off into the ditch towards the sea : these canals were 
at intervals of an hundred stadia, and by them they brought down 
the wood from the mountains to the city, and conveyed the fruits 
of the earth in Ships, cutting transverse passages from one canal 
into another, and to the city. Twice in the year they gathered 
the fruits of the earth — in winter having the benefit of the rains, 
and in summer introducing the water of the canals. 

As to the population, each of the lots in the plain had an 
appointed chief of men who were fit for military service, and the 
1 1 9 size of the lot was to be a square of ten stadia each way, and the 
total number of all the lots was sixty thousand. And of the 
inhabitants of the mountains and of the rest of the country there 
was also a vast multitude having leaders, to whom they were 
assigned according to their dwellings and villages. The leader 
was required to furnish for the war the sixth portion of a war- 
chariot, so as to make up a total of ten thousand chariots ; also 
two horses and riders upon them, and a light chariot without a 

VOL. 11. r r 

Digitized by Google 

6io 

CRITIAS. 

seat, accompanied by a fighting man on foot carrying a small 
shield, and having a charioteer mounted to guide the horses; also, 
he was bound to furnish two heavy armed, two archers, two 
slingers, three stone-shooters, and three javelin-men, who were 
skirmishers, and four sailors to make up the complement of twelve 
hundred ships. Such was the order of war in the royal city — that 
of the other nine governments was different in each of them, and 
would be wearisome to narrate. 

As to offices and honours, the following was the arrangement 
from the first. Each of the ten kings in his own division and in 
his own city had the absolute control of the citizens, and in many 
cases, of the laws, punishing and slaying whomsoever he would. 
Now the relations of their governments to one another were regu- 
lated by the injunctions of Poseidon as the law had handed them 
down. These were inscribed by the first men on a column of 
orichalcum, which was situated in the middle of the island, at 
the temple of Poseidon, whither the people were gathered together 
every fifth and sixth years alternately, thus giving equal honour to 
the odd and to the even number. And when they were gathered 
together they consulted about public affairs, and enquired if any 
one had transgressed in anything, and passed judgment on him ac- 
cordingly, and before they passed judgment they gave their pledges 
to one another on this wise : — There were bulls who had the 
range of the temple of Poseidon ; and the ten who were left alone 
in the temple, after they had offered prayers to the gods that they 
might take the sacrifices which were acceptable to them, hunted 
the bulls, without weapons, but with staves and nooses ; and the 
bull which they caught they led up to the column ; the victim was 
then struck on the head by them and slain over the sacred inscrip- 
tion. Now on the column, besides the law, there was inscribed 
an oath invoking mighty curses on the disobedient. When there- 
fore, after offering sacrifice according to their customs, they had 
burnt the limbs of the bull, they mingled a cup and cast in a clot 120 
of blood for each of them ; the rest of the victim they took to the 
fire, after having made a purification of the column all round. 
Then they drew from the cup in golden vessels, and pouring a liba- 
tion on the fire, they swore that they would judge according to the 
laws on the column, and would punish any one who had previously 
transgressed, and that for the future they would not, if they could 

Digitized by Google 

CRITIAS. 

6x i 

help, transgress any of the inscriptions, and would not command 
or obey any ruler who commanded them, to act otherwise than 
according to the laws of their father Poseidon. This was the 
prayer which each of them offered up for himself and for his family, 
at the same time drinking and dedicating the vessel in the temple 
of the god, and after spending some necessary time at supper, 
when darkness came on, and the fire about the sacrifice was cool, 
all of them put on most beautiful azure robes, and, sitting on the 
ground, at night, near the embers of the sacrifices on which they 
had sworn, and extinguishing all the fire about the temple, they 
received and gave judgment, if any of them had any accusation to 
bring against any one; and when they had given judgment, at 
daybreak they wrote down their sentences on a golden tablet, and 
deposited them as memorials with their robes. 

There were many special laws which the several kings had in- 
scribed about the temples, but the most important was the follow- 
ing : That they were not to take up arms against one another, and 
they were all to come to the rescue if any one in any city attempted 
to overthrow the royal house ; like their ancestors, they were to 
deliberate in common about war and other matters, giving the 
supremacy to the family of Atlas. And the king was not to have 
the power of life and death over any of his kinsmen unless he had 
the assent of the majority of the ten kings. 

Such was the vast power which the god settled in the lost island 
of Atlantis ; and this he afterwards directed against our land on 
the following pretext, as traditions tell : For many generations, as 
long as the divine nature lasted in them, they were obedient to 
the laws, and well-affectioned towards the gods, who were their 
kinsmen ; for they possessed true and in every way great spirits, 
practising gentleness and wisdom in the various chances of life, 
and in their intercourse with one another. They despised every- 
thing but virtue, not caring for their present state of life, and 
thinking lightly of the possession of gold and other property, which 
seemed only a burden to them; neither were they intoxicated 
by luxury ; nor did wealth deprive them of their self-control ; but 
they were sober, and saw clearly that all these goods are increased 
by virtuous friendship with one another, and that by excessive 
zeal for them, and honour of them, the good of them is lost and 
friendship perishes with them. By such reflections and by the 

r r 2 

Digitized by Google 

6l2 

CRITIAS. 

continuance in them of a divine nature, all that which we have 
described waxed and increased in them; but when this divine 
portion began to fade away in them, and became diluted too often 
and with too much of the mortal admixture, and the human nature 
got the upper hand, then they, being unable to bear their fortune, 
became unseemly, and to him who had an eye to see, they began 
to appear base, and had lost the fairest of their precious gifts ; but 
to those who had no eye to see the true happiness, they still 
appeared glorious and blessed at the very time when they were 
filled with unrighteous avarice and power. Zeus, the god of gods, 
who rules with law, and is able to see into such things, perceiving 
that an honourable race was in a most wretched state, and wanting 
to inflict punishment on them, that they might be chastened and 
improve, collected all the gods into his most holy habitation, which 
being placed in the centre of the world, sees all things that par- 
take of generation. And when he had called them together, he 
spake as follows : — 

Digitized by Google 

Digitized by Google 

4:^-* >vv-rv;.>^'-vv: 

*. ’ v 

,-Z- J*- -