m 

THE 

ANTE-NICENE FATHERS. 

TRANSLATIONS OF 

The Writings of the Fathers dow7i to A.D. J2^. 

THE REV. ALEXANDER ROBERTS. D.D., 

AND 

JAMES DONALDSON, LL.D., 

EDITORS. 

AMERICAN REPRINT OF THE EDINBURGH FDITION. 

REVISED AND CHRONOLOGICALLY ARRANGED, WITH BRIEF PREFACES AND 

OCCASIONAL NOTES, 

BY 

A. CLEVELAND COXE, D.D. 

VOLUME V. 

H/PPOLVTUS, CYPRIAN, CAIUS. NOV ATI AN, APPENDIX. 

AUTHORIZED EDITION. 

NEW YORK: 
CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS. 

1919 

Copyright, i8S6, by 
THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY. 

9S35T 

FATHERS OF THE THIRD CENTURY: 

HIPPOLYTUS, CYPRIAN, CAIUS, NOVATIAN, APPENDIX. 

AMERICAN EDITION. 

CHRONOLOGICALLY ARRANGED, WITH BRIEF NOTES AND PREFACES, 

BY 

A. CLEVELAND COXE, D.D. 

Ta apy^ia iBf] KparuTW. 

The Nicene Council. 

PREFACE. 

This fifth volume will be found a work complete in itself, simplex et unum. At first, indeed, 
it might look otherwise. The formation of Latin Christianity in the school of North Africa seems 
interrupted by the interpolation, between Tertullian and his great pupil Cyprian, of a Western 
bishop and doctor, who writes in Greek. A little reflection, however, will suggest to the thought- 
ful student, that, even if our chronological plan admitted of it, we should divest the works of 
Cyprian of a very great advantage should we deprive them of the new and all-important light 
shed upon Cyprian and his conflicts with Stephen by the discovery of the Philosophutnena of 
Hippolytus. That discovery, as Dr. Bunsen reminds us, more than once, has duplicated our 
information concerning the Western Church of the ante-Nicene period. It gives us overwhelming 
evidence on many points heretofore imperfectly understood, and confirms the surmises of the 
learned and candid authors who have endeavoured to disentangle certain complications of history. 
It meets some questions of our own day with most conclusive testimony, and probably had not 
a little to do with the ultimate conclusions of Dollinger, and the rise of the Old Catholic school, 
among the Latins. We cannot fail to observe in all this the hand of a wise and paternal Provi- 
dence, which is never wanting to the faithful in the day of trial. *' I believe, with Niebuhr," 
says Dr. Bunsen, " that Providence always furnishes every generation with the necessary means 
of arriving at the truth and at the solution of its doubts." This consideration has inspired me 
with great hopes from the publication of this series in America, where the aggressions of an alien 
element are forcing us to renewed study of that virgin antiquity which is so fatal to its pretensions. 
I can adopt with a grateful heart the language of Bunsen, when he adds :' "I cannot help thinking 
it of importance that we have just noiv so unexpectedly got our knowledge of facts respecting 
early Christianity doubled^ 

To show some tokens of this new light on old difficulties, I shall be obliged to throw one or 
two of my Elucidations almost into the form of dissertations. It will appear, as we proceed, 
that we have reached a most critical point in the ante-Nicene history, and one on which that 
period itself depends for its complete exposition. Let me adduce conclusive evidence of this by 
reference to two fundamental facts, which need only to be mentioned to be admitted : — 

I. The Council of Nice did not pretend to be setting forth a new creed, or making anything 
doctrine which was not doctrine before. Hence the period we are now studying is to be inter- 
preted by the testimony of the Nicene Fathers, who were able to state historically, and with great 
felicity, in idioms gradually framed by the Alexandrian theologians, the precise intent and purport 
of their teaching. The learned Bull has demonstrated this ; demolishing alike the sophistry of 
Petavius the Jesuit, and the efforts of latitudinarians to make capital out of some of those obiter 
dicta of orthodox Fathers, which, like certain passages of Holy Scripture itself, may be wrested 
into contradictory and self-stultifying declarations. Note, therefore, that the Nicene Creed must 
be studied not so much in the controvertists of the fourth century as in the doctors of preceding 
ages, whom we are reviewing in these pages. 

* HiJipoL, vol. i. p. 7. Ed. London, 1851. 

VI PREFACE. 

2. A like statement is true of the Nicene constitutions and discipline. The synodical rule, 
alike in faith and discipline, was Tu dpxaia IB-q Kparetro : " Let the (ancient) primitive examples 
prevail." Observe, therefore, what they ruled as to Rome and other churches was already ancient. 
Now, the "duplicated " light thrown upon the position of the North- African churches, and others 
in the West, at this period, by the discovery of long-lost portions of Hippolytus, will be found to 
settle many groundless assertions of Roman controvertists as to what these a.p'^^axa I6ri were. 

Bearing this in mind, let us return to the point with which this Preface starts. We arc 
pausing for a moment, in the North-African history, to take a contemporary sur\'ey of Rome, 
and to mark just where it stands, and what it is, at thi-s moment. The earliest of the great Roman 
Fathers now comes forward, but not as a Latin Father. He writes in Greek ; he continues the 
Greek line of thought brought into the West by Irenseus ; he maintains the Johannean rather 
than the Petrine traditions and idioms, which are distinct but not clashing ; he stands only in the 
third generation from St. John himself, through Polycarp, and his master Irenoeus ; and, like his 
master, he confronts the Roman bishops of his time with a superior orthodoxy and with an 
authority more apostolic' He illustrates in his own conduct the maxim of Irenseus, that " the 
Catholic faith is preserved in Rome by the testimony imported into it by those who visit it from 
every side ; " that is, who thus keep alive in it the common faith, as witnessed in all the churches 
of Christendom. 

Thus, Hippolytus, once " torn to pieces as by horses," in his works, if not in his person, comes 
to life again in our times, to shed new light upon the history of Latin Christianity, and to show 
that Rome had no place nor hand in its creation. He appears as a Greek Father in a churchy 
which was yet a " Greek colony ; " ^ and he shows to what an estate of feebleness and humiliation 
the Roman Church had been brought, probably by the neglect of preaching, which is an anomaly 
in its history, and hardly less probably by its adherence to a Greek liturgy long after the Chris- 
tians of Rome had ceased to understand Greek familiarly. At such a moment Hippolytus proves 
himself a reformer. His historical elucidations of the period, therefore, form an admirable 
introduction to Cyprian, and will explain the entire independence of Roman dictation, with which 
he maintained his own opinions against that Church and its bishops. 

And lastly we have Novatian as a sequel to the works of Cyprian ; and truly, the light upon 
his sad history is " duplicated " by what Hippolytus shows us of the times and circumstances 
which made his schism possible, and w^hich somewhat relieve his character from its darker shades. 

Such, then, is the volume now given to the reader, — Hippolytus, Cyprian, Novatian, — afford- 
ing the fullest information ever yet brought together in one volume, upon the rise of Latin Chris- 
tianity, the decline of the Greek period of the Roman See, and the restricted limits of the Roman 
province not yet elevated to the technical position of a Nicene patriarchate. 

' See this series, vol. iii. Elucid. II. p. 630. 

* S«e this series, vol. i. pp. 309, 360; also vol. ii. p. 166, and Milinan (vol. i. pp. 28, 29), Latin Christianity. 

Contents of. Volume V. 

PACK 

I. HIPPOLYTUS. The Refutation of all Heresies ....... 9 

The Extant Works and Fragments of Hippolytus: Exegetical . . 163 
The Extant Works and Fragments of Hippolytus: Dogmatical and 

Historical '. . . . 204 

Appendix to the Works of Hippolytus 242 

II. CYPRIAN. The Life and Passion of Cyprian 267 

The Epistles of Cyprian 275 

The Treatises of Cyprian 421 - 

The Seventh Council of Carthage ......... 565 

Treatises attributed to Cyprian 575 

III. CAIUS. Fragments . 601 

IV.- NOVATIAN. Treatise concerning the Trinity 6ri 

On the Jewish Meats 645 

V. APPENDIX. Acts and Records of the Famous Controversy about the Bap- 
tism of Heretics 653 

A Treatise against the Heretic Novatian 657 

A Treatise on Re-Baptism 665 

HIPPOLYTU& 

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE TO HIPPOLYTUS. 

[a.d. 170-236.] 

The first great Christian Father whose history is Roman is, nevertheless, not a Roman, but a 
Greek. He is the disciple of Irenaeus, and the spirit of his life-work reflects that of his mas- 
ter. In his personal character he so much resembles Irenseus risen again,' that the great Bishop 
of Lyons must be well studied and understood if we would do full justice to the conduct of 
Hippolytus. Especially did he follow his master's example in withstanding contemporary bishops 
of Rome, who, like Victor, " deserved to be blamed," but who, much more than any of their 
predecessors, merited rebuke alike for error in doctrine and viciousness of life. 

In the year 155 1, while some excavations were in progress near the ancient Church of St. 
Lawrence at Rome, on the Tiburtine Road, there was found an ancient statue, in marble, of a 
figure seated in a chair, and wearing over the Roman tunic the pallium of TertuUian's eulogy. 
It was in 1851, just three hundred years after its discovery, and in the year of the publication of 
the newly discovered Philosophuniena at Oxford, that I saw it in the Vatican. As a specimen 
of early Christian art it is a most interesting work, and possesses a higher merit than almost any 
similar production of a period subsequent to that of the Antonines.^ It represents a grave per- 
sonage, of noble features and a higr., commanding forehead, slightly bearded, his right hand rest- 
ing over his heart, while under it his left arm crosses the body to reach a book placed at his 
side. There is no reason to doubt that this is, indeed, the statue of Hippolytus, as is stated in 
the inscription of Pius IV., who calls him "Saint Hippolytus, Bishop of Portus," and states 
that he lived in the reign of the Emperor Alexander ; i.e., Severus. 

Of this there is evidence on the chair itself, which represents his episcopal cathedra, and has 
a modest symbol of lions at " the stays," as if borrowed from the throne of Solomon. It is a 
work of later date than the age of Severus, no doubt ; but Wordsworth, who admirably illustrates 
the means by which such a statue may have been provided, gives us good reasons for supposing 
that it may have been the grateful tribute of contemporaries, and all the more trustworthy as a 
portrait of the man himself. The chair has carved upon it, no doubt for use in the Church, a 
calendar indicating the Paschal full moons for seven cycles of sixteen years each ; answering, 
according to the science of the period, to similar tables in the Anglican Book of Common Prayer. 
It indicates the days on which Easter must fall, from a.d. 222 to a.d. 333. On the back of 
the chair is a list of the author's works.^ 

Not less interesting, and vastly more important, was the discovery, at Mount Athos, in 1842, 
of the long-lost Philosophumena of this author, concerning which the important facts will appear 
below. Its learned editor, Emmanuel Miller, published it at Oxford under the name of Origen, 
which was inscribed on the ms. Like the Epistle of Clement, its composition in the Greek 
language had given it currency among the Easterns long after it was forgotten in the West ; and 
very naturally they had ascribed to Origen an anonymous treatise containing much in coincidence 

' \\i pseudo-Chrysost. c^^A^X-vKyiTaTo^ KtCi evvovaraTOi, See V/ordsv/orth, Si. H//pofyius, etc., p. g2. 

2 A very good representation of it may be seen in Bunsen's Hippolytus and his Age, as a frontispiece to vol. i. London, 1852. 

3 The learned Dr. Wordsworth deals with all the difficulties of the case with judicial impartiality, but enforces his conclusions with 
irrefragable cogency. See also Dr. Jarvis, learned Introduction, p. 339. 

3 

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE TO HIPPOLYTUS. 

with his teachings, and supplying the place of one of his works of a similar kind. It is now 
sufficiently established as the work of Hippolytus, and has been providentially brought to light 
just when it was most needed.' In fact, the statue rose from its grave as if to rebuke the reigning 
pontiff (Pius IV.), who just then imposed upon the Latin churches the novel " Creed " which 
bears his name ; and now the Philosophitmena comes forth as if to breathe a last warning to that 
namesake of the former Pius who, in the very teeth of its testimony, so recently forged and 
uttered the dogma of " papal infallibility " conferring this attribute upon himself, and retro- 
spectively upon the very bishops of Rome whom St, Hippolytus resisted as. heretics, and has 
transmitted to posterity, in his writings, branded with the shame alike of false doctrine and of 
heinous crimes. Dr. DoUinger, who for a time lent his learning and genius to an apologetic 
effort in behalf of the Papacy, was no doubt prepared, by this very struggle of his heart versus 
head, for that rejection of the new dogma which overloaded alike his intellect and his conscience, 
and made it impossible for him any longer to bear the lashes of Rehoboam ^ in communion with 
modern Rome. 

In the biographical data which will be found below, enough is supplied for the needs of the 
reader of the present series, who, if he wishes further to investigate the subject, will find the fullest 
information in the works to which reference has been made, or which will be hereafter indicated.^ 
But this is the place to recur to the much-abused passage of Irenseus which I have discussed in 
a former volume."* Strange to say, I was forced to correct, from a Roman-Catholic writer, the 
very unsatisfactory rendering of our Edinburgh editors, and to elucidate at some length the pal- 
pable absurdity of attributing to Irenaeus any other than a geographical and imperial reference to 
the importance of Rome, and its usefulness to the West, more especially, as its only see of apos- 
tolic origin. Quoting the Ninth Antiochian Canon, I gave good reasons for my conjecture that 
the Latin convenire represents (rvvrpixuv in the original ; and now it remains to be noted how 
strongly the real meaning of Irenseus is illustrated in the life and services of his pupil Hippolytus. 

1. That neither Hippolytus nor his master had any conception that the See of Rome possesses 
any pre-eminent authority, to which others are obliged to defer, is conspicuously evident from 
the history of both. Alike they convicted Roman bishops of error, and alike they rebuked them 
for their misconduct. 

2. Hippolytus is the author of a work called the Little Labyrinth, which, like the recently 
discovered Philosophitmena, attributes to the Roman See anything but the "infallibility" which 
the quotation from Irenaeus is so ingeniously wrested to sustain. s How he did not understand 
the passage is, therefore, sufficiently apparent. Let us next inquire what appears, from his con- 
duct, to be the true understanding of Irenseus, 

3. I have shown, in the elucidation already referred to, how Irenseus affirms that Rome is the 
city which everybody visits from all parts, and that Christians, resorting thither, because it is the 
imperial City, carry into it the testimony of all other churches. Thus it becomes a competent 
witness to the quod ab omnibus, because it cannot be ignorant of what all the churches teach 
with one accord. This argument, therefore, reverses the modern Roman dogma ; primitive 
Rome received orthodoxy instead of prescribing it. She embosomed the Catholic testimony 
brought into it from all the churches, and gave it forth as reflected light ; not primarily her own, 
but what she faithfully preserved in coincidence with older and more learned churches than her- 
self. Doubtless she had been planted and watered by St. Paul and St. Peter ; but doubtless, 
also, she had been expressly warned by the former of her liability to error and to final severance ^ 

» The valuable treatise of Dr. Bunsen must be compared with the luminous reviewal of Wordsworth, St. Hippolytus and the Church 
0/ Rome, hondon, 1853; enlarged 1880. 

* I Kings xii. 14. 

3 A Bibliographical account of all the ante-Nicene literature, from the learned pen of Dr. M. B. Riddle, will be given in the concludins 
▼olume of this series. 

■♦ Vol. i. pp. 415, 460, this series. 

i See Eusebius, Hist., v. 28; also Routh, Script. Eccles. Opusc, vol. ii. pp. 153-160. * Rom. xi. 17-21, 

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE TO HIPPOLYTUS. 

from apostolic communion. Hippolytus lived at a critical moment, when this awful admonition 
seemed about to be realized. 

4. Now, then, from Portus and from Lyons, Hippolytus brought into Rome the Catholic doc- 
trine, and convicted two of its bishops of pernicious heresies and evil living. And thus, as 
Irenaeus teaches, the faith was preserved in Rome by the testimony of those from every side 
resorting thither, not by any prerogative of the See itself. All this will appear clearly enough 
as the student proceeds in the examination of this volume. 

But it is now time to avail ourselves of the information given us by the translator in his Intro- 
ductory Notice, as follows : — 

The entire of The Refutation of all Heresies, with the exception of book i., was found in a 
MS. brought from a convent on Mount Athos so recently as the year 1842. The discoverer of 
this treasure — for treasure it certainly is — was Minoides Mynas, an erudite Greek, who had 
visited his native country in search of ancient mss., by direction of M. Abel Villemain, Minister 
of Public Instruction under Louis Philippe. The French Government have thus the credit of 
being instrumental in bringing to light this valuable work, while the University of Oxford shares 
the distinction by being its earliest publishers. The Refutation was printed at the Clarendon 
Press in 185 1, under the editorship of M. Emmanuel Miller,' whose labours have proved service- 
able to all subsequent commentators. One generally acknowledged mistake was committed by 
Miller in ascribing the work to Origen. He was right in affirming that the discovered ms. was 
the continuation of the fragment, The Philosophumena, inserted in the Benedictine copy of 
Origen's works. In the volume, however, containing the Philosophumena, we have dissertations 
by Huet, in which he questions Origen's authorship in favour of Epiphanius. Heuman attributed 
the Philosophumena to Didymus of Alexandria, Gale to Aetius ; ^ and it, with the rest of The 
Refutation, Fessler and Baur ascribed to Caius, but the Abbe Jellabert to TertuUian. The last 
hypothesis is untenable, if for no other reason, because the work is in Greek. In many respects, 
Caius, who was a presbyter of Rome in the time of Victor and Zephyrinus, would seem the prob- 
able author ; but a fatal argument — one applicable to those named above, except Epiphanius 
— against Caius is his not being, as the author of The Refutation in the Prooemiu?n declares him- 
self to be, a bishop. Epiphanius no doubt filled the episcopal office ; but when we have a large 
work of his on the heresies, with a summary,^ it would seem scarcely probable that he composed 
likewise, on the same topic, an extended treatise like the present, with two abridgments. What- 
ever diversity of opinion, however, existed as to these claimants, most critics, though not all, now 
agree in denying the authorship of Origen. Neither the style nor tone of The Refutation is 
Origenian. Its compilatory process is foreign to Origen's plan of composition ; while the subject- 
matter itself, for many reasons, would not be likely to have occupied the pen of the Alexandrine 
Father. It is almost impossible but that Origen would have made some allusions in The Refuta- 
tion to his other writings, or in them to it. Not only, however, is there no such allusion, but the 
derivation of the word " Ebionites," in The Refutation, and an expressed belief in the (orthodox) 
doctrine of eternal punishment, are at variance with Origen's authorship. Again, no work answer- 
ing the description is awarded to Origen in catalogues of his extant or lost writings. These 
arguments are strengthened by the facts, that Origen was never a bishop, and that he did not 
reside for any length of time at Rome. He once paid a hurried visit to the capital of the West, 
whereas the author of The Refutation asserts his presence at Rome during the occurrence of 
events which occupied a period of some twenty years. And not only was he a spectator, but 
took part in these transactions in such an official and authoritative manner as Origen could never 
have assumed, either at Rome or elsewhere. 

• In addition to Miller, the translator has made use rf the Gottingen edition, by Duacker and Schneidewin, 1859; and the Abb* 
Cruice's edition, Paris, i860. 

^ An Arian bishop of the first half of the fourth century. 

* See pp. 126-157, 'o™- "» of Epiphanius' collected works, edited by Dionysius Petaviui. 

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE TO HIPPOLYTUS. 

In this state of the controversy, commentators turned their attention towards Hippolytus, in 
favour of whose authorship the majority of modern scholars have decided. The arguments that 
have led to this conclusion, and those alleged by others against it, could not be adequately dis- 
cussed in a notice like the present. Suffice it to say, that such names as Jacobi, Gieseler, Duncker, 
Schneidewin, Bernays, Bunsen, Wordsworth, and Dollinger, support the claims of Hippolytus. 
The testimony of Dr. Dollinger, considering the extent of his theological learning, and in particu- 
lar his intimate acquaintance with the apostolic period in church history, virtually, we submit, 
decides the question." 

For a biography of Hippolytus we have not much authentic materials. There can be no 
reasonable doubt but that he was a bishop, and passed the greater portion of his life in Rome and 
its vicinity. This assertion corresponds with the conclusion adopted by Dr. Dollinger, who, how- 
ever, refuses to allow that Hippolytus was, as is generally maintained, Bishop of Portus, a harbour 
of Rome at the northern mouth of the Tiber, opposite Ostia. However, it is satisfactory to 
establish, and especially upon such eminent authority as that of Dr. Dollinger, the fact of Hip- 
polytus' connection with the Western Church, not only because it bears on the investigation of 
the authorship of The Refutation, the writer of which affirms his personal observation of what he 
records as occurring in his own time at Rome, but also because it overthrows the hypothesis of 
those who contend that there were more Hippolytuses than one — Dr. Dollinger shows that there 
is only one historical Hippolytus — or that the East, and not Italy, was the sphere of his episco- 
pal labours. Thus Le Moyne, in the seventeenth century, a French writer resident in Leyden, 
ingeniously argues that Hippolytus was bishop of Portus Romanorum (Aden), in Arabia. Le 
Moyne's theory was adopted by some celebrities, viz., Dupin, Tillemont, Spanheim, Basnage, and 
our own Dr. Cave. To this position are opposed, among others, the names of Nicephorus, Syn- 
cellus, Baronius, Bellarmine, Dodwell, Beveridge, Bull, and Archbishop Ussher. The judgment 
and critical accuracy of Ussher is, on a point of this kind, of the highest value. Wherefore the 
question of Hippolytus being bishop of Portus near Rome would also appear established, for 
the reasons laid down in Bunsen's Letters to Archdeacon Hare, and Canon Wordsworth's St. 
Hippolytus. The mind of inquirers appears to have been primarily unsettled in consequence of 
Eusebius' mentioning Hippolytus (.£"^r/<fj'/d!j'/. Hist.,\\. lo) in company with Beryllus (of Bostra), 
an Arabian, expressing at the same time his uncertainty as to where Hippolytus was bishop. This 
indecision is easily explained, and cannot invalidate the tradition and historical testimony which 
assign the bishopric of Portus near Rome to Hippolytus, a saint and martyr of the Church. Of 
his martyrdom, though the fact itself is certain, the details, furnished in Prudentius' hymn, are not 
historic. Thus the mode of Hippolytus' death is stated by Prudentius to have been identical 
with that of Hippolytus the son of Theseus, who was torn limb from limb by being tied to wild 
horses. St. Hippolytus, however, is known on historical testimony to have been thrown into a 
canal and drowned ; but whether the scene of his martyrdom was Sardinia, to which he was 
undoubtedly banished along with the Roman bishop Pontianus, or Rome, or Portus, has not as 
yet been definitively proved. The time of his martyrdom, however, is probably a year or two, 
])erhaps less or more, after the commencement of the reign of Maximin the Thracian, that is, 
somewhere about a.d. 235-39. This enables us to determine the age of Hippolytus ; and as 
some statements in The Refutation evince the work to be the composition of an old man, and 
as the work itself was written after the death of Callistus in a.d. 222, this would transfer the 
l)eriod of his birth to not very long after the last half of the second century. 

The contents of The Refutation, as they originally stood, seem to have been arranged thus : 

' Those who afe desirous of examining it for themselves may consult Gieseler's paper on Hippolytus, etc., in the Tkeologische 
Studien uv.d Kritiken, 1853; Hergenrother, Tkeologische Quartalschrifi, Tubingen, 1852; Bunsen's Hippolytus and his Age ; Words- 
worth's St. Hippolytus ; Dr. Dollinger's Hippolytus ttnd Kallistus : oder die Rbntische Kirche in der ersten H'dlfte des dritten 
jfahrkunderts, J853 ; and Cruice's £tudes sur de Nouveaux Documents Historiques emprunies au livre des <l>tAo<TO<<>ou^f va, 1853. 
See also articles in the Quarterly Review, 1851 ; Ecclesiastic and Theologian, 1852, 1853 ; the IVettminster Review, 1853 ; the Dublin 
Review, 1853, 1854 ; Le Correspondent, t. xxxi.; and the Revue des Deux Mondcs, 1865. 

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE TO HIPPOLYTUS. 7 

The first book (which we have) contained an account of the different schools of ancient philoso- 
phers; the second (which is missing), the doctrines and mysteries of the Egyptians; the third 
(hkewise missing), the Chaldean science and astrology; and the fourth (the beginning of which 
is missing), the system of the Chaldean horoscope, and the magical rites and incantations of 
the Babylonian Theurgists. Next came the portion of the work relating more immediately to the 
heresies of the Church, which is contained in books v.-ix. The tenth book is the resume of 
the entire, together with the exposition of the author's own religious opinions. The heresies 
enumerated by Hippolytus comprehend a period starting from an age prior to the composition 
of St. John's Gospel, and terminating with the death of Callistus. The heresies are explained 
according to chronological development,, and may be ranged under five leading schools : (i) The 
Ophites; (i) Simonists ; (3) Basilidians ; (4) Docetae ; (5) Noetians. Hippolytus ascends to 
the origin of heresy, not only in assigning heterodoxy a derivative nature from heathenism, but 
in pointing out in the Gnosis elements of abnormal opinions antecedent to the promulgation 
of Christianity. We have thus a most interesting account of the early heresies, which in some 
respects supplies many desiderata in the ecclesiastical history of this epoch. 

We can scarcely over-estimate the value of The Refutation, on account of the propinquity 
of its author to the apostolic age. Hippolytus was a disciple of St. Irenaeus, St. Irenaeus of 
St. Polycarp, St. Polycarp of St. John. Indeed, one fact of grave importance connected with the 
writings of St. John, is elicited from Hippolytus' Refutation. The passage given out of Basilides" 
work, containing a quotation by the heretic from St. John i. 9, settles the period of the composi- 
tion of the fourth Gospel, as of greater antiquity by at least thirty years than is allowed to it by 
the Tubingen school. It is therefore obvious that Basilides formed his system out of the prologue 
of St. John's Gospel ; thus for ever setting at rest the allegation of these critics, that St. John's 
Gospel was written at a later date, and assigned an apostolic author, in order to silence the 
Basilidian Gnostics.' In the case of Irenaeus, too, The Refutation has restored the Greek text of 
much of his book Against Heresies, hitherto only known to us in a Latin version. Nor is the 
value of Hippolytus' work seriously impaired, even on the supposition of the authorship not being 
proved, — a concession, however, in no wise justified by the evidence. Whoever the writer of 
The Refutation be, he belonged to the early portion of the third century, formed his compilations 
from primitive sources, made conscientious preparation for his undertaking, delivered statements, 
confirmed by early writers of note,^ and lastly, in the execution of his task, furnished indubitable 
marks of information and research, and of having thoroughly mastered the relations and affinities, 
each to other, of the various heresies of the first two and a quarter centuries. These heresies, 
whether deducible from attempts to Christianize the philosophy of Paganism, or to interpret the 
Doctrines and Life of our Lord by the tenets of Gnosticism and Oriental speculation generally, or to- 
create a compromise with the pretensions of Judaism, — these heresies, amid all their complexity 
and diversity, St. Hippolytus ^ reduces to one common ground of censure — antagonism to Holy 
Scripture. Heresy, thus branded, he leaves to wither under the condemnatory sentence of the 
Church. 

' It settles the period of the composition of St. John's Gospel only, of course, on the supposition that Hippolytus is giving a correct 
account as regards Basilides' work. The mode, however, in which Hippolytus introduces the quotation, appears to place its authenticity 
beyond reasonable doubt. He represents Basilides (see book vii. chap. lo) as notifying his reference to St. John's Gospel thus, " And this," 
he says, " is what has been stated in the Gospels: ' He was the true light, which lighteneth every man that cometh into the world.' " Now 
this is precisely the mode of reference we should expect that Basilides would employ ; whereas, if Hippolytus had either fabricated the 
passage or adduced it from hearsay, it is almost certain he would have said " in the Gospel of St. John," and not indefinitely " the Gospels." 
And more than this, the formulary " in the Gospels," adopted by Basilides, reads very like a recognition of an agreed collection of authorized 
accounts of our Lord's life and sayings. It is also remarkable that the word " stated " {KtyoiJ-tvov) Basilides has just used in quoting 
(Gen. i. 3) as interchangeable with " written " {yiypa-nTai) , the word exclusively applied to what is included within the canon of Scripture. 

2 For instance, St. Irensus, whom Hippolytus professes to follow, Epiphanius, Theodoret, St. Augustine, etc. 

3 The translator desires to acknowledge obligations to Dr. Lottner, Professor of Sanskrit and sub-librarian in Trinity College, Dublin, 
— a gentleman of extensive historical erudition as well as of accurate and comprehensive scholarship. 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. J. H. MACMAHON, M.A.] 

BOOK I. 

CONTENTS. 

The following are the contents of the first 
book of The Refutation of all Heresies} 

We propose to furnish an account of the ten- 
ets of natural philosophers, and who these are, 
as well as the tenets of moral philosophers, and 
who these are ; and thirdly, the tenets of logi- 
cians, and who these logicians are. 

Among natural philosophers ^ maybe enumer- 
ated Thales, Pythagoras, Empedocles, Hera- 
clitus, Anaximander, Anaximenes, Anaxagoras, 
Archelaus, Parmenides, Leucippus, Democritus, 
Xenophanes, Ecphantus, Hippo. 

Among moral philosophers are Socrates, pupil 
of Archelaus the physicist, (and) Plato the pupil 
of Socrates. This (speculator) combined three 
systems of philosophy. 

Among logicians is Aristotle, pupil of Plato. 
He systematized the art of dialectics. Among 
the Stoic (logicians) were Chrysippus (and) 

' The four of the MSS. of the first^book extant prior to the recent 
discovery of seven out of the remaining nine books of Tlie Refuta- 
tion, concur in ascribing it to Origen. These inscriptions run thus: 
I. " Refutation by Origen of all Heresies; " 2. " Of Origen's Phil- 
osophumena . . . these are the contents;" 3. "Being estimable 
(Dissertations) by Origen, a man of the greatest wisdom." The 
recently discovered MS. itself in the margin has the words, " Origen, 
and Origen's opinion." The title, as agreed upon by modern com- 
mentators, is: I. " Book I. of Origen's Refutation of all Heresies" 
(Wolf and Gronovius) ; 2. " A Refutation of all Heresies; " 3. " Ori- 
gen's Philosophumena, or the Refutation of all Heresies." The last 
is Miller's in his Oxford edition, 1851. The title might have been, 
" Philosophumena, and the Refutation (therefrom) of all Heresies." 
There were obviously two divisions of the work: (i) A resume of 
the tenets of the philosophers (books i., ii., iii., iv.), preparatory to (2) 
the refutation of heresies, on the ground of their derivative character 
from Greek and Egyptian speculation. Bunsen would denominate 
the work "St. Hippolytus' (Bishop and Martyr) Refutation of all 
Heresies; what remains of the ten books." 

^ Most of what follows in book i. is a compilation from ancient 
sources. The ablest resume followed by Cicero in the De Nat. 
Dear., of the tenets of the ancient philosophers, is to be found in 
Aristotle's Metaphysics. The English reader is referred to the Meta- 
physics, hoo\i. i. pp. 13-46 (Bohn's Classical Library) , also to the 
translator's analysis prefixed to this work, pp. 17-25. See also 
Diogenes' Lives of the Philosophers, and Tenneman's Manual of 
Philosophy (translated in Bohn's Library) ; Plutarch, De Placitis 
Philosophorum ; Lewes' Biographical History of (^Ancient') Phil- 
osophy; and Rev. Dr. F. D. Maurice's History of {A itcient) Meta- 
physical and Moi'al Philosophy. The same subject is discussed in 
Ritter's History of Philosophy (translated by Morrison). 

Zeno. Epicurus, however, advanced an opinion 
almost contrary to all philosophers. Pyrrho was 
an Academic; 3 this (speculator) taught the in- 
comprehensibility of everything. The Brahmins 
among the Indians, and the Druids among the 
Celts, and Hesiod (devoted themselves to phil- 
osophic pursuits). 

THE PROffiMIUM. MOTIVES FOR UNDERTAKING 

THE REFUTATION ; EXPOSURE OF THE ANCIENT 
MYSTERIES ; PLAN OF THE WORK ; COMPLETE- 
NESS OF THE REFUTATION ; VALUE OF THE 
TREATISE TO FUTURE AGES. 

We must not overlook^ any figment devised 
by those denominated philosophers among the 
Greeks. For even their incoherent tenets must 
be received as worthy of credit, on account of 
the excessive madness of the heretics ; who, 
from the observance of silence, and from con- 
cealing their own ineffable mysteries, have by 
many been supposed worshippers of God. 5 We 
have likewise, on a former occasion,"^ expounded 
the doctrines of these briefly, not illustrating 
them with any degree of minuteness, but refut- 
ing them in coarse digest ; not having consid- 
ered it requisite to bring to light their secret ^ 
doctrines, in order that, when we have explained 
their tenets by enigmas, they, becoming ashamed, 
lest also, by our divulging their mysteries, we 
should convict them of atheism, might be in- 
duced to desist in some degree from their un- 

3 This word is variously given thus: Academian, Academeian, 
Academaic, Academe, Cademian, and Cadimian. The two last would 
seem to indicate the character rather than the philosophy of Pyrrho. 
To favour this view, the text should be altered into xai afirj/xo?, i.e., 
aTTo^Tjuos = from home, not domestic. 

* Some hiatus at the beginning of this sentence is apparent. 

s An elaborate defence of this position forms the subject of Cud- 
worth's great work. The True /iitellecttial System of the Universe. 

*> This statement has been urged against Origen's authorship, in 
favour of Epiphanius, who wrote an extended treatise on the Here- 
sies, with an abridgment. 

7 That is, their esoteric mysteries, intended only for a favoured 
few, as contrasted with the exoteric, designed for more general dif- 
fusioQ. 

lO 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book I. 

reasonable opinion and their profane attempt." 
But since I perceive that they have not been 
abashed by our forbearance, and have made no 
account of how God is long-suffering, though 
l)laspherited by them, in order that either from 
shame they may repent, or should they perse- 
vere, be justly condemned, I am forced to pro- 
ceed in my intention of exposing those secret 
mysteries of theirs, which, to the initiated, with 
a vast amount of plausibility they deliver who 
are not accustomed first to disclose (to any 
one), till, by keeping such in suspense during 
a period (of necessary preparation), and by ren- 
dering him blasphemous towards the true God, 
they have acquired complete ascendancy over 
him, and perceive him eagerly panting after the 
promised disclosure. And then, when they have 
tested him to be enslaved by sin, they initiate 
him, putting him in possession of the perfection 
of wicked things. Previously, however, they 
bind him with an oath neither to divulge (the 
mysteries), nor to hold communication with any 
person whatsoever, unless he first undergo simi- 
lar subjection, though, when the doctrine has 
been simply delivered (to anyone), there was 
no longer any need of an oath. For he who 
was content to submit to the necessary purga- 
tion,^ and so receive the perfect mysteries of 
these men, by the very act itself, as well as in 
reference to his own conscience, will feel him- 
self sufficiently under an obligation not to 
divulge to others ; for if he once disclose wick- 
edness of this description to any man, he would 
neither be reckoned among men, nor be deemed 
worthy to behold the light, since not even irra- 
tional animals 3 would attempt such an enormity, 
as we shall explain when we come to treat of 
such topics. 

Since, however, reason compels us to plunge -» 
into the very depth of narrative, we conceive 
we should not be silent, but, expounding the 
tenets of the several schools with minuteness, 
we shall evince reserve in nothing. Now it 
seems expedient, even at the expense of a more 
protracted investigation, not to shrink from 
labour ; for we shall leave behind us no trifling 
auxiliary to human life against the recurrence 
of error, when all are made to behold, in an 
obvious light, the clandestine rites of these men, 
and the secret orgies which, retaining under 
their management, they deliver to the initiated 
only. But none will refute these, save the Holy 
Spirit bequeathed unto the Church, which the 
Apostles, having in the first instance received, 
have transmitted to those who have rightly be- 

' One MS has — " the profaae opinion and unreasonable attempt." 

2 " To learn " (Roeper). 

3 " And those that are irrational animals do not attempt," (or) 
" because irrational," etc. The last is Sancroft's reading; that in 
the text, Roeper's. 

* " Ascend up to" (Roeper). 

lieved. But we, as being their successors, and 
as participators in this grace, high-priesthood, 
and office of teaching,5 as well as being reputed 
guardians of the Church, must not be found 
deficient in vigilance,*^ or disposed to suppress- 
correct doctrine. ? Not even, however, labour- 
ing with every energy of body and soul, do we 
tire in our attempt adequately to render our 
Divine Benefactor a fitting return ; and yet 
withal we do not so requite Him in a becoming 
manner, except we are not remiss in discharging 
the trust committed to us, but careful to com- 
plete the measure of our particular opportunity, 
and to impart to all without grudging whatever 
the Holy Ghost supplies, not only bringing to 
light,'"' l)y means of our refutation, matters for- 
eign (to our subject), but also whatsoever things 
the truth has received by the grace of the 
Father,*) and ministered to men. These also, 
illustrating by argument and creating testimony "* 
by letters, we shall unabashed proclaim. 

In order, then, as we have already stated, that 
we may prove them atheists, both in opinion and 
their mode (of treating a question) and in fact, 
and (in order to show) whence it is that their 
attempted theories have accrued unto them, and 
that they have endeavoured to establish their 
tenets, taking nothing from the holy Scriptures 
— nor is it from preserving the succession of any 
saint that they have hurried headlong into these 
opinions ; — but that their doctrines have de- 
rived their origin " from the wisdom of the 
Greeks, from the conclusions of those who have 
formed systems of philosophy, and from would- 
be mysteries, and the vagaries of astrologers, — 
it seems, then, advisable, in the first instance, by 
explaining the opinions advanced by the philoso- 
phers of the Greeks, to satisfy our readers that 
such are of greater antiquity than these (here- 
sies), and more deserving of reverence in refer- 
ence to their views respecting the divinity ; in 
the next place, to compare each heresy with the 
system of each speculator, so as to show that 
the earliest champion of the heresy availing him- 
self'- of these attempted theories, has turned 
them to advantage by appropriating their princi- 
ples, and, impelled from these into worse, has 
constructed his own doctrine. The undertaking 

S This passage is quoted by those who impugn the authorship 
of Origen on the ground of his never having been a bishop of the 
Church. It is not, however, quite certain that the words refer to the 
episcopal office exclusively. 

^ The common reading is in the future, but the present tense is 
adopted by Richter in his Critical Obscr^iations, p. 77. 

^ h might be, " any opinion that may be subservient to the sub- 
ject taken in hand." This is Cruice's rendering in his Latin version. 
A different reading is, " we must not be silent as regards reasons 
that hold good," or, " as regards rational distinctions," or, " refrain 
from utterances through the instrument of reasoning." The last is 
Roeper's. 

8 Another reading is, " bringing into a collection." 

9 Or, " the Spirit." 

'° Or, " indicating a witness; " or, " having adduced testimony." 

" Or, " a starting-point." 

'^ Or, " devoting his attention to; " or, " having lighted upon." 

Chap. II.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

II 

admittedly is full of labour, and (is one) requir- 
ing extended research. We shall not, however, 
be wanting in exertion ; for afterwards it will be 
a source of joy, just like an athlete obtaining 
with much toil the crown, or a merchant after a 
huge swell of sea compassing gain, or a husband- 
man after sweat of brow enjoying the fruits, or a 
prophet after reproaches and insults seeing his 
predictions turning out true. In the commence- 
ment, therefore, we shall declare who first, among 
the Greeks, pointed out (the principles of) natu- 
ral philosophy. For from these especially have 
they furtively taken their views who have first pro- 
pounded these heresies," as we shall subsequently 
prove when we come to compare them one with 
another. Assigning to each of those who take 
the lead among philosophers their own peculiar 
tenets, we shall publicly exhibit these heresiarchs 
as naked and unseemly. 

CHAP. I. — THALES ; HIS PHYSICS AND THEOLOGY ; 
FOUNDER OF GREEK ASTRONOMY. 

It is said that Thales of Miletus, one of the 
seven ^ wise men, first attempted to frame a sys- 
tem of natural philosophy. This person said 
that some such thing as water is the generative 
principle of the universe, and its end ; — for 
that out of this, solidified and again dissolved, all 
things consist, and that all things are supported 
on it ; from which also arise both earthquakes 
and changes of the winds and atmospheric 
movements,^ and that all things are both pro- 
duced ■* and are in a state of flux corresponding 
with the nature of the primary author of genera- 
tion ; — and that the Deity s is that which has 
neither beginning nor end. This person, having 
been occupied with an hypothesis and investiga- 
tion concerning the stars, became the earliest 
author to the Greeks of this kind of learning. 
And he, looking towards heaven, alleging that he 
was carefully examining supernal objects, fell 
into a well ; and a certain maid, by name 
Thratta, remarked of him derisively, that while 
intent on beholding things in heaven, he did not 
know ^ what was at his feet. And he lived about 
the time of Croesus. 

■ The chief writers on the early heresies are : Irenseus, of the 
second century; Hippolytus, his pupil, of the third; Philastrius, 
Epiphanius, and St. Augustine, of the fourth century. The learned 
need scarcely be reminded of the comprehensive digest furnished by 
Ittigius in the preface to his dissertation on the heresies of the apos- 
tolic and post-apostolic ages. A book more within the reach of the 
general reader is Dr. Burton's Inquiry into the Heresies of the 
Apostolic Age. 

2 [These were: Periander of Corinth, B.C. 585; Pittacus of Mity- 
lene, B.C. 570; Thales of Miletus, B.C. 548; Solon of Athens, B.C. 
540; Chiloof Sparta, B.C. 597; Biasof Priene; Cleobulus of Lindus, 

B.C. 564 ] 

3 Or, " motions of the stars" (Roeper). 
■* Or, "carried along" (Roeper). 

s Or, " that which is divine." See Clemens Alexandrinus, 5/ro>«., 
V. pp. 461, 463 (Heinsius and Sylburgius' ed.). Thales, on being 
asked, " What is God ? " " That," replied he, " which has neither 
6»eginning nor end." 

» Or. "see." 

CHAP. II. PYTHAGORAS ; HIS COSMOGONY ; RULES 

OF HIS SECT ; DISCOVERER OF PHYSIOGNOMY ; 
HIS PHILOSOPHY OF NUMBERS ; HIS SYSTEM OF 
THE TRANSMIGRATION OF SOULS; ZARATAS ON 
DEMONS ; WHY PYTHAGORAS FORBADE THE EAT- 
ING OF BEANS; THE MODE OF LIVING ADOPTED 
BY HIS DISCIPLES. 

But there was also, not far from these tim'es, 
another philosophy which Pythagoras originated 
(who some say was a native of Samos), which 
they have denominated Italian, because that 
Pythagoras, flying from Polycrates the king of 
Samos, took up his residence in a city of Italy, 
and there passed the entire of his remaining 
years. And they who received in succession his 
doctrine, did not much differ from the same 
opinion. And this person, instituting an investi- 
gation concerning natural phenomena,^ combined 
together astronomy, and geometry, and music.^ 
And so he proclaimed that the Deity is a monad ; 
and carefully acquainting himself with the nature 
of number, he affirmed that the world sings, and 
that its system corresponds with harmony, and 
he first resolved the motion of the seven stars 
into rhythm and melody. And being astonished 
at the management of the entire fabric, he re- 
quired that at first his disciples should keep si- 
lence, as if persons coming into the world 
initiated in (the secrets of) the universe ; next, 
when it seemed that they were sufficiently con- 
versant with his mode of teaching his doctrine, 
and could forcibly philosophize concerning the 
stars and nature, then, considering them pure, 
he enjoins them to speak. This man distributed 
his pupils in two orders, and called the one eso- 
teric, but the other exoteric. And to the former 
he confided more advanced doctrines, and to the 
latter a more moderate amount of instruction. 

And he also touched on magic — as they say 
— and himself 9 discovered an art of physi- 
ogony,'° laying down as a basis certain numbers 
and measures, saying that they comprised the 
principle of arithmetical philosophy by compo- 
sition after this manner. The first number be- 
came an originating principle, which is one, 
indefinable, incomprehensible, having in itself 
all numbers that, according to plurality, can go 
on ad infinitum. But the primary monad be- 
came a principle of numbers, according to sub- 
stance,"— which is a male monad, begetting 
after the manner of a parent all the rest of the 
numbers. Secondly, the duad is a female num- 
ber, and the same also is by arithmeticians 
termed even. Thirdly, the triad is a male num- 
ber. This also has been classified by arithmeti- 

7 Or, " nature." 

8 " And arithmetic " (added by Roeper). 

9 Or, " and he first." 

'° Or, " physiognomy." . 

•1 Or, ■• in conformity with his hypothesis. 

12 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[I'.OOK 1. 

cians under the denomination uneven. And in 
addition to all these is the tetrad, a female num- 
ber ; and the same also is called even, because 
it is female. Therefore all the numbers that 
have been derived from the genus are four ; but 
number is the indefmite genus, from which 
was constituted, according to them, the perfect ' 
number, viz., the decade. For one, two, three, 
four, become ten, if its proper denomination be 
preserved essendally for each of the numbers. 
Pythagoras affirmed this to be a sacred (juater- 
nion, source of everlasting nature,- having, as it 
were, roots in itself; and that from this number 
all the numbers receive their originating princi- 
ple. For eleven, and twelve, and the rest, par- 
take of the origin of existence ^ from ten. Of 
this decade, the perfect number, there are 
termed four divisions, — namely, number, 
monad,^ square, (and) cube. And the connec- 
tions and blendings of these are performed, ac- 
cording to nature, for the generation of growth 
completing the productive number. For when 
the square itself is multiplied s into itself, a bi- 
quadratic is the result. But when the square is 
multiplied into the cube, the result is the product 
of a square and cube ; and when the cube is 
multiplied into the cube, the product of two cubes 
is the result. So that all the numbers from which 
the production of existing (numbers) arises, are 
seven, — namely, number, monad, square, cul)e, 
biquadratic, quadratic-cube, cubo-cube. 

This philosopher likewise said that the soul 
is immortal, and that it subsists in successive 
bodies. Wherefore he asserted that before the 
Trojan era he was ^Ethalides,^ and during the 
Trojan e])och Fuphorbus, and subsequent to this 
Hermotimus of Samos, and after him Pyrrhus of 
Delos ; fifth, Pythagoras. And Diodorus the 
flretrian,^ and Aristoxenus ^ the musician, assert 

I Or, " the third." 

- Or, " an everlasting nntiire; " or, " having the roots of an ever- 
lasting nature in itself," the words " as it were " being omitted in some 

MSS. 

•* Or, " production." 

•• It should be probably, " monad, number." The monad was 
with Pythagoras, and in imitation of him with Leibnitz, the highest 
generalization of ninnber, and a conception in abstraction, commen- 
surate with what we call essence, whether of matter or spirit. 

5 Ko/3io-9jj in text must be rendered " multiplied." The formulary 
is self-evident: (a^)^ = n*, (a^)^ = a<', {ai)3 = n9. 

*> Or Thallis. /Ethalides, a son of Hermes, was herald of the 
Argonauts, and said never to have forgotten anything. In this way 
his soul remembered its successive migrations into the bodies of 
Euphorbus, Hermotimus, Pyrrhus, and Pythagoras. (See Diogenes' 
Lives, book viii. chap. i. .sec. 4.) 

' No name occurs more frequently in the annals of Greek literature 
than that of Diodorus. One, however, with the title " of Kretria," 
as far as the translator knows, is mentioned only by Hippolytus; so 
that this is likely another Diodorus to be added to the long list already 
existing Tt may be that Diodorus Eretriensis is the same as Diodo- 
rus Crotoniates, a Pythagorean philo.sophcr. Sec Kabricius' Biblioth. 
Crirc, lib ii. cap. iit., lib. iii. cap. xxxi. ; also Meursius' Aftnotatious, 
p. 20, 0)1 Chnliidius' Coiiimctitary on Plato's Timceus. The arti- 
cle in Smith's Dictionary is a transcript of these. 

* Aristoxenus is mentioned by Cicero in his Tusculan Questions, 
book i. chap, xviii., as having broached a theory in psychology, 
which may have suggested, in modern times, to David Hartley his 
hypothesis of sensation being the result of nerval vibrations. Cicero 
says of Aristoxenus, " that he was so charmed with his own harmo- 
nies, that he sought to transfer them into investigations concerning 
our corporeal and spiritual nature." 

that P}thagoras came to Zaratas "^ the Chaldean, 
and that he explained to him that there are two 
original causes of things, father and mother, and 
that father is light, but mother darkness ; and 
that of the light the parts are hot, dry, not heavy, 
light, swift ; but of darkness, cold, moist, weighty, 
slow ; and that out of all these, from female and 
male, the world consists. But the world, he says, 
is a musical harmony ; '° wherefore, also, that the 
sun i)erforms a circuit in accordance with har- 
mony. And as regards the things that are pro- 
duced from earth and the cosmical system, they 
maintain that Zaratas " makes the following state- 
ments : that there are two demons, the one 
celestial and the other terrestrial ; and that the 
terrestrial sends up a production from earth, and 
that this is water ; and that the celestial is a fire, 
partaking of the nature of air, hot and cold." 
And he therefore affirms that none of these de- 
stroys or sullies the soul, for these constitute the 
substance of all things. And he is reported to 
have ordered his followers not to eat beans, 
because that Zaratas said that, at the origin and 
concretion of all things, when the earth was still 
undergoing its process of solidification, '^ and that 
of putrefaction had set in, the bean was pro- 
duced.'^ And of this he mentions the following 
indication, that if any one, after ha\ing chewed 
a bean without the husk, places it opposite the 
sun for a certain period, — for this immediately 
will aid in the result, — it yields the smell of hu- 
man seed. And he mentions also another clearer 
instance to be this : if, when the bean is blossom- 
ing, we take the bean and its flower, and deposit 
them in a jar, smear this over, and bury it in the 
ground, and after a few days uncover it, we shall 
see it wearing the appearance, first of a woman's 
pit (fend 1/711, and after this, when closely examined, 
of the head of a child growing in along with it. 
This person, being burned along with his disciples 
in Croton, a town of Italy, perished. And this 
was a habit with him, whenever one repaired to 
him with a view of becoming his follower, (the 
candiilale disciple was comjielled) to sell his 
l)ossessions, and lodge the money sealed with 
Pythagoras, and he continued in silence to un- 

9 Zaratas is another form of the name Zoroaster. 

'" Or, " is a nature according to musical harmony" (preceding 
note) : or, " The cosmical system is nature and a musical harmony." 

" Zaratas, or Zoroaster, is employed as a sort of generic denomi- 
nation for philosopher by the Orientals, who, whatever portions of 
Asia tliey inhabit, mostly ascribe their speculative systems to a Zo- 
roaster. No less than six individuals bearing this name are spoken 
of Arnobiiis {Contr. Coitfs., i. 52) mentions four — (i) a Chaldean, 
(2) Bactrian, (3) Pamphylian, (4) Armenian. Pliny mentions a fifth 
as a native of "Proconnesus (Nat. Hist., xxx. i), while Apuleius 
{Florida, ii. 15) a sixth Zoroaster, a native of Babylon, and contem- 
porary with Pythagoras, the one evidently alluded to by Hippolytus. 
(See translator's Treatise on Metaphysics, chap, ii.) 

'- Or, " that it was hot and cold," or " hot of moist." 

" Or it might be rendered, "a process of arrangement." The 
Abbe Cruice (in his edition of Hi/>/>olyiiis, Paris, i860) suggests a 
diftcrent reading, which would make the words translate thus, " when 
the earth was an undigested and solid mass." 

'< (See book vi. cap. xxii., infra, and note. But Clement gives 
another explanation. See vol. ii. p. 385, this series.] 

Chap. V.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

13 

dergo instruction, sometimes for three, but 
sometimes for five years. And again, on being 
released, he was permitted to associate with the 
rest, and remained as a disciple, and took his 
meals along with them ; if otherwise, however, 
he received back his property, and was rejected. 
These persons, then, were styled Esoteric Pytha- 
goreans, whereas the rest, Pythagoristee. 

Among his followers, however, who escaped 
the conflagration were Lysis and Archippus, and 
the servant of Pythagoras, Zamolxis,' who also 
is said to have taught the Celtic Druids to cul- 
tivate the philosophy of Pythagoras. And they 
assert that Pythagoras learned from the Egyp- 
tians his system of numbers and measures ; and 
being struck by the plausible, fanciful, and not 
easily revealed wisdom of the priests, he himself 
likewise, in imitation of them, enjoined silence, 
and made his disciples lead a solitary life in 
underground chapels.^ 

CHAP. III. — EMPEDOCLES; HIS TWOFOLD CAUSE; 
TENET OF TRANSMIGRATION. 

But Empedocles, born after these, advanced 
likewise many statements respecting the nature 
of demons, to the effect that, being very numer- 
ous, they pass their time in managing earthly 
concerns. This person affirmed the originating 
principle of the universe to be discord and 
friendship, and that the intelligible fire of the 
monad is the Deity, and that all things consist 
of fire, and will be resolved into fire ; with which 
opinion the Stoics likewise almost agree, expect- 
ing a conflagration. But most of all does he 
concur with the tenet of transition of souls from 
body to body, expressing himself thus : — 

" For surely both youth and maid I was. 
And shrub, and bird,^ and fish, from ocean stray'd."'' 

This (philosopher) maintained the transmuta- 
tion of all souls into any description of animal. 
For Pythagoras, the instructor of these (sages), 5 
asserted that himself had been Euphorbus, who 
served in the expedition against Ilium, alleging 
that he recognised his shield. The foregoing 
are the tenets of Empedocles. 

CHAP. IV. HERACLITUS ; HIS UNIVERSAL DOGMA- 
TISM ; HIS THEORY OF FLUX ; OTHER SYSTEMS. 

But Heraclitus, a natural philosopher of Eph- 
€sus, surrendered himself to universal grief, con- 
demning the ignorance of the entire of life, and 
of all men ; nay, commiserating the (very) exist- 

' Or, "Zametus." 

2 Or, " leading them down into cells, made them," etc. ; or, 
" made his disciples observe silence," etc. 

3 Or, " and beast," more in keeping with the sense of the name; 
or "a lamb" has been suggested in the Gottingen edition of Hip- 
polytus. 

■* Or, " traveller into the sea; " or, " mute ones from the sea; " 
or, " from the sea a glittering fish." 

5 Or, " being the instructor of this (philosopher)." 

ence of mortals, for he asserted that he himself 
knew everything, whereas the rest of mankind 
nothing. *" But he also advanced statements al- 
most in concert with Empedocles, saying that 
the originating principle of all things is discord 
and friendship, and that the Deity is a fire en- 
dued with intelligence, and that all things are 
borne one upon another, and never are at a 
standstill ; and just as Empedocles, he affirmed 
that the entire locality about us is full of evil 
things, and that these evil things reach as far 
as the moon, being extended from the quarter 
situated around the earth, and that they do not 
advance further, inasmuch as the entire space 
above the moon is more pure. So also it 
seemed to Heraclitus. 

After these arose also other natural philoso- 
phers, whose opinions we have not deemed it 
necessary to declare, (inasmuch as) they present 
no diversity to those already specified. Since, 
however, upon the whole, a not inconsiderable 
school has sprung (from thence), and many nat- 
ural philosophers subsequently have arisen from 
them, each advancing different accounts of the 
nature of the universe, it seems also to us ad- 
visable, that, explaining the philosophy that has 
come down by succession from Pythagoras, we 
should recur to the opinions entertained by 
those living after the time of Thales, and that, 
furnishing a narrative of these, we should ap- 
proach the consideration of the ethical and 
logical philosophy which Socrates and Aristotle 
originated, the former ethical, and the latter 
logical. 7 

CHAP. V. ANAXIMANDER ; HIS THEORY OF THE 

INFINITE ; HIS ASTRONOJkllC OPINIONS ; HIS 
PHYSICS. 

Anaximander, then, was the hearer of Thales. 
Anaximander was son of Praxiadas, and a native 
of Miletus. This man said that the originating 
principle of existing things is a certain constitu- 
tion of the Infinite, out of which the heavens are 
generated, and the worlds therein ; and that thi;! 
principle is eternal and undecaying, and com- 
prising all the worlds. And he speaks of time 
as something of limited generation, and subsist- 
ence, and destruction. This person declared 
the Infinite to be an originating principle and 
element of existing things, being the first to 
employ such a denomination of the originating 
principle. But, moreover, he asserted that there 
is an eternal motion, by the agency of which it 
happens that the heavens ^ are generated ; but 
that the earth is poised aloft, upheld by nothing, 

6 Proclus, in his commentary on Plato's Timaus, uses almost the 
same words: " but Heraclitus, m asserting his own universal knowl- 
edge, makes out all the rest of mankind ignorant." 

7 Or, " and among these, Socrates a moral philosopher, and Aris" 
totle a logician, originated systems." 

* Or, " men." 

H 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book I. 

continuing (so) on account of its equal distance 
from all (the heavenly bodies) ; and that the fig- 
ure of it is curved, circular," similar to a column 
of stone.^ And one of the surfaces we tread 
upon, but the other is opposite.^ And that the 
stars are a circle of fire, separated from the fire 
which is in the vicinity of the world, and encom- 
passed by air. And that certain atmospheric ex- 
halations arise in places where the stars shine ; 
wherefore, also, when these exhalations are ob- 
structed, that eclipses take place. And that the 
moon sometimes appears full and sometimes 
waning, according to the obstruction or open- 
ing of its (orbital) paths. But that the circle 
of the sun is twenty-seven times* larger than 
the moon, and that the sun is situated in the 
highest ((}uarter of the firmament) ; whereas 
the orbs of the fixed stars in the lowest. And 
that animals are produced (in moistures) by 
evaporation from the sun. And that man was, 
originally, similar to a different animal, that is, 
a fish. And that winds are caused by the sepa- 
ration of very rarified exhalations of the atmos- 
phere, and by their motion after they have been 
condensed. And that rain arises from earth's 
giving back (the vapours which it receives) from 
the (clouds^') under the sun. And that there 
are flashes of lightning when the wind coming 
down severs the clouds. This person was born 
in the third year of the xlii. Olympiad. ? 

CHAP. VI. ANAXIMENES ; HIS SYSTEM OF " AN 

INFINITE AIR ; " HIS VIEWS OF ASTRONOMY AND 
NATURAL PHENOMENA. 

But Anaximenes, who himself was also a na- 
tive of Miletus, and son of pAirystratus, affirmed 
that the originating principle is infinite air, out 
of which are generated things existing, those 
which have existed, and those that will be, as 
well as gods and divine (entities), and that the 
rest arise from the offspring of this. But that 
there is such a species of air, when it is most 
even, which is imperceptible to vision, but capa- 
ble of being manifested by cold and iieat, and 
moisture and motion, and that it is continually 
in motion ; for that whatsoever things undergo 
alteration, do not change if there is not motion. 
For that it presents a different appearance ac- 
cording as it is condensed and attenuated, for 
when it is dissolved into what is more attenu- 
ated that fire is produced, and that when it is 
moderately condensed again into air that a cloud 

' Or, " moist." 

2 Or, " congealed snow." 

3 That is. Antipodes. Diogenes Laertius was of opinion that 
Plato first indicated by name the Antipodes. 

* Or, " 727 times," an improbable reading. 

5 " In moisture" is properly added, as Plutarch, in his De Placi- 
tis, V. xix., remarks that " Anaximander affirms that primary animals 
were produced in moisture." 

* This word seems requisite to the sense of the passage. 

' [b.c. 610. On Olympiads, see Jarvis, Introd., p. 21.] 

is formed from the air by virtue of the contrac- 
tion ; * but when condensed still more, water, 
(and) that when the condensation is carried still 
further, earth is formed ; and when condensed 
to the very highest degree, stones. Wherefore, 
that the dominant principles of generation are 
contraries, — namely, heat and cold. And that 
the expanded earth is wafted along upon the air, 
and in like manner both sun and moon and the 
rest of the stars ; for all things being of the na- 
ture of fire, are wafted about through the expanse 
of space, upon the air. And that the stars are 
produced from earth by reason of the mist which 
arises from this eai-th ; and when this is attenu- 
ated, that fire is produced, and that the stars 
consist of the fire which is being borne aloft. 
But also that there are terrestrial natures in the 
region of the stars carried on along with them. 
And he says that the stars do not move under 
the earth, as some have supposed, but around the 
earth, '^ just as a cap is turned round our head ; 
and that the sun is hid, not by being under the 
earth, but because covered by the higher por- 
tions of the earth, and on account of the greater 
distance that he is from us. But that the stars 
do not emit heat on account of the length of 
distance ; and that the winds are produced when 
the condensed air, l^ecoming rarified, is borne 
on ; and that when collected and thickened still 
further, clouds are generated, and thus a change 
made into water. And that hail is produced 
when the water borne down from the clouds 
becomes congealed ; and that snow is generated 
when these very clouds, being more moist, ac- 
quire congelation ; and that lightning is caused 
when the clouds are parted by force of the winds ; 
for when these are sundered there is produced a 
brilliant and fiery flash. And that a rainbow is 
produced by reason of the rays of the sun falling 
on the collected air. And that an earthquake 
takes place when the earth is altered into a larger 
(bulk) by heat and cold. These indeed, then, 
were the opinions of Anaximenes. This (phil- 
osopher) flourished about the first year of the 
LViii. Olympiad.'" 

CHAP. VI I. — ANAXAGORAS ; HIS THEORY OF MIND ; 
RECOGNISES AN EFFICIENT C.WSE ; HIS COSMOG- 
ONY AND ASTRONOMY. 

After this (thinker) comes Anaxagoras/' son 
of Hegesibulus,'- a native of Clazomenai. This 
person aftirmed the originating principle of the 
universe to be mind and matter; mind being 

^ Or, " revolutionary motion." 

9 Plutarch, in his De Flacitis Philosophorum. attributes botli 
opinions to Anaximenes, viz., that the sun was moved both under and 
around the earth. 
»o [B.C. 556.] 

" Aristotle considers that Anaxagoras was the first to broach the 
existence of efficient causes in nature. He states, however, that 
Hermotimus received the credit of so doing at an earlier date. 
'2 Or, Hegesephontus. 

Chap. VIII.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

15 

the efficient cause, whereas matter that which 
•was being formed. For all things coming into 
existence simultaneously, mind supervening in- 
troduced order. And material principles, he 
says, are infinite ; even the smaller of these are 
infinite.' And that all things partake of motion 
by being moved by mind, and that similar bodies 
coalesce. And that celestial bodies were arranged 
by orbicular motion. That, therefore, what was 
thick and moist, and dark and cold, and all 
things heavy, came together into the centre, from 
the solidification of which earth derived support ; 
but that the things opposite to these — namely, 
heat and brilliancy, and dryness and lightness — 
hurried impetuously into the farther portion of 
the atmosphere. And that the earth is in figure 
plane ; and that it continues suspended aloft, by 
reason of its magnitude, and by reason of there 
being no vacuum, and by reason of the air, which 
was most powerful, bearing along the wafted earth. 
But that among moist substances on earth, was 
the sea, and the waters in it ; and when these 
evaporated (from the sun), or had settled under, 
that the ocean was formed in this manner, as 
well as from the rivers that from time to time 
llow into it. And that the rivers also derive 
support from the rains and from the actual waters 
in the earth ; for that this is hollow, and contains 
water in its caverns. And that the Nile is inun- 
dated in summer, by reason of the waters carried 
down into it from the snows in northern (lati- 
tudes).^ And that the sun and moon and all 
the stars are fiery stones, that were rolled round 
by the rotation of the atmosphere. And that 
beneath the stars are sun and moon, and certain 
invisible bodies that are carried along with us ; 
and that we have no perception of the heat of 
the stars, both on account of their being so far 
away, and on account of their distance from the 
earth ; and further, they are not to the same 
degree hot as the sun, on account of their occu- 
pying a colder situation. And that the moon, 
being lower than the sun, is nearer us. And that 
the sun surpasses the Peloponnesus in size. And 
that the moon has not light of its own, but from 
the sun. But that the revolution of the stars 
takes place under the earth. And that the moon 
is eclipsed when the earth is interposed, and oc- 
casionally also those (stars) that are underneath 
the moon. And that the sun (is ecHpsed) when, 
at the beginning of the month, the moon is in- 
terposed. And that the solstices are caused by 
both sun and moon being repulsed by the air. 
And that the moon is often turned, by its not 

' Simplicius, in his Commentary on Aristotle's Physics, where 
(book i. c. 2) Anaxagoras is spoken of, says that the latter maintained 
that "all things existed simultaneously — mfinite things, and plurality, 
and diminutiveness, for even what was diminutive was infinite." (See 
AT\i\.ol\e' sj\leiap/tysics , iii. 4, Macmahon's translation, p. 93.) This 
explains Hippolytus' remark, while it suggests an emendation of the 
text. 

- Or, " in the Antipodes; " or, " from the snow in iEthiopisu" 

being able to make head against the cold. This 
person was the first to frame definitions regarding 
eclipses and illuminations. And he affirmed that 
the moon is earthy, and has in it plains and ra- 
vines. And that the milky way is a reflection of 
the light of the stars which do not derive their 
radiance from the sun ;^ and that the stars, cours- 
ing (the firmament) as shooting sparks, arise out 
of the motion of the pole. And that winds are 
caused when the atmosphere is rarified by the 
sun, and by those burning orbs that advance 
under the pole, and are borne from (it). And 
that thunder and lightning are caused by heat 
falling on the clouds. And that earthquakes are 
produced by the air above falling on that under 
the earth ; for when this is moved, that the earth 
also, being wafted by it, is shaken. And that 
animals originally came into existence ■* in moist- 
ure, and after this one from another ; and that 
males are procreated when the seed secreted 
from the right parts adhered to the right parts 
of the womb, and that females are born when 
the contrary took place. This philosopher flour- 
ished in the first year of the lxxxviii. 01ympiad,5 
at which time they say that Plato also was born. 
They maintain that Anaxagoras was likewise 
prescient. 

CHAP. VIII. ARCHELAUS ; SYSTEM AKIN TO THAT 

OF ANAXAGORAS ; HIS ORIGIN OF THE EARTH 
AND OF ANIMALS ; OTHER SYSTEMS. 

Archelaus was by birth an Athenian, and son 
of ApoUodorus.^ This person, similarly with 
Anaxagoras, asserted the mixture of matter, and 
enunciated his first principles in the same man- 
ner. This philosopher, however, held that there 
is inherent immediately in mind a certain mix- 
ture ; and that the originating principle of mo- 
tion is the mutual separation of heat and cold, 
and that the heat is moved, and that the cold 
remains at rest. And that the water, being dis- 
solved, flows towards the centre, where the 
scorched air and earth are produced, of which 
the one is borne upwards and the other remains 
beneath. And that the earth is at rest, and that 
on this account it came into existence ; and that 
it lies in the centre, being no part, so to speak, 
of the universe, delivered from the conflagration ; 
and that from this, first in a state of ignition, 
is the nature of the stars, of which indeed the 
largest is the sun, and next to this the moon ; 
and of the rest some less, but some greater. 
And he says that the heaven was inclined at an 
angle, and so that the sun diffused light over the 
earth, and made the atmosphere transparent, and 
the ground dry ; for that at first it was a sea, 

3 Or, " overpowered by the sun," that is, whose light was lost ia 
the superior brilliancy of the sun. 
* Or, " were generated." 

5 [Died B.C. 428 or 429.] 

6 [B.C. 440.J 

i6 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Rook I, 

inasmuch as it is lofty at the horizon and hollow 
in the middle. And he adduces, as an indica- 
tion of the hollowness, that the sun does not 
rise and set to all at the same time, which ought 
to happen if the earth was even. And with re- 
gard to animals, he affirms that the earth, being 
originally fire in its lower part, where the heat 
and cold were intermingled, both the rest of 
animals made their appearance, numerous and 
dissimilar,' all having the same food, being nour- 
ished from mud ; and their existence was of short 
duration, but afterwards also generation from one 
another arose unto them ; and men were sepa- 
rated from the rest (of the animal creation), 
and they appointed rulers, and laws, and arts, and 
cities, and the rest. And he asserts that mind 
IS innate in all animals alike ; for that each, ac- 
cording to the difference of their physical con- 
stitution, employed (mind), at one time slower, 
at another taster.- 

Natural philosophy, then, continued from 
Thales until Archelaus. Socrates was the hearer 
of this (latter philosopher). There are, how- 
ever, also very many others, introducing various 
opinions respecting both the divinity and the 
nature of the universe ; and if we were disposed 
to adduce all the opinions of these, it would be 
necessary to compose a vast quantity of books. 
But, reminding the reader of those whom we 
especially ought — who are deserving of mention 
from their fame, and from being, so to speak, the 
leaders to those who have subsequently framed 
systems of philosophy, and from their supplying 
them with a starting-point towards such under- 
takings— let us hasten on our investigations 
towards what remains for consideration. 

CHAP. X. — LEUCIPPUS; HIS ATOMIC THEORY. 

But Leucippus,5 an associate of Zeno, did not 

maintain the same opinion, but affirms things to 
be inlinite, and always in motion, and that gen- 
eration and change exist continuously. And he 
affirms plenitude and vacuum to be elements. 
And he asserts that worlds are produced when 
many bodies are congregated and flow together 
from the surrounding space to a common point, 
so that by mutual contact they made substances 
of the same figure and similar in form come into 
connection ; and when thus intertwined,'^ there 
are transmutations into other bodies, and that 
created things wax and wane through necessit)-. 
But what the nature of necessity is, (Varmenides) 
did not define. 

CHAP. IX. — PARMENIDES ; HIS THEORY OF " UNITY ; " 
HIS ESCHATOLOGY. 

For Parmenides3 likewise supposes the uni- 
verse to be one, both eternal and unbegotten, 
and of a spherical form. And neither did he 
escape the ojjinion of the great body (of specu- 
lators), affirming fire and earth to be the origi- 
nating i)rinci])les of the universe — the earth as 
matter, but the fire as cause, even an efficient 
one. He asserted that the world would be de- 
stroyed, but in what way he does not mention.-* 
The same (philosopher), however, affirmed the 
universe to be eternal, and not generated, and 
of spherical form and homogeneous, but not 
having a figure in itself, and immoveable and 
limited. 

},in,',^" "J"^'^ iT"^ "^ ',^^ '■*^'' .°'" »''= ^"''"3' kingdom, and man 

lI'Hl*; (.^<='= '''ogenes Laeriiiis' A/V'M, ii. 17 ) 

- 1 here is some confusion in the text here, but the rendering civen 
above, though conjectural, .s highly probable. One proposed emen- 
dation would make the passage run thus: " for that each body em- 
ployed muKi, sometimes slower, sometimes faster." 

^ [n.c. 500.] 
•♦ The 

next sentence is regarded by some as not genuine. 

CHAP. XI. — DEMOCRITUS; HIS DUALITY OF PRIX. 
CIPLES; HIS COSMOGONY. 

And Democritus7 was an accjuaintance of 
Leucippus. Democritus, son of Damasippus, a 
native of Abdera,« conferring with many gymnos- 
ophists among the Indians, and with priests in 
Egypt, and with astrologers and magi in Bab)-- 
lon, (propounded his .system). Now he makes 
statements similarly with Leucippus concerning 
elements, viz., plenitude and vacuum, denomi*^ 
nating plenitude entity, and vacuum nonentity; 
and this he asserted, since existing things are con- 
tinually moved in the vacuum. And he main- 
tained worlds to be infinite, and varying in bulk ; 
and that in some there is neither sun nor moon! 
while in others that they are larger than with us, 
and with others more numerous. And that in- 
tervals between worlds are unequal ; and that in 
one quarter of space (worlds) are more numer- 
ous, and in another less so ; and that some of 
them increase in bulk, but that others attain 
their full size, while others dwindle away ; and 
that in one quarter they are coming into exist- 
ence, whilst in another they are failing ; and that 
they are destroyed by clashing one wkh another. 
And that some worlds are destitute of animals 
and plants, and every species of moisture. And 
that the earth of our wodd was created before 
that of the stars, and that the moon is under- 
neath; next (to it) the sun; then the fixed 
stars. And that (neither) the planets nor these 
(fixed stars) possess an equal elevation. And 
that the world flourishes, until no longer it can 
receive anything from without. This (philoso- 
pher) turned all things into ridicule, as if all the 
concerns of humanity were deserving of laug]> 
ter. 

S rB.C._37o.] 

° Or, " when again mutually connected, that different entitie* 
were generated." (See Diogenes Laertius' Lives, ix. 30-32.} 
I [Died m his hundred and ninth year, B.C. 361. 1 
8 Or, " Audera." ' ^ ^ 

Chap. XV.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

17 

CHAP. XII. XENOPHANES ; HIS SCEPTICISM ; HIS 

NOTIONS OF GOD AND NATURE ; BELIEVES IN A 
FLOOD. 

But Xenophanes, a native of Colophon,' was 
son of Orthomenes. This man survived to the 
time of Cyrus.^ This (philosopher) iirst asserted 
that there is no possibility of comprehending 
anything, expressing himself thus : — 

" For if for the most part of perfection man may speaii, 
Yet he knows it not himself, and in all attains surmise." 

.•\nd he affirms that nothing is generated or 
perishes, or is moved; and that the universe, 
being one, is beyond change. But he says that 
the deity is eternal, and one and altogether homo- 
geneous and limited, and of a spherical form, and 
endued with perception in all parts. And that 
the sun exists during each day from a conglom- 
eration of small sparks, and that the earth is 
infinite, and is surrounded neither by an atmos- 
phere nor by the heaven. And that there are 
infinite suns and moons, and that all things spring 
from earth. This man affirmed that the sea is 
salt, on account of the many mixtures that flow 
into it. Metrodorus, however, from the fact of 
its being filtered through earth, asserts that it is 
on account of this that it is made salt. And 
Xenophanes is of opinion that there had been 
a mixture of the earth with the sea, and that 
in process of time it was disengaged from the 
moisture, alleging that he could produce such 
proofs as the following : that in the midst of 
earth, and in mountains, shells are discovered ; 
and also in Syracuse he affirms was found in the 
quarries the print of a fish and of seals, and in 
Paros an image of a laurel ^ in the bottom of a 
stone, and in Melita ^ parts of all sorts of marine 
animals. Ana he says that these were generated 
when all things originally were embedded in 
mud, and that an impression of them was dried 
in the mud, but that all men had perished 5 
when the earth, being precipitated into the sea, 
was converted into mud ; then, again, that it 
originated generation, and that this overthrow 
•^jccurred to all worlds. 

primary bodies to be indivisible,'^ and that there 
are three variations of these, viz., bulk, figure, 
capacity, from which are generated the objects 
of sense. But that there is a determinable multi- 
tude of these, and that this is infinite.? And that 
bodies are moved neither by weight nor by im- 
pact, but by divine power, which he calls mind 
and soul; and that of this the world is a repre- 
sentation ;■ wherefore also it has been made in 
the form of a sphere by divine power.^ And 
that the earth in the middle of the cosmical sys- 
tem is moved round its own centre towards the 
east.9 

CHAP. XIV. — HIPPO ; HIS DUALITY OF PRINCIPLES ; 
HIS PSYCHOLOGY. 

Hippo, a native of Rhegium, asserted as origi- 
nating principles, coldness, for instance water, 
and heat, for instance fire. And that fire, when 
produced by water, subdued the power of its 
generator, and formed the wOrld. And the soul, 
he said, is '° sometimes brain, but sometimes 
water ; for that also the seed is that which ap- 
pears to us to arise out of moisture, from which, 
he says, the soul is produced. 

So far, then, we think we have sufficiently ad- 
duced (the opinions of) these ; wherefore, inas- 
much as we have adequately gone in review 
through the tenets of physical speculators, it 
seems to remain that we now turn to Socrates 
and Plato, who gave especial preference to moral 
philosophy. 

CHAP. XV. — S0CR.ATES; HIS PHILOSOPHY REPRO- 
DUCED BY PLATO. 

Socrates, then, was a hearer of Archelaus, the 
natural philosopher; and he, reverencing the 
rule, " Know thyself," and having assembled a 
large school, had Plato (there), who was far su- 
perior to all his pupils. (Socrates) himself left 
no writings " after him. Plato, however, taking 
notes '^ of all his (lectures on) wisdom, estab- 
lished a school, combining together natural, 
ethical, (and) logical (philosophy). But the 
points Plato determined are these following. 

CHAP. XIII. — ECPHANTUS ; HIS SCEPTICISM ; TENET 
OF INFINITY. 

One Ecphantus, a native of Syracuse, affirmed 
that it is not possible to attain a true knowledge 
of things. He defines, however, as he thinks. 

' [Born 556 B.C.] 
2 [In 

.Incredible. Cyrus the younger, fell at Cunaxa B.C. 401. Cyrus 
the elder was a contemporary of Xenophanes.] 

' Or, " anchovy." 

* Or, " Melitus." 

s The textual reading is in the present, but obviously requires a 
past tense. 

6 Some confusion has crept into the text. The first clause of the 
second sentence belongs probably to the first. The sense would then 
run thus: " Ecphantus affirmed the impossibility of dogmatic truth, 
for that every one was permitted to frame definitions as he thought 

? Or, " that there is, according to this, a multitude of defined 
existences, and that such is infinite." 
^ Or, " a single power." 
9 [So far anticipating modern science.] 

10 Or, " holds." , „ J , , , r .-u 

11 Or, "writing." Still Socrates may be called the father of the 
Greek philosophy. " From the age of Aristotle and Plato, the rise 
of the several Greek sects may be estimated as so many successful or 
abortive efforts to carry out the principles enunciated by Socrates. — 
Translator's Treatise on Metaphysics, chap. 111. p. 45- 

12 This word signifies to take impressions from anything, which 
justifies the translation, historically correct, given above. Its litera, 
import is "wipe clean," and in this sen.se Hippolytus may intend to. 
assert that Plato wholly appropriated the philosophy of Socrates 
(See Diogenes Laertius, ii. 61, where the same word occurs.) 

i8 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book I 

CHAP. XVI. — PLATO ; THREEFOLD CLASSIFICATION 
OF PRINCIPLES ; HIS IDEA OF GOD ; DIFFERENT 
OPINIONS REGARDING HIS THEOLOGY AND PSY- 
CHOLOGY ; HIS ESCHATOLOGY AND SYSTEM OF 
METEMPSYCHOSIS ; HIS ETHICAL DOCTRINES ; NO- 
TIONS ON THE FREE-WILL QUESTION. 

Plato (lays down) that there are three origi- 
nating principles of the universe, (namely) God, 
and matter, and exemi)lar ; God as the Maker 
and Regulator of this universe, and the Being who 
exercises ])rovidence over it ; but matter, as that 
which underlies all (phenomena), which (mat- 
ter) he styles both receptive and a nurse, out 
of the arrangement of which proceeded the four 
elements of which the world consists ; (I mean) 
fire, air, earth, water, from which all the rest 
of what are denominated concrete substances, 
as well as animals and plants, have been formed. 
And that the exemplar, which he likewise calls 
ideas, is the intelligence of the Deity, to which, 
as to an image in the soul, the Deity attending, 
fabricated all things. God, he says, is both in- 
corporeal and shapeless, and comprehensible by 
wise men solely ; whereas matter is body poten- 
tially, but with potentiality not as yet passing 
into action, for being itself without form and 
without quality, by assuming forms and qualities, 
it became body. That matter, therefore, is an 
originating principle, and coeval with the Deity, 
and that in this respect the world is uncreated. 
For (Plato) affirms that (the world) was made 
out of it. And that (the attribute of) imperish- 
ableness necessarily belongs to (literally " fol- 
lows") that which is uncreated. So far forth, 
however, as body is supposed to be compounded 
out of both many qualities and ideas, so far 
forth it is both created and perishable. But 
some of the followers of Plato mingled both of 
these, employing some such example as the fol- 
lowing : That as a waggon can always continue 
imdestroyed, though undergoing partial repairs 
from time to time, so that even the parts each 
in turn perish, yet itself remains always complete ; 
so after this manner the world also, although in 
parts it perishes, yet the things that are removed, 
being repaired, and equivalents for them being 
introduced, it remains eternal. 

Some maintain that Plato asserts the Deity to 
be one, ingenerable and incorruptible, as he 
says in The Lares : ' " God, therefore, as the an- 
cient account has it, possesses both the begin- 
ning, and end, and middle of all things." Thus 
he shows God to be one, on account of His hav- 
ing pervaded all things. Others, however, main- 
tain that Plato affirms the existence of many 
gods indefinitely, when he uses these words : 
*' God of gods, of whom I am both the Creator 

• De Legibus, iv. 7 (p. 109, vol. viii. ed. Bekker). 

and Father." ^ But others say that he speaks 
of a definite number of deities in the following 
passage : " Therefore the mighty Jupiter, wheel 
ing his swift chariot in heaven ; " and when he 
enumerates the offspring of the children of 
heaven and earth. But others assert that (Plato) 
constituted the gods as generable ; and on ac- 
count of their having been produced, that alto- 
gether they were subject to the necessity of 
corruption, but that on account of the will of 
God they are immortal, (maintaining this) in the 
passage already quoted, where, to the words, 
" God of gods, of whom I am Creator and 
Father," he adds, " indissoluble through the fiat 
of My will ; " so that if (God) were disposed 
that these should be dissolved, they would easily 
be dissolved. 

And he admits natures (such as those) of de- 
mons, and says that some of them are good, but 
others worthless. And some affirm that he 
states the soul to be uncreated and immortal, 
when he uses the following words, " Every soul 
is immortal, for that which is always moved is 
immortal ; " and when he demonstrates that the 
soul is self-moved, and capable of originating 
motion. Others, however, (say that Plato as- 
serted that the soul was) created, but rendered 
imperishable through the will of God. But 
some (will have it that he considered the soul) 
a composite (essence), and generable and cor- 
ruptible ; for even he supposes that there is a 
receptacle for it,-^ and that it possesses a lumi- 
nous body, but that everything generated in- 
volves a necessity of corruption.-* Those, how- 
ever, who assert the immortality of the soul are 
especially strengthened in their opinion by those 
passages 5 (in Plato's writings), where he says, 
that both there are judgments after death, and 
tribunals of justice in Hades, and that the vir- 
tuous (souls) receive a good reward, while the 
wicked (ones) suitable ])unishment. Some not- 
withstanding assert, that he also acknowledges a 
transition of souls from one body to another, and 
that different souls, those that were marked out 
for such a purpose, pass into different bodies,'' 
according to the desert of each, and that after ' 
certain definite periods they are sent up into 
this world to furnish once more a proof of their 
choice. Others, however, (do not admit this to 

2 Timcpus^c. xvi. (p. 277, vol. vii. ed. Bekker). The passage 
runs thus in the original: "Gods of gods, of whom I am Creator 
and Father of works, which having been formed by Me, are indissolu- 
ble, through, at all events, My will." 

J The word is literally a cup or bowl, and, being employed by 
Plato in an allegorical sense, is evidently intended to signify the 
aniina iinouii (soul of the world), which constituted a sort of de- 
positorj' for all spiritual existences in the world. 

< Or, " that there e.vi.sts a necessity for the corruption of everj-- 
thing created." 

5 Or, " are confirmed by that (philosopher Plato), because he as- 
serts," etc.: or," those who assert the soul's immortality are espe- 
cially contirmed in their opinion, as many as affirm the existence ol 
a future state of retribution." 

^ Or, " th.it he changes different souls," etc. 

7 Or, " during." 

Chap. XVII.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

19 

be his doctrine, but will have it that Plato affirms 
that the souls) obtain a place according to the 
desert of each ; and they employ as a testimony 
the saying of his, that some good men are with 
Jove, and that others are ranging abroad (through 
hea\en) with other gods ; whereas that others 
are involved in eternal punishments, as many as 
durina: this life have committed wicked and un- 
just deeds. 

And people affirm that Plato says, that some 
things are without a mean, that others have a 
mean, that others are a mean. (For example, 
that) waking and sleep, and such like, are con- 
ditions without an intermediate state ; but that 
there are things that had means, for instance vir- 
tue and vice ; and there are means (between 
extremes), for instance grey between white and 
black, or some other colour. And they say, that 
he affirms that the things pertaining to the soul 
are absolutely alone good, but that the things 
pertaining to the body, and those external (to 
it), are not any longer absolutely good, but re- 
puted blessings. And that frequently he names 
these means also, for that it is possible to use 
them both well and ill. Some virtues, therefore, 
he says, are extremes in regard of intrinsic worth, 
but in regard of their essential nature means, for 
nothing is more estimable than virtue. But what- 
ever excels or falls short of these terminates in 
vice. For instance, he says that there are four 
virtues — prudence, temperance, justice, forti- 
tude — and that on each of these is attendant 
two vices, according to excess and defect : for 
example, on prudence, recklessness according to 
defect, and knavery according to excess ; and on 
temperance, licentiousness according to defect, 
stupidity according to excess ; and on justice, 
foregoing a claim according tp defect, unduly 
pressing it according to excess ; and on fortitude, 
cowardice according to defect, foolhardiness ac- 
cording to excess. And that these virtues, when 
inherent in a man, render him perfect, and afford 
him happiness. And happiness, he says, is as- 
similation to the Deity, as far as this is possible ; 
and that assimilation to God takes place when 
any one combines holiness and justice with pru- 
dence. For this he supposes the end of supreme 
wisdom and virtue. And he affirms that the 
virtues follow one another in turn,' and are uni- 
form, and are never antagonistic to each other ; 
Avhereas that vices are multiform, and sometimes 
follow one the other, and sometimes are antago- 
nistic to each other. He asserts that fate exists ; 
not, to be sure, that all things are produced ac- 
cording to fate, but that there is even something 
in our power, as in the passages where he says, 
'' The fault is his who chooses, God is blame- 

' Diogenes Laertius, in describing the system of the Stoics, em- 
ploys the same word in the case of their view of virtue. 

less ; " and " the following law^ of Adrasteia." ^ 
And thus some (contend for his upholding) a 
system of fate, whereas others one of free-will. 
He asserts, however, that sins are involuntary. 
For into what is most glorious of the things in 
our power, which is the soul, no one would 
(dehberately) admit what is vicious, that is, 
transgression, but that from ignorance and an 
erroneous conception of virtue, supposing that 
they were achieving something honourable, they 
pass into vice. And his doctrine on this point 
is most clear in T/ie Republic,'^ where he says, 
" But, again, you presume to assert that vice is 
disgraceful and abhorred of God ; how then, I 
may ask, would one choose such an evil thing? 
He, you reply, (would do so) who is worsted by 
pleasures. 5 Therefore this also is involuntary, if 
to gain a victory be voluntary ; so that, in every 
point of view, the committing an act of turpi- 
tude, reason proves ^ to be involuntary." Some 
one, however, in opposition to this (Plato), ad- 
vances the contrary statement, " Why then are 
men punished if they sin involuntary?" But he 
replies, that he himself also, as soon as possible, 
may be emancipated from vice, and undergo 
punishment. For that the undergoing punish- 
ment is not an evil, but a good thing, if it is 
likely to prove a purification of evils ; and that 
the rest of mankind, hearing of it, may not trans- 
gress, but guard against such an error. (Plato, 
however, maintains) that the nature of evil is 
neither created by the Deity, nor possesses sub- 
sistence of itself, but that it derives existence 
from contrariety to what is good, and from at- 
tendance upon it, either by excess and defect, as 
we have previously affirmed concerning the vir- 
tues. Plato unquestionably then, as we have 
already stated, collecting together the three de- 
partments of universal philosophy, in this man- 
ner formed his speculative system. 

CHAP. XVII. ARISTOTLE ; DUALITY OF PRINCI- 
PLES ; HIS CATEGORIES ; HIS PSYCHOLOGY ; HIS 
ETHICAL DOCTRINES ; ORIGIN OF THE EPITHET 
" PERIPATETIC." 

Aristotle, who was a pupil of this (Plato), 
reduced philosophy into an art, and was dis- 
tinguished rather for his proficiency in logical 
science, supposing as the elements of all things 
substance and accident ; that there is one sub- 
stance underlying all things, but nine accidents, 
— namely, quantity, quality, relation, where, 

2 This is suppHed from the original; the passage occurs in the 
Phadrus, c. Ix. (p. 86, vol i. ed. Bekker) 

3 The word Adrasteia was a name for Nemesis, ani means here 
unalterable destiny. 

■* The passage occurs in Clilophon (p. 244, vol vi ed Eekker). 

S The text, as given by Miller, is scarcely capable of any mean- 
ing. The translation is therefore conjectural, in accordance with 
alterations proposed by Schneidewin. 

'^ Or, " declares." 

20 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book I. 

when, possession, posture, action, passion ; and 
that substance is of some such description as 
God, man, and each of the beings that can fall 
under a similar denomination. But in regard of 
accidents, quality is seen in, for instance, white, 
black; and quantity, for instance two cubits' 
three cubits; and relation, for instance father,' 
son ; and where, for instance at Athens, Megara ; 
and when, for instance during the tenth Olym- 
piad ; and possession, for instance to have ac- 
quired ; and action, for instance to write, and in 
general to evince any practical powers ; and pos- 
ture, for instance to lie down ; and passion, for 
mstance to be struck. He also supposes that 
sonie things have means, but that others are 
without means, as we have declared concerning 
Plato likewise. And in most points he is in 
agreement with Plato, except the opinion con- 
cerning soul. For Plato affirms it to be immor- 
tal, but Aristotle that it involves permanence • 
and after these things, that this also vanishes in 
the fifth body,' which he supposes, along with the 
other four (elements),- viz., fire, and earth, and 
water, and air, — to be a something more subtle 
(than these), of the nature of spirit. Plato 
therefore says, that the only really good things 
are those pertaining to the soul, and that they 
are sufficient for happiness ; whereas Aristotle in- 
troduces a threefold classification of good things 
and asserts that the wise man is not perfect' 
unless there are present to him both the good 
things of the body and those extrinsic to it ^ 
The former are beauty, strength, vigour of the 
senses, soundness; while the things extrinsic (to 
the body) are wealth, nobility, glorv, power 
peace, friendship.^ And the inner' qualities of 
the soul he classifies, as it was the opinion of 
Plato, under prudence, temperance, justice, forti- 
tude. This (philosopher) also affirms that evils 
arise according to an opposition of the things 
that are good, and that they exist beneath the 
(juarter around the moon, but reach no farther 
beyond the moon ; and that the soul of the en- 
tire world is immortal, and that the world itself 
IS eternal, but that (the soul) in an individual 
as we have before stated, vanishes (in the fifth 
body). This (speculator), then holding dis- 
cussions in the Lyceum, drew up from time to 
tune his system of philosophy; but Zeno (held 
his school) in the porch called Poecile. And 
the followers of Zeno obtained their name from 
the place — that is, from .VM/— (i.e., a i)orch) 
being styled Stoics ; whereas Aristotle's followers 
(were denominated) from their mode of employ- 

ing themselves while teaching. For since thev 
were accustomed walking about in the Lyceum 
to pursue their investigations, on this account 
hey were called Peripatetics. These indeed, 
tlien, were the doctrines of Aristotle. 

CHAP. XVm. — THE stoics; THEIR SUPERIORITY IV 

logic; fatalists; their doctrine of cox- 
flagr.4tions. 

l^he Stoics themselves, also imparted growth 
to philosophy, in respect of a greater devel- 
opment of the art of syllogism, and included 
almost everything under definitions, both Chr\- 
sippus and Zeno being coincident in opinion on 
this point. And they likewise supposed God to 
be the one originating principle of all things 
being a body of the utmost refinement, and that 
His providential care pervaded everything • and 
these speculators were positive about the exist- 
ence of fate everyAvhere, employing some siich 
e.xample as the following: that just as a do- 
supposing him attached to a car, if indeed he Ts 
disposed to follow, both is drawn,-* or follows vol- 
untarily, making an exercise also of free power 
in combination with necessity, that is, fate • but 
if he may not be disposed to follow, he will 
altogether be coerced to do so. And the same 
of course, holds good in the case of men For 
though not willing to follow, thev will altogether 
be compelled to enter upon what has been t'e- 
creed for them. (The Stoics), however, assert 
that the soul abides after death, s but that it is a 
body, and that such is formed from the refrigera- 
tion of the surrounding atmosphere ; wherefore 
also, that it was called /jr,r//.' (i.e., soul). And 
I they acknowledge likewise, that there is a tran- 
I sition of souls from one body to another, that is 
for those souls for whom this migration has been 
destined. And they accept the doctrine, that 
there will be a conflagration, a purification of 
this world, some say the entire of it, but others 
a i)ortion, and that (the world) itself is under- 
going partial destruction ; and this all but cor- 
ruption, and the generation from it of another 
w-orld, they term purgation. And they assume 
the existence of all bodies, and that body does 
not pass through body," but that a refraction 7 
takes place, and that all things involve pleni- 
tude, and that there is no vacuum. The fore- 
going are the opinions of the Stoics also. 

be (composed) of ^emh^r four " ^^'^ ''°'^^' '"'^""^ '•* '^"PP'^^'^'^ '° 
^ Ur, glory, the confinncj power of friciuls." 

_" One of the Mss. elucidates the simile in the text thus: " But if 
he .s not disposed there is absolutely a necessuy for his being drawn 
along. Ana m hke manner n.en. if they do not follow fate.^seem to 
val^r "If h"' "'""''''he reason of (their being) fate hoUis assuredly 
valid. If however, they do not wish to follow, they will absolutely 
be coerced to enter upon what has been fore-ord.^ined " '"''°'"'^'> 

his s. hU. '^ '"'■"°"'''" ^''"g^"'i_^ >--«"''"* (book vii ) notices, in 
his seaion on Zeno, as part of the Stoic doctrine, " that the sout 
abides after death, but that it is perishable " 

void' or ^'mity :;;":'."''''" "'^ '"-'P"--'' = " "'■•'' -- "'-ugh what is 

medium.' " '■"""'=^"°"-- " «^ "resistance;" that is, a resisting 

Chap. XXL] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

21 

CHAP. XIX. — EPICURUS ; ADOPTS THE DEMOCRITIC 
ATOMISM ; DENIAL OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE ; THE 
PRINCIPLE OF HIS ETHICAL SYSTEM. 

Epicurus, however, advanced an opinion al- 
most contrary to all. He supposed, as originat- 
ing principles of all things, atoms and vacuity.' 
He considered vacuity as the place that would 
contain the things that will exist, and atoms the 
matter out of which all things could be formed ; 
and that from the concourse of atoms both the 
Deity derived existence, and all the elements, 
and all things inherent in them, as well as ani- 
mals and other (creatures) ; so that nothing 
was generated or existed, unless it be from 
atoms. And he affirmed that these atoms were 
composed of extremely small particles, in which 
there could not exist either a point or a sign, 
or any division ; wherefore also he called them 
atoms. Acknowledging the Deity to be eternal 
and incorruptible, he says that God has provi- 
dential care for nothing, and that there is no 
such thing at all as providence or fate, but that 
all things are made by chance. For that the 
Deity reposed in the intermundane spaces, (as 
they) are thus styled by him ; for outside the 
world he determined that there is a certain hab- 
itation of God, denominated " the intermundane 
spaces," and that the Deity surrendered Himself 
to pleasure, and took His ease in the midst of 
supreme happiness ; and that neither has He 
any concerns of business, nor does He devote 
His attention to them.- As a consequence on 
these opinions, he also propounded his theory 
concerning wise men, asserting that the end of 
wisdom is pleasure. Different persons, however, 
received the term "pleasure" in different accep- 
tations ; for some (among the Gentiles ^ under- 
stood) the passions, but others the satisfaction 
resulting from virtue. And he concluded that 
the souls of men are dissolved along with their 
bodies, just as also they were produced along 
with them, for that they are blood, and that 
when this has gone forth or been altered, the 
entire man perishes ; and in keeping with this 
tenet, (Epicurus maintained) that there are nei- 
ther trials in Hades, nor tribunals of justice ; so 
that whatsoever any one may commit in this life, 
that, provided he may escape detection, he is 
altogether beyond any liability of trial (for it in 
a future state). In this way, then, Epicurus also 
formed his opinions. 

' The atomic theory is, as already mentioned by Hippolytus, of 
more ancient date than Epicurus' age, being first broached by Leucip- 
pus and Democritus. This fact, however, has, as Cudworth argues, 
been frequently overlooked by those who trace the doctrine to no 
older a source than the founder of the Epicurean philosophy. 

- Or, " that neither has He business to do, nor does He attend to 
any. As a consequence of which fact," etc. 

3 "Among the Gentiles" seems a mistake. One reading pro- 
posed is, " some (intended) our sensuous passions; " or, " some un- 
derstood the passions." The words " among the Gentiles," the 
French commentator, the Abbe Cruice, is of opinion, were added by 
Christian hands, in order to draw a contrast between the virtuous 
Christian and the vicious pagan. 

CH.AP. XX. THE ACADEMICS ; DIFFERENCE OF 

OPINION AMONG THEM. 

And another opinion of the philosophers was 
called that of the Academics,* on account of 
those holding their discussions in the Academy, 
of whom the founder Pyrrho, from whom they 
were called Pyrrhonean philosophers, first intro- 
duced the notion of the incomprehensibility of 
all things, so as to (be ready to) attempt an 
argument on either side of a question, but not 
to assert anything for certain ; for that there is 
nothing of things intelligible or sensible true, but 
that they appear to men to be so ; and that all 
substance is in a stale of flux and change, and 
never continues in the same (condition). Some 
followers, then, of the Academics say that one 
ought not to declare an opinion on the principle 
of anything, but simply making the attempt to 
give it up ; whereas others subjoined the formu- 
lary "not rather "5 (this than that), saying that 
the fire is not rather fire than anything else. 
But they did not declare what this is, but what 
sort it is.^ 

CHAP. XXI. — THE BRACHMANS ; THEIR MODE OF 
LIFE ; IDEAS OF DEITY ; DIFFERENT SORTS OF ; 
THEIR ETHICAL NOTIONS. 

But there is also with the Indians a sect 
composed of those philosophizing among the 
Brachmans. They spend a contented existence, 
abstain both from living creatures and all cooked 
food, being satisfied with fruits ; and not gather- 
ing these from the trees, but carrying off those 
that have fallen to the earth. They subsist upon 
them, drinkiiig the water of the river Tazabena.^ 
But they pass their life naked, affirming that die 
body has been constituted a covering to the 
soul by the Deity. These affirm that God is 
light, not such as one sees, nor such as the sun 
and fire ; but to them the Deity is discourse, 
not that which finds expression in articulate 
sounds, but that of the knowledge through which 
the secret mysteries of nature ^ are perceived 
by the wise. And this light which they say 
is discourse, their god, they assert that the 
Brachmans only know on account of their alone 
rejecting all vanity of opinion which is the soul's 
ultimate covering. ^ These despise death, and 
always in their own peculiar language '° call God 

* See Diogenes Laertius' Lives, _\. 63 (Bohn's Library); Plu- 
tarch, De Plucitis Philosophorutn, iv. 3. 

5 Diogenes Laertius, Lives, ix. 75; Sextus Empiricus, Hypotyp., 
i. 188-192. 

0 This is what the Academics called "the phenomenon" (Sextus 
Empiricus, Pyrrk. Hyp., i. ig-22). 

^ This is a mistake in the manuscript for Ganges, according to 
Roeper. 

^ Or, "knowledge." (See Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom., i., 
XV., Ixxii. ; "Eusehms, Pripparat. Eva>ig:,'iK. b.) 

9 Athenaeus {Deipn., book ix.) ascribes this opinion to Plato, 
who, he tells us, " asserted that the soul was so constituted, that it 
should reject its last covering, that of vanity." 

'° Or, " they name lij-^ht their ijod: " or, " they celebrate in their 
own peculiar language God, whom they name," etc. 

22 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book I. 

by the name which we have mentioned previ- 
ously, and they send up hymns (to him). But 
neither are there women among them, nor do 
they beget children. But they who aim at a 
life similar to these, after they have crossed over 
to the country on the opposite side of the river, 
continue to reside there, returning no more ; 
and these also are called Brachmans. But they 
do not pass their life similarly, for there are also 
in the place women, of whom those that dwell 
there are born, and in turn beget children. 
And this discourse which ' they name God they 
assert to be corporeal, and enveloped in a body 
outside himself, just as if one were wearing a 
sheep's skin, but that on divesting himself of 
body that he would appear clear to the eye. 
But the Brachmans say that there is a conflict 
in the body that surrounds them, (and they 
consider that the body is for them full of con- 
flicts) ; ^ in opposition to which, as if marshalled 
for battle against enemies, they contend, as we 
have already explained. And they say that all 
men are captive to their own congenital struggles, 
viz., sensuality and inchastity, gluttony, anger, joy, 
sorrow, concupiscence, and such like. And he 
who has reared a trophy over these, alone goes 
to God ; wherefore the Brachmans deify Dan- 
damis, to whom Alexander the Macedonian paid 
a visit, as one who had proved victorious in the 
bodily conflict. But they bear down on Calanus 
as having profanely withdrawn from their phil- 
osophy. But the Brachmans, putting off the 
body, like fishes jumping out of water into the 
pure air, behold the sun. 

CHAP. XXII. — THE DRUIDS ; PROGENITORS OF THEIR 

SYSTEM. 

And the Celtic Druids investigated to the very 
highest point the Pythagorean philosophy, after 
Zamolxis,' by birth a Thracian,-* a servant of 
Pythagoras, became to them the originator of 
this discipline. Now after the death of Pythag- 
oras, Zamolxis, repairing thither, became to 
them the originator of this philosophy. The 
Celts esteem these as prophets and seers, on ac- 
count of their foretelling to them certain 
(events), from calculations and numbers by the 

* TTie text here would seem rather confused. The above trans- 
lation agrees with Cruice's and Schneidewin's l,atin version. I have 
doubts about its correctness, however, and would render it thus: 
"... enveloped in a body extrinsic to the divine essence, just as 
if one wore a sheepskin covering ; but that his body, on beinjj di- 
vested of this (covering), would appear visible to the naked eye," 
t)r, " This discourse whom they name God they affirm to be incor- 
poreal, but enveloped in a body outside himself (or his own body) 
(just as if one carried a covering of sheepskin to have it seen) ; but 
having stripped off" the body iu which he is enveloped, that he no 
longer appears visible to the naked eye." (Koeper.) 1 am not very 
confident that this exactly conveys the meaning of Rocper's some- 
what obscure Greek paraphrase. 

- The parenthetical words Roeper considers introduced into the 
text from a marginal note. 

J Or " Zamalxis," or " Zamelris " (see Menagius on Diogenes 
Laertius, viii. 2). 

* Or, " of Thracian origin." The words arc omitted in two MSS. 

Pythagorean art ; on the methods of which very 
art also we shall not keep silence, since also from 
these some have presumed to introduce heresies ; 
but the Druids resort to magical rites likewise. 

CHAP. XXIII. HESIOD ; THE NINE MUSES ; THE 

HESIODIC COSMOGONY ; THE ANCIENT SPECULA- 
TORS, M.'^TERULISTS ; DERIVATIVE CHARACTER OF 
THE HERESIES FROM HK^IHEN PHILOSOPHY. 

But Hesiod the poet asserts himself also that 
he thus heard from the Muses concerning nature, 
and that the Muses are the daughters of Jupiter. 
For when for nine nights and days together, 
Jupiter, through excess of passion, had uninter- 
ruptedly lain with Mnemosyne, that Mnemosyne 
conceived in one womb those nine Muses, be- 
coming pregnant with one during each night. 
Having then summoned the nine Muses from 
Pieria, that is, Olympus, he exhorted them to 
undergo instruction : — 

" How first both gods and earth were made,^ 
And rivers, and boundless deep, and ocean's surge, 
And glittering stars, and spacious heaven above; 
How they grasped the crown and shared th£ glory, 
And how at first they held the many-\aled Olympus. 
These (truths), ye Muses, tell me of, saith he, 
From first, and next which of thein first arose. 
Chaos, no doubt, the very first, arose ; but next 
Wide-stretching Earth, ever the throne secure of all 
Immortals, who hold the peaks of white Olympus ; 
And breezy Tartarus in wide earth's recess ; 
And Love, who is most beauteous of the gods immor- 
tal, 
Chasing care away from all the gods and men, 
Quells in breasts the mind and counsel sage. 
But Erebus from Chaos and gloomy Night arose; 
And, in turn, from Night both Air and Day were born; 
But primal Earth, equal to self in sooth begot 
The stormy sky to veil it round on every side, 
Ever to be for happy gods a throne secure. 
And forth she brought the towering hills, the pleasant 

haunts 
Of nymphs who dwell throughout the woody heights. 
And also barren Sea begat the surge-tossed 
Flood, apart from luscious Love ; but next 
Embracing Heaven, she Ocean bred with eddies deep. 
And Casus, and Crius, and Hyperian, and Lipetus, 
And Thia, and Rhea, and Themis, and Mnemosyne, 
And gold-crowned PhcEbe, and comely Tethys. 
But after these was born last'' the wiley Cronus, 
Fiercest of sons; but he abhorred his blooming sire, 
And in turn the Cyclops bred, who owned a savage 
breast." 

And all the rest of the giants from Cronus, He- 
siod enumerates, and somewhere afterwards that 
Jupiter was born of Rhea. All these, then, made 

s There are several verbal differences from the original in Hippoly- 
tus' version. These m.ay be seen on comparing it with Hcsiod's own 
text. The particular place which Hesiod occupies in the history of 
philosophy is pointed out by Aristotle in his MttnpJiysics. The 
Stagyrite detects in the Hesiodic cosmogony, in the principle of 
" love," the dawn of a recognition of the necessity of an efficient cause 
to account for the phenomena of nature. It was Aristode himself, 
however, who built up the science of causation; and in this respect 
humanity owes that extraordinary man a deep debt of gratitude. 

* Or "youngest," or " most vigorous." This is Hesiod's word, 
which signifies literally, " fittest for bearing arms " (for service, as w^ 
say). 

CHAr. XXIII.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

23 

the foregoing statements in their doctrine regard- 
ing both the nature and generation of the uni- 
verse. But all, sinking below what is divine, 
busied themselves concerning the substance of 
existing things,' being astonished at the magni- 
tude of creation, and supposing that it consti- 
tuted the Deity, each speculator selecting in 
preference a different portion of the world ; fail- 
ing, however, to discern the God and maker of 
these. 

' " The majority of those who first formed systems of philosophy, 
consider those that subsist in a form of matter, to be alone the princi- 
ple of all things." — ArisTOTLE's Metaphysics, hook i. c. iii. p- 13 
(Bohn's ed.). 

The opinions, therefore, of those who have 
attempted to frame systems of philosophy among 
the Greeks, I consider that we have sufficiently 
explained ; and from these the heretics, taking 
occasion, have endeavoured to establish the ten- 
ets that will be after a short time declared. It 
seems, however, expedient, that first explaining 
the mystical rites and whatever imaginary doc- 
trines some have laboriously framed concerning 
the stars, or magnitudes, to declare these ; for 
heretics likewise, taking occasion from them, are 
considered by the multitude to utter prodigies. 
Next in order we shall elucidate the feeble opiii' 
ions advanced by these. 

BOOKS n. AND m. AK£ AWANTING. 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

BOOK IV. 

CHAP. I. — SYSTEM OF THE ASTROLOGERS ; SIDERE- 
AL LXFLUENCE ; CONFIGURATION OF THE STARS. 

But in eacli zodiacal sign they call limits of 
the stars those in which each of the stars, from 
any one quarter to another, can exert the great- 
est amount of influence ; in regard of which 
there is among them, according to their writings, 
no mere casual divergency of opinion. But 
they say that the stars are attended as if by sat- 
ellites when they are in the midst of other stars, 
in continuity with the signs of the Zodiac ; as 
if, when any particular star may have occupied 
the first portions of the same sign of the Zodiac, 
and another the last, and another those portions 
in the middle, that which is in the middle is said 
to be guarded by those holding the portions at 
the extremities. And they are said to look upon 
one another, and to be in conjunction with one 
another, as if appearing in a triangular or quad- 
rangular figure. They assume, therefore, the 
figure of a triangle, and look upon one another, 
which have an intervening distance ' extending 
t^or three zodiacal signs ; and they assume the 
figure of a square those which have an interval 
extending for two signs. But as the underlying 
jjarts smpathize with the head, and the head 
with the underlying parts,- so also things terres- 
trial with superlunar objects.^ But there is of 
these a certain difference and want of sympathy, 
so that they do not involve one and the same 
point of juncture. 

CHAP. II. — doctrines CONCERNING /EONS ; THE 
CHALDEAN ASTROLOGY ; HERESY DERIVABLE FROM 
IT. 

Employing these (as analogies), Euphrates 
the Peratic, and Acembes^ the Carystian, and 

' Or, " interval." 

' Hippolyiiis gives the substance of Sextiis Empiricus" remarks, 
omitting:, li.iwcvcr, .i portion of the passai;e followed. (See Sextus 
tinpiriciiN M,it/i,-m.. v. 44.) 

•• Or, " celestial." 

*, ^'■- ". Celbes," or " Ademes." The first is the form of the name 
employed in book v. c. via. : the second in book x. c. vi. 
24 

the rest of the crowd of these (speculators), 
imposing names different from the doctrine of 
the truth, speak of a sedition of ^ons, and of 
a revolt of good powers over to evil (ones), and 
of the concord of good with wicked (^ons), 
calling them Toparchai and Froastioi, and \'ery 
many other names. But the entire of this her- 
esy, as attempted by them, I shall explain and 
refute when we come to treat of the subject of 
these (^ons). But now, lest any one suppose 
the opinions propounded by the Chaldeans re- 
specting astrological doctrine to be trustworthy 
and secure, we shall not hesitate to furnish a 
brief refutation respecting these, establishing 
that the futile art is calculated both to deceive 
and blind the soul indulging in vain expectations, 
rather than to profit it. And we urge our case 
with these, not according to any experience of 
the art, but from knowledge based on practical 
principles. Those who have cultivated the art, 
becoming disciples of the Chaldeans, and com- 
municating mysteries as if strange and astonish- 
ing to men, having changed the names (merely), 
have from this source concocted their heresy. 
But since, estimating the astrological art as a 
powerful one, and availing tliemselves of the 
testimonies adduced by its patrons, they wish to 
gain reliance for their own attempted conclusions, 
we shall at present, as it has seemed expedient, 
prove the astrological art to be untenable, as our 
intention next is to invalidate also the Peratic 
system, as a branch growing out of an unstable 
root. 

CH.'^P. III. — THE HOROSCOPE THE FOUND.'^TION OF 
ASTROLOGY ; INDISCOVERABILITY OF THE HORO- 
SCOPE ; THEREFORE THE FUTILITY OF THE CHAL- 
DEAN ART. 

The originating principle,5 and, as it were, 
foundation, of the entire art, is fixing'' the horo- 

5 This p.assage occurs in Scxtus Empiricus. 
*> t>r, " the knowledge of." 

Chap. IV.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

25 

scope.' For from this are derived the rest of 
the cardinal points, as well as the declinations 
and ascensions, the triangles and squares, and the 
configurations of the stars in accordance with 
tliese ; and from all these the predictions are 
taken. Whence, if the horoscope be removed, 
it necessarily follows that neither any celestial 
object is recognisable in the meridian, or at the 
horizon, or in the point of the heavens opposite 
the meridian ; but if these be not comprehended, 
the entire system of the Chaldeans vanishes along 
with (them) . But that the sign of the horoscope 
is indiscoverable by them, we may show by a 
variety of arguments. For in order that this 
(horoscope) may be found, it is first requisite 
that the (time of) birth of the person falling 
tinder inspection should be firmly fixed ; and 
secondly, that the horoscope which is to signify 
this should be infallible ; and thirdly, that the 
ascension^ of the zodiacal sign should be ob- 
served with accuracy. For from ^ (the moment) 
of birth •* the ascension of the zodiacal sign ris- 
ing in the heaven should be closely watched,5 
since the Chaldeans, determining (from this) the 
horosco))e, frame the configuration of the stars 
in accordance with the ascension (of the sign) ; 
and they term this — disposition, in accordance 
with which they devise their predictions. But 
neither is it possible to take the birth of persons 
falling under consideration, as I shall explain, 
nor is the horoscope infallible, nor is the rising 
zodiacal sign apprehended with accuracy. 

How it is, then, that the system of the Chal- 
deans ^ is unstable, let us now declare. Having, 
then, previously marked it out for investigation, 
they draw the birth of persons falling under con- 
sideration from, unquestionably, the depositing 
of the seed, and (from) conception or from par- 
turition. A.nd if one will attempt to take (the 
horoscope) from conception, the accurate ac- 
count of this is incomprehensible, the time 
(occupied) passing quickly, and naturally (so). 
For we are not able to say whether conception 
takes place upon the transference ^ of the seed 
or not. For this can happen even as quick as 
thought, just also as leaven, when put into heated 
jars, immediately is reduced to a glutinous state. 
But conception can also (take place) after a 
lapse of duration. For there being an interval 

* Horoscope (from oupa <TKOTros) is the act of observing the aspect 
of the heavens at the moment of any particular birth. Hereby the 
astrologer alleged his ability of foretelling the future career of the 
person so born. The most important part of the sky for the astrolo- 
ger's consideration was that sign of the Zodiac which rose abo\e the 
horizon at the moment of parturition. This was the " horoscope as- 
cendant," or " first house." The circuit of the heavens was divided 
into twelve " houses," or zodiacal signs. 

2 Or, "difference." 

3 Or, " during." 

^ clTTOTefeu)!; some would read aTroTafeM?. 

5 The passage is given more explicitly in Sextus Empiricus. (See 
Adversiis Astral. , v. 53.) 

6 Se.\tus uses almost these words. 

7 Or " lodgment" (Sextus), or " deposition." 

from the mouth of the womb to the fundament, 
where physicians'^ say conceptions take place, it 
is altogether the nature of the seed deposited to 
occupy some time in traversing ^ this interval. 
The Chaldeans, therefore, being ignorant of the 
quantity of duration to a nicety, never will com- 
prehend the (moment of) conception ; the seed 
at one time being injected straight forward, and 
falling at one spot upon actual parts of the womb 
well disposed for conception, and at another 
time dropping into it dispersedly, and being col- 
lected into one place by uterine energies. Now, 
while these matters are unknown, (namely), as 
to when the first takes place, and when the sec- 
ond, and how much time is spent in that partic- 
ular conception, and how much in this ; while, I 
say, ignorance on these points prevails on the 
part of these (astrologers), an accurate compre- 
hension of conception is put out of the ques- 
tion.'° And if, as some natural philosophers 
have asserted, the seed, remaining stationary 
first, and undergoing alteration in the womb, 
then enters the (womb's) opened blood-vessels, 
as the seeds of the earth ■ ' sink into the ground ; 
from this it will follow, that those who are not 
acquainted with the quantity of time occupied 
by the change, will not be aware of the precise 
moment of conception either. And, moreover, 
as women '^ differ from one another in the other 
parts of the body, both as regards energy and in 
other respects, so also (it is reasonable to sup- 
pose that they differ from one another) in re- 
spect of energy of womb, some conceiving 
quicker, and others slower. And this is not 
strange, since also women, when themselves 
compared with themselves, at times are observed 
having a strong disposition towards conception, 
but at times with no such tendency. And when 
this is so, it is impossible to say with accuracy 
when the deposited seed coalesces, in order that 
from this time the Chaldeans may fix the horo- 
scope of the birth. 

CHAP. IV. IMPOSSIBILITY OF FIXING THE HORO- 
SCOPE ; FAILURE OF AN ATTEMPT TO DO THIS 
AT THE PERIOD OF BIRTH. 

For this reason it is impossible to fix the ho- 
roscope from the (period of) conception. But 
neither can this be done from (that of) birth. 
For, in the first place, there exists the difificulty 
as to when it can be declared that there is a 
birth ; whether it is when the foatus begins to 
incline towards the orifice, '^ or when it may pro- 
ject a little, or when it may be borne to the 

^ Or, "attendants of physicians." 

9 Or, " make." 
'° Or, " vanishes " 
" Not in Sextus Empiricus. 
'' The pas.sage is more clearly given in Sextus. 
13 (Jr^ " the cold atmosphere." 

26 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book IV 

ground. Neither is it in each of these cases 
possible to comprehend the precise moment of 
parturition," or to define the time. For also on 
account of disposition of soul, and on account 
of suitableness of body, and on account of 
choice of the parts, and on account of experience 
in the midwife, and other endless causes, the 
time is not the same at which the fuetus inclines 
towards the orifice, when the membranes are 
ruptured, or when it projects a little, or is de- 
posited on the ground ; but the period is differ- 
ent in the case of different individuals. And 
when the Chaldeans are not able definitely and 
accurately to calculate this, they will fail, as 
they ought, to determine the period of emer- 
gence. 

That, then, the Chaldeans profess to be ac- 
quainted with the horoscope at the periods of 
birth," but in reality do not know it, is evident 
from these considerations. But that neither is 
their horoscope infallible, it is easy to conclude. 
For when they allege that the person sitting 
beside the woman in travail at the time of par- 
turition gives, by striking a metallic rim, a sign 
to the Chaldean, who from an elevated place is 
contemplating the stars, and he, looking towards 
heaven, marks down the rising zodiacal sign ; 
in the first place, we shall prove to them, that 
when parturition happens indefinitely, as we have 
shown a little before, neither is it easy - to sig- 
nify this (birth) by striking the metallic rim. 
However, grant that the birth is comprehensible, 
yet neither is it possible to signify this at the 
exact time ; for as the noise of the metallic plate 
is capable of being divided by a longer time and 
one protracted, in reference to perception, it 
happens that the sound is carried to the height 
(with proportionate delay). And the following 
proof may be observed in the case of those fell- 
ing timber at a distance. For a sufficiendy long 
time after the descent of the axe, the sound of 
the stroke is heard, so that it takes a longer time 
to reach the listener. And for this reason, there- 
fore, it is not possible for the Chaldeans accu- 
rately to take the time of the rising zodiacal sign, 
and conse(iuently the time when one can make 
the horoscope with truth. And not only does 
more time seem to elapse after parturition, when 
he who is sitting beside the woman in labour 
strikes the metallic plate, and next after the 
sound reaches the listener, that is, the person 
who has gone up to the elevated jjosition ; but 
also, while he is glancing around and looking to 
ascertain in which of the zodiacal signs is the 
moon, and in which appears each of the rest of 
the stars, it necessarily follows that there is a 
different position in regard of the stars, the 

' Or, " manifestation." 
2 Or, " reasonable." 

motion ^ of the pole whirling them on with in- 
calculable velocity, before what is seen in the 
heavens'* is carefully adjusted to the moment 
when the person is born. 

CHAP. V. AXOTHKR METHOD OF FIXING THE 

HOROSCOPE AT BIRTH ; EQUALLY FUTILE ; USE 
OF THE CLEPSYDRA IN ASTROLOGY ; THE PRE- 
DICTIONS OF THE CHALDE.\NS NOT VERIFIED. 

In this way, the art practised by the Chal- 
deans will be shown to be unstable. Should 
any one, however, allege that, by questions put 
to him who inquires from the Chaldeans,5 the 
birth can be ascertained, not even by this plan 
is it possible to arrive at the precise period. 
For if, supposing any such attention on their 
part in reference to their art to be on record, 
even these do not attain — as we have proved — 
unto accuracy either, how, we ask, can an unso- 
phisticated individual comprehend precisely the 
time of parturition, in order that the Chaldean 
acquiring the requisite information from this- 
person may set '^ the horoscope correctly ? But 
neither from the appearance of the horizon will 
the rising star seem the same everywhere ; but 
in one place its declination w^ill be supposed to 
be the horoscope, and in another the ascension 
(will be thought) the horoscope, according as 
the places come into view, being either lower or 
higher. Wherefore, also, from this quarter an 
accurate prediction will not appear, since many 
may be born throughout the entire world at the 
same hour, each from a different direction ob- 
serving the stars. 

But the supposed comprehension (of the 
period of parturition) by means of clepsydras ^ 
is likewise futile. For the contents of the jar 
will not flow out in the same time when it is full 
as when it is half empty ; yet, according to their 
own account, the pole itself by a single impulse 
is whirled along at an equable velocity. If, 
however, evading the argument,'^ they should 
affirm that they do not take the time precisely, 
but as it happens in any particular latitude,^ 
they will be refuted almost by the sidereal in- 
fluences themselves. For those who have been 
born at the same time do not spend the same 
life, but some, for example, have been made 
kings, and others have grown old in fetters. 

3 Or, " but the motion ... is whirled on with velocity." 
■* This rendering of the passage may be deduced from Sextus 
Empiricus. 

5 The text is corrupt, but the above seerns probably the meaning, 
and agrees with the rendering of Schneidewin and Cruice. 

6 Or, " view." 

7 The clepsydra, an instrument for measuring duration, was, with 
the sun-dial, invented by the Egyptians luider the PtnleMiics. It was 
employed not only for the measurement of time, bvu for maUing 
astronomic calcul.itions. Water, as the name imports, was the fluid 
emjiloyed, though mercury has been likewise used. The inherent 
defect of an instrument of this description is mentioned by Hip- 
polytus. 

8 Literally, " twisting, tergiversating." 

9 This seems the meaning, as deiUicible from a comparison of 
liippolylus with the correspondin;; passage in Sextus Empiricus. 

:]iAr. VII.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

27 

There has been born none equal, at all events, 
to Alexander the Macedonian, thongli many 
were brought forth along with him throughout 
the earth ; (and) none equal to the philosopher 
Plato. Wherefore the Chaldean, examining the 
time of the birth in any particular latitude, will 
not be able to say accurately, whether a person 
born at this time will be prosperous. Many, I 
take it, born at this time, have been unfortunate, 
so that the similarity according to dispositions is 
futile. 

Having, then, by different reasons and various 
methods, refuted the ineffectual mode of exam- 
ination adopted by the Chaldeans, neither shall 
we omit this, namely, to show that their predic- 
tions will eventuate in inexplicable difficulties. 
For if, as the mathematicians assert, it is neces- 
sary that one born under the barb of Sagittarius' 
arrow should meet with a violent death, how was 
it that so many myriads of the Barbarians that 
fought with the Greeks at Marathon or Salamis ■ 
were simultaneously slaughtered ? For unques- 
tionably there was not the same horoscope in 
the case, at all events, of them all. And again, 
it is said that one born under the urn of Aquarius 
will suffer shipwreck : (yet) how is it that so 
many ^ of the Greeks that returned from Troy 
were overwhelmed in the deep around the m- 
dented shores of Euboea ? For it is incredible 
that all, distant from one another by a long in- 
terval of duration, should have been born under 
the urn of Aquarius. For it is not reasonable 
to say, that frequently, for one whose fate it was 
to be destroyed in the sea, all who were with him 
in the same vessel should perish. For why 
should the doom of this man subdue the (des- 
tinies) of all? Nay, but why, on account of 
one for whom it was allotted to die on land, 
should not all be preserved ? 

CHAP. VI. — ZODIACAL INFLUENCE j ORIGIN OF 
SIDEREAL NAMES. 

But since also they frame an account con- 
cerning the action of the zodiacal signs, to 
which they say the creatures that are procreated 
are assimilated,^ neither shall we omit this : as, 

' Omitted by Se.vtus. 

- The Abbe Cruice observes, in regard of some verbal difference 
here in the text from that of Sextus, that the MS. of The Refntation 
was probably executed by one who heard the extracts from other 
writers read to him, and frequently mistook the sound. The tran- 
scriber of the MS. was one Michael, as we learn from a marginal note 
at the end. 

3 This was the great doctrine of astrology, the forerimner of the 
science of astronomy. Astrology seems to have arisen first among 
the Chaldeans, nut of the fimdamental principle of their religion — 
the assimilation of the divine nature to light. This tenet introduced 
another, the worship of the stars, which was developed into astrology. 
Others suppose astrology 10 have been of Arabian or Egyptian 
origin. From some of these sources it reached the ' oeeks, and 
through them the Romans, who held the astrologic art in high repute. 
The art, after having become almost extinct, was revived by the 
Arabians at the verge of the middle ages. For the history' of a>trclogy 
one must consult the writings of Manilius, Julius Firmicus, and 
Ptolemy. Its greatest media;\al apologist is Cardan, the famous 
physician of Pavia (see his work, Dc Astron. Judic, lib. vi.-Lx. 
torn. V. of his collected works). 

for instance, that one born in Leo will be brave ; 
and that one born in Virgo will have long 
straight hair,-* be of a fair complexion, childless, 
modest. These statements, however, and others 
similar to them, are rather deserving of laughter 
than serious consideration. For, according to 
them, it is possible for no /Ethiopian to be born 
in Virgo ; otherwise he would allow that such a 
one is white, with long straight hair and the 
rest. But I am rather of opinion, 5 that the 
ancients imposed the names of received animals 
upon certain specified stars, for the purpose of 
knowing them better, not from any similarity of 
nature ; for what have the seven stars, distant 
one from another, in common with a bear, or 
the five stars with the head of a dragon? — in 
regand of which Aratus ^ says : — 

" But two his temples, and two his eyes, and one 
beneath 
Reaches the end of the huge monster's jaw." 

CHAP. VII. PRACTICAL ABSURDITY OF THE CHAL- 

DAIC art; DEVELOPMENT OF THE ART. 

In this manner also, that these points are not 
deserving so much labour, is evident to those 
who prefer to think correctly, and do not attend 
to the bombast of the Chaldeans, who consign 
monarchs to utter obscurity, by perfecting cow- 
ardice 7 in them, and rouse private individuals to 
dare great exploits. But if any one, surrender- 
mg himself to evil, is guilty of delinquency, he 
who has been thus deceived does not become a 
teacher to all whom the Chaldeans are disposed 
to mislead by their mistakes. (Far from it) ; 
(these astrologers) impel the minds (of their 
dupes, as they would have them), into endless 
perturbation, (when) they affirm that a con- 
figuration of the same stars could not return to 
a similar position, otherwise than by the renewal 
of the Great Year, through a space of seven 
thousand seven hundred and seventy and seven 
years.^ How then, I ask, will human observa- 
tion for one birth be able to harmonize with so 
many ages ; and this not once, (but oftentimes, 

4 Sextus adds, " bright-eyed." 

5 Hippolytus here follows Sextus. 

* Aratus, from whom Hippolytus quotes so frequently in this 
chapter, was a poet and astronomer of antiquity, born at Soli in 
Cilicia. He afterwards became physician to Gonatus, son of Deme- 
trius Poliorcetes, king of Macedon, at whose court he rose high into 
favour. The work alluded to by Hippolytus is Aratus' Phenomena, 
— a versified account of the motions of the stars, and of sidereal in- 
fluence over men. This work seems to have been a great favourite 
with scholars, if we are to judge from the many excellent annotated 
editions of it that have appeared. Two of these deserve notice, viz., 
Grotius' Leyden edition, 1600, in Greek and Latin ; and Buhle's 
edition, Leipsic, 1S03. See also Dionysius Petavius' Uranologion. 
Aratus must alw.ays be famous, from the fact that .St. Paul (Acts 
xvii. 2S) quotes the fifth line of the Phieiiotnnia. Cicero considered 
Aratus a noble poet, and translated the Phceuonicim into Latin, a 
fragment of which has been preserved, and is in Grotius' edition. 
Aratus has been translated into English verse, with notes by Dr. 
Lamb, Dean of Bristol (London: J W. Parker, 1S58). 

7 'fhe Abbe Cruice suggests " freedom from danger," instead of 
"cowardice," and translates thus: "whereby kings are slam, by 
having impunity promised in the predictions of these seers." 

2 Sextus makes the number " nine thousand nine hundred and 
seventy and seven years." 

28 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[EooK IV. 

when a destruction of the world, as some have 
stated, would intercept the progress of this (Ireat 
Year ; or a terrestrial convulsion, though partial, 
would utterly break the continuity of the his- 
torical tradition) ? ' The Chaldaic art must 
necessarily be refuted by a greater number of 
arguments, although we have been reminding 
(our readers) of it on account of other circum- 
stances, not peculiarly on account of the art 
itself. 

Since, however, wc have determined to omit 
none of the opinions advanced by Gentile phil- 
osoi)hers, on account of the notorious knavery 
of the heretics, let us see what they also say who 
have attempted to propound doctrines concern- 
ing magnitudes, — who, observing the fruitless 
labour of the majority (of speculators), wjiere 
each after a different fashion coined his own 
falsehoods and attained celebrity, have ventured 
to make some greater assertion, in order that 
they might be highly magnified by those who 
mightily extol their contemptible lies. These 
suppose the existence of circles, and measures, 
and triangles, and sijuares, both in twofold and 
threefold array. Their argumentation, however, 
in regard of this matter, is extensive^ yet it is not 
necessary in reference to the subject which we 
have taken in hand. 

CHAP. VIII. — PRODIGIES OF THE ASTROLOGERS ; 
SYSTEM OF THE ASTRONOMERS; CHALDEAN 
DOCTRINE OF CIRCLES ; DISTANCES OF THE 
HEAVENLY BODIES. 

I reckon it then sufficient to declare the prod- 
igies- detailed by these men. Wherefore, em- 
ploying condensed accounts of what they affirm, 
I shall turn my attention to the other points 
(that remain to be considered). Now they 
make the following statements.^ The Creator 
communicated pre-eminent power to the orbital 
motion of the identical and similar (circle), for 
He permitted the revolution of it to be one and 
indivisible ; but after dividing this internally into 
six parts, (and thus having formed) seven un- 
equal circles, according to each interval of a 
twofold and threefokl dimension, He com- 
manded, since there were three of each, that the 
circles should travel in orbits contrary to one 
another, three indeed (out of the aggregate of 
seven) being whirled along with equal velocity, 
and four of them with a speed dissimilar to each 

' The parenthetical words are taken from Sexttis Empiriciis, as 
introduced into his text by the Abbe Cruice. Schncidewin alludes to 
the passage in Sextus as proof of some confusion in Hippolytus' text, 
which he thinks is signified by the transcriber in the words, " I 
thiiik there is some deficiency or omissions," which occur in the Ms. 
of T/ie Rf/utatioti. 

- As regards astrological predictions, see Origen's Coiiiitient. en 
C,»n.: Diodorus of Tarsus. De l-'ato ; Photii /3i/>lioth.. coA. ccxxiii. ; 
and Bardesanis, Pc Legilms Nationum, in Cureton's Spicilegium 

^ See Plato's Timtetis. 

Other and to the remaining three, yet (all) ac- 
cording to a definite principle. For he affirms 
that the master)^ was communicated to the or- 
bital motion of the same (circle), not only since 
it embraces the motion of the other, that is, the 
erratic stars, but because also it possesses so 
great mastery, that is, so great power, that even 
it leads round, along with itself, by a peculiar 
strength of its own, those heavenly bodies — that 
is, the erratic stars — that are whirled along in 
contrary directions from west to east, and, in like 
manner, from east to ,west. 

And he asserts that this motion was allowed 
to be one and indivisible, in the first place, in- 
asmuch as the revolutions of all the fixed stars 
were accomplished in equal periods of time, and 
were not distinguished according to greater or 
less portions of duration. In the next place, 
they all present the same phase as that which 
belongs to the outermost motion ; whereas the 
erratic stars have been distributed into greater 
and varying periods for the accomplishment of 
their movements, and into unequal distances 
from earth. And he asserts that the motion in 
six parts of the other has been distributed prob- 
ably into seven circles. For as many as are 
sections of each (circle) — I allude to monads 
of the sections •* — become segments ; for ex- 
ample, if the division be by one section, there 
will be two segments ; if by two, three segments ; 
and so, if anything be cut into six parts, there 
will be seven segments. And he says that the 
distances of these are alternately arranged both 
in double and triple order, there being three of 
each, — a principle which, he has attempted to 
prove, holds good of the composition of the soul 
likewise, as depending upon the seven numbers. 
For among them there are from the monad three 
double (numbers), viz., 2, 4, 8, and three triple 
ones, viz., 3, 9, 27. But the diameter of Farth 
is 8o;io8 stadii ; and the perimeter of Earth, 
250,543 stadii ; and the distance also from the 
surface of the Earth to the lunar circle, Aris- 
tarchus the Sannan comjiutes at 8,000,1 78 stadii, 
but Apollonius 5,000,000, whereas Archimedes 
computes 5 it at 5,544,130. And from the lunar 
to solar circle, (according to the last authority,) 
are 50,262,065 stadii ; and from this to the circle 
of Venus, 20,272,065 stadii; and from this to 
the circle of Mercury, 50,817,165 stadii; and 
from this to the circle of IVIars, 40,541,108 stadii ; 
and from this to the circle of Jupiter, 20,275,065 

* Schneidewin, on Roeper's suggestion, amends the passage thus, 
though 1 am not sure that I exactly render his almost unintelligible 
Latin version: "For as many sections as there are of each, there 
are educible from the monad more segments than sections; for ex- 
ample, if," etc. The Abbe Cruice would seemingly .adopt the follow- 
ing version: "For whatsoever are sections of each, now there are 
more segments than sections of a monad, will become; for example, 
if," etc. 

5 Schneidewin, on mathematical authority, discredits the numei7 al 
calculations ascribed to Archimedes. 

Chap. XL] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

29 

stadii ; and from this to the circle of Saturn, 40,- 
372,065 stadii ; and from this to the Zodiac and 
the furthest periphery, 20,082,005 stadii.' 

CHAP. IX. 

•FURTHER ASTRONOMIC CALCULATIONS. 

Tlie mutual distances of the circles and spheres, 
and the depths, are rendered by Archimedes, He 
takes the perimeter of the Zodiac at 447,310,000 
stadii ; so that it follows that a straight line from 
the centre of the Earth to the most outward 
superficies would be the sixth of the aforesaid 
number, but that the line from the surface of 
the Earth on which we tread to the Zodiac would 
"be a sixth of the aforesaid number, less by four 
myriads of stadii, which is the distance from the 
centre of the Earth to its surface. And from 
the circle of Saturn to the Earth he says the dis- 
tance is 2,226,912,711 stadii; and from the 
circle of Jupiter to Earth, 202,770,646 stadii; 
and from the circle of Mars to Earth, 132,418,- 
581. From the Sun to Earth, 121,604,454 ; and 
from Mercury to the Earth, 526,882,259; and 
from Venus to Earth, 50,815,160. 

CHAP. X. THEORY OF STELLAR MOTION AND DIS- 
TANCE IN ACCORDANCE WITH HARIVIONY. 

Concerning the Moon, however, a statement 
has been previously made. The distances and 
profundities of the spheres Archimedes thus ren- 
ders ; but a different declaration regarding them 
has been made by Hipparchus ; and a different 
one still by ApoUonius the mathematician. It is 
sufficient, however, for us, following the Platonic 
opinion, to suppose twofold and threefold dis- 
tances from one another of the erratic stars ; for 
the doctrine is thus preserved of the composition 
of the universe out of harmony, on concordant 
principles^ in keeping with these distances. The 
numbers, however, advanced by Archimedes,^ 
and the accounts rendered by the rest concern- 
ing the distances, if they be not on principles 
of symphony, — that is, the double and triple 
(distances) spoken of by Plato, — but are dis- 
covered independent of harmonies, would not 
preserve the doctrine of the formation of the 
universe according to harmony. For it is neither 
credible nor possible that the distances of these 
should be both contrary to some reasonable plan, 
and independent of harmonious and proportional 
principles, except perhaps only the Moon, on 
account of wanings and the shadow of the Earth, 

' This is manifestly erroneous; the total could only be " four 
myriads! " 

2 The Abbe Cruice thinks that the word should be '' tones," sup- 
porting his emendation on the authority of Phny, who states that 
Pythagoras called the distance of the Moon from the Earth a tone, 
deriving the term from musical science (see Pliny's Hist. Nat., ii. 20) . 

3 These numerical speculations are treated of by Archimedes in 
his work On the Number of the Sand, in which he maintains the 
possibility of counting the sands, even on the supposition of the 
world's being much larger than it is (see Archimedes, id m^XP' ^"^ 
crio^ofieva aTrafra, Treatise +o/xfiiT7)9, p. 120, ed. Eustoc. Ascalon., 
Basil, J 544). 

in regard also of the distance of which alone — 
that is, the lunar (planet) from earth — one may 
trust Archimedes. It will, however, be easy for 
those who, according to the Platonic dogma 
itself, adopt this distance to comprehend by 
numerical calculation (intervals) according to 
what is double and triple, as Plato requires, and 
the rest of the distances. If, then, according to 
Archimedes, the Moon is distant from the sur- 
face of the Earth 5,544,130 stadii, by increasing 
these numbers double and triple, (it will be) 
easy to find also the distances of the rest, as if 
subtracting one part of the number of stadii 
which the Moon is distant from the Earth. 

But because the rest of the numbers — those 
alleged by Archimedes concerning the distance 
of the erratic stars — are not based on principles 
of concord, it is easy to understand — that is, 
for those who attend to the matter — how the 
numbers are mutually related, and on what prin 
ciples they depend. That, however, they should 
not be in harmony and symphony — I mean 
those that are parts of the world which con- 
sists according to harmony — this is impossible. 
Since, therefore, the first number which the 
Moon is distant from the earth is 5,544,130, the 
second number which the Sun is distant from 
the Moon being 50,272,065, subsists by a greater 
computation than ninefold. But the higher 
number in reference to this, being 20,272,065, 
is (comprised) in a greater computation than 
half. The number, however, superior to this, 
which is 50,817,165, is contained in a greater 
computation than half. But the number supe- 
rior to this, which is 40,541,108, is contained in 
a less computation than two-fifths. But the 
number superior to this, which is 20,275,065, is 
contained in a greater computation than half. 
The final number, however, which is 40,372,065, 
is comprised in a less computation than double. 

CHAP. XI. — THEORY OF THE SIZE OF THE HEAV- 
ENLY BODIES IN ACCORDANCE WITH NUMERICAL 
HARMONIES. 

These (numerical) relations, therefore, the 
greater than ninefold, and less than half, and 
greater than double, and less than two-fifths, 
and greater than half, and less than double, are 
beyond all symphonies, from which not any 
proportionate or harmonic system could be pro- 
duced. But the whole world, and the parts of 
it, are in all respects similarly framed in con- 
formity with proportion and harmony. The 
proportionate and harmonic relations, however, 
are preserved — as we have previously stated 
— by double and triple intervals. If, therefore, 
we consider Archimedes reliable in the case of 
only the first distance, that from the Moon to 
the Earth, it is easy also to find the rest (of the 
intervals), by multiplying (them) by double and 

;o 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book IV, 

treble. Let then the distance, according to 
Archimedes, from Earth to Moon be 5,544,130 
stadii ; there will therefore be the double num- 
ber of this of stadii which the Sun is distant 
from the Moon, viz., 11,088,260. But the Sun 
is distant from the P^arth 16,632,390 stadii ; and 
Venus is likewise distant from the Sun 16,632,- 
390 stadii, ])ut from the Ivirth 33,264,780 stadii ; 
and Jklercury is distant from Venus 22,176,520 
stadii, but from Earth 55,441,300 stadii; and 
Mars is distant from Mercury 49,897,170 stadii, 
and from Earth 105,338,470 stadii; and Jupiter 
is distant from Mars 44,353,040 stadii, but from 
Earth 149,691,510 stadii; Saturn is distant 
from Jupiter 149,691,510 stadii, but from Earth 
299,383,020 stadii. 

CHAP. XII. — WASTE OF MENTAL ENERGY IN THE 
SYSTEMS OF THE ASTROLOGERS. 

Who will not feel astonishment at the exertion 
of so much deep thought with so much toil? 
This Ptolemy, however — a careful investigator 
of these matters — does not seem to me to be 
useless; but only this grieves (one), that being 
recently born, he could not be of service to the 
sons of the giants, who, being ignorant of these 
measures, and supposing that the heights of 
heaven were near, endeavoured in vain to con- 
struct a tower. And so, if at that time he were 
present to explain to them these measures, they 
would not have made the daring attempt inef- 
fectually. But if any one profess not to have 
confidence in this (astronomer's calculations), 
let him by measuring be persuaded (of their 
accuracy) ; for in reference to those incredulous 
on the point, one cannot have a more manifest 
proof than this. O, pride of vain-toiling soul, 
and incredible belief, that Ptolemy should be 
considered pre-eminently wise among those who 
have cultivated similar wisdom 1 

CHAP. XIII. — MENTION OF THE HERETIC COLAR- 
BASUS ; ALLIANCE BETWEEN HERESY AND THE 
PYTHAGOREAN PHILOSOPHY. 

Certain, adhering partly to these, as if having 
propounded great conclusions, and supposed 
things worthy of reason, have framed enormous 
and endless heresies ; and one of these is Colar- 
basus,' who attempts to ex))lain religion by meas- 
ures and numbers. And others there are (who 
act) in like manner, whose tenets we shall explain 
when we commence to speak of what concerns 
those who give heed to Pythagorean calculation 
as possible ; and uttering vain prophecies, hastily 
assume ^ as secure the philosophy by numbers 

' Colarbasus is afterwards mentioned in company with Marcus 
the lieretic, at the beginning and end of hook vi. of The Rifiitntwit. 

- I'his word {(T\e6iaC,ov<T') , more than once used by Hippolytus, 
is applied to anything done offhand, e.g., an extern /•ore speech. It 
therefore might be made to designate inunatiirity of opinion, ive^'** 
means something liastily put together, viz., a raft; crx^Atos, sudden. 

and elements. Now certain (speculators), appro- 
priating 3 similar reasonings from these, deceive 
unsophisticated individuals, alleging themselves 
endued with foresight ; ■♦ sometimes, after utter- 
ing many predictions, happening on a single ful- 
filment, and not abashed by many failures, but 
making their boast in this one. Neither shall I 
pass over the witless philosophy of these men ; 
but, after explaining it, I shall prove that those 
who attempt to form a system of religion out of 
these (aforesaid elements), are disciples of a 
school 5 weak and full of knavery. 

CHAP. XIV. .SYSTEM OF THE ARITHMETICL\NS ; 

PREDICTIONS THROUGH CALCULATIONS ; NUMERI- 
CAL ROOTS ; TRANSFERENCE OF THESE DOC- 
TRINES TO letters; EXAMPLES IN PARTICULAR 
NAMES ; DIFFERENT METHODS OF CALCULATION ; 
PRESCIENCE POSSIBLE BY THESE. 

Those, then, who suppose that chey prophesy 
by means of calculations and numbers,'' and ele- 
ments and names, constitute the origin of their 
attempted system to be as follows. They afiirm 
that there is a root of each of the numbers ; 
in the case of thousands, so many monads as 
there are thousands : for example, the root of 
six thousand, six monads ; of seven thousand, 
seven monads ; of eight thousand, eight mon- 
ads ; and in the case of the rest, in like manner, 
according to the same (proportion). And in the 
case of hundreds, as many hundreds as there 
are, so many monads are the root of them : for 
instance, of seven hundred there are seven hun- 
dreds ; the root of these is seven monads : of 
six hundred, six hundreds ; the root of these, six 
monads. And it is similar respecting decades : 
for of eighty (the root is) eight monads ; and 
of sixty, six monads ; of forty, four monads ; of 
ten, one monad. And in the case of monads, 
the monads themselves are a root : for instance, 
of nine, nine ; of eight, eight ; of seven, seven. 
In this way, also, ought we therefore to act in 
the case of the elements (of words), for each 
letter has been arranged according to a certain 
number : for instance, the letter ;/ according to 
fifty monads ; but of fifty monads five is the 
root, and the root of the letter ;/ is (therefore) 
five. Grant that from some name we take cer- 
tain roots of it. For instance, (from) the name 

3 Schneidewin suggests o/oito? instead of oiuoiio?. The word 
(t'oarnrann'oi) translated " appropriating " is derived from tpai'o?, 
which signifies a meal to which those who partake of it have each con- 
tributed some dish (pic-nic). The term, therefore, is an e.vpressive 
one for Hippolytus' purpose. 

* TTpoyruxTTiKoui;. Some would read 7rpn5 yvunjn.Koii'i. 

s Some propose! Sofi)?, " opinion." Hippolytus, however, u.sed 
the word 'oii^r\<: ( translated " school "\ in a similar way at the end of 
chap. i. of book iv. " Novelty" is read instead of" knavery; " and for 
a.vci-n\iov. " full,"' is proposed (i) oran-Atoi'Ta?, (2) TraTrTtooj/jTa?. 

6 The subject of the numerical system employed by the Gnostics, 
and their occult mysteries, is treated of by the learned Kiroher, CEdi/>t 
.■Egyf'i., \.om.\\. part i.,^^' CabnlA Hchrifprum ; also in his A'-ith- 
motog.. in the book Dc Arithmoi!iaii!i<i Giuisticor., cap. viii., Je 
Cabalii Pytlmgored. See also Mersennes, Comment, on Genes. 

Chap. XIV.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

31 

Agamemnon, there is of the a, one monad ; and 
of the g, three monads ; and of the other a, one 
monad ; of the m, four monads ; of the c\ five 
monads ; of the m, four monads ; of the ;/, 
five monads; of the (long) o, eight monads; 
of the //, five monads ; which, brought together 
into one series, will be i, 3, i, 4, 5, 4, 5, 8, 5 ; 
and these added together make up 36 monads. 
Again, they take the roots of these, and they 
become three in the case of the number thirty, 
but actually six in the case of the number six. 
The three and the six, then, added together, 
constitute nine ; but the root of nine is nine : 
therefore the name Agamemnon terminates in 
the root nine. 

Let us do the same with another name — 
Hector. The name (H)ector has five letters 
— e, and k, and /, and 0, and r. The roots of 
these are 5, 2, 3, 8, i ; and these added to- 
gether make up 19 monads. Again, of the ten 
the root is one ; and of the nine, nine ; which 
added together make up ten : the root of ten is 
a monad. The name Hector, therefore, when 
made the subject of computation, has formed a 
root, namely a monad. It would, however, be 
easier ' to conduct the calculation thus : Divide 
the ascertained roots from the letters — as now 
in the case of the name Hector we have found 
nineteen monads — into nine, and treat what 
remains over as roots. For example, if I divide 
19 into 9, the remainder is i, for 9 times 2 are 
18, and there is a remaining monad : for if I sub- 
tract 18 from 19, there is a remaining monad; 
so that the root of the name Hector will be a 
monad. Again, of the name Patroclus these 
numbers are roots : 8, i, 3, i, 7, 2, 3, 7, 2 ; 
added together, they make up 34 monads. And 
of these the remainder is 7 monads : of the 30, 
3 ; and of the 4, 4. Seven monads, therefore, 
are the root of the name Patroclus. 

Those, then, that conduct their calculations 
according to the rule of the number nine,^ take 
the ninth part of the aggregate number of roots, 
and define what is left over as the sum of the 
roots. They, on the other hand, (who conduct 
their calculations) according to the rule of the 
number seven, take the seventh (part of the 
aggregate number of roots) ; for example, in 
the case of the name Patroclus, the aggregate 
in the matter of roots is 34 monads. This di- 
vided into seven parts makes four, which (mul- 
tiplied into each other) are 28. There are six 
remaining monads ; (so that a person using this 
method) says, according to the rule of the num- 
ber seven, that six monads are the root of the 

' This subject is examined by Cornelius Agrippa in his celebrated 
work, De vniiitatc et incertitiaiine Scicntiariiiii, chap. ,\i., De 
Sorte PythagflricA. Terentiiis Maurus has also a versified work on 
Letters and Syllahh's and Metres, in which he alludes to similar 
interpretations educible from the names Hector and Patroclus. 
2 That is, the division by nine. 

name Patroclus. If, however, it be 43, (six) 
taken seven times, ^ he says, are 42 , for seven 
times six are 42, and one is the remainder. A 
monad, therefore, is the root of the number 43, 
according to the rule of the number seven. But 
one ought to observe if the assumed number, 
when divided, has no remainder ; for example, 
if from any name, after having added together 
the roots, I find, to give an instance, 36 monads. 
But the number 36 divided into nine makes 
exactly 4 enneads ; for nine times 4 are 36, 
and nothing is over. It is evident, then, that 
the actual root is 9. And again, dividing the 
number forty-five, we find nine* and nothing 
over — for nine times five are forty-five, and 
nothing remains; (wherefore) in the case of 
such they assert the root itself to be nine. And 
as regards the number seven, the case is similar : 
if, for example we divide 28 into 7, we have 
nothing over ; for seven times four are 28, and 
nothing remains ; (wherefore) they say that 
seven is the root. But when one computes 
names, and finds the same letter occurring twice, 
he calculates it once ; for instance, the name 
Patroclus has the pa twice, 5 and the 0 twice : 
they therefore calculate the a once and the 0 
once. According to this, then, the roots will 
be 8, 1,3, I, 7, 2, 3, 2, and added together they 
make 2 7 monads ; and the root of the name 
will be, according to the rule of the number 
nine, nine itself, but according to the rule of the 
number seven, six. 

In like manner, (the name) Sarpedon, when 
made the subject of calculation, produces as a 
root, according to the rule of the number nine, 
two monads. Patroclus, however, produces nine 
monads ; Patroclus gains the victory. For when 
one number is uneven, but the other even, the 
uneven number, if it is larger, prevails. But 
again, when there is an even number, eight, and 
five an uneven number, the eight prevails, for it 
is larger. If, however, there were two numbers, 
for example, both of them even, or both of them 
odd, the smaller prevails. But how does (the 
name) Sarpedon, according to the rule of the 
number nine, make two monads, since the letter 
(long) 0 is omitted? For when there maybe 
in a name the letter (long) 0 and (long) e, they 
leave out the (long) 0, using one letter, because 
they say both are equipollent ; and the same 
must not be computed twice over, as has been 
above declared. Again, (the name) Ajax makes 
four monads ; (but the name) Hector, accord- 
ing to the rule of the ninth number, makes one 

3 That is, calculated according to the rule of a division by seven. 

4 We should expect rather five instead of 9, if the division be by 
nine. 

5 There is some confusion in the text. Miller conjectures that 
the reading should be: " .\s, for instance, the name Patroclus has 
the letter (' occurring twice in it, they tlierefore take it into calculation 
once." Schneidewin suggests that the fjiiu of the name may b* 
Papatroclus. 

32 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book IV. 

monad. And the tetrad is even, whereas the 
monad odd. And in the case of such, we say, 
the greater prevails — Ajax gains the victory. 
Again, Alexander and Menelaus (may be ad- 
duced as examples). Alexander has a proper 
name (Paris). But Paris, according to the rule 
of the number nine, makes four monads ; and 
Menelaus, according to the rule of the number 
nine, makes nine monads. The nine, however, 
conquer the four (monads) : for it has been 
declared, when the one number is odd and the 
other even, the greater prevails ; but when both 
are even or both odd, the less (prevails) . Again, 
Amycus and Polydeuces (may be adduced as 
examples). Amycus, according to the rule of 
the number nine, makes two monads, and Poly- 
deuces, however, seven : Polydeuces gains the 
victory. Ajax and Ulysses contended at the 
funeral games. Ajax, according to the rule of 
the number nine, makes four monads ; Ulysses, 
according to the rule of the number nine, 
(makes) eight.' Is there, then, not any an- 
nexed, and (is there) not a proper name for 
Ulysses?^ for he has gained the victory. Ac- 
cording to the numbers, no doubt, Ajax is vic- 
torious, but history hands down the name of 
Ulysses as the conqueror. Achilles and Hector 
(may be adduced as examples). Achilles, ac- 
cording to the rule of the number nine, makes 
four monads ; Hector one : Achilles gains the 
victory. Again, Achilles and Asteropaeus (are 
instances). Achilles makes four monads, Aster- 
opaeus three : Achilles conquers. Again, Men- 
elaus and Euphorbus (may be adduced as 
examples). Menelaus has nine monads, Eu- 
phorbus eight : Menelaus gains the victory. 

Some, however, according to the rule of the 
number seven, employ the vowels only, but 
others distinguish by themselves the vowels, and 
by themselves the semi-vowels, and by them- 
selves the mutes; and, having formed three 
orders, they take the roots by themselves of the 
vowels, and by themselves of the semi-vowels, 
and by themselves of the mutes, and they 
compare each apart. Others, however, do not 
employ even these customary numbers, but dif- 
ferent ones : for instance, as an example, they 
no not wish to allow that the letter/ has as a 
root 8 monads, but 5, and that the (letter) x 
(si) has as a root four monads ; and turning in 
every direction, they discover nothing sound. 
When, however, they contend about the second 
(letter), from each name they take away the 
first letter; but when they contend about the 
third (letter), they take away two letters of 
each name, and calculating the rest, compare 
them 

' Miller s.iys there is .in error in the calculation here. 
^ 1 his IS ns near the sense of ihc passage as a translation in some 
respects conjectural can make it. ■ 

CHAP. XV. — QUIBBLES OF THE NIBIERICAL THEO- 
RISTS ; THE ART OF THE FROVTISPICISTS (PHYS- 
IOGNOMY) ; CONNECTION OF THIS ART WITH 
ASTROLOGY; TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER 
ARIES. 

I think that there has been clearly expounded 
the mind of arithmeticians, who, by means of 
numbers and of names, suppose that they inter- 
pret life. Now I perceive that these, enjoying 
leisure, and being trained in calculation, have 
been desirous that, through the art^ delivered 
to them from childhood, they, acquiring celeb- 
rity, should be styled prophets. And they, meas- 
uring the letters up (and) down, have wandered 
into trifling. For if they fail, they say, in put- 
ting forward the difficulty. Perhaps this name 
was not a family one, but imposed, as also light- 
ing in the instance they argue in the case of 
(the names) Ulysses and Ajax. Who, taking 
occasion from this astonishing philosophy, and 
desirous of being styled " Heresiarch," will not 
be extolled? 

But since, also, there is another more profound 
art among the all-wise speculators of the Greeks 
— to whom heretical individuals boast that they 
attach themselves as disciples, on account of 
their employing the opinions of these (ancient 
philosophers) in reference to the doctrines at- 
tempted (to be established) by themselves, as 
shall a little afterwards be proved; but this is 
an art of divination, by examination of the fore- 
head,-* or rather, I should say, it is madness : yet 
we shall not be silent as regards this (system) 
There are some who ascribe to the stars figures 
that mould the ideas s and dispositions of men, 
assigning the reason of this to births (that have 
taken place) under particular stars; they thus 
express themselves : Those who ^ are born under 
Aries will be of the following kind : long head, 
red hair, contracted eyebrows, pointed fore- 
head, eyes grey and lively,^ drawn cheeks, long- 
nosed, expanded nostrils, thin lips, tapering 
chin, wide mouth. These, he says, will partake 
of the following nature : cautious, subtle, per- 
spicuous,^ prudent, indulgent, gentle, over-anx- 
ious, persons of secret resolves, fitted for every 
undertaking, prevailing more by prudence than 
strength, deriders for the time being, scholars. 

3 The word fleAtii/ occurs in this sentence, but is obviously sui cr- 
fluous. 

* In the margin of the MS. is the note, " Opinion of the Mctcpii- 
copists." 

5 These words are out of place. See next note. 

<> There is evidently some displacement of words here. Miller 
and Schncidewin suggest: " There are some who ascribe to the in- 
fluence of the stars the natures of men; since, in computing the 
births of individuals, they thus express themselves as if ihey were 
moulding the species of men." The Abbe Cruice would leave the 
text as it is, altering only TvnovvTt<; t£ea? into tvttuiv re i£ta^. 

' Literally, "jumping;" others read "blackish," or "expres- 
sive" (literally, "talking"). The vulgar reading, xtno oAAoct, is. 
evidently untenable. 

8 Or " cowardly," or "cowards at heart;" or some read, x"Po- 
jToioi, i.e., " causative of gladness." 

Chap. XXL] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

33 

trustworthy, contentions, quarrellers in a fray, 
concupiscent, inflamed witli unnatural lust, reflec- 
tive, estranged ' from their own homes, giving 
dissatisfaction in everything, accusers, like mad- 
men in their cups, scorners, year by year losing 
something - sei'viceable in friendship through 
goodness; they, in the majority of cases, end 
their days in a foreign land. 

CHAP. XVI. TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER TAURUS. 

Those, however, who are born in Taurus will 
be of the following description : round head, 
thick hair, broad forehead, square eyes, and 
large black eyebrows ; in a white man, thin 
veins, sanguine, long eyelids, coarse huge ears, 
round mouths, thick nose, round nostrils, thick 
lips, strong in the upper parts, formed straight 
from the legs.^ The same are by nature pleas- 
ing, reflective, of a goodly disposition, devout, 
just, uncouth, complaisant, labourers from twelve 
years, quarrelsome, dull. The stomach of these 
is small, they are quickly filled, forming many 
designs, prudent, niggardly towards themselves, 
liberal towards others, beneficent, of a slow* 
body : they are partly sorrowful, heedless as re- 
gards friendship, useful on account of mind, 
unfortunate. 

CHAP. XVII. 

• TYPE OF THOSE 
GEMINI. 

BORN UNDER 

Those who are born in Gemini will be of the 
following description : red countenance, size not 
very large, evenly proportioned limbs,5 black 
eyes as if anointed with oil, cheeks turned 
down,*" and large mouth, contracted eyebrows ; 
they conquer all things, they retain whatever 
possessions they acquire, 7 they are extremely 
rich, penurious, niggardly of what is peculiarly 
their own, profiise in the pleasures of women,'* 
equitable, musical, liars. And the same by 
nature are learned, reflective, inquisitive, arriv- 
ing at their own decisions, concupiscent, sparing 
of what belongs to themselves, liberal, quiet, 
prudent, crafty, they form many designs, calcu- 
lators, accusers, importunate, not prosperous, 
they are beloved by the fair sex, merchants ; as 
regards friendship, not to any considerable ex- 
tent useful. 

' Or, " diseased with unnatural lust," i.e., I'ocroOi'Te; for I'oouyrcs, 

- Or, kot' e77-o«, " verbally rejecting anything." 

3 Or better, " weak in the limbs." 

^ Or, " short." 

5 Or, " parts." 

^ Some read KaAu) yeyei'v-rjueyiof, or KaXio TeTfri'rj^e'i'wi--. 

' Or, " they are given to hoarding, they have possessions." 

8 This is an amended reading of the te.\t, which is obviously con- 
fu.'ied. The correction necessary is introduced lower down \n the 
MS., which makes the same characteristic be twice mentioned. The 
Abbe Cruice, however, accounts for such a twofold mention, on 
the ground that the whole subject is treated by Hippoiytuj in such a 
way .IS to expose the absurdities of the astrologic predictions. He 
therefore quotes the opinions of various astrologers, in order to ex- 
pose- ihe diversities of opinion existing among them. 

CHAP. XVIII. TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER 

CANCER. 

Those born in Cancer are of the following 
description : size not large, hair like a dog, of a 
reddish colour, small mouth, round head, pointed 
forehead, grey eyes, sufficiently beautiful, limbs 
somewhat varying. The same by nature are 
wicked, crafty, proficients in plans, insatiable, 
stingy, ungracious, illiberal, useless, forgetful ; 
they neither restore what is another's, nor do 
they ask back what is tiieir own ; 'J as regards 
friendship, useful. 

CHAP. XIX. TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER LEO. 

Those born in Leo are of the following descrip- 
tion : round head, reddish hair, huge wrinkled 
forehead, coarse ears, large development of 
neck, partly bald, red complexion, grey eyes, 
large jaws, coarse mouth, gross in the upper 
parts,'" huge breast, the >.nder limbs tapering. 
The same are by nature persons who allow noth- 
ing to interfere with their own decision, pleasing 
then^'selves, irascible, passionate, scorners, obsti- 
nate, tbrming no design, not loquacious," indo- 
lent, making an improper use of leisure, famil- 
iar,'- wholly abandoned to pleasures of women, 
adulterers, immodest, in faith untrue, importu- . 
nate, daring, penurious, spoliators, remarkable ; 
as regards fellowship, useful ; as regards friend- 
ship,'^ useless. 

CHAP. XX. 

■TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER VIRGO. 

following 

Those born in Virgo are of the 
description : fair appearance, eyes not large, 
fascinating, dark, compact '•♦ eyebrows, cheerful, 
swimmers; they are, however, slight in frame, '5 
beautiful in aspect, with hair prettily adjusted, 
large forehead, prominent nose. The same by 
nature are docile, moderate, intelligent, sportive, 
rational, slow to speak, forming many plans ; in 
regard of a favour, importunate ; ''' gladly observ- 
ing everything ; and well-disposed pupils, they 
master whatever they learn ; moderate, scorners. 
victims of unnatural lusts, companionable, of a 
noble soul, despisers, careless in practical mat- 
ters, attending to instruction, more honourable 
in what concerns others than what relates to 
themselves ; as regards friendship, useful. 

CHAP. XXI. TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER LIBRA. 

Those born in Libra will be of the following 
description : hair thin, drooping, reddish and 

9 Manilius maintains that persons born tmder Cancer are of an 
avaricious and usurious disposition. (.See Astrfliioin., iv. 5.) 

■° Or, " havipg the upper parts larger than the lowei." 

'^ Some read ai'aAot, 

'- Schneidewin conjectures d<7ui'i/^et?, i.e., inexperienced. 

'3 Or, " succour." 

'■i Or. " straight, compact." 

'5 Miller gives an additional sentence: " They are of equal meas- 
urement at the ("same) age, and possess a body perfect and erect." 

"' Or, " careful observers." 

34 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book IV. 

longish, forehead pointed (and) wrinkled, fair 
compact eyebrows, beautiful eyes, dark pupils, 
long thin ears, head inclined, wide mouth. The 
same by nature are intelligent. God-fearing, 
communicative to one another,' traders, toilers, 
not retaining gain, liars, not of an amiable dis- 
position, in business or principle true, free- 
spoken, beneficent, illiterate, deceivers, friendly, 
careless, (to whom it is not profitable to do any 
act of injustice) ; ^ they are scorners, scoffers, 
satirical, 3 illustrious, listeners, and nothing suc- 
ceeds with these ; as regards friendship, useful. 

CHAP. XXII. — TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER 
SCORPIO. 

Those bom in Scorpio are of the following 
description : a maidenish countenance, comely, 
pungent, blackish hair, well-shaped eyes, fore- 
head not broad, and sharp nostril, small con- 
tracted ears, wrinkled foreheads, narrow eye- 
brows, drawn cheeks. The same by nature are 
crafty, sedulous, liars, communicating their par- 
ticular designs to no one, of a deceitful spirit, 
wicked, scorners, victims to adultery, well-grown, 
docile ; as regards friendship, useless. 

CHAP. XXIII. — TYPE OF THOSE BORN LTNDER 
SAGITTARIUS. 

Those born in Sagittarius will be of the follow- 
ing description : great length, square forehead, 
profuse eyebrows, indicative of strength, well- 
arranged projection of hair, reddish (in com- 
plexion). The same by nature are gracious, as 
educated persons, simple, beneficent ; given to 
unnatural lusts, companionable, toil-worn, lovers, 
beloved, jovial in their cups, clean, passionate, 
careless, wicked ; as regards friendship, useless ; 
scorners, with noble souls, insolent, crafty; for 
fellowship, useful. 

CHAP. XXIV, — TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER 
CAPRICORN. 

Those born in Capricorn will be of the fol- 
lowing description : reddish body, projection of 
greyish hair, round mouth,* eyes as of an eagle, 
contracted brows, open forehead, somewhat bald, 
in the upper parts of the body endued with 
more strength. The same by nature are phil- 
osophic, scorners, and scoffers at the existing 
state of things, passionate, persons that can 
make concessions, honourable, beneficent, lovers 
of the practice of music, passionate in their cups, 
mirthful, familiar, talkative, given to unnatural 
lusts, genial, amiable, quarrelsome lovers, for 
fellowship well disposed. 

' Or, *' speakinK falsehoods, they will be believed." 
* The parenthetical words are obviously an interpolation. 
^ Or, " spies." 
■* Or, " body." 

CHAP. XXV. — TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER 
AQUARIUS. 

Those born in Aquarius will be of the follow- 
ing description : square in size, of a diminutive 
body ; sharp, small, fierce eyes ; imperious, un- 
genial, severe, readily making acquisitions, for 
friendship and fellowship well disposed ; more- 
over, for maritime s enterprises they make 
voyages, and perish. The same by nature are 
taciturn, modest, sociable, adulterers, penurious, 
practised in business,^ tumultuous, pure, well- 
disposed, honourable, large eyebrows ; frequent- 
ly they are born in the midst of trifling events, 
but (in after life) follow a different pursuit; 
though they may have shown kindness to any 
one, still no one returns them thanks. 

CHAP. XXVI, — TYPE OF THOSE BORN UNDER 

PISCES. 

Those bom in Pisces will be of the following 
description : of moderate dimensions, pointed 
forehead like fishes, shaggy hair, frequently they 
become soon grey. The same by nature are of 
exalted soul, simple, passionate, penurious, talk- 
ative ; in the first period of life they will be 
drowsy ; they are desirous of managing business 
by themselves, of high repute, venturesome, em- 
ulous, accusers, changing their locality, lovers, 
dancers ; for friendship, useful. 

CHAP. XXVn. — FUTILITY OF THIS THEORY OF 
STELLAR INFLUENCE. 

Since, therefore, we have explained the aston- 
ishing wisdom of these men, and have not con- 
cealed their overwrought art of divination by 
means of contemplation, neither shall I be silent 
as regards (undertakings) in the case of which 
those that are deceived act foolishly. For, com- 
paring the forms and dispositions of men with 
names of stars, how impotent their system is ! 
For we know that those originally conversant 
with such investigations have called the stars 
by names given in reference to propriety of sig- 
nification and facility for future recognition. 
For what similarity is there of these (heavenly 
bodies) with the likeness of animals, or what 
community of nature as regards conduct and 
energy (is there in the two cases), that one 
should allege that a person born in Leo should 
be irascible, and one bom in Virgo moderate, 
or one bom in Cancer wicked, but that those 
born in . . . 

5 Literally " moist," or " difficult ; " or, the Abbe Cruice si^ggcsts, 
fortuitous." 
t* Or, " pragmatic, mild, not violent." 

Chap. XXVIII.] THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

35 

CHAP. XXVIII.' — SYSTEM OF THE MAGICIANS ] 
INCANTATIONS OF DEMONS J SECRET MAGICAL 
RITES. 

. . . And (the sorcerer), taking (a paper), 
<iirects the inquirer ^ to write down with water 
whatever questions he may desire to have asked 
from the demons. Then, folding up the paper, 
and dehvering it to the attendant, he sends him 
away to commit it to the flames, that the as- 
cending smoke may waft the letters to demons. 
While, however, the attendant is executing this 
order, (the sorcerer) first removes equal por- 
tions of the paper, and on some more parts of it 
he pretends that demons write in Hebrew char- 
acters. Then burning an incense of the Egyp- 
tian magicians, termed Cyphi, he takes these 
(portions of paper)away, and places them near 
the incense. But (that paper) which the in- 
quirer happens to have wTitten (upon), having 
placed on the coals, he has burned. Then (the 
sorcerer), appearing to be borne away under 
divine influence, (and) hurrying into a comer 
(of the house), utters a loud and harsh cry, 
and unintelligible to all, . . . and orders all 
those present to enter, crying out (at the same 
time), and invoking Phryn, or some other de- 
mon. But after passing into the house, and 
when those that were present stood side by side, 
the sorcerer, flinging the attendant upon a bed,3 
utters to him several words, partly in the Greek, 
and partly, as it were, the Hebrew language, 
(embodying) the customary incantations em- 
ployed by the magicians. (The attendant), 
however, goes away* to make the inquiry. And 
within (the house), into a vessel full of water 
(the sorcerer) infusing copperas mixture, and 
melting the drug, having with it sprinkled the 
paper that forsooth had (the characters upon 
it) obliterated, he forces the latent and con- 
cealed letters to come once more into light ; and 
by these he ascertains what the inquirer has 
written down. And if one ^vrite with copperas 
mixture likewise, and having ground a gall nut, 
use its vapour as a fumigator, the concealed 
letters would become plain. And if one write 
with milk, (and) then scorch the paper, and 
scraping it, sprinkle and -rub (what is thus 
scraped oft") upon the letters traced with the 
milk, these will become plain. And urine like- 
wise, and sauce of brine, and juice of euphorbia, 
and of a fig, produce a similar result. But when 

(the sorcerer) has ascertained the question in 
this mode, he makes provision for the manner 
in which he ought to give the reply. And next 
he orders those that are present to enter, hold- 
ing laurel branches and shaking them, and utter- 
ing cries, and invoking the demon Phryn. For 
also it becomes these to invoke him ; s and it is 
worthy that they make this request from demons, 
which they do not wish of themselves to put 
forAvard, having lost their minds. The confused 
noise, however, and the tumult, prevent thern 
directing attention to those things which it 
is supposed (the sorcerer) does in secret. But , 
what these are, the present is a fair opportunity 
for us to declare. 

Considerable darkness, then, prevails. For 
the (sorcerer) affirms that it is impossible for 
mortal nature to behold divine things, for that to 
hold converse (with these mysteries) is sufficient. 
Making, however, the attendant lie down (upon 
the couch), head foremost, and placing by each 
side two of those little tablets, upon which had 
been inscribed in, forsooth, Hebrew characters, 
as it were names of demons, he says that (a 
demon) will deposit the rest in their ears. But 
this (statement) is requisite, in order that some 
instrument may be placed beside the ears of the 
attendant, by which it is possible that he signify 
everything which he chooses. First, however, he 
produces a sound that the (attendant) youth 
may be terrified ; and secondly, he makes a hum- 
ming noise; then, thirdly, he speaks^ through 
the instrument what he wishes the youth to say, 
and remains in expectation of the issue of the 
afi'air ; next, he makes those present remain still, 
and directs the (attendant) to signify what he 
has heard from the demons. But the instrument 
that is placed beside his ears is a natural instru- 
ment, viz., the windpipe of long-necked cranes, 
or storks, or swans. And if none of these is at 
hand, there are also some different artificial in- 
struments (employed) ; for certain pipes of 
brass, ten in number, (and) fitting into one 

» Hippolytus, having exposed the system of sidereal influence 
over men; proceeds to detail the magical rites and operations of the 
sorcerers. This arrangement i-, in conformity with the technical 
divisions of astrology into (.) judiciary, (2) natural. The former 
related to the prediction of future events, and the latter of the phe- 
nomena of nature, being thus akin to the art of magic. _ 

2 The text here and at the end of the last chapter is somewhat im- 
perfect. ,, ,> 

3 Or " cushion " (Cruice), or "couch, or a recess. 

* Or " goes up," or " commences," or " enters in before the others, 
bearing the oblation" (Cruice)._ 

another, terminating in a narrow point, are 
adapted (for the purpose), and through these is 
spoken into the ear whatsoever the (magician) ; 
wishes. And the youth hearing these (words) 
with terror as uttered by demons, when ordered, 
speaks them out. If any one, however, putting 
around a stick a moist hide, and having dried it 
and drawn it together, close it up, and by re- 
moving the rod fashion the hide into the form of 
a pipe, he attains a similar end. Should any of 
these, however, be not at hand, he takes a book, 
and, opening it inside, stretches it out as far as 

6 The Abbe Cruice considers that this passage, as attributmg all 
this jugglen- to the artifice of sorcerers, militates agamst the author- 
ship of Origen, who ascribes (Uepc Apxu.i'. hb- 111. p. I44. ed. Bene- 
dict } the same results not to the frauds of magicians, but to demons. ; 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIPZS. 

[Book IV. 

he think requisite, (and thus) achieves the same \ 
result. 

But if he knows beforehand that one is present j 
who is about to ask a question, he is the more 
ready for all (contingencies). If, however, he 
may also previously ascertain the question, he 
writes (it) with the drug, and. as being prepared, 
he is considered' more skilful, on account of; 
having clearly written out what is (about) being 
asked. If, however, he is ignorant of the question, | 
he forms conjectures, and puts forth something 
capable of a doubtful and varied interpretation, 
in order that the oracular response, being origi- 
nally unintelligible, may serve for numerous pur- 
poses, and in the issue of events the prediction 
may be considered correspondent with what 
actually occurs. Next, having filled a vessel with 
water, he puts down (into it) the paper, as if 
uninscribed, at the same time infusing along with 
it copperas mixture. For in this way the paper 
written upon floats^ upwards (to the surface), 
bearing the response. Accordingly there ensue 
frequently to the attendant formidable fancies, 
for also he strikes blows plentifully on the terri- 
fied (bystanders). For, casting incense into the 
fire, he again operates after the following method. 
Covering a lump of what are called " fossil salts " 
with Kltruscan wax, and dividing the piece itself 
of incense into two parts, he throws in a grain 
of salt ; and again joining (the piece) together, 
and placing it on the burning coals, he leaves it 
there. And when this is consumed, the salts, 
bounding upwards, create the impression of, as 
it were, a strange vision taking place. And the 
dark-blue dye which has been deposited in the 
incense produces a blood-red flame, as we have 
already declared. But (the sorcerer) makes a 
scarlet liquid, by mixing wax with alkanet, and, 
as I said, depositing the wax in the incense. 
And he makes the coals ■•■ be moved, placing 
underneath powdered alum ; and when this is 
dissolved and swells up like bubbles, the coals 
are moved. 

CHAP. XXIX. — DISPLAY OF DIFFERENT EGGS. 

But different eggs they display after this man- 
ner. Perforating the top at both ends, and ex- 
tracting the white, (and) having again dipped 
it, throw in some minium and some writing ink. 
Close, however, the openings with refined scrajj- 
ings of the eggs, smearing them with fig-juice. 

CHAP. XXX. SELF-SLAUGHTER OF SHEEP. 

By those who cause sheep to cut off their own 
heads, the following plan is adopted. Secretly 
smearing the throat (of the animal) with a cau- 

' Or, " denominated." 
- Or, " rises up " 

3 On the margin of the MS. we find tlip words, " concerning 
coals." " concerning magical signs," " concerning sheep." 

terizing drug, he places a sword near, and leaves 
it there.-* The sheep, desirous of scratching 
himself, rushes against the blade, and in the act 
of rubbing is slaughtered, while the head is 
almost severed from the trunk. There is, how- 
ever, a compound of the drug, bryony and salt 
and squills, made up in equal parts. In order 
that the person bringing the drug may escape 
notice, he carries a box with two compartments 
constructed of horn, the visible one of which 
contains frankincense, but the secret one (the 
aforesaid) drug. He, however, likewise insin- 
uates into the ears of the sheep about to meet 
death quicksilver ; but this is a poisonous drug. 

CHAP. XXXI. 

METHOD OF POISONING GOATS. 

And if one smear 5 the ears of goats over with 
cerate, they say that they expire a little after- 
wards, by having their breathing obstructed. 
For this to them is the way — as these affirm — 
of their drawing their breath in an act of respi- 
ration. And a ram, they assert, dies,-' if one 
bends back (its neck) ^ opposite the sun. And 
they accomplish the burning of a house, by 
daubing it over with the juice of a certain fish 
called dactylus. And this effect, which it has by 
reason of the sea-water, is very useful. Like- 
wise foam of the ocean is boiled in an earthen 
jar along with some sweet ingredients ; and if 
you apply a lighted candle to this while in a 
seething state, it catches the fire and is consumed ; 
and (yet though the mixture) be poured upon 
the head, it does not burn it at all. If, however, 
you also smear it over with heated resin,^ it is 
consumed far more effectually. But he accom- 
plishes his object better still, if also he takes 
some sulphur. 

CHAP. XXXII. — IMITATIONS OF THUNDER, .AND 
OTHER ILLUSIONS. 

Thunder 'is produced in many ways; for 
stones very numerous and unusually large, being 
rolled downwards along wooden planks, fall upon 
]-)lates of brass, and cause a sound similar to 
thunder. And also around the thin plank with 
which carders thicken cloth, they coil a thin 
rope ; and then drawing away the cord with a 
whirr, they spin the plank round, and in its revo- 
lution it emits a sound like thunder. These 
farces, verily, are played off thus. 

There are, however, other i)ractices which I 
shall explain, which those who execute these 

■* Or, nnpaSoSe'is, " he delivers it a sword, and departs." 

^ Or, " close tip." 

<> The words " death of a goat" occur on the rnargin of the MS. 

^ A similar statemcnl is made, on the aiithoriiy of Alcmaon, by- 
Aristotle in his Histor. A>ii»tnl., i. 2. 

s Mai'i-i) is the word in the text. P.ut manna in the ordinary 
acceptation of the term can scarcely be intended. Pliny, however, 
mentions it as a proper name of grains of incense and resin. The 
Abbe Criiice suggests the very probable emendation of y-o-KDif), which 
signifies a mixture of wax and resin for caulking ships. 

Chap. XXXIV.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

1 'f 

ludicrous performances estimate as great ex- 
ploits. Placing a cauldron full of pitch upon 
burning coals, when it boils up, (though) laying 
their hands down upon it, they are not burned ; 
nay, even while walking on coals of fire with 
naked feet, they are not scorched. But also set- 
ting a pyramid of stone on a hearth, (the sor- 
cerer) makes it get on fire, and from the mouth 
it disgorges a volume of smoke, and that of a 
fiery description. Then also putting a linen 
cloth upon a pot of water, throwing on (at the 
same time) a quantity of blazing coals, (the 
magician) keeps the linen cloth unconsumed. 
Creating also darkness in the house, (the sor- 
cerer) alleges that he can introduce gods or 
demons ; and if any requires him to show yEscu- 
lapius, he uses an invocation couched in the fol- 
lowing words : — 

*'The child once slain, again of Phoebus deathless made, 
I call to come, and aid my sacrificial rues; 
Who, also, once the countless tribes of fleeting dead, 
In ever-mournful homes of Tartarus wide, 
The fatal billow breasting, and the inky ' flood 
Surmounting, where all of mortal mould must float. 
Torn, beside the lake, with endless ^ grief and woe. 
Thyself didst snatch from gloomy Proserpine. 
Or whether the seat of Holy Thrace thou haunt, or 

lovely 
Pergamos, or besides Ionian Epidaurus, 
The chief of seers, O happy God, invites thee here." 

CHAP. XXXIII. THE BURNING ^SCULAPIUS ; TRICKS 

WITH FIRE. 

But after he discontinues uttering these jests, 
a fiery yEsculapius^ appears upon the floor. 
Then, placing in the midst a pot full of water, 
he invokes all the deities, and they are present. 
For any one who is by, glancing into the pot, 
will behold them all,, and Diana leading on her 
baying hounds. We shall not, however, shrink 
from narrating the account (of the devices) of 
these men, how they attempt (to accomplish 
their jugglery). For (the magician) lays his 
hand upon the cauldron of pitch,'^ which is in, 
as it were, a boiling state; and throwing in (at 
the same time) vinegar and nitre and moist 
pitch, he kindles a fire beneath the cauldron. 
The vinegar, however, being mixed along with 
the nitre, on receiving a small accession of heat, 
moves the pitch, so as to cause bubbles to rise 
to the surface, and afford the mere semblance 
of a seething (pot). The (sorcerer), however, 
previously washes his hands frequently in brine ; 
the consequence being, that the contents of the 
cauldron do not in any wise, though in reality 

1 StauAoi/ in the text has been altered into KiKavov. The trans- 
lator has followed the latter. 

2 Or " indissoluble," or " inseparable." 

3 Marsilius Ficinus (in his Coiinnetttary on Plottints,\>. 504 et 
seq., vol. ii. Creuzer's edition), who here discusses the subject of 
demons and magical art, mentions, on the authority of Porphyry, 
that sorcerers had the power of evoking demons, and that a magician, 
in the presence of many, had shown to Plotinus his guardian demon 
(angel). This constitutes the Goetic department of magic. 

•• Or, "full of pitch." 

boiling, burn him very much. But if, having 
smeared his hands with a tincture of myrtles and 
nitre and myrrh, along with vinegar, he wash 
them • in brine frequently, he is not scorched ; 
and he does not burn his feet, provided he 
smear them with isinglass and a salamander. 

As regards, however, the burning like a taper 
of the pyramid, though composed of stone, the 
cause of this is the following. Chalky earth ir 
fashioned into the shape of a pyramid, but iti 
colour is that of a milk-white stone, and it \\ 
prepared after this fashion. Having anointeo 
the piece of clay with plenty of oil, and put it 
upon coals, and baked it, by smearing it afresh, 
and scorching it a second and third time, and 
frequently, (the sorcerer) contrives that it can 
be burned, even though he should plunge it in 
water ; for it contains in itself abundance of oil. 
The hearth, however, is spontaneously kindled, 
while the magician pours out'^ a libation, by 
having Hme instead of ashes burning underneath, 
and refined frankincense and a large quantity 
of to%v^ and a bundle '^ of anointed tapers and 
of gall nuts, hollow within, and supplied with 
(concealed) fire. And after some delay, (the 
sorcerer) makes (the pyramid) emit smoke from 
the mouth, by both putting fire in the gall nut, 
and encircling it with tow, and blowing into the 
mouth. The linen cloth, however, that has been 
placed round the cauldron, (and) on which he 
deposits the coals, on account of the underlying 
brine, would not be burned ; besides, that it has 
itself been washed in brine, and then smeared 
with the white of an Q%g, along with moist alum. 
And if, likewise, one mix in these the juice of 
house-leek along with vinegar, and for a long 
time previously smear it (with this preparation), 
after being washed in this drug, it continues 
altogether fire-proof. 

CHAP. XXXIV. THE ILLUSION OF THE SEALED 

LETTERS ; OBJECT IN DETAILING THESE JUG- 
GLERIES. 

After, then,*^ we have succinctly explained the 
powers of the secret arts practised among these 
(magicians), and have shown their easy j^lan for 
the acquisition of knowledge,'" neither are we 
disposed to be silent on the following point, 

S Mupo-iVr). This word is evidently not the right one, for we 
have (<T;avpi'r)) myrrh mentioned. Perhaps the word uaA#r,, sug- 
gested in a previous passage, is the one employed here likewise. 

^ Or, " makes speedy preparation; " or, " resorts to the contriv- 
ance of." 

7 The words in italics are added by the Abbe Cruice. There is 
obviously some hiatus in the original. 

8 Or, " the refuse of." 

9 In the margin of the MS. occur the words, "concerning the 
breaking of the seals." 

'° Or, " exposed their method of proceeding in accordance with 
the system of Gnosticism." .Schneidewin. following C. Fr. Hermann, 
is of opinion that what follows is taken from Celsus' work on magic, 
to which Origen alludes in the Contra Celsiiin, lib. 1. p. 53 (Spen- 
cer's edition). Lucian (the well-known satirist), in his Alexamier, 
or Pseudomajttis, gives an account of the jugglery of these magicians. 
See note, chap. xlii. of this book. 

3S 

THE REFUTATION OP ALL HERESIES. 

[Book IV.. 

which is a necessary one, — how that, loosing the 
seals, they restore the sealed letters, with the 
actual seals themselves. Melting pitch, resin, 
and sulphur, and moreover asphalt, in equal 
parts, (and) forming the ointment into a figure, 
they keep it by them. When, however, it is time 
to loose a small tablet, smearing with oil their 
:.ongue, next with the latter anointing the seal, 
(and) heating the drug with a moderate fire, 
(the sorcerers) place it upon the seal ; and they 
leave it there until it has acquired complete con- 
sistence, and they use it in this condition as a 
seal. But they say, likewise, that wax itself with 
fir-wood gum possesses a similar potency, as well 
as two parts of mastich with one part of dry 
asphalt. But sulphur also by itself effects the 
purpose tolerably well, and flower of gypsum 
strained with water, and of gum. Now this (last 
mixture) certainly answers most admirably also 
for sealing molten lead. And that which is ac- 
complished by the Tuscan wax, and refuse ' of 
resin, and pitch, and asphalt, and mastich, and 
powdered spar, all being boiled together in equal 
parts, is superior to the rest of the drugs which 
I have mentioned, while that which is effected 
by the gum is not inferior. In this manner, then, 
also, they attempt to loose the seals, endeavour- 
ing to learn the letters written within. 

These contrivances, however, I hesitated to 
narrate ^ in this book, perceiving the danger lest, 
perchance, any knavish person, taking occasion 
(from my account), should attempt (to practise 
these juggleries). Solicitude, however, for many 
young persons, who could be preserved from such 
practices, has persuaded me to teach and pub- 
lish, for security's sake, (the foregoing state- 
ments). For although one person may make 
use of these for gaining instruction in evil, in 
this way somebody else will, by being instructed 
(in these practices), be preserved from them. 
And the magicians themselves, corrupters of life, 
will be ashamed in plying their art. And learn- 
ing these points that have been previously eluci- 
: dated 3 by us, they will possibly be restrained 
from their folly. But that this seal may not be 
broken, let me seal it with hog's lard and hair 
mixed with wax."* 

CHAP. XXXV. THE DIVINATION BY A CAULDRON; 

ILLUSION OF FIERY DEMONS; SPECIMEN OF A 
MAGICAL INVOCATION. 

But neither shall I be silent respecting that 
piece of knavery of these (sorcerers), which 

' Or, "ground" — <t>opvKrri<:, (al.) <t>opvrri'; , (ai.) <t>pvKTfif, (<j/.) 

2 Or, " insert." 

3 Or " taiiRhi,"'or " adduced," or " delivered." 

■• This sentence is obviously out of place, and should properly 
Come in probably before the words, " These contrivances, however, 1 
hesii.ilcd lo narrate," etc., a few lines above in this chapter. The 
Abbe Criiice conjectures that it may have been written on the margin 
^y some reader acquainted with chemistry, and that afterwards it 
jlbund its way into the text. 

consists in the divination by means of the caul- 
dron. For, making a closed chamber, and anoint- 
ing the ceiling with cyanus for present use, 5 they 
introduce certain vessels of cyanus,^ and stretch, 
them upwards. The cauldron, however, full of 
water, is placed in the middle on the ground ; 
and the reflection of the cyanus falUng upon it, 
presents the appearance of heaven. But the 
floor also has a certain concealed aperture, on 
which the cauldron is laid, having been (pre- 
viously, supplied with a bottom of crystal, while 
itself is composed of stone.' Underneath, how- 
ever, unnoticed (by the spectators), is a com- 
partment, into which the accomplices, assembling, 
appear invested with the figures of such gods 
and demons as the magician wishes to exhibit. 
Now the dupe, beholding these, becomes aston- 
ished at the knavery of the magician, and subse- 
quently believes all things that are likely to be 
stated by him. But (the sorcerer) produces 
a burning demon, by tracing on the wall what- 
ever figure he wishes, and then covertly smearing 
it with a drug mixed according to this manner, 
viz., of Laconian* and Zacynthian asphalt, — 
— while next, as if under the influence of pro- 
phetic frenzy, he moves the lamp towards the 
wall. The drug, however, is burned with con- 
siderable splendour. And that a fiery Hecate 
seems to career through air, he contrives in the 
mode following. Concealing a certain accom- 
plice in a place which he wishes, (and) taking 
aside his dupes, he persuades them (to believe 
himself), alleging that he will exhibit a flaming 
demon riding through the air. Now he exhorts 
them immediately to keep their eyes fixed until 
they see the flame in the air, and that (then), 
veiling themselves, they should fall on their face 
until he himself should call them ; and after 
having given them these instructions, he, on a 
moonless night, in verses speaks thus : — 

" Infernal, and earthy, and supernal Bombo, come I 
Saint of streets, and brilliant one, that strays by- 
night; 
Foe of radiance, but friend and mate of gloom ; 
In howl of dogs rejoicing, and in crimson gore. 
Wading 'mid corpses through tombs of lifeless dust, 
Panting for blood ; with fear convulsing men. 
Gorgo, and Mormo, and Luna,' and of many shapes. 
Come, propitious, to our sacrificial rites I " 

CHAP. XXXVl. — MODE OF ^LVNAGING AN APPARI- 
TION. 

And while speaking these words, fire is seen 
borne through the air ; but the (spectators) being 
horrified at the strange apparition, (and) cover- 

5 Some read 4)avf p'ov for napov. 

•> What cyanus was is not exacdy known. It was employed in 
the Homeric age for the adornment of implements of war. What- 
ever the nature of the substance be, it was of a dark-blue colour. 
Some suppose it to have been blue steel, others blue copper. Theo- 
phrastus' account of it makes it a stone like a dark sapphire. 

7 Or, " with the head downwards." 

* There is some hiatus here. 

9 Or, " memory." 

Chap. XLI.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

39 

ing their eyes, fling themselves speechless to 
earth. But the success of the artifice is en- 
hanced by the following contrivance. The ac- 
complice whom I have spoken of as being 
concealed, when he hears the incantation ceas- 
ing, holding a kite or hawk enveloped with 
tow, sets fire to it and releases it. The bird, 
however, frightened by the flame, is borne aloft, 
and makes a (proportionably) quicker flight, 
which these deluded persons beholding, con- 
ceal themselves, as if they had seen something 
divine. The winged creature, however, being 
whiried round by the fire, is borne whitherso- 
ever chance may have it, and bums now the 
houses, and now the courtyards. Such is the 
divination of the sorcerers. 

CHAP, xxxvu. • 

ILLUSIVE APPEARANCE OF THE 
MOON. 

And they make moon and stars appear on the 
ceiling after this manner. In the central part of 
the ceiling, having fastened a mirror, placing a 
dish full of water equally (with the mirror) in 
the central portion of the floor, and setting in a 
central place likewise a candle, emitting a faint 
light from a higher position than the dish, — in 
this way, by reflection, (the magician) causes 
the moon to appear by the mirror. But fre- 
quently, also, they suspend on high from the 
ceiling, at a distance, a drum,' but which, being 
covered with some garment, is concealed by the 
accomplice, in order that (the heavenly body) 
may not appear before the (proper) time. And 
afterwards placing a candle (within the drum), 
when the magician gives the signal to the accom- 
plice, he removes so much of the covering as 
may be sufficient for effecting an imitation rep- 
reseAting the figure of the moon as it is at that 
particular time. He smears, however, the lumi- 
nous parts of the drum with cinnabar and gum ;* 
and having pared around the neck and bottom 
of a flagon 3 of glass ready behind, he puts a 
candle in it, and places around it some of the 
requisite contrivances for making the figures 
shine, which some one of the accomplices has 
concealed on high ; and on receiving the signal, 
he throws down from above the contrivances, so to 
make the moon appear descending from the sky. 

And the same result is achieved by means of 
a jar in sylvan localities.* For it is by means 
of a jar that the tricks in a house are performed. 
For having set up an altar, subsequently is (placed 

* Or, "suspending a drum, etc., covered with," etc.; or " fre- 
quently placing on an elevated position a drum." For noppuOfv, 
which IS not here easy of explanation, some read Topvuj9iv, others 
iropiriaOiv, i.e., fastened with buckles; others, nopput rtflti'. 

* Schneidewin, but not the Abbe Cruice, thinks there is a hiatus 
here. 

^ There are difTerent readings: (i) €Tv»toAoyi«r^s ; (2) en 6A0- 
«A^oov ; (3) uoAovpytic^;, i e., composed of glass. (See next note.) 

* The Abbe Cruice properly remarks that this has no meaning 
here. He would i«ad iioAuidcui toitois, or by means of g^as& images. 

upon it) the jar, having a lighted lamp ; when, 
however, there are a greater number of lamps, 
no such sight is displayed. After then the en- 
chanter invokes the moon, he orders all the lights 
to be extinguished, yet that one be left faintly 
burning ; and then the light, that which streams 
from the jar, is reflected on the ceiling, and fur- 
nishes to those present a representation of the 
moon ; the uiouth of the jar Leing kept covered 
for the time which it would seem to require, in 
order tiiat the representation of full moon should 
be exhibited on the ceiUng. 

CHAP. XXXVIII. — ILLUSIVE APPEARANCE OF THE 
STARS. 

But the scales of fishes — for instance, the sea- 
horse — cause the stars to appear to be ; the 
scales being steeped in a mixture of water ijjd 
gum, and fastened on the ceiling at intervals. 

CHAP. XXXIX. IMITATION OF AN EARTHQUAKE. 

The sensation of an earthquake they cause ia 
such a way, as that all things seem set in motion ; 
ordure of a weasel burned with a magnet upon 
coals (has this efrect).5 

CHAP. XL. — TRICK WITH THE LIVER. 

And they exhibit a liver seemingly bearing aa 
inscription in this manner. With the left hand 
he writes what he wishes, appending it to the 
question, and the letters are traced with gall juice 
and strong vinegar. Then taking up the liver, 
retaining it in the left hand, he makes some de- 
lay, and then it draws away the impression, and 
it is supposed to have, as it were,,writing upon it.. 

CHAP. XU. — MAKING A SKULL SPEAK. 

But putting a skull on the ground, they make 
it speak in this manner. The skull itself is made 
out of the caul of an ox ; ^ and when fashioned 
into the requisite figure, by means of Etruscan 
wax and prepared gum,' (and) when this mem- 
brane is placed around, it presents the appear- 
ance of a skull, which seems to all^ to speak- 
when the contrivance operates ; in the same 
manner as we have explained in the case of the 
(attendant) youths, when, having procured the 
windpipe of a crane,' or some such long-necked 
animal, and attaching it covertly to the skull, the 
accomplice utters what he wishes. And when 
he desires (the skull) to become invisible, he 

s There is a hiatus here. 

^ The Abbe Cruice suggests (irinKeov ^oiAou, which he thinks 
corresponds with the material of which the pyramid mentioned in a 
previous chapter was composed. He, however, makes no attempt at 
translating eTrin-Aeoi'. Does he mean that the skuU was filled with 
clay ? His emendation is forced. 

7 Or, " rubbings of" (Cruice). 

* Or, " they say." 

9 Some similar juggleries are mentiooed by Lucian in his Alex- 
ander, or Psettriomantis, xxxii. 26, — a work of a kindred nature to 
Celsijs' Treatise on Magic (the latter alluded to by Origen, Contr^ 
Celi., lib. i p. 53, ed^ Spcnc), and dedicated by Lucian to Ccbw. 

40 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book IV, 

appears as if burning incense, placing around, 
(for this purpose,) a quantity of coals; and 
when the wax catches the heat of these, it melts, 
and in this way the skull is sup[josed to become 
invisible. 

CHAP. XLIl. — THE FRAUD OF THE FOREGGIN'G 
PR.\CTICES ; THEIR CONNECl'ION WITH HERESY. 

These are the deeds of the magicians,' and 
innumerable other such (tricks) there are which 
work on the credulity of the dupes, by fair bal- 
anced words, and the appearance of plausible 
acts. And the heresiarchs, astonished at the 
art of these (sorcerers), have imitated them, 
partly by delivering their doctrines in secrecy 
and darkness, and partly by advancing (these 
tenets) as their own. For this reason, being 
desirous of warning the multitude, we have been 
the more painstaking, in order not to omit any 
expedient- practised by the magicians, for those 
who may be disposed to be deceived. We have 
been howe\'er drawn, not unreasonably, into a 
detail of some of the secret (mysteries) of the 
sorcerers, which are not very requisite, to be 
sure, in reference to the subject taken in hand ; 
yet, for the purpose of guarding against the vil- 
lanous and incoherent art of magicians, may be 
supposed useful. Since, therefore, as far as 
delineation is feasible, we have explained the 
opinions of all (speculators), exerting especial 
attention towards the elucidation of the opin- 
ions introduced as novelties by the heresiarchs ; 
(opinions) which, as far as piety is concerned, 
are futile and spurious, and which are not, even 
among themselves, perhaps ^ deemed worthy of 
serious consideration. (Having pursued this 
course of inquiry), it seems expeflient that, by 
means of a compendious discourse, we should 
recall to the (reader's) memory statements that 
have been previously made. 

CHAP. XLIII. — RECAPITULATION OF THEOLOGIES AND 
COSMOGONIES ; SYSTEM OF THE PERSIANS J OF 
THE liAHVLONIANS ; THE EGYPTIAN NOTION OF 
DEII'V ; THEIR THEOLOCiV BASED ON A THEORY 
OF NUMBERS ; THEIR SYSTEM OF COSMOGONY. 

Among all those who throughout the earth, as 
philosophers and theologians, have carried on 

' The word magic, or magician, at its origin, had no sinister mean- 
ing, as being the science professed by the Magi, who were an cxcki- 
sive religious sect of great antiquity in Persia, universally venerated 
for their mathematical skill and erudition generally. It was per- 
so.is who practised wicked arts, and assumed the name of Magi, 
that brought the term into disrepute. The origin of magic has been 
ascribed to Zoroaster, and once devised, it made rapid progress; be- 
cause, as Pliny reminds us, it includes three systems of the greatest 
influence among men — (i) the art of medicine^ (2) religion, (3) 
divination. This corresponds with Agrippa's division of magic into 
(i) natural, (2) celestial, (3) ceremonial, or superstitious. This last 
has been also called " goetic " (full of imposture), and relates to the 
invocaiioii of devils. T his originated probably in Egypt, and quickly 
spread all over the world. 

■* Or, " topic discussed; " or, " not leave any place (subterfuge) 
for these," etc. 

-' Or " you will suppose." 

investigations, has prevailed diversity of opinion^ 
concerning the Deity, as to His essence or na- 
ture. For some afifirm Him to be fire, and some 
spirit, and some water, while others say that He 
is earth. And each of the elements labours un- 
der some deficiency, and one is worsted by the 
other. To the wise men of the world, this, how- 
ever, has occurred, which is obvious to persons 
possessing intelligence ; (I mean) that, behold- 
ing the stupendous works of creation, they were 
confused respecting the substance of existing 
things, supposing that these were too vast to ad- 
mit of deriving generation from another, and at 
the same time (asserting) that neither the universe 
itself is God. As far as theology was concerned, 
they declared, however, a single cause for things 
that fall under the cognizance of vision, each 
supposing the cause which he adjudged the most 
reasonable ; and so, when gazing on the objects 
made by God, and on those which are the most 
insignificant in comparison with His overpower- 
ing majesty, not, however, being able to extend 
the mind to the magnitude of God as He really 
is, they deified these (works of the external 
world). 

But the Persians,5 supposing that they had 
penetrated more within the confines of the 
truth, asserted that the Deity is luminous, a 
light contained in air. The Babylonians, how- 
ever, affirmed that the Deity is dark, which very 
opinion also appears the consequence of the 
other ; for day follows night, and night day. 
Do not the Egyptians, however,'' who suppose 
themselves more ancient than all, speak of the 
power of the Deity? (This power they esti- 
mate by) calculating these intervals of the parts 
(of the zodiac ; and, as if) by a most divine 
inspiration, 7 they asserted that the Deity is an 
indivisible monad, both itself generating itself, 
and that out of this were formed all things. For 
this, say they,^ being unbegotten, produces the 
succeeding numbers ; for instance, the monad, 
superadded into itself, generates the duad ; and 
in like manner, when superadded (into duad, 
triad, and so forth), produces the triad and 
tetrad, up to tlie decade, which is the beginning 
and end of numbers. Wherefore it is that the 
first and tenth monad is generated, on account 
of the decade being e(iuipollent, and being 
reckoned for a monad, and (because) this mul- 
tiplied ten times will become a hundred, and 

* .See Aristotle's Uletafihysics, book i. : Cicero, De Naturd De- 
oriim, book i. (both translated in Bohn's Classical Library) ; and 
Plutarch, De Placiiis I'hiloso/tltoruiii. lib. i. 

5 The mention of the Persians, Babylonians, and Egyptians shows 
the subject-matter of the lost books to have been concerning the 
speculative systems of these nations 

^ This rendering follows Miller's text. -Schneidewin thinks there 
is a hiatus, which the Abbe Cruice tills up, the latter translating the 
passage without an interrogation : " The Egyptians, who think them- 
selves more ancient than all, have formed their ideas of the power of 
the Deity by calculations and computing," etc. 

7 Or, " meditation on the divine nature," or "godlike reflection." 

* The MS. has " says he." 

Chai>. XLV.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

41 

again becomes a monad, and the hundred mul- 
tiphed ten times will produce a thousand, and 
this will be a monad. In this manner also the 
thousand multiplied ten times make up the full 
sum of a myriad ; in like manner will it be a 
monad. But by a comparison of indivisible 
quantities, the kindred numbers of the monad 
comprehend 3, 5, 7, 9.' 

There is also, however, a more natural rela- 
tion of a different number to the monad, accord- 
ing to the arrangement of the orbit of six days' 
duration,- (that is), of the duad, according to 
the position and division of even numbers. But 
tlie kindred number is 4 and 8. These, how- 
ever, taking from the monad of the numbers ^ 
an idea of virtue, progressed up to the four ele- 
ments ; (I allude), of course, to spirit, and fire, 
and water, and earth. And out of these having 
made the world, (God) framed it an ermaphro- 
dite, and allocated two elements for the upper 
hemisphere, namely spirit and fire ; and this is 
styled the hemisphere of the monad, (a hemi- 
sphere) beneficent, and ascending, and mascu- 
line. For, being composed of small particles, 
the monad soars into the most rarified and 
purest part of the atmosphere ; and the other 
two elements, earth and water, being more gross, 
he assigned to the duad ; and this is termed the 
descending hemisphere, both feminine and mis- 
chievous. And hkewise, again, the upper ele- 
ments themselves, when compared one with 
another, comprise in one another both male and 
female for fruitfulness and increase of the whole 
creation. And the fire is masculine, and the 
spirit feminine. And again the water is mascu- 
line, and the earth feminine. And so from the 
beginning fire consorted with spirit, and water 
with earth. For as the power of spirit is fire, 
so also that of earth is water ;•*... and the 
elements themselves, when computed and re- 
solved by subtraction of enneads, terminate 
properly, some of them in the masculine num- 
ber, and others of them in the feminine. And, 
again, the ennead is subtracted for this cause, 
because the three hundred and sixty parts of the 
entire (circle) consist of enneads, and for this 
reason the four regions of the world are circum- 
scribed by ninety perfect parts. And light has 
been appropriated to the monad, and darkness 

' The Abbe Cruice suggests the elimination of 9, on account of 
its being a divisible number. 

2 Miller considers some reference here to the six days' creation 
(Hexaemeron) , on account of the word (pvaiKiarepa, i.e., more natural. 
The Abbe Cruice considers that there is an allusion to an astronomic 
instrument used for exhibiting harmonic combinations ; see Ptolem., 
Hiiriiion., i. 2. Bunsen reads toi) k^aKVKKov i/AiKoO. 

3 The text is obviously corrupt. As given by Schneidewin, it 
might be rendered thus: " These deriving from the monad a numeri- 
cal symbol, a virtue, have progressed up to the elements." He makes 
no attempt at a Latin version. The .Abbe Cruice would suggest the 
-.troduction of the word Trpotrre^eiirai', on account of the statement 
already made, that " the monad, superadded into itself, produces a 
duad." 

^ There is a hiatus here. Hippolytus has said nothing concern- 
ing enneads. 

to the duad, and life to light, according to 
nature, and death to the duad. And to life (has 
been appropriated) justice ; and to death, in- 
justice. Wherefore everything generated among 
masculine numbers is beneficent, while that (pro- 
duced) among feminine (numbers) is mischiev- 
ous. For instance, they pursue their calculations 
thus : monad — that we may commence from 
this — becomes 361, which (numbers) terminate 
in a monad by the subtraction of the ennead. 
In like manner, reckon thus : Duad becomes 
605 ; take away the enneads, it ends in a duad, 
and each reverts into its own peculiar (func- 
tion) . 

CHAP. XLIV. EGYPTIAN THEORY OF NATURE J 

THEIR AMULETS. 

For the monad, therefore, as being beneficent, 
they assert that there are consequently s names 
ascending, and beneficent, and masculine, and 
carefully observed, terminating in an uneven 
number ; ^ whereas that those terminating in the 
even number have been supposed to be both 
descending, and feminine and malicious. For 
they affirm that nature is made up of contraries, 
namely bad and good, as right and left, light and 
darkness, night and day, life and death. And 
moreover they make this assertion, that they 
have calculated the word " Deity," (and found 
that it reverts into a pentad with an ennead sub- 
tracted). Now this name is an even number, 
and when it is written down (on some material) 
they attach it to the body, and accomplish cures ^ 
by it. In this manner, likewise, a certain herb, 
terminating in this number, being similarly 
fastened around (the frame), operates by rea- 
son of a similar calculation of the number. 
Nay, even a doctor cures sickly people by a 
similar calculation. If, however, the calculation 
is contrary, it does not heal with facility.*^ Per- 
sons attending to these numbers reckon as many 
as are homogeneous according to this principle ; 
some, however, according to vowels alone ; 
whereas others according to the entire number. 
Such also is the wisdom of the Egyptians, by 
which, as they boast, they suppose that they 
cognise the divine nature. 

CHAP. XLV. — USE OF THE FOREGOING DISCUSSIONS. 

It appears, then, that these speculations also 
have been sufficiently explained by us. But 
since I think that I have omitted no opinion 
found in this earthly and grovelling Wisdom, I 

S Or, " names have been allocated," or " distributed." 

* Miller thinks it should be "even number" (n-tpiTTor). The 
Abbe Cruice would retain "uneven" {'nripii^vyov), on the ground 
that the duad being a wept-^v^ apidfjLtx;, the monad will be -iTrepi^Vyo?. 

' Servius on the Eclogiit-s of I'irgil (viii. 75) and Pliny (Hist. 
Nat , xxxviii 2) make similar statements. 

8 This is Miller and Schneidewin's emendation for " uneven" in 
the MS. 

42 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book IV, 

perceive that the solicitude expended by us on 
these subjects has not been useless. For we 
observe that our discourse has been serviceable 
not only for a refutation of heresies, but also in 
reference to those who entertain these opinions. 
Now these, when they encounter the extreme 
care evinced by us, will even be struck, with ad- 
miration of our earnestness, and will not despise 
our industry and contlemn Christians as fools 
when they discern the opinions to which they 
themselves have stupidly accorded their belief. 
And furthermore, those who, desirous of learn- 
ing, addict themselves to the truth, will be as- 
sisted by our discourse to become, when they 
have learned the fundamental principles of the 
heresies, more intelligent not only for the easy 
refutation of those who have attempted to de- 
ceive them, but that also, when they have ascer- 
tained the avowed opinions of the wise men, and 
have been made acquainted with them, that they 
shall neither be confused by them as ignorant 
persons would, nor become the dupes of certain 
individuals acting as if from some authority ; nay, 
more than this, they shall be on their guard 
against those that are allowing themselves to 
become victims to these delusions. 

CHAP. XLVI. THE ASTROTHEOSOPHISTS ; ARATUS 

IMITATED nv THE HERESIARCHS ; HIS SYSTEM 
OF THE DISPOSITION OF THE STARS. 

Having sufficiently explained these opinions, 
let us next pass on to a consideration of the 
subject taken in hand, in order that, by proving 
•what we have determined concerning heresies, 
and by compelling their (champions) to return to 
these several (speculators) their peculiar tenets, 
we may show the heresiarchs destitute (of a 
system) ; and by proclaiming the folly of those 
who are persuaded (by these heterodox tenets), 
we shall jjrevail on them to retrace their course 
to the serene haven of the truth. In order, 
however, that the statements about to follow 
may seem more clear to the readers, it is expe- 
dient also to declare the oi)inions advanced by 
Aratus concerning the disposition of the stars of 
the heavens. (And this is necessary), inasmuch 
as some persons, assimilating these (doctrines) 
to those declared by the ScrijJtures, convert (the 
holy writings) into allegories, and endeavour to 
seduce the mind of those who give heed to their 
(tenets), drawing them on by plausible words 
into the admission of whatever opinions they 
wisii, (and) exhibiting a strange marvel, as if 
the assertions made by them were fixed among 
the stars. They, however, gazing intently on the 
very extraordinary wonder, admirers as they are 
of trifles, are Hiscinated like a bird called the 
owl, which example it is proper to mention, on 
account of the statements that are about to fol- 
low. The animal (I speak of) is, however, not 

very different from an eagle, cither in size or 
figure, and it is captured in the following way : 
— The hunter of these birds, when he sees a 
flock of them lighting anj^vhere, shaking his 
hands, at a distance pretends to dance, and so 
by little and little draws near the birds. But 
they, struck with amazement at the strange sight, 
are rendered unobservant of everything passing 
around them. But others of the i)arty, who have 
come into the country ecjuipped for such a pur- 
pose, coming from behind upon the birds, easily 
lay hold on them as they are gazing on the 
dancer. 

Wherefore I desire that no one, astonished 
by similar wonders of those who interpret the 
(aspect of) heaven, should, like the owl, be takea 
captive. For the knavery practised by such spec- 
ulators may be considered dancing and silliness, 
but not truth. Aratus,' therefore, expresses him- 
self thus : — 

"Just as many are they; hither and thither they roll 
Day by day o'er heav'n, endless, ever, (that is, every 

star), 
Yet this declines not even little; but thus exactly 
K'er remains with axis fixed and poised in every part 
Holds earth midway, and heaven itself around con- 
ducts." 

CHAP. XLVII. OPINIONS OF THE HERETICS BOR- 
ROWED FROM ARATUS. 

Aratus says that there are in the sky revolving, 
that is, gyrating stars, because from east to west, 
and west to east, they journey perpetually, (and) 
in an orbicular figure. And he says that there 
revolves towards^ "The Bears" themselves, like 
some stream of a river, an enormous and pro- 
digious monster, (the) Serpent ; and that this is 
what the devil says in the book of Job to the 
Deity, when (Satan) uses these words : " I have 
traversed earth under heaven, and have gone 
around (it),"^ that is, that I have been turned 
around, and thereby have been able to survey 
the worlds. For they suppose that towards the 
North Pole is situated the Dragon, the Serpent, 
from the highest pole looking upon all (the ob- 
jects), and gazing on all the works of creation, 
in order that nothing of the things that are being 
made may escape his notice. For though all 
the stars in the firmament set, the pole of this 
(luminary) alone never sets, but, careering high 
above the horizon, surveys and beholds all things, 
and none of the works of creation, he says, can 

escape his notice. 

" Where chiefly 
Settings mingle and risings one with other."* 

(Here Aratus) says that the head of this (con- 
stellation) is placed. For towards the west and 

' Arat., Phirnom., v. 19 et scq. 
- Ibid , V. 45, 46. 

3 This refers to Job i. 7, but is at once recognised as not a correct 
quotation. 

•♦ Arat., Fhanom,, v. 6i. 

Chap.xlviii] the refutation OF ALL HERESIES. 

cast of the two hemispheres is situated the head 
of the Dragon, in order, he says, that nothing 
may escape his notice throughout the same 
<]uarter, either of objects in the west or those in 
the east, but that the Beast may know all things 
at the same time. And near the head itself of 
the Dragon is the appearance of a man, con- 
spicuous by means of the stars, which Aratus 
styles a wearied image, and like one oppressed 
with labour, and he is denominated "Engonasis." 
Aratus ' then affirms that he does not know what 
this toil is, and what this prodigy is that revolves 
in heaven. The heretics, however, wishing by 
means of this account of the stars to establish 
their own doctrines, (and) with more than ordi- 
nary earnestness devoting their attention to these 
(astronomic systems), assert that Engonasis is 
Adam, according to the commandment of God 
as Moses declared, guarding the head of the 
Dragon, and the Dragon (guarding) his heel. 
For so Aratus expresses himself: — 

*' The right-foot's track of the Dragon fierce possess- 
ing."- 

CHAP. XLVIII. INVENTION OF THE LYRE ; ALLE- 
GORIZING THE APPEARANCE AND POSITION OF 
THE stars; origin of THE PHCENICIANS J THE 
LOGOS IDENTIFIED liV AR.\TUS WITH THE CON- 
STELLATION CANIS ; INFLUENCE OF CANIS ON 
FERTILITY AND LIFE GENERALLY. 

And (Aratus) says that (the constellations) 
Lyra and Corona have been placegl on both sides 
near him, — now I mean Engonasis, — but that 
he bends the knee, and stretches forth both hands, 
as if making a confession of sin. And that the 
lyre is a musical instrument fashioned by Logos 
while still altogether an infant, and that Logos 
is the same as he who is denominated Mercury 
among the Greeks. And Aratus, with regard to 
the construction of the lyre, observes : — 

"Then, further, also near the cradle,^ 
Hermes pierced it through, and said, Call it Lyre."* 

It consists of seven strings, signifying by these 
seven strings the entire harmony and construc- 
tion of the world as it is melodiously constituted. 
For in six days the world was made, and (the 
Creator) rested on the seventh. If, then, says 
(Aratus), Adam, acknowledging (his guilt) and 
guarding the head of the Beast, according to the 

■ Arnt., Phcfnom., v. 63 et seq. 

^ Arat., P/icDinm., v. 70. 

3 " Pierced it through," i.e., bored the holes for the strings, or, in 
other iord-i. constructed the instrument. The Latin version in 
Huhlc's edition of Aratus is ad funaiu (cutiahu/niii) compet^it, i e., 
he fnsiened the strings into the shell of the tortoise near his bed. The 
tortoise is mentioned by Aratus in the first part of the line, which fact 
removes the obscurity of the passage as quoted by Hippolytus. The 
general tradition corresponds with this, in representing Mercury on 
the shores of the Nile forming a lyre out of a dried tortoise. The word 
translated bed might be also rendered fan, which was used as a cradle, 
its size and consiructicm being suitable. [See note, p. 46, i>i/ra.\ 

* Aral., Phtenoin., v. 268. 

commandment of the Deity, will imitate Lyra, 
that is, obey the Logos of God, that is, submit 
to the law, he will receive Corona that is situated 
near him. If, however, he neglect his duty, he 
shall be hurled downwards in company with the 
Beast that lies underneath, and shall have, he 
says, his portion with the Beast. And Engonasis 
seems on both sides to extend his hands, and on 
one to touch Lyra, and on the other Corona — 
arid this is his confession ; — so that it is possible 
to distinguish him by means of this (sidereal) 
configuration itself. But Corona nevertheless is 
plotted against, and forcibly drawn away by 
another beast, a smaller Dragon, which is the 
offspring of him who is guarded by the foot 5 of 
Engonasis. A man also stands firmly grasping 
with both hands, and dragging towards the space 
behind the Serpent from Corona ; and he docs 
not permit the Beast to touch Corona, though 
making a violent effort to do so. And Aratus 
styles him Anguitenens, because he restrains the 
impetuosity of the Serpent in his attempt to 
reach Corona. But Logos, he says, is he who, 
in the figure of a man, hinders the Beast from 
reaching Corona, commiserating him who is 
being plotted against by the Dragon and his 
offspring simultaneously. 

These (constellations), "The Bears," how- 
ever, he says, are two hebdomads, composed of 
seven stars, images of two creations. For the 
first creation, he affirms, is that according to 
Adam in labours, this is he who is seen " on his 
knees" (Engonasis). The second creation, 
however, is that according to Christ, by which 
we are regenerated ; and this is Anguitenens, 
who struggles against the Beast, and hinders 
him from reaching Corona, which is reserved for 
the man. But " The Great Bear " is, he says, 
Helice,'' symbol of a mighty world towards which 
the Greeks steer their course, that is, for which 
they are being disciplined. And, wafted by the 
waves of life, they follow onwards, (having in 
prospect) some such revolving world or disci- 
pline or wisdom which conducts those back that 
follow in pursuit of such a world. For the term 
Helice seems to signify a certain circling and 
revolution towards the same points. There is 
likewise a certain other " Small Bear " (Cyno- 
suris), as it were some image of the second cre- 
ation— that formed according to God. For 
few, he says, there are that journey by the nar- 
row path.7 But they assert that Cynosuris is 
narrow, towards which Aratus^ says that the Si- 

S Or, " son of" (see Arat., Phtrtiom., v. 70). 
'' The Abbe Cruice considers that these interpretations, as well as 
what follows, are taken not from a CJreck writer, but a Jewish heretic. 
No Greek, he supposes, would write, as is stated lower down, that 
the Greeks were a Phtenician colony. The Jewish heresies were ini- 
I pregnated by these silly doctrines about tliet-lars (sec Epiplian., Adv. 
, Ha-res., lib. i. Pv PJutrisifis). 
\ '' Reference is here made to Matt, vii 14. 
I * Arat., Phienom.,'\. 44. 

44 

THE RKFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[1\)<JK IV. 

donians navigate. But Aratus has spoken partly 
of the Sidonians, (but means) the Phcjenicians, 
on account of the existence of the admirable 
wisdom of the Phoenicians. The Greeks, how- 
ever, assert that they are Phfjenicians, who have 
migrated from (the shores of) the Red Sea into 
this country where they even at present dwell, 
for this is the opinion of Herodotus.' Now 
Cynosura, he says, is this (lesser) P>ear, the sec- 
ond creation ; the one of limited dimensions, 
the narrow way, and not Helice. For he does 
not lead them back, but guides forward by a 
straight path, those that follow him being (the 
tail) of Canis. For Canis is the Logos,- partly 
guarding and preserving the flock, that is plotted 
against by the wolves ; and partly like a dog, 
hunting the beasts from the creation, and de- 
stroying them ; and partly producing all things, 
and being what they express by the name " Cyon " 
(Canis), that is, generator. Hence it is said, 
Aratus has spoken of the rising of Canis, ex- 
pressing himself thus : " When, however, Canis 
has risen, no longer do the crops miss." This is 
what he says : Plants that have been put into 
the earth up to the period of Canis' rising, fre- 
quently, though not having struck root, are yet 
covered with a profusion of leaves, and afford 
indications to spectators that they will be pro- 
ductive, and that they appear full of life, (though 
in reality) not having vitality in themselves from 
the root. But when the rising of Canis takes 
place, the living are separated from the dead by 
Canis ; for whatsoever plants have not taken 
loot, really undergo putrefaction. This Canis, 
therefore, he says, as being a certain divine Lo- 
gos, has been appointed judge of quick and 
dead. And as (the influence of) Canis is ob- 
servable in the vegetable productions of this 
world, so in plants of celestial growth — in men 
— is beheld the (power of the) Logos. From 
some such cause, then, Cynosura, the second 
creation, is set in the iirmament as an image of 
a creation by the Logos. The Dragon, however, 
in the centre reclines between the two creations, 
preventing a transition of whatever things are 
from the great creation to the small creation ; 
and in guarding those that are fixed in the 
(great) creation, as for instance Engonasis, ol)- 
serving (at the same time) how and in what 
manner each is constituted in the small creation. 
And (the Dragon) himself is watched at the 
head, he says, by Anguitenens. This image, he 
affirms, is fixed in heaven, being a certain wis- 
dom to those capable of discerning it. If, how- 
ever, this is obscure, by means of some other 
image, he says the creation teaches (men) to 

» Herod., Hist., i. i. 

2 Or, "for creation is the Logos" (see Aral., Phanom., v. 332 
et seq.}. 

philosophize, in regard to which Aratus has ex- 
pressed himself thus : — 

"Neither of Cepheus lasidas are we the wretched 
Ijrood." 3 

CH.AP. XLIX. SV.MBOL OF THE CRE.\TURF, ; .^ND 

OF SPIRIT ; .\XD OF THE DIFFERENT ORDERS OF 
AXIM.ALS. 

But Aratus says, near this (constellation) is 
Cepheus, and Cassiepea, and Andromeda, and 
Perseus, great lineaments of the creation to those 
who are able to discern them. For he asserts 
that Cepheus is Adam, Cassiepea Eve, Androm- 
eda the soul of both of these, Perseus the 
Logos, winged offspring of Jove, and Cetos* 
the plotting monster. Not to any of these, but to 
Andromeda only does he repair, who sla}-s the 
Beast ; from whom, likewise taking unto him- 
self Andromeda, who had been delivered (and) 
chained to the Beast, the Logos — that is, Per- 
seus — achieves, he says, her liberation. Per- 
seus, however, is the winged axle that pierces 
both poles through the centre of the earth, and 
turns the world round. The spirit also, that 
which is in the world, is (symbolized by) Cyc- 
nus, a bird — a musical animal near '"The Bears" 
— type of the Divine Spirit, because that when 
it approaches the end itself of life, 5 it alone is 
fitted by nature to sing, on departing with good 
hope from the wicked creation, (and) offering 
up hymns unto God. But crabs, and bulls, and 
lions, and rams, and goats, and kids, and as many 
other beasts as have their names used for de- 
nominating the stars in the firmament, are, he 
says, images, and exemplars from which the crea- 
tion, subject to change, obtaining (the different) 
species, becomes replete with animals of this 
description. 

CHAP. L. 

FOLLY OF ASTROLOGY. 

Employing these accounts, (the heretics) 
think to deceive as many of these as devote 
themselves over-sedulously to the astrologers, 
from thence striving to construct a system of re- 
ligion that is widely divergent from the thoughts 
of these (speculators). Wherefore, beloved, let 
us avoid the habit of admiring trifles, secured by 
which the bird (styled) the owl (is captured). 
For these and other such speculations are, (as it 
were), dancing, and not Truth. For neither do 
the stars yield these points of information ; but 
men of their own accord, for the designation of 
certain stars, thus called them b\' names, in 
order that they might become to them easily 

3 Aral., Phtrnom., v. 179. 

< i.e., literally a sea-monster (Cicero's Pistrix) : Aral., Phaupm., 

V. 353et sei). . . , - o c j 

S TTpb*; auTOi? roT) r""c zio}xn'7i vernuei'oi' Toi' oioi/. c»ome resci 
Tols <j-irep/i&7i, which yields no intelligible meaning. 

Chap. LI.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

45 

distinguishable. For what similarity with a bear, 
or lion, or kid, or waterman, or Cepheus, or 
Andromeda, or the spectres that have names 
given them in Hades, have the stars that are 
scattered over the firmament — for we must re- 
member that these men, and the titles them- 
selves, came into existence long after the origin 
of man, — (what, I say, is in common between 
the two), that the heretics, astonished at the 
marvel, should thus strive by means of such dis- 
courses to strengthen their own opinions ? 

CHAP. LI. THE HEBDOMAD.'^RII ; SYSTEM OF THE 

ARITH.METICI.'\NS ; PRESSED INTO THE SERVICE 
OF HERESY ; INSTANCES OF, IN SIMON AND 
VALENTINUS ; THE NATURE OF THE UNIVERSE 
DEDUCIBLE FROM THE PHYSIOLOGY OF THE 
BRAIN. 

But since almost every heresy (that has sprung 
up) through the arithmetical art has discovered 
measures of hebdomads and certain projections 
of yEons, each rending the art differently, while 
whatever variation prevailed was in the names 
merely; and (since) Pythagoras became the in- 
structor of these, first introducing numbers of 
this sort among the Greeks from Egypt, it seems 
expedient not to omit even this, but, after we 
have given a compendious elucidation, to ap- 
proach the demonstration of those things that 
we propose to investigate. 

Arithmeticians and geometers arose, to whom 
especially Pythagoras first seems to have fur- 
nished principles. And from numbers that can 
continually progress «r/ infinitum by multiplica- 
tion, and from figures, these derived their first 
principles,' as capable of being discerned by 
reason alone ; for a principle of geometry, as 
one may perceive, is an indivisible point. From 
that point, however, by means of the art, the 
generation of endless figures from the point is 
discovered. For the point being drawn into 
length becomes a line, after being thus con- 
tinued, having a point for its extremity. And a 
line flowing out into breadth begets a surface, and 
the limits of the surface are lines ; but a surface 
flowing out into breadth becomes body. And 
when what is solid has in this manner derived 
existence from, altogether, the smallest point, 
the nature of a huge body is constituted ; and 
this is what Simon expresses thus : " I'he little 
will be great, being as a point, and the great 
illimitable." Now this coincides with the geo- 
metrical doctrine of a point. 

But of the arithmetical^ art, which by com- 
position contains philosophy, number became a 
first principle, which is an indefinable and in- 

' Sextiis Empiricus, adv. Ccoin., 29 et seq. (See book vi. chap, 
xviii. of Tlie Refutation.') 

2 The observations following have already been made in book i. 
of The Rc/uiatiOH. 

comprehensible (entity), comprising in itself all 
the numbers that can go on ad infinitum by 
aggregation. But the first monad became a 
principle, according to substance, of the num- 
bers, which (principle) is a male 3 monad, pro- 
creating paternally all the rest of the numbers. 
Secondly, the duad is a female number, which 
by the arithmeticians is also itself denominated 
even. Thirdly, the triad is a male number ; this 
also it has been the usual custom of arithmeti- 
cians to style odd. In addition to all these, the 
tetrad is a female number ; and this same, be- 
cause it is feminine, is likewise denominated 
even. All the numbers therefore, taken gener- 
ically, are four — number, however, as regards 
genus, is indefinite — from which, according to 
their system, is formed the perfect number — I 
mean the decade. For one, two, three, four, 
become ten — as has been previou.sly proved — 
if the proper denomination be preserved, ac- 
cording to substance, for each of the numbers. 
This is the sacred quaternion, according to 
Pythagoras, having in itself roots of an endless 
nature, that is, all other numbers ; for eleven, 
and twelve, and the rest, derive the principle of 
generation from the ten. Of this decade — the 
perfect number — there are called four parts — 
number, monad, power, cube — whose connec- 
tions and mixtures take place for the generation 
of increase, according to nature completing the 
productive number. For when the square is 
multiplied into itself, it becomes a biquadratic \ 
but when the square is multiplied into a cube, 
it becomes the product of a quadratic and cube ; 
but when a cube is multiplied into a cube, it be- 
comes the product of cube multiplied by cube. 
Wherefore all the numbers are seven ; so that 
the generation of things produced may be from 
the hebdomad — which is number, monad, power, 
cube, biquadratic, product of quadratic multi- 
plied by cube, product of cube multiplied by 
cube. 

Of this hebdomad Simon and Valentinus, hav- 
ing altered the names, detailed marv^ellous stories, 
from thence hastily adopting a system for them- 
selves. For Simon employs his denominations 
thus : Mind, Intelligence, Name, Voice, Ratio- 
cination, Reflection ; and He who stood, stands, 
will stand. And Valentinus (enumerates them 
thus) : Mind, Truth, Word, Life, Man, Church, 
and the Father, reckoned along with these, ac- 
cording to the same principles as those advanced 
by the cultivators of arithmetical philosophy. 
And (heresiarchs) admiring, as if unknown to 
the multitude, (this philosophy, and) following 
it, have framed heterodox doctrines devised by 
themselves. 

Some indeed, then, attempt likewise to form 

3 Some read apats. 

46 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book IV. 

the hebdomads from the medical' (art), being 
astonished at the dissection of the brain, assert- 
ing that the substance of the universe and the 
power of procreation and the Godhead could 
be ascertained from the arrangement of the 
brain. For the brain, being the dominant por- 
tion of the entire body, reposes calm and un- 
moved, containing within itself the spirit. Such 
an account, then, is not incredible, but widely 
differs from the conclusions which these (her- 
etics) attempt to deduce from it. For the brain, 
on being dissected, has within it what may be 
called a vaulted chamber. And on either side 
of this are thin membranes, which they term 
little wings. Xow these are gently moved by 
the spirit, and in turn propel towards the cere- 
bellum the spirit, which, careering through a 
certain blood-vessel like a reed, advances tow- 
ards the pineal gland. And near this is situ- 
ated the entrance of the cerebellum, which 
admits the current of spirit, and distributes it 
into what is styled the spinal marrow. But from 
them the whole frame participates in the spiritual 
energy, inasmuch as all the arteries, like a branch, 
are fastened on from this blood-vessel,, the ex- 

' The Abbe Cruice refers to Censorinus {De Die Xatali, cap. vii. 

et xiv.), who mentions that two numbers were held in vener.Ttion, the 

seventh (hebdomad) and ninth (ennead). The former was of use in 

curing corporeal disease, and ascribed lo Apollo; the latter healed 

I the diseases of the mind, and was attributed to the Muses. 

tremity of which terminates in the genital blood- 
vessels, whence all the (animal) seeds proceeding 
from the brain through the loin are secreted (in 
the seminal glands). The form, however, of the 
brain is like the head of a serpent, respecting 
which a lengthened discussion is maintained by 
the professors of knowledge, falsely so named, 
as we shall prove. Six other coupling ligaments 
grow out of the brain, which, traversing round 
the head, and having their termination in (the 
head) itself, hold bodies together; but the 
seventh (ligament) proceeds from the cerebel- 
lum to the lower parts of the rest of the frame, 
as we have declared. 

And respecting this there is an enlarged dis- 
cussion, whence both Simon and Valentinus will 
be found both to have derived from this source 
starting-points for their opinions, and, though 
they may not acknowledge it, to be in the first 
instance liars, then heretics. Since, then, it ap- 
pears that we have sufficiently explained these 
tenets likewise, and that all the reputed opinions 
of this earthly philosophy have been comprised 
in four books ; it seems expedient to proceed to 
a consideration of the disciples of these men, 
nay rather, those who have furtively appropri- 
ated their doctrines.^ 

* At fool of MS. occur the words, " Founh Book of Philosophu* 
mena." 

NOTE. 

[On p. 43 supra I omitted to direct attention to the desirable enlargement of note 3 by a reference 
[to Homer's Hymn of Mercury and its minute description of the invention of the Lyre. The passage is 
given in Heiiry Nelson Coleridge's Iniroduction, etc., p. 202. The versified translation of Shelley 
[is inimitable ; in ottava rima, but instinct with the ethos of the original.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

BOOK V. 

CONTENTS. 

The following are the contents of the fifth 
book of the Refutation of all Heresies : ' — 

What the assertions are of the Naasseni, who 
style themselves Gnostics, and that they advance 
those opinions which the Philosophers of the 
Greeks previously propounded, as well as those 
■who have handed down mystical (rites), from 
(both of) whom t/ie Naasseni, taking occasion, 
have constructed their heresies. 

And what are the tenets of the Peratae, and 
that their system is not framed by them out of 
the holy Scriptures, but from astrological art. 

What is the doctrine of the Sethians," and 
that, purloining 3 their theories from the wise 
men among the Greeks, they have patched to- 
gether their own system out of shreds of opinion 
taken from Musaeus, and Linus, and Orpheus, 

What are the tenets of Justinus, and that his 
system is framed by him, not out of the holy 
Scriptures, but from the detail of marvels fur- 
nished by Herodotus the historian. 

CHAP. I. — recapitulation; characteristics of 

HERESY ; ORIGIN OF THE NAME NAASSENI ; THE 
SYSTEM OF THE NAASSENI. 

I think that in the four preceding books I 
have very elaborately explained the opinions 
propounded by all the speculators among both 
Greeks and Barbarians, respecting the Divine 
Nature and the creation of the world ; and not 
€ven have I omitted '♦ the consideration of their 
systems of magic. So that I have for my readers 
undergone no ordinary amount of toil, in my 
anxiety to urge many forward into a desire of 

' [Consult Bunsen, vol. i. p. 33, always interesting and ingen- 
iously critical; nobody should neglect his work. But for a judicial 
mind, compare Dr. Wordsworth, p, 182.] 

2 The MS. employs the form Sithians, which is obviously not the 
correct one. 

3 This term icAei^tAoyos is frequently applied by Hippolytus to the 
heretics. 

< Miller has ajroKaXui/zas for wopaAcii/ia?. This, however, can 
bear no intelligible meaning, except we add some other word, as 
thus: " not even have I failed to disclose." Schneidewin's correction 
of a;To.<aAi/i//a$ inco /ropaAiiipas is obviously an improvement. 

learning, and into stedfastness of knowledge in 
regard of the truth. It remains, therefore, to 
hasten on to the refutation of the heresies ; but 
it is for the purpose of furnishing this (refuta- 
tion) that we have put forward the statements 
aheady made by us. For from philosophers the 
heresiarchs deriving s starting-points, (and) like 
cobblers patching together, according to their 
own particular interpretation, the blunders of the 
ancients, have advanced them as novelties to 
those that are capable of being deceived, as we 
shall prove in the following books. In the re- 
mainder (of our work), the opportunity invites 
us to approach the treatment of our proposed 
subjects, and to begin from those who have pre- 
sumed to celebrate a serpent,^ the originator of 
the error (in question), through certain expres' 
sions devised by the energy of his own (ingenu- 
ity). The priests, then, and champions of the 
system, have been first those who have been 
called Naasseni,^ being so denominated from 
the Hebrew language, for the serpent is called' 
naas^ (in Hebrew). Subsequently, however, 
they have styled themselves Gnostics, alleging 
that they alone have sounded the depths of 
knowledge. Now, from the system of these 
(speculators), many, detaching parts, have con- 
structed a heresy which, though with several 
subdivisions, is essentially one, and they explain 
precisely the same (tenets) ; though conveyed 
under the guise of different opinions, as the fol- 
lowing discussion, according as it progresses, will 
prove. 

5 MfToAo^di'Tf?; some read neTao-xo'''''*?. which it is presumed 
might be rendered, " sharing in the opinions which gave occasion to 
these heterodox doctrines." 

6 i.e.,6<f>i?. This term has created the title "Ophites," which 
may be regarded as the generic denomination for all the advocates of 
this phase of Gnosticism. 

7 The heresy of the Naasseni is adverted to by the other leading 
writers on heresy in the early age 'of the Church. See St. Irenseus, 
i. 34: Origen, Contr. Cels., vi 28 (p. 291 et seq. ed. Spenc.) ; Tertul- 
\\in,Pmscr:,c. 47; T\\&odoKX,Haretic. Fabul., i. 14; Epiphanius, 
Advers. Hcgreses.,xx\. and xxxvii.; St. AugVi%Une,'De H ceres., 
xvii.; Jerome, Comment. Epist. ad Galat., lib. ii. The Abbe Cruice 
reminds his readers that the Naasseni carried their doctrines into 
India, and refers to the Asiatic Researches (vol. x. p. 39). 

8 The Hebrew word is i^nj {nachash). 

T t 

48 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book V. 

These (Naasseni), then, according to the sys- 
tem' advanced by them, magnify, (as the origi- 
nating cause) of all things else, a man and a son 
of man. And this man is a hermaphrodite, and 
is denominated among them Adam ; and hymns 
many and various are made to him. The 
hymns,= however — to be brief — are couched 
among them in some such form as this : " From 
thee (comes) father, and through thee (comes) 
mother, two names immortal, progenitors of 
.•Eons, O denizen of heaven, thou illustrious 
man." But they divide him as Geryon-^ into 
three parts. For, say they, of this man one ])art 
is rational, another psychical, another earthly. 
And they suppose that the knowledge of him is 
the originating principle of the capacity for a 
knowledge of God, expressing themselves thus : 
" The originating principle of perfection is the 
knowledge •• of man, while the knowledge of God 
is absolute perfection." All these (lualities, how- 
ever — rational, and psychical, and earthly — 
have, (the Naassene) says, retired and descended 
into one man simultaneously — Jesus, s who was 
born of Mary. And these three men (the Naas- 
sene) says, are in the habit of speaking (through 
Jesus) at the same time together, each from their 
own proper substances to those peculiarly their 
own. For, according to these, there are three 
kinds of all existent things — angelic, psychical, 
earthly ; and there are three churches — angelic, 
psychical, earthly ; and the names of these are 
elect, called, captive. 

CHAP. II. NAASSENI ASCRIBE THEIR SYSTEM, 

THROUGH MARIAMNE, TO JAMES THE LORD'S 
BROTHER ; REALLY TRACEABLE TO THE ANCIENT 
MYSTERIES ; THEIR PSYCHOLOGY AS GIVEN IN THE 
" GOSPEL ACCORDING TO THOMAS ; " ASSYRIAN 
THEORY OF THE SOUL ; THE SYSTEMS OF THE 
NAASSENI AND THE ASSYRIANS COMPARED ; SUP- 
PORT DR.'VWN BY THE NAASSENI FROM THE PHRV- 
GUN AND EGYPTIAN MYSTERIES ; THE MYSTERIES 
OF ISIS ; THESE MYSTERIES ALLEGORIZED BY THE 
NAASSENI. 

These are the heads of very numerous dis- 
courses which (the Naasseile) asserts James the 

' Ttapa. Tof avTuiv \6yof. Bernaysiiis suggests for these words, 
iraTepa t<u aiiTuJ Aoyoj. Schneidcwin regards the emendation as an 
error, and Bunsen partly so. The latter would read, waTepa toi' 
nvTuiv .\6yov, i.e., " The Naasseni honour the Father of all existent 
things, the Logos, as man and the Son of Man." 

- See Irenseus, Hifr., i. i. 

3 Geryon (see note, chap, iii.) is afterwards mentioned as a syno- 
nyme with Jordan, i.e., " flowing from earth " (yr; ptnui'). 

4 yi/wcri?, — a term often alluded to by St. John, and which gives 
its name "Gnosticism" to the various forms of the Ophitic heresy. 
The aphorism in the te.vt is one that embodies a grand principle 
which lies at the root of all correct philosophy. In this and other 
instances it will be found that the .system, however wild and inco- 
liercnt in its theolo.gj', of the Naasseni and of some of the other 
CJnosi.c sects, was one which was constructed by a subtle analysis of 
thought, and by ob.servation of nature. 

5 The Abbe Cruice remarks on this passage, thai, as the state- 
ment here as regards Jesus Christ does not correspond with Origen's 
remarks on the opinions of the Naasseni in reference to our Lord, the 
Philoiophuiiuna cannot be the work of OrigcH. 

brother of the Lord handed down to Mariamne.^ 
j In order, then, that these impious (heretics) 
may no longer belie Mariamne or James, or the 
Saviour Himself, let us com.e to the mvstic rites 
(whence these have derived their figment), — 
to a consideration, if it seems right, of both the 
: Barbarian and Grecian < mysteries), — and let 
I us see how these (heretics), collecting together 
the secret and ineffable mysteries of all the Gen- 
tiles, are uttering falsehoods against Christ, and 
are making dupes of those who are not ac- 
(|uainte(i with these orgies of the Gentiles. For 
since the foundation of the doctrine with them 
is the man Adam, and they say that concerning 
him it has been written, " Who shall declare his 
'generation?"'' learn how, pardy deriving from 
the (ientiles the undiscoverable and diversified ^ 
generation of the man, they fictitiously apply it 
to Christ. 

" Now earth," "^ say the Greeks, " gave forth a 
man, (earth) first bearing a goodly gift, wish- 
ing to become mother not of plants devoid of 
sense, nor beasts without reason, but of a gentle 
and highly favoured creature." '' It, however, 
is difficult," (the Naassene) says, *' to ascertain 
whether Alalcomeneus,'° first of men, rose upon 
the Boeotians over Lake Cephisus ; or whether it 
were the Ltean Curetes, a divine race ; or the 
Phrygian Corybantes, whom first the sun beheld 
springing up after the manner of the growth of 
trees ; or whether Arcadia brought forth Pelasgus, 
of greater antiquity than the moon ; or Eleusis 
(produced) Diaulus, an inhabitant of Raria ; or 
Lemnus begot Cabirus, fair child of secret 
orgies; or Pallene (brought forth) the Phleg- 
raean Alcyoneus, oldest of the giants. But the 
Libyans affirm that larbas, first born, on emer- 
ging from arid plains, commenced eating the 
sweet acorn of Jupiter. But the Nile of the 
Egyptians," he says, "up to this day fertilizing 
mud, (and therefore) generating animals, renders 
up living bodies, which acquire flesh from moist 
vapour." The Assyrians, however, say that 
fish-eating Cannes" was (the first man, and) 
produced among themselves. The Chaldeans, 
howe\er, say that this Adam is the man whom 

* The Abbe Cruice observes that we have here another proof that 
the Phitosophuviena is not the work of Origen, who in his Contra 
Celsitm mentions Mariamne, but professes not to have met with any 
of his followers (see Contr. Ceis., lib. v. p. 272, ed. Spenc). This 
confirms the opinion mostly entertained of Origen, that neither the 
bent of his mind nor the direction of his studies justify the supposi- 
tion that he would write a detailed history of heresy. 

" Isa. liii. 8. 

8 Or a6io</>opoi', equivocal. 

9 This has been by the best critics regarded as a fragment of a 
hymn of Pindar's on Jupiter Amnion. Schneidewin furnishes a re- 
stored poetic version of it by Bergk. This hymn, we believe, first 
suggested to M. Miller an idea of the possible value and importance 
ol the MS. of T/ie Ru/utation brought by Minbides Mynas from 
Greece. 

'° The usual form is Alalcomenes. He was a Boeotian Autoclhon. 

" Or, " lannes." The Abbe Cruice refers to Berosus, Chald. 
Hist., pp. 48, 49, and to his own dissertation (Paris, 1844) on the 
authority to be attached to Jo.sephus, as regards the writers adduced 
by him in his treatise Contr, Apion. 

Chap. II.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

49 

alone earth brought forth. And that he lay in- 
animate, unmoved, (and) still as a statue ; being 
an image of him who is above, who is celebrated 
as the man Adam,' having been begotten by 
many powers, concerning whom individually is 
an enlarged discussion. 

In order, therefore, that finally the Great Man 
from above may be overpowered, "from whom," 
as they say, " the whole family named on earth 
and in the heavens " has been formed, to him 
was given also a soul, that through the soul he 
might suffer ; and that the enslaved image may 
be punished of the Great and most Glorious and 
Perfect Man, for even so they call him. Again, 
then, they ask what is the soul, and whence, and 
what kind in its nature, that, coming to the man 
and moving him,^ it should enslave and punish 
the image of the Perfect Man. They do not, 
however, (on this point) institute an inquiry from 
the Scriptures, but ask this (question) also from 
the mystic (rites). And they aifirm that the 
soul is very difficult to discover, and hard to 
understand ; for it does not remain in the same 
figure or the same form invariably, or in one 
passive condition, that either one could express 
it by a sign, or comprehend it substantially. 

But they have these varied changes (of the 
soul) set down in the gospel inscribed " accord- 
ing to the Eg>-ptians." 3 They are, then, in 
doubt, as all the rest of men among the Gen- 
tiles, whether (the soul) is at all from something 
pre-existent, or whether from the self-produced 
(one),"* or from a widespread Chaos. And first 
they fly for refuge to the mysteries of th>:; Assy- 
rians, perceiving the threefold division of the 
man ; for the Assyrians first advanced the opin- 
ion that the soul has three parts, and yet (is 
essentially) one. For of soul, say they, is every 
nature desirous, and each in a different manner. 
For soul is cause of all things made ; all things 
that are nourished, (the Naassene) says, and 
that grow, require soul. For it is not possible, 
he says, to obtain any nourishment or growth 
where soul is not present. For even stones, he 
affirms, are animated, for they possess what is 
capable of increase; but increase would* not at 
any time take place without nourishment, for it 
is by accession that things which are being in- 

' The Rabbins, probably deriving their notions from the Chal- 
deans, entertained the most exaggerated ideas respecting the per- 
fection of Adam. Thus Gerson, in his Comvioitary on Aharbancl, 
says that " Adam was endued with the very perfection of wisdom, and 
•was chief of philosophers, that he was an immediate disciple of the 
.Deity, also a physician and astrologer, and the originator of all the 
arts and sciences." This spirit of exaggeration passed from the Jews 
to the Christians (see Clemetitine Hoinih'es, ii.). Aquinas (^Snni. 
TheoL, pars i 94) says of Adam, " Since the first man was appointed 
perfect, he ought to have possessed a knowledge of everything capa- 
ble of being ascertained by natural means." 

^ Or, "vanquishing him" (Roeper). 

3 This is known to us only by some ancient quotations. The 
Naasseni had another work of repute among them, the " Gospel ac- 
cording to Thomas," Bunsen conjectures that the two "Gospels" 
may be the same. 

■♦ avToyivov^. Miller has auToO vcVov;, which Bunsen rejects in 
davour of the reading " self-begotten." 

creased grow, but accession is the nourishment 
of things that are nurtured. Every nature, then, 
(the Naassene) says, of things celestial, and 
earthly, and infernal, desires a soul. And an 
entity of this description the Assyrians call 
Adonis or Endymion ; 5 and when it is styled 
Adonis, Venus, he says, loves and desires the 
soul when styled by such a name. But Venus 
is production, according to them. But when- 
ever Proserpine or Cora becomes enamoured 
with Adonis, there results, he says, a certain 
mortal soul separated from Venus (that is, from 
generation). But should the Moon pass into 
concupiscence for Endymion, and into love of 
her form, the nature,^ he says, of the higher 
beings requires a soul likewise. But if, he says, 
the mother of the gods emasculate Attis,^ and 
herself has this (person) as an object of affec- 
tion, the blessed nature, he says, of the supernal 
and everlasting (beings) alone recalls the male 
power of the soul to itself. 

For (the Naassene) says, there is the her- 
maphrodite man. According to this account of 
theirs, the intercourse of woman with man is 
demonstrated, in conformity with such teach- 
ing, to be an exceedingly wicked and filthy 
(practice).^ For, says (the Naassene), Attis 
has been emasculated, that is, he has passed 
over from the earthly parts of the nether world 
to the everlasting substance above, where, he 
says, there is neither female or male,^ but a new 
creature,'" a new man, which is hermaphrodite. 
As to whjere, however, they use the expression, 
"above," I shall show when I come to the prop- 
er place (for treating this subject). But they 
assert that, by their account, they testify that 
Rhea is not absolutely isolated, but — for so I 
may say — the universal creature ; and this they 
declare to be what is affirmed by the Word. 
" For the invisible things of Him are seen from 
the creation of the world, being understood by 
the things that are made by Him, even His 
eternal power and Godhead, for the purpose of 
leaving them without excuse. Wherefore, know- 
ing God, they glorified Him not as God, nor 
gave Him thanks ; but their foolish heart was 
rendered vain. For, professing themselves to 
be wise, they became fools, and changed the 
glory of the uncorruptible God into images of 
the likeness of corruptible man, and of birds, 
and four-footed beasts, and creeping things. 
Wherefore also God gave them up unto vile af- 

5 Schneidewin considers that there have been left out in the MS. 
the words "or Attis" after Endymion. Attis is subsequently men- 
tioned with some degree of particularity. 

*> Or, " creation." 

7 Or, " Apis." See Diodorus Siculus, iii. 58, 59. Pausanias, vii. 
20, writes 'he word Attes. See also Minucius Felix, Octav., cap. xxi. 

8 Or, " fo.bidden." . r • • ,. 

9 Gal. iii. 28, and Clement's Ep'st. ad Rom.,a. 12. [This is the 
apocryphal Clement reserved for vol. viii. of this series. See also 
same text, Ignatius, vol. i. p. 81.] 

10 See 2 Cor. v. 17, Gal. vi. 15. 

50 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book V, 

fections ; for even their women did change the 
natural use into that which is against nature." 
"What, however, the natural use is, according to 
them, we shall afterwards declare. " And like- 
wise also the men, leaving the natural use of the 
woman, burned in their lust one toward another ; 
men with men working that which is unseemly" 
— now the expression '• that which is unseemly" 
signifies, according to these (Naasseni), the first 
and blessed substance, figureless, the cause of 
all figures to those things that are moulded into 
shapes, — " and receiving in themselves that rec- 
ompense of their error which was meet." ' For 
in these words which Paul has spoken they say 
the entire secret of theirs, and a hidden mystery 
of blessed pleasure, are comprised. For the 
promise of washing is not any other, according 
to them, than the introduction of him that is 
washed in, according to them, life-giving water, 
and anointed with ineffal)le - ointment (than his 
introduction) into unfading bliss 

But they assert that not only is there in favour 
of their doctrine, testimony to be drawn from 
the mysteries of the Assyrians, but also from 
those of the Phrygians concerning the happy 
nature — concealed, and yet at the same time 
disclosed — of things that have been, and are 
coming into'existence, and moreover will be, — 
(a happy nature) which, (the Naassene) sayr, 
is the kingdom of heaven to be sought fr/r 
within a man.^ And concerning this (nature) 
they hand down an explicit passage, occurrmg^ 
in the Gospel inscribed according to Thomas, 5 
expressing themselves thus : " He who seeks me, 
will find me in children from seven years old ; 
for there concealed, I shall in the fourteenth age 
be made manifest." This, however, is not (the 
teaching) of Christ, but of Hippocrates, who uses 
these words : " A child of seven years is half of 
I father." And so it is that these (heretics), 
placing the originative nature of the universe in 
causative seed, (and) having ascertained the 
(aphorism) of Hippocrates,^' that a child of 
seven years old is half of a father, say that in 
fourteen years, according to Thomas, he is mani- 
fested. Tliis, with them, is the ineffable and 
mystical Logos. They assert, then, that the 
Fgyptians, who after the Phrygians, 7 it is estab- 
lished, are of greater antiquity than all mankind, 
and who confessedly were the first to proclaim to 

' Rom. i. 20-27. 

2 aAdAu ; some read aAAcu. 

3 I.ukc xvii. 21. 

•♦ These words do not occur in the " Gospel of Thomas concern- 
ing the Saviour's infancy," as given by Fabrlcius and Thilo. 

i The Abbe Cruice mentions the following works as of authority 
among the Naasseni, and from whence they derived their system: 
T/ie Gospel of Perfection, Gospel of Eve, The Questions of Mary, 
Concerning the Offspring of Mary, The Gospel of Philip, The 
Gospel according to (i) Thomas, (2) the Egyptians. (See Epi- 
^hanius, Hteres.,c. xxvi., and Origen, Contr. Cels., vi. 30, p. 296, ed. 
bpenc.) These heretics likewise make use of the Old Testament, St. 
John's Gospel, and some of the Pauline epistles. 

(> Miller refers to Littr^, Traduct. des CEuvres d'Hippocrate, 
*• >• P- 396. '> See Herodotus, ii. a, 5. 

all the rest of men the rites and .orgies of, at the 
same time, all the gods, as well as the species 
and energies (of things), have the sacred and 
august, and for those who are not initiated, un- 
speakable mysteries of Isis. These, however, 
are not anything else than what by her of the 
seven dresses and sable robe was sought and 
snatched away, namely, the pudendum of Osiris. 
And they say that Osiris is water.** But the 
seven-robed nature, encircled and arrayed with 
seven mantles of ethereal texture — for so they 
call the planetary stars, allegorizing and denomi- 
nating them ethereal'' robes, — is as it were the 
changeable generation, and is exhibited as the 
creature transformed by the ineffable and unpor- 
trayable,'° and inconceivable and figureless one. 
And this, (the Naassene) says, is what is declared 
in Scripture, " The just will fall seven times, and 
rise again."" For these falls, he says, are the 
changes of the stars, moved by Him who puts 
all things in motion. 

They affirm, then, concerning the substance '- 
of the seed which is a cause of all existent 
things, that it is none of these, but that it pro- 
duces and forms all things that are made, express- 
ing themselves thus : " I become what I wish, 
and I an: what I am : on account of this I say, 
that wha'v puts all things in motion is itself un- 
moved. For wiia,*" exists remains forming all 
things, and nought of evisting things is made."'^ 
He says that this (one) alone is good, and that 
what is spoken by the Saviour '■* is declared 
concerning this (one) : "Why do you say that 
I am good? One is good, my Father which 
is in the heavens, who causeth His sun to rise 
upon the just and unjust, and sendeth rain upon 
saints and sinners." '5 But who the saintly ones 
are on whom He sends the rain, and the sinners 
on whom the same sends the rain, this likewise 
we shall afterwards declare with the rest. And 
this is the great and secret and unknown mys- 
tery of the universe, concealed and revealed 
among the Egyptians. For Osiris,'^ (the Naas- 
sene) says, is in temples in front of Isis ; '^ and 
his pudendum stands exposed, looking down- 
wards, and crowned with all its own fruits of 
things that are made. And (he affirms) that 
such stands not only in the most hallowed 
temples chief of idols, but that also, for the in- 
formation of all, it is as it were a light not set 
under a bushel, but upon a candlestick, proclaim- 
ing its message upon the housetops,'^ in all by- 

8 See Origen, Contr. Cels., v. 38 (p. 257, ed. Spenc). 

9 Or, " brilliant." 

■° Or, " untraceable." 

" Prov. xxiv. 16; Luke xvii. 4. 

>2 Or, " spirit." 

'J See Epiphanius, H teres., xxvi. 8. 

'< Matt. XIX. 17; ^Iark x. 18; Luke xvili. 19, 

15 Matt. V. 45. 

'^ Miller has ovU\%. See Plutarch, De liid. et Otirtd.,*^ 'k p 

371 

'7 Or, fio-oSov, i.e., entrance. 
•^ Matt, V. X5, X. 37. 

Chap. II.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

51 

ways, and all streets, and near the actual dwell- 
ings, placed in front as a certain appointed limit 
and termination of the dwelling, and that this is 
denominated the good (entity) by all. For they 
style this good-producing, not knowing what they 
say. And the Greeks, deriving this mystical 
(expression) from the Egyptians, preserve it 
until this day. For we behold, says (the Naas- 
sene), statues of Mercury, of such a figure hon- 
oured among them. 

Worshipping, however, Cyllenius with especial 
distinction, they style him Logics. For Mercury 
is Logos, who being interpreter and fabricator of 
the things that have been made simultaneously, 
and that are being produced, and that will exist, 
stands honoured among them, fashioned into 
some such figure as is the pudendum of a man, 
having an impulsive power from the parts below 
towards those above. And that this (deity) — 
that is, a Mercury of this description — is, (the 
Naassene) says, a conjurer of the dead, and a 
guide of departed spirits, and an originator of 
souls ; nor does this escape the notice of the 
poets, who express themselves thus : — 

" Cyllenian Hermes also called 
The souls of mortal suitors." ' 

Not Penelope's suitors, says he, O wretches ! but 
(souls) awakened and brought to recollection of 
themselves, 

" From honour so great, and from bliss so long."- 

That is, from the blessed man from above, or 
the primal man or Adam, as it seems to them, 
souls have been conveyed down here into a 
creation of clay, that they may serve the Demi- 
urge of this creation, laldabaoth,^ a fiery God, a 
fourth number ; for so they call the Demiurge 
and father of the formal world : — 

" And in hand he held a lovely 
Wand of gold that human eyes enchants, 
Of whom he will, and those again who slumber rouses."'' 

This, he says, is he who alone has power of Ufe 
and death. Concerning this, he says, it has 
been written, " Thou shalt rule them with a rod 
of iron." s The poet, however, he says, being 
desirous of adorning the incomprehensible (po- 
tency) of the blessed nature of the Logos, in- 
vested him with not an iron, but golden wand. 
And he enchants the eyes of the dead, as he says, 
and raises up again those that are slumbering, 
after having been roused from sleep, and after 
having been suitors. And concerning these, he 
says, the Scripture speaks : " Awake thou that 
sleepest, and arise, and Christ will give thee 
light." ^ 

1 Odyssey, xxiv. i. 

2 Empedocles, v. 390, Stein. 

3 Esaldaius, Miller (see Origen, Contr. Cels., t. 76, p. 297, ed. 
Spenc). 

■♦ Odyssey, xxiv. 2. 
S Ps. ii. 9. 
<> Eph. V. 14. 

This is the Christ who, he says, in all that have 
been generated, is the portrayed Son of Man 
from the unportrayable Logos. This, he says, is 
the great and unspeakable mystery of the Eleu- 
sinian rites, Hye, Cye.'' And he affirms that all 
things have been subjected unto him, and this is 
that which has been spoken, "Their sound is 
gone forth unto all the earth," ^ just as it agrees 
with the expressions, " Mercury ^ waving his 
wand, guides the souls, but they twittering 
follow." I mean the disembodied spirits follow 
continuously in such a way as the poet by his 
imagery delineates, using these words : — 

" And as when in the magic cave's recess 
Bats humming fly, and when one drops 
From ridge of rock, and each to other closely clings." '" 

The expression " rock," he says, he uses of 
Adam. This, he afiirms, is Adam : " The chief 
corner-stone become the head of the corner." 
For that in the head the substance is the forma- 
tive brain from which the entire family is fash- 
ioned.'- " Whom," he says, " I place as a rock 
at the foundations of Zion." Allegorizing, he 
says, he speaks of the creation of the man. 
The rock is interposed (within) the teeth, as 
Homer "^ says, " enclosure of teeth," that is, a 
wall and fortress, in which exists the inner man, 
who thither has fallen from Adam, the primal 
man above. And he has been " severed with- 
out hands to effect the division," •■* and has been 
borne down into the image of oblivion, beifig 
earthly and clay is h. And he asserts that the 
twittering spirits follow him, that is, the Lo- 
gos : — 

" Thus these, twittering, came together • and then the 
souls 

That is, he guides them ; 
Gentle Hermes led through wide-extended paths." '' 

That is, he says, into the eternal places separated 

from all wickedness. For whither, he says, did 

they come : — 

" O'er ocean's streams they came, and Leuca's cliff. 
And by the portals of the sun and land of dreams." 

This, he says, is ocean, "generation of gods 
and generation of men " ^^ ever whirled round 
by the eddies of water, at one time upwards, at 
another time downwards. But he says there 
ensues a generation of men when the ocean 
flows downwards ; but when upwards to the wall 
and fortress and the cliff of Luecas, a generation 

7 See Plutarch, De hide et Osiride, c. xxxiv. 

8 Rom. X. 18. 

9 Odyssey, xxiv. 5. 

10 Ibid., xxiv. 6 et seq. 

" Ps. cxviii. 22; Isa. xxviii. 16. 

'^ Eph. iii. 15. 

'3 [Had, iv. 350, 'ipKO<i atovTuiv: — 

" What word hath 'scaped the ivory guard that should 
Have fenced it in." 

■* Dan. ii. 45. 

'5 Odyssey, xxiv. 9. 

'* Hiad, V. 246, xxiv. 20i. 

52 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book V. 

of gods takes place. This, he asserts, is that 
which has been written : " I said. Ye are gods, 
and all children of the highest ; " ' " If ye 
hasten to fly out of Egypt, and repair beyond 
the Red Sea into the wilderness," that is, from 
earthly intercourse to the Jerusalem above, which 
is the mother of the living;^ "If, moreover, 
again you return into Egypt," that is, into 
earthly intercourse,^ " ye shall die as men." 
For mortal, he says, is every generation below, 
"but immortal that which is begotten above, for 
it is born of water only, and of spirit, being 
spiritual, not carnal. But what (is bom) below 
is carnal, that is, he says, what is written. 
" That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and 
that which is born of the spirit is spirit."'* 
This, according to them, is the spiritual genera- 
tion. This, he says, is the great Jordan 5 which, 
flowing on (here) below, and preventing the 
children of Israel from departing out of Egypt 
— I mean from terrestrial intercourse, for Egypt 
is with them the body, — Jesus drove back, and 
made it flow upwards. 

CHAP. III. FURTHER EXPOSITION OF THE HERESY 

OF THE NAASSENl ; PROFESS TO FOLLOW HOMER ; 
ACKNOWLEDGE A TRIAD OF PRINCIPLES ; THEIR 
TECHNICAL NAMES OF THE TRIAD ; SUPPORT 
THESE ON THE AUTHORITY OF GREEK POETS ; 
ALLEGORIZE OUR SAVIOUR'S MIRACLES ; THE 
MYSTERY OF THE SAMOTHR.\CIANS ; WHY THE 
LORD CHOSE TWELVE DISCIPLES; THE NAME 
CORVBAS, USED BY THRACIANS AND PHRYGIANS, 
EXPLAINED ; NAASSENl PROFESS TO FIND THEIR 
SYSTEM IN SCRIPTURE ; THEIR INTERPRETATION 

OF Jacob's vision ; their idea of the " per- 
fect MAN ; " THE " PERFECT MAN " CALLED 
"papa" by THE PHRYGIANS; THE NAASSENl 
AND PHRYGIANS ON THE RESURRECTION ; THE 
ECSTASIS OF ST. PAUL ; THE MYSTERIES OF RELI- 
GION AS ALLUDED TO BY CHRIST; INTERPRE- 
TATION OF THE PARABLE OF THE SOWER ; 
ALLEGORY OF THE PROMISED LAND ; COMPARI- 
SON OF THE SYSTEM OF THE PHRYGIANS WITH 
THE STATEMENTS OF SCRIPTURE; EXPOSITION 
OF THE MEANING OF THE HIGHER AND LOWER 
ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES; THE INCARNATION DIS- 
COVERABLE HERE ACCORDING TO THE NAASSENl. 

Adopting these and such like (opinions), 
these most marvellous Gnostics, inventors of a 
novel ^ grammatical art, magnify Homer as their 
])rophct — as one, (according to them,)' who, 
after the mode adopted in the mysteries, an- 
nounces these truths ; and they mock those who 

■ Ps. Ixxxii. 6; Luke vi. 35; John x. 34. 
^ Gal. iv. 26. 

3 phiio Judaeus adopts the same imagery (sec his De Agricult., 
Lb. i.)- 

■* John iii. 6. 
^ Josh. iii. 7-17. 
6 Or, " empty." 

are not indoctrinated into the holy Scriptures, 
by betraying them into such notions. They 
make, however, the following assertion : he who 
says that all things derive consistence from one, 
is in error ; but he who says that they are of 
three, is in possession of the truth, and will fur- 
nish a solution of the (phonomena of the) uni- 
verse. For there is, says (the Naassene), one 
blessed nature of the Blessed Man, of him who 
is above, (namely) Adam ; and there is one 
mortal nature, that which is below ; and there 
is one kingless generation, which is begotten 
above, where, he says, is Mariam ^ the sought- 
for one, and lothor the mighty sage, and Seph- 
ora the gazing one, and Moses whose generation 
is not in Egypt, for children were born unto him 
in Madian ; and not even this, he says, has es- 
caped the notice of the poets. 

"Threefold was our partition; each obtained 
His meed of honour due."^ 

For, says he, it is necessary that the magnitudes 
be declared, and that they thus be declared by- 
all everywhere, " in order that hearing they may 
not hear, and seeing they may not see."'^ For 
if, he says, the magnitudes were not declared, 
the world could not have obtained consistence. 
These are the three tumid expressions (of these 
heretics), Caulacau,'° Saulasau, Zeesar. Cau- 
LACAU, i.e., Adam, who is farthest above ; Saula- 
sau, that is, the mortal one below ; Zeesar, that 
is, Jordan that flows upwards. This, he says, is 
the hermaphrodite man (present) in all. But 
those who are ignorant of him, call him Geryon 
with the threefold body — Geryon, i.e., as if (in 
the sense of) flowing from earth — but (whom) 
the Greeks by common consent (style) "celestial 
horn of the moon," because he mixed and 
blended all things in all. " For all things," he 
says, " were made by him, and not even one 
thing was made without him, and what was made 
in him is life."" This, says he, is the life, the 
ineffable generation of perfect men, which was 
not known by preceding generations. But the 
passage, " nothing was made without him," 
refers to the formal world, for it was created 
without his instrumentality by the third and 
fourth (of the quaternion named above). For 
says he, this is the cup " Condy, out of w-hich 
the king, while he quaffs, draws his omens." "^ 
This, he says, has been discovered hid in the 
beauteous seeds of Benjamin. And the Greeks 

' The Abbe Cruice considers that this is taken from verses of 
Ezekiel, founding his opinion on fragments of these verses to be 
found in Eusebius' Praparat. Evang., ix. 38. 
* Iliad, XV. 189. 
9 Matt. xiii. 13. 

'° The commentators refer to Isa. xxviii. 10. Epiphanius, Hfpres., 
XXV., mentions these expressions, but assigns them a different mean- 
ing. Sau/asau is tribulation, Caulacau hope, and Zeesar " \\o\)^, 
as yet, little." fSee my note on Irenaui, p. 350, this series, and 
see Elucidation 11. j 
" John i. 3, 4. 
*^ Gen. xliv. 2-5. 

Chap. III.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

53 

likewise, he says, speak of this in the following 
terms : — 

" Water to the raging mouth bring ; thou slave, bring 
wine ; 
Intoxicate and plunge me into stupor. 
My tankard tells me 
The sort I must become."' 

This, says he, was alone sufificient for its being 
understood by men ; (I mean) the cup of Anac- 
reon declaring, (albeit) mutely, an ineffable mys- 
tery. For dumb, says he, is Anacreon's cup ; 
and (yet) Anacreon affirms that it speaks to 
himself, in language mute, as to what sort he 
must become — that is spiritual, not carnal — if 
he shall listen in silence to the concealed mys- 
tery. And this is the water in those fair nuptials 
which Jesus changing made into wine. This, he 
says, is the mighty and true beginning of mira- 
cles^ which Jesus performed in Cana of Galilee, 
and (thus) manifested the kingdom of heaven. 
This, says he, is the kingdom of heaven that 
reposes within us as a treasure, as leaven hid in 
the three measures of meal.-^ 

This is, he says, the great and ineffable mys- 
tery of the Samothracians, which it is allowable, 
he says, for us only who are initiated to know. 
For the Samothracians expressly hand down, in 
the mysteries that are celebrated among them, 
that (same) Adam as the primal man. And 
habitually there stand in the temple of the 
Samothracians two images of naked men, having 
both hands stretched aloft towards heaven, and 
their pudenda erecta, as with the statue of Mer- 
cury on Mount Cyllene. And the aforesaid 
images are figures of the primal man, and of 
that spiritual one that is born again, in every 
respect of the same substance with that man. 
This, he says, is what is spoken by the Saviour ■. 
" If ye do not drink my blood, and eat my flesh, 
ye will not enter into the kingdom of heaven ; 
but even though," He says, " ye drink of the 
cup which I drink of, whither I go, ye cannot 
enter there."'* For He says He was aware of 
what sort of nature each of His disciples was, 
and that .there was a necessity that each of them 
should attain unto His own peculiar nature. 
For He says He chose twelve disciples from the 
twelve tribes, and spoke by them to each tribe. 
On this account, He says, the preachings of the 
twelve disciples neither did all hear, nor, if they 
heard, could they receive. For the things that 
are not according to nature, are with them con- 
trary to nature. 

This, he says, the Thracians who dwell 
around Hsemus, and the Phrygians similarly with 
the Thracians, denominate Corybas, because, 
(though) deriving the beginning of his descent 

* Taken from Anacreon. 
^ John ii. i-ii. 

3 Matt. xiii. 33, 34; Luke xvii. 8i. 

* John vi. 53; Mark x. 38. 

from the head above and from the unportrayed 
brain, and (though) permeating all the principles 
of the existing state of things, (yet) we do not 
perceive how and in what manner he comes 
down. This, says he, is what is spoken : " We 
have heard his voice, no doubt, but we have not 
seen his shape." s For the voice of him that is 
set apart ^ and portrayed is heard; but (his) 
shape, which descends from above from the un- 
portrayed one, — what sort it is, nobody knows. 
It resides, however, in an earthly mould, yet no 
one recognises it. This, he says, is "the god 
that inhabiteth the flood," according to the 
Psalter, "and who speaketh and crieth from 
many waters." ^ The " many waters," he says, 
are the diversified generation of mortal men, 
from which (generation) he cries and vociferates 
to the unportrayed man, saying, " Preserve my 
only-begotten from the lions." ^ In reply to him, 
it has, says he, been declared, " Israel, thou art 
my child : fear not ; even though thou passest 
through rivers, they shall not drown thee ; even 
though thou passest through fire, it shall not 
scorch thee." 9 By rivers he means, says he, the 
moist substance of generation, and by fire the 
impulsive principle and desire for generation. 
" Thou art mine ; fear not." And again, he says, 
" If a mother forget her children, so as not to 
have pity on them and give them food, I also 
will forget you." '° Adam, he says, speaks to his 
own men . " But even though a woman forget 
these things, yet I will not forget you. I have 
painted you on my hands." In regard, however, 
of his ascension, that is his regeneration, that he 
may become spiritual, not carnal, the Scripture, 
he says, speaks (thus) : " Open the gates, ye 
who are your rulers ; and be ye lift up^^ye ever- 
lasting doors, and the King of glory shall come 
in," that is a wonder of wonders." " For who," 
he says, "is this King of glory? A worm, and 
not a man ; a reproach of man, and an outcast 
of the people ; himself is the King of glory, and 
powerful in war." '^ 

And by war he means the war that is in the 
body, because its frame has been made out of 
hostile elements ; as it has been written, he says, 
" Remember the conflict that exists in the 
body." '^ Jacob, he says, saw this entrance and 
this gate in his journey into Mesopotamia, that 
is, when from a child he was now becoming a 
youth and a man ; that is, (the entrance and 
gate) were made known unto him as he jour- 
neyed into Mesopotamia. But Mesopotamia, he 

5 John V. 37. 

6 airoTSTtt-y/LieVov: some read a»roTCTOM«>oi', 

7 Ps. xxix. 3, 10. 

8 Ps. xxii. 20, 21, XXXV. 17. 

9 Isa. xli. 8, xliii. i, 2. 
'° Isa. xlix. 15. 

" Ps. xxiv. 7-9. _ 
'2 Ps. xxii. 6, xxiv. 8. 

•^ This is a quotation from the Septuagint, Job' xl. 27, The rder- 
coce to the authorized (English) version would be xli. 8. 

54 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book V. 

ocean flowing 

says, is the current of the great 
from the midst of the Perfect Man ; and he was 
astonished at the celestial gate, exclaiming, 
" How terrible is this place ! it is nought else 
than the house of God, and this (is) the gate of 
heaven." ' On account of this, he says, Jesus 
uses the words, " I am the true gate." ^ Now he 
who makes these statements is, he says, the Per- 
fect Man that is imaged from the unportrayable 
one from above. The Perfect Man therefore 
cannot, he says, be saved, unless, entering in 
through this gate, he be born again. But this 
very one the Phrygians, he says, call also Papa, 
because he tranquillized all things which, prior 
to his manifestation, were confusedly and dis- 
sonantly moved. For the name, he says, of 
Papa belongs simultaneously to all creatures ^ — 
celestial, and terrestrial, and infernal — who ex- 
claim. Cause to cease, cause to cease the discord 
of the tvorld, and make " peace for those that 
are afar off," that is, for material and earthly 
beings; and " peace for those that are near," •♦ 
that is, for perfect men that are spiritual and 
endued with reason. But the Phrygians denomi- 
nate this same also " corpse " — buried in the 
body, as it were, in a mausoleum and tomb. 
This, he says, is what has been declared, " Ye 
are whited sepulchres, full," he says, "of dead 
men's bones within," s because there 
you the living man. And again he 
" The dead shall start forth from the 
that is, from the earthly bodies, being born again 
spiritual, not carnal. For this, he says, is the 
Resurrection that takes place through the gate 
of heaven, through which, he says, all those that 
do not enter remain dead. These same Phry- 
gians, however, he says, affirm again that this very 
(man), as a conseciuence of the change, (be- 
comes) a god. For, he says, he becomes a god 
when, having risen from the dead, he will enter 
into heaven through a gate of this kind. Paul 
the apostle, he says, knew of this gate, partially 
opening it in a mystery, and stating " that he 
was caught up by an angel, and ascended as far 
as the second and third heaven into paradise 
itself; and that he beheld sights and heard un- 
speakable words which it would not be possible 
for man to declare." ^ 

These are, he says, what are by all called the 
secret mysteries, " which (also we speak), not in 
words taught of human wisdom, but in those 
taught of the Spirit, comparing spiritual things 
with spiritual. But the natural man receiveth 
not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are 

IS not ni 
exclaims, 
graves," ^ 

> G 

en. xxvui. 7, 17. 

John X. 9; Matt. vii. 13. 
[A strange 

3 [A strange amplifying of the word, which is now claimed ex- 
clusively for one. Elucidation III. J 
* Eph. ii. 17. 
5 Matt, xxiii. 27. 
*> Matt, xxvii. 51, 53. 
■? "Cor. xii. 2. 

foolishness unto him." * And these are, he says, 
the ineffable mysteries of the Spirit, which we 
alone are acquainted with. Concerning these, 
he says, the Saviour has declared, " No one can 
come unto me, except my heavenly Father draw 
some one unto me." ^ For it is very difficult, he 
says, to accept and receive this great and ineffa- 
ble mystery. And again, it is said, the Saviour 
has declared, " Not every one that saith unto 
me. Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of 
heaven, but he that doeth the will of my Father 
which is in heaven." '° And it is necessary that 
they who perform this (will), not hear it merely, 
should enter into the kingdom of heaven. And. 
again, he says, the Saviour has declared, "The 
publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom 
of heaven before you." " For " the publicans," 
he says, are those who receive the revenues '^ of 
all things ; '^ but we, he says, are the publicans, 
" unto whom the ends of the ages have come." '+ 
For*" the ends," he says, are the seeds scattered 
from the unportrayable one upon the world, 
through which the whole cosmical system is 
completed ; for through these also it began to 
exist. And this, he says, is what has been de- 
clared : " The sower went forth to sow. And 
some fell by the wayside, and was trodden down ; 
and some on the rocky places, and sprang up," 
he says, " and on account of its having no depth 
(of soil), it withered and died; and some," he 
says, " fell on fair and good ground, and brought 
forth fruit, some a hundred, some sixty, and some 
thirty fold. Who hath ears," he says, " to hear, 
let him hear." '5 The meaning of this, he says, 
is as follows, that none becomes a hearer of 
these mysteries, unless only the perfect Gnos- 
tics. This, he says, is the fair and good land 
which Moses speaks of : "I will bring you into 
a fair and good land, into a land flowing with 
milk and honey." ''' This, he says, is the honey 
and the milk, by tasting which those that are per- 
fect become kingless, and share in the Pleroma. 
This, he says, is the Pleroma, through which all 
existent things that are produced '^ have from 
the ingenerable one been both produced and 
completed. 

And this same (one) is styled also by '^ the 
Phrygians " unfruitful." For he is unfruitful 
when he is carnal, and causes the desire of the 
flesh. This, he says, is what is spoken : " ECvery 
tree not producing good fruit, is cut down and 

* I Cor. ii. 13, 14. 

9 John vi. 44. 
■° Matt. vii. 21. 
" Matt. xxi. 31. 
'2 The word translated "revenues" and "ends" is the same— 

13 Tuv oA(oi': some read Twi' itvinw. 

'* I Cor. X. II. 

'5 Matt. xiii. 3-9; Mark iv. 3-9; Luke viii. 5-8. 

'* Deut. xxxi. 20. 

'' Or, " genera." 

IS VTTo: Stiller reads airb. 

Chap III.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

55 

cast into the fire." ' For these fruits, he says, 
are only rational living men, who enter in through 
the third gate. They say, forsooth, " Ye devour 
the dead, and make the living ; (but) if ye eat the 
living, what will ye do?" They assert, how- 
ever, that the living " are rational faculties and 
minds, and men — pearls of that unportrayable 
one cast before the creature below." ^ This, he 
says, is what (Jesus) asserts : " Throw not that 
which is holy unto the dogs, nor pearls unto the 
swine." 3 Now they allege that the work of 
swine and dogs is the intercourse of the woman 
with a man. And the Phrygians, he says, call 
this very one " goat- herd " (Aipolis), not be- 
cause, he says, he is accustomed to feed the 
goats female and male, as the natural (men) use 
the name, but because, he says, he is " Aipolis " 
— that is, always ranging over, — who both re- 
volves and carries around the entire cosmical 
system by his revolutionary motion. For the 
v.-ord " Polein " signifies to turn and change 
things ; whence, he says, they all call the twos 
centre of the heaven poles (Poloi). And the 
poet says : — 

" What sea-born sinless sage comes hither, 
Undying Egyptian Proteus ? "* 

He is not undone, 5 he says,^ but revolves as 
it were, and goes round himself. Moreover, also, 
cities in which we dwell, because we turn and 
-^fo round in them, are denominated " Poleis." 
n this manner, he says, the Phrygians call this 
one " Aipolis," inasmuch as he everywhere cease- 
lessly turns all things, and changes them into 
their own peculiar (functions). And the Phry- 
gians style him, he says, " very fruitful " likewise, 
"because," says he, "more numerous are the 
children of the desolate one, than those of her 
which hath an husband ; " ^ that is, things by 
being born again become immortal, and abide 
for ever in great numbers, even though the things 
that are produced may be few ; whereas things 
carnal, he says, are all corruptible, even though 
very many things (of 'this type) are produced. 
For this reason, he says, " Rachel wept ^ for her 
children, and would not," says (the prophet), 
" be comforted ; sorrowing for them, for she 
knew," says he, "that they are not." 9 But 
Jeremiah likewise utters lamentation for Jeru- 
salem below, not the city in Phoinicia, but the 
corruptible generation below. For Jeremiah 
likewise, he says, was aware of the Perfect Man, 
of him that is born again — of water and the 

' Matt. iii. lo; Luke iii. 9. 

2 KOiTio; some read Kapn-ov. 

3 Matt. vii. 6. 

* Odyssey, iv. 384. 

5 riTrpacTKeTai; literally, bought and sold, i.e., ruined. 

6 Ae-yei: some read dfieAei, i.e., doubtless, of course. 
^ Isa. liv. I ; Gal. iv. 27. 

8 eicAaie: this is in the margin; eXa^e is in the MS, 
^nal reading is the proper correction of that of the MS, 

9 Jer. xxxi. 15; Matt. ii. 18. 

The mar- 

Spirit not carnal, kt least Jeremiah himself re- 
marked : " He is a man, and who shall know 
him?"'° In this manner, (the Naassene) says, 
the knowledge of the Perfect Man is exceedingly 
profound, and difficult of comprehension. For, 
he says, the beginning of perfection is a knowl- 
edge of man, whereas knowledge of God is 
absolute perfection. 

The Phrygians, however, assert, he says, that 
he is likewise "a green ear of corn reaped." 
And after the Phrygians, the Athenians, while 
initiating people into the Eleusinian rites, like- 
wise display to those who are being admitted to 
the highest grade at these mysteries, the mighty, 
and marvellous, and most perfect secret suitable 
for one initiated into the highest mystic truths : 
(I allude to) an ear of corn in silence reaped. 
But this ear of corn is also (considered) among 
the Athenians to constitute the perfect enormous 
illumination (that has descended) from the un- 
portrayable one, just as the Hierophant himself 
(declares) ; not, indeed, emasculated like Attis," 
but made a eunuch by means of hemlock, and 
despising '^ all carnal generation. (Now) by 
night in Eleusis, beneath a huge fire, (the Cele- 
brant,) enacting the great and secret mysteries, 
vociferates and cries aloud, saying, " August 
Brimo has brought forth a consecrated son, 
Brimus ; " that is, a potent (mother has been 
delivered of) a potent child. But revered, he 
says, is the generation that is spiritual, heavenly, 
from above, and potent is he that is so born. 
For the mystery is called " Eleusin " and "An- 
actorium." " Eleusin," because, he says, we 
who are spiritual come flowing down from Adam 
above ; for the word " eleusesthai " is, he says, 
of the same import with the expression " to 
come." But "Anactorium" is of the same im- 
port with the expression " to ascend upwards." 
This, he says, is what they affirm who have been 
initiated in the mysteries of the Eleusinians. It 
is, however, a regulation of law, that those who 
have been admitted into the lesser should again 
be initiated into the Great Mysteries. For 
greater destinies obtain greater portions. But 
the inferior mysteries, he says, are those of 
Proserpine below ; in regard of which mysteries, 
and the path which leads thither, which is wide 
and spacious, and conducts those that are perish- 
ing to Proserpine, the poet likewise says : — 

" But under her a fearful path extends, 
Hollow, miry, yet best guide to 
Highly-honoured Aphrodite's lovely grove." " 

These, he says, are the inferior mysteries, those 
appertaining to carnal generation. Now, those 

'° Jer. xvii. g. 

11 [The Phrygian Atys (see cap. iv. in/r a) , Whose history should 
have saved Origen from an imitation of heathenism.] 

12 7rapr)Ti7nei»05: some read aTTTjpTKr/uteVos, i.e., perfecting. 
'3 These verses have been ascribed to Parmenides. 

=;6 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book V. 

■men who are initiated into these inferior (mys- 
teries) ought to pause, and (then) be admitted 
into the great (and) heavenly (ones). For they, 
he says, who obtain their shares (in this mys- 
tery), receive greater portions. For this, he 
says, is the gate of heaven ; and this a house of 
God, where the Good Deity dwells alone. And 
into this (gate), he says, no unclean person shall 
enter, nor one that is natural or carnal ; but it 
is reserved for the spiritual only. And those 
who come hither ought to cast off' their gar- 
ments, and become all of them bridegrooms, 
emasculated through the virginal spirit. For 
this is the virgin - who carries in her womb and 
conceives and brings forth a son, not animal, not 
corporeal, but blessed for evermore. Concern- 
ing these, it is said, the Saviour has expressly 
declared that "straight and narrow- is the way 
that leadeth unto life, and few there are that 
enter upon it ; whereas broad and spacious is 
the way that leadeth unto destruction, and many 
there are that pass through it." J 

CHAP. IV. — FURTHER USE MADE OF THE SYSTEM 
OF THE PHRYGIANS ; MODE OF CELEBRATING THE 
.MYSTERIES ; THE MYSTERY OF THE " GREAT 
MOTHER ; " THESE MYSTERIES HAVE A JOINT 
OBJECT OF WORSHIP WITH THE NAASSENI ; THE 
NAASSENI ALLEGORIZE THE SCRIPTURAL ACCOUNT 
OF THE GARDEN OF EDEN ; THE ALLEGORY 
APPLIED TO THE LIFE OF JESUS. 

The Phrygians, however, further assert that 
the father of the universe is " Amygdalus," not 
a tree, he says, but that he is " Amygdalus " who 
previously existed ; and he having in himself 
the perfect fruit, as it were, throbbing and moving 
in the depth, rent his breasts, and produced his 
now invisible, and nameless, and ineffable child, 
respecting whom we shall speak. For the word 
" Amyxai " signifies, as it were, to burst and 
sever through, as he says (happens) in the case 
of inflamed bodies, and which have in them- 
selves any tumour ; and when doctors have cut 
this, they call it " Amychai." In this way, he 
says, the Phrygians call him " Amygdalus," from 
which proceeded and was born the Invisible 
(One), "by whom all things were made, and 
nothing was made without Him."'* And the 
Phrygians say that what has been thence pro- 
duced is "Syrictas" (piper), because the Spirit 
that is born is harmonious. " For God," he 
says, " is Spirit ; wherefore," he affirms, " neither 
in this mountain do the true worshippers wor- 
ship, nor in Jerusalem, but in spirit'. For the 
adoration of the perfect ones," he says, " is 
spiritual, not carnal." s The Spirit, however, he 

• Or, '' receive." 
^ Isa. vii. 14. 

3 Matt. vii. 13, 14. 

* John i. 3. 

S John iv. 2X. 

says, is there where likewise the Father is named, 
and the Son is there born from this Father. 
This, he says, is the many-named, thousand-eyed 
Incomprehensible One, of whom every nature — 
each, however, differently — is desirous. This, 
he says, is the word of God, which, he says, is a 
word of revelation of the Great Power. Where- 
fore it will be sealed, and hid, and concealed, 
lying in the habitation where lies the basis of the 
root of the universe, viz., yEons, Powers, Intelli- 
gences, Gods, Angels, delegated Spirits, Entities, 
Nonentities, Generables, Ingenerables, Incom- 
prehensibles, Comprehensibles, Years, Months, 
Days, Hours, (and) Invisible Point from which *^ 
what is least begins to increase gradually. That 
which is, he says, nothing, and which consists of 
nothing, inasmuch as it is indivisible — (I mean) 
a point — will become through its owti reflective 
power a certain incomprehensible magnitude. 
This, he says, is the kingdom of heaven, the 
grain of mustard seed,^ the point which is in- 
divisible in the body ; and, he says, no one 
knows this (point) save the spiritual only. This, 
he says, is what has been spoken : ' " There is no 
speech nor language where their voice is not 
heard." « 

They rashly assume in this manner, that what- 
soever things have been said and done by all 
men, (may be made to harmonize) with their 
own particular mental view, alleging that all 
things become spiritual. Whence likewise they 
assert, that those exhibiting themselves in the- 
atres, — not even these say or do anything with- 
out premeditation. Therefore, he says, when, 
on the people assembling in the theatres, any 
one enters clad in a remarkable robe, carrying a 
harp and playing a tune (upon it, accompany- 
ing it) with a song of the great mysteries, he 
speaks as follows, not knowing what he says : 
"Whether (thou art) the race of Saturn or 
happy Jupiter,'' or mighty Rhea, Hail, Attis, 
gloomy mutilation of Rhea. Assyrians style thee 
thrice-longed-for Adonis, and the whole of Egypt 
(calls thee) Osiris, celestial horn of the moon : 
Greeks denominate (thee) Wisdom ; Samo- 
thracians, venerable Adam ; Haemonians, Cory- 
bas ; and the Phrygians (name thee) at one time 
Papa, at another time Corpse, or God, or Fniit- 
less, or Aipolos, or green Ear of Corn that has 
been reaped, or whom the very fertile Amyg- 
dalus produced — a man, a musician." This, 
he says, is multiform Attis, whom while they 
celebrate in a hymn, they utter these words : " I 
will hymn Attis, son of Rhea, not with the buzzr 
ing sounds of trumpets, or of Idaean pipers, 
which accord with (the voices of) the Curetes ; 

* <f fi<! or tf 5?, i.e., next. _ 

^ Matt. xiii. 31, 32; Mark iv. 31, 32; Luke xiii. 19. 

8 Ps. xix. 3. 

9 Tl;e passage following obviously was in verse originally. It has 
been icjtorcd to its poetic form by Schneidewin. 

Chap. IV.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

57 

but I will mingle (my song) with Apollo's music 
of harps, ' evoe, evan,' inasmuch as thou art Pan, 
as thou art Bacchus, as thou art shepherd of 
brilliant stars." 

On account of these and such like reasons, 
these constantly attend the mysteries called those 
of the " Great Mother," supposing especially 
that they behold by means of the ceremonies 
performed there the entire mystery. For these 
have nothing more than the ceremonies that are 
performed there, except that they are not emas- 
culated : they merely complete the work of the 
emasculated. For with the utmost severity and 
vigilance they enjoin (on their votaries) to ab- 
stain, as if they were emasculated, from inter- 
course with a woman. The rest, however, of 
the proceeding (observed in these mysteries), as 
we have declared at some length, (they follow) 
just as (if they were) emasculated persons. 
And they do not worship any other object but 
Naas, (from thence) being styled Naasseni. 
But Naas is the serpent from whom, i.e., from 
the word Naas, (the Naassene) says, are all that 
under heaven are denominated temples (Naous). 
And (he states) that to him alone — that is, 
Naas — is dedicated every shrine and every 
initiatory rite, and every mystery ; and, in gen- 
eral, that a religious ceremony could not be dis- 
covered under heaven, in which a temple (Naos) 
has no existence ; and in the temple itself is 
Naas, from whom it has received its denomina- 
tion of temple (Naos). And these afinrm that 
the serpent is a moist substance, just as Thales 
also, the Milesian, (spoke of water as an orignat- 
ing principle,) and that nothing of existing 
things, immortal or mortal, animate or inani- 
mate, could consist at all without him. And 
that all things are subject unto him, and that he 
is good, and that he has all things in himself, as 
in the horn of the one-horned bull ; ■ so as that 
he imparts beauty and bloom to all things that 
exist according to their own nature and peculi- 
arity, as if passing through all, just as ("the 
river) proceeding forth from Edem, and divid- 
ing itself into four heads." ^ 

They assert, however, that Edem is the brain, 
as it were, bound and tightly fastened in encir- 
cling robes, as if (in) heaven. But they suppose 
that man, as far as the head only, is Paradise, 
therefore that " this river, which proceeds out of 
Edem," that is, from the brain, " is divided into 
four heads,^ and that the name of the first river 
is called Phison ; this is that which encompass- 
eth all the land of Havilath : there is gold, and 
the gold of that land is excellent, and there is 
bdellium and the onyx stone." This, he says, 
is the eye, which, by its honour (among the rest 

* Deut. xxxiii, 17. 
2 Gen. ii. lo. 
^ Cen. ii. 11-14. 

of the bodily organs), and its colours, furnishes 
testimony to what is spoken. " But the name 
of the second river is Gihon : this is that which 
compasseth the land of Ethiopia." This, he 
says, is hearing, since Gihon is (a tortuous 
stream), resembling a sort of labyrinth. "And 
the name of the third is Tigris. This is that 
which floweth over against (the country of) the 
Assyrians." This, he says,'* is smelling, employ- 
ing the exceedingly rapid current of the stream 
(as an analogy of this sense) . But it flows over 
agamst (the country of) the Assyrians, because 
in every act of respiration following upon expira- 
tion, the breath drawn in from the external at- 
mosphere enters with swifter motion and greater 
force. For this, he says, is the nature of respira- 
tion. " But the fourth river is Euphrates." This, 
they assert, is the mouth, through which are the 
passage outwards of prayer, and the passage in- 
wards of nourishment. (The mouth) makes 
glad, and nurtures and fashions the Spiritual 
Perfect Man. This, he says, is " the water that 
is above the firmament," 5 concerning which, he 
says, the Saviour has declared, " If thou knewest 
who it is that asks, thou wouldst have asked from 
Him, and He would have given you to drink 
living, bubbling water." ^ Into this water, he 
says, every nature enters, choosing its own sub- 
stances ; and its peculiar quality comes to each 
nature from this water, he says, more than iron 
does to the magnet, and the gold to the back- 
bone 7 of the sea falcon, and the chaff to the 
amber. 

But if any one, he says, is blind from birth, 
and has never beheld the true light, "which 
lighteneth every man that cometh into the 
world," ^ by us let him recover his sight, and 
behold, as it were, through some paradise planted 
with every description of tree, and supplied with 
abundance of fruits, water coursing its way 
through all the trees and fruits ; and he will 
see that from one and the same water the olive 
chooses for itself and draws the oil, and the vine 
the wine ; and (so is it with) the rest of plants, 
according to ea.ch. genus. That Man, however, 
he says, is of no reputation in the world, but of 
illustrious fame in heaven, being betrayed by 
those who are ignorant (of his perfections) to 
those who know him not, being accounted as a 
drop from a cask.*? We, however, he says, are 
spiritual, who, from the life-giving water of Eu- 

■♦ Or, "they say." 

5 Gen. i. 7. 

6 John iv. 10. 

7 KepKts. This word literally means the rod; or, in later times, 
the comb fixed into the i(TT6<: (i.e., the upright loom), for the purpose 
of driving the threads of the woof home, thus making the web even 
and close. It is, among other significations, applied to bones in the 
leg or arm. Cruice and Schneidewin translate /cepicit by spina, ^ 
rendering adopted above. The allusion is made again in chap. xii. 
and chap. xvi. In the last passage, Kifrpoy {fipui) is used inste.id 
ofKep_ti9. 

8 'John i. 9, ix. I. 

9 Isa. xX, 15. 

58 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book V, 

phrates, which flows through the midst of Baby- 
lon, choose our own pecuHar (luality as we pass 
through the true gate, which is the blessed Jesus. 
And of all men, we Christians alone are those 
who in the third gate celebrate the mystery, and 
are anointed there with the unspeakable chrism 
from a horn, as David (was anointed), not from , 
an earthen vessel,' he says, as (was) Saul, who 
held converse with the evil demon ^ of carnal 
concupiscence. 

CHAP. V. — EXPLAXATION OF THE SYSTEM OF THE 
N.\ASSENI TAKEN FROM ONE OF THEIR HYMNS. 

The foregoing remarks, then, though few out 
of many, we have thought proper to bring for- 
ward. For innumerable are the silly and crazy 
attempts of folly. But since, to the best of our 
ability, we have explained the unknown Gnosis, 
it seemed expedient likewise to adduce the fol- 
lowing point. This psalm of theirs has been 
composed, by which they seem to celebrate all 
the mysteries of the error (advanced by) them 
m a hynin, couched in the following terms : — 

The world's producing law was Primal Mind,^ 

And next was First-born's outpoured Chaos; 

And third, the soul received its law of toil : 

Encircl'd, therefore, with an aqueous'' form. 

With care o'erpowered it succumbs to death. 

Now holding sway, it eyes the light, 

And now it weeps on misery flung; 

Now it mourns, now it thrills with joy; 

Now it wails, now it hears its doom; 

Now it hears its doom, now it dies. 

And now it leaves us, never to return. 

It, hapless straying, treads the maze of ills. 

But Jesus said. Father, behold, 

A strife of ills across the earth 

Wanders from thv breath (of wrath); 

But bitter Chaos (man) seeks to shun, 

And knows not how to pass it through. 

On this account, O Father, send me ; 

Bearing seals, I shall descend ; 

Through ages whole I'll sweep, 

All mysteries I'll unravel, 

And forms of Gods I'll show; 

And secrets of the saintly path, 

Styled " Gnosis," I'll impart. 

CHAP. VI. — THE OPHITES THE GRAND SOURCE OF 

HERESY. 

These doctrines, then, the Naasseni attempt 
to establish, calling themselves (inostics. But 
since the error is many-headed and diversified, 
resembling, in truth, the hytlra that we read of 
in history ; when, at one blow, we have struck 
off the heads of this (delusion) by means of 
refutation, employing the wand of truth, we shall 
entirely exterminate the monster. For neither 

' I Sam. X. I, xvi. 13. 

° I Sam. xvi. 14. 

3 The text of this hymn is very corrupt. The Abbe Cniice ex- 
plains the connection of the hymn with the foregoing exposition, and 
considers it to have a reference to the Metempsychosis, which forms 
ipart of 'he system of the Naasseni. [Bunsen, i. 36.] 

* Or. " nimble." 

do the remaining heresies present much differ- 
ence of aspect from this, having a mutual con- 
nection through (the same) spirit of error. But 
since, altering the words and the names of the 
serpent, they wish that there should be many 
heads of the serpent, neither thus shall we fail 
thoroughly to refute them as they desire. 

CHAP. VII. THE SYSTEM OF THE PERAT.'E ; THEIR 

TRITHEISM ; EXPLAX-VTION OF THE INCARNATION. 

There is also unquestionably a certain other, 
(head of the hydra,5 namely, the heresy) of the 
Peratce,^ whose blasphemy against Christ has for 
many years escaped notice. And the present is 
a fitting opportunity for bringing to light the 
secret mysteries of such (heretics) . These allege 
that the world is one, triply divided. And of 
the triple division with them, one portion is a 
certain single originating principle, just as it were 
a huge fountain, which can be divided mentally 
into infinite segments. Now the first segment,, 
and that which, according to them, is (a seg- 
ment) in preference (to others), ^ is a triad, and 
it is called a Perfect Good, (and) a Paternal 
Magnitude. And the second portion of the 
triad of these is, as it were, a certain infinite 
crowd of potentialities that are generated ^ from 
themselves, (while) the third is formal.'^ And 
the first, which is good, is unbegotten, and the 
second is a self-producing good, and the third 
is created ; and hence it is that they expressly 
declare that there are three Gods, three Logoi. 
three Minds, three Men. For to each portion 
of the world, after the division has been made, 
they assign both (jods, and Logoi, and Minds, 
and Men, and the rest ; but that from unorigina- 
tion and the first segment '° of the world, when 
afterwards the world had attained imto its com- 
pletion, there came down from above, for causes 
that we shall afterwards declare, in the time of 

5 Something is wanting after nepariK^ in the text. Miller sup- 
plies the deficiency, and his conjecture is adopted above. Literally, 
It should be rendered — " the Peratic heresy, the blasphemy of which 
(heretics)," etc. 

*> Most of what is mentioned by Hippolytus concerning this sect 
is new, as the chief writers on the early heresies are comparatively 
silent concerning the Peratse; indeed, Irenaeus, Tertullian, and Epi- 
phanius completely so. Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom., vii.; (vol. 
'•• P- 555) > mentions the Peratics, and Theodoret more fully than 
the rest speaks of them {Ha-rct./abul., i. 17). Theodoret, however, 
as the Abbe Cruice thinks, has appropriated his remarks from Hip- 
polytus. 

7 upoe^\t<nipa. or ttpoa^xtinipo., contiguous. This is Miller's 
reading, but is devoid of sense. Ilpoexfo-repa, adopted by Schneide- 
win and Cruice, might bear the meaning of the expression /ar excel- 
lence. 

8 ■yeyei'rtjuiei'wr: Miller reads y(yt:Vvr\\j.ivov, agreeing with 
ttA^Sos. Bernays, in his Episiola Critica addressed to Bunsen, 
proposes the former reading. 

9 eifiiKoO : some read idiicoO. This term, adopted from the Pla- 
tonic philosophy, is translated spccialis by logicians, and iraiisccn- 
deiitalis by metaphysicians. It expresses the pre-existent form in the 
divine mind, accordnig to which material objects were fashioned. The 
term seems out of place as used by the Peratics to denominate a cor- 
ruptible and perishmg world. We should rather expect vKikov, i.e., 
material. (See Aristotle's masterly exposition of the subject of the 
ei6o? and v\t) in his Metaphysics, book vi., and p. 64 of the analyas 
prefixed to the translation in Bohn's Library.) 

'• 7rpu»TT)s or irpb T^s, " antecedent to the segment." 

Chap. VIII.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

59 

Herod a certain man called Christ, with a three- 
fold nature, and a threefold body, and a three- 
fold power, (and) having in himself all (species 
of) concretions and potentialities (derivable) 
from the three divisions of the world ; and that 
this, says (the Peratic), is what is spoken: "It 
pleased him that in him should dwell all fulness 
bodily," ' and in Him the entire Divinity resides 
of the triad as thus divided. For, he says, that 
from the two superjacent worlds — namely, from 
that (portion of the triad) which is unbegotten, 
and from that which is self-producing — there 
have been conveyed down into this world in 
which we are, seeds of all sorts of potentialities. 
What, however, the mode of the descent is, we 
shall afterwards declare. 

(The Peratic) then says that Christ de- 
scended from above from unorigination, that by 
His descent all things triply divided might be 
saved. For some things, he says, being borne 
down from above, will ascend through Him, 
whereas whatever (beings) form plots against 
those which are carried down from above are 
cast off,- and being placed in a state of punish- 
ment, are renounced. This, he says, is what is 
spoken : " For the Son of man came not into the 
world to destory the world, but that the world 
through Him might be saved." The world, he 
says, he denominates those two parts that are 
situated above, viz., both the unbegotten (por- 
tion of the triad), and the self-produced one. 
And when Scripture, he says, uses the words, 
"• that we may not be condemned with the 
world," it alludes to the third portion of (the 
triad, that is) the formal world. For the third 
portion, which he styles the world (in which we 
are), must perish; but the two (remaining por- 
tions), which are situated above, must be rescued 
from corruption. 

CHAP. VIII. 

•THE PER.'VT.^ DERIVE THEIR SYSTEM 

FROM THE ASTROLOGERS ; THIS PROVED BY A 
STATEMENT OF THE ASTROLOGICAL THEORIES OF 
THE ZODIAC ; HENCE THE TERMINOLOGY OF THE 
PERATIC HERETICS. 

Let US, then, in the first place, learn how (the 
Peratists), deriving this doctrine from astrolo- 
gers, act despitefully towards Christ, working 
destruction for those who follow them in an 
error of this description. For the astrologers, 
alleging that there is one world, divide it into 
the twelve fixed portions of the zodiacal signs, 
and call the world of the fixed zodiacal signs 
one immoveable world ; and the other they 

' o-w/j.aTiKu>?, i.e, substantially. See Col. i. 19, ii. 9. 

- a<J)ieTai: some read a<i>i€i, i.e., dismisses; some o'^ifi eiicij, i.e., 
heedlessly casts off. Hippolytus, in his Summary of the Peratic 
Heresy in book x., has a^icrai eiitTJ, which Cruice translates teinere 
absolviititur. Schneidewin has in the same passage ac^ierai merely, 
and translates it abjiciuntur. In both places Bemays suggests 
oi^iO£i6)j, i.e., those of the nature of the Serpent. 

affirm to be a world of erratic (signs), both in 
power, and position, and number, and that it 
extends as far as the moon.^ And (they lay 
down), that (one) world derives from (the 
other) world a certain power, and mutual partici- 
pation (in that power), and that the subjacent 
obtain this participation from the superjacent 
(portions). In order, however, that what is 
(here) asserted may be perspicuous, I shall one 
by one employ those very expressions of the as- 
trologers ; (and in doing so) I shall only be 
reminding my readers of statements previously 
made in the department of the work where we 
have explained the entire art of the astrologers. 
What, then, the opinions are which those (specu- 
lators) entertain, are as follow : — 

(Their doctrine is), that from an emanation 
of the stars the generations of the subjacent 
(parts) is consummated. For, as they wistfully 
gazed upward upon heaven, the Chaldeans as- 
serted that (the seven stars) •♦ contain a reason 
for the efficient causes of the occurrence of all the 
events that happen unto us, and that the parts 
of the fixed zodiacal signs co-operate (in this 
influence). Into twelve (parts they divide the 
zodiacal circle) , and each zodiacal sign into thirty 
portions, and each portion into sixty diminutive 
parts ; for so they denominate the very smallest 
parts, and those that are indivisible. And of the 
zodiacal signs, they term some male, but others 
feminine ; and some with two bodies, but others 
not so ; and some tropical, whereas others firm. 
The male signs, then, are either feminine, which 
possess a co-operative nature for the procrea- 
tion of males, (or are themselves productive of 
females.) For Aries is a male zodiacal sign, but 
Taurus female ; and the rest (are denominated) 
according to the same analogy, some male, but 
others female. And I suppose that the Pythago- 
reans, being swayed from such (considerations), 
style the Monad male, and the Duad female ; 
and, again, the Triad male, and analogically the 
remainder of the even and odd numbers. Some, 
however, dividing each zodiacal sign into twelve 
parts, employ almost the same method. For ex- 
ample, in Aries, they style the first of the twelve 
parts both Aries and a male, but the second both 
Taurus and a female, and the third both Gemini 
and a male ; and the same plan is pursued in the 
case of the rest of the parts. And they assert 
that there are signs with two bodies, viz., Gem- 
ini and the signs diametrically opposite, namely 
Sagittarius, and Virgo, and Pisces, and that the 
rest have not two bodies. And (they state) that 
some are likewise tropical, and when the sun 
stands in these, he causes great turnings s of the 
surrounding (sign). Aries is a sign of thi« 

3 Or, " is part of the moon." 

■• Some omissions here are supplied from Sextus Empiricus. 

5 Or, " produces alterations and causes turnings." 

6o 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book V. 

description, and that which is diametrically op- 
posite to it, just as Libra, and Capricorn, and 
Cancer. For in Aries is the vernal turning, and 
in Capricorn that of winter, and in Cancer that 
of summer, and in Libra that of autumn. 

The details, however, concerning this system 
we have minutely explained in the book pre- 
ceding this ; and from it any one who wishes 
instruction (on the point), may learn how it is 
that the originators of this Peratic heresy, viz., 
Euphrates the Peratic, and Celbes the Carystian,' 
have, in the transference (into their own system 
of opinions from these sources), made alterations 
in name only, while in reality they have put for- 
ward similar tenets. (Nay more), they have, 
with immoderate zeal, themselves devoted (their 
attention) to the art (of the astrologers). For 
also the astrologers speak of the limits of the 
stars, in which they assert that the dominant 
stars have greater influence ; as, for instance, on 
some they act injuriously, while on others they 
act well. And of these they denominate some 
malicious, and some beneficent. And (stars) are 
said to look upon one another, and to harmonize 
with each other, so that they appear according 
to (the shape of) a triangle or square. The 
stars, looking on one another, are figured accord- 
ing to (the shape of^) a triangle, having an in- 
tervening distance of the extent of three zodiacal 
signs ; whereas (those that have an interval of) 
two zodiacal signs are figured according to (the 
shape of) a square. And (their doctrine is), 
that as in the same way as in a man, the subja- 
cent parts sympathize with the head, and the 
head likewise sympathizes with the subjacent 
parts, so all terrestrial (sympathize) with super- 
lunar J objects. But (the astrologers go further 
than this'') ; for there exists (according to 
them) a certain difference and incompatibility 5 
between these, so as that they do not involve one 
and the same union. This combination and 
divergence of the stars, which is a Chaldean 
(tenet), has been arrogated to themselves by 
those of whom we have previously spoken. 

Now these, falsifying the name of tmth, pro- 
claim as a doctrine of Christ an insurrection of 

' Celbes, as observed in a former note, has two other forms in 
The Refutation, viz., Acembes and Ademes. He is called Carystius, 
and the other founder of the heresy Peratlcus. As the latter term is 
frequently used to designate Eubcca, i.e., the country beyond {-nipav) 
the continent, it is inferred that Carystius has a similar import. This 
would seem placed beyond conjecture by a passage {Strom., vii. 
vol. il. p. 555) in Clemens Alexandrinus, already alluded to, who 
<ays that some heresies, e.g , those of the Marcionites and Basilidians, 
derived their denomination from the names, whereas others from the 
country, of their founders. As an instance of the latter, he mentions 
the Peratics (see note 4, p. 62, [and note 6, p. 58]) 

* Some deficiencies in the text are filled up m 
cus. 

3 Or, " celestial." 

* This expression aWa. yap requires to have the ellipsis supplied 
as above. It ma^ be freely rendered " nay more." Miller reads 
'AAAt) yap, i.e. " There is some other difference," etc.; but this does 
not agree with Sextus Empiricus. 

_ s Or, " sympathy: " avpLnadda is, however, properly altered into 
aTunnadtta on the authority of Sextus. 

up from Sextus Empiri- 

/^ons and revolts of good into (the ranks of) 
evil powers ; and they speak of the confedera- 
tions of good powers with wicked ones. De- 
nominating them, therefore, Toparchai and 
Proastioi,^ and (though thus) framing for them- 
selves very many other names not suggested (to 
them from other sources), they have yet un- 
skilfully systematized the entire imaginary doc- 
trine of the astrologers concerning the stars. 
And since they have introduced a supposition 
pregnant with immense error, they shall be re- 
futed through the instrumentality of our admira- 
ble arrangement. For I shall set down, in 
contrast with the previously mentioned Chaldaic 
art of the astrologers, some of the Peratic ' 
treatises, from which, by means of comparison, 
there will be an opportunity of perceiving how 
the Peratic doctrines are those confessedly of 
the astrologers, not of Christ. 

CHAP. IX. — SYSTEM OF THE PERAT^E EXPLAINED 
OUT OF ONE OF THEIR OWN BOOKS. 

It seems, then, expedient to set forth a certain 
one of the books held ^ in repute amongst them, 
in which the following passage ^ occurs : " I am 
a voice of arousal from slumber in the age of 
night. Henceforward I commence to strip the 
power which is from chaos. The power is that 
of the lowest depth of mud, which uprears the 
slime of the incorruptible (and) humid expanse 
of space. And it is the entire power of the 
convulsion, which, ever in motion, and presenting 
the colour of water, whirls things on that are 
stationary, restrains things tremulous, sets things 
free as they proceed, lightens '° things as they 
abide, removes things on the increase, a faithful 
steward of the track of the breezes, enjoying 
the things disgorged from the twelve eyes of 
the law," (and) manifesting a seal '^ to the 
power which along with itself distributes the 
downborne invisible waters, and has been called 
Thalassa. This power ignorance has been ac- 
customed to denominate Cronus,, guarded with 
chains because he tightly bound the fold of the 

* i.e., " Rulers of localities and suburbans." 

7 The Peratic heresy both Hippolytus and Theodoret state to 
have originated from Euphrates. Origen, on the other hand, states 
(Cofttr. Cels., vi. 2S, [vol. iv. p. 586]) that Euphrates was founder 
of the Ophites. The inference from this is, that Origen was not 
author of T/te Refutation. 

* Hippolytus at the end of th's chapter mentions the title of one 
of their books, Oi irpoocTTeioi ttus oiSepos, " The Suburbans up to 
the Air " Bunsen suggests neparai iu><: ai$ipoi, " The Transcen- 
dental Etherians." (See note i sufira.) 

9 The Abbe Cruice considers that the following system of cn«- 
mogony is translated into Greek from some Chaldaic or Syriac work. 
He recognises in it likewise a Jewish element, to be accounted for 
from the fact that the Jews during the Babylonish captivity imbibed 
the principles of the Oriental philosophy. What, therefore, is given 
by Hippolytus may have a Judaistic origin. 

■° Schneidewin considers the text here corrupt. 

" The Abbe Cruice observes that the reference here is to the sec- 
ond book of the law (Ex. xv. 27). where mention is made of the 
twelve fountains of Elim. The Hebrew word iVV) stands for both 

an eye and a fountain. Hence the error by the Greek translator. 

'2 i.e., a poeiic expression, as Cruice remarks, for closing the seal. 
(Sec Job ix. 7.) 

Chap. X.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

6i 

dense and misty and obscure and murky Tar- 
tarus. According to the image of this were 
produced Cephcus, Prometheus, (and) Japetus. 
The Power to which has been entrusted Tha- 
lassa ' is hermaphrodite. And it fastens the 
hissing sound arising from the twelve mouths 
into twelve pipes, and pours it forth. And the 
power itself is subtle, and removes the controll- 
ing, boisterous, upward motion (of the sea), 
and seals the tracks of its paths, lest (any an- 
tagonistic power) should wage war or introduce 
any alteration. The tempestuous daughter of 
this one is a faithful protectress of all sorts of 
waters. Her name is Chorzar. Ignorance is 
in the habit of styling this (power) Neptune, 
according to whose image was produced Glau- 
cus, Melicertcs, Ino, Nebroii.- He that is encir- 
cled with the pyramid of twelve angels,^ and 
darkens the gate into the pyramid with various 
colours, and completes the entire in the sable 
hues of Night : this one ignorance denominated 
Cronus.'* .And his ministers were five, — first 
U, second Aoai, third Uo, fourth Uoab, fifth . . . 
Other trustworthy managers (there are) of his 
province of night and day, who repose in their 
own power. Ignorance denominated these the 
erratic stars, from whom depends a corruptible 
generation. Manager of the rising of the stars 
is Carphacasemeocheir, (and) Eccabbacara (is 
the same). Ignorance is in the habit of de- 
nominating these Curetes chief of the winds ; 
third in order is Ariel, according to whose image 
was generated yEolus, Briares. And chief of 
the twelve-houred nocturnal (power) is Soclan, 
whom ignorance is accustomed to style Osiris ; 
(and) according to the image of this one was 
born Admetus, Medea, Helen, yEthusa. Chief 
of the twelve-houred diurnal power is Euno. 
This is manager of the rising of the star Proto- 
camarus and of the ethereal (region), but igno- 
rance has denominated him Isis. A sign of this 
one is the Dog-star, according to whose image 
were born Ptolem.-eus son of Arsinoe, Didyma, 
Cleopatra, and Olympias. God's right-hand 
power is that which ignorance has denominated 
Rhea, according to whose image were produced 
Attis, Mygdon,'' (and) fEnone. The left-hand 
power has lordship over sustenance, and igno- 
rance is in the habit of styling this Ceres, 
(while) her name is Bena ; and according to 
the image of this one were born Celeus, Trip- 

' Schneidewin refers us to a passage from Berosiis, who affirms 
that tills person was styled Thalatta by the Greeks, Thalath by the 
Chaldeans; another denomination being Omorka, or Omoroka, or 
Marcaia. The Abbe Crince, however, sets little value on these 
names, which, following the judgment of Scallger, he pronounces 
spurious. It is unnecessary to relnind scholars that the authenticity 
of I'erosus has collapsed under the attacks of modern criticism. 

- Miller suggests SK}>i\Tq, Cruice Nebo. 

3 Cruice thinks this may be a figure of the year and of twelve 
months. 

* Miller has Koprju. 

5 Or, "air." 

*> Miller reads Muyfiwi-ij, others Muy5d»T|. 

tolemus, Misyr, and Pra.xidica.' The right-hand 
poxver has lordship over fruits. This one igno- 
rance has denominated Mena, according to 
whose image were born Bumegas,^ Ostanes, 
Mercury Trismegistus, Curites, Petosiris, Zoda- 
rium, Berosus, .Astrampsuchus, (and) Zoroaster. 
The left-hand power is (lord) of fire, (and) 
ignorance has denominated this one Vulcan, 
according to whose image were born Eric- 
thonius, Achilles, Capaneus, PhaiJthon,'' Melea- 
ger, Tydeus, Enceladus, Raphael, Suriel, (and) 
Omphale. There are three intermediate pow- 
ers suspended from air, authors of generation. 
These ignorance has been in the habit of de- 
nominating Fates ; and according to the image 
of these were produced the house of Priam, 
the house of Laius, Ino, Autonoe, Agave, Atha- 
mas, Procne, Danaides, and Peliades. A power 
(there is) hermaphrodite, always continuing in 
infancy, never waxing old, cause of beauty, 
pleasure, maturity, desire, and concupiscence ; 
and ignorance has been accustomed to style 
this Eros, according to whose image were born 
Paris, Narcissus, Ganymede, Endymion, Titho- 
nus, Icarius, Leda, Amymone, Thetis, Hesperides, 
Jason, Leander, (and) Hero." These are Pro- 
ASTioi up to /Ether, for with this title also he 
inscribes the book. 

CHAP. X. — THE PERATIC HERESY NOMINALLY DIF- 
FERENT FROM ASTROLOGY, BUT REALLY THE 
SAME SYSTEM ALLEGORIZED, 

It has been easily made evident to all, that the 
heresy of the Peratoe is altered in name only 
from the (art) of the astrologers. And the rest 
of the books of these (heretics) contain the same 
method, if it were agreeable to any one to wade 
through them all. For, as I said, they suppose 
that the causes of the generation of all begotten 
things are things unbegotten and superjacent, 
and that the world with us has been produced 
after the mode of emanation, which (world) 
they denominate formal. And (they maintain) 
that all those stars together which are beheld in 
the firmament have been causes of the genera- 
tion of this world. They have, however, altered 
the name of these, as one may perceive from the 
Proastioi by means of a comparison (of the two 
systems). And secondly, according to the same 
method as that whereby the world was made 
from a supernal emanation, they aftirm that in 
this manner objects here derive from the emana- 
tion of the stars their generation, and corruption, 
and arrangement. Since, then, astrologers are 
acquainted with the horoscope, and meridian, 
and setting, and the point opposite the merid- 
ian ; and since these stars occupy at different 

7 Miller has 'ATrpa(ia. 

* Miller suggests Bou^uyjjs, . 

9 Miller reads •tAeywi'. 

02 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book V. 

times different positions' in space, on account 
of the perpetual revolution of the universe, there 
are (necessarily) at different periods different 
declinations towards a centre, and (different) 
ascensions to centres.- (Now the Peratic here- 
tics), affixing an allegorical import to this ar- 
rangement of the astrologers, delineate the 
centre, as it were, a god and monad and lord 
over universal generation, whereas the declina- 
tion (is regarded by them as a power) on the 
left, and ascension on the right. When any one, 
therefore, falling in with the treatises of these 
(heretics), finds mention among them of right 
or left power, let him recur to the centre, and 
the declination, and the ascension (of the Chal- 
dean sages, and) he will clearly observe that the 
entire system of these (Peratse) consists of the 
astrological doctrine. 

CHAP. XI. — WHY THEY CALL THEMSELVES PERAT^ ; 
THEIR THEORY OF GENER.\TION SUPPORTED BY 
AN APPEAL TO ANTIQUITY ; THEIR INTERPRETA- 
TION OF THE EXODUS OF ISRAEL ; THEIR SYSTEM 
OF "THE SERPENT;" DEDUCED BY THEM FROM 
SCRIPTURE ; THIS THE REAL IMPORT OF THE 
DOCTRINES OF THE ASTROLOGERS. 

They denominate themselves, however, Pera- 
tse, imagining that none of those things existing 
by generation can escape the determined lot for 
those things that derive their existence from 
generation. For if, says (the Peratic), anything 
be altogether begotten, it also perishes, as also 
is the opinion of the Sibyl. ^ But we alone, he 
says, who are conversant with the necessity of 
generation, and the paths through which man 
has entered into the world, and who have been 
accurately instructed (in these matters), we alone 
are competent to proceed through and pass be- 
yond destruction.-* But water, he says, is de- 
struction ; nor did the world, he says, perish by any 
other thing quicker than by water. Water, how- 
ever, is that which rolls around among the Pro- 
ASTini, (and) they assert (it to be) Cronus. For 
such a power, he says, is of the colour of water ; 
and this power, he says — that is, Cronus — none 
of those things existent by generation can escape. 
For Cronus is a cause to every generation, in re- 
gard of succumbing under destruction, and there 
could not exist (an instance of) generation in 
which Cronus does not interfere. This, he says, 
is what the poets also affirm, and what even ap- 
pals the gods : — 

* VH'O^eVcui/; some read Kivovtiiviov, i.e., have different motions. 

2 Kei-Tpots: Schneidewin suggests (ceVrpuji-. 

3 See Oratn/a Siby/lina Fragm., ii. ver. i. 

* 7rep<i<7ai; hence their name Peratics, i.e., Transcendentalists. 
Bunsen considers, however, that such a derivation as this was not the 
true one (see note i, p. 6o), but merely an afte.-thought. The title 
of one of the Peratic treatises, as altered by Bunsen from Oi irpoao-- 
T«tot iio<r aiflepo? into Oi Ueparat iuis aiOtpo?, i.e., " the Transcen- 
dental Etherians," would agree with their subsequent assumption of 
this title. [Bunsen, i. p. 37. J 

" For know, he says, this earth and spacious heaven 

above, 
And Styx' flooded water, which is the oath 
That greatest is, and dreaded most by gods of happy 

life." ^ 

And not only, he says, do the poets make this 
statement, but already also the very wisest men 
among the Greeks. And Heraclitus is even one 
of these, employing the following words : " For 
to souls water becomes death." This death, 
(the Peratic) says, seizes the Egyptians in the 
Red Sea, along with their chariots. All, how- 
ever, who are ignorant (of this fact), he says, 
are Egyptians. And this, they assert, is the 
departure from Egypt, (that is,) from the body. 
For they suppose little Egypt to be body, and 
that it crosses the Red Sea — that is, the water 
of corruption, which is Cronus — and that it 
reaches a place beyond the Red Sea, that is, 
generation ; and that it comes into the wilder- 
ness, that is, that it attains a condition inde- 
pendent of generation, where there exist pro- 
miscuously all the gods of destruction and the 
God of salvation. 

Now, he says, the stars are the gods of de- 
struction, which impose upon existent things the 
necessity of alterable generation. These, he 
says, Moses denominated serpents of the wilder- 
ness, which gnaw and utterly ruin those who 
imagined that they had crossed the Red Sea. 
To those, then, he says, who of the children of 
Israel were bitten in the wilderness, Moses ex- 
hibited the real and perfect serpent ; and they 
who believed . on this serpent were not bitten 
in the wilderness, that is, (were not assailed) by 
(evil) powers. No one therefore, he says, is 
there who is able to save and deliver those that 
come forth from Egypt, that is, from the body 
and from this world, unless alone the serpent 
that is perfect and replete with fulness. Upon 
this (serpent), he says, he who fixes his hope is 
not destroyed by the snakes of the wilderness, 
that is, by the gods of generation. (This state- 
ment) is written, he says, in a book of Moses. 
This serpent, he says, is the power that attended 
Moses,5 the rod that was turned into a serpent. 
The serpents, however, of the magicians — (that 
is,) the gods of destruction — withstood the 
power of Moses in Egypt, but the rod of Moses 
reduced them all to subjection and slew them. 
This universal serpent is, he says, the wise dis- 
course of Eve. This, he says, is the mystery 
of Edem, this the river of Edem ; this th,e mark 
that was set upon Cain, that any one who findeth 
him might not kill him. This, he says,'' is Cain,^ 
whose sacrifice ** the god of this world did not 
accept. The gory sacrifice, however, of Abel he 

s Ex. iv. 2-4, 17, vii. 9-1 J. 
6 Or, " they say." 
' Gen. ir. 15. 
* Gen. iv. 5. 

riiAi'. XI I.J 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

approved of; for the ruler of this world rejoices 
in (offerings of) blood. This, he says, is he 
who appeared in the last days, in form of a man, 
in the times of Herod, being born after the 
likeness of Joseph, who was sold by the hand of 
his brethren, to wliom alone belonged the coat 
of many colours. This, he says, is he who is 
according to the likeness of Esau, whose gar- 
ment — he not being himself present — was 
blessed ; who did not receive, he says, the bene- 
diction uttered by him of enfeebled vision.' He 
acquired, however, wealth from a source inde- 
l)endent of this, receiving nothing from him 
whose eyes were dim ; and Jacob saw his coun- 
tenance,^ as a man beholds the face of God. In 
regard of this, he says, it has been written that 
'• Nebrod was a mighty hunter before the Lord." ^ 
And there are, he says, many who closely imitate 
this (Nimrod) : as numerous are they as the 
gnawing (serpents) which were seen in the wil- 
derness by the children of Israel, from which 
that perfect serpent which Moses set up delivered 
those that were bitten. This, he says, is that 
which has been declared : " In the same manner 
as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, 
so also must the Son of man be lifted up." * 
According to the likeness of this was made in 
the desert the brazen serpent which Moses set 
up. Of this alone, he says, the image is in 
heaven, always conspicuous in light. 

This, he says, is the great beginning respect- 
ing which Scripture has spoken. Concerning 
this, he says it has been declared : " In the be- 
ginning was the Word, and the Word was with 
God, and the Word was God. This was in the 
beginning with God, all things were made by 
Him, and without Him was not one thing that 
was made. And what was formed in Him is 
life." 5 And in Him, he says, has been formed 
Eve ; (now) Eve is life. This, however, he 
says, is Eve, mother of all living,*' — a common 
nature, that is, of gods, angels, immortals, mor- 
tals, irrational creatures, (and) rational ones. 
For, he says, the expression " all " he uttered 
of all (existences). And if the eyes of any, he 
says, are blessed, this one, looking upward on 
the firmament, will behold at the mighty sum- 
rait " of heaven the beauteous image of the ser- 
|)ent, turning itself, and becoming an originating 
principle of every (species of) motion to all 
things that are lieing produced. He will (there- 
by) know that without him nothing consists, 
either of things in heaven, or things on earth, 
or things under the earth. Not night, not 

' Gen. xxvii. i. 
^ Gen. xxxiii. lo. 
3 Gen. X. 9. 
^ John iii. 14, 15. 

5 John i. 1-4. 

6 The Abbe Cniice thinks that Hippolytus is here quoting from 
the Gospel of Eve (see Epiph., H<er., xxvi. 2). 

^ axpij: this is a conjectural reading instead of ipxV' 

moon, not fruits, not generation, not wealth, not 
sustenance, not anything at all of existent things, 
is without his guidance. In regard of this, he 
says, is the great wonder which is beheld in the 
firmament by those who are able to observe it. 
For, he says, at this top of his head, a fact which 
is more incredible than all things to those who 
are ignorant, " are setting and rising mingled 
one with other." This it is in regard of which 
ignorance is in the habit of affirming : in heaven 

" Draco revolves, marvel mighty of monster dread." ' 

And on both sides of him have been placed Co- 
rona and Lyra ; and above, near the top itself of 
the head, is visible the piteous man "Engonasis," 

" Holding the right foot's end of Draco fierce." ' 

And at the back of Engonasis is an imperfect 
serpent, with both hands tightly secured by An- 
guitenens, and being hindered from touching 
Corona that lies beside the perfect serpent. 

CHAP, XII. — COMPENDIOUS STATEMENT OF THE 
DOCTRINES OF THE PERAT^. 

This is the diversified wisdom of the Peratic 
heresy, which it is difficult to declare in its en- 
tirety, so intricate is it on account of its seem- 
ing to consist of the astrological art. As far 
forth, then, as this is possible, we shall briefly 
explain the whole force of this (heresy). In 
order, however, that we may by a compendious 
statement elucidate the entire doctrine of these 
persons, it appears expedient to subjoin the fol- 
lowing observations. According to them, the 
universe is Father, Son, (and) Matter; (but) 
each of these three has endless capacities in 
itself. Intermediate, then, between the Matter 
and the Father sits the Son, the Word, the Ser- 
pent, always being in motion towards the un- 
moved Father, and (towards) Matter itself in 
motion. And at one time he is turned towards 
the Father, and receives the powers into his own 
person ; but at another time takes up these 
powers, and is turned towards Matter. And 
Matter, (though) devoid of attribute, and being 
unfashioned, moulds (into itself) forms from the 
Son which the Son moulded from the Father. 

But the Son derives shape from the Father 
after a mode ineffable, and unspeakable, and 
unchangeable ; (that is,) in such a manner as 
Moses says that the colours of the conceived 
(kine) flowed from the rods'" which were fixed 
in the drinking-troughs. And in like manner, 
again, that capacities flowed also from the Son 
into Matter, similarly to the power in reference 
to conception which came from the rods upon 
the conceived (kine). And the difference of 

8 Aratus, Ph(enom., v. 62. 

9 Ibid., V. 46. 

'° Gen. XXX. 37-30. 

64 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book v. 

colours, and the dissimilarity which flowed from 
the rods through the waters ujjon the sheep, is, 
he says, the difference of corruptible and incor- 
ruptible generation. As, however, one who 
]>aints from nature, though he takes nothing 
away from animals, transfers by his pencil all 
forms to the canvas ; so the Son, by a power 
which belongs to himself, transfers paternal 
marks from the Father into Matter. All the pa- 
ternal marks are here, and there are not any 
more. For if any one, he says, of those (beings) 
which are here will have strength to perceive 
that he is a paternal mark transferred hither from 
above, (and that he is) incarnate — just as by the 
conception resulting from the rod a something 
white is produced, — he is of the same substance 
altogether with the Father in heaven, and returns 
thither. If, however, he may not happen upon 
this doctrine, neither will he understand the ne- 
cessity of generation, just as an abortion born 
at night will perish at night. When, therefore, 
he says, the Saviour observes, "your Father 
which is in heaven,'" he alludes to that one 
from whom the Son deriving his characteristics 
has transferred them hither. When, however, 
(Jesus) remarks, "Your father is a murderer 
from the beginning,'" he alludes to the Ruler 
and Demiurge of matter, who, appropriating the 
marks delivered from the Son, generated him 
here who from the beginning was a murderer, 
for his work causes corruption and death. 

No one, then, he says, can be saved or return 
(into heaven) without the Son, and the Son is 
the Serpent. For as he brought down from 
above the paternal marks, so again he carries up 
from thence those marks roused from a dormant 
condition and rendered paternal characteristics, 
substantial ones from the unsubstantial Being, 
transferring them hither from thence. This, he 
says, is what is spoken : " I am the door." ^ 
And he transfers (those marks), he says,'* to 
those who close the eyelid, as the naphtha draw- 
ing the fire in every direction towards itself; 
nay rather, as the magnet (attracting) the iron 
and not anything else, or just as the backbone 
of the sea falcon, the gold and nothing else, or 
as the chaff is led by the amber. In this man- 
ner, he says, is the portrayed, perfect, and con- 
substantial genus drawn again from the world by 
the Serpent ; nor does he (attract) anything else, 
as it has been sent down by him. For a proof 
of this, they adduce the anatomy s of the brain, 
assimilating, from the fact of its immobility, the 

' Matt. vii. II. 

^ John viii. 44. 

3 John .X. 7. 

* I'here is.i hiatus here. Miller, who also suggests iiix^fpti instead 
of ^tradnpti, supplies the deficiency as' translated above. The .Abbe 
Cruicc fills up the hiatus by words taken from a somewhat similar 
passage in the third chapter of book viii., but the obscurity still re- 
mains. Miller thinks there ib a reference to Isa vi. 10. 

5 This theory has been previously alluded to by Hippolytus in the 
last chapter of book iv. 

brain itself to the Father, and the cerebellum to 
the Son. because of its being moved and being 
of the form of (the head of) a serpent. And 
they allege that this (cerebellum), by an ineffable 
and inscrutable process, attracts through the 
pineal gland the spiritual and life-giving sub- 
stance emanating from the vaulted chamber'^ 
(in which the brain is embedded). And on 
receiving this, the cerebellum in an ineffable 
manner imparts the ideas, just as the Son does, 
to matter ; or, in other words, the seeds and the 
genera of the things produced according to the 
flesh flow along into the spinal marrow. Em- 
ploying this exemplar, (the heretics) seem to 
adroitly introduce their secret mysteries, which 
are delivered in silence. Now it would be 
impious for us to declare these ; yet it is easy to 
form an idea of them, by reason of the many 
statements that have been made. 

CHAP. XIII. THE PER.\TIC HERESY NOT GENER-ALLV 

KNOWN. 

But since I consider that I have plainly ex- 
plained the Peratic heresy, and by many (argu- 
ments) have rendered evident (a system that 
hitherto) has always escaped notice, and is 
altogether 7 a tissue of fable, and one that dis- 
guises its own peculiar venom, it seems expedi- 
ent to advance no further statement beyond 
those already put for\vard ; for the opinions pro- 
pounded by (the heretics) themselves are suffi- 
cient for their own condemnation. 

CHAP. XIV. THE SYSTEM OF THE SETHUNS ; THEIR 

TRUD OF INFINITE PRI.VCIPLES ; THEIR HERESY 
EXPL.'MNED; THEIR INTERPRETATION OF THE IN- 
CARNATION. 

Let us then see what the Sithians^ affirm. 
To these it appears that there are three definite 
principles of the universe, and that each of the^e 
principles possesses infinite powers. And when 
they speak of powers ^ let him that heareth take 
into account that they make this statement. 
Everything whatsoever you discern by an act 
of intelligence, or also omit (to discern) as not 
being understood, this by nature is fitted to 
become each of the principles, as in the hur.ian 
soul every art whatsoever which is made the 
subject of instruction. Just for instance, he 
says, this child will be a m..3ician, having waited 

6 Kaixapiov: some would read ^axopioi; ["the dome of thought, 
the palace ol the soul "]. 

7 TToi'Tairacn: some read navTa iraai. Cruice suggests -rraav 
<'TriTifltiM«V>)^, i.e., one that plots against all. 

8 This is the form in which the name occurs in Hippolytus, but 
the correct one is Selhians. As regards this sect, see Ircnaius, Ccnir. 
//a-rcf., i. 30; Tertullian, jPrtfJt^;//., c. Ixvii.; Theodoret, iVa-rf/. 
FaiuL, i. \Y. Epiphanius, Advers. Hares., c. xxviii., xxxvii., and 
xx.\ix.; Augustine, /V }iurtt.,c. xix.; Josephus, Antiq. "Judaic.., 
i. 2; Suidas on the word " Seth." 

9 For 6d»o«<i? . . . Aov't'tcrfi"', Bemays reads lvva.to.1. . . . 
Aovi^effflai: "While these make (such) assertions, he is able to cal- 
culate," etc. 

Chap. XIV.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

bs, 

the requisite time for (acquiring a knowledge 
of) the harp ; or a geometrician, (having pre- 
viously undergone the necessary study for ac- 
quiring a knowledge) of geometry ; (or) a 
grammarian, (after having sufficiently studied) 
grammar ; (or) a workman, (having acquired a 
practical acquaintance) with a handicraftsman's 
business ; and to one brought into contact with 
the rest of the arts a similar occurrence will 
take place. Now of principles, he says, the 
substances are light and darkness ; and of these, 
spirit is intermediate without admixture. The 
spirit, however, is that which has its appointed 
place in the midst of darkness which is below, 
and light which is above. It is not spirit as a 
current of wind, or some gentle breeze that can 
be felt ; but, as it were, some odour of ointment 
or of incense formed out of a compound. (It 
is) a subtle power, that insinuates itself by means 
of some impulsive quality in a fragrance, which 
is inconceivable and better than could be ex- 
pressed by words. Since, however, light is above 
and darkness below, and spirit is intermediate 
in such a way as stated between these ; and since 
light is so constituted, that, like a ray of the sun. 
It shines from above upon the underlying dark- 
ness ; and again, since the fragrance of the spirit, 
holding an intermediate place, is extended and 
carried in every direction, as in the case of 
incense-offerings placed upon fire, we detect the 
fragrance that is being wafted in every direction : 
when, I say, there is a power of this description 
belonging unto the principles which are classified 
under three divisions, the power of spirit and 
light simultaneously exists in the darkness that 
is situated underneath them. But the darkness 
is a terrible water, into which light is absorbed 
and translated into a nature of the same descrip- 
tion with spirit. The darkness, however, is not 
devoid of intelligence, but altogether reflective, 
and is conscious that, where the light has been 
abstracted from the darkness, the darkness re- 
mains isolated, invisible, obscure, impotent, 
inoperative, (and) feeble. Wherefore it is con- 
strained, by all its reflection and understanding, 
to collect into itself the lustre and scintillation 
of light with the fragrance of the spirit. And it 
is possible to behold an image of the nature of 
these in the human countenance ; for instance, 
the pupil of the eye, dark from the subjacent 
humours, (but) illuminated with spirit. As, 
then, the darkness seeks after the splendour, 
that it may keep in bondage the spark, and may 
have perceptive power, so the light and spirit 
seek after the power that belongs to themselves, 
and strive to uprear, and towards each other to 
carry up their intermingled powers into the dark 
and formidable water lying underneath. 

But all the powers of the three originating 
principles, which are as regards number indefi- 

nitely infinite, are each according to its own sub- 
stance reflective and intelligent, unnumbered in. 
multitude. And since what are reflective and 
intelligent are numberless in multitude, while 
they continue by themselves, they are all at rest. 
If, however, power approaches power, the dis- 
similarity of (what is set in) juxtaposition pro- 
duces a certain motion and energy, which are 
formed from the motion resulting from the con- 
course effected by the juxtaposition of the 
coalescing powers. For the concourse of the 
powers ensues, just like any mark of a seal that 
is impressed by means of the concourse corre- 
spondingly with (the seal) which prints the 
figure on the substances that are brought up 
(into contact with it). Since, therefore, the 
powers of the three principles are infinite m 
number, and from infinite powers (arise) infinite 
concourses, images of infinite seals are neces- 
sarily produced. These images, therefore, are 
the forms of the different sorts of animals. 
From the first great concourse, then, of the three 
principles, ensues a certain great form, a seal ' 
of heaven and earth. The heaven and the 
earth have a figure similar to the womb, having 
a navel in the midst ; and if, he says, any one }> 
desirous of bringing this figure under the orgaa 
of vision, let him artfully scrutinize the pregnant 
womb of whatsoever animal he wishes, and he 
will discover an image of the heaven and tl-<e 
earth, and of the things which in the midst of 
all are unalterably situated underneath. 

(And so it is, that the first great concourse of 
the three principles) has produced such a figure 
of heaven and earth as is similar to a womb after 
the first coition. But, again, in the midst of the 
heaven and the earth have been generated infi- 
nite concourses of powers. And each concourse 
did not effect and fashion anything else than a 
seal of heaven and earth similar to a womb. 
But, again, in the earth, from the infinite seals 
are produced infinite crowds of various animals. 
But into all this infinity of the different animals 
under heaven is diffused and distributed, along 
with the light, the fragrance of the Spirit from 
above. From the water, therefore, has been 
produced a first-begotten originating principle, 
viz., wind, (which is) violent and boisterous, and 
a cause of all generation. For producing a sor«- 
of ferment in the waters, (the wind) uplifts 
waves out of the waters; and the motion^ of 
the waves, just as when some impulsive power 
of pregnancy is the origin of the production of 
a man or mind,^ is caused when (the ocean), 
excited by the impulsive power of spirit, is pro- 
pelled forward. When, however, this wave that 

' Or, " form of a seal." 

2 Or, " production." 

3 This is Cruice's mode of supplying the hiatus. Miller has " mar 
or ox." 

66 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book V. 

has been raised out of the water by the wind, 
and rendered pregnant in its nature, has within 
itself obtained the power, possessed by the 
female, of generation, it holds together the light 
•scattered from above along with the fragrance 
of the spirit — that is, mind moulded in the dif- 
ferent species. And this (light) is a perfect 
'God, who from the unbegotten radiance above, 
and from the spirit, is borne down into human 
nature as into a temple, by the impulsive power 
•of Nature, and by the motion of wind. And it 
is produced from water being commingled ' and 
blended with bodies as if it were a salt' of ex- 
istent things, and a light of darkness. And it 
struggles to be released from bodies, and is not 
able to find liberation and an egress for itself 
For a very diminutive spark, a severed splinter 
from above like the ray of a star, has been min- 
gled in the much compounded waters of many 
(existences),^ as, says he, (David) remarks in a 
psalm.^ Every thought, then, and solicitude act- 
uating the supernal light is as to how and in 
what manner mind may be liberated, by the 
death of the depraved and dark body, from the 
Father that is below, which is the wind that with 
-noises and tumult uplifted the waves, and who 
generated a perfect mind his own Son ; not, 
however, being his pecuUar (offspring) substan- 
tially. For he was a ray (sent down) from 
above, from that perfect light, (and) was over- 
powered in the dark,'' and formidable, and bitter, 
and defiled water ; and he is a luminous spirit 
borne down over the water.'' When, therefore, 
the waves that have been upreared from the 
waters have received within themselves the 
power of generation possessed by females, they 
contain, as a certain womb, in different species, 
the infused radiance, so as that it is visible in 
the case of all animals.^ But the wind, at the 
same time fierce and formidable,'^ whirling along, 
is, in respect of its hissing sound, like a serpent.'" 
First, then, from the wind — that is, from the 
serpent — has resulted the originating j)rinciple 
of generation in the manner declared, all things 
having simultaneously received the principle of 
generation. After, then, tha light and the spirit 

' Or, " soncealed." 

2 a\a<; Ttof -yei/OMf I'^Ji': Miller reads dAoiAiui'. 

3 The hiatus, as filled up by Miller, is adopted above. The Abbe 
Cruice suggests the following emendation : " For there has been inter- 
mingled a certain ver>' diminutive spark from the light (subsisting) 
along with the supernal fragrance, from the spirit producing, like a 
ray, composition hi things dissolved, and dissolution in things com- 
pounded." 

■* Ps. xxix. 3. 

5 j3po|uoj: some read Ppa<rnu>, i.e., agitation, literally a boiling up. 

6 (TicoTirii'c.": some read o-koAku (which is of similar import), 
<;rooked, i.e., involved, obscure. 

7 Or, " the light." 

8 A hiatus occurs here. The deficiency is supplied by Cruice from 
previous statements of Hippolytus, and is adopted above. 

'> Or, " strong." 

'° This passage is obscure. The translation above follows Schnei- 
.dewin and Cruice. Miller's text would seem capable of this meaning;: 
" The wind, simultaneously fierce and fonuidable, is whirled along 
like a trailing serpent supphed with wings." His text is, tiZ arvpfxari 
.6<^ci TTa/^airAiitrios' irrepuiTO^, but suggest:) irTcpuiTui' ws awo. 

had been received, he says, into the polluted and 
baneful (and) disordered womb, the serpent — 
the wind of the darkness, the first-begotten of the 
waters — enters within and produces man, and 
the impure womb neither loves nor recognises 
any other form. The perfect Word of supernal 
light being therefore assimilated (in form) to the 
beast, (that is,) the serpent, entered into the 
defiled womb, having deceived (the womb) 
through the similitude of the beast itself, in 
order that (the Word) may loose the chains that 
encircle the perfect mind which has been be- 
gotten amidst impurity of womb by the primal 
offspring of water, (namely,) serpent, wind, 
(and) beast." This, he says, is the form of the 
servant,'- and this the necessity of the Word of 
God coming down into the womb of a virgin. 
But he says it is not sufficient that the Perfect 
Man, the Word, has entered into the womb of a 
virgin, and loosed the pangs '^ which were in that 
darkness. Nay, more than this was requisite ; 
for after his entrance '■* into the foul mysteries of 
the womb, he was washed, and drank of the cup 
of life-giving bubbling water.'s And it was al- 
together needful that he should drink who was 
about to strip off the ser\'ile form, and assume 
celestial raiment. 

CHAP. XV. THE SETHIANS SUPPORT THEIR DOC- 
TRINES BY AN ALLEGORICAL INTERPRETATION 
OF SCRIPTURE ; THEIR SYSTEM REALLY DERIVED 
FROM NATURAL PHILOSOPHERS AND FROM THE 
ORPHIC RITES; ADOPT THE HOMERIC COSMOG- 
ONY. 

These are the statements which the patrons ''^ 
of the Sethian doctrines make, as far as it is 
possible to declare in a few words. Their sys- 
tem, however, is made up (of tenets) from natu- 
ral (philosophers), and of expressions uttered 
in reference to different other subjects ; and 
transferring (the sense of) these to the Eternal '^ 
Logos, they explain them as we have declared. 
But they assert likewise that Moses confirms 
their doctrine when he says, " Darkness, and 
mist, and tempest." These, (the Sethian) says, 
are the three principles (of our system) ; or 
when he states tliat three were born in paradise 
— Adam, Eve, the serpent ; or when he s])eaks 
of three (persons, namely) Cain, Abel, Seth^ 

" Schneidewin has a full stop af'f- " wind," and begins the next 
sentence with flijpiou (beast). , 

'= Phil. ii. 7. 

" Acts ii. 24. 

'■' Miller would read ixfra to . . . e^e\0u>i', "after the foui 
mysteries of the womb he went forth," etc. 

" John iv. 7-14. For iruir some read Troteii', " a course which 
he must pursue who," etc. 

"> nona-Tarai.. This is a military expression applied to those placed 
in the foremost ranks of a battalion of soldiers; but it was also em- 
ployed in civil affairs, to designate, for instance at Athens, those who 
protected the neToiKOL (aliens), and others without tlie rights of citi- 
zenship. lloo'rTaTT)s" wMS the Roman Fatroictts, 

*' Or, " Uieir owu peculiar." 

Chap. XVI.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

67 

and again of three (others) — Shem, Ham," Ja- 
pheth ; or when he mentions three patriarchs — ' 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob ; or when he speaks of 
the existence of three days before sun and 
moon ; or when he mentions three laws — pro- 
hibitory, permissive, and adjudicatory of punish- 
ment. Now, a prohibitory law is as follows : 
" Of every tree that is in paradise thou mayest 
freely eat ; but of the tree of the knowledge of 
good and evil thou mayest not eat." ^ But in 
the passage, "Come forth from thy land and 
from thy kindred, and hither into a land which 
I shall show thee," ^ this law, he says, is permis- 
sive ; for one who is so disposed may depart, 
and one who is not so disposed may remain. 
But a law adjudicatory of punishment is that 
which makes the following declaration : " Thou 
shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not kill, 
thou shalt not steal ; " ■♦ for a penalty is awarded 
to each of these acts of wickedness. 

The entire system of their doctrine, however, 
is (derived) froms the ancient theologians Mu- 
sseus, and Linus, and Orpheus,^ who elucidates 
especially the ceremonies of initiation, as well as 
the mysteries themselves. For their doctrine 
concerning the womb is also the tenet of Or- 
pheus ; and the (idea of the) navel, ^ which is 
harmony,^ is (to be found) with the same sym- 
bolism attached to it in the Bacchanalian orgies 
of Orpheus. But prior to the observance of the 
mystic rite of Celeus, and Triptolemus, and 
Ceres, and Proserpine, and Bacchus in Eleusis, 
these orgies have been celebrated and handed 
down to men in Phlium of Attica.^ For ante- 
cedent to the Eleusinian mysteries, there are 
(enacted) in Phlium the orgies '° of her denomi- 
nated the "Great (Mother)." There is, how- 
ever, a portico in this (city), and on the portico 
is inscribed a representation, (visible) up to the 
present day, of all the words which are spoken 
(on such occasions). Many, then, of the words 
inscribed upon that portico are those respecting 

I It is written Cham in the text. 

^ Gen. ii. 16, 17. 

- Gen. xii. i. 

* Ex. XX, 13-15; Deut. V. 17-19. 

S VTTO, Miller. 

*' These belong to the legendary period of Greek philosophy. 
'Jusjeus flourished among the Athenians, Linus among the Thebans, 
and Orpheus among the Thracians. They weaved their physical 
theories into crude theological systems, which subsequently suggested 
the cosmogony and theogony of Hesiod. See the translator's Trea- 
tise on Metaphysics, chap. ii. pp. 33, 34. 

^ 6^<iaAos: some read with greater probability <|)aAAb?, which 
means the figure, generally wooden, of a tnembrnin virile. This 
h=>rmonizes with what Hippolytus has already mentioned respecting 
Osiris. A figure of this description was carried in solemn procession 
in the orgies of Bacchus as a symbol of the generative power of na- 
ture. The worship of the Lingam among the Hindoos is of the same 
description. 

8 apixovia (Schneidewin). Cruice reads afSpela (manliness), 
which agrees with <f>aK\oi; (see preceding note). For <^aAAbs 
Schneidewin reads oti.<i)a\6'; (navel). 

9 "Of Achaia" (Meinekius, I'indic. Strah., p. 242). 

•° The reading in Miller is obviously incorrect, viz., Aevoniei'Tj 
fifyaArj^opia, for which he suggests ^ievaA>) eopx^. Several other 
emendations have been proposed, but they scarcely differ from the 
rendering given above, which is coincident with what may be learned 
of these mysteries from other sources. 

which Plutarch institutes discussions in his ten 
books against ' ' Empedocles. And in the greater '- 
number of these books is also drawn the repre- 
sentation of a certain aged man, grey-haired 
winged,'^ having \iv& pudendum erectum, pursuing 
a retreating woman of azure colour.'^* And over 
the aged man is the inscription " phaos ruen- 
tes," and over the woman "pereephicola." '5 But 
" phaos ruentes " '^ appears to be the light (which 
exists), according to the doctrine of the Sethi- 
ans, and " phicola " the darkish water ; while 
the space in the midst of these seems to be a 
harmony constituted from the spirit that is placed 
between. The name, however, of " phaos ru- 
entes " manifests, as they allege, the flow from 
above of the light downwards. Wherefore one 
may reasonably assert that the Sethians celebrate 
rites among themselves, very closely bordering 
upon those orgies of the "Great (Mother" 
which are observed among) the Phliasians. And 
the poet likewise seems to bear his testimony to 
this triple division, when he remarks, "And all 
things have been triply divided, and everything 
obtains its (proper) distinction ; " '^ that is, each 
member of the threefold division has obtained 
(a particular) capacity. But now, as regards 
the tenet that the subjacent water below, which 
is dark, ought, because the light has set (over it), 
to convey upwards and receive the spark borne 
down from (the light) itself; in the assertion of 
this tenet, I say, the all-wise Sethians appear to 
derive (their opinion) from Homer : — 

" By earth I sware, and yon broad Heaven above, 
And Stygian stream beneath, the weightiest oath 
Of solemn power, to bind the blessed gods." '^ 

That is, according to Homer, the gods suppose 
water to be loathsome and horrible. Now, 
similar to this is the doctrine of the Sethians, 
which affirms (water) to be formidable to the 
mind. '9 

CHAP. XVI. THE SETHL\N THEORY CONCERNINS 

"JVIIXTURE " AND "COMPOSITION ; " APPLICATION 
OF IT TO CHRIST ; ILLUSTR.ATION FROM THE 
WELL OF AMPA. 

These, and other assertions similar to these, 
are made (by the Sethians) in their interminable 

" Trpb?, or it might be rendered " respecting." A reference, how- 
ever, to the catalogue of Empedocles' works, given by Fabncius (t. v. 
p. i6o), shows that for Trpb? we should read ei«. 

•2 TrAetocri: Miller would read n-KAeuxTt, i.e., gateways. 

13 Or 7reTp(uT6«, intended for Tr-erpuiSr);, " made of stone." [A 
winged phallus was worn by the women of Pompeii as an ornament, 
for which Christian women substituted a cross. See vol. iii., this 
series, p. 104.] 

U Kvavoii.hr\: some read KwoeiSjj, i e., like a dog. 

15 Some read Persephone (Proserpine) Phlya. 

16 For "phaos ruentes" some read " Phanes rueis," which is the 
expression found in the Orphic hymn (see Cruice's note). 

'7 Iliad, XV 189. (See the passage from Hesiod given at the end 
of book i. of The Refutation.^ 

" Iliad, XV. 36-38 (Lord Derby's translation) : Odyssey, v. 185- 
, 187. 

! 19 Miller reasonably proposes for tw roi the reading aTOt.\t>.ov^ 
I " which affirms water to be a formidable element." 

68 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book V 

commentaries. They, however, persuade their 
(Hsciples to become conversant with the theory 
respecting composition and mixture. But this 
theory has formed a subject of meditation to 
many, but (among others) also to Andronicus 
the Peripatetic. The Sethians, then, affirm that 
the theory concerning composition and mixture 
is constituted according to the following method : 
The luminous ray from above is intermingled, 
and the very diminutive spark is delicately 
blended in the dark waters beneath ; and (both 
of these) become united, and are formed into 
one compound mass, just as a single savour 
(results) from the mixture of many incense- 
offerings in the fire, and (just as) an adept, by 
having a test in an acute sense of smell, ought 
to be able from the single odour of the incense 
to distinguish accurately each (ingredient) of the 
incense-offerings that have been mingled in the 
fire, — whether, for example, storax, and myrrh, 
and frankincense, or whatever other (ingredient) 
may be mixed (in the incense). They, how- 
ever, employ also other examples, saying both 
that brass is mixed with gold, and that some art 
has been discovered which separates the brass 
from the gold. And, in like manner, if tin or 
brass, or any substance homogeneous with it, be 
discovered mixed with silver, these likewise, by 
some art superior to that of mixing, are distin- 
guished. But already some one also distinguishes 
water mingled with wine." So, say they, though all 
things are commingled, they are capable of being 
separated. Nay, but, he says, derive the same 
lesson from the case of animals. For when the 
animal is dead, each of its parts is separated ; 
and when dissolution takes place, the animal in 
this way vanishes. This is, he says, what has 
been spoken: "I came not to send peace on 
the earth, but a sword," ^ — that is, the division 
and separation of the things that have been com- 
mingled. For each of the things that have been 
commingled is separated and divided when it 
reaches its proper place. For as there is one 
place of mixture for all animals, so also has there 
been established one (locality) of separation. 
And, he says, no one is aware of this (place), 
save we alone that have been born again, spirit- 
ual, not carnal, whose citizenship is in hea\en 
above. 

In this manner insinuating themselves, they 
corrupt their ])upils, partly by misusing the wortls 
spoken (by themselves), w'hile they wickedly 
pervert, to serve any purpose they wish, what 
has been admirably said (in Scripture) ; and 

' vSutp ne/niyfieVoi' oii'ui iiaKpirei: Miller's text is iiiujp fie/uiy- 
lii(foi' aivuiSia KfirivT), which is obviously corrupt. His emendation 
of the passage may be translated thus: " And now some one observes 
water from a wayside fountain, mixed, so they say; and even though 
all things be intermingled, a separation is effected." 

2 Matt. X. 34. 

partly by concealing their nefarious conduct, by 
means of whatever comparisons they please. All 
these things, then, he says, that have been com- 
mingled, possess, as has been declared, their own 
particular place, and hurry towards their own 
peculiar (substances), as iron towards the mag- 
net, and the chaff to the vicinity of amber, and 
the gold to the spur^ of the sea falcon. In like 
manner, the niy^ of light which has been com- 
mingled with the water, having obtained from 
discipline and instruction its own proper locality,- 
hastens towards the Logos that comes from 
above in servile form ; and along with the Logos 
exists as a logos in that place where the Logos is 
still : (the light, I say, hastens to the Logos 
with greater speed) than the iron towards the 
magnet. 

And that these things, he says, are so, and 
that all things that have been commingled are 
separated in their proper places, learn. There is 
among the Persians in a city Ampa,5 near the 
river Tigris, a well ; and near the well, at the 
top, has been constructed a certain reservoir, 
supplied with three outlets ; and when one 
pumps from this well, and draws off some of its 
contents in a vessel, what is thus pumped out of 
the well, whatever it is at all, he pours into the 
reservoir hard by. And when what is thus in- 
fused reaches the outlets, and when what is 
taken up (out of each outlet) in a single vessel 
is examined, a separation is obser\'ed to have 
taken i)lace. And in the first of the outlets is 
exhibited a concretion of salt, and in the second 
of asi)halt, and in the third of oil ; and the oil 
is black, just as, he says, Herodotus'' also nar- 
rates, and it yields a heavy smell, and the Per- 
sians call this " rhadinace." The similitude 
of the well is, say the Sethians, more sufficient 
for the demonstration of their proposition than 
all the statements that have been previously 
made. 

CHAP. XVII. 

•THE SETHIAN DOCTRINES TO P.E 

LEARNED FROM THE " PARAPHRASE OF SETH, 

The opinion of the Sethians appears to us to 
have been sufficiently elucidated. If, however, 
any one is desirous of learning the entire doc- 
trine according to them, let him read a book 
inscribed Paraphrase of Scth ; for all their se- 
cret tenets he will find deposited there. But 
since we have explained the ojiinions entertained 
by the Sethians, let us see also what are the 
doctrines advanced by Justinus. 

3 icei'Tpw. In Other passages the word xcpxit is used, i.e., the 
backbone. 

* Or, " power." 

5 Or, "Ama." 

6 Herodotus, vi. 119. 

Chap. XX.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

69 

CHAP. XVIII. THE SYSTEM OF JUSTINUS ANTI- 
SCRIPTURAL AND ESSENTIALLY PAGAN. 

Justinus ' was entirely opposed to the teach- 
ing of the holy Scriptures, and moreover to the 
written or oral teaching of the blessed evangel- 
ists, according as the Logos was accustomed to 
instruct His disciples, saying, " Go not into the 
way of the Gentiles;"^ and this signifies that 
they should not attend to the futile doctrine of 
the Gentiles. This (heretic) endeavours to lead 
on his hearers into an acknowledgment of prod- 
igies detailed by the Gentiles, and of doctrines 
inculcated by them. And he narrates, word for 
word, legendary accounts prevalent among the 
Greeks, and does not previously teach or de- 
liver his perfect mystery, unless he has bound 
his dupe by an oath. Then he brings forward 
(these) fables for the purpose of persuasion, in 
order that they who are conversant with the in- 
calculable trifling of these books may have some 
consolation in the details of these legends. Thus 
it happens as when in like manner one making 
a long journey deems it expedient, on having 
fallen in with an inn, to take repose. And so it 
is that, when once more they are induced to 
turn towards studying the diffuse doctrine of these 
lectures, they may not abhor them while they, 
undergoing instruction unnecessarily prolix, rush 
stupified into the transgression devised by (Jus- 
tinus) ; and previously he binds his followers 
with horrible oaths, neither to publish nor abjure 
these doctrines, and forces upon them an ac- 
knowledgment (of their truth). And in this 
manner he delivers the mysteries impiously dis- 
covered by himself, partly, according to the 
statements previously made, availing himself of 
the Hellenic legends, and partly of those pre- 
tended books which, to some extent, bear a 
resemblance to the foresaid heresies. For all, 
forced together by one spirit, are drawn into one 
profound abyss of pollution, inculcating the same 
tenets, and detailing the same legends, each after 
a different method. All those, however, style 
themselves Gnostics in this peculiar sense, that 
they alone themselves have imbibed the mar- 
vellous knowledge of the Perfect and Good 
(Being). 

' 'What Hippolytus here states respecting Justinus is quite new. 
No mention occurs of this heretic in ecclesiastical history. It is 
evident, however, that, like Simon Magus, he was contemporary with 
St. Peter and St. Paul. Justinus, however, and the Ophitic sect to 
which he belonged, are assigned by Hippolytus and Irenaius a prior 
position as regards the order of their appearance to the system of 
Simon, or its offshoot Valentinianism. The Ophites engrafted Phry- 
gian Judaism, and the Valentinians Gentilism, upon Christianity, the 
former not rejecting the speculations and mysteries of Asiatic pagan- 
ism, and the latter availing themselves of the cabalistic corruptions 
of Judaism. The Judaistic element soon became prominent in suc- 
cessive phases of Valentinianism, which produced a fusion of the sects 
of the old Gnostics and of Simon. Hippolytus, however, now places 
the Ophitic sect before us prior to its amalgamation with Valentinian- 
ism. Here, for the first time, we have an authentic delineation of the 
primitive Ophites. This is of great value. [See Irenseus, vol. i., this 
series, p. 354; also Bunsen (on Baur), vol. 1. p. 42.] 

- Matt. X. s. 

CHAP. XIX. THE JUSTINIAN HERESY UNFOLDED 

IN THE " BOOK OF BARUCH." 

But swear, says Justinus, if you wish to know 
" what eye hath not seen, and ear hath not heard, 
and the things which have not entered into the 
heart ; " ^ that is, if you wish to know Him who 
is good above all. Him who is more exalted, 
(swear) that you will preserve the secrets (of 
the Justinian) discipline, as intended to be kept 
silent. For also our Father, on beholding the 
Good One, and on being initiated with Him, 
preserved the mysteries respecting which silence 
is enjoined, and sware, as it has been written, 
"The Lord sware, and will not repent."-* Hav- 
ing, then, in this way set the seal to these tenets, 
he seeks to inveigle (his followers) with more 
legends, (which are detailed) through a greater 
number of books ; and so he conducts (his read- 
ers) to the Good One, consummating the initi- 
ated (by admitting them into) the unspeakable 
Mysteries. 5 In order, however, that we may not 
wade through more of their volumes, we shall 
illustrate the ineffable Mysteries (of Justinus) 
from one book of his, inasmuch as, according 
to his supposition, it is (a work) of high repute. 
Now this volume is inscribed Bariich ; and one 
fabulous account out of many which is explained 
by (Justinus) in this (volume), we shall point 
out, inasmuch as it is to be found in Herodotus. 
But after imparting a different shape to this 
(account), he explains it to his pupils as if it 
were something novel, being under the impres- 
sion that the entire arrangement of his doctrine 
(springs) out of it. 

CHAP. XX. THE COSMOGON\' OF JUSTINUS AN AL- 
LEGORICAL EXPLANATION OF HERODOTUS* LEGEND 
OF HERCULES. 

Herodotus,^" then, asserts that Hercules, when 
driving the oxen of Geryon from Erytheia,^ came 
into Scythia, and that, being wearied with travels 
ling, he retired into some desert spot and slept 
for a short time. But while he slumbered his 
horse disappeared, seated on which he had per- 
formed his lengthened journey. On being 
aroused from repose, he, however, instituted a 
diligent search through the desert, endeavouring 
to discover his horse. And though he is unsuc- 
cessful in his search after the horse, he yet finds 
in the desert a certain damsel, half of whose 
form was that of woman, and proceeded to ques- 
tion her if she had seen the horse anywhere. 
The girl, however, replies that she had seen ( the 
animal), but that she would not show him unles;? 

3 Isa. Ixiv. 4; I Cor. ii. 9. 

* Ps. ex. 4; Heb. vii. 21. 

S Or, " the rest of the Mysteries." 

*> Herodotus, iv. 8-10. _ _ , . 

7 Erytheia (Eretheia) was the island which Geryon inhabited. 
Miller's text has 'EpvSas (i.e., sc. 0aAa<ro-T)s) , " the Red Sea." This, 
however, is a mistake. 

^o 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book V, 

Hercules previously would come along with her 
for the purpose of sexual intercourse. Now 
Herodotus informs us that her upper parts as 
far as the groin were those of a virgin, but that 
everything below the body after the groin pre- 
sented some horrible appearance of a snake. In 
anxiety, however, for the discovery of his horse, 
Hercules complies with the monster's request ; 
for he knew her (carnally), and made her preg- 
nant. And he foretold, after coition, that she 
had by him in her womb three children at the 
same time, who were destined to become illus- 
trious. And he ordered that she, on bringing 
forth, should impose on the children as soon as 
born the following names : Agathyrsus, Gelonus, 
and Scytha. And as the reward of this (favour) 
receiving his horse from the beast-like damsel, 
he went on his way, taking with him the cattle 
also. But after these (details), Herodotus has 
a protracted account ; adieu, however, to it for 
the present.' But what the opinions are of Jus- 
tinus, who transfers this legend into (his account 
oQ the generation of the universe, we shall 
explain. 

CHAP. XXI. — JUSTINUS' TRIAD OF PRINCIPLES ; HIS 
ANGELOGRAPHY FOUNDED ON THIS TRIAD ; HIS 
EXPLANATION OF THE BIRTH, LIFE, AND DEATH 
OF OUR LORD. 

This (heresiarch) makes the following state- 
ment. There are three unbegotten principles 
of the universe, two male (and) one female. 
Of the male (principles), however, a certain one 
is denominated good, and it alone is called after 
this manner, and possesses a power of prescience 
concerning the universe. But the other is father - 
of all begotten things, devoid of prescience,^ and 
invisible. And the female (principle) is devoid 
of prescience, passionate, two-minded,-» two- 
bodied, in every respect answering (the descrip- 
tion of) the girl in the legend of Herodotus, as 
far as the groin a virgin, and (in) the parts be- 
low (resembling) a snake, as Justinus says. But 
this girl is styled Edem and Israel. And these 
princi{)lcs of the universe are, he says, roots and 
fountains from which existing things have been 
produced, but that there was not anything else. 
The Father, then, who is devoid of prescience, 
beholding that half-woman Edem, i)assed into a 
concupiscent desire for her. But this Father, he 
says, is called Elohim. Not less did Edem also 
long for Elohim, and the mutual i)assion brought 
them together into the one nuptial couch of love. 5 

' Some read t'ov coOc, which has been properly altered into to 
v\iv, as translated above. 

^ Or, " mother." 

3 Kai ayi'iuo-TO';, " and unknown," is added in Cruice's and Schnei- 
dewin's text, as this word occurs in Hippolytus' epitome of Justinus' 
heresy in book x. of The Refutation. 

* 6iYi'u)>io? ; some read dyviufinov, i.e., devoid of judgment. 

5 (iivriv: some read ein'oiop, i.e., goodwill, but this seems pleo- 
nastic where (/itAia; precedes. 

And from such an intercourse the Father gener- 
ates out of Edem unto himself twelve antrels. 
And the names of the angels begotten by the 
Father are these : Michael, Amen,'' Baruch, Ga- 
briel, Esaddc-eus. . . . And of the maternal 
angels which Edem brought forth, the names in 
like manner have been subjoined, and they are 
as follows : Babel,7 Achamoth, Naas, Bel, Belias, 
Satan, Sael, Adoneeus, Leviathan,^ Pharao, Car- 
camenos, (and) Lathen. 

Of these twenty-four angels the paternal ones 
are associated with the Father, and do all things 
according to His will; and the maternal (angels 
are associated with) Edem the Mother. .And 
the multitude of all these angels together is Para- 
dise, he says, concerning which Moses speaks : 
" God planted a garden in Eden towards the 
east," 9 that is, towards the face of Edem, that 
Edem might behold the garden — that is, the 
angels — continually. Allegorically the ange":s 
are styled trees of this garden, and the tree of 
life is the third of the paternal angels — Baruch. 
And the tree of the knowledge of good and e\il 
is the third of the maternal angels — Naas. For 
so,'° says (Justinus), one ought to interpret the 
words of Moses, observing, " Moses said these 
things disguisedly, from the fact that all do not 
attain the truth." And, he says. Paradise being 
formed from the conjugal joy of Elohim and 
Edem, the angels of Elohim receiving from the 
most beauteous earth, that is, not from the jjor- 
tion of Edem resembling a monster, but from 
the parts above the groin of human shape, and 
gentle — in aspect, — make man out of the earth. 
But out of the parts resembling a monster are 
produced wild beasts, and the rest of the ani- 
mal creation. They made man. therefore, as a 
symbol of the unity and love (subsisting) be- 
tween them ; and they depute their own powers 
unto him, Edem the soul, but Elohim the spirit. 
And tlie man Adam is produced as some actual 
seal and memento of love, and as an everlasting 
emblem of the marriage of Edem and Elohim. 
And in like manner also Eve was produced, he 
says, as Moses has described, an image and 
emblem (as well as) a seal, to be preserved for 
ever, of Edem. And in like manner also a soul 
was deposited in Eve, — an image — from Edem, 
but a spirit from l^lohim. And there were given 
to them commandments, " Be fruitful, and mul- 
tiply, and rei)lenish the earth."" that is, Edem ; 
for so he wishes that it had been written. For 
the entire of the power belonging unto herself, 
Edem conferred ujwn Elohim as a sort of nuptial 
dowry. Whence, he says, from imitation of that 

6 See Rev. iii. 14. [P.unsen, i. 39.] 

7 Or, " Babelachamos," or " Babel, AchaMOS." 

8 Or, " Kaviathan." 

9 Gen. ii. 8. 

'° Or, "this one." 
" Gen. i. 28. 

Chap. XXL] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

71 

primary marriage up to this day, women bring a 
dowry to their husbands, complying with a cer- 
tain divine and paternal law that came into ex- 
istence on the part of Edem towards Elohim. 

And when all things were created as has been 
described by Moses — both heaven and earth, 
and the things therein ' — the twelve angels of 
the Mother were divided into four principles, 
and each fourth part of them is called a river — 
Phison, and Gehon, and Tigris, and Euphrates, 
as, he says, Moses states. These twelve angels, 
being mutually connected, go about into four 
parts, and manage the world, holding from 
Edem a sort of viceregal - -authority over the 
world. But they do not always continue in the 
same places, but move around as if in a circular 
dance, changing place after place, and at set 
times and intervals retiring to the localities sub- 
ject to themselves. And when Phison holds 
sway over places, famine, distress, and affliction 
prevail in that part of the earth, for the battalion 
of these angels is niggardly. In like manner 
also there belong to each part of the four, ac- 
cording to the power and nature of each, evil 
times and hosts of diseases. And continually, 
according to the dominion ^ of each fourth part, 
this stream of evil, just (like a current) of rivers, 
careers, according to the will of Edem, uninter- 
ruptedly around the world. x\nd from some 
cause of this description has arisen the necessity 
of evil. 

When Elohim had prepared and created the 
world as a result from joint pleasure, He wished 
to ascend up to the elevated parts of heaven, and 
to see that not anything of what pertained to the 
creation laboured under deficiency. And He 
took His Own angels with Him, for His nature 
was to mount aloft, leaving Edem below : ■* for 
inasmuch as she was earth, she was not disposed 
to follow upward her spouse. Elohim, then, 
coming to the highest part of heaven above, 
and beholding a light superior to that which 
He Himself had created, exclaimed, " Open 
me the gates, that entering in I may acknowl- 
edge the Lord ; for I considered Myself to be 
Lord." 5 A voice was returned to Him from 
the light, saying, " This is the gate of the Lord : 
through this the righteous enter in."*" And im- 
mediately the gate was opened, and the Father, 
without the angels, entered, (advancing) towards 
the Good One, and beheld " what eye hath not 
seen, and ear hath not heard, and what hath not 
entered into the heart of man to (conceive)." ^ 

' iv avTi): some read er ap^rj, i.e., in the beginning. 

- a-aTpaniKrii'. The common reading oo-TpajriKryi' is obviously 
corrupt. 

3 Or, " mixture." 

* koltw. some read KaTuiyq, i.e., KOTco-yaio!, earthly; some kotco- 
^€pr)?, with a downward tendency. 

s Ps. cxvii. 19. 

*' Ps. cxviii. 20. 

7 Isa. Ixiv. 4; I Cor. ii. 9. 

Then the Good One says to him, " Sit thou on 
my right hand." '^ And the Father says to the 
Good One, " Permit me. Lord, to overturn the 
world which I have made, for my spirit is bound 
to men.'' And I wish to receive it back (from 
them." Then the Good One replies to him, 
" No evil canst thou do while thou art with me, 
for both thou and Edem made the world as a 
result of conjugal joy. Permit Edem, then, tO' 
hold possession of the world as long as she 
wishes ; but do you remain with me." Then 
Edem, knowing that she had been deserted by 
Elohim, was seized with grief, and placed beside 
herself her own angels. And she adorned her- 
self after a comely fashion, if by any means 
Elohim, passing into concupiscent desire, might 
descend (from heaven) to her. 

When, however, Elohim, overpowered by the 
Good One, no longer descended to Edem, Edem 
commanded Babel, which is Venus, to cause 
adulteries and dissolutions of marriages among 
men. (And she adopted this expedient) in 
order that, as she had been divorced from Elo- 
him, so also the spirit of Elohim, which is in 
men, being wrung with sorrow, might be pun- 
ished by such separations, and might undergo 
precisely the sufferings which (were being en- 
dured by) the deserted Edem. And Edem gives 
great power to her third angel, Naas, that by 
every species of punishment she might chasten 
the spirit of Elohim which is in men, in order 
that Elohim, through the spirit, might be pun- 
ished for having deserted his spouse, in violation, 
of the agreements entered into between them. 
Elohim the father, seeing these things, sends forth, 
Baruch, the third angel among his own, to suc- 
cour the spirit that is in all nien.'° Baruch then 
coming, stood in the midst of the angels of 
Edem, that is, in the midst of paradise — foi 
paradise is the angels, in the midst of whom he 
stood, — and issued to the man the following in- 
junction : " Of every tree that is in paradise thou 
mayest freely eat, but thou mayest not eat of th(i 
tree of the knowledge of good and evil," " which 
is Naas. Now the meaning is, that he should 
obey the rest of the eleven angels of Edem, for 
the eleven possess passions, but are not guilty of 
transgression. Naas, however, has committed 
sin, for he went in unto Eve, deceiving her, and 
debauched her ; and (such an act as) this* is a 
violation of law. He, however, likewise went in 
unto Adam, and had unnatural intercourse with 
him ; and this is itself also a piece of turpitude, 
whence have arisen adultery and sodomy. 

Henceforward vice and virtue were prevalent 
among men, arising from a single source — that 

8 Ps. ex. I. 

9 Or, " the heavens." 
^'^ ai'^pwTrots Trao'ii'. 

" Gen. ii. 16, 17. 

'EK6'uiv. Some read: avflpuTrots. YlaKiv 

72 

THE rj-:futation of all heresies. 

[Book V. 

■of the Father. For the Father having ascended 
to the Good One, points out from time to time 
the way to those desirous of ascending (to him 
likewise). After having, however, departed from 
Edem, he caused an originating principle of evil 
for the spirit of the Father that is in men.' 
Baruch therefore was despatched to Moses, and 
through him spoke to the children of Israel, that 
they might be converted unto the Good One. 
But the third angel (Naas), by the soul which 
came from I-Mem upon Moses, as also upon all 
men, obscured the i)recepts of Baruch, and 
caused his own peculiar injunctions to be heark- 
ened unto. For this reason the soul is arrayed 
against the spirit, and the spirit against the soul.^ 
For the soul is Edem, but the spirit Elohim, and 
each of these exists in all men, both females and 
males. Again, after these (occurrences), Baruch 
was sent to the Prophets, that through the Proph- 
ets the spirit that dwelleth in men ^ might hear 
(words of warning), and might avoid Edem and 
the wicked fiction, just as the Father had fled 
from Elohim. In like manner also — by the 
prophets ■♦ — Naas, by a similar device, through 
the soul 5 that dwells in man, along with the 
spirit of the Father, enticed away the prophets, 
and all (of them) were allured after him, and 
did not follow the words of Baruch, which Elo- 
him enjoined. 

Ultimately Elohim selected Hercules, an un- 
circumcised pro))het, and sent him to quell the 
twelve angels of Edem, and release the Father 
from the twelve angels, those wicked ones of the 
creation. These are the twelve conflicts of Her- 
cules which Hercules underwent, in order, from 
first to last, viz.. Lion, and Hydra, and Boar, 
and the others successively. For they say that 
these are the names (of them) among the Gen- 
tiles, and they have been derived with altered 
denominations from the energy of the maternal 
angels. When he seemed to have vancjuished 
his antagonists, Omphale — now she is Babel or 
Venus — clings to him and entices away Hercules, 
and divests him of his power, viz., the commands 
of Baruch which Elohim issued. And in place 
(of this power. Babel) envelopes him in her own 
peculiar robe, that is, in the power of Edem, 
who is the power below ; and in tliis way the 
prophecy of Hercules remained unfulfilled, and 
his ^orks. 

Finally, however, in the days of Herod the 
king, Baruch is despatched, being sent down 
once more by Elohim ; and coming to Naza- 
reth, he found Jesus, son of Joseph and Mary, a 
child of twelve years, feeding sheep. And he 

' Or, " in heaven." 

2 Gal. V. 17. 

3 Or, " in heaven." 

* These words are superfluous here, and are repeated from the 
preceding sentence by mistake. 

S \l/v\r]t: some read tux^t, i.e., prayer. 

announces to him all things from the beginning, 
whatsoever had been done by Edem and Elohim, 
and whatsoever would be likely to take place 
hereafter, and spoke the following words : "^11 
the prophets anterior to you have been enticed. 
Put forth an effort, therefore, Jesus, Son of man, 
not to be allured, but preach this word unto 
men, and carry back tidings to them of things 
pertaining to the Father, and things pertaining 
to the Good One, and ascend to the Good One. 
and sit there with Elohim, Father of us all." And 
Jesus was obedient unto the angel, saying that. 
" I shall do all things, Lord," and proceeded to 
preach. Naas therefore wished to entice this 
one also. (Jesus, however, was not disposed to 
listen to his overtures'"'), for he remained faithful 
to Baruch. Therefore Naas, being inflamed with 
anger because he was not able to seduce him, 
caused him to be crucified. He, however, leav- 
ing the body of Edem on the (accursed) tree, 
ascended to the Good One ; saying, however, to 
Edem, "Woman, thou retainest thy son," 7 that 
is, the natural and the earthly man. But (Jesus) 
himself commending his spirit into the hands of 
the Father, ascended to the Good One. Now 
the Good One is Priapus, (and) he it is who 
antecedently caused the production of every- 
thing that exists. On this account he is stvleil 
Priapus, because he previously fashioned all 
things (according to his own design). For this 
reason^ he says, in every temple is placed his 
statue, which is revered by every creature ; antl 
(there are images of him) in the highways, car- 
rying over his head ripened fruits, that is, the 
produce of the creation, of which he is the cause, 
having in the first instance formed, (according 
to His own design), the creation, when as yet it 
had no existence. When, therefore, he says, you 
hear men asserting that the swan went in unto 
Leda, and begat a child from her, (learn that) 
the swan is Elohim, and Leda Edem. And 
when people allege that an eagle went in unto 
Ganymede, (know that) the eagle is Naas, and 
Ganymede Adam, .^nd when they assert that 
gold (in a shower) went in unto Danae and 
begat a child from her, (recollect that) the gold 
is Elohim, and Danae is Edem. And similarly, 
in the same manner adducing all accounts of 
this description, which correspond with (the 
nature of) legends, they pursue the work of in- 
struction. AVhen, therefore, the prophet sa)'s, 
" Hearken, O heaven, and give ear, O earth ; 
the Lord hath spoken," he means by heaven, 
(Justinus) says, the spirit which is in man from 
Elohim ; and by earth, the soul which is in man 
along with the spirit; and by Lord, Baruch; 
and by Israel, Edem, for Israel as well as Edem 

6 Miller conjectures that the parenthetical words should be added 
to the text. 

7 John \ix, 26. 

Chap. XXIII.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

To 

is called the spouse of Elohim. " Israel," he 
says, "did not know me (Elohim) ; for had 
he known me, that I am with the Good One, 
he would not have punished through paternal 
ignorance the spirit which is in men." 

CHAP, XXII. — OATH USED BY THE JUSTINIAN HER- 
ETICS ; THE BOOK OF BARUCH ; THE REPERTORY 
OF THEIR SYSTEM. 

Hence ■ also, in the first book inscribed " Ba- 
ruch," has been written the oath which they 
compel those to swear who are about to hear 
these mysteries, and be initiated with the Good 
One.^ And this oath, (Justinus) says, our 
Father Elohim sware when He was beside the 
Good One, and having sworn He did not repent 
(of the oath) , respecting which, he says, it has 
been written, " The Lord sware, and will not 
repent." 3 Now the oath is couched in these* 
terms : " I swear by that Good One who is above 
all, to guard these mysteries, and to divulge them 
to no one, and not to relapse from the Good 
One to the creature." And when he has sworn 
this oath, he goes on to the Good One, and be- 
holds " whatever things eye hath not seen, and 
ear hath not heard, and which have not entered 
into the heart of man ; " 5 and he drinks from 
life-giving water, which is to them, as they sup- 
pose, a bath,^ a fountain of life-giving, bubbling 
water.7 For there has been a separation made 
between water and water ; and there is water, 
that below the firmament of the wicked creation, 
in which earthly and animal men are washed ; 
and there is life-giving water, (that) above the 
firmament,^ of the Good One, in which spiritual 
(and) living men are washed; and in this Elo- 
him washed Himself, and having washed did 
not repent. And when, he says, the prophet 
affirms, " Take unto yourself a wife of whore- 
dom, since the earth has abandoned itself to 
fornication, (departing) from (following) after 

1 (.vnvSiv: this word stands at the end of the last chapter in the 
text of Miller, who suspects that there is here some hiatus. In this 
opinion the Abbe Cruice concurs. Schneidewin, however, transfers 
ivTivQtv to the beginning of this chapter as above. 

2 TTapa Tui ayaOuJ ; or rather, we should expect, into a knowledge 
of the Good One. 

3 Ps. ex. 4; Heb. vii. 21. 

4 ouTu)?: some read outo?. 

5 I Cor. ii. 9. 

6 KavTpov: the ecclesiastical use of this word makes it stand for 
baptism. 

' John iv. 14. 
8 Gen. i. 6, 7. 

the Lord ; " 9 that is, Edem (departs) from 
Elohim. (Now) in these words, he says, the 
prophet clearly declares the entire mystery, and 
is not hearkened unto by reason of the wicked 
machinations of Naas. According to that same 
manner, they deliver other prophetical passages 
in a similar spirit of interpretation throughout 
numerous books. The volume, however, in- 
scribed " Baruch," is pre-eminently to them the 
one in which the reader '° will ascertain the en- 
tire explanation of their legendary system (to be 
contained). Beloved, though I have encoun- 
tered many heresies, yet with no wicked (here- 
siarch) worse than this (Justinus) has it been 
my lot to meet. But, in truth, (the followers of 
Justinus) ought to imitate" the example of his 
Hercules, and to cleanse, as the saying is, the 
cattle-shed of Augias, or rather I should say, a 
ditch,'- into which, as soon as the adherents of 
this (heresiarch) have fallen, they can never be 
cleansed ; nay, they will not be able even to 
raise their heads. 

CHAP. XXIII. SUBSEQUENT HERESIES DEDUCIBLE 

FROM THE SYSTEM OF JUSTINUS. 

Since, then, we have explained the attempts 
(at a system) of the pseudo-gnostic Justinus, it 
appears likewise expedient in the following books 
to elucidate the opinions put forward in heresies 
following (in the way of consequence upon the 
doctrines of Justinus), and to leave not a single 
one of these (speculators) unrefuted. Our refu- 
tation will be accomplished by adducing the 
assertions made by them ; such (at least of their 
statements) as are sufficient for making a public 
example (of these heretics). (And we shall 
attain our purpose), even though there should 
only be condemned '^ the secret and ineffable 
(mysteries) practised amongst them, into which, 
silly mortals that they are, scarcely (even) with 
considerable labour are they initiated. Let us 
then see what also Simon affirms. 

9 Hos. i. 2. 

'° kvTv\iiiv\ some read i\nv\iiv, i.e., one who is fortunate enough 
to meet with the book. 

" Literally "ought, according to his Hercules, by imitating," etc. 

'2 d/uiapai-. This word means a trench or channel in a field, for 
the purpose either of irrigation or drainage. Schneidewin and Cruice 
render it by the Latin Sentinain, an expression applied, for example, 
to bilge water. 

•■5 eKpr)deiri, i.e., eKpifleir) : some read tVicptfeir), which might be 
rendered, " even though, (for the purpose of holding these heretics up 
to public shame,) there should be made a selection only," etc. 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

BOOK VI. 

CONTENTS. 

The following are the contents of the sixth 
book of the Refutatioti of all Heresies: — 

What the opinions are that are attempted (to 
be established) by Simon, and that his doctrine 
derives its force from the (lucubrations) of ma- 
gicians and poets. 

What are the opinions propounded by Valen- 
tinus, and that his system is not constructed out 
of the Scriptures, but out of the Platonic and 
Pythagorean tenets. 

And what are the opinions of Secundus, and 
Ptolemseus, and Heracleon, as persons also who 
themselves advanced the same doctrines as the 
philosophers among the Greeks, but enunciated 
them in different phraseology. 

And what are the suppositions put forward 
by Marcus and Colarbasus, and that some of 
them devoted their attention to magical arts and 
the Pythagorean numbers. 

CHAP. I.' — THE OPHITES THE PROGENITORS OF 
SUBSEQUENT HERESIES. 

Whatever opinions, then, were entertained by 
those who derived the first principles (of their 
doctrine) from the serpent, and in process of 
time ^ deliberately ^ brought forward into public 
notice their tenets, we have explained in the 
book preceding this, (and) which is the fifth of 
the Refutation of Heresies. But now also I 
shall not be silent as regards the opinions of 
(heresiarchs) who follow these (Ophites in suc- 
cession) ; nay, not one (speculation) will I 
leave unrefuted, if it is possible to remember 
all (their tenets), and the secret orgies of these 
(heretics) which one may fairly style orgies, — 
for they who propagate such audacious opinions 
are not far distant from the anger (of God), — 
that I may avail myself of the assistance of 
etymology. 

' [Presumint; that all who are disposed to study this work will 
turn to Dr. Hunsen's first volume {H ippol .^ , I have not thought it 
wise to load these pages with references to his interesting reviewal. ) 

- Kara TfAeiuxrir luiv \pnvu>v. This is Bunsen's emendation. 
3he textual reading is neiuxrii'. 

3 cfcovcriuf : Bunsen suggests avoai'ws, i.e., profanely. 

74 

CHAP. 11. — SIMON MAGUS. 

It seems, then, expedient likewise to explain 
now the opinions of Simon,-* a native of Gitta, 
a village of Samaria ; and we shall also prove 
that his successors, taking a starting-point from 
him, have endeavoured (to establish) similar 
opinions under a change of name. This Simon 
being an adept in sorceries, both making a mock- 
ery of many, partly according to the art of 
Thrasymedes, in the manner in which we have 
explained above, 5 and partly also by the assist- 
ance of demons perpetrating his villany, at- 
tempted to deify himself. (But) the man was a 
(mere) cheat, and full of folly, and the Apostles 
reproved him in the Acts.*^ U^ith much greater 
wisdom and moderation than Simon, did Apse- 
thus the Libyan, inflamed with a similar wish, 
endeavour to have himself considered a god in 
Libya. And inasmuch as his legendary system 
does not present any wide divergence from the 
inordinate desire of that silly Simon, it seems 
expedient to furnish an explanation of it, as one 
worthy of the attempt made by this man. 

CHAP. III. 

STORY OF APSETHUS THE LIBYAN. 

Apsethus 7 the Libyan inordinately longed to 
become a god ; but when, after repeated in- 
trigues, he altogether failed to accomplish his 
desire, he nevertheless wished to appear to have 
become a god ; and he did at all events appear, 
as time wore on, to have in reality become a 
god. For the foolish Libyans were accustomed 

* See Irenseus, Hares., i. 19, 20; Tertullian. Prescript. ,c. xlvi. ; 
Epiphanius, Hceres., xxi. ; Theodoret, Hcerct. Fah., i. i ; St. Augus- 
tine, Dc Hteres., 1. See the apology of Justin Martyr (vol. i., this 
series, p. 171), who s.iys, " There was a Samaritan, Simon, a native 
of the village called Oitto, who, in the reign of Claudius C'a;sar, and 
in your royal city of Rome, did mighty acts of magic, by virtue of 
the art of the devils operating in him." Simon's history and opiniuius 
are treated of largely in the Reco^^iiitiotis of Cli-iiiiiit. .See vol. iii. 
of the Edinburgh series, pp. 156-271; [vol. viii. of this series]. 

5 In book iv. of The Kefuintioii. 

*> Acts viii. 9-24. 

7 Millerrefers us to Apostolius' /"roi'^ri., s.v. i/zai^iui'. Schneide- 
win remarks that Maximus Tyrius relates almost a similar story con- 
cerning one P.sapho, a Libyan, in his Dissert, (xxxv.), and that 
Apostolius extracted this account and in.sertcd it in his tV /..' , xviii. 
p. 730, ed. I^utsch, mentioning at the same time a similar narrative 
from /Elian's Hist., xiv. 30. See Justin., xxi. 4, and Pliny, jVa^. 
Hist., viii. 16. 

Chap. IV.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

75 

to sacrifice unto him as to some divine power, 
supposing tliat they were yielding credence to a 
voice that came down from above, from heaven. 
For, collecting into one and the same cage a 
great number of birds, — parrots, — he shut 
them up. Now there are very many parrots 
throughout Libya, and very distinctly these imi- 
tate the human voice. This man, having for a 
time nourished the birds, was in the habit of 
teaching them to say, " Apsethus is a god." 
After, however, the birds had practised this for 
a long period, and were accustomed to the utter- 
ance of that which he thought, when said, would 
make it supposed that Apsethus was a god, then, 
opening the habitation (of the birds), he let 
forth the parrots, each in a different direction. 
While the birds, however, were on the wing, their 
sound went out into all Libya, and the expres- 
sions of these reached as far as the Hellenic 
country. And thus the Libyans, being astonished 
at the voice of the birds, and not perceiving the 
knavery perpetrated by Apsethus, held Apsethus 
to be a god. Some one, however, of the Greeks, 
by accurate examination, perceiving the trick of 
the supposed god, by means of those same 
parrots not only refutes, but also utterly destroys, 
that boastful and tiresome fellow. Now the 
Greek, by confining many of the parrots, taught 
them anew to say, " Apsethus, having caged us, 
compelled us to say, Apsethus is a god." But 
having heard of the recantation of the parrots, 
the Libyans, coming together, all unanimously 
decided on burning Apsethus. 

CHAP. IV. — Simon's forced interpretation of 

SCRIPTURE ; plagiarizes FROM HERACLITUS AND 
ARISTOTLE ; SIMON'S SYSTEM OF SENSIBLE AND 
INTELLIGIBLE EXISTENCES. 

In this way we must think concerning Simon 
the magician, so that we may compare him unto 
the Libyan, far sooner than unto Him who, 
though made man,' was in reality God. If, 
however, the assertion of this likeness is in itself 
accurate, and the sorcerer was the subject of a 
passion similar to Apsethus, let us endeavour to 
teach anew the parrots of Simon, that Christ, 
who stood, stands, and will stand, (that is, was, 
is, and is to come,) was not Simon. But (Jesus) 
was man, offspring of the seed of a woman, 
born of blood and the will of the flesh, as also 
the rest (of humanity). And that these things 
are so, we shall easily prove as the discussion 
proceeds. 

Now Simon, both foolishly and knavishly para- 
phrasing the law of Moses, makes his statements 
(in the manner following) : For when Moses 

' The text here is corrupt. The above is Miller's emendation. 
Cruice's reading may thus be rendered: " So that far sooner we may 
compare him unto the Libyan, who was a mere man, and not the true 
God." 

asserts that " God is a burning and consuming ■ 
fire," - taking what is said by Moses not in its 
correct sense, he affirms that fire is the origi- 
nating principle of the universe. (But Simon) 
does not consider what the statement is which 
is made, namely, that it is not that God is a fire, 
but a burning and consuming fire, (thereby) not 
only putting a violent sense upon the actual law 
of Moses, but even plagiarizing from Heraclitus 
the Obscure. And Simon denominates the origi- 
nating principle of the universe an indefinite 
power, expressing himself thus : " This is the 
treatise of a revelation of (the) voice and name, 
(recognisable) by means of intellectual appre- 
hension of the Great Indefinite Power. Where- 
fore it will be sealed, (and) kept secret, (and) 
hid, (and) will repose in the habitation, at the 
foundation of which lies the root of all things." 
And he asserts that this man who is born of 
blood is (the aforesaid) habitation, and that in 
him resides an indefinite power, which he affirms 
to be the root of the universe. 

Now the indefinite power which is fire, 
constitutes, according to Simon, not any un- 
compounded (essence, in conformity with the 
opinion of those who) assert that the four ele- 
ments are simple, and who have (therefore) 
likewise imagined that fire, (which is one of the 
four,) is simple. But (this is far from being 
the case) : for there is, (he maintains,) a certain 
twofold nature of fire ; ^ and of this twofold (na- 
ture) he denominates one part a something 
secret, and another a something manifest, and 
that the secret are hidden in the manifest por- 
tions of the fire, and that the manifest portions 
of the fire derive their being from its secret 
(portions). This, however, is what Aristotle 
denominates by (the expressions) "potentiality" 
and " energy," or (what) Plato (styles) " intel- 
ligible " and " sensible." And the manifest por- 
tion of the fire comprises all things in itself, 
whatsoever any one might discern, or even what- 
ever objects of the visible creation -♦ he may hap- 
pen to overlook. But the entire secret (portion 
of the fire) which one may discern is cognised 
by intellect, and evades the power of the senses ; 
or one fails to observe it, from want of a capa- 
city for that particular sort of perception. In 
general, however, inasmuch as all existing things 
fall under the categories, namely, of what are ob- 
jects of Sense, and what are objects of Intellect, 
and as for the denomination of these (Simon) 
employs the terms secret and manifest ; it may, 
(I say, in general,) be affirmed that the fire, (I 
mean) the super-celestial (fire), is a treasure, as 
it were a large tree, just such a one as in a dream 

2 Deut. iv. 24. 

3 The Abbe Cruice considers that Theodoret has made use of this 
passage. (See Hceret. Fab., i. i.) 

■♦ Or, Tov aopaTov, the invisible one. 

76 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book Vi. 

was seen by Nabuchodonosor,' out of which all 
flesh is nourished. And the manifest portion of 
the fire he regards as the stem, the branches, the 
leaves, (and) the external rind which overlaps 
them. All these (appendages), he says, of the 
Cireat Tree being kindled, are made to disappear 
])y reason of the blaze of the all-devouring fire. 
The fruit, however, of the tree, when it is fully 
grown, and has received its own form, is deposited 
in a granary, not (flung) into the fire. For, he 
says, the fruit has been produced for the purpose 
of being laid in the storehouse, whereas the chaff 
that it may be delivered over to the fire.- (Now 
the chaff) is stem, (and is) generated not for its 
own sake, but for that of the fruit. 

CHAP. V. — SIMON APPEALS TO SCRIPTURE IN SUP- 
PORT OF HIS SYSTEM. 

And this, he says, is what has been written in 
Scripture : " For the vineyard of the Lord of 
Sabaoth is the house of Israel, and the man 
of Judah is His beloved plant." If, however, the 
man of Judah (is) the beloved plant, it has been 
proved, he says, that there is not any Other tree 
l)ut that man. But concerning the secretion and 
dissolution of this (tree). Scripture, he says, has 
spoken sufficiently. And as regards instruction 
for those who have been fashioned after the im- 
age (of him), that statement is enough whiclj is 
made (in Scripture), that "all flesh is grass, and 
all the glory of flesh, as it were, a flower of grass. 
The grass withereth, and its flower falleth ; but 
the word of the Lord abideth for ever." ^ The 
word of the Lord, he says, is that word which is 
produced in the mouth, and (is) a Logos, but 
nowhere else exists there a place of genera- 
tion. 

CHAP. VI. — Simon's system expounded in the 
WORK, great announcement; follows em- 
pedocles. 

Now, to express myself briefly, inasmuch as 
the fire is of this description, according to Simon, 
and since all things are visible and invisible, 
(and) in like manner resonant and not resonant, 
numerable and not subjects of numeration ; he 
denominates in the Great Announcemoit a per- 
fect intelligible (entity), after such a mode, that 
each of those things which, existing indefinitely, 
may be infinitely comprehended, both speaks, 
and understands, and acts in such a manner as 
Empedocles ■♦ speaks of : — 

" For earth, indeed, by earth we see, and water by water, 
And air divine by air, and fire fierce by fire, 
And love by love, and also strife by gloomy strife." 

' Dan iv. IO-I2. 

2 Matt iii. 12; Luke iii. 17. 

3 I Pet. i. 24. 

* Emped., ed. Kar^t. v. 324. 

CHAP. VII. SIMON S system OF A THREEFOLD 

emanation by pairs. 

For, he says, he is in the habit of considering 
that all these portions of the fire, both visible 
and invisible, are possessed of perception and a 
share of intelligence.^ The world, therefore, that 
which is generated, was produced from the un- 
begotten fire. It began, however, to exist, he 
says, according to the following manner. He 
who was begotten from the principle of that fire 
took six roots, and those primary ones, of the 
originating principle of generation. And, he 
says, that the roots were made from the fire in 
pairs, which roots he terms " Mind " and " Intelli- 
gence," "Voice" and " Name," "Ratiocination " 
and " Reflection." And that in these six roots 
resides simultaneously the entire indefinite power 
potentially, (however) not actually. And this 
indefinite power, he says, is he who stood, 
stands, and will stand. Wherefore, whensoever 
he may be made into an image, inasmuch as he 
exists in the six powers, he will exist (there) 
substantially, potentially, quantitively, (and) com- 
pletely. (And he will be a power) one and the 
same with the unbegotten and indefinite power, 
and not labouring under any greater deficiency 
than that unbegotten and unalterable (and) in- 
definite power. If, however, he may continue 
only potentially in the six powers, and has not 
been formed into an image, he vanishes, he says, 
and is destroyed in such a way as the grammati- 
cal or geometrical capacity in man's soul. For 
when the capacity takes unto itself an art, a light 
of existent things is produced ; but when (the 
capacity) does not take unto itself (an art), un- 
skilfulness and ignorance are the results ; and 
just as when (the power) was non-existent, it 
perishes along with the expiring man. 

chap. VIII. — FURTHER PROGRESSION OF THIS 

threefold emanation ; co- existence with 

THE double TRL^D OF A SEVENTH EXISTENCE. 

And of those six powers,^ and of the seventh 
which co-exists with them, the first pair. Mind 
and Intelligence, he calls Heaven and Earth. 
And that one of these, being of male sex, be- 
holds from above and takes care of his partner, 
but that the earth receives below the rational 
fruits, akin to the earth, whicli are borne down 
from the heaven. On this account, he sa}-s, the 
Logos, frequently looking towards the things 
that are being generated from Mind and Intelli- 
gence, that is, from Heaven and Earth, exclaims, 
" Hear, O heaven, and give ear, O earth, because 

S cu/ttarot aXaav: Miller has ■yviuii.t\v i<7->)i', which yields but little 
sense. 

<> These powers are thus arranged: — 

1. Mind and Intelligence: termed also, — i. Heaven and Earth. 

2. Voice and Name, " " 2. Sun and Moon. 

3. Ratiocination and Retlection, " 3. Air and Water. 

Chap. IX.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

n 

the Lord has spoken. I have brought forth 
children, and exaUed them ; and these have re- 
jected me." Now, he who utters these words, 
he says, is the seventh power — he who stood, 
stands, and will stand ; for he himself is cause 
of those beauteous objects of creation which 
Moses commended, and said that they were 
very good. But Voice and Name (the second 
of the three pairs) are Sun and Moon ; and 
Ratiocination and Reflection (the third of the 
three pairs) are Air and Water. And in all 
these is intermingled and blended, as I have 
declared, the great, the indefinite, the (self-) 
existing power. 

CHAP. IX. — Simon's interpretation of the mo- 
saic HEXAEMERON ; HIS ALLEGORICAL REPRE- 
SENTATION OF PARADISE. 

When, therefore, Moses has spoken of " the 
six days in which God made heaven and earth, 
and rested on the seventh from all His works," ' 
Simon, in a manner already specified, giving 
(these and other passages of Scripture) a dif- 
ferent application (from the one intended by 
the holy writers), deifies himself. When, there- 
fore, (the followers of Simon) affirm that there 
are three days begotten before sun and moon, 
they speak enigmatically of Mind and Intelli- 
gence, that is. Heaven and Earth, and of the 
seventh power, (I mean) the indefinite one. 
For these three powers are produced antecedent 
to all the rest. But when they say, " He begot 
me prior to all the Ages,"^ such statements, he 
says, are alleged to hold good concerning the 
seventh power. Now this seventh power, which 
was a power existing in the indefinite power, 
which was produced prior to all the Ages, this 
is, he says, the seventh power, respecting which 
Moses utters the following words : " And the 
Spirit of God was wafted over^ the water;" 
that is, says (the Simonian), the Spirit which 
contains all things in itself, and is an image of 
the indefinite power about which Simon speaks, 
— " an image from an incorruptible form, that 
alone reduces all things into order." For this 
power that is wafted over the water, being be- 
gotten, he says, from an incorruptible form alone, 
reduces all things into order. When, therefore, 
according to these (heretics), there ensued some 
such arrangement, and (one) similar (to it) of 
the world, the Deity, he says, proceeded to form 
man, taking clay from the earth. And He 
formed him not uncompounded, but twofold, 
according to (His own) image and likeness.-* 
Now the image is the Spirit that is wafted over 
the water ; and whosoever is not fashioned into 

' Gen. ii. 2. 

- Prov. viii. 22-24. 

3 " Brooded over" (see Gen. i. 2). 

■* Gen. ii. 7. 

a figure of this, will perish with the world, inas- 
much as he continues only potentially, and does 
exist actually. This, he says, is what has been 
spoken, " that we should not be condemned 
with the world." 5 If one, however, be made 
into the figure of (the Spirit), and be generated 
from an indivisible point, as it has been written 
in the Announce metii, (such a one, albeit) small, 
will become great. But what is great will con- 
tinue unto infinite and unalterable duration, as 
being that which no longer is subject to the con- 
ditions of a generated entity. 

How then, he says, and in what manner, does 
God form man? In Paradise; for so it seems 
to him. Grant Paradise, he says, to be the 
womb ; and that this is a true (assumption) the 
Scripture will teach, when it utters the words, 
" I am He who forms thee in thy mother's 
womb."^ For this also he wishes to have been 
written so. Moses, he says, resorting to allegory, 
has declared Paradise to be the womb, if we 
ought to rely on his statement. If, however, 
God forms man in his mother's womb — that is, 
in Paradise — as I have affirmed, let Paradise be 
the womb, and Edem the after-birth,? " a river 
flowing forth from Edem, for the purpose of irri- 
gating Paradise,"^ (meaning by this) the navel. 
This navel, he says, is separated into four prin- 
ciples ; for on either side of the navel are situ- 
ated two arteries, channels of spirit, and two 
veins, channels of blood. But when, he says, 
the umbilical vessels ^ proceed forth from Edem, 
that is, the caul in which the foetus is enveloped 
grows into the (fcetus) that is being formed in 
the vicinity of the epigastrium, — (now) all in 
common denominate this a navel, — these two 
veins through which the blood flows, and is- con- 
veyed from Edem, the after-birth, to what are 
styled the gates of the liver ; (these veins, I say,) 
nourish the foetus. But the arteries which we have 
spoken of as being channels of spirit, embrace 
the bladder on both sides, around the pelvis, and 
connect it with the great artery, called the aorta, 
in the vicinity of the dorsal ridge. And in this 
way the spirit, making its way through the ven- 
tricles to the heart, produces a movement of the 
fcetus. For the infant that was formed in Para- 
dise neither receives nourishment through the 
mouth, nor breathes through the nostrils : for as 
it lay in the midst of moisture, at its feet was 
death, if it attempted to breathe ; for it would 
(thus) have been drawn away from moisture, 
and perished (accordingly). But (one may go 
further than this) ; for the entire (foetus) is 

5 I Cor. xi. 32. 

'' Jer. i. 5. 

' \uipiov (i.e., locality) is tlie reading in Miller, which Cruice in- 
geniously alters into ■x°P'-°^'t ^^^ '^•'"' '" which the foetus is enclosed, 
which is called the " after-birth." 

" Gen. ii. 10. 

9 This rendering follows Cruice, who has succeeded in clearing 
away the obscurity of the passage as given in Miller. 

78 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VL 

bound tightly round by a covering styled the 
caul, and is nourished by a navel, and it receives 
through the (aorta), in the vicinity of the dorsal 
ridge, as I have stated, the substance of the 
spirit. 

CHAP. X. — SIMON'S EXPLANATION OF THE FIRST 
T\VO BOOKS OF MOSES. 

The river, therefore, he says, which proceeds 
out of Edem is divided into four principles, four 
channels — that is, into four senses, belonging 
to the creature that is being born, viz., seeing, 
smelling, taste, and touch ; for the child formed 
in Paradise has these senses only. This, he says, 
is the law which Moses appointed ; and in refer- 
ence to this very law, each of his books has been 
written, as the inscriptions evince. The first 
book is Genesis. The inscription of the book 
is, he says, sufficient for a knowledge of the uni- 
verse. For this is (equivalent in meaning with) 
generation, (that is,) vision, into which one sec- 
tion of the river is divided. For the world was 
seen by the power of vision. Again, the inscrip- 
tion of the second book is Exodus. For what 
has been produced, passing through the Red 
Sea, must come into the wilderness, — now they 
say he calls the Red (Sea) blood, — and taste 
bitter water. For bitter, he says, is the water 
which is (drunk) after (crossing) the Red Sea; 
which (water) is a path to be trodden, that leads 
(us) to a knowledge in (this) life of (our) toil- 
some and bitter lot. Altered, however, by Moses 
— that is, by the Logos — that bitter (water) 
becomes sweet. And that this is so we may 
hear in common from all who express themselves 
according to the (sentiments of the) poets : — 

"Dark at the root, like milk, the flower, 
Gods call it 'Moly,' and hard for mortal men 
To dig, but power divine is boundless." ' 

CHAP. XI. SIMON'S EXPLANATION OF THE THREE 

LAST BOOKS OF THE PENTATEUCH. 

What is spoken by the Gentiles is sufficient 
for a knowledge of the universe to those who 
have ears (capable) of hearing. For whosoever, 
he says, has tasted this fruit, is not the only one 
that is changed by Circe into a beast ; but also, 
employing the jjower of such a fruit, he forms 
anew and moulds afresh, and re-entices into that 
primary peculiar character of theirs, those that 
already have been altered into beasts. But a 
faithful man, and beloved by that sorceress, is, 
he says, discovered through that milk-like and 
divine fruit. In like manner, the third book is 
Leviticus, which is smelling, or respiration. For 
the entire of that book is (an account) of sac- 
riiices and offerings. Where, however, there is 
a sacrifice, a certain savour of the fragrance 

' Odyssey, x. 304 et seq. [See Butcher and Lang, p. 163.] 

arises from the sacrifice through the incense- 
offerings ; and in regard of this fragrance (the 
sense of) smelling is a test. Numbers, the fourth 
of the books, signifies taste, where the discourse 
is operative. For, from the fact of its speaking 
all things, it is denominated by numerical ar- 
rangement. But Deuteronomy, he says, is writ- 
ten in reference to the (sense of) touch possessed 
by the child that is being formed. For as touch, 
by seizmg the things that are seen by the other 
senses, sums them up and ratifies them, testing 
what is rough, or warm, or clammy, (or cold) ; 
so the fifth book of the law constitutes a sum- 
mary of the four books preceding this. 

All things, therefore, he says, when unbegot- 
ten, are in us potentially, not actually, as the 
grammatical or geometrical (art). If, then, one 
receives proper instruction and teaching, and 
(where consequently) what is bitter will be al- 
tered into what is sweet, — that is, the spears 
into pruning-hooks, and tlie swords into plough- 
shares,^ — there will not be chaff and wood be- 
gotten for fire, but mature fruit, fully formed, as 
I said, equal and similar to the unbegotten and 
indefinite power. If, however, a tree continues 
alone, not producing fruit fully formed, it is 
utterly destroyed. For somewhere near, he says, 
is the axe (which is laid) at the roots of the tree. 
Every tree, he says, which does not produce good 
fruit, is hewn down and cast into fire.^ 

CHAP. XII. FIRE A PRIMAL PRINCIPLE, ACCORD- 
ING TO SIMON. 

According to Simon, therefore, there exists 
that which is blessed and incorruptible in a latent 
condition in every one — (that is,) potentially, 
not actually ; and that this is He who stood, 
stands,-* and is to stand. 5 He has stood above 
in unbegotten power. He stands below, when 
in the stream of waters He was begotten in a 
likeness. He is to stand above, beside the 
blessed indefinite i)ower, if He be fashioned 
into an image. For, he says, there are three 
who have stood ; and except there were three 
/Eons who have stood, the imbegotten one is 
not adorned. (Now the unbegotten one) is, 
according to them, wafted over the water, and 
is re-made, according to the similitude (of an 

- Isa. ii. 4. 

3 Matt. iii. lo; Luke iii. 9. 

•» In the Rccognitwiis of Clrment we have this passage: "He 
(Simon) wishes himself to be believed to be an exalted power, which 
is above God the Creator, and to be thought to be the Christ, and to 
be called the standnig one" (Ante-Nicene Library, ed. Edinburgh, 
vol. iii. p. 196). 

S The expression stans (standing) was used by the scholastics as 
applicable to the divine nature. interpreted in this manner, the 
words in the text would be equivalent with " which was, and is, and 
is to come " (Rev. i. 8). The Riuognitioiis of Clement explain the 
term thus: " He (Simon) uses this name as implyini; that he can 
never be dissolved, asserting that his flesh is so compacted by the 
power of his divinity, that it can endure to eternity. Hence, tnere- 
ibre, he is called the standing: one, as though he cannot fall by any 
corruption " (Ante-Nicene Library, vol. iii. p. igo) . | To be found in 
vol. viii. of this series, with the other apocryphal Clementines.] 

Chap. XIII.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

79 

eternal nature), a perfect celestial (being), in 
no (quality of) intelligence formed inferior to 
the unbegotten power : that is what they say — 
I and you, one ; you, before me ; I, that which 
is after you. This, he says, is one power divided 
above (and) below, generating itself, making 
itself grow, seeking itself, finding itself, being 
mother of itself, father of itself, sister of itself, 
spouse of itself, daughter of itself, son of itself, 
mother, father, a unit, being a root of the entire 
circle of existence. 

And that, he says, the originating principle of 
the generation of things begotten is from fire, 
he discerns after some such method as the fol- 
lowing. Of all things, (i.e.) of whatsoever there 
is a generation, the beginning of the desire of 
the generation is from fire. Wherefore the 
desire after mutable generation is denominated 
" to be inflamed." For when the fire is one, it 
admits of two conversions. For, he says, blood 
in the man being both warm and yellow, is con- 
verted as a figured flame into seed ; but in the 
woman this same blood is converted into milk. 
And the conversion of the male becomes gen- 
eration, but the conversion of the female nour- 
ishment for the foetus. This, he says, is " the 
flaming sword, which turned to guard the way 
of the tree of life." ' For the blood is con- 
verted into seed and milk, and this power 
becomes mother and father — father of those 
things that are in process of generation, and 
the augmentation of those things that are being 
nourished ; (and this power is) without further 
want, (and) self-sufficient. And, he says, the 
tree of life is guarded, as we have stated, by 
the brandished flaming sword. And it is the 
seventh power, that which (is produced) from 
itself, (and) which contains all (powers, and) 
which reposes in the six powers. For if the 
flaming sword be. not brandished, that good 
tree will be destroyed, and perish. If, however, 
these be converted into seed and milk, the prin- 
ciple that resides in these potentially, and is in 
possession of a proper position, in which is 
evolved a principle of souls, (such a principle,) 
beginning, as it were, from a very small spark, 
will be altogether magnified, and will increase 
and become a power indefinite (and) unal- 
terable, (equal and similar) to an unalterable 
age, v/hich no longer passes into the indefinite 
age. 

CHAP. XIII. — HIS DOCTRINE OF EMANATION FUR- 
THER EXPANDED. 

Therefore, according to this reasoning, Simon 
became confessedly a f;^od to his silly followers, 
as that Libyan, namely, Apsethus — begotten, no 
doubt, and subject to passion, when he may 

^ Oen. iii. 24. 

exist potentially, but devoid of propensions. 
(And this too, though born from one having pro- 
pensions, and uncreated though born) from one 
that is begotten, when He may be fashioned into 
a figure, and, becoming perfect, may come forth 
from two of the primary powers, that is. Heaven 
and Earth. For Simon expressly speaks of this 
in the " Revelation " after this manner : " To 
you, then, I address the things which I speak, 
and (to you) I write what I write. The writing 
is this : there are two offshoots from all the 
^ons, having neither beginning nor end, from 
one root. And this is a power, viz., Sige, (who 
is) invisible (and) incomprehensible. And one 
of these (offshoots) appears from above, which 
constitutes a great power, (the creative) Mind 
of the universe, which manages all things, (and 
is) a male. The other (offshoot), however, is 
from below, (and constitutes) a great Intelli- 
gence, and is a female which produces all things. 
From whence, ranged in pairs opposite each 
other, they undergo conjugal union, and mani- 
fest an intermediate interval, namely, an incom- 
prehensible air, which has neither beginning nor 
end. But in this is a father who sustains all 
things, and nourishes things that have beginning 
and end. This is he who stood, stands, and 
will stand, being an hermaphrodite power ac- 
cording to the pre-existent indefinite power, 
which has neither beginning nor end. Now this 
(power) exists in isolation. For Intelligence, 
(that subsists) in .unity, proceeded forth from 
this (power), (and) 'became two. And that 
(father) was one, for having in himself this 
(power) he was isolated, and, however. He was 
not primal though pre-existent ; but being ren- 
dered manifest to himself from himself, he 
passed into a state of duality. But neither 
was he denominated father before this (power) 
would style him father. As, therefore, he 
himself, bringing forward himself by means of 
himself, manifested unto himself his own pe- 
culiar intelligence, so also the intelligence, when 
it was manifested, did not exercise the function 
of creation. But beholding him, she concealed 
the Father within herself, that is, the power ; 
and it is an hermaphrodite power, and an intelli- 
gence. And hence it is that they are ranged in 
pairs, one opposite the other ; for power is in no 
wise different from intelligence, inasmuch as they 
are one. For from those things that are above 
is discovered power ; and from those below, in- 
telligence. So it is, therefore, that likewise what 
is manifested from these, being unity, is dis- 
covered (to be) duality, an hermaphrodite hav- 
ing the female in itself. This, (therefore,) is 
Mind (subsisting) in Intelligence ; and these are 
separable one from the other, (though both 
taken together) are one, (and) are discovered 
in a state of duality." 

So 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Rook VI. 

CHAP. XIV. SIMON INTERPRETS HIS SYSTEM BY 

THE MYTHOLOGICAL REPRESENTATION OF HELEN 
OF TROY ; GIVES AN ACCOUNT OF HIMSELF IN CON- 
NECTION WITH THE TROJAN HEROINE ; IMMORAL- 
ITY OF HIS FOLLOWERS ; SIMON'S VIEW OF CHRIST ; 
THE SIMONISTS' APOLOGY FOR THEIR VICE. 

Simon then, after inventing these (tenets), 
not only by evil devices interpreted the writings 
of Moses in whatever way he wished, but even 
the (works) of the poets.' For also he fastens 
an allegorical meaning on (the story of) the 
wooden horse and Helen with the torch, and on 
very many other (accounts), which he transfers 
to what relates to himself and to Intelligence, 
and (thus) furnishes a fictitious explanation of 
them. He said, however, that this (Helen) was 
the lost sheep. And she, always abiding among 
women, confounded the powers in the world by 
reason of her surpassing beauty. Whence, like- 
wise, the Trojan war arose on her account. For 
in the Helen born at that time resided this In- 
telligence ; and thus, when all the powers were 
for claiming her (for themselves), sedition and 
war arose, during which (this chief power) was 
manifested to nations. And from this circum- 
stance, without doubt, we may believe that Stesi- 
chorus, who had throilgh (some) verses reviled 
her, was deprived of the use of his eyes ; and 
that, again, when he repented and composed re- 
cantations, in which he sung (Helen's) praises, 
he recovered the power of vision. But the 
angels and the powers below — who, he says, 
created the world — caused the transference 
from one body to another of (Helen's soul) ; 
and subsequently she stood on the roof of a 
house in Tyre, a city of Phoenicia, and on going 
down thither (Simon professed to have) found 
her. For he stated that, princii)ally for the pur- 
pose of searching after this (woman), he had 
arrived (in Tyre), in order that he might rescue 
her from bondage. And after having thus re- 
deemed her, he was in the habit of conducting 
her about with himself, alleging that this (girl) 
was the lost sheep, and affirming himself to be 
the Power above all things. But the filthy - 
fellow, becoming enamoured of this miserable 
woman called Helen, purchased her (as his 
slave), and enjoyed her person.^ He, (how- 
ever,) was likewise moved with shame towards 
his disciples, and concocted this figment. 

But, again, those who become followers of this 
impostor — I mean Simon the sorcerer — indulge 
in similar practices, and irrationally allege the 

* Homer, for instance (See Epiphanius, H<ere$., xxi. 3). 

2 fxiapbf, Hiinscn's emendation for v//u;^(.b?, the reading in Miller 
and Schneidewin. Some read >//ii6pb?, i.e., lying; others i|/eu6o- 
\pt<TTos, i.e., counterfeit Christ. Cruice considers Himsen's emenda- 
tion unnecessarv', as >\t\>x(io<i m.ay be translated " absurd fellow." The 
word, hterally meaning cold, is applied in a derived sense to persons 
who were heartless, — an import suitable to Hippolytus' meaning. 

-' [See Irena;us, vol. i. p. 348, and Bunsen's ideas, p. 50 of his 
first volume. 1 

necessity of promiscuous intercourse. They ex- 
press themselves in the manner following : " All 
earth is earth, and there is no difference where 
any one sows, provided he does sow." But even 
they congratulate themselves on account of this 
indiscriminate intercourse, asserting that this is 
perfect love, and employing the expressions, 
" holy of holies," and " sanctify one another." * 
For (they would have us believe) that they are 
not overcome by the supposed vice, for that they 
have been redeemed. "And (Jesus), by having 
redeemed Helen in this way," (Simon says,) 
" has afforded salvation to men through his 
own peculiar intelligence. For inasmuch as the 
angels, by reason of their lust for pre-eminence, 
improperly managed the world, (Jesus Christ) 
being transformed, and being assimilated to the 
rulers and powers and angels, came for the res- 
toration (of things). And so (it was that Jesus) 
appeared as man, when in reality he was not a 
man. And (so it was) that likewise he suffered 
— though not actually undergoing suffering, but 
appearing to the Jews to do so 5 — in Judca as 
' Son,' and in Samaria as ' Father,' ^ and among 
the rest of the Gentiles as ' Holy Spirit.' " And 
(Simon alleges) that Jesus tolerated being styled 
by whichever name (of the three just mentioned) 
men might wish to call him. '* And that the 
prophets, deriving their inspiration from the 
world-making angels, uttered predictions (con- 
cerning him)." Wherefore, (Simon said.) that 
towards these (prophets) those felt no concern 
up to the present, who believe on Simon and 
Helen, and that they do whatsoever they please, 
as persons free ; for they allege that they are 
saved by grace. For that there is no reason for 
punishment, even though one shall act wickedly ; 
for such a one is not wicked by nature, but by 
enactment. " For the angels who created the 
world made," he says, "whatever enactments they 
pleased," thinking by such (legislative) words to 
enslave those who listened- to them. But, again, 
they speak of a dissolution 7 pf the world, for the 
redemption of his own particular adherents. 

CHAP. XV. — SIMON'S DISCIPLES ADOPT THE MYS- 
TERIES ; SIMON MEETS ST. PETER AT ROME ; 

ACCOUNT OF Simon's closing years. 

The disciples, then, of this (Magus), celebrate 
magical rites, and resort to incantations. And 

< This rendering is according to Bunsen's emendation of the text. 

5 Cruice omits the word SffioKijitei'oi, which .seems an interpola- 
tion. The above rendering adopts the proposed emendalion. 

<> Bunscn thinks that there is an allusion here to the conversation 
of our Lord with the woman of .Samaria, and if so that Menander, 
a disciple of Simon, and not Simon himself, was the author of The 
Great Aii>ioiinc,»titit, as the heretic did not outlive St. Peter and 
St. Paul, and therefore died before the period at which St John's 
Gospel was written. 

' .Miller rcids <i)i>(rii', which makes no sense. The rendering .-ibove 
follows Bunsen's emendation of the te.xt. [Here it is equaliv inter- 
esting to the student of our author or of Irenscus to turn to Bunscn 
(p. 51), and to observe his parallels.] 

Chap. XVI.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

8i 

(they profess to) transmit both love-spells and 
charms, and the demons said to be senders of 
dreams, fbr the purpose of distracting whomso- 
ever they please. But they also employ those 
denominated Paredroi. " And they have an 
image of Simon (fashioned) into the figure of 
Jupiter, and (an image) of Helen in the form 
of Minerva; and they pay adoration to these." 
But they call the one Lord and the other Lady. 
And if any one amongst them, on seeing the 
images of either Simon or Helen, would call 
them by name, he is cast off, as being ignorant 
of the mysteries. This Simon, deceiving many ' 
in Samaria by his sorceries, was reproved by the 
Apostles, and was laid under a curse, as it has 
been written in the Acts. But he afterwards 
abjured the faith, and attempted these (aforesaid 
practices). And journeying as far as Rome,^ 
he fell in with the Apostles ; and to him, deceiv- 
ing many by his sorceries, Peter offered repeated 
opposition. This man, ultimately repairing to 
. . . (and) sitting under a plane tree, contin- 
ued to give instruction (in his doctrines). And 
in truth at last, when conviction was imminent, 
in case he delayed longer, he stated that, if he 
were buried alive, he would rise the third day. 
And accordingly, having ordered a trench to be 
dug by his disciples,^ he directed himself to 
be interred there. They, then, executed the 
injunction given ; whereas he remained (in that 
grave) until this day, for he was not the Christ. 
This constitutes the legendary system advanced 
by Smion, and from this Valentinus derived a 
starting-point (for his own doctrine. This doc- 
trine, in point of fact, was the same with the 
Simonian, though Valentinus) denominated it 
under different tides : for "■ Nous," and '"Ale- 
theia," and " Logos," and "Zoe," and " Anthro- 
pos," and " Ecclesia," and .Lons of Valenti- 

' The Abbe Cruice considers that the statements made by Origen 
{Contr. Celsinn, Mb. i. p. 44, ed Spenc), respecting the followers 
of Simon in respect of number, militates against Origen's authorship 
of The Refiitatioti. 

^ This rendering follows the text of Schneidewin and Cruice. 
The Clementine Recognitions (Ante-Nicene Library, ed. Edinb., 
vol. iii. p. 273) represent Simon Magus as leaving for Rome, and St. 
Peter resolving to follow him thither. Miller's te.vt is different; and 
as emended by him, Hippolytus' account would harmonize with that 
given in the Acts. Miller's te.xt may be thus translated: " And hav- 
ing been laid under a curse, as has been written in the Acts, he sub- 
sequently disapproved of his practices, and made an attempt to jour- 
ney as far as Rome, but he fell in with the apostles," etc. The text 
of Cruice and Schneidewin .seems less forced; while the statement it- 
self— a new witness to this controverted point in ecclesiastical history 
concerning St. Peter — corroborates Hippolytus' authorship of The 
Refntation. 

i Justin Martyr mentions, as an instance of the estimation in 
which Simon Magus was held among his followers, that a statue was 
erected to him at Rome. Bunsen considers that the rejection of this 
fable of Justin Martyr's, points to the author of The Rc/utntion being 
.1 Roman, who would therefore, as he shows himself in the case of 
the statue, be better informed than the Eastern writer of any event 
occurring in the capital of the West. [Pumsen's magisterial decision 
(p. 53) is very amusingly characteristic] Hippolytus' silence is a 
presumption against the existence of such a statue, though it is very 
possible he might omit to mention it, supposing it to be at Rome. At 
all events, the very precise statement of Justin Martyr ought not to 
be rejected on slight or conjectural grounds. [See vol. i., this series, 
pp. 171, 172, 182, 187, and 193. But our author relies on Irenseus, 
same vol., p. 348. Why reject positive testimony?] 

nus, are confessedly the six roots of Simon, 
viz., "Mind" and " Intelligence," "Voice " and 
" Name," " Ratiocination " and " Reflection." 
But since it seems to us that we have sufficiently 
explained Simon's tissue of legends, let us see 
what also Valentinus asserts. 

CHAP. XVI. HERESY OF VALENTINUS ; DERIVED- 

FROM PLATO AND PYTHAGORAS. 

The heresy of Valentinus "♦ is certainly, then, 
connected \vith the Pythagorean and Platonic 
theory. For Plato, in the Timceus, altogether 
derives his impressions from Pythagoras, and 
therefore Timsus himself is his Pythagorean 
stranger. Wherefore, it appears expedient that 
we should commence by reminding (the reader) 
of a few points of the Pythagorean and Platonic 
theory, and that (then we should proceed) to 
declare the opinions of Valentinus. 5 For even 
although in the books previously finished by us 
with so much pains, are contained the opinions 
advanced by both Pythagoras and Plato, yet at 
all events I shall not be acting unreasonably, in 
now also calling to the recollection of the reader, 
by means of an epitome, the principal heads of 
the favourite tenets of these (speculators). And 
this (recapitulation) will facilitate our knowl- 
edge of the doctrines of Valentinus, by means 
of a nearer comparison, and by similarity of 
composition (of the two systems). For (Pythag- 
oras and Plato) derived these tenets originally 
from the Egyptians, and introduced their novel 
opinions among the Greeks. But (Valentinus 
took his opinions) from these, because, although 
he has suppressed the truth regarding his obliga- 
tions to (the Greek philosophers), and in this, 
way has endeavoured to construct a doctrine, 
(as it were,) peculiarly his own, yet, in point 
of fact, he has altered the doctrines of those 
(thinkers) in names only, and numbers, and has 
adopted a peculiar terminology (of his own). 
Valentinus has formed his definitions by meas- 

* Valentinus came from Alexandria to Rome during the pontifi- 
cate of Hyginus, and established a school there. His desi.e seems, 
to have been to remain in commimion with Rome, which he did for 
many years, as TertuUian informs us. Epiphanius, however, tells 
that Valentinus, towards the end of his life, when living in Cyprus, 
separated entirely from the Church. Irenasus, book i.; 1'ertullian on 
Valentinus, and chap. xxx. of his Prescript. ; Clemens Alexandri- 
nus, Strom., iv. 13, vi. 6; Theodoret, Hieret. Fab., i. 7: Epiphanius, 
Hirr., xxxi. ; St. Augustine, Hier., xi. : Philastrius, Hist. Hrer-es., c. 
viii. ; Photius, Biblioth., cap. ccxxx.; Clemens Alexandrinus' Epito- 
me of Theodotus (pp. 789-809, ed. Sylburg). The title is, 'Ek rCiv 
©€o66tou Ka'i T^? avaToKiKy)'^ KaXovfxevr}^ dtSacTKaAta?, Kara tov<; 
Ova\evTivov xP°^°'"'> eTriTO/ual. See likewise Neander's Church 
History, vol. ii. Bohn's edition. 

5 These opinions are mostly given in extracts from Valentinus' 
work Sophia, a book of great repute among Gnostics, and not named 
by Hippolytus, probably as being so well known at the time. The 
Gospel of Truth, mentioned by Irenseus as used among the Valen- 
tinians, is not, however, considered to be from the pen of Valentinus. 
In the extracts given by Hippolytus from Valentinus, it is important 
(as in the case of Basilides: see translator's introduction) to find that 
he quotes St. John's Gospel, and St. Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians. 
The latter had been pronounced by the TUbingen school as belonging 
to the period of the Montanistic disputes in the middle of the second 
century, that is, somewhere about 25-30 years after Valentinus. 

82 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VI. 

ures, in order that he may estabhsh an Hellenic 
heresy, diversified no doubt, but unstable, and 
not connected with Christ. 

CHAP. XVII. — ORIGIN OF THE GREEK PHILOSOPHY. 

The origin, then, from which Plato derived 
his theory in the Timceus, is (the) wisdom of 
the Egyptians.' For from this source, by some 
ancient and prophetical tradition, Solon ^ taught 
his entire system concerning the generation and 
destruction of the world, as Plato says, to the 
Greeks, who were (in knowledge) young chil- 
dren, and were acquainted with no theological 
doctrine of greater antiquity. In order, there- 
fore, that we may trace accurately the arguments 
by which Valentinus established his tenets, I 
shall now explain what are the principles of the 
philosophy of Pythagoras of Samos, — a philoso- 
phy (coupled) with that Silence so celebrated 
by the Greeks. And next in this manner (I 
shall elucidate) those (opinions) which Valen- 
tinus derives from Pythagoras and Plato, but 
refers with all solemnity of speech to Christ, 
and before Christ to the Father of the universe, 
and to Silence conjoined with the Father. 

CHAP. XVIir. — PYTHAGORAS' SYSTEM OF NUMBERS. 

Pythagoras, then, declared the originating prin- 
ciple of the universe to be the unbegotten monad, 
and the generated duad, and the rest of the 
numbers. And he says that the monad is the 
father of the duad, and the duad the mother of 
all things that are being begotten — the begotten 
one (being mother) of the things that are be- 
gotten. And Zaratas, the pupil of Pythagoras, 
was in the habit of denominating unity a father, 
and duality a mother. For the duad has been 
generated from the monad, according to Pythag- 
oras ; and the monad is male and primary, but 
the duad female (and secondary). And from 
the duad, again, as Pythagoras states, (are gen- 
erated) the triad and the succeeding numbers 
up to ten. For Pythagoras is aware that this is 
the only perfect number — I mean the decade 
— for that eleven and twelve are an addition 
and repetition of the decade ; not, however, 
that what is added ^ constitutes the generation 
of another number. And all solid bodies he 
generates from incorporeal (essences). For he 
asserts that an element and principle of both 
corporeal and incorporeal entities is the point 
which is indivisible. And from a point, he says, 
is generated a line, and from a line a surface ; 
and a surface flowing out into a height becomes, 
he says, a solid body. Whence also the Pytha- 
goreans have a certain object of adjuration, viz., 

' See Timceus, c. vii. ed. Bekker. 

2 Or, •' Solomon," evidently a mistake. 

3 Miller would read for Trpoo'Tidc/biefOfi vom<jTiov oc vo/xi^et. 

the concord of the four elements. And they 
swear in these words : — 

" By him who to our head quaternion gives, 
A font that has the roots of everlasting nature."* 

Now the quaternion is the originating principle 
of natural and solid bodies, as the monad of 
intelligible ones. And that likewise the quater- 
nion generates,^ he says, the perfect number, as 
in the case of intelligibles (the monad) does the 
decade, they teach thus. If any, beginning to 
number, says one, and adds two, then in like 
manner three, these (together) will be six, and 
to these (add) moreover four, the entire (sum), 
in like manner, will be ten. For one, two, three, 
four, become ten, the perfect numljer. Thus, he 
says, the quaternion in every respect imitated the 
intelligible monad, which was able to generate a 
perfect number. 

CHAP. XIX. — PYTHAGORAS' DUALITY OF SUB- 
STANCES; HIS "CATEGORIES." 

There are, then, according to Pythagoras, two 
worlds : one intelligible, which has the monad 
for an originating principle ; and the other sen- 
sible. But of this (latter) is the quaternion 
having the iota, the one tittle,*" a perfect num- 
ber. And there likewise is, according to the 
Pythagoreans, the z, the one tittle, which is chief 
and most dominant, and enables us to appre- 
hend the substance of those intelligible entities 
which are capable of being understood through 
the medium of intellect and of sense. (And in 
this substance inhere) the nine incorporeal acci- 
dents which cannot exist without substance, viz., 
"quality," and "quantity," and "relation," and 
" where," and " when," and '' position," and 
" possession," and " action," and " passion." 
These, then, are the nine accidents (inhering in) 
substance, and when reckoned with these (sub- 
stances), contains the perfect number, the /. 
Wherefore, the universe being divided, as we 
said, into the intelligible and sensible world, we 
have also reason from the intelligible (world), 
in order that by reason we may behold the sub- 
stance of things that are cognised by intellect, 
and are incorporeal and divine. But we have, 
he says, five senses — smelling, seeing, hearing, 
taste, and touch. Now, by these we arrive at 
a knowledge of things that are discerned by 
sense ; and so, he says, the sensible is divided 
from the intelligible world. And that we have 
for each of these an instrument for attaining 
knowledge, we perceive from the following con- 
sideration. Nothing, he says, of intelligibles can 

♦ Respecting these Imes, Miller refers us to Fabricius, in SexUivt 
Empiricum, p. 332. 

s The Abbe Cruice adduces a passage from Suidas (on the word 
apid^ot) which contains a similar statement to that furnished by 
Hippolytus. 

<> Matt. V. i3. 

Chap. XXI.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

83 

be known to us from sense. For he says neither 
eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor any whatsoever 
of the other senses known that (which is cog- 
nised by mind). Neither, again, by reason is it 
possible to arrive at a knowledge of any of the 
things discernible by sense. But one must see 
that a thing is white, and taste that it is sweet, 
and know by hearing that it is musical or out of 
tune. And whether any odour is fragrant or 
disagreeable, is the function of smell, not of 
reason. It is the same with objects of touch ; 
for anything rough, or soft, or warm, or cold, it is 
not possible to know by hearing, but (far from 
it), for touch is the judge of such (sensations). 
Things being thus constituted, the arrangement 
of things that have been made and are being 
made is observed to happen in conformity with 
numerical (combinations). For in the same 
manner as, commencing from monad, by an 
addition of monads or triads, and a collection 
of the succeeding numbers, we make some one 
very large complex whole of number ; (and) 
then, again, from an amassed number thus formed 
by addition, we accomplish, by means of a cer- 
tain subtraction and re-calculation, a solution of 
the totality of the aggregate numbers ; so like- 
wise he asserts that the world, bound by a cer- 
tain arithmetical and musical chain, was, by its 
tension and relaxation, and by addition and 
subtraction, always and for ever preserved in- 
corrupt. 

CHAP. XX. — PYTHAGORAS' COSMOGONY' ; SIMILAR 
TO THAT OF EMPEDOCLES. 

The Pythagoreans therefore declare their opin- 
ion concerning the continuance of the world in 
some such manner as this : — 

" For heretofore it was and will be ; never, I ween. 
Of both of these will void the age eternal be." 

"Of these ; " but what are they? Discord and 
Love. Now, in their system. Love forms the 
world incorruptible (and) eternal, as they sup- 
pose. For substance and the world are one. 
Discord, however, separates and puts asunder, 
and evinces numerous attempts by subdividing 
to form the world. It is just as if one severs 
into small parts, and divides arithmetically, the 
myriad into thousands, and hundreds, and tens ; 
and drachmae into oboli and small farthings. In 
this manner, he says, Discord severs the sub- 
stance of the world into animals, plants, metals, 
and things similar to these. And the fabricator 
of the generation of all things produced is, ac- 
cording to them. Discord ; whereas Love, on the 
other hand, manages and provides for the uni- 
verse in such a manner that it enjoys perma- 
nence. And conducting together ' into unity 

' Or, trvvdyti., leads together. 

the divided and scattered parts of the universe, 
and leading them forth from their (separate) 
mode of existence, (Love) unites and adds to 
the universe, in order that it may enjoy perma- 
nence ; and it thus constitutes one system. They 
will not therefore cease, — neither Discord divid- 
ing the world, nor Love attaching to the world 
the divided parts. Of some such description as 
this, so it appears, is the distribution of the world 
according to Pythagoras. But Pythagoras says 
that the stars are fragments from the sun, and 
that the souls - of animals are conveyed from the 
stars ; and that these are mortal when they are 
in the body, just as if buried, as it were, in a 
tomb : whereas that they rise (out of this world) 
and become immortal, when we are separated 
from our bodies. Whence Plato, being asked by 
some one, "What is philosophy?" replied, "It 
is a separation of soul from body." 

CHAP. XXI. — OTHER OPINIONS OF PYTHAGORAS. 

Pythagoras, then, became a student of these 
doctrines likewise, in which he speaks both by 
enigmas and some such expressions as these : 
"When you depart from your own (tabernacle), 
return not;^ if, however, (you act) not (thus), 
the Furies, auxiliaries to justice, will overtake 
you," — denominating the body one's own (tab- 
ernacle), and its passions the Furies. When, 
therefore, he says, you depart, that is, when you 
go forth from the body, do not earnestly crav'e 
for this ; but if you are eagerly desirous ( for 
departure), the passions will once more confine 
you within the body. For these suppose that 
there is a transition of souls from one body to 
another, as also Empedocles, adopting the prin- 
ciples of Pythagoras, aftirms. For, says he, souls 
that are lovers of pleasure, as Plato states,'* if, 
when they are in the condition of suffering inci- 
dental to man, they do not evolve theories of 
philosophy, must pass through all animals and 
plants (back) again into a human body. And 
when (the soul) may form a system of specula- 
tion thrice in the same body, (he maintains) 
that it ascends up to the nature of some kindred 
star. If, however, (the soul) does not philoso- 
phize, (it must pass) through the same (succes- 
sion of changes once more). He affirms, then, 
that the soul sometimes may become even mor- 
tal, if it is overcome by the Furies, that is, the 
passions (of the body) ; and immortal, if it suc- 
ceeds in escaping the Furies, which are the 
passions. 

2 The Abbe Cruice considers that the writer of T/ie Refutation 
did not agree with Pythagoras' opinion regarding the soul, — a fact 
that negatives the authorship of Origen, who assented to the Pytha- 
gorean psychology. The question concerning the pre-existence of 
the soul is stated in a passage often quoted, viz., St. Jerome's Letter 
to Marcellitia (Ep. 82). 

3 Cruice thinks that the following words are taken from Heracli- 
tus, and refers to Plutarch, De Exilio, c. xi. 

■♦ Pkcedo, vol. i. p. 89, ed. Bekker. 

84 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book Vt 

CHAP. XXII. — THE "SAYINGS OF PYTH.-^GORAS. 

But since also we have chosen to mention the 
sayings darkly expressed by Pythagoras to his 
disciples by means of symbols, it seems likewise 
expedient to remind (the reader) of the rest 
(of his doctrines. And we touch on this sub- 
ject) on account also of the heresiarchs, who 
attempt by some method of this description to 
converse by means of symbols ; and these are 
not their own, but they have, (in propounding 
them,) taken advantage of expressions employed 
by the Pythagoreans.' Pythagoras then in- 
structs his disciples, addressing them as follows : 
" Bind up the sack that carries the bedding." 
(Now,) inasmuch as they who intend going 
upon a journey tie their clothes into a wallet, to 
be ready for the road ; so, (in like manner,) he 
wishes his disciples to be prepared, since every 
moment death is likely to come upon them by 
surprise.- (In this way Pythagoras sought to 
effect) that (his followers) should labour under 
no deficiency in the qualifications required in 
his pupils. 3 Wherefore of necessity he was in 
the habit, with the dawn of day, of instructing 
the Pythagoreans to encourage one another to 
bind up the sack that carries the bedding, that 
is, to be ready for death. " Do not stir fire with 
a sword;"-* (meaning,) do not, by addressing 
him, quarrel with an enraged man ; for a per- 
son in a passion is like fire, whereas the sword 
is the uttered expression. " Do not trample on 
a besom ; " s (meaning,) despise not a small 
matter. " Plant not a palm tree in a house ; " 
(meaning,) foment not discord in a family, for 
the palm tree is a symbol of battle and slaugh- 
ter.^' " Eat not from a stool ; " (meaning,) do 
not undertake an ignoble art, in order that you 
may not be a slave to the body, which is cor- 
ruptible, but make a livelihood from literature. 

' These sayings {Symbola Pythagorica) have been collected by, 
amongst others, Thomas .Stanley, and more recently by Caspar 
< Irelliiis. The meaning and the form of the proverbs given by Hip- 
polytiis do not always correspond with, e.g., Jamblichiis (the biogra- 
pher of Pythagoras), Porphyr>', and Phitarch. The curious reader 
can see the Proverbs, in all their variety of readings and explana- 
tions, in the edition of L. Gyraldus. 

^ This has been explained by Erasmus as a precept enjoining 
habits of tidiness and modesty. 

■* Miller's texi here yields a different but not very intelligible 
meaning. 

■• Horace quotes this proverb (2 Serin., lii. 274) with a somewhat 
diderent meaning. Porphyry considers it a precept against irrev- 
erent language towards the Deity, the fire being a symbol — for in- 
stance, the vestal fire — of the everlasting nature of (Jod. SicaAeue 
in Hippolytus is also read, e.g., by Basil, ^aivovTc;, that is, cleaving. 
'I'his alludes to some ancient game in which fire was struck at and 
severed. 

S i.apoi'. This word also signifies "sweepings" or "refuse." 
Some s.ay it means a Chaldean or Babylonian measure. The mean- 
ing would then be: Neglect not giving good measure, i.e., practise 
fair dealing. This agrees with another form of the proverb, re.iding 
iuyoi' for uapov — that is, overlook not the balance or scales. 

* Another meaning assigned to this proverb is, " Labour to no 
purpose." The palm, it is alleged, when it grows oi itself, produces 
fruit, but sterility ensues upon transplantation. The proverb is also 
s.iid to mean: Avoid what may seem agreeable, but really is inju- 
rious. This alludes to the quality of the wine (see Xenophon's 
W«rti^., ii.), which, pleasant in appearance, produced severe head- 
ache in those partaking of it. 

For it lies within your reach both to nourish the 
body, and make the soul better.^ " Don't take 
a bite out of an uncut loaf; " (meaning,) dimin- 
ish not thy possessions, but live on the profit 
(of them), and guard thy substance as aa 
entire loaf.*^ " Feed not on beans ; " (mean- 
ing,) accept not the government of a city, for 
with beans they at that time were accustomed 
to ballot for their magistrates.^ 

CHAP. XXIII. — PYTHAGORAS' ASTRONOMIC SYSTEM, 

These, then, and such like assertions, the 
Pythagoreans put forward ; and the heretics, 
imitating these, are supposed by some to utter 
important truths. The Pythagorean system, 
however, lays down that the Creator of all al- 
leged existences is the Great Geometrician and 
Calculator — a sun ; and that this one has been 
fixed in the whole world, just as in the bodies a 
soul, according to the statement of Plato. For 
the sun (being of the nature of) fire,'° resembles 
the soul, but the earth (resembles the) body. 
And, separated from fire, there would be nothing 
visible, nor would there be any object of touch 
without something solid ; but not any solid body 
exists without earth. Whence the Deity, locating 
air in the midst, fashioned the body of the uni- 
verse out of fire and earth. And the Sun, he 
says, calculates and geometrically measures the 
world in some such manner as the following : 
The world is a unity cognizable by sense ; and 
concerning this (world) we now make these as- 
sertions. But one who is an adept in the science 
of numbers, and a geometrician, has divided it 
into twelve parts. And the names of these parts 
are as follow : Aries, Taurus, (jcmini. Cancer, 
Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capri- 
corn, Aquarius, Pisces. Again, he divides each 
of the twelve parts into thirty ])arts, and these 
are days of the month. Again, he divides each 
part of the thirty parts into sixty small divisions^ 

' " Eat not from a stool." This proverb is also differently read 
and interpreted. Another form is, " Eat not from a chariot,"' of 
which the import is variously given, as. Do not tamper with your 
health, because food swallowed in haste, as it must be when one is 
driving a team of horses, cannot be salutary or nutritive: or. Do not 
be careless, because one should attend to the business in hand: if 
that be guiding a chariot, one should not at the same time trj* to eat 
his meats. 

^ The word " entire " Plutarch adds to this proverb. Its ancient 
form would seem to inculcate patience and courtesy, as if one should 
not, when at meals, snap at food before others. As read in Plutarch, 
it has been also interpreted as a precept to avoid creating dissension, 
the unbroken bread being a symbol of unity. It has likewise been 
explained as an injunction against greediness. The loaf was marked 
by two intersecting lines into four parts, and one was not to devour 
all of these. (See Horace, i Kf>ist., xvii. 49.) 

9 This is the generally received import of the proverb. .Ancient 
writers, however, put forward other meanings, connected chiefly with 
certain effects of beans, e.g., disturbing the mind, and producing 
melancholy, which Pythagoras is said to have noticed. Horace had 
no such idea concerning beans (see 2 Siri/i., vi. 63), but evidently 
alludes to a belief of the magi that disembodied spirits resided in 
beans. (See Lucian, Micyll.: Plutarch, Uepi nai6. 'A-yioy. 17; 
Aulus Gellius, iv. 11; and Guigniaut's Cruiser's Symholik, i. 160.) 
[See p. 12 supra, and compare vol. ii., this series, p. 383, and Eluci- 
dation III. p. 403.] 

■° The text seems doubtful. Some would read, " The sun is (to 
be compared with) soul, and the moon with body " 

Chap. XXV.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

85 

and (each) of these small (divisions) he sub- 
tlivides into minute portions, and (these again) 
into portions still more minute. And always 
doing this, and not intermitting, but collecting 
from these divided portions (an aggregate), and 
constituting it a year ; and again resolving and 
dividing the compound, (the sun) completely 
finishes the great and everlasting world.' 

CH.4P. XXIV. VALENTINUS CONVICTED OF PLAGI- 

-ARISMS FROM THE PLATONIC AND PYTHAGORIC 
PHILOSOPHY ; THE VALENTINIAN THEORY OF 
EMANATION BY DUADS. 

Of some such nature, as I who have accurately 
examined their systems (have attempted) to state 
compendiously, is the opinion of Pythagoras and 
Plato. And from this (system), not from the 
Gospels, Valentinus, as we have proved, has col- 
lected the (materials of) heresy — I mean his 
own (heresy) — and may (therefore) justly be 
reckoned a Pythagorean and Platonist, not a 
Christian. Valentinus, therefore, and Heracleon, 
and Ptolemgeus, and the entire school of these 
(heretics), as disciples of Pythagoras and Plato, 
(and) following these guides, have laid down as 
the fundamental principle of their doctrine the 
arithmetical system. For, likewise, according to 
these (Valentinians), the originating cause of the 
universe is a Monad, unbegotten, imperishable, 
incomprehensible, inconceivable, productive, and 
a cause of the generation of all existent things. 
And the aforesaid Monad is styled by them 
Father. There is, however, discoverable among 
them some considerable diversity of opinion. 
For some of them, in order that the Pythagorean 
doctrine of Valentinus may be altogether free 
from admixture (with other tenets), suppose that 
the Father is unfeminine, and unwedded, and 
solitary. But others, imagining it to-be impos- 
sible that from a male only there could proceed 
a generation at all of any of those things that 
have been made to exist, necessarily reckon 
along with the Father of the universe, in order 
that he may be a father, Sige as a spouse. But 
as to Sige, whether at any time she is united in 
marriage (to the Father) or not, this is a point 
which we leave them to wrangle about among 
themselves. We at present, keeping to the Pyth- 
agorean principle, which is one, and unwedded, 
unfeminine, (and) deficient in nothing, shall pro- 
ceed to give an account of their doctrines, as 
they themselves inculcate them. There is, says 
(Valentinus), not anything at all begotten, but 
the Father is alone unbegotten, not subject to 
the condition of place, not (subject to the con- 
dition of) time, having no counsellor, (and) not 
being any other substance that could be realized 

' Or, " completes the great year of the world " (see book iv. chap, 
♦ii. of The Refutation') . 

according to the ordinary methods of perception. 
(The Father,) however, was solitary, subsisting, 
as they say, in a state of quietude, and Himself 
reposing in isolation within Himself. When, how- 
ever. He became productive,^ it seemed to Him 
expedient at one time to generate and lead forth 
the most beautiful and perfect (of those germs 
of existence) which He possessed within Him 
self, for (the Father) was not fond of solitari- 
ness. For, says he. He was all love, but love is 
not love except there may be some object of 
affection. The Father Himself, then, as He was 
solitary, projected and produced Nous and Ale- 
theia, that is, a duad which became mistress,^ 
and origin, and mother of all the /Eons com- 
puted by them (as existing) within the Pleroma. 
Nous and Aletheia being projected from the 
Father, •♦ one capable of continuing generation, 
deriving existence from a productive being, 
(Nous) himself likewise, in imitation of the 
Father, projected Logos and Zoe ; and Logos and 
Zoe project Anthropos and Ecclesia. But Nous 
and Aletheia, when they beheld that their own 
offspring had been bom productive, returned 
thanks to the Father of the universe, and offer 
unto Him a perfect number, viz., ten ^ons. 
For, he says. Nous and Aletheia could not offer 
unto the Father a more perfect (one) than this 
number. For the Father, who is perfect, ought 
to be celebrated by a perfect number, and ten 
is a perfect number, because this is first of those 
(numbers) that are formed by plurality, (and 
therefore) perfect. 5 The Father, however, being 
more perfect, because being alone unbegotten, 
by means of the one primary conjugal union of 
Nous and Aletheia, found means of projecting 
all the roots of existent things. 

CHAP. XXV. THE, TENET OF THE DUAD MADE 

THE FOUNDATION OF VALENTINUS* SYSTEM OF 
THE EMANATION OF ^ONS. 

Logos himself also, and Zoe, then saw that 
Nous and Aletheia had celebrated the Father of 
the universe by a perfect number ; and Logos him- 

- Valentinus' system, if purged of the glosses put upon it by his 
disciples, appears to have been constructed out of a grand conception 
of Deity, and evidences much power of abstraction. Between the 
essence of God, dwelling in the midst of isolation prior to an exercise 
of the creative energy, and the material worlds, Valentinus interposes 
an ideal world. Through the latter, the soul — of a kindred nature 
— is enabled to mount up to God. This is the import of the terms 
Bythus (depth) and Sige (silence, i.e., solitariness) afterwards used. 

3 Kvpca: instead of this has been suggested the reading Kai pi^a, 
i.e., " which is both the root," etc. 

■i In all this Valentinus intends to delineate the progress from 
absolute to phenomenal being. There are three developments in this 
transition. Absolute being (Bythus and Sige) is the same as the 
eternal thought and consciousness of God's own essence. Here we 
have the primary emanation, viz.. Nous, i.e.. Mind (called also Mono- 
genes, only-begotten), and Aletheia, i.e., Truth. Next comes the 
ideal manifestation through the Logos, i.e.. Word (obvioiisly bor- 
rowed from the prologue to St. John's Gospel), and Zoe, i.e., Life 
(taken from the same source). We have then the passage from the 
ideal to the actual in Anthropos, i.e., Man, and Ecclesia, i.e.. Church. 
These last are the phenomenal manifestations of the divine mind. 

5 TeAeio?: Bunsen would read xeAos, which Cruice objects to on 
account of the word TeAecdrepos occurring in the next sentence. 

86 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VI. 

self likewise with Zoe wished to magnify their own 
father and mother, Nous and Aletheia. Since, 
however, Nous and Aletheia were begotten, and 
did not possess paternal (and) perfect uncreated- 
ness, Logos and Zoe do not glorify Nous their 
father with a perfect number, but far from it, 
with an imperfect one.' For Logos and Zoe 
offer twelve ^4^ons unto Nous and Aletheia. 
For, according to Valentinus, these — namely. 
Nous and Aletheia, Logos and Zoe, Anthropos 
and Ecclesia — have been the primary roots of 
the .-Eons. But there are ten ^ons proceeding 
from Nous and Aletheia, and twelve from Logos 
and Zoe — twenty and eight in all.^ And to 
these (ten) they give these following denomina- 
tions : 3 Bythus and Alixis, Ageratus and Henosis, 
Autophyes and Hedone, Acinetus and Syncrasis, 
Monogenes and Macaria.-* These are ten yEons 
whom some say (have been projected) by Nous 
and Aletheia, but some by Logos and Zoe. 
Others, however, affirm that the twelve (^ons 
have been projected) by Anthropos and Eccle- 
sia, while others by Logos and Zoe. And upon 
these they bestow these following names : s Para- 
cletus and Pistis, Patricus and Elpis, Metricus 
and Agape, .Vinous and Synesis, Ecclesiasticus 
and Macariotes, Theletus and Sophia. But of 
the twelve, the twelfth and youngest of all the 
twenty-eight yEons, being a female, and called 
Sophia, observed the multitude and power of 
the begetting ^ons, and hurried back into the 
depth of the Father. And she perceived that 
all the rest of the .Lons, as being begotten, gen- 
erate by conjugal intercourse. The Father, on 
the other .hand, alone, without copulation, has 
produced (an offspring). She wished to emu- 
late the Father,*^' and to produce (offspring) of 
herself without a marital partner, that she might 
achieve a work in no wise inferior ' to (that of) 

' This follows the text as emended by Bernays. 

2 The number properly should be thirty, as there were two tetrads: 
(i) Bythus, Sigc, Nous, and Aletheia; (2) Logos, Zoe, Kcclesia, and 
Anthropos. Some, as we learn from Hippolytus, made up the num- 
ber to thirty, by the addition of Christ and the Holy Ghost, — a fact 
■which I'unsen thinks conclusively proves that the alleged generation 
of JEons was a subsequent addition to Valentinus' system. 

^ There is some confusion in Hippolytus' text, which is, however, 
remove.able by a reference to Irena;us (i. i). 

* We subjoin the meanings of these names: — 

Ten .(^ions from Nous and Aletheia, (or) Logos and Zoe, 

VIZ 

I. 
2. 
3- 
4- 
5- 

Bythus = Profundity. 6. Hedone = Voluptuousness. 

Mixis = Mixture. 7. Acinetus = Motionless. 

Ageratos = Ever-young. 8. Syncrasis = Composition. 

Henosis = Unification. 9. Monogenes = Only-begotten. 

Autophyes = Self-grown. 10. Macaria = Blessedness. 

5 The following are the meanings of these names: — 

Twelve yEons from Anthropos and Ecclesia, (or) Logos and 
^oe : — 

7. ./Einous = Ever-thinking. 

8. .Synesis = Intellijjencc. 
19. Ecclosiasticus = Ecclesiastical. 

10. Makariotes = Felicity. 

11. Theletus = Volition. 

12. Sophia = Wisdom. 

Paracletus 

Pistis 
Patricus 
Elpis 
Metricus 

= Comforter. 
= Faith. 
= Paternal. 
= Hope. 
= Temperate. 
= I^ove. 

X. 

2. 

3- 

4- 

5- 

6. Agape 

<> [Rev. ii. 24. It belongs to the "depths of Satan" to create 
mythologies that caricature the Divine mysteries. Cf. 2 Cor. ii. 11.] 
' This Sophia was, so to speak, the bridge which spanned the 
Bbyss between God and Reality. Under an aspect of this kind .Solo- 
inon (Prov. viii.) views Wisdom; and Valentinus introduces it into his 
aystem, according to the old Judaistic interpretation of Sophia, as the 

the Father. (Sophia, however,) was ignorant 
that the Unbegotten One, being an originating 
principle of the universe, as well as root and 
depth and abyss, alone possesses the power of 
self-generation. But Sophia, being begotten, 
and born after many more (^ons), is not able 
to acquire possession of the power inherent in 
the Unbegotten One. For in the Unbegotten 
One, he says, all things exist simultaneously, but 
in the begotten (i^ons) the female is projective 
of substance, and the male is formative of the 
substance which is projected by the female. 
Sophia, therefore, prepared to project that only 
which she was capable (of projecting), viz., a 
formless and undigested substance.** And this, 
he says, is what Moses asserts : " The earth was 
invisible, and unfashioned." This (substance) 
is, he says, the good (and) the heavenly Jerusa- 
lem, into which God has promised to conduct 
the children of Israel, saying, " I will bring you 
into a land flowing with milk and honey." 

CHAP. XXVL — valentinus' EXPLANATION OF THE 
EXISTENCE OF CHRIST AND THE SPIRIT. 

Ignorance, therefore, having arisen within the 
Pleroma in consequence of Sophia, and shape- 
lessness in consequence of the offspring of 
Sophia, confusion arose in the Pleroma. (For 
all) the yEons that were begotten (became over- 
whelmed with apprehension, imagining) that in 
like manner formless and incqmplete progenies 
of the yEons should be generated ; and that 
some destruction, at no distant period, should 
at length seize upon the ^ons. All the ^-Eons, 
then, betook themselves to supplication of the 
Father, that he would tranquillize the sorrowing 
Sophia ; for she continued weeping and bewail- 
ing on account of the abortion produced by her, 
— for so they term it. The Father, then, com- 
passionating the tears of Sophia, and accepting 
the supplication of the ^Lons, orders a further 
projection. For he did not, (Valentinus) says, 
himself project, but Nous and Aletheia (pro- 
jected) Christ and the Holy Spirit for the 
restoration of Form, and the destruction of the 
abortion, and (for) the consolation and cessa- 
tion of the groans of Sophia. And thirty yEons 
came into existence along with Christ and the 
Holy Spirit. Some of these (Valentinians) wish 
that this should be a triacontad of yEons, whereas 
others desire that Sige should exist along with the 
Father, and that the yEons should be reckoned 
along with them. 

instrument for God's creative energy. But Sophia thought to pass 
beyond her function as the connecting link between limited and illim- 
itable existence, i)y an attempt to evolve the infinite from herself. She 
fails, and an abortive image of the true Wisdom is procreated, while 
Sophia herself sinks into this nether world. 

8 Miller's text has, " a well-formed and properly-digested sub- 
stance." This reading is, however, obviously wrong, as is proved by 
a reference to what Epiphanius states {Har., xxxi.) concerning Val- 
entinus. 

Chap. XXVII.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

87 

Christ, therefore, being additionally projected, 
and the Holy Spirit, by Nous and Aletheia, im- 
mediately this abortion of Sophia, (which was) 
shapeless, (and) born of herself only, and gen- 
erated without conjugal intercourse, separates 
from the entire of the ^ons, lest the perfect 
.-Eons, beholding this (abortion), should be dis- 
turbed by reason of its shapelessness. In order, 
then, that the shapelessness of the abortion might 
not at all manifest itself to the perfect ^ons, the 
Father also again projects additionally one yEon, 
viz., Staurus. And he being begotten great, as 
from a mighty and perfect father, and being pro- 
jected for the guardianship and defence of the 
^ons, becomes a limit of the Pleroma, having 
within itself all the thirty yEons together, for 
these are they that had been projected. Now 
this (^on) is styled Horos, because he sepa- 
rates from the Pleroma the Hysterema that is 
outside. And (he is called) Metocheus, because 
he shares also in the Hysterema. And (he is 
denominated) Staurus, because he is fixed in- 
flexibly and inexorably, so that nothing of the 
Hysterema can come near the ^ons who are 
within the Pleroma. Outside, then, Horos, (or) 
Metocheus,' (or) Staurus, is the Ogdoad, as it 
is called, according to them, and is that Sophia 
which is outside the Pleroma, which (Sophia) 
Christ, who was additionally projected by Nous 
and Aletheia, formed and made a perfect ^on, 
so that in no respect she should be inferior in 
power to any of the ^ons within the Pleroma.^ 
Since, however, Sophia was formed outside, and 
it was not possible and equitable that Christ 
and the Holy Spirit, who were projected from 
Nous and Aletheia, should remain outside the 
Pleroma, Christ hurried away, and the Holy 
Spirit, from her who had had shape imparted to 
her, unto Nous and Aletheia within the Limit, 
in order that with the rest of the /Eons they 
might glorify the Father. 

CHAP. XXVII. VALENTINUS' EXPLANATION OF THE 

EXISTENCE OF JESUS; POWER OF JESUS OVER 
HUMANITY. 

After, then, there ensued some one (treaty 
of) peace and harmony between all the /Eons 
within the Pleroma, it appeared expedient to 
them not only by a conjugal union to have mag- 
nified the Son, but also that by an offering of 
ripe fruits they should glorify the Father. Then 
all the thirty ^ons consented to project one 
^on, joint fruit of the Pleroma, that he might be 
(an earnest) of their union,^ and unanimity, and 
peace. And he alone was projected by all the 
^ons in honour of the Father. This (one) is 

' Or, " Metagogeus" (see Irenseus, i. i, 2, iii. i). 

- Bunsen corrects the passage, " So that she should not be inferior 
to any of the iEons, or unequal (in power) to any (of them)." 

3 evoTJjTos: Miller has I'edrrjTos, i.e., youth. The former is the 
emendation of Bernays. 

styled among them "Joint Fruit of the Pleroma." 
These (matters), then, took place within the Ple- 
roma in this way. And the " Joint Fruit of the 
Pleroma" was projected, (that is,) Jesus, — for 
this is his name, — the great High Priest. Sophia, 
however, who was outside the Pleroma in search 
of Christ, who had given her form, and of the 
Holy Spirit, became involved in great terror that 
she would perish, if he should separate from her, 
who had given her form and consistency. And 
she was seized with grief, and fell into a state of 
considerable perplexity, (while) reflecting who 
was he who had given her form, what the Holy 
Spirit was, whither he had departed, who it was 
that had hindered them from being present, who 
it was that had been envious of that glorious and 
blessed spectacle. While involved in sufferings 
such as these, she turns herself to prayer and sup- 
plication of him who had deserted her. During 
the utterance of her entreaties, Christ, who is 
within the Pleroma, had mercy upon (her), and 
all the rest of the ^Eons (were similarly affected) ; 
and they send forth beyond the Pleroma " the 
Joint Fruit of the Pleroma " as a spouse for 
Sophia, who was outside, and as a rectifier of 
those sufferings which she underwent in searching 
after Christ. 

"The Fruit," then, arriving outside the Ple- 
roma, and discovering (Sophia) in the midst of 
those four primary passions, both fear and sorrow, 
and perplexity and entreaty, he rectified her affec- 
tions. While, however, correcting them, he ob- 
served that it would not be proper to destroy 
these, inasmuch as they are (in their nature) eter- 
nal, and peculiar to Sophia ; and yet that neither 
was it seemly that Sophia should exist in the midst 
of such passions, in fear and sorrow, supplication 
(and) perplexity. He therefore, as an /Eon so 
great, and (as) offspring of the entire Pleroma, 
caused the passions to depart from her, and he 
made these substantially-existent essences. ^ He 
altered fear into animal desire, s and (made) grief 
material, and (rendered) perplexity (the passion) 
of demons. But conversion,^ and entreaty, and 
supplication, he constituted as a path to repent- 
ance and power over the animal essence, which 
is denominated right.^ The Creator** (acted) 
from fear ; (and) that is what, he says. Scripture 
affirms : " The fear of the Lord is the beginning 
of wisdom." ^ For this is the beginning of the 

* This is Bunsen's text, vno(rTdTOvs. Duncker reads vnoaraTL- 
(cas, hypostatic. 

5 Some read oixriav (see Theodoret, Hisr., c. vii.). 

6 67rio-Tpo(f>)ji'; or it may be rendered "solicitude." Literally, it 
means a turning towards, as in this instance, for the purpose of prayer 
(see Irenseus, i. 5). 

7 Valentinus denominates what is psychical (natural) right, and 
what is material or pathematic left (see Irenaeus, i. 5). 

8 Cruice renders the passage thus : "which is denominated riglit. 
or Demiurge, while fear it is that accomplishes this transformation." 
The Demiurge is of course called " right," as being the power of the 
psychical essence (see Clemens Alexandrinu6, Hypot. excerpta e 
Theod., c. 43). 

9 Ps. cxi. 10; ProY. 1. 7, ix. 10. 

88 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VI. 

affections of Sophia, for she was seized with fear, 
next with grief, then with perplexity, and so she 
sought refuge in entreaty and supphcation. And 
the animal essence is, he says, of a fiery nature, 
and is also termed by them the super-celestial To- 
pos, and Hebdomad,' and "Ancient of Days."^ 
And whatever other such statements they ad- 
vance respecting this (/Eon), these they allege 
to hold good of the animalish (one), whom they 
assert to be creator of the world. Now he is 
of the appearance of fire. Moses also, he says, 
■expresses himself thus : " The Lord thy God is a 
burning and consuming fire." ^ For he, likewise, 
wishes (to think) that it has been so written. 
There is, however, he says, a twofold power of 
the fire ; for fire is all-consuming, (and) cannot 
be quenched. According, therefore, to this divis- 
ion, there exists, subject to death, a certain soul 
which is a sort of mediator, for it is a Hebdomad 
and Cessation.^ For underneath the Ogdoad, 
where Sophia is, but above Matter, which is the 
Creator, a day has been formed, 5 and the " Joint 
Fruit of the Pleroma." If the soul has been 
fashioned in the image of those above, that is, 
the Ogdoad, it became immortal and repaired 
to the Ogdoad, which is, he says, heavenly Jeru- 
salem. If, however, it has been fashioned in the 
image of Matter, that is, the corporeal passions, 
the soul is of a perishable nature, and is (accord- 
ingly) destroyed. 

•CHAP. XXVIII. THE VALENTINLAN ORIGIN OF THE 

CREATION. 

As, therefore, the primary and greatest power '^ 
of the animal essence came into existence, an 
image (of the only begotten Son) ; so also the 
devil, who is the ruler of this world, constitutes 
the power of the material essence, as Beelzebub 
IS of the essence of demons which emanates 
from anxiety. (In consequence of this,) So])hia 
from above exerted her energy from the Ogdoad 
to the Hebdomad. For the Demiurge, they say, 
itnows nothing at all, but is, according to them, 
devoid of understanding, and silly, and is not 
conscious of what he is doing or working at. 
But in him, while thus in a state of ignorance 
That even he is producing, Sophia wrought all 
sorts of energy, and infused vigour (into him). 
And (although Sophia) was really the operating 
cause, he himself imagines that he evolves the 
creation of the world out of himself: whence 

■ Schneidewin fills up the hiatus thus: "Place of Mediation." 
The above translation adopts the emendation of Cruice (see Irenasus, 
i-5) 

^ Dan. vii. g, 13, 22. 
3 Deut. ix. 3; Ps. 1 
* Gen. ii 2. 

3; Heb. xii. 29. 

S See Epistle of Barnabas, chap. xv. vol. i. p. 146, and Ignatius' 
Letter to the Magnesians, chap. ix. p. 63, this series. 

* The opening sentence in this chapter is confused in Miller's text. 
The sense, however, as given above, is deducible from a (efereace to 
• corresponding passage in Irenxus (i. 5) . 

he commenced, saying, " I am God, and beside 
me there is no other." ^ 

CHAP. XXIX. THE OTHER VALENTINIAN EMANA- 
TIONS IN CONFORMITY WITH THE PYTHAGOREAN 
SYSTEM OF NUMBERS. 

The quaternion, then, advocated by Valen- 
tinu's, is " a source of the everlasting nature 
having roots ; " ** and Sophia (is the power) from 
whom the animal and material creation has de- 
rived its present condition. But Sophia is called 
"Spirit," and the Demiurge "vSoul," and the 
Devil " the ruler of this world," and Beelzebub 
" the (ruler) of demons." These are the state- 
ments which they put forward. But further, in 
addition to these, rendering, as I have previously 
mentioned, their entire system of doctrine (akin 
to the) arithmetical (art), (they determine) that 
the thirty /Eons within the Pleroma have again, 
in addition to these, projected other .^ons, ac- 
cording to the (numerical) proportion (adopted 
by the Pythagoreans), in order that the Pleroma 
might be formed into an aggregate, according to 
a perfect number. For how the Pythagoreans 
divided (the celestial sphere) into twelve and 
thirty and sixty parts, and how they have minute 
parts of diminutive portions, has been made 
evident. 

In this manner these (followers of Valentinus) 
subdivide the parts within the Pleroma. Now 
likewise the parts in the Ogdoad have been sub- 
divided, and there has been projected Sophia, 
which is, according to them, mother of all living 
creatures, and the " Joint Fruit of the Pleroma," 
(who is) the Logos,'? (and other ^ons,) who 
are celestial angels that have their citizenship in 
Jerusalem whicli is above, which is in hea\-en. 
For this Jerusalem is Sophia, she (that is) out- 
side (the Pleroma), and her spouse is the "Joint 
Fruit of the Pleroma." And the Demiurge pro- 
jected souls ; for this (Sophia) is the essence 
of souls. This (Demiurge), according to them, 
is Abraham, and these (souls) the children of 
Abraham. From the material antl devilish 
essence the Demiurge fashioned bodies for the 
souls. This is what has been declared : " And 
God formed man, taking clay from the earth, 
and breathed upon his face the breath of life, 
and man was made into a living soul." '° This, 
according to them, is the inner man, the natural 
(man), residing in the material body. Now a 
material (man) is perishable, incomplete, (and) 
formed out of the devilish essence. And this is 

7 Deut. iv. 35; Isa. xlv. 5, 14, 18, 21, 22. 

8 These words are a line out of Pythagoras' Golden Verses : — 

n»)y^ Ti« aevaou (Jiiio-ews pi^uj/aar' i\ovaa. — (48). 

9 The Abbe Cruice thinks that a comparison of this passage 
with the corresponding one in Irenaeus suggests the addition of oi 
iopu<;)6poi after Aoyos, i.e., the Logos and his satellites. fVol. i. p. 
381, this series.] 

'" Gen. iL 7. 

Chap. XXXI.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

89 

the material man, as it were, according to them 
an inn ' or domicile, at one time of soul only, 
at another time of soul and demons, at another 
time of soul and Logoi.^ And these are the 
Logoi that have been dispersed from above, from 
the "Joint Fruit of the Pleroma" and (from) 
Sophia, into this world. And they dwell in an 
earthly body, with a soul, when demons do not 
take up their abode with that soul. This, he 
says, is what has been written in Scripture : " On 
this account I bend my knees to the God and 
Father and Lord of our Lord Jesus Christ, that 
God would grant you to have Christ dwelling in 
the inner man," 3 — that is, the natural (man), 
not the corporeal (one), — "that you may be 
able to understand what is the depth," which is 
the Father of the aniverse, " and what is the 
breadth," which is Staurus, the limit of the Ple- 
roma, " or what is the length," that is, the 
Pleroma of the ^ons. Wherefore, he says, 
" the natural man receiveth not the things of 
the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto 
him ; " ^ but folly, he says,, is the power of the 
Demiurge, for he was foolish and devoid of 
understanding, and imagined himself to be fab- 
ricating the world. He was, however, ignorant 
that Sophia, the Mother, the Ogdoad, was really 
the cause of all the operations performed by him 
who had no consciousness in reference to the 
creation of the world. 

CHAP. XXX. — VALENTINUS' EXPLANATION OF THE 
BIRTH OF JESUS ; TWOFOLD DOCTRINE ON THE 
NATURE OF JESUS' BODY ; OPINION OF THE ITAL- 
IANS, THAT IS, HERACLEON AND PTOLEM.EUS ; 
OPINION OF THE ORIENTALS, THAT IS, AXIONICUS 
AND BARDESANES. 

All the prophets, therefore, and the law, spoke 
by means of the Demiurge, — a silly god, 5 he 
says, (and themselves) fools, who knew nothing. 
On account of this, he says, the Saviour observes : 
■" All that came before me are thieves and rob- 
bers."^ And the apostle (uses these words) : 
*'The mystery which was not made known to 
former generations." ^ For none of the prophets, 
he says, said anything concerning the things of 
which we speak ; for (a prophet) could not but 
be ignorant of all (these) things, inasmuch as 
they certainly had been uttered by the Demiurge 
only. When, therefore, the creation received 
completion, and when after (this) there ought 
to have been the revelation of the sons of God 
— that is, of the Demiurge, which up to this 
had been concealed, and in which obscurity the 

' Or, " subterranean" (Cruice). 

^ Epiphanius, Hter., xxxi. sec. 7. 

3 Eph. iii. 14-18. 

•♦ I Cor. ii. 14. 

5 Epiphanius, Hier., xxxi. az, 

* John X. 8. 

" Col. i. 26. 

1 natural man was hid, and had a veil upon the 
heart; — when (it was time), then, that the veil 
should be taken away, and that these mysteries 
should be seen, Jesus was born of Mary the 

I virgin, according to the declaration (in Scrip- 
ture), "The Holy Ghost will come upon thee " 

— Sophia is the Spirit — " and the power of the 
Highest will overshadow thee," — the Highest 

j is the Demiurge, — "wherefore that which shall 
j be born of thee shall be called holy." * For he 
has been generated not from the highest alone, 
as those created in (the likeness of) Adam have 
been created from the highest alone — that is, 
(from) Sophia and the Demiurge. Jesus, how- 
ever, the new man, (has been generated) from 
the Holy Spirit — that is, Sophia and the Demi- 
urge — in order that the Demiurge may com- 
plete the conformation and constitution of his 
body, and that the Holy Spirit may supply his 
essence, and that a celestial Logos may proceed 
from the Ogdoad being born of Mary. 

Concerning this (Logos) they have a great 
question amongst them — an occasion both of 
divisions and dissension. And hence the doc- 
trine of these has become divided : and one 
doctrine, according to them, is termed Oriental, 
and the other Italian. They from Italy, of whom 
is Heracleon and Ptolemaeus, say that the body 
of Jesus was (an) animal (one). And on ac- 
count of this, (they maintain) that at his baptism 
the Holy Spirit as a dove came down — that is, 
the Logos of the mother above, (I mean Sophia) 

— and became (a voice) to the animal (man), 
and raised him from the dead. This, he says, 
is what has been declared.: " He who raised 
Christ from the dead will also quicken youi* mor- 
tal and natural bodies." ^ For loam has come 
under a curse ; " for," says he, " dust thou art, 
and unto dust shalt thou return." ■" The Orien- 
tals, on the other hand, of whom is Axionicus " 
and Bardesianes,'^ assert that tl'ie body of the 
Saviour was spiritual ; for there came upon Mary 
the Holy Spirit — that is, Sophia and the power 
of the highest. This is the creative art, (and 
was vouchsafed) in order that what was given 
to Mary by the Spirit might be fashioned. 

CHAP. XXXI. FURTHER DOCTRINES OF VALEN- 
TINUS RESPECTING THE .«ONS ; REASONS FOR 
THE INCARNATION. 

Let, then, those (heretics) pursue these inqui- 
ries among themselves, (and let others do so 
likewise,) if it should prove agreeable to any- 
body else to investigate (such points. Valen- 

8 Luke i. 35. ' 

9 Rom. viii. 11, 12. 
'° Gen. iii. 19. 

" Axionicus is mentioned by Tertullian only (see Tertullian, 
Contr. Valetit., c. iv. [vol. iii. p. 505, this series]). 

'^ Bardesianes (or Ardesianes, as Miller's text has it) is evidently 
tht Kuns with Bardesanes, mentioned by Eusebius and St. j3rome. 

90 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VI. 

tinus) subjoins, however, the following statement : 
That the trespasses appertaining to the .^ons 
within (the Pleroma) had been corrected ; and 
likewise had been rectified the trespasses apper- 
taining to the Ogdoad, (that is,) Sophia, outside 
(the Pleroma) ; and also (the trespasses) apper- 
taining to the Hebdomad (had been rectified). 
For the Demiurge had been taught by Sophia 
that He is not Himself God alone, as He im- 
agined, and that except Himself there is not 
another (Deity). But when taught by Sophia, 
He was made to recognise the superior (Deity). 
for He was instructed ' by her, and initiated 
and indoctrinated into the great mystery of the 
Father and of the ^ons, and divulged this to 
none. "Phis is, as he says, what (God) declares 
to Moses : " I am the God of Abraham, and the 
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob ; and my 
name I have not announced to them ; " ^ that 
!S, I have not declared the mystery, nor explained 
who is God, Dut I nave preserved the mystery 
which I have heard from Sophia in secrecy with 
jnyself. When, then, the trespasses of those 
above had been rectified, it was necessary, 
according to the same consequence, that the 
(transgressions) here likewise should obtain rec- 
tification. On this account Jesus the Saviour 
was born of Mary, that he might rectify (the 
trespasses committed) here ; as the Christ who, 
having been projected additionally from above 
by Nous and Aletheia, had corrected the pas- 
sions of Sophia — that is, the abortion (who 
was) outside (the Pleroma). And, again, the 
Saviour who was born of Mary came to rectify 
tne passions ^ of the soul. There are therefore, 
according to these (heretics), three Christs : 
(the first the) one additionally projected by 
Nous and Aletheia, along with the Holy Spirit ; 
and (the second) the "Joint truit of the Ple- 
roma," spouse of Sophia, who was outside (the 
Pleroma). And she herself is likewise styled 
Holy Spirit, but one inferior to the first (projec- 
tion). And the third (Chrisr is) He who was 
born of Mary for the restoration of this world of 
ours. 

CHAP. XXXII. — VALENTINUS COWICTED OF PLA- 
GIARISMS FROM PLATO. 

I think that the heresy of Val.^ntinus, which 
is of Pythagorean (origin), has been sufficiently, 
indeed more than sufficiently, delineated. It 
therefore seems also expedient, that having ex- 
])laine(l his opinions, we should desist from (fur- 
ther) refutation (of his system). Plato, then, in 
expounding mysteries concerning the universe, 
writes to Dionysius expressing himself after some 

' KaTTjyiiflr). Miller's text has KaTT/xBr), which is properly cor- 
Tected by Bvinsen into the word as tianslated above. 

- Ex. vi. 2, 3. 

- Or, " tlie multitudes.** 

such manner-' as this : " I must speak to you by 
riddles, 5 in order that if the letter may meet with 
any accident in its leaves by either sea or land, 
he who reads (what falls into his hands) may 
not understand it. For so it is. All things are 
about the King of all, and on his account are all 
things, and he is cause of all the glorious (ob- 
jects of creation). The second is about the 
second, and the third about the third. But per- 
taining to the King there is none of those things 
of which I have spoken. But after this the soul 
earnestly desires to learn what sort these are, 
looking upon those things that are akin to itself, 
and not one of these is (in itself) sufficient. 
This is, O son of Dionysius and Doris, the ques- 
tion (of yours) which is a cause of all evil things. 
Nay, but rather the solicitude concerning this is 
innate in the soul ; and if one does not remove 
this, he will never really attain truth.^ But what 
is astonishing in this matter, listen. For there 
are men who have heard these things — (men) 
furnished with capacities for learning, and fur- 
nished with capacities of memory, and persons 
who altogether in every way are endued with an 
aptitude for investigation with a view to infer- 
ence. (These are) at present aged speculators. ^ 
And they assert that opinions which at one time 
were credible are now incredible, and that things 
once incredible are now the contrary. While, 
therefore, turning the eye of examination towards 
these (inquiries), exercise caution, lest at any 
time you should have reason to repent in regard 
of those things should they happen in a manner 
unbecoming to your dignity. On this account I 
have written nothing concerning these (points) ; 
nor is there any treatise of Plato's (upon them), 
nor ever shall there be. The observations, how- 
ever, now made are those of Socrates, conspicu- 
ous for virtue even while he was a young man." 

Valentinus, falling in with these (remarks), 
has made a fiindamental principle in his system 
" the King of all," whom Plato mentioned, and 
whom this heretic styles Pater, and Bythos, and 
Proarche ^ over the rest of the .45ons. And when. 
Plato uses the words, " what is second about 
things that are second," Valentinus supposes to 
be second all the ^'Eons that are within the limit 
(of the Pleroma, as well as) the limit (itself). 
And when Plato uses the words, " what is third 
about what is third," he has (constituted as third) 

* Cruice thinks that the following extract from Plato's epistles has 
been added by a second hand. [Cf vol. iii. p. 181, this .series.] 

5 There are .some verbal diversities between the texts of Plato and. 
Hippolytus, which a reference will show (see Plat., Epist., t. ix. p. 76, 
ed. l'.ckker). 

<* Some forty lines that follow in Plato's letter are omitted here. 

' Here likewise there is another deficiency as compared with the 
original letter. 

^ Miller's text is, Kai. iraai. yriv, etc. In the German and French 
edition of Hippolytus we have, instead of this, «c«i l\poap\riy. The 
latter word is nitroduced on the authority of Epiphanius and The- 
odoret. Bernays proposes -ii7r)r, and Scott IlAaaxTji'. The Abbe 
Cruice considers IIAao-Tjji' an incongruous word as applied to the- 
creation of spiritual beings. 

Chap. XXXIV] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

91 

the entire of the arrangement (existing) outside 
the Hmit ' and the Pleroma. And Valentinus has 
elucidated this (arrangement) very succinctly, in 
a psalm commencing from below, not as Plato 
does, from above, expressing himself thus : " I 
behold ^ all things suspended in air by spirit, and 
I perceive all things wafted by spirit ; the flesh 
(I see) suspended from soul, but the soul shining 
out from air, and air depending from aether, and 
fruits produced from Bythus, and the foetus borne 
from the womb." Thus (Valentinus) formed his 
opinion on such (points). Flesh, according to 
these (heretics), is matter which is suspended 
from the soul of the Demiurge. And soul shines 
out from air ; that is, the Demiurge emerges from 
the spirit, (which is) outside the Pleroma. But 
air springs forth from aether ; that is, Sophia, 
which is outside (the Pleroma, is projected from 
the Pleroma) which is within the limit, and 
(from) the entire Pleroma (generally) . And from 
Bythus fruits are produced ; (that is,) the entire 
projection of the ^ons is made from the Father. 
The opinions, then, advanced by Valentinus have 
been sufficiently declared. It remains for us to 
explain the tenets of those who have emanated 
from his school, though each adherent (of Val- 
entinus) entertains different opinions.^ 

CHAP. XXXIII. — SECUNDUS' SYSTEM OF JEOyiS ; 
EPIPHANES ; PTOLEM^US. 

A certain (heretic) Secundus,'* born about the 
same time with Ptoleniceus, expresses himself 
thus : (he says) that there is a right tetrad and 
a left tetrad, — namely, light and darkness. And 
he affirms that the power which withdrew and 
laboured under deficiency, was not produced 
from the thirty ^Fons, but from the fruits of 
these. Some other (heretic), however — Epi- 
phanes, a teacher among them — expresses him- 
self thus : " The earliest originating principle 
was inconceivable, ineffable, and unnameable ; " 
and he calls this Monotes. And (he maintains) 
that there co-exists with this (principle) a power 
which he denominates Henotes. This Henotes 
and this Monotes, not by projection (from them- 
selves), sent forth a principle (that should pre- 
side) over all intelligibles ; (and this was) both 

' The word "limit" occurs twice in this sentence, and Bunsen 
ahers the second into " Pleroma," so that the words may be rendered 
thus: "Valentinus supposes to be second all the ^ons that are 
within the Pleroma." 

- Ihis is a Gnostic hymn, and is arranged metrically by Cruice, 
of which the following is a translation: — 

AH things whirled on by spirit I see, 
Flesh from soul depending, 
And soul from air forth flashing, 
And air from tether hanging. 
And fruits from Bythus streaming. 
And from womb the infant growing. 
3 The text here is corrupt, but the above rendering follows the 
Abbe Cruice's version. Bunsen's emendation would, however, seem 
untenable. 

■* Concerning Secundus and Epiphanes, see Irenaeus, i. 11 ; Theod- 
oret, Ha:r. Fah., i. 5-9; Epiphanius, xxxii. i, 3, 4; Tertullian, Adv. 
i'alent., c. xxxviii.; and St. Augustine, Hcer.,-M. Hippolytus, in his 
remarks on Secundus and Epiphanes, borrows from St. Irenseus. 

unbegotten and invisible, and he styles it a Mon- 
ad. "With this power co-exists a power of the 
same essence, which very (power) I call Unity. 
These four powers sent forth the remainder of 
the projections of the ^ons." But others, 
again, denominate the chief and originating Og- 
doad, (which is) fourth (and) invisible, by the 
following names : first, Proarche ; next, Anen- 
noetus ; third, Arrhetus ; and fourth, Aoratus. 
And that from the first, Proarche, was projected 
by a first and fifth place, Arche ; and from Anen- 
noetus, by a second and sixth place, Acataleptus ; 
and from Arrhetus, by a third and seventh place, 
Anonomastus ; and from Aoratus, Agennetus, a 
complement of the first Ogdoad. They wish 
that these powers should exist before Bythus and 
Sige. Concerning, however, Bythus himself, there 
are many different opinions. Some affirm him 
to be unwedded, neither male nor female ; but 
others (maintain) that Sige, who is a female, is 
present with him, and that this constitutes the 
first conjugal union. 

But the followers of PtolemaeusS assert that 
(Bythus) has two spouses, which they call like- 
wise dispositions, viz., Ennoia and Thelesis (con- 
ception and volition). For first the notion was 
conceived of projecting anything ; next followed, 
as they say, the will to do so. Wherefore also 
these two dispositions and powers — namely, 
Ennoia and Thelesis — being, as it were, mingled 
one with the other, there ensued a projection of 
Monogenes and Aletheia by means of a conju- 
gal union. And the consequence was, that visi- 
ble types and images of those two dispositions 
of the Father came forth from the invisible 
(yFons), viz., from Thelema, Nous, and from 
Ennoia, Aletheia. And on this account the 
image of the subsequently generated Thelema 
is (that of a) male ; but (the image) of the un- 
begotten Ennoia is (that of a) female, since 
volition is, as it were, a power of conception. 
For conception always cherished the idea of a 
projection, yet was not of itself at least able to 
project itself, but cherished the idea (of doing 
so). When, however, the power of vohtion 
(would be present), then it projects the idea 
which had been conceived. 

CHAP. XXXIV. SYSTEM OF MARCUS ; A MERE IM- 
POSTOR ; HIS WICKED DEVICES UPON THE 
EUCHARISTIC CUP. 

A certain other teacher among them, Marcus,^ 
an adept in sorcery, carrying on operations' 

s Concerning Ptolemaeus, see Irenaeus, i. 12; Tertullian, De Pree- 
scr/^t., c. xVix.: and A dz'ers. l'alent.,c. viii. ; Epiphanius, Hier., 
xxxiii. 3-7; and Theodoret, Hceret. Fab., i. 8. 

*> Concerning Marcus, see Irenaeus, i. 12-18; Tertullian, Prcr^ 
script. ,z. 1.; Epiphanius, Hter., xxxiv.; Theodoret, Hard. Fab.,i. 
9; St. Augustine, Hier., c. xiv. ; and St. Jerome's 29th Epistle. 

7 kvtpyiiv'. Bunsen reads Spui', which has the same meaning. 
Cruice reads aiiupcov, but makes no attempt at translation. Miller* 
reading is ^wpiov, which is obviously corrupt, but for which hoKiav ha> 
been suggested, and with good show of reason. 

92 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VI. 

partly by sleight of hand and partly by demons, 
deceived many from time to time. This (heretic) 
alleged that there resided in him the mightiest 
jiower from invisible and unnameable places. 
And very often, taking the Cup, as if offering up 
the Eucharistic i)rayer, and prolonging to a 
greater length than usual the word of invoca- 
tion, he would cause the appearance of a purple, 
and sometimes of a red mixture, so that his 
dupes imagined that a certain Grace descended 
and communicated to the potion a blood-red 
potency. The knave, however, at that time suc- 
ceeded in escaping detection from many ; but 
now, being convicted (of the imposture), he will 
be forced to desist from it. For, infusing se- 
cretly into the mixture some drug that possessed 
the power of imparting such a colour (as that 
alluded to above), uttering for a considerable 
time nonsensical expressions, he was in the habit 
of waiting, (in expectation) that the (drug), ob- 
taining a supply of moisture, might be dissolved, 
and, being intermingled with the potion, might 
impart its colour to it. The drugs, however, 
that possess the quality of furnishing this effect, 
we have i)reviously mentioned in the book on 
magicians." And here we have taken occasion 
to explain how they make dupes of many, and 
thoroughly ruin them. And if it should prove 
agreeable to them to apply their attention with 
greater accuracy to the statement made by us, 
they will become aware of the deceit of Marcus. 

CH.\P. XXXV. FUR rHP:R ACTS OF JUGGLERY ON 

THE PARI' OF .rfARCUS. 

And this (Marcus), infusing (the aforesaid) 
mixture into a smaller cup, was in the habit of 
delivering it to a woman to offer up the Eucha- 
ristic prayer, while he himself stood by, and 
held (in his hand) another empty (chalice) 
larger than that. And after his female dupe had 
pronounced the sentence of Consecration,' hav- 
ing received (the cup from her), he proceeded 
to infuse (its contents) into the larger (chalice), 
and, pouring them frequently from one cup to 
the other, was accustomed at the same time to 
utter the following invocation : " Grant that the 
inconceivable and ineffable Grace which existed 
prior to the universe, may fill thine inner man, 
and make to abound in thee the knowledge of 
this (grace), as She disseminates the seed of the 
mustard-tree upon the good soil." And simul- 
taneously pronouncing some such words as these, 
and astonishing both his female dupe and those 
that are present, he was regarded as one per- 
forming a miracle ; while the larger was being 
filled from the smaller chalice, in such a way as 

' [The lost book upon the Witch of Endor, possibly. " Against 
the Magi " is the title of the text, and is taken to refer to book iv. 
cap. xx\i'.'.. p. 35, supra: the more probable opinion.] 

5 Or, " had given thanks." 

that (the contents), being superabundant, flowed 
over. And the contrivance of this (juggler) we 
have likewise explained in the aforesaid (fourth) 
book, where we have proved that very many 
drugs, when mingled in this way with liquid sub- 
stances, are endued with the quality of yielding 
augmentation, more particularly when diluted in 
wine. Now, when (one of these impostors) pre- 
viously smears, in a clandestine manner, an 
empty cup with any one of these drugs, and 
shows it (to the spectators) as if it contained 
nothing, by infusing into it (the contents) from 
the other cup, and pouring them back again, the 
drug, as it is of a flatulent nature, is dissolved ^ 
by being blended with the moist substance. And 
the effect of this was, that a superabundance of 
the mixture ensued, and was so far augmented, 
that what was infused was put in motion, such 
being the nature of the drug. And if one stow- 
away (the chalice) when it has been filled, (what 
has been poured into it) will after no long time 
return to its natural dimensions, inasmuch as the 
potency of the drug becomes extinct by reason 
of the continuance of moisture. \\'herefore he 
was in the habit of hurriedly presenting the cup 
to those present, to drink ; but they, horrified 
at the same time, and eager (to taste the con- 
tents of the cup), proceeded to drink (the mix- 
ture), as if it were something divine, and devised 
by the Deity. + 

CHAP. XXXVI. THE HERETICAL PRACTICES OF 

THE MARCITES IN REGARD OF BAPTISM. 

Such and other (tricks) this impostor at- 
tempted to perform. And so it was that he 
was magnified by his dupes, and sometimes he 
was supposed to utter predictions. But some- 
times he tried to make others (prophesy), partly 
by demons carrying on these operations, and 
partly by practising sleight of hand, as we ha\c 
previously stated. Hoodwinking therefore mul- 
titudes, he led on (into enormities) many (dupes) 
of this descrijition who had become his disciples, 
by teaching them that they were prone, no doubt, 
to sin, but beyond the reach of danger, from the 
fact of their belonging to the perfect power, and 
of their being participators in the inconceivable 
potency. And subsecjuent to the (first) bap- 
tism, to these they promise another, which they 
call Redemption. And by this (other baptism) 
they wickedly subvert those that remain with 
them in expectation of redemption, as if persons, 
after they had once been baptized, could again 
obtain remission. Now, it is by means of such 
knavery as this that they seem to retain their 

3 avaKvoiievov : some read avaSvotnevov , which is obviously un- 
tenable. 

* [Here was an awful travesty of the heresy of a later day which 
introduced " the miracle of Bolsena"and the Cor/us-C/iri'siz eels- 
bration. See Robertson, Hist., vol. iii. p. 604.] 

cuAr. XXXVII.] THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

93 

liearers. And when they consider that these 
have been tested, and are able to keep (secret 
the mysteries) committed unto them, they then 
admit them to this (baptism). They, however, 
do not rest satisfied with this alone, but promise 
(their votaries) some other (boon) for the pur- 
pose of confirming them in hope, in order that 
they may be inseparable (adherents of their 
sect). For they utter something in an inex- 
pressible (tone of) voice, after having laid hands 
on him who is receiving the redemption. And 
they allege that they could not easily declare 
(to another) what is thus spoken unless one 
were highly tested, or one were at the hour of 
death, (when) the bishop comes and whispers 
(it) into the (expiring one's) ear. And this 
knavish device (is undertaken) for the purpose 
of securing the constant attendance upon the 
bishop of (Marcus') disciples, as individuals 
eagerly panting to learn what that may be which 
is spoken at the last, by (the knowledge of) 
which the learner will be advanced to the rank 
of those admitted into the higher mysteries. 
And in regard of these I have maintained a 
silence for this reason, lest at any time one 
should suppose that I was guilty of disparaging 
these (lieretics). For this does not come with- 
in the scope of our present work, only so far as 
it may contribute to prove from what source 
(the heretics) have derived the standing-point 
from which they have taken occasion to intro- 
duce the opinions advanced by them.' 

CHAP. XXXVII. MARCUS' SYSTEM EXPLAINED BY 

IREX.EUS ; MARCUS' VISION ; THE VISION OF 
VALENTINUS REVEALING TO HIM HIS SYSTEM. 

For also the blessed presbyter Irenfeus, hav- 
ing approached the subject of a refutation in a 
more unconstrained spirit, has explained such 
washings and redemptions, stating more in the 
way of a rough digest ^ what are their practices. 
(And it appears that some of the Marcosians,) 
on meeting with (Ireuceus' work), deny that 
they have so received (the secret word just 
alluded to), but they have learned that always 
they should deny. Wherefore our anxiety has 
been more accurately to investigate, and to dis- 
cover minutely what are the (instructions) which 
they deliver in the case of the first bath, styling 
it by some such name ; and in the case of the 
second, which they denominate Redemption. 
But not even has this secret of theirs escaped 

^ [Buusen (vol. i. p 72-75) makes useful comments.] 
- Hippolytus has already employed this word, aSpofj-iaTepov, in 
the ProoetniniH. It literally means, of strong or compact parts. 
Hippolytus, however, uses it in contrast to the expression AeTTTo/uepijs, 
in reference to his Sioiiinnry of Heresies. Bunsen thinks that 
Hippolytus means to say that Irenaeus expressed himself rather too 
strongly, and that the Marcosians, on meeting with Irenaeus' asser- 
tions, indignantly repudiated them. Dr. Wordsworth translates 
<.6po(aepu)9 (in the Proaemium), "with rude generality," — a ren- 
<]er;ng scarcely in keeping with the passage above. 

(our scrutiny). For these opinions, however, 
we consent to pardon Valentinus and his school. 
But Marcus, imitating his teacher, himself 
also feigns a vision, imagining that in this way 
he would be magnified. For Valentinus like- 
wise alleges that he had seen an infant child 
lately born; and questioning (this child), he 
proceeded to inquire who it might be. And 
(the child) replied, saying that he himself is the 
Logos, and then subjoined a sort of tragic 
legend ; and out of this (Valentinus) wishes 
the heresy attempted by him to consist. Mar- 
cus, making a similar attempt ^ with this (here- 
tic), asserts that the Tetrad came to him in the . 
form of a woman, — since the world could not 
bear, he says, the male (form) of this Tetrad, — 
and that she revealed herself who she was, and 
explained to this (Marcus) alone the generation 
of the universe, which she never had revealed 
to any, either of gods or of men, expressing 
herself after this mode : When first the self- 
existent Father, He who is inconceivable and 
without substance. He who is neither male nor 
female, willed that His own ineffability should 
become realized in something spoken, and that 
His invisibility should become realized in form. 
He opened His mouth, and sent forth similar to 
Himself a Logos. And this (Logos) stood by 
Him, and showed unto Him who he was, viz., 
that he himself had been manifested as a (reali- 
zation in) form of the Invisible One. And the 
pronunciation of the name was of the following 
description. He was accustomed to utter the 
first word of the name itself, which was Arche, 
and the syllable of this was (composed) of four + 
letters. Then he subjoined the second (sylla- 
ble), and this was also (composed) of four 
letters. Next he uttered the third (syllable), 
which was (composed) of ten letters; and he 
uttered the fourth (syllable), and this was (com- 
posed) of twelve letters. Then ensued the 
pronunciation of the entire name, (composed) 
of thirty letters, but of four syllables. And 
each of the elements had its own peculiar let- 
ters, and its own peculiar form, and its own 
peculiar pronunciation, as well as figures and 
images. And not one of these was there that 
beholds the form of that (letter) of which this 
was an element. And of course none of them 
could know the pronunciation of the (letter) 
next to this, but (only) as he himself pronounces 
it, (and that in such a way) as that, in pro- 

3 The largest extract from Irenaeus is that which follows— the 
explanation of the heresy of Marcus. From this to the end of book 
vi. occurs in Irenseus likewise. Hippolytus' text does not always 
accurately correspond with that of his master. The divergence, 
however, is inconsiderable, and may sometimes be traceable to the 
error of the transcriber. 

* Hippolytus uses two words to signify letters, o-rotxeioi' and 
ypapiixa. The former strictly means an articulate sound as the basis 
of language or of written words, and the latter the sound itself when 
represented by a particular symbol or sign. 

94 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VI. 

nouncing the whole (word), he supposed that 
he was uttering the entire (name). For each 
of these (elements), being part of the entire 
(name), he denominates (according to) its own 
peculiar sound, as if the whole (of the word). 
And he does not intermit sounding until he 
arrived at the last letter of the last element, 
and uttered it in a single articulation. Then he 
said, that the restoration of the entire ensued 
when all the (elements), coming down into the 
one letter, sounded one and the same pronun- 
ciation, and an image of the pronunciation he 
supposed to exist when we simultaneously utter 
the word Auien.' And that these sounds are 
those which gave form to the insubstantial and 
imbegotten ^on, and that those forms are 
what the Lord declared to be angels — the 
(forms) that uninterruptedly behold the face ot 
the Father. 

CHAP. XXXVIII. MARCUS' SYSTEM OF LETTERS. 

But the generic and expressed names of the 
elements he called ^ons, and Logoi, and Roots, 
and Seeds, and Pleromas, and Fruits. (And 
he maintains) that every one of these, and what 
was peculiar to each, is perceived as being con- 
tained in the name of " Ecclesia." And the 
final letter of the last element sent forth its own 
peculiar articulation. And the sound of this 
(letter) came forth and produced, in accordance 
with images of the elements, its own peculiar 
elements. And from these he says that things 
•existing here were garnished, and the things ante- 
cedent to these were produced. The letter itself 
certainly, of which the sound was concomitant 
•with the sound below, he says, was received up 
by its own syllable into the complement of the 
entire (name) ; but that the sound, as if cast 
outside, remained below. And that the element 
itself, from which the letter along with its own 
pronunciation descended below, he says, is 
(composed) of thirty letters, and that each one 
of the thirty letters contains in itself other let- 
ters, by means of which the title of the letter is 
named. And again, that the other (letters) are 
named by different letters, and the rest by dif- 
ferent (ones still). So that by writing down the 
letters individually, the number would eventuate 
in infinity. In this way one may more clearly 
understand what is spoken. The element Delta, 
(he says,) has five letters in itself, (viz.). Delta, 
and Fpsilon, and Lambda, and Tau, and Alpha ; 
and these very letters are (written) by means of 
other letters. If, therefore, the entire substance 
of the Delta eventuates in infinity, (and if) dif- 
ferent letters invariably produce different letters, 
and succeed one another, by how much greater 

' [Rev. iil. 14. A name of Christ. This word is travestied as the 
Kama Logos also, most profanely.] 

than that element is the more enormous sea^ of 
the letters? And if one letter is thus infinite, 
behold the entire name's depth of the letters 
out of which the patient industry, nay, rather 
(I should say,) the vain toil of Marcus wishes 
that the Progenitor (of things) should consist ! 
Wherefore also (he maintains) that the Father, 
who knew that He was inseparable from Him- 
self, gave (this depth) to the elements, which he 
likewise denominates ^ons. And he uttered 
aloud to each one of them its own peculiar pro- 
nunciation, from the fact that one could not 
pronounce the entire. 

chap. xxxex. — the quaternion exhibits 
"truth." 

And (Marcus alleged) that the Quaternion, 
after having explained these things, spoke as 
follows : " Now, I wish also to exhibit to you 
Truth herself, for I have brought her down from 
the mansions above, in order that you may be- 
hold her naked, and become acquainted with 
her beauty ; nay, also that you may hear her 
speak, and may mar\'el at her wisdom. Ob- 
serve," says the Quaternion, " then, first, the 
head above. Alpha (and long) O ; the neck, B 
and P[si] ; shoulders, along with hands, G and 
C[hi] ; breasts, Delta and P[hi] ; diaphragm,^ 
Eu ; belly, Z and T ; pudenda, Eta and S ; thighs, 
T[h] and R ; knees, Ip ; calves, Ko ; ankles, 
Lx[si] ; feet, M and N." This is in the body 
of Truth, according to Marcus. This is the figure 
of the element ; this the character of the letter. 
And he styles this element Man, and affirms it to 
be the source of every word, and the originating 
principle of every sound, and the realization in 
speech of everything that is ineffable, and a 
mouth of taciturn silence. And this is the body 
of (Truth) herself. But do you, raising aloft the 
conceiving power of the understanding, hear from 
the mouths of Truth (of) the Logos, who is Self- 
generator-* and Progenitor.5 

CHAP. XL. THE N.4ME OF CHRIST JESUS. 

But, after uttering these words, (Marcus de- 
tails) that Truth, gazing upon him, and opening 
her mouth, spoke the discourse (just alluded to). 
And (he tells us) that the discourse became a 
name, and that the name was that which we 
know and utter, viz., Christ Jesus, and that as 
soon as she had named this (name) she re- 
mained silent. While Marcus, however, was 
expecting that she was about to say more, the 

- This is Duncker's emendation, suggested by Irenxus' text. 
Miller reads tov ro-nov, which yields scarcely any meaning. 

■5 Hippolytus' text has been here corrected from that of Irenaeus. 

* This is a correction from Progenitor, on the authority of Irena;us 
and Epiphanius. 

5 UpoTraTopo: Irenseus reads narpdfiopa, which is adopted by 
Schneidewin, and translated /air/«>«. 

Chap. XLIL] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

95 

Quaternion, again advancing into the midst, 
speaks as follows : " Thou didst regard as con- 
temptible ' this discourse which you have heard 
from the mouth of Truth. And yet this which 
you know and seem long since to possess is not 
the name ; for you have merely the sound of it, 
but are ignorant of the power. For Jesus is a 
remarkable name, having six letters,^ invoked ^ 
by all belonging to the called (of Christ) ; 
whereas the other (name, that is, Christ,) con- 
sists of many parts, and is among the (five) 
^ons of the Pleroma. (This name) is of an- 
other form and a different type, and is recog- 
nised by those existences who are connate with 
him, and whose magnitudes subsist with him 
continually. 

CHAP. XLI. MARCUS' MYSTIC INTERPRETATION OF 

THE ALPHABET. 

Know, (therefore,) that these letters which 
with you are (reckoned at) twenty-four, are 
emanations from the three powers, and are rep- 
resentative * of those (powers) which embrace 
even the entire number of the elements. For 
suppose that there are some letters that are mute 
— nine of them — of Pater and Aletheia, from 
the fact that these are mute — that is, ineffable 
and unutterable. And (again, assume) that there 
are other (letters that are) semi-vowels — eight 
of them — of the Logos and of Zoe, from the 
fact that these are intermediate between conso- 
nants and vowels, and receive the emanation s of 
the (letters) above them, but the reflux of those 
below them.'^ And (likewise take' for granted) 
that there are vowels — and these are seven — 
of Anthropos and Ecclesia, inasmuch as the 
voice of Anthropos proceeded forth, and im- 
parted form to the (objects of the) universe. 
For the sound of the voice produced figure, 
and invested them with it. From this it follows 
that there are Logos and Zoe, which have eight 
(semi-vowels) ; and Anthropos and Ecclesia, 
which have seven (vowels) ; and Pater and 
Aletheia, which have nine (mutes). But from 
the fact that Logos wanted 7 (one of being an 
ogdoad), he who is in the Father was removed 
(from his seat on God's right hand), and came 
down (to earth). And he was sent forth (by 
the Father) to him from whom he was separated, 

' The reading is doubtful. The translator adopts Scott's emenda- 
tion. 

2 [See note i, p. 94 supra, on " Amen." Comp. Irenseus, vol. i. 
p. 393, this series. This name of Jesus does, indeed, run through all 
Scripture, in verbal and other forms; Gen. xli.\. 18 and in Joshua, as 
a foreshadowing.] 

^ Irenaeus has " known." 

■• €t<oi'i/ca?. This is Irenaeus' reading. Miller has etKOfas 
( representations) . 

5 oTToppoiai' : some read aTropiaf, which is obviously erroneous. 

- inr' avTa: Irensus reads inrkp auTJji', and Massuet VTrtvipBev. 

^ The deficiency consisted in there not being three ogdoads. The 
sum total was twenty-four, but there was only one ogdoad — Logos 
and Zoe. The other two — Pater and Aletheia, and Anthropos and 
Ecclesia — had one above and one b»low an ogdoad. 

for the rectification of actions that had been 
committed. (And his descent took place) in 
order that the unifying process, which is inherent 
in Agathos, of the Pleromas might produce in 
all the single power tliat emanates from all. 
And thus he who is of the seven (vowels) ac- 
quired the power of the eight ^ (semi-vowels) ; 
and there were produced three ^opoi, correspond- 
ing with the (three) numbers (nine, seven, and 
eight), — (these A>/>(}i) being ogdoads. And 
these three being added one to the other, ex- 
hibited the number of the twenty-four (letters) . 
And (he maintains), of course, that the three ele- 
ments,— (which he himself affirms to be (allied) 
with the three powers by conjugal union, and 
which (by this state of duality) become six, and 
from which have emanated the twenty-four ele- 
ments,— being rendered fourfold by the Quater- 
nion's ineffable word, produce the same number 
(twenty-four) with these. And these, he says, 
belong to Anonomastus. And (he asserts) that 
these are conveyed by the six powers into a 
similarity with Aoratus. And (he says) that 
there are six double letters of these elements, 
images of images, which, being reckoned along 
with the twenty-four letters, produce, by an 
analogical power, the number thirty. 

CHAP. XLII. HIS SYSTEM APPLIED TO EXPLAIN OUR 

lord's LIFE AND DEATH. 

And he says, as the result of this computation 
and that proportion,*? that in the similitude of an 
image He appeared who after the six days Him- 
self ascended the mountain a fourth person, and 
became the sixth. '° And (he asserts) that He (like- 
wise) descended and was detained by the Heb- 
domad, and thus became an illustrious Ogdoad. 
And He contains in Himself of the elements the 
entire number which He manifested, as He came 
to His baptism. (And the symbol of manifes- 
tation was) the descent of the dove, which is 
0[mega] and Alpha, and which by the number 
manifested (by these is) 8oi." And for this 
reason (he maintains) that Moses says that man 
was created on the sixth day. And (he asserts) 

* Tuiv oKTui has been substituted for tw vor]Ti^, an obviously cor- 
rupt reading. The correction is supplied by Irenaeus. 
9 Or, " economy." 

'° Christ went up with the three apostles, and was therefore the 
fourth Himself; by the presence of Moses and Elias, He became 
the sixth: Matt. xvii. i; Mark ix. 2. 

'I The Greek word for dove is nepiarepa, the letters of which rep- 
resent 8oi, as may be seen thus: — 

77= 80 

f = 5 
p = 100 
I. = 10 
a = 200 

T = 300 

e= 5 
p = 100 
a = I 

801 
This, therefore, is equipollent with Alpha and Omega, as a is equal ta 
I, and 10 to 800. [Stuff! Bunscn, very naturally, exclaims.] 

96 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VI 

that the dispensation of suffering (took place) 
on the sixth day, which is the preparation ; (and 
so it was) that on this (day) appeared the last 
man for the regeneration of the first man. And 
that the beginning and end of this dispensation 
is the sixth hour, at which He was nailed to the 
(accursed) tree. For (he says) that perfect 
Nous, knowing the sixfold number to be pos- 
sessed of the power of production and regen- 
eration, manifested to the sons of light the 
regeneration that had been introduced into this 
number by that illustrious one who had ap- 
peared. Whence also he says that the double 
letters ' involve the remarkable number. For 
the illustrious number, being intermingled with 
the twenty-four elements, produced the name 
(consisting) of the thirty letters. 

CHAP. XLIII. — LETTERS, SYMBOLS OF THE HEAVENS. 

He has, however, employed the instrumentality 
of the aggregate of the seven numbers, in order 
that the result of the self-devised (counsel)^ 
might be manifested. Understand, he says, for 
the present, that remarkable number to be Him 
who was formed by the illustrious one, and who 
was, as it were, divided, and remained outside. 
And He, through both His Own power and wis- 
dom, by means of the projection of Himself, 
imi)arted, in imitation of the seven powers,^ ani- 
mation to this world, so as to make it consist of 
seven powers, and constituted (this world) the 
soul of the visible universe. And therefore this 
one has resorted to such an operation as what 
was spontaneously undertaken by Himself; and 
these minister,-* inasmuch as they are imitations 
of things inimitable, unto the intelligence of the 
Mother. And the first heaven sounds Alpha,' 
and the one after that E[psilon], and the third 
Eta, and the fourth, even that in the midst of 
the seven (vowels, enunciates) the power of Iota, 
and the fifth of 0[micron], and the sixth of 
U[psilon], and the seventh and fourth from the 
central" one, 0[mega]. And all the powers, 
when they are connected together in one, emit 
a sound, and glorify that (Being) from whom 
they have been projected. And the glory of 
that sound is transmitted upwards to the Pro- 
genitor. And furthermore, he says that the 
sound of this ascription of glory being conveyed 
to the earth, became a creator and producer of 
terrestrial objects. And (he maintains) that the 
proof of this (may be drawn) from the case of 
infants recently born, whose soul, simultaneously 
with exit from the womb, utters similarly this 

' Vpd.uinaTo : some read wpayiuaTo. 

2 Supf.l-ed from Irenaeus. 

3 This should be altered into Hebdomad if we follow Ircnseus. 

* Ta5e fiioKoi-ei. This is the text of Ircnaus, and corrects the 
common reading, ra SI elxovutv. 

5 (^fie-yyeTai (Irenseus). The common reading is (paivtTai, 

* H(<Tovi in Irenseus we have fitpovs. 

sound of each one of the elements. As, then, 
he says, the seven powers glorify the Logos, so 
also does the sorrowing soul in babes (magnifv 
Him). 7 And on account of this, he says, David 
likewise has declared, " Out of the mouths of 
babes and sucklings Thou hast perfected praise." * 
And again, " The heavens declare the glory of 
God." 'J When,'" however, the soul is involved in 
hardships, it utters no other exclamation than the 
0[mega], inasmuch as it is afflicted in order that 
the soul above, becoming aware of what is akin 
to herself (below), may send down one to help 
this (earthly soul). 

CHAP. XLIV — RESPECTING THE GENERATION OF 
THE TWENTY-FOUR LETTERS. 

And so far for these points. Respecting, how- 
ever, the generation of the twenty-four elements, 
he expresses himself thus : that Henotes co- 
exists with Monotes, and that from these issue 
two projections, viz., Monas and Hen, and that 
these being added together" become four, for 
twice two are four. And again, the two and four 
(projections) being added together, manifested 
the number six ; and these six made fourfold, 
produce the twenty- four forms. '^ And these are 
the names of the first tetrad, and they are under- 
stood as Holy of Holies, and cannot be ex- 
pressed, and they are recognised by the Son 
alone. These the Father knows which they are. 
Those names which with Him are pronounced 
in silence and with faith, are Arrhetus and Sige, 
Pater and Aletheia. And of this tetrad the en- 
tire number is (that) of twenty-four letters. For 
Arrhetus has seven elements, Sige five, and Pater 
five, and Aletheia seven. '^ And in like manner 
also (is it with) the second tetrad ; (for) Logos 
and Zoe, Anthropos and Ecclesia, exhibited the 
same number of elements. And (he says) that 
the expressed name — (that is, Jesus) '•* — of the 
Saviour consists of six letters, but that His inef- 
fable '5 name, according to the number of the let- 
ters, one by one, '^ consists of twenty- four elements, 
but Christ a Son of twelve. And (he says) that 
the ineffable (name) in Christ consists of thirty 

7 Irenaeus has the sentence thus: " so also the soul in babes, la- 
menting and bewailing Marcus, glorifies him." 

^ Ps. viii. 2. 

9 Ps. xix. 1. 

'° Hippolytus here omits some passages which are to be found in 
Irenaeus. 

" Literally, "being twice two:" some for ouaai read ouo-iat. 
lrena;us has eirl Siio ovaai, i.e., " which being (added) into two." 

'2 Hippolytus has only the word " twenty-four," to which Schneide- 
win supplies " letters," and Iren.-uus " forms," as given above. Hip- 
polytus likewise omits the word " produced," which Irena;us supplies. 
The text of the latter is to? dKocmecraapaq a.neKvri(Tav nop<|)os. 

'^ Irena-'us adds, "which being added together, I mean the 
twice five and twice seven, complete the number of the twenty-four 
(forms)." 

'* The parenthetical words had fallen into a wrong part of the sen- 
tence, and are placed here by Schneidewin. 

'5 This is a correction for "expressed" from Irenaeus. Marcus 
observes the distinction afterwards. 

'6 Kara ev ypo/ijioTwi'. The MS. has eyypo/aoTuii'. Irenaeus 
omits these words. 

Chap. XLVIL] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

97 

letters, and this exists, according to the letters 
which are in Him, the elements being counted 
one by one. For the (name) Christ' consists 
of eight elements ; for Chi ^ consists of three, 
and R[ho] of two, and EI of two, and I[ota] 
of four, S[igma] of five, and T[au] of three, 
and OU of two, and San of three. Thus the 
ineffable name in Christ consists, they allege, 
of thirty letters. And they assert that for this 
reason He utters the words, " I am Alpha and 
Omega," displaying the dove, which (symboli- 
cally) has this number, which is eight hundred 
and one.^ 

CHAP. XLV. — WHY JESUS IS CALLED ALPHA. 

Now Jesus possesses this ineffable generation. 
For from the mother of the universe, I mean the 
first tetrad, proceeded forth, in the manner of a 
daughter, the second tetrad. And it became an 
ogdoad, from which proceeded forth the decade ; 
and thus was produced ten, and next eighteen. 
The decade, therefore, coming in along with the 
ogdoad, and rendering it tenfold, produced the 
number eighty ; and again making eighty ten- 
fold, generated the number eight hundred.* And 
so it is that the entire number of letters that 
proceeded forth from ogdoad into decade is 
eight hundred and eighty-eight, which is Jesus ; 
for the name Jesus, according to the number in 
letters, is eight hundred and eighty-eight. Now 
likewise the Greek alphabet has eight monads 
and eight decades, and eight hecatontads ; and 
these exhibit the calculated sum of eight hun- 
dred and eighty-eight, that is, Jesus, who consists 
of all numbers. And that on this account He is 
called Alpha (and Omega), indicatmg His gen- 
eration (to be) from all.s 

CHAP. XLVL — MARCUS' ACCOU>rr OF THE BIRTH 
AND LIFE OF OUR LORD. 

But concerning the creation of this (Jesus), 
he expresses himself thus : That powers emanat- 
ing from the second tetrad fashioned Jesus, who 
appeared on earth, and that the angel Gabriel ^ 
filled the place of the Logos, and the Holy Spirit 
that of Zoe, and the " Power of the Highest " ^ 
that of Anthropos, and the Virgin that of Eccle- 
sia.^ And so it was, in Marcus' system, that the 
,man (who appeared) in accordance with the dis- 

' This entire sentence is wariting in Trenaeus 

^ Corrected from Chri, which is in the MS. 
1 3 IrensKus has the passage thus: "And for this reason He says 
jihat He is Alpha and Omega, that He may manifest the dove, inas- 
much as this bird (symbolically) involves this number (8oi)." See 
la previous note in chap. xlii. p. 95, sitpra. 

■* Part of this sentence is supplied from Irena;us. 

5 Hippolytus here omits the following sentence found in Irenaeus: 
" And again thus — of the first quarternion, when added into itself, in 
.accordance with a progression of number, appeared the number ten, 
land so forth." 

"^ Luke i. 26-38. 

7 Or, " of the Son," an obvious mistake. 

• Ircnaius has, " And the Virgin exhibited the place of Egclesia." 

pensation was bom through ' Mary.^ And when 
He came to the water, (he says) that He de- 
scended like a dove upon him who had ascended 
above and filled the twelfth number. And in 
Him resides the seed of these, that is, such as 
are sown along with Him, and that descend with 
(Him), and ascend with (Him). And that this 
power which descended upon Him, he says, is 
the seed of the Pleroma, which contains in itself 
both the Father and the Son, and the unname- 
able power of Sige, which is recognised through 
these and all the /Eons. And that this (seed) is 
the spirit which is in Him and spoke in Him 
through the mouth of the Son, the confession of ( 
Himself as Son of man, and of His being one" 
who would manifest the Father ; (and that) when! 
this spirit came down upon Jesus, He was united 
with Him. The Saviour, who was of the dispen- 
sation, he says, destroyed death, whereas He 
made known (as) the Father Christ (Jesus). 
He says that Jesus, therefore, is the name of the 
man of the dispensation, and that it has been 
set forth for the assimilation and formation of 
Anthropos, who was about to descend upon Him ; 
and that when He had received Him unto Him- 
self, He retained possession of Him. And (he 
says) that He was Anthropos, (that) He (was) 
Logos, (that) He (was) Pater, and Arrhetus, and 
Sige, and Aletheia, and Ecclesia, and Zoe. 

CHAP. XLVII. — THE SYSTEM OF MARCUS SHOWN 
TO BE THAT OF PYTHAGORAS, BY QUOTATIONS 
FROM THE WRITINGS OF MARCUS' FOLLOWERS. 

I trust, therefore, that as regards these doc- 
trines it is obvious to all possessed of a sound 
mind, that (these tenets) are unauthoritative,^ 
and far removed from the knowledge that is in; 
accordance with Religion, and are mere por- 
tions of astrological discovery, and the arithmet-j 
ical art of the Pythagoreans. And this assertion,' 
ye who are desirous of learning shall ascertain 
(to be tnie, by a reference to the previous books,' 
where,) amongst other opinions elucidated by. 
us, we have explained these doctrines likewise*] 
In order, however, that we may prove it a more 
clear statement, viz., that these (Marcosians) are 
disciples not of Christ but of Pythagoras, I shall 
proceed to explain those opinions that have 
been derived (by these heretics) from Pythag- 
oras concerning the meteoric (phenomena) of 
the stars '° as far as it is possible (to do so) by 
an epitome. 

Now the Pythagoreans make the following 
statements : that the universe consists of a Mon- 

9 Irenaeus adds, "whom the Father of the universe selected, for* 
passage through the womb, by means of the Logos, for recognition 
of Himself." 

'° Cruice thinks that for stars we should read "numbers," but, 
gives no explanation of the meaning of neTtwpa. This word, as 
applied to numbers, might refer to " the astrological phenomena'^ 
dcducible b^ means of numeric^ caJculaiigns. 

98 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VL 

ad and Duad, and that by reckoning from a 
monad as far as four they thus generate a decade. 
And again,' a duad coming forth as far as the 
remarkable (letter), — for instance, two and four 
and six, — exhibited the (number) twelve. And 
again, if we reckon from the duad to the decade, 
thirty is produced , and in this are comprised 
the ogdoad, and decade, and dodecade. And 
therefore, on account of its having the remark- 
able (letter), the dodecade has concomitant^ 
with it a remarkable ])assion.s And for this 
reason (they maintain) that when an error had 
arisen respecting the twelfth number, the sheep 
skipped from the flock and wandered away ; •♦ 
for that the apostasy took place, they say, in 
like manner from the decade. And with a simi- 
lar reference to the dodecade, they speak of the 
piece of money which, on losing, a woman, hav- 
ing lit a candle, searched for diligently. (And 
they make a similar application) of the loss 
(sustained) in the case of the one sheep out of 
the ninety and nine ; and addmg these one into 
the other, they give a fabulous account of num- 
bers. And in this way, they affirm, when the 
eleven is multiplied into nine, that it produces 
the number ninety and nine ; and on this account 
that it is said that the word Amen embraces the 
number ninety-nine. And in regard of another 
number they express themselves in this manner : 
that the letter Eta along with the remarkable 
one constitutes an ogdoad, as it is situated in 
the eighth place from Alpha. Then, again, com- 
puting the number of these elements without the 
.remarkable (letter), and adding them together 
up to Eta, they exhibit the number thirty. For 
any one beginning from the Alpha 5 to the Eta 
will, after subtracting the remarkable (letter), 
discover the number of the elements to be the 
nvunber thirty. Since, therefore, the number 
thirty is unified from the three powers ; when 
multii)lied thrice into itself it produced ninety, 
for thrice thirty is ninety, (and this triad when 
multiplied into itself ])roduced nine). In this 
way the Ogdoad brought forth the number ninety- 
nine from the first Ogdoad, and Decade, and 
Dodecade. And at one time they collect the 
number of this (trio) into an entire sum, and 

* A comparison of Hippolylus with Irenacus, as regards what 
follows, manifests many omissions in the former. 

2 Followinj; lrena:iis, the passage would be rendered thus: " And 
therefore, on account of its having the remarkable (letter) concomitant 
with it, they style the dodecade a remarkable passion." Massuet, in 
his Annotations on /renieris, gives the following explanation of the 
above statement, which is made by Hippolytus likewise. From the 
twelfth number, by once abstracting the remarkable (number), which 
does not come into the order and number of the letters, eleven letters 
remain. Hence in the dodecade, the naOo<;, or what elsewhere the 
heretics call the " Hysterema," is a defect of one letter. And this is 
a symbol of the defect or suffering which, upon the withdrawal of one 
i^Eon, happened unto the last dodecade of itons. 

3 Hippolytus' statement is less copious and less clear than that of 
Irena;us, who explains the defect of the letter to be symbolical of an 
apostasy of one of the /Eons, and that this one was a female. 

* I.uke XV. 4-10. 

5 Marcus' explanation of this, as furnished by Irenaeus, is more 
.«opioiis than Hippolytus". 

produce a triacontad ; whereas at another time 
they subtract twelve, and reckon it at eleven. 
And in like manner, (they subtract) ten and 
make it nine. And connecting the.se one into 
the other, and multiplying them tenfold, they 
complete the number ninety-nine. Since, how- 
ever, the twelfth ^on, having left the eleven 
(/Eons above), and departing downwards, with- 
drew, they allege that even this is correlative 
(with the letters). For the figure of the letters 
teaches (us as much). For L is placed eleventh 
of the letters, and this L is the number thirty. 
And (they say) that this is placed according to 
an image of the dispensation above ; since from 
Alpha, irrespective of the remarkable (letter), 
the number of the letters themselves, added 
together up to L, according to the augmentation 
of the letters with the L itself, produces the 
number ninety-nine. But that the L, situated 
in the eleventh (of the a)'/nabet\ came down 
to search after the number similar to itself, in 
order that it might fill up the twelfth number, 
and that when it was discovered it was filled up, 
is manifest from the shape itself of the letter. 
For Lambda, when it attained unto, as it were, 
the investigation of what is similar to itself, and 
when it found such and snatched it away, filled 
up the place of the twelfth, the letter M, which 
is composed of two Lambdas. And for this rea- 
son (it was) that these (adherents of Marcus), 
through their knowledge, avoid the place of the 
ninety-nine, that is, the Hysterema, a type of 
the left hand,^ and follow after the one which, 
added to ninety-nine, they say was transferred 
to his own right hand 

CHAP. XLVIII. THEIR COSMOGONY FRAMED AC- 
CORDING TO THESE MYSTIC DOCTRINES OF 
LETTERS. 

And by the Mother, they allege, were created 
first the four elements, which, they say, are fire, 
water, earth, air ; and these have been projected 
as an image of the tetrad above ; and reckoning 
the energies of these — for instance, as hot, cold, 
moist, dry — they assert that they accurately 
portray the Ogdoad. And next they compute 
ten powers thus. (There are, they say,) seven 
orbicular bodies, which they likewise call heavens. 
There is next a circle containing these within its 
compass, and this also they name an eighth 
heaven ; and in addition to these, they affirm 
the existence of both a sun and moon. And 
these being ten in number, they say, are images 
of the invisible decade that (emanated) from 

* The allusion here seems to be to the habit among the ancients 
of employing the fingers lor counting, those of the left hand being 
used for all numbers under loo, and those of the right for the numbers 
above it. To this custom the poet Juvenal alludes, when he says of 
Nestor : — 

" Atqua sues jam dextera computat annos." 
That is, that he was one hundred years old. 

Chap. L.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

99 

Logos and Zoe. (They afifirm,) however, that 
the dodecade is indicated by what is termed the 
zodiacal circle. For these twelve zodiacal signs, 
they say, most evidently shadowed forth ' tfie 
daughter of Anthropos and Ecclesia, namely 
the Dodecade. And since, he says, the upper 
heaven has been united from an opposite direc- 
tion to the revolutionary motion, which is most 
rapid, of the entire (of the signs) ; and since 
(this heaven) within its cavity retards, and by 
its slowness counterpoises, the velocity of those 
(signs), so that in thirty years it accomplishes 
its circuit from sign to sign, — they therefore 
assert that this (heaven) is an image of Horos, 
who encircles the mother of these, who has 
thirty names. And, again, (they afifirm) that 
the moon, which traverses the heaven in thirty 
days, by reason of (these) days portrays the 
number of the yEons. And (they say) that the 
sun, performing its circuit, and terminating its 
exact return to its first position in its orbit in 
twelve months, manifests the dodecade. And 
also (they say) that the days themselves, involv- 
ing the measure of twelve hours, constitute a 
type of the efnpty ^ dodecade ; and that the 
circumference of the actual zodiacal circle con- 
r.ists of three hundred and sixty degrees, and 
that each zodiacal sign possesses thirty divisions. 
In this way, therefore, even by means of the 
circle, they maintain that the image is pre- 
served 3 of the connection of the twelve with the 
thirty.'' But, moreover, alleging that the earth 
was divided into twelve regions, and that accord- 
ing to each particular region it receives one 
power by the latter's being sent down from the 
heavens, and that it produces children corre- 
sponding in likeness s unto the power which 
transmitted (the likeness) by emanation; (for 
this reason) they assert that earth is a type of 
the Dodecade above. 

CHAP. XLIX. — THE Vi^ORK OF THE DEMIURGE 
PERISHABLE. 

And in addition to these (points, they lay 
down) that the Demiurge of the supernal Og- 
doad, desirous of imitating the indefinite, and 

' Or, " sketched out" (Irenaeus). 

2 Or, " radiant." 

3 Or, " measured." 

* Massuet gives the following explanation! The sun each day de- 
scribes a circle which is divided into twelve parts of 30 degrees each, 
and consists of 360 degrees. And as for each of the hours, where 
days and nights are equal, 15 degrees are allowed, it follows that in 
two hours, that is, in the twelfth par) of a day, the sun completes a 
progress of 30 degrees. 

^ Or, " of the same substaace." 

everlasting, and illimitable (one), and (the one) 
not subject to the condition of time; and (the 
Demiurge) not being able to represent the sta- 
bility^ and eternity of this (Ogdoad), on account 
of his being the fruit of the Hysterema, to this 
end appointed times, and seasons, and numbers, 
measuring many years in reference to the eter- 
nity of this (Ogdoad), thinking by the multitude 
of times to imitate its indefiniteness. And here 
they say, when Truth eluded his pursuit, that 
Falsehood followed close upon him ; and that 
on account of this, when the times were fulfilled, 
his work underwent dissolution. 

CHAP. L. — MARCUS AND COLARBASUS REFUTED BY 
IREN^US. 

These assertions, then, those who are of the 
school of Valentinus advance concerning both 
the creation and the universe, in each case prop- 
agating opinions still more empty.^ And they 
suppose this to constitute productiveness (in 
their system), if any one in like manner, making 
some greater discovery, will appear to work won- 
ders. And finding, (as they insinuate,) each of 
the particulars of Scripture to accord with the 
aforesaid numbers, they (attempt to) criminate 
Moses and the prophets, alleging that these 
speak allegorically of the measures of the ^ons. 
And inasmuch as these statements are trifling 
and unstable, it does not appear to me expe- 
dient to bring them before (the reader. This, 
however, is the less requisite,) as now the blessed 
presbyter* Irenasus has powerfully and elabo- 
rately refuted the opinions of these (heretics). 
And to him we are indebted for a knowledge of 
their inventions, (and have thereby succeeded 
in) proving that these heretics, appropriating 
these opinions from the Pythagorean philosophy, 
and from over-spun theories of the astrologers, 
cast an imputation upon Christ, as though He 
had delivered these (doctrines). But since I 
suppose that the worthless opinions of these 
men have been sufficiently explained, and that 
it has been clearly proved whose disciples are 
Marcus and Colarbasus, who were successors of 
the school of Valentinus, let us see what state- 
ment likewise Basilides advances. 

6 Or, " blamelessness." 

^ Or, " strange." 

8 [The Apostle John delights to call himself a presbyter, and St. 
Peter claims to be co-presbyter with the elders whom he exhorts. 
The Johannean school of primitive theologians seem to love this ex- 
pression pre-eminently. It was almost as little specific in the prim 
idve age as that oi paster or minisier in our own.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

BOOK VII. 

CONTENTS. 

The following are the contents of the seventh 
book of the Refutation of all Heresies : — 

What the opinion of Basilides is, and that, 
being struck with the doctrines of Aristotle, he 
out of these framed his heresy.' 

And what are the statements of Saturnilus,^ 
who flourished much about the time of Basilides. 
"And how Menander advanced the assertion 
that the world was made by angels. 

What is the folly of Marcion, and that his 
tenet is not new, nor (taken) out of the Holy 
Scriptures, but that he obtains it from Empedo- 
cles. 

How Carpocrates acts sillily, in himself also 
alleging that existing things were made by an- 
gels. 

That Cerinthus, in no wise indebted to the 
Scriptures, formed his opinion (not out of them), 
but from the tenets of the Egyptians. ^ 

What are the opinions propounded by the 
Ebionaeans, and that they in preference adhere 
to Jewish customs. 

How Theodotus has been a victim of error, 
deriving contributions to his system partly from 
the Ebionseans, (partly from Cerinthus.) "♦ 

And what were the opinions of Cerdon,5 who 
both enunciated the doctrines of Empedocles, 
and who wickedly induced Marcion to step 
forward. 

And how Lucian, when he had become a dis- 
ciple of Marcion,^ having divested himself of all 
shame, blasphemed God from time to time. 

' [Here our author's theory conceminc the origin of heresy in 
heathen philosophy hegins to be elaborated.] 

2 Salronilus (Miller). 

3 Or, " in no respect formed his system from the Scriptures, but 
from the tenets propounded by the Egyptians." 

* Cruice would prefer, " from the Gnostics," on account of Cerin- 
thus being coupled with the Gnostics and Ebionaeans by Hippolytus, 
■when he afterwards indicates the source from which Theodotus de- 
rived his heretical notions of Christ. 

5 Miller has " Sacerdon." 

* The word it.6vo<; occurs in Miller's text, but ought obviously 
to be expunged. It has prob.ibly, as Cruice conjectures, crept into 
the MS. from the termination of >«>'d/nevos. Duncker suggests 

too 

And Apelles also, having become a disciple 
of this (heretic), was not in the habit of ad- 
vancing the same opinions with his preceptor ; 
but being actuated (in the formation of his sys- 
tem) from the tenets of natural philosophers, 
assumed the substance of the universe as the 
fundamental principle of things.^ 

CHAP. I. — HERESY COMPARED TO ( 1 ) THE STORAIY 
OCEAN, (2) THE ROCKS OF THE SIRENS; MORAL 
FROM ULYSSES AND TH^ SIRENS. 

The pupils of these men, when they perceive 
the doctrines of the heretics to be like unto 
the ocean when tossed into waves by violence of 
the winds, ought to sail past in quest of the 
tranquil haven. For a sea of this description is 
both infested with wild beasts and difficult of 
navigation, like, as we may say, the Sicilian 
(Sea), in which the legend reports were Cyclops, 
and Charybdis, and Scylla, and the rock ** of the 
Sirens. Now, the poets of the Greeks allege 
that Ulysses sailed through (this channel)^ 
adroitly using (to his own purpose) the tcrrible- 
ness of these strange monsters.^ For the sav- 
age cruelty (in the aspect) of these towards 
those who were sailing through was remarkable. 
The Sirens, however, singing sweetly and har- 
moniously, beguiled the voyagers, luring, by 
reason of their melodious voice, those who heard 
it, to steer their vessels towards (the promontory) . 
The (poets) report that Ulysses, on ascertaining 
this, smeared with wax the ears of his compan- 
ions, and, lashing himself to the mast, sailed, 
free of danger, past the Sirens, hearing their 
chant distinctly. And my advice to my readers 
is to adopt a similar expedient, viz., cither on 
account of their infirmity to smear their ears 
with wax, and sail (straight on) through the 

"> This rendering would ascribe Pantheism to Apelles. The pas- 
sage might also be construed, " supposed there to exist an essence 
(that formed the basis) of the universe." 

8 A hiatus here has given rise to conjecture. Cruice suggests 
Xopo? (band) instead of opo?. 

9 Or, "practices of the monsters," or "inhospitable beasts." 
Abbe Cruice suggests irapof «(*»', and Keeper iy.it\i.<rtiav. 

Chap. VI.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

lOl 

tenets of the heretics, not even listenhig to (doc- 
trines) that are easily capable of enticing them 
into pleasure, like the luscious lay of the Sirens, 
or, by binding one's self to the Cross ' of Christ, 
(and) hearkening with fidelity (to His words), 
not to be distracted, inasmuch as he has reposed 
flis trust in Him to whom ere this he has been 
firmly knit, and (I admonish that man) to con- 
tinue stedfastly (in this faith). 

CHAP. II. — THE SYSTEM OF BASILIDES DERIVED 
FROM ARISTOTLE. 

Since, therefore, in the six books preceding 
this, we have explained previous (heretical opin- 
ions), it now seems proper not to be silent re- 
specting the (doctrines) of Basilides,^ which are 
the tenets of Aristode the Stagyrite, not (those) 
of Christ. But even though on a former occa- 
sion the opinions propounded by Aristotle have 
been elucidated, we shall not even now scruple 
to set them down beforehand in a sort of synop- 
sis, for the purpose of enabling my readers, by 
means of a nearer comparison of the two sys- 
tems, to perceive with facility that the doctrines 
advanced by Basilides are (in reality) the clever 
quibbles of Aristotle. 

CHAP. III. 

SKETCH OF ARISTOTLE S PHILOSOPHY. 

Aristotle, then, makes a threefold division of 
substance. For one portion of it is a certain 
genus, and another a certain species, as that 
( philosopher) expresses it, and a third a certain 
ind'vidual. What is individual, however, (is so) 
not through any minuteness of body, but because 
by nature it cannot admit of any division what- 
soever. The genus, on the other hand, is a sort 
of aggregate, made up of many and different 
germs. And from this genus, just as (from) a 
certain heap, all the species of existent things 
derive their distinctions. ' And the genus con- 
stitutes a competent cause for (the production 
of) all generated entities. In order, however, 
that the foregoing statement may be clear, I 
shall prove (my position) through an example. 
And by means of this it will be possible for us 
to retrace our steps over the entire speculation 
of the Peripatetic (sage). 

CHAP. IV. — Aristotle's general idea. 

We affirm the existence of animal absolutely, 
r.ot some animal. And this animal is neither 
■ox, nor horse, nor man, nor god ; nor is it sig- 

1 Literally, the (accursed) tree. 

2 What Hippolytus now states in regard of the opinions of Basili- 
des, is quite new (compare Irenaeus, i. 2+; Clemens Alexandrinus, 
Strom., iii. and vii. ; TertuUian, Pmscript., xlvi.; Epiphanius, 
H<er., xxiv. : Theodoret, i. 4; Eusebius, Ecclesiast. Hist., iv. 7; 
and Philastrius, c. xxxii.). Abbe Cruice refers us to Basilidis phi- 
iosophi Gnostici Scntentice, by Jacobi (Berlin, 1852), and to Das 
Basilidianische Systetti, etc., by Ulhorn (Gottingen, 1855). 

^ Or, " dispositions." 

nificant of any of these at ail, but is animal ab- 
solutely. From this animal the species of all 
particular animals derive their subsistence. And 
this animality, itself the siimmum genus,'^ consti- 
tutes (the originating principle) for all animals 
produced in those (particular) species, and (yet 
is) not (itself any one) of the things generated. 
For man is an animal deriving the principle (of 
existence) from that animality, and horse is an 
animal deriving the principle of existence from 
that animality. The horse, and ox, and dog, 
and each of the rest of the animals, derive the 
principle (of existence) from the absolute ani- 
mal, while animality itself is not any of these. 

CHAP. V. — NONENTITY AS A CAUSE. 

If, however, this animality is not any of these 
(species), the subsistence, according to Aris- 
totle, of the things that are generated, derived its 
reality from non-existent entitles. For animality. 
from whence these singly h;ive been derived, is 
not any one (of them) ; ana though it is not 
any one of them, it has yet become some one 
originating principle of existing things. But who 
it is that has established this substance as an 
originating cause of what is subsequently pro- 
duced, we shall declare when we arrive at the 
proper place for entertaining a discussion of this 
sort. 

CHAP. VI. — SUBSTANCE, ACCORDING TO ARISTOTLE J 
THE PREDICATES. 

Since, however, as I have stated, substance is 
threefold, viz., genus, species, (and) individual ; 
and (since) we have set down animality as being 
the genus, and man the species, as being already 
distinct from the majority of animals, but not- 
withstanding still to be identified (with animals 
of his own kind), inasmuch as not being yet 
moulded into a species of realized substance, — 
(therefore it is, that) when I impart form under 
a name to a man derived from the genus, 1 style 
him Socrates or Diogenes, or some one of the 
many denominations (in use). And since (in 
this way, I repeat,) I comprehend under a name 
the man who constitutes a species that is gener- 
ated from the genus, I denominate a substance 
of this description individual. For genus has 
been divided into species, and species into in- 
dividual. But (as regards) the individual, since 
it has been comprehended under a name, it is 
not possible that, according to its own nature, it 
could be divided into anything else, as we have 
divided each of the fore- mentioned (genus and 
species). 5 

Aristotle primarily, and especially, and pre- 
eminently entitles this — substance, inasmuch as 

* Compare Porphyry's Isagoge, c. ii., and Aristotle's Categ., c. v. 
5 Aristotle's Categ., c. v. 

I02 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VI L 

it cannot either be predicated of any Subject, or 
exist in a Subject. He, however, predicates of 
the Subject, just as with the genus, what I said 
constituted animality, (and which is) predicated 
by means of a common name of all particular 
animals, such as ox, horse, and the rest that are 
placed under (this genus). For it is true to say 1 
that man is an animal, and horse an animal, and ' 
that ox is an animal, and each of the rest. Now I 
the meaning of the expression " predicated of a 
Subject " is this, that inasmuch as it is one, it | 
can be predicated in like manner of many (par- 
ticulars), even though these happen to be diver- 
sified in species. For neither does horse nor 
ox differ from man so far forth as he is an ani- 
mal, for the definition of animal is said to suit 
all animals alike. For what is an animal? If 
we define it, a general definition will comprehend 
all animals. For animal is an animated Sub- 
stance, endued with Sensation. Such are ox, 
man, horse, and each of the rest (of the animal 
kingdom). But the meaning of the expression 
" in a Subject " is this, that what is inherent in 
anything, not as a part, it is impossible should 
exist separately from that in which it is. But 
this constitutes each of the accidents (resident) 
in Substance, and is what is termed Quality. 
Now, accordmg to this, we say that certain per- 
sons are of such a quality ; for instance, white, 
grey, black, just, unjust, temperate, and other 
(characteristics) similar to these. But it is im- 
possible for any one of these to subsist itself by 
itself; but it must inhere in something else. If, 
however, neither animal which 1 predicate of all 
individual animals, nor accidents which are dis- 
coverable in all things of which they are non- 
essential qualities, can subsist themselves by 
themselves, and (yet if) individuals are formed 
out of these, (it follows, therefore, that) the 
triply divided Substance, which is not made up 
out of other things, consists of nonentities. If, 
then, what is primarily, and pre-eminently, and 
particularly denominated Substance consists of 
these, it derives existence from nonentities, ac- 
cording to Aristotle. 

CHAP. VII. — Aristotle's cosmogony ; his " psy- 
chology;" HIS " ENTELECHEIA ; " HIS THEOL- 
OGY ; HIS ETHICS ; P.ASILIDES FOLLOWS ARISTOTLE. 

But concerning Substance, the statements now 
made will suffice. But not only is Substance 
denominated genus, species, (and) individual, 
but also matter, and form, and privation. There 
is, however, (as regards the substance,) in these 
no difference, even though the division be al- 
lowed to stand. Now, inasmuch as Substance 
is of this description, the arrangement of the 
world has taken place according to some such 
plan as the following. The world is divided, 

according to Aristotle, into very numerous and 
diversified parts. Now the portion of the world 
which extends from the earth to the moon is 
devoid of foresight, guideless, and is under the 
sway ' of that nature alone which belongs to it- 
self. But another (part of the world which lies) 
beyond the moon, and extends to the surface 
of heaven, is arranged in the midst of all order 
and foresight and governance. Now, the (celes- 
tial) superficies constitutes a certain fifth sub- 
stance, and is remote from all those natural 
elements out of which the cosmical system de- 
rives consistence. And this is a certain fifth 
Substance, according to Aristotle, — as it were, 
a certain super-mundane essence. And (this 
essence) has become (a logical necessity) in his 
system, in order to accord with the (Peripatetic) 
division of the world. And (the topic of this 
fifth nature) constitutes a distinct investigation 
in philosophy. For there is extant a certain 
disquisition, styled A Lecture on Physical {Phe- 
nome}m),m which he has elaborately treated ^ 
concerning the operations which are conducted 
by nature and not providence, (in the quarter 
of space extending) from the earth as far as the 
moon. And there is also extant by him a cer- 
tain other peculiar treatise on the princi^^les of 
things (in the region) beyond the moon, and 
it bears the following inscription : Me/ap/iysics.^ 
And another peculiar dissertation has been (writ- 
ten) by him, entitled Coiicerning a Fifth Sub- 
stance, and in this work Aristotle unfolds his 
theological opinions. 

There exists some such division of the universe 
as we have now attempted to delineate in out- 
line, and (corresponding with it is the division) 
of the Aristotelian philosophy. His work, how- 
ever, (styled) Concerning the Soul, is obscure. 
For in the entire three books (where he treats 
of this subject) it is not possible to say clearly 
what is Aristotle's opinion concerning the soul. 
For, as regards the definition which he furnishes 
of soul, it is easy (enough) to declare this ; but 
what it is that is signified by the definition ■♦ is 
difficult to discover. For soul, he says, is an 
entelecheia of a natural organic body ; (but tO' 
explain) what this is at all, would require a very 
great number of arguments and a lengthened 
investigation. As regards, however, the Deity, 
the Originator of all those glorious objects ia 
creation, (the nature of) this (First Cause) — 
even to one conducting his speculations by a 
more prolonged inquiry than that concerning 
(the soul) — is more difficult to know than the 
soul itself. The definition, however, which Aris- 

» Or, " is sufficient." 

^ Or, " the question is discussed." 

3 [This word, not yet technic.il, as with us, is thus noted as curi- 
ous. Of its force see Professor Caird, Encyc. Britannic, sub %ioc» 
" Metaphysic."] 

* See Aristotle, De Anitn., ii. i. 

Chap. IX.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

103 

totle furnishes of the Deity is, I admit, not 
difficult to ascertain, but it is impossible to com- 
prehend the meaning of it. For, he says, (the 
Deity) is a " conception of conception ; " but 
this is altogether anon-existent (entity). The 
world, however, is incorruptible (and) eternal, 
according to Aristotle. For it has in itself noth- 
ing faulty,' inasmuch as it is directed by Provi- 
dence and Nature. And Aristotle has laid down 
doctrines not only concerning Nature and a 
cosmical system, and Providence, and God,^ but 
he has written (more than this) ; for there is 
extant by him likewise a certain treatise on ethi- 
cal subjects, and these he inscribes Books of 
Ethics? But throughout these he aims at ren- 
dering the habits of his hearers excellent from 
being worthless. When, therefore, Basilides has 
been discovered, not in spirit alone, but also in 
the actual expressions and names, transferring 
the tenets of x^ristotle into our evangelical and 
saving doctrine, what remains, but that, by re- 
storing what he has appropriated from others, we 
should prove to the disciples of this (heretic) 
that Christ will in no wise profit them, inasmuch 
as they are heathenish ? 

CHAP. VIII. BASILIDES AND ISIDORUS ALLEGE APOS- 
TOLIC SANCTION FOR THEIR SYSTEMS; THEY 
REALLY FOLLOW ARISTOTLE. 

Basilides, therefore, and Isidorus, the true son 
and disciple of Basilides, say that Matthias-* 
communicated to them secret discourses, which, 
being specially instructed, he heard from the 
Saviour. Let us, then, see how clearly BasiHdes, 
simultaneously with Isidorus, and the entire band 
of these (heretics), not only absolutely belies 
Matthias, but even the Saviour Himself. (Time) 
was, says (Basilides), when there was nothing. 
Not even, however, did that nothing constitute 
anything of existent things ; but, to express my- 
self undisguisedly and candidly, and without any 
quibbling, it is altogether nothing. But when, 
he says, I employ the expression "was," I do 
not say that it was; but (I speak in this way) 
in order to signify the meaning of what I wish 
to elucidate. I affirm then, he says, that it was 
" altogether nothing." For, he says, that is not 
absolutely ineffable which is named (so), — al- 
though undoubtedly we call this ineffable, — but 
that which is " non-ineffable." For that which is 
" non-ineffable " is not denominated ineffable, 
but is, he says, above every name that is named. 

' Literally, " out of tune." 

^ These works must be among Aristotle's lost writings (see 
Fabricius' Bibl. Gnec, t. iii. pp. 232, 404). We have no work of 
Aristotle's expressly treating " of God." However, the Stagyrite's 
theology, such as it is, is unfolded in his Metaphysics. See Macma- 
hon's analysis prefixed to his translation of Aristotle's Metaphysics, 
P<ohn's Classical Library. 

3 Aristotle composed three treatises on ethical subjects: {i) Ethics 
to Nicomachus; (2) Great Morals; {-^ Morals to Eudenius. 

■* Miller erroneously reads " Matthew." 

For, he says, by no means for the world are these 
names sufficient, but so manifold are its divisions 
that there is a deficiency (of names). And I da 
not take it upon myself to discover, he says,. 
proper denominations for all things. Undoubt- 
edly, however, one ought mentally, not by means- 
of names, to conceive, after an ineffable man- 
ner, the peculiarities (of things) denominated. 
For an equivocal terminology, (when employed 
by teachers,) has created for their pupils confu- 
sion and a source of error concerning objects. 
(The Basilidians), in the first instance, laying 
hold on this borrowed and furtively derived 
tenet from the Peripatetic (sage), play upon the 
folly of those who herd together with them. 
For Aristotle, born many generations before Ba- 
silides, first lays down a system in The Categories 
concerning homonymous words. And these 
heretics bring this (system) to light as if it were 
peculiarly their own, and as if it were some novel 
(doctrine), and some secret disclosure from the 
discourses of Matthias. 5 

CHAP. DC. BASILIDES ADOPTS THE ARISTOTELIAN 

DOCTRINE OF "NONENTITY." 

Since, therefore, "nothing" existed, — (I 
mean) not matter, nor substance, nor what is 
insubstantial, nor is absolute, nor composite,^ 
(nor conceivable, nor inconceivable, (nor what is 
sensible,) nor devoid of senses, nor man, nor angel, 
nor a god, nor, in short, any of those objects, 
that have names, or are apprehended by sense, 
or that are cognised by intellect, but (are) thus 
(cognised), even with greater minuteness, still, 
when all things are absolutely removed, — (since, 
I say, "nothing" existed,) God, " non-existent, "^ 
— whom Aristotle styles " conception of concep- 
tion," but these (Basilidians) " non-existent," — • 
inconceivably, insensibly, indeterminately, invol- 
untarily, impassively, (and) unactuated by de- 
sire, willed to create a world. Now I employ, 
he says, the expression "willed" for the purpose 
of signifying (that he did so) involuntarily, and 
inconceivably, and insensibly. And by the ex- 
pression "world " I do not mean that which was 
subsequently formed according to breadth and 
division, and which stood apart ; nay, (far from 
this,) for (I mean) the germ of a world. The 
germ, however, of the world had all things in 
itself. Just as the grain of mustard comprises 
all things simultaneously, holding them (col- 
lected) together within the very smallest (com- 
pass), viz., roots, stem, branches, leaves, and 
innumerable grains which are produced from 
the plant, (as) seeds again of other plants, and 

5 [See Bunsen, i. v. 86. A fabulous reference may convey a 
truth. This implies that Matthias was supposed to have preached 
and left results of his teachings.] 

'^ This emendation is made by Abbe Cruice. The Ms. has " iiv- 
compositc," an obviously untenable reading. 

I04 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VII. 

frequently of others (still), that are produced 
(from them). In this way, " non-existent " God 
made the world out of nonentities, casting and 
depositing some one Seed that contained in 
itself a conglomeration of the germs of the 
world. But in order that I may render more 
clear what it is those (heretics) affirm, (I shall 
mention the following illustration of theirs.) As 
an egg of some variegated and particoloured 
bird, — for instance the peacock, or some other 
(bird) still more manifold and particoloured, — 
l)eing one in reality, contains in itself numerous 
forms of manifold, and particoloured, and much 
compounded substances ; so, he says, the non- 
existent seed of the world, which has been de- 
posited by the non-existent Ood, constitutes at 
the same time the germ of a multitude of forms 
and a multitude of substances. 

CHAP. X. — ORIGIN OF THE WORLD ; BASILIDES' 
ACCOUNT OF THE " SONSHIP." 

All things, therefore, whatsoever it is possible 
to declare, and whatever, being not as yet dis- 
covered, one must omit, were likely to receive 
adaptation to the world which was about to be 
generated from the Seed. And this (Seed), at 
the recjuisite seasons, increases in bulk in a pe- 
culiar manner, according to accession, as through 
the instrumentality of a Deity so great, and of 
this description. (But this Deity) the creature 
can neither express nor grasp by perception. 
(Now, all these things) were inherent, treasured 
in the Seed, as we afterwards observe in a new- 
born child the growth of teeth, and paternal 
substance, and intellect, and everything which, 
though previously having no existence, accrues 
unto a man, growing little by little, from, a youth- 
ful period of life. But since it would be al)surd 
to say that any projection of a non-existent 
God became anything non-existent (for Basilides 
altogether shuns and dreads the Substances of 
things generated in the way of projection : for, 
(he asks,) of what sort of projection is there a 
necessity, or of what sort of matter ' must we 
assume the previous existence, in order that God 
should construct a world, as the spider his web ; 
or (as) a mortal man, for the purpose of work- 
ing it, takes a (piece of) brass or of wood, or 
some other of the parts of matter?), — (pro- 
jection, I say, being out of the cjuestion,) cer- 
tainly, says (Basilides), (iod spoke the word, and 
it was carried into effect. And this, as these 
men assert, is that which has been stated by 
Moses : " Let there be light, and there was 
light." ^ Whence, he says, came the light? 
From nothing. For it has not been written, he 
says, whence, but this only, (that it came) from 

• Or, " of what sort of material substance," etc. 
2 Gen. i. 3. 

the voice of him who speaks the word. .And 
he who speaks the word, he says, was non-exist- 
ent ; nor was that existent which was being pro- 
duced.^ The seed of the cosmical system was 
generated, he says, from nonentities ; (and I 
mean by the seed,) the word which was spoken, 
" Let there be light." And this, he says, is that 
which has been stated in the Gospels : " He was 
the true light, which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world." ^ He derives his ori- 
ginating principles from that Seed, and ol)tains 
from the same source his illuminating power. 
This is that seed which has in itself the entire 
conglomeration of germs. And Aristotle affirms 
this to be genius, and it is distributed by him 
into infinite species ; just as from animal, which 
is non-existent, we sever ox, horse, (and) man. 
When, therefore, the cosmical Seed becomes the 
basis (for a subsequent development), those 
(heretics) assert, (to quote Basilides' own 
words:) "Whatsoever I affirm," he says, "to 
have been made after the3e, ask no question as 
to whence. For (the Seed) had all seeds treas- 
ured and reposing in itself, just as non-existent 
entities, and which were designed to be pro- 
duced by a non-existent Deity." 

Let us see, therefore, what they say is first, or 
what second, or what third, (in the development 
of) what is generated from the cosmical Seed. 
There existed, he says, in the Seed itself, a Son- 
ship, threefold, in every respect of the same 
Substance with the non-existent God, (and) be- 
gotten from nonentities. Of this Sonship (thus) 
involving a threefold division, one part was re- 
fined, (another gross,) and another reciuiring 
purification. The refined portion, therefore, in 
the first place, simultaneously with the earliest 
deposition of the Seed by the non-existent one, 
immediately burst forth 5 and went upwards and 
hurried above from below, employing a sort of 
velocity describetl in poetry, — 

"... "As wing or thought,"'' — 

and attained, he says, unto him that is non- 
existent. For every nature desires that (non- 
existent one), on account of a superabundance 
of beauty and bloom. Each (nature desires 
this), however, after a different mode. The 
more gross portion, however, (of the Sonship) 
continuing still in the Seed, (and) being a cer- 
tain imitative (principle), was not able to hurry 
upwards. For (this portion) was much more 
deficient in the refinement that the Sonship pos- 
sessed, which through itself hurried upwards, 
(and so the more gross portion) was left behind. 
Therefore the more gross Sonship equipped it- 

3 Or, " being declared." 

* John i. 9. [See translator's important note (i), p. 7, sit/^ra.] 

5 Liceraily, " throbbed." 

6 Odyssey, vii. 36. 

Chap. XI.J 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

lo- 

self with some such wing as Plato, the Preceptor 
of Aristotle, fastens on the soul in (his) F/m- 
ifrus.' And Basilides styles such, not a wing, 
but Holy Spirit ; and Sonship invested in this 
(Spirit) confers benefits, and receives them in 
turn. He confers benefits, because, as a wing 
of a bird, when removed from the bird, would 
not of itself soar high up and aloft ; nor, again, 
would a bird, when disengaged from its pinion, 
at any time soar high up and aloft ; (so, in like 
manner,) the Sonship involved some such rela- 
tion in reference to the Holy Spirit, and the 
Spirit in reference to the Sonship. For the Son- 
ship, carried upwards by the Spirit as by a wing, 
bears aloft (in turn) its pinion, that is, the Spirit. 
And it approaches the refined Sonship, and the 
non-existent God,^ even Him who fabricated 
the world out of nonentities. He was not, (how- 
ever,) able to have this (spirit) with (the Son- 
ship) itself; for it was not of the same substance 
(with God), nor has it (any) nature (in com- 
mon) with the Sonship. But as pure and dry 
air is contrary to (their) nature, and destructive 
to fishes ; so, in contrariety to the nature of the 
Holy Spirit, was that place simultaneously of 
non-existent Deity and Sonship, — (a place) 
more ineffable than ineffable (entities), and 
higher up than all names. 

Sonship, therefore, left this (spirit) near that 
Blessed Place, which cannot be conceived or 
represented by any expression. (He left the 
spirit) not altogether deserted or separated from 
the Sonship ; nay, (far from it,) for it is just as 
when a most fragrant ointment is put into a ves- 
sel, that, even though (the vessel) be emptied 
(of it) with ever so much care, nevertheless 
some odour of the ointment still remains, and is 
left behind, even after (the ointment) is sepa- 
rated from the vessel ; and the vessel retains an 
odour of ointment, though (it contain) not the 
ointment (itself). So the Holy Spirit has con- 
tinued without any share in the Sonship, and 
separated (from it), and has in itself, similarly 
with ointment, its own power, a savour of Son- 
ship. And this is what has been declared : "As 
the ointment upon the head which descended to 
the beard of Aaron." ^ This is the savour from 
the Holy Spirit borne down from above, as far 
as formlessness, and the interval (of space) in 
the vicinity of our world. And from this the 
Son began to ascend, sustained as it were, says 
(Basilides), upon eagles' wings, and upon the 
back. For, he says, all (entities) hasten up- 
wards from below, ft-om things inferior to those 
that are superior. For not one of those things 
that are among things superior, is so silly as to 

1 See Plato, vol. i. p. 75 et seq., ed. Bekker. Miller has " Phae- 
do; " an obvious mistake. 

2 [Foretaste of Cent. IV.] Miller's te.xt has, instead of toO ovk 
V.'Tos (non-existent), oikoDitos (who dwells above). 

3 Ps. c.\.\.\iii. 2. 

descend beneath. The third Sonship, however, 
that which requires purification, has continued, 
he says, in the vast conglomeration of all germs 
conferring benefits and receiving them. But in 
what manner it is that (the third Sonship) re- 
ceives benefits and confers them, we shall after- 
wards declare when we come to the proper place 
for discussing this question. 

CHAP. XI. — THE "GRE.A.T ARCHON " OF BASILIDES. 

When, therefore, a first and second ascension 
of the Sonship took place, and the Holy Spirit 
itself also remained after the mode mentioned, 
the firmament was placed between the super- 
mundane (spaces) and the world. For existing 
things were distributed by Basilides into two 
continuous and primary divisions, and. are, ac- 
cording to him, denominated partly in a certain 
(respect) world, and partly in a certain (respect) 
super-mundane (spaces). But the spirit, a line 
of demarcation between the world and super- 
mundane (spaces), is that which is both holy, 
and has abiding in itself the savour of Sonship. 
While, therefore, the firmament which is above 
the heaven is coming into existence, there burst 
forth, and was begotten from the cosmical Seed, 
and the conglomeration of all germs, the Great 
Archon (and) Head of the world, (who consti- 
tutes) a certain (species of) beauty, and mag- 
nitude, and indissoluble power.-* For, says he, 
he is more ineffable than ineffable entities, and 
more potent than potent ones, and more wise 
than wise ones, and superior to all the beautiful 
ones whatever you could mention. This (Ar- 
chon), when begotten, raised Himself up and 
soared aloft, and was carried up entire as far as 
the firmament. And there He paused, sup- 
posing the firmament to be the termination of 
His ascension and elevation, and considering 
that there existed nothing at all beyond these. 
And than all the subjacent (entities) whatsoever 
there were among them which remained mun- 
dane. He became more wise, more powerful, 
more comely, more lustrous, (in fact,) pre-emi- 
nent for beauty above any entities you could 
mention with the exception of the Sonship alone, 
which is still left in the (conglomeration of) all 
germs. For he was not aware that there is (a 
Sonship) wiser and more powerful, and better 
than Himself. Therefore imagining Himself to 
be Lord, and Governor, and a wise Master 
Builder, He turns Himself to (the work of) the 
creation of every object in the cosmical system. 
And first, he deemed it proper not to be alone, 
but made unto Himself, and generated from 
adjacent (entities), a Son far superior to Him- 
self, and wiser. For all these things had the 
non-existent Deity previously determined upon, 

3 Or, " unspeakable power." 

io6 

THE RKFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VII. 

■when He cast down the (conglomeration of) all 
germs. Beholding, therefore, the Son, He was 
seized with astonishment, and loved (Him), and 
was stnick with amazement. For some beauty 
of this description appeared ' to the Great Archon 
to belong to the Son, and the Archon caused 
Him to sit on his right (hand). This is, accord- 
ing to these (heretics), what is denominated the 
Ogdoad, where the Great Archon has his throne. 
The entire celestial creation, then, that is, the 
^ther, He Himself, the Great Wise Demiurge 
formed. The Son, however, begotten of this 
(Archon), operates in Him, and offered Him 
suggestions, being endued with far greater wis- 
dom than the Demiurge Himself. 

CHAP. XII. BASILIDES ADOPTS THE 

CHEIA " OF ARISTOTLE. 

ENTELE- 

This, then, constitutes the entelecheia of the 
natural organic body, according to Aristotle, 
(viz.,) a soul operating in the body, without which 
the body is able to accomplish nothing ; ( I mean 
nothing) that is greater, and more illustrious, 
and more powerful, and more wise than the 
body.^ The account, therefore, which Aristotle 
has previously rendered concerning the soul and 
the body, Basilides elucidates as applied to the 
Great Archon and his Son. For the Archon has 
generated, according to Basilides, a son ; and 
the soul as an operation and completion, Aris- 
totle asserts to be an eiitelecheia of a natural 
orga.iic body. As, therefore, the entelecheia con- 
trols the body, so the. Son, according to Basilides, 
controls the God that is more ineffable than 
ineffable (entities). All things, therefore, have 
been provided for, and managed by the majesty ^ 
of the Great Archon ; (I mean) whatever objects 
exist in the rethereal region of space as far as 
the moon, for from that quarter onwards air is 
separated from aether. When all objects in the 
sethereal regions, then, were arranged, again 
from (the conglomeration of) all germs another 
Archon ascended, greater, of course, than all 
subjacent (entities), with the exception, however, 
of the Sonship that had been left behind, but 
far inferior to the First Archon. And this (sec- 
ond Archon) is called by them Rhetus."* And 
this Topos is styled Hebdomad, and this (Ar- 
chon) is the manager and fabricator of all sub- 
jacent (entities). And He has likewise made 
unto Himself out (of the conglomeration of) all 
germs, a son who is more prudent and wise than 
Himself, similarly to what has been stated to 
have taken place in the case of the First Archon. 
That which exists in this quarter (of the uni- 

' Or, " was produced unto." 

2 Miller's text has ".the soul," which Duncker and Cruice properly 
correct into " body." 

3 Mt7aAci6Tr)To<;, a correction from fieyoAj)?. 
■♦ A correction from " Arrhetus." 

verse) constitutes, he says, the actual conglomer- 
ation and collection of all seeds ; and the things 
which are generated are produced according to 
nature, as has been declared already by Him 
who calculates on things future, when they ought 5 
(to be), and what sort they ought (to be), and 
how they ought (to be). And of these no one 
is Chief, or Guardian, or Creator. For (a) suffi- 
cient (cause of existence) for them is that cal- 
culation which the Non- Existent One formed 
when He exercised the function of creation. 

CHAP. XIII. FURTHER EXPLANATION OF THE 

" SONSHIP." 

When, therefore, according to these (heretics), 
the entire world and super- mundane entities 
were finished, and (when) nothing exists labour- 
ing under deficiency, there still remains in the 
(conglomeration of) all germs the third Sonship, 
which had been left behind in the Seed to confer 
benefits and receive them. And it must needs 
be that the Sonship which had been left behind 
ought likewise to be revealed and reinstated 
above. And His place should be above the 
Conterminous Spirit, near the refined and imita- 
tive Sonship and the Non-Existent One. But 
this -would be in accordance with what has been 
written, he says : " And the creation itself groan- 
eth together, and travaileth in pain together, 
waiting for the manifestation of the sons of 
God." ^ Now, we who are spiritual are sons, he 
says, who have been left here to arrange, and 
mould, and rectify, and complete the souls which, 
according to nature, are so constituted as \.o 
continue in this quarter of the universe. " Sin, 
then, reigned from Adam unto Moses," 7 as it 
has been written. For the Great Archon exer- 
cised dominion and possesses an empire with 
limits extending as far as the firmament. And 
He imagines Himself alone to be God, and that 
there exists nothing above Him, for (the reason 
that) all things have been guarded by unrevealed 
Slope. This, he says, is the mystery which has 
not been made known to former generations ; 
but in those days the Great Archon, the Ogdoad, 
was King and Lord, as it seemed, of the universe. 
But (in reality) the Hebdomad was king and 
lord of this quarter of the universe, and the 
Ogdoad is Arrhetus, whereas the Hebdomad is 
Rhetus. This, he says, is the Archon of the 
Hebdomad, who has spoken to Moses, and says : 
" I am the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and 
Jacob, and I have not manifested unto them the 
name of God"* (for so they wish that it had 
been written) — that is, the God, Arrhetus, 

5 This passage is very obscure, and is variously rendered by the 
commentators. The above translation follows Schneidewin's yersion, 
which yields a tolerably clear meanmg. 

* Rom. viii. 19, 22. 
f Rom. V. 14. 

* Ex. vi. 2, ■\, 

Chap. XIV.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

107 

Archon of the Ogdoad. All the prophets, there- 
fore, who were ' before the Saviour uttered their 
predictions, he says, from this source (of inspira- 
tion). Since, therefore, it was requisite, he says, 
that we should be revealed as the children of 
God, in expectation of whose manifestation, he 
says, the creation habitually groans and travails 
in pain, the Gospel came into the world, and 
passed through every Principality, and Power, 
and Dominion, and every Name that is named.' 
And (the Gospel) came in reality, though noth- 
ing descended from above ; nor did the blessed 
Sonship retire from that Inconceivable, and 
Blessed, (and) Non- Existent God. Nay, (far 
from it ;) for as Indian naphtha, when lighted 
merely ^ from a considerably long distance, nev- 
ertheless attracts fire (towards it), so from below, 
from the formlessness of the conglomeration (of 
all germs), the powers pass upwards as far as the 
Sonship. For, according to the illustration of 
the Indian naphtha, the Son of the Great Archon 
of the Ogdoad, as if he were some (sort of) 
naphtha, apprehends and seizes conceptions 
from the Blessed Sonship, whose place of habi- 
tation is situated after that of the Conterminous 
(S{)irit). For the power of the Sonship which 
is in the midst of the Holy Spirit, (that is,) in 
the midst of the (Conterminous) Spirit, shares 
the flowing and rushing thoughts of the Sonship 
with the Son of the Great Archon. 

'JHAP. XIV. WHENCE CAME THE GOSPEL ; THE 

NUMBER OF HEAVENS ACCORDING TO BASILIDES ; 
EXPLANATION OF CHRIST'S MIRACULOUS CON- 
CEPTION. 

The Gospel then came, says (Basilides), first 
from the Sonship through the Son, that was 
seated beside the Archon, to the Archon, and 
the Archon learned that He was not God of the 
universe, but was begotten. But (ascertaining 
that) He has above Himself the deposited treas- 
ure of that Ineffable and Unnameable (and) 
Non-existent One, and of the Sonship, He was 
both converted and filled with terror, when He 
was brought to understand in what ignorance He 
was (involved). This, he says, is what has been 
declared : " The fear of the Lord is the begin- 
ning of wisdom. "3 For, being orally instructed 
by Christ, who was seated near, he began to 
acquire wisdom, (inasmuch as he thereby) learns 
who is the Non- Existent One, what the Sonship 
(is), what the Holy Spirit (is), what the appara- 
tus of the universe (is), and what is likely to be 
the consummation of things. This is the wisdom 
spoken in a mystery, concerning which, says 
(Basilides), Scripture uses the following expres- 

' Eph. i. 21. 

^ Or, " seen merely." 

■5 Prov. i. 7. 

sions : " Not in words taught of human wisdom, 
but in (those) taught of the Spirit." ■< The 
Archon, then, being orally instructed, and taught, 
and being (thereby) filled with fear, proceeded 
to make confession concerning the sin which He 
had committed in magnifying Himself This, he 
says, is what is declared : " I have recognised 
my sin, and I know my transgression, (and) 
about this I shall confess for ever." s When, 
then, the Great Archon had been orally in- 
structed, and every creature of the Ogdoad had 
been orally instructed and taught, and (after) the 
mystery became known to the celestial (powers), 
it was also necessary that afterwards the Gospel 
should come to the Hebdomad, in order like- 
wise that the Archon of the Hebdomad might 
be similarly instructed and indoctrinated into the 
Gospel. The Son of the Great Archon (there- 
fore) kindled in the Son of the Archon of the 
Hebdomad the light which Himself possessed 
and had kindled from above from the Sonship. 
And the Son of the Archon of the Hebdomad 
had radiance imparted to Him, and He pro- 
claimed the Gospel to the Archon of the Heb- 
domad. And in like manner, according to the 
previous account, He Himself was both terrified 
and induced to make confession. When, there- 
fore, all (beings) in the Hebdomad had been 
likewise enlightened, and had the Gospel an- 
nounced to them (for in these regions of the 
universe there exist, according to these heretics, 
creatures infinite (in number), viz., Principalities 
and Powers and Rulers, in regard of which there 
is extant among the (Basilidians) ^ a very prolix 
and verbose treatise, where they allege that there 
are three hundred and sixty-five heavens, and 
that the great Archon of these is Abrasax,'' from 
the fact that his name comprises the computed 
number 365, so that, of course, the calculation 
of the title includes all (existing) things, and 
that for these reasons the year consists of so 
many days) ; — but when, he says, these (two 
events, viz., the illumination of the Hebdomad 
and the manifestation of the Gospel) had thus 
taken place, it was necessary, likewise, that after- 
wards the Formlessness existent in our quarter 
of creation should have radiance imparted to it, 
and that the mystery should be revealed to the 
Sonship, which had been left behind in Form- 
lessness, just like an abortion. 

Now this (mystery) was not made known to 
previous generations, as he says, it has been 
written, " By revelation was made known unto 
me the mystery ; " ^ and, " I have heard inex- 

•* I Cor. ii. 13. 

5 Ps. xxxii. 5, li. 3. 

6 Kar' avTous. Ulhorn fills up the ellipsis thus: " And in refer- 
ence to these locAlities^of the Arohons," etc. 

7 This is a moit correct form than that occasionally given, viz. 
Abraxas. See Beausobre, //isi. Manick., lib. ii. p. 51. 

* Eph. iii. 3-5. 

ro8 

11 ii:: REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIFS. 

[IJOOK VII 

pressible words which it is not possible for man 
to declare." ' The light, (therefore,) which 
came down from the Ogdoad above to the Son 
of the Hebdomad, descended from the Heb- 
domad upon Jesus the son of Mary, and he had 
radiance imparted to him by being illuminated 
with the light that shone upon him. This, he 
says, is that which has been declared: "The 
Holy Spirit will come upon thee," - (meaning) 
that which proceeded from the Sonship through 
the conterminous spirit upon the Ogdoad and 
Hebdomad, as far as Mary ; " and the power of 
the Highest will overshadow thee," (meaning) 
the power of the anointing,^ (which streamed) 
from the (celestial) height above (through) the 
Demiurge, as far as the creation, which is (as 
far as) the Son. And as far as that (Son) he 
says the world consisted thus. And as far as 
this, the entire Sonship, which is left behind for 
benefiting the souls in Formlessness, and for 
being the recipient in turn of benefits, — (this 
Sonship, I say,) when it is transformed, followed 
Jesus, and hastened upwards, and came forth 
purified. And it becomes most refined, so that 
it could, as the first (Sonship), hasten upwards 
through its own instrumentality. For it possesses 
all the power that, according to nature, is firmly 
connected with the light which from above shone 
down (upon earth). 

CHAP. XV. — god's dealings WITH THE CREATURE ; 
BASILIDES' NOTION OF (l) THE INNER MAN, 
(2) THE gospel; his INTERPRETATION OF THE 
LIFE AND SUFFERINGS OF OUR LORD. 

^V'hen, therefore, he says, the entire Sonship 
shall have come, and shall be above the con- 
terminous spirit, then the creature will become 
the object of mercy. For (the creature) groans 
until now,-* and is tormented, and waits for the 
manifestation of the sons of (iod, in order that 
all who are men of the Sonship may ascend from 
thence. When this takes place, God, he says, 
will bring upovs the whole world enormous igno- 
rance, that all things may continue according to 
nature, and that nothing may inordinately desire 
anything of the things that are contrary to nature. 
But (far from it) ; for all the souls of this quar- 
ter of creation, as many as possess the nature of 
remaining immortal in this (region) only, con- 
tinue (in it), aware of nothing superior or better 
(than their j)resent state). And there will not 
prevail any rumour or knowledge in regions 
below, concerning beings whose dwelling is 
])laced al)ove, lest subjacent souls should be 
wrung with torture from longing after impossi- 

' 2 Cor. xii. 4. 
- Luke i. 35. 

•* Miller's text has" judgment," which yields no meaning. Roeper 
suggests " Ogdoad." 

* Rom. viii. 19-22. 
\ 

bilities. (It would be) just as if a fish were to 
crave to feed on the mountains along with sheep. 
(For) a wish of this description would, he says, 
be their destruction. All things, therefore, that 
abide in (this) quarter 5 are incorruptible, l)ut 
corruptible if they are disposed to wander and 
cross over from the things that are according to 
nature. In this way the Archon of the Hebdo- 
mad will know nothing of superjacent entities. 
For enormous ignorance will lay hold on this 
one likewise, in order that sorrow, and grief, 
and groaning may depart from him ; for lie will 
not desire aught of impossible things, nor will he 
be visited with anguish. In like manner, how- 
ever, the same ignorance will lay hold also on 
the Great Archon of the Ogdoad, and similarly 
on all the creatures that are subject unto him, 
in order that in no respect anything may desire 
aught of those things that are contrary to nature, 
and may not (thus) be overwhelmed with sorrow. 
And so there will be the restitution of all things 
which, in conformity with nature, have from the 
beginning a foundation in the seed of the uni- 
verse, but will be restored at (their own) proper 
periods. And that each thing, says (Basilides), 
has its own particular times, the Saviour is a 
sufficient (witness ^) when He observes, " Mine 
hour is not yet come." 7 And the Magi (afford 
similar testimony) when they gaze wistfully upon 
the (Saviour's) star.^ For (Jesus) Himself was, 
he says, mentally preconceived at the time of 
the generation of the stars, and of the complete 
return to their starting-point of the seasons in 
the vast conglomeration (of all germs). This 
is, according to these (Basilidians), he who has 
been conceived as the inner spiritual man in 
what is natural (now this is the Sonship which 
left there the soul, not (that it might be) mortal, 
but that it might abide here according to nature, 
just as the first Sonship left above in its ])roper 
locality the Holy Spirit, (that is, the spirit) which 
is conterminous), — (this, I say, is he who has 
been conceived as the inner spiritual man, and) 
has then been arrayed in his own jieculiar soul. 

In order, however, that we may not omit any 
of the doctrines of this (Basilides), I shall like- 
wise explain whatever statements they ])ut for- 
ward respecting a gospel. For gospel with them, 
as has been elucidated, is of super-mundane 
entities the knowledge which the Great Archon 
did not understand. As, then, it was manifested 
unto him that there are likewise the Holy Spirit 
— that is, the conterminous (spirit) — and the 
Sonship, and the Non-Fxistent God, the cause 
of all these, he rejoiced at the communications 
made to him, and was filled with exultation. 

5 Or, " their own peculiar locality " (Bunsen). 
<> This word is added by Bunsen. 
" John ii. 4. 
* Matt. ii. I, 2. 

Chap. XVI.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

109 

According to them, this constitutes the gospel. 
Jesus, however, was born, according to these 
"(heretics), as we have aheady declared. And 
when the generation which has been previously 
explained took place, all the events in our Lord's 
life occurred, according to them, in the same 
manner as they have been described in the Gos- 
pels. And these things happened, he says, in 
order that Jesus might become the first-fruits of 
a distinction of the different orders (of created 
objects) that had been confused together.' For 
when the world had been divided into an Og- 
doad, which is the head of the entire world, — 
now the great Archon is head of the entire 
•world, — and into a Hebdomad, — which is the 
head of the Hebdomad, the Demiurge of subja- 
cent entities, — and into this order of creatures 
(that prevails) amongst us, where exists Form- 
lessness, it was requisite that the various orders 
of created objects that had been confounded 
together should be distinguished by a separating 
process performed by Jesus. (Now this sepa- 
ration) that which was his corporeal part suf- 
fered, and this was (the part) of Formlessness, 
and reverted into Formlessness. And that was 
resuscitated which was his psychical part, and 
this was (part) of the Hebdomad, and reverted 
into the Hebdomad. And he revived that (ele- 
ment in his nature) which was tlie peculiar 
property of the elevated region where dwells 
the Great Archon, and (that element) remained 
beside the Great Archon. And he carried up- 
wards as far as (that which is) above that which 
was (the peculiar property) of the contermin- 
ous spirit, and he remained in the conterminous 
spirit. And through him there was purified the 
third Sonship, which had been left for conferring 
benefits, and receiving them. And (through 
Jesus) it ascended towards the blessed Sonship, 
and passed through all these. For the entire 
purpose of these was the blending together of, 
as it were, the conglomeration of all germs, and 
the distinction of the various orders of created 
objects, and the restoration into their proper 
component parts of things that had been blended 
together. Jesus, therefore, became the first- 
fruits of the distinction of the various orders of 
created objects, and his Passion took place for 
not any other reason than the distinction which 
was thereby brought about in the various orders 
of created objects that had been confounded 
together. For in this manner (Basilides) says 
that the entire Sonship, which had been left in 
Formlessness for the purpose of conferring bene- 
fits and receiving, them, was divided into its 
component elements, according to the manner 
in which also the distinction of natures had 
taken place in Jesus. These, then, are the 

legends which likewise Basilides details after his 
sojourn in Egypt ; ^ and being instructed by the 
(sages of this country) in so great a system of 
wisdom, (the heretic) produced fruits of this 
description. 

CHAP. XVI. THE SYSTEM OF SATURNILUS. 

But one Saturnilus,^ who flourished about the 
same period with Basilides,'* but spent his time 
in Antioch, (a city) of Syria, propounded opin- 
ions akin to whatever (tenets) Menander (ad- 
vanced). He asserts that there is one Father, 
unknown to all — He who had made angels, 
archangels, principalities, (and) powers ; and that 
by certain angels, seven (in number), the world 
was made, and all things that are in it. And 
(Saturnilus affirms) that man was a work of 
angels. There had appeared above from (the 
Being of) absolute sway, a brilliant s image ; and 
when (the angels) were not able to detain this, 
on account of its immediately, he says, returning 
with rapidity upwards, they exhorted one an- 
other, saying, " Let us make man in our likeness 
and image." ^ And when the figure was formed, 
and was not, he says, able, owing to the impo- 
tence of the angels, to lift up itself, but continued 
writhing as a worm, the Power above, compas- 
sionating him on account of his having been born 
in its own image, sent forth a scintillation of life, 
which raised man up, and caused him to have 
vitality. (Saturnilus) asserts that this scintilla- 
tion of life rapidly returns after death to those 
things that are of the same order of existence ; 
and that the rest, from which they have been 
generated, are resolved into those. And the 
Saviour ^ he supposed to be unbegotten and in- 
corporeal, and devoid of figure. (Saturnilus,) 
however, (maintained that Jesus) was manifested 
as man in appearance only. And he says that 
the God of the Jews is one of the angels, and, on 
account of the Father's wishing to deprive of 
sovereignty all the Archons, that Christ came for 
the overthrow of the God of the Jews, and for 
the salvation of those that believe upon Him ; 
and that these have in them the scintillation of 
life. For he asserted that two kinds of men had 
been formed by the angels, — one wicked, but 
the other good. And, since demons from time 
to time assisted wicked (men, Saturnilus affirms) 
that the Saviour came for the overthrow of worth- 
less men and demons, but for the salvation of 

I See Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom., ii. p. 375. ed. Sylburg. 
[Comp, cap. viii. vol. ii. p. 355, this series.] 

2 Bernays and Bunsen read rov nepiVaTor, which Abbe Cruice 
and Duncker consider erroneous, referring us to Eusebius, Htst. 
.Ecclcsidst . iv. 7. 

3 See [vol i. p. 348, this series, where it is Satnrttinus]; 
Irenseus i. 24; [vol. iii., this series, p. 649] : Tertullian, Prcescript., 
xlvi.; Epiphanius, //<^r., xxiii.; Theodoret, Hcer. Fab., 1. 3; 6t. 
Augustine, Hcer., iii. Eusebius styles this heretic Satuminus. 

■i Epiphanius makes Basilides and Saturnilus belong to the sam« 
school. 

5 (ftaeii'ijs: Miller reads (^xortj?. 

6 Gen. i. 20. , 
^ Miller reads " the Father." 

1 lO 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VII. 

good men. And he afifirms that marriage and 
procreation are from Satan. The majority, how- 
ever, of those who belong to this (heretic's 
school) abstain from animal food likewise, (and) 
by this affectation of asceticism (make many 
their dupes). And (they maintain) that the 
prophecies have been uttered, partly by the 
world-making angels, and partly by Satan, who is 
also the very angel whom they suppose to act in 
antagonism to the cosmical ' (angels), and es- 
pecially to the God of the Jews. These, then, 
are in truth the tenets of Saturnilus. 

CHAP. XVII. 

M.'VRCION ; HIS 

DUALISM ; DERIVES 

HIS SYSTEM FROM EMPEDOCLES ; SKETCH OF THE 
DOCTRINE OF EMPEDOCLES. 

But Marcion,* a native of Pontus, far more 
frantic than these (heretics), omitting the major- 
ity of the tenets of the greater number (of specu- 
lators), (and) advancing into a doctrine still 
more unabashed, supposed (the existence of) 
two originating causes of the universe, alleging 
one of them to be a certain good (principle), 
but the other an evil one. And himself imagin- 
ing that he was introducing some novel (opinion), 
founded a school full of folly, and attended by 
men of a sensual mode of life, inasmuch as he 
himself was one of lustful propensities.^ This 
(heretic) having thought that the multitude would 
forget that he did not happen to be a disciple of 
Christ, but of Kmpedocles,^ who was fir anterior 
to himself, framed and formed the same opin- 
ions, — namely, that there are two causes of the 
universe, discord and friendship. For what does 
Empedocles say respecting the plan of the world? 
Even though we have previously spoken (on this 
subject), yet even now also, for the purpose, at 
all events, of comparing the heresy of this plagia- 
rist (with its source), we shall not be silent. 

This (philosopher) affirms that all the ele- 
ments out of which the world consists and 
derives its being, are six : two of them material, 
(viz.,) earth and water; and two of them in- 
struments by which material objects are arranged 
and altered, (viz.,) fire and air ; and two of them, 
by means of the instruments, o])erating upon 
matter and fashioning it, viz., discord and friend- 
ship. (Empedocles) expresses himself somehow 
thus : — 

"The four roots of all things hear thou first: 
Brilliant Jove, and life-giving Juno and Aidoneus, 
And Nestis, who with tears bedews the mortal font." ^ 

* Or, " world-m.iking." 

* See [vol. i. p. 352, this series]; Irenaeus, i. 27; [vol. iii., thia 
series especially p. 257], TertuUian, Ad7i. Marc, and Prtescript., 
XXX.; Epiphanius, Hter., xlii. ; Theodoret, Heer. Fab., i. 24: Euse- 
bius, Hist. Kcc/esiast., v. 13, 16; and St Augustine, Hier., xxii. 

' Or, "quarrelsome," or, "frantic." 

* Hippolytus' discussion respecting the heresy of Marcion is 
chiefly interesting from the light which it throws on the philosophy of 
Empedocles. 

5 These are lines 55-57 in Karsten's edition of a collection of the 
Empedoclean verses. 

Jupiter is fire, and life-giving Juno earth, which 
produces fruits for the support of existence ; 
and Aidoneus air, because although through 
him we behold all things, yet himself alone we 
do not see. But Nestis is water, for this is a 
sole vehicle of (food), and thus becomes a cause 
of sustenance to all those that are being nour- 
ished ; (but) this of itself is not able to afford 
nutriment to those that are being nourished. 
For if it did possess the power of affording nutri- 
ment, animal life, he says, could never be de- 
stroyed by famine, inasmuch as water is always 
superabundant in the world. For this reason 
he denominates Nestis water, because, (though 
indirectly) being a cause of nutriment, it is not 
(of itself) competent to afford nutriment to those 
things that are being nourished. These, there- 
fore — to delineate them as by way of outline — 
are the principles that comprise (Empedocles') 
entire theory of the world : (viz.,) water and 
earth, out of which (proceed) generated enti- 
ties ; fire and spirit, (which are) instruments and 
efficient (causes), but discord and friendship, 
which are (principles) artistically fabricating (the 
universe). And friendship is a certain peace, 
and unanimity, and lov'e, whose entire effort is, 
that there should be one finished and complete 
world. Discord, however, invariably separates 
that one (world), and subdivides it, or makes 
many things out of one. Therefore discord is 
of the entire creation a cause which he styles 
" oidomenon,''' that is, destructive. For it is the 
concern of this (discord), that throughout every 
age the creation itself should continue to pre- 
serve its existing condition. And ruinous dis- 
cord has been (thus) a fabricator and an efficient 
cause of the production of all generated entities ; 
whereas friendship (is the cause) of the educ- 
tion, and alteration, and restoration of existing 
things into one system. And in regard of these 
(causes), Empedocles asserts that they are two 
immortal and unbegotten principles, and such 
as have not as yet received an originating cause of 
existence. (Fmi)edocles) somewhere or other 
(expresses himself) in the following manner : — 

" For if both once it was, and will lie; never, I think, 
Will be the age eternal void of both of these."* 

(But) what are these (two) ? Discord and 
Friendship ; for they did not begin to come into 
being, but pre-existed and always will exist, be- 
cause, from the fact of their being unbegotten, 
they are not al)le to undergo corruption. But 
fire, (and water,) and earth, and air, are (enti- 
ties) that perish and revive. For when these 
generated (bodies), by reason of Discord, cease 
to exist, Friendship, laying hold on them, brings 
them forward, and attaches and associates them 

^ These are lines no, in, in Stein's edition of Empedocles. 

Chap. XVII.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

1 1 I 

herself with the universe. (And this takes place) 
in order that the Universe may continue one, 
being always ordered by Friendship in a manner 
one and the same, and with (uninterrupted) 
uniformity. 

When, however. Friendship makes unity out 
of plurality, and associates with unity separated 
entities, Discord, again, forcibly severs them from 
unity, and makes them many, that is, fire, water, 
earth, air, (as well as) the animals and plants 
produced from these, and whatever portions of 
the world we observe. And in regard of the 
form of the world, what sort it is, (as) arranged 
by Friendship, (Empedocles) expresses himself 
in the following terms : — 

•' For not from back two arms arise, 
Not feet, not nimble knees, not genital groin, 
But a globe it was, and equal to itself it is." ' 

An operation of this description Friendship main- 
tains, and makes (one) most beautiful form of 
the world out of plurality. Discord, however, 
the cause of the arrangement of each of the 
parts (of the universe), forcibly severs and makes 
many things out of that one (form). And this 
is what Empedocles affirms respecting his own 
generation : — 

" Of these I also am from God a wandering exile." ^ 

That is, (Empedocles) denominates as God the 
unity and unification of that (one form) in which 
(the world) existed antecedent to the separation 
and production (introduced) by Discord among 
the majority of those things (that subsisted) in 
accordance with the disposition (effected) by 
Discord. For Empedocles affirms Discord to 
be a furious, and perturbed, and unstable Demi- 
\irge, (thus) denominating Discord the creator 
of the world. For this constitutes the condem- 
nation and necessity of souls which Discord for- 
cibly severs from unity, and (which it) fashions 
and operates upon, (according to Empedocles,) 
who expresses himself after some such mode as 
the following : — 

" Who perjury piles on sin, 
While demons gain a life prolonged;"^ 

meaning by demons long-lived souls, because 
they are immortal, and live for lengthened 
ages : — 
■" For thrice ten thousand years banished from bliss ; " * 

denominating as blissful, those that have been 

collected by Friendship from the majority of 

entities into the process of unification (arising 

out) of the intelligible world. He asserts that 

those are exiles, and that 

■' In lapse of time all sorts of mortal men are born. 
Changing the irksome ways of life." ^ 

■ Lines 360-362 (ed. Karst.). 

2 Line 7 (Karsten), 3S1 (Stein). 

3 Line 4 (Karsten), 372, 373 (Stein). 

* Line 5 (Karsten), 374 (Stein). 

* Line 6 (Karsten), 375, 376 (Stein). 

He asserts the irksome ways to be the alterations 
and transfigurations of souls into (successive) 
bodies. This is what he says : — 

"Changing the irksome ways of life." 

For souls " change," body after body being 
altered, and punished by Discord, and not per- 
mitted to continue in the one (frame), but that 
the souls are involved in all descriptions of pun- 
ishment by Discord being changed from body to 
body. He says : — 

" Ethereal force to ocean drives the souls, 
And ocean spurts them forth on earth's expanse, 
And earth on beams of blazing sun, who flings 
(The souls) on jether's depths, and each from each 
(A spirit) takes, and all with hatred burn."^ 

This is the punishment which the Demiurge in- 
flicts, just as some brazier moulding (a piece 
of) iron, and dipping it successively from fire 
into water. For fire is the aether whence the 
Demiurge transfers the souls into the sea ; and 
land is the earth : whence he uses the words, 
from water into earth, and from earth into air. 
This is what (Empedocles) says : — - 

" And earth on beams 
Of blazing sun, who flings (the souls) 
On aether's depths, and each from each 
A (spirit) takes, and all with hatred burn." 

The souls, then, thus detested, and tormented, 
and punished in this world, are, according to 
Empedocles, collected by Friendship as being a 
certain good (power), and (one) that pities the 
groaning of these, and the disorderly and wicked 
device of furious Discord. And (likewise Friend- 
ship is) eager, and toils to lead forth little by 
little the souls from the world, and to domes- 
ticate them with unity, in order that all things, 
being conducted by herself, may attain unto 
unification. Therefore on account of such an 
arrangement on the part of destructive Discord 
of this divided world, Empedocles admonishes 
his disciples to abstain from all sorts of animal 
food. For he asserts that the bodies of animals 
are such as feed on the habitations of punished 
souls. And he teaches those who are hearers of 
such doctrines (as his), to refrain from inter- 
course with women. (And he issues this pre- 
cept) in order that (his disciples) may not 
co-operate with and assist those works which 
Discord fabricates, always dissolving and forci- 
bly severing the work of Friendship. Emped- 
ocles asserts that this is the greatest law of the 
management of the universe, expressing himself 
somehow thus : — 

" There's something swayed by Fate, the ancient, 
Endless law of gods, and sealed by potent oaths."' 

He thus calls Fate the alteration from unity into 
plurality, according to Discord, and from plu- 

* Lines 16-19 (Karsten), 377-380 (Stein). 
' Lines i, a (Karsten), 369, 370 (Stein). 

I 12 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VII. 

rality into unity, according to Friendship. And, 
as I stated, (P^mpedocles asserts) that there are 
four perishable gods, (viz.,) fire, water, earth, 
(and) air. (He maintains,) however, that there 
are two (gods) which are immortal, unhegotten, 
(and) continually hostile one to the other, 
(namely) Discord and Friendship. And (he 
asserts) that Discord always is guilty of injustice 
and covetousness, and forcible abduction of the 
things of Friendship, and of api)ropriation of 
them to itself. (He alleges,) however, that 
Friendship, inasmuch as it is always and invari- 
ably a certain good (power), and intent on union, 
recalls and brings towards (itself), and reduces 
to unity, the parts of the universe that have been 
forcibly severed, and tormented, and punished 
in the creation by the Demiurge. Some such 
system of philosophy as the foregoing is advanced 
for us by Empedocles concerning the generation 
of the world, and its destruction, and its consti- 
tution, as one consisting of what is good and 
bad. And he says that there is likewise a cer- 
tain third power which is cognised by intellect, 
and that this can be understood from these, 
(viz.. Discord and Friendship,) expressing him- 
self somehow thus : — 

" For if, 'neath hearts of oak, these truths you fix. 
And view them kindly in meditations jiuie, 
Each one of these, in lapse of time, will haunt you. 
And many others, sprung of these, descend. 
For into every habit these will grow, as Nature prompts ; 
But if for other things you sigh, which, countless, linger 
Undisguised 'mid men, and blunt the edge of care, 
As years roll on they'll leave you fleetly. 
Since they vearn to reach their own beloved race ; 
For know that all possess perception and a share of 
mind." ' 

CHAP. XVIII. — SOURCE OF ]\IARCIONISM ; EMPEDO- 
CLES REASSERTED AS THE SUGGESTER OF THE 
HERESY. 

When, therefore, Marcion or some one of his 
hounds barks against the Demiurge, and adduces 
reasons from a comparison of what is good and 
bad, we ought to say to them, that neither Paul 
the apostle nor Mark, he of the maimed finger,- 
announced such (tenets). For none of these 
(doctrines) has been written in the Gospel ac- 
cording to Mark. But (the real author of the 
system) is Empedocles, son of Meto, a native 
of Agrigentum. And (Marcion) despoiled this 
(philosopher), and imagined that up to the 

' The text of these verges, as given by Hippolytus, is obviously 
crrrupt, and therefore obscure. SchneiJewui has furnished an 
emended copy of them {Pfii'lol., \\. i66), which the transhiior has 
mostly adopted. (See Stein's edition of the Emprdoclcan I irsis, 
line 222 et seq.) 

- 6 Ko\ofioia.KTv\o<:. Bunsen [more siio, vol. i., p. 89] con- 
siders this a corrupt reading, and suggests xaKuv Aoyiur OihaaicnKn', 
i e., " a te.achcr of good words," i.e., an evangelist, which word, as 
just used, he does not wish to repeat. The .Abbe Cruice denies llie 
necessity for any such emendation, and refers us to an article in the 
yoiirtuil of Classical ami Sacred Pliilology (Cambridge, March, 
1S55), the writer of which maintains, on the authority of St. Jerome, 
that St. Mark had amputated his thumb, in order that he might be 
considered disqualified for the priesthood. 

present would pass undetected his transference, 
under the same expressions, of the arrangement 
of his entire heresy from Sicily into the evan- 
gelical narratives. For bear with me, 0 Mar- 
cion : as you have instituted a comparison of 
what is good and evil, 1 also to-day will institute 
a comjiarison following up your own tenets, as 
you sui)pose them to be. You affirm that the 
Demiurge of the world is evil — why not hide 
your countenance in shame, (as thus) teaching 
to the Church the doctrines of Empedocles? 
You say that there is a good Deity who destrovs 
the works of the Demiurge : then do not you 
plainly })reach to your i)upi]s, as the good Deitv, 
the Friendship of Empedocles. You forbid 
marriage, the procreation of children, (and) the 
abstaining from meats which God has created 
for participation by the faithful, and those that 
know the truth. ^ (Thinkest thou, then,) that 
thou canst escape detection, (while thus) en- 
joining the purificatory rites of Empedocles? 
For in point of fact you follow in every respect 
this (philosopher of paganism), while you in- 
struct your own disciples to refuse meats, in 
order not to eat any body (that might be) a 
remnant of a soul which has been punished by 
the Demiurge. You dissolve marriages that have 
been cemented by the Deity. And here again 
you conform to the tenets of Empedocles, in 
order that for you the work of Friendship may 
be perpetuated as one (and) indivisible. For, 
according to P^mpedocles, matrimony separates 
unity, and makes (out of it) plurality, as we 
have proved. 

CHAP. XIX. — THE HERESY OF PREPON ; FOLLOWS 
EMPEDOCLES ; MARCION REJECTS THE GENERA- 
TION OF THE SAVIOUR. 

The principal heresy of Marcion, and (the one 
of his) which is most free from admixture (with 
other heresies), is that which has its system 
formed out of the theory concerning the gooil 
and bad (God). Now this, it has been mani- 
fested by us, belongs to Empedocles. But since 
at present, in our times, a certain follower of 
Marcion, (namely) Prepon, an Assyrian,-* has 
endeavoured to introduce something more novel, 
antl has given an account of his heresy in a work 
inscribed to Bardesanes, an Armenian, neither of 
this will I be silent. In alleging that what is just 
constitutes a third principle, and that it is placed 
intermediate between what is good and bad, 
Pre])on of course is not able to avoid (the impu- 
tation of inculcating) the opinion of Empedocies, 
For I'anpedocles asserts that the world is man- 
aged bv wicked Discord, and that the other 

3 I Tim. iv. 3, 

* What Hippolytus communicates concerning Prepon i>i quite uj .. 
The only writer who mentions liim is Theodoret i/.'.-rr. I'ri ., i. 2j;. 
ill his article on Apclles. 

Chap. XX.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

1 1 

(world) which (is managed) by Friendship, is 
cognisable by intellect. And (he asserts) that 
these are the two different principles of good and 
evil, and that intermediate between these diverse 
principles is impartial reason, in accordance with 
which are united the things that have been 
separated by Discord, (and which,) in accord- 
ance with the influence of Friendship, are accom- 
modated to unity. The impartial reason itself, 
that which is an auxiliary to Friendship, Emped- 
ocles denominates "Musa." And he himself 
likewise entreats her to assist him, and expresses 
himself somehow thus : — 

" For if on fleeting mortals, deathless Muse, 
Thy care it be that thoughts our mind engross, 
Calliope, again befriend my present prayer, 
As I disclose a pure account of happy gods." ' 

Marcion, adopting these sentiments, rejected 
altogether the generation of our Saviour. He 
considered it to be absurd that under the (cate- 
gory of a) creature fashioned by destructive' 
Discord should have been the Logos that was an 
auxiliary to Friendship — that is, the Good Deity. 
(His doctrine,) however, was that, independent 
of birth, (the Logos) Himself descended from 
above in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tibe- 
rius Caesar, and that, as being intermediate be- 
tween the good and bad Deity, He proceeded 
to give instruction in the synagogues. For if 
He Ms a Mediator, He has been, he says, liber- 
ated from the entire nature of the Evil Deity. 
Now, as he affirms, the Demiurge is evil, and 
his works. For this reason, he affirms, Jesus 
came down unbegotten, in order that He might 
be liberated from all (admixture of) evil. And 
He has, he says, been liberated from the nature 
of the Good One likewise, in order that He may 
be a Mediator, as Paul states,^ and as Himself 
acknowledges : " Why call ye me good ? there 
is one good.""* These, then, are the opinions 
of Marcion, by means of which he made many 
his dupes, employing the conclusions of Em- 
pedocles. And he transferred the philosophy 
invented by that (ancient speculator) into his 
own system of thought, and (out of Empedo- 
cles) constructed his (own) impious heresy. 
But I consider that this has been sufficiently re- 
futed by us, and that I have not omitted any 
opinion of those who purloin their opinions from 
the Greeks, and act despitefully towards the dis- 
ciples of Christ, as if they had become teachers 
to them of these (tenets). But since it seems 
that we have sufficiently explained the doctrines 
of this (heretic), let us see what Carpocrates 
says. 

' Schneidewin gives a restored version of these lines. They are 
found (at lines 338-341 ) in Stein's edition of the Emfedoclean I 'erses. 

2 Tertullian combats these heretical notions in his De Came 
Christi [vol. viii. p. 521, this series]. 

3 Gal. iii. 19. 

* Matt. xix. 17; Mark x. 18; Luke xviii. 19. 

CHAP. XX. THE HERESY OF CARPOCR.'VTES ; WICKED 

DOCTRINES CONCERNING JESUS CHRIST ; PRACTISE 
MAGICAL arts; ADOPT A METEMPSYCHOSIS. 

Carpocrates 5 affirms that the world and the 
things in it were made by angels, far inferior to 
the unbegotten Father ; and that Jesus was gen- 
erated of Joseph, and that, having been born 
similar to (other) men. He was more just than 
the rest (of the human race). And (Carpocrates 
asserts) that the soul (of Jesus), inasmuch as it 
was made vigorous and undefiled, remembered 
the things seen by it in its converse with the 
unbegotten God. And (Carpocrates maintains) 
that on this account there was sent down upon 
(Jesus) by that (God) a power, in order that 
through it He might be enabled to escape the 
world-making (angels). And (he says) that this 
power, having passed through all, and having 
obtained liberty in all, again ascended ^ to God 
(Himself). And (he alleges) that in the same 
condition with (the soul of Jesus are all the 
souls) that embrace similar objects of desire 
with the (power just alluded to). And they 
assert that the soul of Jesus, (though,) accord-' 
ing to law, it was disciplined in Jewish customs, 
(in reality) despised them. And (he says) that 
on this account (Jesus) received powers whereby 
He rendered null and void the passions inci- 
dental to men for their punishment. And (he 
argues), therefore, that the (soul), which, simi- 
larly with that soul of Christ, is able to despise 
the world-making Archons, receives in like man- 
ner power for the performance of similar acts. 
Wherefore, also, (according to Carpocrates, there 
are persons who) have attained unto such a 
degree of pride as to affirm some of themselves 
to be equal to Jesus Himself, whereas others 
among them to be even still more powerful. 
But (they also contend) that some enjoy an 
excellence above the disciples of that (Re- 
deemer), for instance Peter and Paul, and the 
rest of the Apostles, and that these are in no 
respect inferior to Jesus. And (Carpocrates 
asserts) that the souls of these have originated 
from tliat supernal power, and that consequently 
they, as equally despising the world-making 
(angels), have been deemed worthy of the same 
power, and (of the privilege) to ascend to the 
same (place) . If, however, any one would de- 
spise earthly concerns more than did that 
(Saviour, Carpocrates says) that such a one 
would be able to become superior to (Jesus. 
The followers of this heretic) practise their magi- 
cal arts and incantations, and spells and volup- 

5 See [vol. i. p. 350] Irenaeus, i. 25; [vol. iii. p. 203] Tertullian, 
De Anima, c. xxiii.-xxv., and Pmscript., c. xlvni.; Eusebius, 
Hist. Ecdesiast., iv. 7, Epiphanius, Hcer., xxvn. sec. 2; Theodoret, 
Hier. Fab., i. 5; and St. Augustine, H<er., c. vn. The entire of this 
article is taken from Irena;us, and equally coincides with the account 
given of Carpocrates by Epiphanius. 

* Or, " came." 

114 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VII. 

tiious feasts. And (they are in the habit of 
invoking the aid of) subordinate demons and 
dream-senders, and (of resorting to) the rest of 
the tricks (of sorcery), alleging that they possess 
power for now acquiring sway over the Archons 
and makers of this world, nay, even over all the 
works that are in it. 

(Now these heretics) have themselves been 
sent forth by Satan, for the purpose of slander- 
ing before the Gentiles the divine name of the 
Church. (And the devil's object is,) that men 
hearing, now after one fashion and now after 
another, the doctrines of those (heretics), and 
thinking that all of us are people of the same 
stamp, may turn away their ears from the 
preaching of the truth, or that they also, looking, 
(without abjuring,) upon all the tenets of those 
(heretics), may speak hurtfully of us. (The 
followers of Carpocrates) allege that the souls 
are transferred from body to body, so far as that 
they may fill up (the measure of) all their sins. 
When, however, not one (of these sins) is left, 
(the Carpocratians affirm that the soul) is then 
emancipated, and departs unto that God above 
of the world- making angels, and that in this way 
all souls will be saved. If, however, some (souls), 
during the presence of the soul in the body for 
one life, may by anticipation become involved in 
the full measure of transgressions, they, (accord- 
ing to these heretics,) no longer undergo me- 
tempsychosis. (Souls of this sort,) however, on 
paying off at once all trespasses, will, (the Carpo- 
cratians say,) be emancipated from dwelling any 
more in a body. Certain, likewise, of these 
(heretics) brand ' their own disciples in the 
back parts of the lobe of the right ear. And 
they make counterfeit images of Christ, alleging 
that these were in existence at the time (during 
which our Lord was on earth, and that they were 
fashioned) by Pilate.^ 

CHAP. XXI. — THE SYSTEM OF CERINTHUS CON- 
CERNING CHRIST. 

Rut a certain Cerinthus,^ himself l)eing disci- 
])lined in the teaching of the Egyptians, asserted 
that the world was not made by the primal Deity, 
but by some virtue which was an offshoot from 
that Power which is above all things, and which 
(yet) is ignorant of the God that is above all. 
And he supposed that Jesus was not generated 
from a virgin, but that he was l)orn son of Joseph 
and Mary, just in a manner similar with the rest 
of men, and that (Jesus) was more just and more 

' Literally, " cauterize." 

2 Epiphanius alludes in the same manner to these images. 

3 See [vol. i. pp. 351, 415] Irenaeus, i. 26, iii. 2, 3; Tvol. iii. p. 
6;i] Tcrtu\Via.n, Prcescri/ii., c. -xlviii. ; Kuschius, //ist. £ccUs/asi., 
iii. 28, vii. 25; Epiphanius, Hcer., xxviii.; Theodoret, Har. Fab., 
ii. 3; St. Augustine, liter., c. viii. ; and St. Jerome, E/>., Ixxxix. 
We have here, as in the preceding articles, Irenaeus in the Greek, as 
Hippolytus' text corresponds with the Latin version of this portion 
of Irenaeus' work. 

wise (than all the human race). And (Cerinthus 
alleges) that, after the baptism (of our Lord), 
Christ in form of a dove came down upon him, 
from that absolute sovereignty which is above all 
things. And then, (according to this heretic,) 
Jesus proceeded to preach the unknown Father,* 
and in attestation (of his mission) to work mira- 
cles. It was, however, (the opinion of Cerin- 
thus,) that ultimately Christ departed from Jesus, 
and that Jesus suffered and rose again ; whereas 
that Christ, being spiritual,5 remained beyond the 
possibility of suffering. 

CHAP. XXIL — DOCTRINE OF THE EBION^ANS. 

The Ebiongeans,'' however, acknowledge that 
the world was made by Him Who is in reality 
God, but they propound legends concerning the 
Christ similarly with Cerinthus and Carpocrates. 
They live conformably to the customs of the 
Jews, alleging that they are justified according 
to the law, and saying that Jesus was justified by 
fulfilling the law. And therefore it was, (accord- 
ing to the Ebionaeans,) that (the Saviour) was 
named (the) Christ of God and Jesus,' since noc 
one of the rest (of mankind) had observed com- 
pletely the law. For if even any other had ful- 
filled the commandments (contained) in the law, 
he would have been that Christ. And the (Ebi- 
onaeans allege) that they themselves also, when 
in like manner they fulfil (the law), are able to 
become Christs ; for they assert that our Lord 
Himself was a man in a like sense with all (the 
rest of the human family). 

CHAP. XXIU. 

THE HERESY OF THEODOTUS. 

But there was a certain Theodotus,^ a native 
of Byzantium, who introduced a novel heresy. 
He announces tenets concerning the originating 
cause of the universe, which are partly in keep- 
ing with the doctrines of the true Church, in so 
far as he acknowledges that all things were 
created by God. Forcibly appropriating, how- 
ever, (his notions of) Christ from the school of 
the Gnostics, and of Cerinthus and Ebion, he 
alleges that (our Lord) appeared in some such 
manner as I sliall now describe. (According to 
this, Theodotus maintains) that Jesus was a 
(mere) m;in, born of a virgin, according to the 
counsel of the Father, and that after he had 
lived i)romiscuously with all men, and had be- 

* Acts xvii. 23. 

5 Or, " paternal." 

6 See [vol. i. p. 352] Irena;us, i. 26; \\a\. iii. p. 651] TertuUian, 
Prescript. , z. \\\m.\ [vol. iv. p. 429, tnis series] <3rigen, Contr. 
Cels., ii. i; Eusebius, Hist. Ecch-siast., iii. 27; Epiphanius, Hcer., 
XXX.; and Theodoret, Hcer. Fah., ii. 2. Hippolytus is indebted in 
this article partly to Irena;us, and partly to original sources. 

7 Or, " that the Christ of God was named Jesus " (Bunsen). 

* See [vol. iii. p. 654, "two Theodoli "J TertuUian, Prascript., 
c. liii.; Eusebuis, Hist. Ecclesiast , v. 27; Epiphanius, Hier., liv. : 
and Theodoret, H<er. Fab., ii. 5. Clemens Alexandrinus seems to 
have been greatly indebted to Theodotus, whose system he has ex- 
plained and commented upoiu 

Chap. XXVI.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

115 

come pre-eminently religious, he subsequently at 
his baptism in Jordan received Christ, who came 
from above and descended (upon him) in form 
of a dove. And this was the reason, (according 
to Theodotus,) why (miraculous) powers did not 
operate within him prior to the manifestation in 
him of that Spirit which descended, (and) which 
proclaims him to be the Christ. But (among 
the followers of Theodotus) some are disposed 
( to think) that never was this man made God, 
(even) at the descent of the Spirit; whereas 
others (maintain that he was made God) after 
the resurrection from the dead. 

€HAP. XXIV. THE MELCHISEDECIANS ; THE NICO- 

LAITANS. 

While, however, different questions have arisen 
among them, a certain (heretic), who himself 
also was styled Theodotus, and who was by trade 
a banker,' attempted to establish (the doctrine), 
that a certain Melchisedec constitutes the great- 
est power, and that this one is greater than 
Christ. And they allege that Christ happens to 
be according to the likeness (jf this Melchise- 
dec). And they themselves, similarly with those 
who have been previously spoken of as adherents 
of Theodotus, assert that Jesus is a (mere) man, 
and that, in conformity with the same account 
(already given), Christ descended upon him. 

There are, however, among the Gnostics di- 
versities of opinion ; but we have decided that 
it would not be worth while to enumerate the 
silly doctrines of these (heretics), inasmuch as 
they are (too) numerous and devoid of reason, 
and full of blasphemy. Now, even those (of the 
heretics) who are of a more serious turn in re- 
gard of^ the Divinity, and have derived their 
systems of speculation from the Greeks, must 
stand convicted^ (of these charges). But Nico- 
laus"* has been a cause of the wide-spread com- 
bination of these wicked men. He, as one of 
the seven (that were chosen) for the diaconate,^ 
was appointed by the Apostles. (But Nicolaus) 
departed from correct doctrine, and was in the 
habit of inculcating indifferency of both life and 
food.'' And when the disciples (of Nicolaus) 
continued to offer insult to the Holy Spirit, 
John reproved them in the Apocalypse as 
fornicators and eaters of things offered unto 
idols.7 

' Concerning the younger Theodotus, see [vol. iii. p. 654] Ter- 
tuUian, Pmscri/>t., c. liii. ; Epiphanius, Heer., Iv.; and Theodoret, 
Hier. Fab., ii. 6. 

- Or, " in reference to" (Bunsen). 

3 Or, " have been adduced" (Miller). 

•* See \ut supra\ Irenseus, i. 26; \tit supra\ Tertullian, Prce- 
script., c. xlv. ; Epiphanius, Hcer., c. xxv. ; Eusebius, Hist. Eccle- 
siast., iii. 29; Theodoret, Hter. Fab., i. 15; and St. Augustine, 
Hcer., c. V. [But see Clement, vol. ii. p. 373, this series.] 

= [He understands that the seven (Acts vi. 5) were deacons. 
Bunsen, i. p. 97.] 

^ Or, " knowledge." Bunsen suggests ppitKTeoii;, as translated 
above. 

7 Rev. ii. 6. 

CH.\P. XXV. THE HERESY OF CERDON. 

But one Cerdon ^ himself also, taking occasion 
in like manner from these (heretics) and Simon, 
affirms that the God preached by Moses and the 
prophets was not Father of Jesus Christ. For 
(he contends) that this (Father) had been 
known, whereas that the Father of Christ 9 was 
unknown, and that the former was just, but the 
latter good. And Marcion corroborated the 
tenet of this (heretic) in the work which he 
attempted to write, and which he styled Antithe- 
ses.''^ And he was in the habit, (in this book,) 
of uttering whatever slanders suggested them- 
selves to his mind against the Creator of the 
universe. In a similar manner likewise (acted) 
Lucian," the disciple of this (heretic). 

CHAP. XXVI. — THE DOCTRINES OF APELLES ; 
PHILUMENE, HIS PROPHETESS. 

But Apelles," sprung from these, thus expresses 
himself, (saying) that there is a certain good 
Deity, as also Marcion supposed, and that he 
who created all things is just. Now he, (ac- 
cording to Apelles,) was the Demiurge of 
generated entities. And (this heretic also main- 
tains) that there is a third (Deity), the one who 
was in the habit of speaking to Moses, and that 
this (god) was of a fiery nature, and that there 
was another fourth god, a cause of evils. But 
these he denominates angels. He utters, how- 
ever, slanders against law and prophets, by 
alleging that the things that have been written 
are (of) human (origin), and are false. And 
(Apelles) selects from the Gospels or (from the 
writings of) the Apostle (Paul) whatever pleases 
himself. But he devotes himself to the dis- 
courses of a certain Philumene as to the revela- 
tions '^ of a prophetess. He affirms, however, 
that Christ descended from the power above ; 
that is, from the good (Deity), and that he is 
the son of that good (Deity). And (he asserts 
that Jesus) was not born of a virgin, and that 
when he did appear he was not devoid of flesh. 
(He maintains,) however, that (Christ) formed 
his body by taking portions of it from the sub- 
stance of the universe : that is, hot and cold, 
and moist and dry. And (he says that Christ), 
on receiving in this body cosmical powers, lived 
for the time he did in (this) world. But (he 

5 Irenaeus, i. 27; Eusebius (who here gives Irenaeus' Greek), 
Hist. Ecclesiast., iv. 2; Epiphanius, c. xli.; Theodoret, //o'r. Fab., 
i. 24; and Philastrius, c. xliv. 

9 Hippolytus follows Irenaeus, but introduces some alterations. 

'° 'Ai'Tidto-ei?. This is the emendation proposed by the Abbe 
Cruice. The textual reading is drTiTrooiSeo-ei? f comparisons). 

" See [«< supra, p. 353], Tertullian-, Prcescript., c. Ii., and 
Epiphanius, Hier., c. xliii. 

'^ See [vol. iii. p. 257] Tertullian, Prescript. ,c.-x.-x.y..: Eusebius. 
Hist. Ecclesiast., v. 13; Epiphanius, Har., c. xliv.; Theodoret, 
Hcer. Fab., i. 25; and .St. Augustine, Hter., c. xxiv. 

'3 (jyafepMaerri. Miller's text reads (fjarepoos, the error of which 
is obvious from Tertullian's Prescript., c. xxx. Cruice con.siders 
tne word to signify the title of a work written by Apelles. 

ii6 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VII. 

held that Jesus) was subsequently crucified by 
the Jews, and expired, and that, being raised 
up after three days, he appeared to his disciples. 
And (the Saviour) showed them, (so Apelles 
taught,) the prints of the nails and (the wound) 
in his side, desirous of persuading them that he 
was in tmth no phantom, but was present in the 
flesh. After, says (Apelles), he had shown 
them his flesh, (the Saviour) restored it to earth, 
from which substance it was (derived. And 
this he did because) he coveted nothing that 
belonged to another. (Though indeed Jesus) 
might use for the time being (what belonged to 
another), he yet in due course rendered to each 
(of the elements) what peculiarly belonged to 

them. And so it was, that 
loosed the chains of 

more 

after he had once 
his body, he gave 
back heat to what is hot, cold to what is cold, 
moisture to what is moist, (and) dryness to 
what is dry. And in this condition (our Lord) 
departed to the good Father, leaving the seed 
of life in the world for those who through his 
disciples should believe in him. 

It appears to us that these (tenets) have been 
sufficiently explained. Since, however, we have 
determined to leave unrefuted not one of those 
opinions that have been advanced by any (of 
the heretics), let us see what (system) also has 
been invented by the Docetae, 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

BOOK VIIL 

CONl'ENTS. 

The following are the contents of the eighth 
book of the Refutation of all Heresies : — 

What are the opinions of the Docetae, and that 
they have formed the doctrines which they 
assert from natural philosophy. 

How Monoimus - trifles, devoting his atten- 
tion to poets, and geometricians, and arithme- 
ticians. 

How (the system of) Tatian has arisen from 
the opinions of Valentinus and Marcion, and how 
this heretic (from this source) has formed his 
own doctrines. Hermogenes, however, availed 
Jiimself of the tenets of Socrates, not those of 
Christ. 

How those err who contend for keeping 
Easter on the fourteenth day. 

What the error is of the Phrygians, who sup- 
pose that Montanus, and Priscilla, and Maxi- 
milla, are prophets. 

What the conceit is of the Encratites, and 
that their opinions have been formed not from 
the Holy Scriptures, ^ but from themselves, and 
the Gymnosophists among the Indians. 

CHAP. I. HERESIES HITHERTO REFUTED ; OPIN- 
IONS OF THE DOCET.E. 

Since the great body of (the heretics) do not 
employ the counsel of the Lord, by having the 
beam in the eye,* and announce that they see 
when in reality labouring under blindness, it 
seems to us expedient in no wise to be silent 
concerning the tenets of these. Our object is, 
that by the refutation accomplished by us, the 
(heretics), being of themselves ashamed, may 
be brought to know how the Saviour has advised 
(men) first to take away the beam, then to be- 
hold clearly the mote that is in thy brother's 
« . _ 

' Much that we have in this book is quite new. Hippolytus de- 
rives his article on Tatian, and in a measure that on the Encratites, 
frjm IrensEus. The rest is probably from original sources. 

- Or, " Noimus." 

3 [Note the honour uniformly rendered to the Holy Scriptures by 
the Fathers.] 

* Matt. vii. 3, 4; Luke vl. 41, 43. 

eye. Having therefore adequately and suffi- 
ciently explained the doctrines of the majority 
(of the hererics) in the seven books before this, 
we shall not now be silent as regards the (heter- 
odox) opinions that follow (from these). We 
shall by this means exhibit the abundance of 
the grace of the Holy Spirit ; and we shall 
refute those (who suppose) that they have ac- 
quired stedfastness of doctrine, when it is only 
in appearance. Now these have styled them- 
selves Docet»,5 and propound the following 
opinions : — 

(The Docetae maintain) that God is the pri- 
mal (Being), as it were a seed of a fig-tree, 
which is altogether very diminutive in size, bui 
infinite in power. (This seed constitutes, ac- 
cording to the Docetae,) a lowly magnitude, 
incalculable in multitude,^ (and) labouring under 
no deficiency as regards generation. (This seed 
is) a refuge for the terror-stricken, a shelter of 
the naked, a veil for modesty, (and) the sought- 
for produce, to which He came in search (for 
fruit), he says, three times, 7 and did not dis- 
cover (any). Wherefore, he says. He cursed 
the fig-tree,^ because He did not find upon it 
that sweet fruit — the sought-for produce. And 
inasmuch as the Deity is, according to them — 
to express myself briefly — of this description 
and so great, that is, small and minute, the world, 
as it seems to them, was made in some such 
manner as the following : When the branches of 
the fig-tree became tender, leaves budded (first), 
as one may (generally) see, and next in suc- 
cession the fruit. Now, in this (fruit) is pre- 

S See [vol i. p. 526] Irenasus, v. i; T\\&oAox&\, Hcer. Fab., \. 
12: and [vol. ii. p. 398, and Elucidation XI\^ p. 407] Clemens Alex- 
andrinus {Strom., iii.) , who informs us that Julius Cassianus — a pupil 
of Valentinus — was founder of the Docetic heresy. 

'^ Miller's text reads TaTreirbi/ (lowly), but this is obviously unten- 
able. Duncker alters it into dTreipol' (infinite), and joins Tamivnv 
with the word following. He renders the passage thus : " but infinite 
in power — a lowly magnitude." Cruice strikes out the word Taneivhy, 
and renders the passage thus: "but infinite in power, a magnitude 
incalculable in bulk." The above rendering seems to convey Hip- 
polytus' meaning. 

^ Or, " the Lord came in search of fruit " (Roeper). The reading 
followed in the translation agrees with the scriptural account; see 
Luke xiii. 7. 

* Matt. xxi. 19, 20; Mark xi. 13, 14, 23, 21. 

117 

Tl8 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VIII. 

served treasured the infinite and incalculable 
seed of the fig-tree. We think, therefore, (say 
the Docetse,) that there are three (parts) which 
are primarily produced by the seed of the fig- 
tree, (viz.,) stem, which constitutes the fig-tree, 
leaves, and fruit — the fig itself, as we have pre- 
viously declared. In this manner, the (Docetic) 
affirms, have been produced three .-Eons, which 
are principles from the primal originating cause 
of the universe. And Moses has not been silent 
on this point, when he says, that there are three 
words of God, " darkness, gloom, tempest, and 
added no more." ' For the (Docetic) says, 
Ciod has made no addition to the three A\.ons ; 
but these, in every respect, have been sufficient 
for (the exigencies of) those who have been 
begotten and are sufficient. God Himself, how- 
ever, remains with Himself, far separated from 
the three ^fCons. When each of these .^i^ons 
had obtained an originating cause of generation, 
he grew, as has been declared, by little and 
little, and (by degrees) was magnified, and 
(ultimately) became perfect. But they think 
that that is perfect which is reckoned at ten. 
When, therefore," the ^ons had become equal 
in number and in perfection, they were, as (the 
Docetse) are of opinion, constituted thirty ^ons 
in all, while each of them attains full perfection 
in a decade. And the three are mutually dis- 
tinct, and hold one (degree of) honour relatively 
to one another, differing in position merely, 
because one of them is first, and the other sec- 
ond, and the other of these third. Position, 
however, afforded them diversity of power. For 
he who has obtained a position nearest to the 
])rimal Deity — who is, as it were, a seed — pos- 
sessed a more productive power than the rest, 
inasmuch as he himself who is the immeasurable 
one, measured himself tenfold in bulk. He, 
however, who in position is second to the primal 
1 )eity, has, inasmuch as he is the incomprehen- 
sible one, comprehended himself sixfold. But 
he who is now third in position is conveyed to 
an infinite distance, in conseciuence of the dila- 
tation of his brethren. (.And when this third 
yEon) had thrice realized himself in thought, he 
encircled himself with, as it were, some eternal 
chain of union. 

CHAP. II. — DOCETIC NOTION OF THE INC.'\RNATION ; 
THEIR DOCTRINES OF ^ONS ; THEIR ACCOUNT OF 
CRE.'VTION ; THEIR NOTION OF A FIERY GOD. 

And these (heretics) suppose that this is what 
is spoken by the Saviour : " A sower went forth 
to sow ; and that which fell on the fair and good 
ground produced, some a hundred-fold, and some 
sixty-fold, and some thirty-fold." ^ And for this 

' Deut. V. 22. 

' Matt, xiii. 3-8; Mark iv. 3-8; Luke viil 5-*. 

reason, the (Docetic) says, (that the Saviour) 
has spoken the words, " He that hath ears to 
hear, let him hear," because these (truths) are 
not altogether rumours. All these yEons, both 
the three and all those infinite (^'Fons which 
proceed) from these indefinitely, are hermaph- 
rodite .^ons. All these, then, after they had 
been increased and magnified, and had sprung 
from that one primary seed, (were actuated by 
a spirit) of concord and union, and they all 
coalesced into one JEon. And in this manner 
they begot of a single virgin, Mary,^ a joint 
offspring, who is a Mediator, (that is,) the 
Saviour of all who are in the (covenant of) 
mediation. (And this Saviour is,) in every re- 
spect, coequal in power with the seed of the fig- 
tree, with the exception that he was generated. 
Whereas that primary seed, from whence the 
fig-tree sprung, is unbegotten. When, therefore,, 
those three .^ons were adorned with all virtue 
and with all sanctity, so these teachers suppose, 
as well as that only begotten child — for he alone 
was begotten by those infinite .Fons from three 
immediately concerned in his birth, for three 
immeasurable yEons being unanimous procreated 
him ; — (after, I say, the xF^ons and only Son 
were thus adorned,) the entire nature, which is 
cognised by intellect, was fashioned free from 
deficiency. Now, all those intelligible and eter- 
nal (entities) constituted light. Light, however, 
was not devoid of form, nor inoperative, nor in 
want, as it were, of the assistance of any (other 
power). But (light) proportionately with the 
multitude of those infinite (.Eons) indefinitely 
(generated) in conformity with the exemplar of 
the fig-tree, possesses in itself infinite species 
of various animals indigenous to that quarter of 
creation, and it shone down upon the underlying 
chaos. And when this (chaos) was simultane- 
ously illuminated, and had form impartetl to it 
by those diversified species from above, it de- 
rived (thereby) solidity, and acijuired all those 
supernal species from the third .Eon, who had 
made himself threefold. 

This third ^on, however, beholding all his 
own distinctive attributes laid hold on collec- 
tively by the underlying darkness (which was) 
beneath, and not being ignorant of the power 
of darkness, and at the same time of the secu- 
rity •♦ and j^rofusion of light, did not allow his 
brilliant attributes (which he derived) from above 
for any length of time to be snatched away by 
the darkness beneath. But (he acted in quite a 
contrary manner), for he subjected (darkness) 
to the .^ons. After, then, he had formed the 

3 The word Mary seems interpolated. Miller's text reads it after 
eV jueo-oTTjTi. The passage would then be rendered thus: "that is, 
Him who through the intervention of Mary (has been born into the 
world) the Saviour of all." 

* To atr^a\ii : Cruice reads, on the authority of Bemays, di^cAct, 
Le., the simplicity. 

Chap. III.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

119 

firmament over the nether world, " he both 
divided the darkness from the hght, and called 
the light which was above the firmament day, 
and the darkness he called night." ' When all 
the infinite species, then, as I have said, of the 
third ^on were intercepted in this the lowest 
darkness, the figure also of the ^on himself, 
such as he has been described, was impressed 
(upon them) along with the rest (of his attri- 
butes). (Now this figure is) a life-giving fire, 
which is generated from light, from whence the 
Great Archon originated. And respecting this 
(Archon) Moses observes : " In the beginning 
God created the heavens and the earth." ^ 
Moses mentions ^ this fiery God as having spoken 
from the bush,-* (batos,) that is, from the darkish 
air. For the whole of the atmosphere that 
underlies the darkness is (batos, i.e.,) a medium 
for the transmission of light. Now Moses has 
employed, says (the Docetic), the expression 
batos, because all the species of light pass down 
from above by means of their having the atmos- 
phere as a medium (batos) of transmission. 
And in no less degree is capable of being recog- 
nised the Word of Jehovah addressed to us from 
the bush (batos, i.e., an atmospheric medium) ; 
for voice, as significant (in language) of a mean- 
ing, is a reverberation of air, and without this 
(atmosphere) human speech is incapable of 
being recognised. And not only the Word (of 
Jehovah addressed) to us from the bush (batos), 
that is, the air, legislates and is a fellow-citizen 
with (us) ; but (it does more than this), for 
both odours and colours manifest to us, through 
the medium of air, their own (peculiar) qualities. 

CHAP. III. CHRIST UNDOES THE WORK OF THE 

DEMIURGE ; DOCETIC ACCOUNT OF THE BAPTISM 
AND DEATH OF JESUS ; WHY HE LIVED FOR 
THIRTY YEARS ON EARTH. 

This fiery deity, then, after he became fire 
from light, proceeded to create the world in the 
manner which Moses describes. He himself, 
however, as devoid of subsistence, employs the 
darkness as (his) substance, and perpetually 
insults those eternal attributes of light which, 
(being) from above, had been laid hold on by 
(the darkness) beneath. Up to the time, there- 
fore, of the appearance of the Saviour, there 
jjrevailed, by reason of the Deity of fiery light, 
(that is,) the Demiurge, a certain extensive 
delusion of souls. For the species are styled 
souls, because they are refrigerations s from the 
(rEons) above, and continue in darkness. But 

' Gen. i. 4, 5, 7. 

^ Gen. i. 1. 

3 Ex. iii. 2. 

* The Docetae here attempted to substantiate their system from 
Scripture by a play upon words. 

s The Greek word for soul is derived ifom the same root as that 
ioi refrigeration. 

when (the souls) are altered from bodies to 
bodies, they remain under the guardianship of 
the Demiurge. And that these things are so, 
says (the Docetic), it is possible also to perceive 
from Job, when he uses the following words : 
" And I am a wanderer, changing both place 
after place, and house after house." ^ And (we 
may learn, according to the Docetae, the same) 
from the expressions of the Saviour, " And if ye 
will receive it, this is Elias that was for to come. 
He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." 7 But 
by the instrumentality of the Saviour this trans- 
ference of souls from body to body was made 
to cease, and faith is preached for remission 
of sins. After some such manner, that only- 
begotten Son, when He gazes upon tlie forms 
of the supernal .^ons, which were transferred 
from, above into darkish bodies, coming down, 
wished to descend and deliver them. When 
(the Son), however, became aware that the 
JEons, those (that subsist) collectively, are un- 
able to behold the Pleroma of all the ^ons, 
but that in a state of consternation they fear lest 
they may undergo corruption as being themselves 
perishable, and that they are overwhelmed by 
the magnitude and splendour of power ; — (when 
the Son, I say, perceived this,) He contracted 
Himself — as it were a very great flash in a very 
small body, nay, rather as a ray of vision con- 
densed beneath the eyelids, and (in this condi- 
tion) He advances forth as far as heaven a;.'(l 
the effulgent stars. And in this quarter of crea^ 
tion He again collects himself beneath the lid? 
of vision according as He wishes it. Now the 
light of vision accomplishes the same effect ; 
for though it is everywhere, and (renders visi- 
ble) all things, it is yet imperceptible to us. 
We, however, merely see lids of vision, white 
corners (of the eye), a tissue which is broad, 
tortuous,** (and) exceedingly fibrous, a mem- 
brane of the cornea ; and underneath this, the 
pupil, which is shaped as a berry, is net-like 
and round. (And we observe) whatever other 
membranes there are that belong to the light of 
the eye, and enveloped in which it lies concealed. 
Thus, says (the Docetic), the only-begotten 
(and) eternal Child from above arrayed Him- 
self in a form to correspond with each individual 
^on of the three ^ons ; ^ and while he was 
within the triacontad of /Eons, He entered into 
this world '° just as we have described Him, un- 

*> These words are spoken of the wife of Job, as the feminine form, 
n\avriTi'; and Aarpis, proves. They have been added from apocry- 
phal sources to the Greek version (ii. 9), but are absent from the 
Englisli translation. The passage stands thus: icai iyio n\avriTi<; 
KOL AaTpi5 Tonov iic Tonov rrepiepxo/iei'r) Kal oiKiai' ef oi/cia;. The 
Abbe Cruice refers to St. Chrysostom's Horn, de Staiuis [vol. ii. 
p. 139, opp. ed Migne. not textually quoted.] 

7 Matt. XI. 14, 15. 

^ Or, " a fleshly membrane." 

9 Miller reads, " of the third .^on." 

'° The Abbe Cruice considers that the mention of the period or 
our Lord's birth has accidentally dropt out of the MS. here. See 
book vii. chap. xix. 

1 20 

TlIK REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VIII 

noticed, unknown, obscure, and disbelieved. In 
order, therefore, say the DocetK, that He may be 
clad in the darkness that is jjrevalent in more 
distant (juarters of creation — (now l^iy darkness 
he means) flesh — an angel journeyed with Him 
from above, and announced the glad tidings to 
Mary, says (the Docetic), as it has been written. 
And the (child) from her was born, as it has 
been written. And He who came from above 
put on that which was born ; and so did He all 
things, as it has been written (of Him) in the 
(iospels. He washed in Jordan, and when He 
was baptized He received a figure and a seal in 
the water of (another spiritual body beside) the 
body born of the Virgin. (And the object of 
this was,) when the Archon condemned his own 
jjeculiar figment (of flesh) to death, (that is,) 
to the cross, that that soul which had been nour- 
ished in the body (born of the Virgin) might 
strip off" that body and nail it to the (accursed) 
tree. (In this way the soul) would triumph by 
means of this (body) over i)rincipalities and 
jjowers,' and would not be found naked, but 
would, instead of that flesh, assume the (other) 
body, which had been represented in the water 
when he was being baptized. This is, says (the 
Docetic), what the Saviour affirms : "Except a 
man be born of water and spirit, he will not 
enter into the kingdom of heaven, because that 
which is born of the flesh is flesh."- From the 
thirty /Eons, therefore, (the Son) assumed thirty 
forms. And for this reason that eternal One 
existed for thirty years on the earth, because 
each /Eon was in a peculiar manner manifested 
<luring (his own) year. And the souls are all 
those forms that have been laid hold on by 
each of the thirty /Eons ; and each of these is 
so constituted as to discern Jesus, who is of 
a nature (similar to their own). (And it was 
the nature of this Jesus) which that only- 
begotten and eternal One assumed from ever- 
lasting places. These (places), however, are 
diverse. Consequently, a jjroportionate number 
of heresies, with the utmost emulation, seek 
Jesus. Now all these heresies have their own 
peculiar Jesus ; but he is seen differently accord- 
ing as the place ^ is different towards which, he 
says, each soul is borne and hastens. (Now each 
soul) supposes that (the Jesus seen from its 
particular place) is alone that (Jesus) who is its 
own peculiar kinsman and fellow-citizen. An(i 
On first beholding (this Jesus, that soul) recog- 
nises Him as its own peculiar brother, but the 
rest as bastards. Those, then, that derive their 
nature from the places below, are not able to 
see the forms of the Saviour which are above 
them. Those, however, he says, who are from 

' Col. ii. II, 14, 15. 

2 John iii. 5, 6. 

3 Miller's text has " tjrpe." 

' above, from the intermediate decade and the 
most excellent ogdoad — whence, say (the Do- 

jcetoe), we are — have themselves known not in 
part, but entirely, Jesus the Stiviour. And those, 

I who are from above, are alone perfect, but all 

I the rest are only partially so. 

CH.-VP. IV. DOCETIC DOCTRINE DERIVED FROM THE 

GREEK SOPHISTS. 

These (statements), therefore, I consider 
sufficient to properly-constituted minds for the 

i purpose of attaining unto a knowledge of the 
com])licated and unstable heresy of the DocetK. 
(But) those who have propounded attempted 
arguments about inaccessible and incomprehen- 

j sible Matter, have styled themselves Docetje. 

! Now, we consider that some of these are acting 
foolishly, we will not say in appearance, but in 
reality. At all events, we have proved that a 
beam from such matter is carried in the eye, if 
by any means they may be enabled to perceive 

j it. If, however, they do not (discern it, our 
object is) that they should not make others 
blind. But the fact is, that the sophists of the 
Greeks in ancient times have previously devised, 
in many particulars, the doctrines of these (Do- 
cetas), as it is possible for my readers (who take 
the trouble) to ascertain. These, then, are the 
opinions propounded by the Docetae. As to 
what likewise, however, are the tenets of Mo- 
noimus, we shall not be silent. 

CHAP. V. — MONOIMUS ; MAN THE UNIVERSE, AC- 
CORDING TO MONOIMUS ; HIS SYSTEM OF THE 
MONAD. 

Monoi'mus* the Arabian was far removed from 
the glory of the high-sounding poet. (For Mo- 
noimus) supposes that there is some such man 
as the poet (calls) Oceanus, expressing himself 
somehow thus : — 

" Oceanus, source of gods and source of men." ^ 

Changing these (sentiments) into other words, 
Monoimus says that man is the universe. Now 
the universe is the originating cause of all things, 
unbegotten, incorruptible, (and) eternal. And 
(he says) that the son of (the) man previously 
spoken of is begotten, and subject to passion, 
(and) that he is generated independently of 
time, (as well as) undesignedly,'' (and) without 
being predestinated. For such, he says, is the 
power of that man. And he being thus consti- 
tuted in power, (Monoimus alleges) that the son 
was born quicker than thought and volition. 

* Wh.-it is given here by Hippolytiis respecting Monoimus is quite 
new. The only writer that mentions him is Theodoret, Hier. Fab., 
i. i3. [See Bunsen, vol. i. p. 103.] 

5 Iliad, xiv. 201, 246. 

^ Or, " kinglessly," which has no meaning here. Miller there- 
fore alters a/SaaiAcvruit into a/SoiiAr/rui;. 

Chap. VII.] 

thp: refutation of all heresies. 

12 I 

.And this, he says, is what has been spoken in 
the Scriptures, "He was, and was generated.'" 
And the meaning of this is : Man was, and his 
son was generated ; just as one may say, Fire 
was, and, independently of time, and undesign- 
edly, and without being predestinated, light was 
generated simultaneously with the existence of 
the fire. And this man constitutes a single 
monad, which is uncompounded and indivisible, 
(and yet at the same time) compounded (and) 
divisible. (And this monad is) in all respects 
friendly (and) in all respects peaceful, in all 
respects quarrelsome (and) in all respects con- 
tentious with itself, dissimilar (and) similar. 
(This monad is likewise,) as it were, a certain 
musical harmony, which comprises all things in 
itself, as many as one may express and may 
omit when not considering ; and it manifests 
all things, and generates all things. This (is) 
Mother, this (is) Father — two immortal names. 
As an illustration, however, consider, he says, as 
a greatest image of the perfect man, the one jot 
— that one tittle. And this one tittle is an un- 
compounded, simple, and pure monad, which 
derives its composition from nothing at all. 
(And yet this tittle is likewise) compounded, 
multiform, branching into many sections, and 
consisting of many parts. That one indivisible 
tittle is, he says, one tittle of the (letter) iota, 
with many faces, and innumerable eyes, and 
countless names, and this (tittle) is an image of 
that perfect invisible man. 

CHAP. VI. — MONOIMUS' " IOTA ; " HIS NOTION OF 

THE " SON OF MAN." 

The monad, (that is,) the one tittle, is^ there- 
fore, he says, also a decade. For by the actual 
power of this one tittle, are produced duad, and 
triad, and tetrad, and pentad, and hexad, and 
heptad, and ogdoad, and ennead, up to ten. 
For these numbers, he says, are capable of 
many divisions, and they reside in that simple 
and uncompounded single tittle of the iota. 
And this is what has been declared : " It pleased 
(God) that all fulness should dwell in the Son 
of man bodily."^ For such compositions of 
numbers out of the simple and uncompounded 
one tittle of the iota become, he says, corporeal 
realities. The Son of man, therefore, he says, 
has been generated from the perfect man, whom 
no one knew ; every creature who is ignorant of 
the Son, however, forms an idea of Him as the 
offspring of a woman. And certain very obscure 
rays of this Son which approach this world, 
check and control alteration (and) generation. 

And the beauty of that Son of man is up to the 
present incomprehensible to all men, as many as 
are deceived in reference to the offspring of the 
woman. Therefore nothing, he says, of the things 
that are in our quarter of creation has been pro- 
duced by that man, nor will aught (of these) 
ever be (generated from him). All things, how- 
ever, have been produced, not from the entirety, 
but from some part of that Son of man. For 
he says the Son of man is a jot in one tittle, 
which proceeds from above, is fuii, and com- 
pletely replenishes all (rays flowing down from 
above). And it comprises in itself whatever 
things the man also possesses (who is) the Father 
of the Son of man. 

CHAP. VII. — MONOIMUS ON THE SABBATH ; ALLE- 
GORIZES THE ROD OF MOSES; NOTION CON- 
CERNING THE DECALOGUE. 

The world, then, as Moses says, was made in 
six days, that is, by six powers, which (are in- 
herent) in the one tittle of the iota. (But) the 
seventh (day, which is) a rest and Sabbath, has 
been produced from the Hebdomad, which is 
over earth, and water, and fire, and air. And 
from these (elements) the world has been formed 
by the one tittle. For cubes, and octahedrons, 
and pyramids, and all figures similar to these, 
out of which consist fire, air, water, (and) earth, 
have arisen from numbers which are compre- 
hended in that simple tittle of the iota. And 
this (tittle) constitutes a perfect son of a perfect 
man. When, therefore, he says, Moses mentions 
that the rod was changeably brandished for the 
(introduction of the) plagues throughout Egypt* 
— now these plagues, he says, are allegorically 
expressed symbols of the creations — he did not 
(as a symbol) for more plagues than ten shape 
the rod. Now this (rod) constitutes one tittle 
of the iota, and is (both) twofold (and) various. 
This succession of ten plagues is, he says, the 
mundane creation. For all things, by being 
stricken, bring forth and bear fruit, just like 
vines. Man, he says, bursts forth, and is forci- 
bly separated from man by being severed by a 
certain stroke. (And this takes place) in order 
that (man) may be generated, and may declare 
the law which Moses ordained, who received (it) 
from God. Conformably ^ with that one tittle, 
the law constitutes the series of the ten com- 
mandments which expresses allegorically the 
divine mysteries of (those) precepts. For, he 
says, all knowledge of the universe is contained 

' An allusion is evidently made to the opening chapter of St. John's 
Gospel. Monointus, like Basilides, seems to have formed his system 
from the prologue to the fourth Gospel. 

- The iota with a little mark placed above, signifies ten; thus, 

i. = lo. 

^ Col. I. 19. 

■* Ex. vii., viii. 

5 The plagues, being transformations, were no doubt considered 
symbols of creation, in accordance with the view of the ancient phil- 
osophers, that creation itself brought nothing into existence, but 
simply altered the disposition of already existing elements. [Gen. i. 
2. ZeeHx. C^iaXmen' Astrouotm'cal Discourses.] 

6 It is very much after this allegorical mode that Philo Judaeu* 
iaterprets the Mosaic law and history. 

122 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VIII. 

in what relates to the succession of the ten 
plagues and the series of the ten command- 
ments. And no one is acquainted with this 
(knowledge) who is (of the number) of those 
that are deceived concerning the offspring of the 
woman. If, however, you say that the Penta- 
teuch constitutes the entire law, it is from the 
Pentad which is comprehended in the one tittle. 
But the entire is for those who have not been 
altogether perfected in understanding a mystery, 
a new and not antiquated feast, legal, (and) 
everlasting, a passover of the Lord God kept 
unto our generations, by those who are able to 
discern (this mystery), at the commencement 
of the fourteenth day, which is the beginning of 
a decade from which, he says, they reckon. For 
the monad, as far as fourteen, is the summary 
of that one (tittle) of the perfect number. For 
one, two, three, four, become ten ; and this is 
the one tittle. But from fourteen until one-and- 
twenty, he asserts that there is an Hebdomad 
which inheres in the one tittle of the world, and 
constitutes an unleavened creature in all these. 
For in what respect, he says, would the one tittle 
require any substance such as leaven (derived) 
from without for the Lord's Passover, the eternal 
feast, which is given for generation upon genera- 
tion ? ' For the entire world and all causes of 
creation constitute a passover, (i.e.,) a feast of 
the Lord. For God rejoices in the conversion 
of the creation, and this is accomplished by ten 
strokes of the one tittle. And this (tittle) is 
Moses' rod, which was given by God into the 
hand of Moses. And with this (rod Moses) 
smites the Egyptians, for the purpose of altering 
bodies, — as, for instance, water into blood ; and 
the rest of (material) things similarly with these, 
— (as, for example,) the locusts, which is a sym- 
bol of grass. And by this he means the altera- 
tion of the elements into flesh ; " for all flesh," 
he says, " is grass." ^ These men, nevertheless, 
receive even the entire law after some such man- 
ner ; adopting very probably, as I think, the 
opinions of those of the Greeks who affirm that 
there are Substance, and Quality, and Quantity, 
and Relation, and Place, and Time, and Posi- 
tion, and Action, and Possession, and Passion. 

CHAP. VIII. — MONOI'mUS EXPLAINS HIS OPINIONS 
IN A LETTER TO THEOPHR.'VSTUS ; WHERE TO 
FIND god; HIS SYSTEM DERIVED FRO.M PYTHAG- 
ORAS. 

Monoi'mus himself, accordingly, in his letter 
to Theophrastus, expressly makes the following 
statement : " Omitting to seek after God, and 
creation, and things similar to these, seek for 
Him from (out of) thyself, and learn who it is 

' [Exod. xii. 17. 
2 Isa. xl. 6. 

Comp. I Cor. V. 7, S.] 

that absolutely appropriates (unto Himself) all 
things in thee, and says, ' My God (is) my mind, 
my understanding, my soul, my body.' Ancl 
learn from whence are sorrow, and joy, and love, 
and hatred, and involuntary wakefulness, and in- 
voluntary drowsiness, and involuntary anger, and 
involuntary affection ; and if," he says, " you 
accurately investigate these (points), you will 
discover (God) Himself, unity and plurality, in 
thyself, according to that tittle, and that He 
finds the outlet (for Deity) to be from thyself." 
Those (heretics), then, (have made) these (state- 
ments). But we are under no necessity of 
comparing such (doctrines) with what have pre- 
viously been subjects of meditation on the part 
of the Greeks, inasmuch as the assertions ad- 
vanced by these (heretics) evidently derive their 
origin from geometrical and arithmetical art. 
The disciples, however, of Pythagoras, expounded 
this (art) after a more excellent method, ^ as our 
readers may ascertain by consulting those pas- 
sages (of our work) in which we have previously 
furnished expositions of the entire wisdom of the 
Greeks. But since the heresy of Monoimus has 
been sufficiently refuted, let us see what are the 
fictitious doctrines which the rest also (of these 
heretics) devise, in their desire to set up for 
themselves an empty name. 

CH.\P. IX. 

-TATL^N. 

Tatian,* however, although being himself a 
disciple of Justinus the Martyr, did not entertain 
similar opinions with his master. But he at- 
tempted (to establish) certain novel (tenets), 
and affirmed that there existed certain invisible 
^ons. And he framed a legendary account (of 
them), similarly to those (spoken of) by Valen- 
tinus. And similarly with Marcion, he asserts 
that marriage is destruction. But he alleges that 
Adam is not saved on account of his having been 
the author of disobedience. And so far for the 
doctrines of Tatian. 

CHAP. X. — HERMOGENES ; ADOPTS THE SOCRATIC 
PHILOSOPHY ; HIS NOTION CONCERNING THE 
BIRTH AND BODY O5, OUR LORD. 

But a certain Hermogenes,^ himself also im- 
agining that he propounded some novel opinion, 
said that God made all things out of coeval and 
ungenerated matter. For that it was impossible 
that (iod could make generated things out of 
things that are not. And that God is always. 

3 Literally, " nobly born." 

* See [vol. i. pp. 353, 457. But see his works, vol. ii. p. 61, this 
series]; Irenscus, i. 28; Eusebius, Hisi. Ecciesiasi., \v. 16, v. 13; 
Epiphaniiis, Hter., xlvi. ; Jerome, I'ir. Ulustr., c. xxix.; and The- 
odoret, Htrr. Fab., i. 20. 

5 See [vol. iii. p. 257, also p. 477] Tertullian, Prescript., c. 
XXX.; (vol. iv. p. 245, this series] Origen, Uepi ap^., i. 2; Euse- 
bius, be Prap., vii. 8, 9; St. Augustine, Har., lix.; Theodoret, 
H»r. Fab., i. 19; and Philastrius, Httr., Iv. 

Chap. XII.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

12 

Lord, and always Creator, and matter always a 
subservient (substance), and that which is as- 
suming phases of being — not, however, the 
whole of it. For when it was being continually 
moved in a rude and disorderly manner. He 
reduced (matter) into order by the following 
expedient. As He gazed (upon matter) in a 
seething condition, like (the contents of) a pot 
when a fire is burning underneath, He effected 
a partial separation. And taking one portion 
from the whole. He subdued it, but another He 
allowed to be whirled in a disorderly manner. 
And he asserts that what was (thus) subdued is 
the world, but that another portion remains wild, 
and is denominated chaotic ' matter. He asserts 
that this constitutes the substance of all things, 
as if introducing a novel tenet for his disciples. 
He does not, however, reflect that this happens 
to be the Socratic discourse, which (indeed) is 
worked out more elaborately by Plato than by 
Hermogenes. He acknowledges, however, that 
Christ is the Son of the God who created all 
things; and along with (this admission), he 
confesses that he was born of a virgin and of 
(the) Spirit, according to the voice of the Gos- 
pels. And (Hermogenes maintains that Christ), 
after His passion, was raised up in a body, 
and that He appeared to His disciples, and 
that as He went up into heaven He left His 
body in the sun, but that He Himself proceeded 
on to the Father. Now (Hermogenes) resorts 
to testimony, thinking to support himself by 
what is spoken, (viz.,) what the Psalmist David 
says : " In the sun he hath placed his tabernacle, 
and himself (is) as a bridegroom coming forth 
from his nuptial chamber, (and) he will rejoice 
as a giant to run his course." ^ These, then, are 
the opinions which also Hermogenes attempted 
to establish. 

CH.-VP. XI. 

THE QUARTODECIMANS. 

And certain other (heretics), contentious by 
nature, (and) wholly uninformed as regards 
knowledge, as well as in their manner more 
(than usually) quarrelsome, combine (in main- 
taining) that Easter should be kept on the four- 
teenth day 3 of the first month, according to the 
commandment of the law, on whatever day (of 
the week) it should occur. (But in this) they 
only regard what has been written in the law, 
that he will be accursed who does not so keep 
(the commandment) as it is enjoined. They 
do not, however, attend to this (fact), that the 
legal enactment was made for Jews, who in 
times to come should kill the real Passover. •* 

' Literally, " unadorned." 

" Ps. xix. 4, 5. 

3 They were therefore called " Quartodecimans." (See Euse- 
bius, Hist. Ecclesiast., v. c. xxii. xxv. ; Epiphanius, Hter., 1.; and 
Theodoret, Hcer. Fab., iii. 4.) 

< [Bunsen, i. p. 105.] The chapter on the Quartodecimans 
agrees with the arguments which, we are informed in an extract from 

And this (paschal sacrifice, in its efficacy,) has 
spread unto the Gentiles, and is discerned by 
faith, and not now observed in letter (merely). 
They attend to this one commandment, and do 
not look unto what has been spoken by the 
apostle : " For I testify to every man that is cir- 
cumcised, that he is a debtor to keep the whole 
law." 5 In other respects, however, these con- 
sent to all the traditions delivered to the Church 
by the Apostles.^ 

CHAP, XII. THE MONTANISTS; PRISCILLA AND 

MAXIMILLA THEIR PROPHETESSES; SOME OF 
THEM NOETIANS. 

But there are others who themselves are even 
more heretical in nature (than the foregoing) , 
and are Phrygians ^ by birth. These have been 
rendered victims of error from being previously 
captivated by (two) wretched women, called a 
certain Priscilla and Maximilla, whom they sup- 
posed (to be) prophetesses. And they assert 
that into these the Paraclete Spirit had departed ; 
and antecedently to them, they in like manner 
consider Montanus as a prophet. And being in 
possession of an infinite number of their books, 
(the Phrygians) are overrun with delusion ; and 
they do not judge whatever statements are made 
by them, according to (the criterion of) reason ; 
nor do they give heed unto those who are com- 
petent to decide ; but they are heedlessly swept 
onwards, by the reliance which they place on 
these (impostors). And they allege that they 
have learned something more through these, than 
from law, and prophets, and the Gospels. But 
they magnify these wretched women above the 
Apostles and every gift of Grace, so that some 
of them presume to assert that there is in them 
a something superior to Christ. These acknowl- 
edge God to be the Father of the universe, and 
Creator of all things, similarly with the Church, 
and (receive) as many things as the Gospel 
testifies concerning Christ. They introduce, 
however, the novelties of fasts, ^ and feasts, and 
meals of parched food, and repasts of radishes, 
alleging that they have been instructed by women. 
And some of these assent to the heresy of the 
Noetians, and affirm that the Father himself is 

Hippolytus' Chrpiiicon Paschale, as preserved in a quotation by 
Bishop Peter of Alexandria, were employed in his Treatise agaimt 
all Heresies. This would seem irrefragable proof of the authorship 
of the Refutation 0/ all Heresies. 

s Gal. V. 3. 

* [He regards the Christian Paschal as authorized, i Cor. v. 7, 8. | 

7 These heretics had several denominations: (i) Phrygians and 
Cataphrygians, from Phrygia; (2) Pepuzians, from a village in Phry- 
gia of this name; {3) Priscillianists; (4) Quintillists. See Eusebius, 
Hist. Ecclesiast., iv. i-j, v. 16, 18; Epiphanius, Hcer., xlviii. ; 
Theodoret, Hter. Fab., iii. 2; Philastrius, xlix. ; and St. Augustine, 
Hcer., xxvi. [The " Tertullianists" were a class by themselves, 
which is a fact going far to encourage the idea that they did not share 
the wQrst of these delusions.] 

^ Bunsen thinks that Hippolytus is rather meagre in his details 
of the heresy of the Phrygians or Montanists, but considers this, with 
other instances, a proof that parts of The Re/utaiion are only ab- 
stracts of more extended accounts. 

124 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book VI I L 

the Son, and that this (one) came under gene- 
ration, and suffering, and death. Concerning 
these I shall again offer an explanation, after a 
more minute manner ; for the heresy of these 
has been an occasion of evils to many. We 
therefore are of opinion, that the statements 
made concerning these (heretics) are sufficient, 
when we shall have briefly proved to all that the 
majority of their books are silly, and their at- 
tempts (at reasoning) weak, and worthy of no 
consideration. But it is not necessary for those 
who possess a sound mind to pay attention 
(either to their volumes or their arguments). 

CHAP. XIII. THE DOCTRINES OF THE ENCRATITES.' 

Others, however, styling themselves Encratites, 
acknowledge some things concerning God and 
Christ in like manner with the Church. In re- 
spect, however, of their mode of life, they pass 
their days inflated with pride. They suppose 
that by meats they magnify themselves, while 
abstaining from animal food, (and) being water- 
drinkers, and forbidding to marry, and devoting 
themselves during the remainder of life to habits 
of asceticism. But persons of this description 
are estimated Cynics rather than Christians, 
inasmuch as they do not attend unto the words 
spoken against them through the Apostle Paul. 
Now he, predicting the novelties that were to 
be hereafter introduced ineffectually by certain 
(heretics), made a statement thus : "The Spirit 
speaketh expressly. In the latter times certain 
will depart from sound doctrine, giving heed 
to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils, 
uttering falsehoods in hypocrisy, having their 
own conscience seared with a hot iron, forbid- 
ding to marry, to abstain from meats, which God 
has created to be partaken of with thanksgiving 

' [See my Introductory Note to Hennas, vol. ii p. 5, this series.] 

by the faithful, and those who know the truth ; 
because every creature of God is good, and 
nothing to be rejected which is received with 
thanksgiving ; for it is sanctified by the word of 
God and prayer." ^ This voice, then, of the 
blessed Paul, is sufficient for the refutation of 
those who live in this manner, and plume them- 
selves on being just ; ^ (and) for the purpose of 
proving that also, this (tenet of the Encratites) 
constitutes a heresy. But even though there 
have been denominated certain other heresies — 
I mean those of the Cainites,"* Ophites, 5 or 
Noachites,^ and of others of this description — 
I have not deemed it requisite to explain the 
things said or done by these, lest on this account 
they may consider themselves somebody, or de- 
serving of consideration. Since, however, the 
statements concerning these appear to be suffi- 
cient, let us pass on to the cause of evils to all, 
(viz.,) the heresy of the Noetians. Now, after 
we have laid bare the root of this (heresy), and 
stigmatized openly the venom, as it were, lurking 
within it, let us seek to deter from an error of 
this description those who have been impelled 
into it by a violent spirit, as it were by a swollen 
torrent. 

- I Tim. iv. 1-5. 

3 [This, Tertullian should have learned. How happily Keble, i<i 
his Cnristzan Year, gives it in sacred verse: — 

" We need not bid, for cloister'd cell. 
Our neighbour and our work farewell, 
Nor strive to wind ourselves too high 
For sinful man beneath the sky: 

" The trivial round, the common task, 
Would furnish all we ought to ask; 
Room to deny ourselves; a road 
To bring us daily nearer God."] 

* Those did homage to Cain. 

5 The Ophites are not considered, as Hippolytus has already 
devoted so much of his work to the Naasseni. The former denomi- 
nation is derived from the Greek, and the latter from the Hebrew, 
and both signify worshippers of th« serpent. 

* Hippolytus seemingly makes this a synonyme with Ophites. 

Perhaps it is connected with the Hebrew word i^PJ. 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

BOOK IX. 

CONTENTS. 

The following are the contents of the ninth 
book of the Refutation of all Heresies : — 

What the blasphemous folly is of Noetus, and 
that he devoted himself to the tenets of Hera- 
clitus the Obscure, not to those of Christ. 

And how Callistus, intermingling the heresy 
of Cleomenes, the disciple of Noetus, with that 
of Theodotus, constructed another more novel 
heresy, and what sort the life of this (heretic) 
was. 

What was the recent ' arrival (at Rome) of 
the strange spirit Elchasai, and that there served 
as a concealment of his peculiar errors his ap- 
parent adhesion to the law, when in point of 
fact he devotes himself to the tenets of the 
Gnostics, or even of the astrologists, and to the 
arts of sorcery. 

What the customs of the Jews are, and how 
many diversities of opinion there are (amongst 
them). 

CHAP. I. — AN ACCOUNT OF CONTEMPORANEOUS 
HERESY.^ 

A lengthened conflict, then, having been 
maintained concerning all heresies by us who, 
at all events, have not left any unrefuted, the 
greatest struggle now remains behind, viz., to 
furnish an account and refutation of those heresies 
that have sprung up in our own day, by which 
certain ignorant and presumptuous men have 
attempted to scatter abroad the Church, and 
have introduced the greatest confusion ^ among 
all the faithful throughout the entire world. For 
it seems expedient that we, making an onslaught 
upon the opinion which constitutes the prime 
source of (contemporaneous) evils, should prove 
what are the originating principles'* of this 
(opinion), in order that its offshoots, becoming 
a matter of general notoriety, may be made the 
object of universal scorn. 

' Or, " fruitless; " or, " unmeaning." 

2 [Elucidation IV.] 

3 [i Cor. xi. 19. These terrible confusions were thus foretold. 
Note the remarkable feeling, the impassioned tone, of the Apostle's 
warning in Acts xx. 28-31.] 

< [The Pkilosophumena, therefore, responds to the Apostle's 
warnings. Col. ii. 8; i Tim. vi. 20; Gal iv. 3, 9; Col. ii. 20.) 

CHAP. II. SOURCE OF THE HERESY OF NOETUS ; 

CLEOMENES HIS DISCIPLE ; ITS APPEARANCE AT 
ROME DURING THE EPISCOPATES OF ZEPHYRINUS 
AND CALLISTUS; NOETIANISM OPPOSED AT ROME 
BY HIPPOLYTUS. 

There has appeared one, Noetus s by name, 
and by birth a native of Smyrna. This person 
introduced a heresy from the tenets of Hera- 
clitus.^ Now a certain man called Epigonus 
becomes his minister and pupil, and this person 
during his sojourn at Rome disseminated his 
godless opinion. But Cleomenes, who had be- 
come his disciple, an alien both in way of life and 
habits from the Church, was wont to corroborate 
the (Noetian) doctrine. At that time, Zephy- 
rinus imagines that he administers the affairs of 
the Churth^ — an uninformed and shamefully 
corrupt man. And he, being persuaded by prof- 
fered gain, was accustomed to connive at those 
who were present for the purpose of becoming 
disciples of Cleomenes. But (Zephyrinus) him- 
self, being in process of time enticed away, hur- 
ried headlong * into the same opinions ; and he 
had Calhstus as his adviser, and a fellow-champion 
of these wicked tenets.^ But the life of this (Cal- 
listus), and the heresy invented by him, I shall 
after a little explain. The school of these heretics 
during the succession of such bishops, continued 
to acquire strength and augmentation, from the 
fact that Zephyrinus and Callistus helped them 
to prevail.9 Never at any time, however, have 
we been guilty of collusion with them ; but we 
have frequently offered them opposition,'" and 
have refuted them, and have forced them reluc- 
tantly to acknowledge the truth. And they, 
abashed and constrained by the truth, have con- 
fessed their errors for a short period, but after a 
little, wallow once again in the same mire." 

5 See Fragments of Hi/>polytus' IVori-s (p 235 et seq.), edited 
byFabricius: Theodoret, //.yr. /•"<(/' , iii 3; Epiphanius, Hier., Ivii. ; 
and Philastrius, Hceret., liv. Theodoret mentions Epigonus and 
Cleomenes, and his account is obviously adoplea by Hippolytus. 

* [See Tatian, vol. ii. p. 66, this series] 

7 See note 2, cap. iii in/ra., and Elucidation V.] 

^ See Elucidation VI.] 

9 Note the emphasis and repeated statement with which our 
author dwells on this painful charge.] 

■o [Elucidation VI.] 

" 3 Pet. ii. 22. [See book x. cap xxiii., p. 148, in/ra.l 

126 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book IX. 

CHAP. III. — NOETIANISM AN OFFSHOOT FROM THE 
HER.\CLITIC PHILOSOPHY. 

But since we have exhibited the succession of 
their genealogy, it seems expedient next that we 
should also explain the depraved teaching in- 
volved in their doctrines. For this purpose we 
shall first adduce the opinions advanced by Her- 
aclitus " the Obscure," ' and we shall next make 
manifest what are the portions of these opinions 
that are of Heraclitean origin. Such parts of 
their system its present chamjiions are not aware 
belong to the " Obscure " philosopher, but they 
imagine ^ them to belong to Christ. But if they 
might happen to fall in with the following obser- 
vations, perhaps they thus might be put out of 
countenance, and induced to desist from this 
godless blasphemy of theirs. Now, even though 
the opinion of Heraclitus has been expounded 
by us previously in the Fhi/osophujnena, it never- 
theless seems expedient now also to set down 
side by side in contrast the two systems, in order 
that by this closer refutation they may be evi- 
dently instructed. / 7nean the followers of this 
(heretic), who imagine^ themselves to be disci- 
ples of Christ, when in reality they are not so, but 
of " the Obscure." 

CHAP. IV. — AN ACCOUNT OF THE SYSTEM OF 
HERACLITUS. 

Heraclitus then says that the universe is one,^ 
divisible and indivisible ; generated and ungen- 
erated ; mortal and immortal ; reason, eternity ; 
Father, Son, and justice, God.-* " For those 
who hearken not to me, but the doctrine, it is 
wise that they acknowledge all things to be one," 
says Heraclitus ; and because all do not know 
or confess this, he utters a reproof somewhat in 
the following terms : " People do not understand 
how what is diverse (nevertheless) coincides 
with itself, just like the inverse harmony of a 
bow and lyre." s But that Reason always exists, 
inasmuch as it constitutes the universe, and as it 
pervades all things, he affirms in this manner. 
*' But in regard of this Reason, which always 

' ['() SKOTeivot, because he maintained the darkest system of 
sensual philosophy that ever shed night over the human intellect. — 
T. Lewis in Plato against the Atheists, p. 156: Elucidation VII.] 

- [Note the use o( this phrase, " imagine themselves, etc," as a 
spcci.Tlty of our author's style. Seecap. ii. supra ; Elucidation VIII.] 

■5 This addition seems necessary from .Stobaeus' account of Hera- 
clitus. (See F.clflg. Phys., i. 47, where we have Heraclitus affirming 
that " unity is from plurality, and plurality from unity; " or, in other 
wor<ls, " that all things are one." ) 

* Dr. Wordsworth for biKmov suggC-Sts e'lKolov, i.e., "but that 
the neity is by chance." There is some difficulty in arriving at the 
correct te.xt, and consequently at the meaning of Hippolytus' extracts 
from Heraclitus. The Heraclite.an philosophy is explained by Sto- 
bacus, already mentioned. See likewise Hernays' " Critical Epistle" 
in Bunsen's Analect. Ante-.Vicati. (vol. iii. p. 331 et seq. of Hippol- 
ytus ami his Age), and Schleiermacher in Museum der Alter- 
thumswisseyischaft, t. i p. 408 et seq. 

5 TraAiVrpoTTO?. Miller suggests TraAu'Toi'Oi;, the word used by 
Plutarch (De hid. et Osirid., p. 369, ed. Xyland) in recounting 
Heraclitus' opinion. X\.oXivTovo<;, referring to tne shape of the bow, 
means " reflex" or "unstrung," or it may signify " clanging," that 
it, as a consequence of its being well bent back to wing a shau. 

exists, men are continually devoid of under- 
standing,*^' both before they have heard of it and 
in first hearing of it. For though all things take 
place according to this Reason, they seem like 
persons devoid of any experience regarding it. 
Still they attempt both words and works of such 
a description as I am giving an account of, by 
making a division according to nature, and de- 
claring how things are." And that a Son is the 
universe and throughout endless ages an eternal 
king of all things, he thus asserts : " A sporting 
child, playing at his dice, is eternity ; the king- 
dom is that of a child." ^ And that the Father 
of all things that have been generated is an un- 
begotten creature who is creator, let us hear 
Heraclitus affirming in these words : " Contra- 
riety is a progenitor of all things, and king of 
all ; and it exhibited some as gods, but others as 
men, and made some slaves, whereas others 
free." And (he likewise affirms) that there is " a 
harmony, as in a bow and lyre." That obscure 
harmony (is better),** though unknown and in- 
visible to men, he asserts in these words : " An 
obscure harmony is preferable to an obvious 
one." He commends and admires before what 
is known, that which is unknown and invisible 
in regard of its power. And that harmony visi- 
ble to men, and not incapable of being discov- 
ered, is better, he asserts in these words: 
" Whatever things are objects of vision, hearing, 
«««' intelligence, these I pre-eminently honour," 
he says ; that is, he prefers things visible to 
those that are invisible.- From such expressions 
of his it is easy to understand the spirit of his 
philosophy. " Men," he says, " are deceived in 
reference to the knowledge of manifest things 
similarly with Homer, who was wiser than all 
the Greeks. For even children "> killing vermin 
deceived him, when they said, ' \\^hat we have 
seen and seized, these we leave behind ; whereas 
what we neither have seen nor seized, these we 
carry away.' " 

CHAP. V. HERACLITUS' ESTIMATE OF HESIOD ; 

PARADOXES OF HERACLITUS ; HIS ESCH.ATOLOGY ; 
THE HERESY OF NOETUS OF HERACLITEAN ORI- 
GIN ; NOETUS' VIEW OF THE BIRTH .AND PAS- 
SION OF OUR LORD. 

In this manner Heraclitus assigns to the visi- 
ble an equality of position and honour with the 
invisible, as if what was visible and what was 
invisible were confessedly some one thing. For 

*> Compare Aristotle's Rhet., iii. 5, and Sextus Empiricus, Adv. 
Math., lib. vii. p. 152, ed. Aurel, 1621. 

7 See Lucian, lit. Auct., vol i. p. 554, ed. Hemsterh. 

' This word seems necessary . see Plutarch, De Procreat. ani- 
ttiee, c. xxvii. 

9 This is a well-known anecdote in the life of Homer. See Col- 
eridge's Greek Poets — Homer. [The unsavoury story is decently 
given by Henry Nelson Coleridge in this work, republished. Bos. 
ton : Jamas Munroe & Co., 1843!] 

Chap. V.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

127 

lie says, " An obscure harmony is preferable to 
an obvious one ; " and, " Whatsoever things are 
objects of vision, hearing, and intelligence," 
that is, of the (corporeal) organs, — "these," 
he says, " I pre-eminently honour," not (on 
this occasion, though previously), having pre- 
eminently honoured invisible things. Therefore 
neither darkness, nor light, nor evil, nor good, 
Heraclitus affirms, is different, but one and the 
same thing. At all events, he censures Hesiod ' 
because he knew not day and night. For day, 
he says, and night are one, expressing himself 
somehow thus : " The teacher, however, of a 
vast amount of information is Hesiod, and peo- 
ple suppose this poet to be possessed of an ex- 
ceedingly large store of knowledge, and yet he 
did not know (the nature of) day and night, 
for they are one." As regards both what is 
good and what is bad, (they are, according to 
Heraclitus, likewise) one. " Physicians, un- 
doubtedly," says Herachtus, " when they make 
incisions and cauterize, though in every respect 
they wickedly torture the sick, complain that 
they do not receive fitting remuneration from 
their patients, notwithstanding that they perform 
these salutary operations upon diseases." And 
both straight and twisted are, he says, the same. 
•" The way is straight and curved of the carders 
of wool ; " ^ and the circular movement of an 
instrument in the fuller's shop called "a screw" 
is straight and curved, for it revolves up and 
circularly at the same time. " One and the 
.same," he says, "are, therefore, straight and 
.curved." And upward and downward,^ he says, 
are one and the same. " The way up and the 
icuzy down are the same." And he says that 
what is filthy and what is pure are one and the 
■same, and what is drinkable and unfit for drink 
are one and the same. " Sea," he says, " is 
•water very pure and very foul, drinkable to fishes 
aio doubt, and salutary /^r them, but not fit to 
be used as drink by men, and (for them) per- 
nicious." And, confessedly, he asserts that 
what is immortal is mortal, ■♦ and that what is 
mortal is immortal, in the following expressions : 
'^' Immortals are mortal, and mortals are immor- 
tal, that is, when the one derive life from death, 
and the other death from life." And he affirms 
also that there is a resurrection of this palpable 
flesh in which we have been born ; and he 
knows God to be the cause of this resurrection, 
■expressing himself in this manner : " Those 

' See Theogon., v. 123 et seq., v. 748 et seq. 

- Vva.i>iu>v: some read yi'a(J)eiip, i.e., a fuller's soap. The proper 
re.iding however, is probably yvaiiia, i.e., a carder's comb. Dr. 
'vV'ordsvvorth's text has ■ypacfreujj' and iv tuJ ypa^cio), and he trans- 
l.Ttes the passage thus: "The path," says he, " of the lines of the 
machine called the screw is both straight and crooked, and the revo- 
lution in the graving-tool is both straight and crooked." 

^ See Diogenes, Laertius, ix. 8. 

■* Plato, Clemens Alexandrinus, [vol. ii. p. 384, this series), and 
Sextus Empiricus notice this doctrine of Heraclitus. 

that are here s will God enable to arise and 
become guardians of quick and dead." And 
he likewise affirms that a judgment of the world 
and all things in it takes place by fire, express- 
ing himself thus : " Now, thunder pilots all 
things," that is, directs thein, meaning by the 
thunder everlasting fire. But he also asserts 
that this fire is endued with intelligence, and a 
cause of the management of the Universe, and 
he denominates it craving and satiety. Now 
craving is, according to him, the arrangement 
of the world, whereas satiety its destruction. 
" For," says he, " the fire, coming upon the 
earth, will judge and seize all things." 

But in this chapter Heraclitus simultaneously 
explains the entire peculiarity of his mode of 
thinking, but at the same time the (characteris- 
tic quality) of the heresy of Noetus. And I 
have briefly demonstrated Noetus to be not a 
disciple of Christ, but of Heraclitus. For this 
philosopher asserts that the primal world is itself 
the Demiurge and creator of itself in the fol- 
lowing passage : " God is day, night ; winter, 
summer ; war, peace ; surfeit, famine." All 
things are contraries — this appears his mean- 
ing — " but an alteration takes place, just as ^ 
if incense were mixed with other sorts <?/ incense, 
but denominated ^ according to the pleasurable 
sensation produced by each sort. Now it is 
evident to all that the silly successors of Noetus, 
and the champions of his heresy, even though 
they have not been hearers of the discourses of 
Heraclitus, nevertheless, at any rate when they 
adopt the opinions of Noetus, undisguisedly ac- 
knowledge these (Heraclitean) tenets. For 
they advance statements after this manner — 
that one and the same God is the Creator and 
Father of all things ; and that when it pleased 
Him, He nevertheless appeared, (though invisi- 
ble,) to just men of old. For when He is not 
seen He is invisible; and He is incomprehensi- 
ble when He does not wish to be comprehended, 
but comprehensible when he is comprehended. 
Wherefore it is that, according to the same 
account. He is invincible and vincible, unbegot- 
ten and begotten, immortal and mortal. How 
shall not persons holding this description of 
opinions be proved to be disciples of Heracli- 
tus? Did not (Heraclitus) the Obscure antici- 
pate Noetus in framing a system of philosophy, 
according to identical modes of expression? 

Now, that Noetus affirms that the Son and 
Father are the same, no one is ignorant. But he 
makes his statement thus : " When indeed, then, 

5 'Ei'8a6e eoira?: some read, iiSa. flebi' hil, i.e., "God musf 
arise and become the guardian," etc. The rendering in the text is 
adopted by Bernays and Bunsen. 

'^ Or, " as commingled kinds of incense each with different names, 
but denominated," etc. 

7 Dr. Wordsworth reads o voiat^erai, and translates the passag« 
thus: " But they undergo changes, as perfumes do, when whatever 
is thought agreeable to any individual is mingled with them." 

128 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book IX. 

the Father had not been born, He yet was justly 
styled Father ; and when it j)leased Him to 
undergo generation, having been begotten, He 
Himself became His own Son, not another's." 
For in this manner he thinks to establish the 
sovereignty of God, alleging that Father and 
Son, so called, are one and the same (substance), 
not one individual produced from a different 
one, but Himself from Himself; and that He 
is styled by name Father and Son, according to 
vicissitude of times.' But that He is one who 
has appeared (amongst us), both having sub- 
mitted to generation from a virgin, and as a man 
having held converse among men. And, on 
account of the birth that had taken place, He 
confessed Himself to those beholding Him a 
Son, no doubt ; yet He made no secret to those 
who could comprehend Him of His being a 
Father. That this person suffered by being 
fastened to the tree, and that He commended 
His spirit unto Himself, having died to appear- 
ance, and not being (in reality) dead. And He 
raised Himself up the third day, after having 
been interred in a sepulchre, and wounded with 
a spear, and perforated with nails. Cleomenes 
asserts, in common with his band of followers, 
that this person is God and Father of the uni- 
verse, and thus introduces among many an ob- 
scurity (of thought) such as we find in the 
philosoohy of Heraclitus. 

CHAP. VI. — CONDUCr OF CALLISTUS AND ZEPHY- 
RINUS IN THE MATTER OF NOETIANISM ; AVOWED 
OPINION OF ZEPHYRINUS CONCERNING JESUS 
CHRIST ; DISAPPROVAL OF HIPPOLVTUS \ AS A CON- 
TEMPORANEOUS EVENT, HIPPOLVTUS COMPETENT 
TO EXPLAIN IT. 

Callistus attempted to confirm this heresy, — 
a man cunning in wickedness, and subtle where 
deceit was concerned, (and) who was impelled 
by restless ambition to mount the episcopal 
throne.- No7v this man ??ioulded to his purpose 
Zephyrinus, an ignorant and illiterate individual, 
and one unskilled in ecclesiastical definitions.^ 
.^nd inasmuch as Zephyrinus was accessible to 
bribes, and covetous, Callistus, by luring him 
through presents, and by illicit demanas, was 
enabled to seduce him into whatever course of 
action he pleased. And so it was that Callistus 
siicceeded in inducing Zephyrinus to create con- 
tinually disturbances among the brethren, while 
he himself took care subseciuently, by knavish 
words, to attach both factions in good-will to 
him.self. And, at one time, to those who enter- 
tained true opinions, he would in private ■• allege 

' Ilippolytus repeats this opinion in his summary in book X. (See 
Theoilorct, Hwr. Fab., iii. 3.) 

- [Elucidation IX ] 
' [Elucidation X.J 
< The ws. reads icafl 

jfl' rfiiav, obviously corrupt. Dr. Wordsworth 
sucifcsts Kai' ibiixv, i.e., " he, under pretext of arguing with them, 
deluded them." 

that they held similar doctrines (with himself), 
and thus make them his dupes ; while at another 
\\tc\g he would act similarly towards those (who 
embraced) the tenets of Sabellius. But Callistus 
perverted Sabellius himself, and this, too, though 
he had the ability of rectifying this heretic's 
error. For (at any time) during our admoni- 
tion Sabellius did not evince obduracy ; but as 
long as he continued alone with Callistus, he was 
wrought upon to relapse into the system of 
Cleomenes by this very Callistus, who alleges 
that he entertains similar opinions to Cleomenes. 
Sabellius, however, did not then perceive the 
knavery of Callistus ; but he afterwards came to 
be aware of it, as I shall narrate presently. 

. Now Callistus brought forward Zephyrinus 
himself, and induced him publicly to avow the 
follozuing sentiments : "I know that there is 
one God, Jesus Christ ; nor except Him do I 
know any other that is begotten and amenable 
to suffering." And on another occasion, when 
he would make the following statement : " The 
Father did not die, but the Son." Zephyrinus 
would in this way continue to keep up ceaseless 
disturbance among the people. And we,5 be- 
coming aware of his sentiments, did not give 
place to him, but reproved and withstood him 
for the truth's sake. And he hurried headlong 
into folly, from the fact that all consented to his 
hypocrisy — we,5 however, did not do so — and 
called us worshippers of two gods, disgorging, 
independent of compulsion,'' the venom lurking 
within him. It would seem to us desirable to 
explain the life of this heretic, inasmuch as he 
was born about the same time with ourselves, in 
order that, by the exposure of the habits of a 
person of this description, the heresy attempted 
to be established by him may be easily known, 
and may perchance be regarded as silly by those 
endued with intelligence. This Callistus became 
a " martyr " at the period when Fuscianus was 
prefect of Rome, and the mode of his " martyr- 
dom " was as follows. 7 

CHAP. VII. THE PERSONAL HISTORY OF CALLIS- 
TUS ; HIS OCCUP.ATION AS A BANKER ; FRAUD 
ON CARPOPHORUS ; CALLISTUS ABSCONDS ; AT- 
TEMPl'ED SUICIDE ; CONDEMNED TO THE TREAD- 
MILL ; RE-CONDEMNATION BV ORDER OF THE 
PREFECT FUSCIANUS ; BANISHED TO SARDINIA ; 
RELEASE OF CALLISTUS BY THE INTERFERENCE 

5 It is to be noticed how the plural number is observed in this 
account, as keeping before the reader's mind the episcopal office of 
him who was thus exercising high ecclesiastical authority. [Elucida- 
tion XL] 

* Or, " with violence." 

7 Hippolytus is obviously sneering at the martyrdom of Callistus, 
who did not \n reality suffer or die for the truth. Nay, his condemna- 
tion before Fuscianus enabled Callistus to succeed ciitirely in his plans 
for worldly advancement. [The martyrdom of Callistus. so ludicnnis 
in the eyes of our author, is doctrine in the Roman system. This 
heretic figures as a saint, and has his festival on the 14th of October-. 
Maxima veneratione colitur, says the Roman Breviary.] 

Chap. VII.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

"129 

OF MARCION ; CALLISTUS ARRIVES AT ROME ; 
POPE VICTOR REMOVES CALLISTUS TO ANTIUM j 
RETURN OF CALLISTUS ON VICTOR'S DEATH ; 
ZEPHYRINUS FRIENDLY TO HIM ; CALLISTUS 
ACCUSED BY SABELLIUS ; HIPPOLYTUS* ACCOUNT 
OF THE OPINIONS OF CALUSTUS ; THE CALLIS- 
TIAN SCHOOL AT ROME, AND -ITS PRACTICES ; 
THIS SECT IN EXISTENCE IN HIPPOLYTUS' TIME. 

CaUistiis happened to be a domestic of one 
Carpophorus, a man of the faith belonging to 
the household of Caesar. To this Callisius, as 
being of the faith, Carpophorus committed no 
inconsiderable amount of money, and directed 
him to bring in profitable returns from the bank- 
ing business. And he, receiving the money, tried 
(the experiment of) a bank in what is called 
the Piscina Publican And in process of time 
were entrusted to him not a few deposits by 
widows and brethren, under the ostensive cause 
of lodging their jnoney 7vi(h Carpophorus. Cal- 
/is/us, however, made away with all (the moneys 
committed to him), and became involved in 
pecuniary difficulties." And after having prac- 
tised such conduct as this, there was not want- 
ing one to tell Carpophorus, and the latter stated 
that he would require an account from him. 
Callistus, perceiving these things, and suspect- 
ing danger from his master, escaped away by 
stealth, directing his flight towards the sea. 
And finding a vessel in Portus ready for a 
voyage, he went on board, intending to sail 
wherever she happened to be bound for. But 
not even in this way could he avoid detection, 
for there was not wanting one who conveyed 
to Carpophorus intelligence of what had taken 
place. But Carpophorus, in accordance with 
the information he had received, at once re- 
paired to the harbour (Portus), and made an 
effort to hurry into the vessel after Callistus. 
The boat, however, was anchored in the middle 
of the harbour ; and as the ferryman was slow 
in his movements, Callistus, who was in the ship, 
had time to descry his master at a distance. And 
knowing that himself would be inevitably cap- 
tured, he became reckless of life ; and, consider- 
ing his affairs to be in a desperate condition, he 
proceeded to cast himself into the sea. But the 
, sailors leaped into, boats and drew him out, un- 
willing to come, while those on shore were rais- 
ing a loud cry. And thus Callistus was handed 
over to his master, and brought to Rome, and 
his master lodged him in the Pistriiium.^ 

But as time wore on, as happens to take place 
in such cases, brethren repaired to Carpophorus, 
and entreated him that he would release the 

' The Latin name is written by HIppolytus in Greek letters, and 
means " the public fish-market." The Piscina, one of the fourteen 
quarters of Rome, was the resort of money-dealers. 

- The Pistritium was the doiiieitic treadmill of the Roman 
slaveholders. 

fugitive serf from punishment, on the plea of 
their alleging that Callistus acknowledged him- 
self to have money lying to his credit with cer- 
tain persons. But Carpophorus, as a devout 
man, said he was indifferent regarding his own 
property, but that he felt a concern for the de- 
posits ; for many shed tears as they remarked to 
him, that they had committed what .they had 
entrusted to Callistus, under the ostensive cause 
of lodging the money with himself.^ And Car- 
pophorus yielded to their persuasions, and gave 
directions for the liberation of Callistus. The 
latter, however, having nothing to pay, and not 
being able again to abscond, from the fact of his 
being watched, planned an artifice by which he 
hoped to meet death. Now, pretending that he 
was repairing as it were to his creditors, he hur- 
ried on their Sabbath-day to the synagogue of 
the Jews, who were congregated, and took his 
stand, and created a disturbance among them.' 
They, however, being disturbed by him, offered 
him insult, and inflicted blows upon him, and 
dragged him before Fuscianus, who was prefect 
of the city. And (on being asked the cause of 
such treatment), they replied in the following" 
terms : "Romans have conceded to US'* the privi- 
lege of publicly reading those laws of ours that 
have been handed down from our fathers. This 
person, however, by coining into (our place of 
worship), prevented (us so doing), by creating 
a disturbance among us, alleging that he is a 
Christian." And Fuscianus happens at the time 
to be on the judgment-seat ; and on intimating 
his indignation against Callistus, on account of 
the statements made by the Jews,- there was not 
wanting one to go and acquaint Carpophorus con- 
cerning these transactions. And he, hastening 
to the judgment-seat of the prefect, exclaimed,' 
" I implore of you, my lord Fuscianus, believe 
not thou this fellow ; for he is not a Christian, 
but seeks occasion of death, having made away 
with a quantity of my money, as I shall prove." 
The Jews, however, supposijig that this was a 
stratagem, as if Carpophorus were seeking un- 
der this pretext to liberate Callistus, with the 
greater enmity clamoured against him'm pres- 
ence of the prefect. Fuscianus, however, was 
swayed by these Jews, and having scourged 
Callistus, he gave him to- be sent to a mine in 
Sardinia. 5 

But after a time, there being in that place 
other martyrs, Marcia, a concubine of Commo- 
dus, who was a God-loving female, and desirous 
of performing some good work, invited into her 

J [An instance illustrative of the .touching sense of moral obli;;a- 
tion given in 2 Kings vi. 5.] 

< See Josephus, Antig., .\i.v. 10. 

5 The air of Sardinia was unwholesome, if not pestilential; and 
for this reason, no doubt, it was selected as a place of exile for mar- 
tyrs. Hippolytus himself, along with the Roman bishop Puntianus, 
was banished thither. See Introductory Notice. 

130 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book IX. 

presence ' the blessed Victor, who was at that 
time a bishop of the Church,^ and inquired of 
him what martyrs were in Sardinia. And lie 
delivered to her the names of all, but did not 
give the na?ne of Callistus, knowing the villanous 
acts he had ventured upon. Marcia,^ obtaining 
her request from Commodus, hands the letter of 
emancipation to Hyacinthus, a certain eunuch,'* 
rather advanced in life. And he, on receiving //, 
sailed away into Sardinia, and having delivered 
the letter to the person who at that time was 
governor of the territory, he succeeded in having 
the martyrs released, with the exception of Cal- 
listus. But Callistus himself, dropping on his 
knees, and weeping, entreated that he likewise 
might obtain a release. Hyacinthus, therefore, 
overcome by the captive's importunity, requests 
the governor to grant a release, alleging that 
permission had been given to himself from Mar- 
cia 5 (to liberate Callistus), and that he would 
make arrangements that there should be no risk 
in this to him. Now (the governor) was per- 
suaded, and liberated Callistus also. And when 
the latter arrived at Rome, Victor was very much 
grieved at what had taken place ; but since he 
was a compassionate man, he took no action in 
the matter. Guarding, however, against the re- 
l)roach (uttered) by many, — for the attempts 
made by this Callistus were not distant occur- 
rences,— and because Carpophorus also still con- 
tinued adverse, F/<r/(?r sends Callistus to take up 
nis abode in Antium, having settled on him a 
certain monthly allowance for food. And after 
Victor's death, Zephyrinus, having had Callistus 
as a fellow-worker in the management of his 
clergy, paid him respect to his own damage ; 
and transferring this person from Antium, ap- 
pointed him over the cemetery.^ 

And Callistus, who was in the habit of always 
associating with Zephyrinus, and. as I have pre- 
viously stated, of paying him hypocritical service, 
disclosed, by force of contrast, Zephyrinus to be a 
j)erson able neither to form a judgment of things 
said, nor discerning the design of Callistus, who 
was accustomed to converse with Zephyrinus on 
topics which yielded satisfaction to the latter. 
Thus, after the death of Zephyrinus, supposing 

' Marcia's connection with the emperor would not seem very con- 
sistent with the Christian character which Hippolytus ^ives her. Dr. 
Wordsworth supposes that Hippolytus speaks ironically in the case 
of Marcia, as well as of Hyacinthus and Carpophorus. [1 do not see 
the evidence of this. Poor Marcia, afterwards poisoned hy the wretch 
who degraded her, was a heathen who under a little light was awak- 
ening to some sense of duty, like the woman of Samaria, John iv. 19.] 

^ [Note this expression in contrast with subsequent claims to be 
the " Universal Bishop."] 

■• See Dio Cassius, Ixxii. 4. [See vol. ii. p. 604, this .series.] 

< Or, " a presbyter, though an eunuch," thus indicating the decay 
of ecclesiastical discipline. 

5 Or, " that Marcia had been brought up by him." [See what 
Bunsen has to say (vol. i. pp. T26, 127, and note) upon this subject, 
about which we know very little.] 

'' The cemetery of Callistus was situated in the I'la Afif>ia. [The 
catacombs near the Church of St. Sebastian still bear the name of 
ilhis unhappy man, and give incidental corroboration to the incident.] 

that he had obtained (the position) after which 
he so eagerly pursued, he excommunicated Sa- 
bellius, as not entertaining orthodox opinions. 
He acted thus from apprehension of me, and 
imagining that he could in this manner obliterate 
the charge against him among the churches, as 
if he did not entertain strange opinions.^ He 
was then an impostor and knave, and in process 
of time hurried away many with him. And hav- 
ing even venom imbedded in his heart, and form- 
ing no correct opinion on any subject,*^ and yet 
withal being ashamed to speak the truth, this Cal- 
listus, not only on account of his publicly saying 
in the way of reproach to us, "Ye are Ditheists," 
but also on account of his being frequently ac- 
cused by Sabellius, as one that Jiad transgressed 
his first faith, devised some such heresy as the 
following. -^Crf///j'///j' alleges that the Logos Him- 
self is Son, and that Himself is Father ; and 
that though denominated by a different title, yet 
that in reality He is one indivisible spirit. And 
he maintains that the Father is not one person 
and the Son another, but that they are one and 
the same ; and that all things are full of the 
Divine Spirit, both those above and those below. 
And he affirms that the Spirit, which became 
incarnate in the virgin, is not different from the 
Father, but one and the same. And he adds, 
that this is what has been declared by the Sav- 
iour: "Believest thou not that I am in the 
Father, and the Father in me?'"^ For that 
which is seen, which is man, he considers to 
be the Son ; whereas the Spirit, which was con- 
tained in the Son, to be the Father. " For," 
says (Callistus), "I will not profess behef in two 
Gods, Father and Son, but in one. For the 
Father, who subsisted in the Son Himself, after 
He had taken unto Himself our flesh, raised it 
to the nature of Deity, by bringing it into union 
with Himself, and made it one ; so that Father 
and Son must be styled one God, and that this 
Person being one, cannot be two." And in this 
way Callistus contends that the Father suffered 
along with the Son ; for he does not wish to 
assert that the Father suffered, and is one Per- 
son, being careful to avoid blasphemy against 
the Father. (How careful he is !) senseless and 
knavish fellow, who improvises blasphemies in 
every direction, only that he may not seem to 
speak in violation of the truth, and is not abashed 
at being at one time betrayed into the tenet of 
Sabellius, whereas at another into the doctrine 
of Theodotus. 

7 [Here Wordsworth's note is valuable, p. 80. Callistus had 
doubtless sent letters to announce his consecration to other bishops, 
as was customary, and had received answers demanding proofs of 
his orthodoxy. See my note on the intercommunion of primitive 
bishops, vol. ii. p. 12,' note 9: also on the Provincial System, vol. 
iv. pp. Ill, 114'. Also Cyprian, this vol. passim.] 

8 (vSiui:; ^Lr)&iv•. Scott reads evOeo? M'j'ifi'. Dr. Wordsworth trans- 
lates the words thus: " having no rectitude of mind." 

9 John xiv. 11. 

Chap. VIII.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

131 

The impostor Callistiis, having ventured on 
such opinions, established a school of theology in 
antagonism to the Church, adopting the fore- 
going system of instruction. And he first in- 
vented the device of conniving with men in 
regard of their indulgence in sensual pleasures, 
/laying that all had their sins forgiven by himself.' 
For he who is in the habit of attending the con- 
gregation of any one else, and is called a Chris- 
tian, should he commit any transgression ; the 
sin, they say, is not reckoned unto him, provided 
only he hurries off and attaches himself to the 
school of Callistus. And many persons were 
gratified with his regulation, as being stricken in 
conscience, and at the same time having been 
rejected by numerous sects ; while also some of 
them, in accordance with our condemnatory sen- 
tence, had been by us forcibly ejected from the 
Church.^ Noiv such disciples as these passed 
over to XhesQ followers of Callistus, and served 
to crowd his school. This one propounded the 
opinion, that, if a bishop was guilty of any sin, 
if even a sin unto death,^ he ought not to be 
deposed. About the time of this man, bishops, 
priests, and deacons, who had been twice mar- 
ried, and thrice married, began to be allowed to 
retain their place among the clergy. If also, 
however, any one who is in holy orders should 
become married, Callistus perinitted such a one 
to continue in holy orders as if he had not 
sinned.* And in justification, he alleges that 
what has been spoken by the Apostle has been 
declared in reference to this person : " Who art 
thou that judgest another man's servant?" 5 But 
he asserted that likewise the parable of the tares 
is uttered in reference to this o/ie : " Let the 
tares grow along with the wheat ; " ^ or, in other 
words, let those who in the Church are guilty of 
sin remain in it. But also he affirmed that the 
ark of Noe was made for a symbol of the Church, 
in which were both dogs, and wolves, and ravens, 
and all things clean and unclean ; and so he 
alleges that the case should stand in like manner 
with the Church. And as many parts of Scrip- 
ture bearing on this view of the subject as he 
could collect, he so interpreted. 

And the hearers of Callistus being delighted 
with his tenets, continue with him, thus mocking 
both themselves as well as manv others, and 
crowds of these dupes stream together into his 
school. Wherefore also his pupils are multiplied, 
and they plume themselves upon the crowds 
(attending the school) for the sake of pleasures 
which Christ did not permit. But in contempt 

' [Here is a very early precedent for the Taxa Paenitentiaria, 
of which see Bramhall, vol. i. pp. 56, 180; ii. pp. 445, 446]. 

2 [Elucidation XII.] 

3 I John V. 16. 

* [Elucidation XIII. And on marriage of the clergy, vol. iv. p. 
49, this series.] 
! Rom. xiv. 4. 
*= Mutt. xiii. 30. 

of Him, they place restraint on the commission 
of no sin, alleging that they pardon those who 
acquiesce (in Callistus' opinions). For even also 
he permitted females, if they were unwedded/ 
and burned with passion at an age at all events 
unbecoming, or if they were not disposed to 
overturn their own dignity through a legal mar- 
riage, that they might have whomsoever they 
would choose as a bedfellow, whether a slave or 
free, and that a woman, though not legally mar- 
ried, might consider such a companio7i as a hus- 
band. Whence women, reputed believers, began 
to resort to drugs ^ for producing sterility, and 
to gird themselves round, so to expel what was 
being conceived on account of their not wishing 
to have a child either by a slave or by any paltry 
fellow, for the sake of their family and excessive 
wealth.9 Behold, into how great impiety that 
lawless one has proceeded, by inculcating adul- 
tery and murder at the same time ! And withal, 
after such audacious acts, they, lost to all shame, 
attempt to call themselves a Catholic Church ! '* 
And some, under the supposition that they will 
attain prosperity, concur with them. During the 
episcopate of this one, second baptism was for the 
first time presumptuously attempted by them. 
These, then, (are the practices and opinions 
which) that most astonishing Callistus estab- 
lished, whose school continues, preserving its 
customs and tradition, not discerning with whom 
they ought to communicate, but indiscriminately - 
offering communion to all. And from him they 
have derived the denomination of their cogno- 
men ; so that, on account of Callistus being a 
foremost champion of such practices, they should 
be called Callistians." 

CHAP, VIII. SECT OF THE ELCHASAITES ; HIP- 

POLYTUS' OPPOSITION TO IT. 

The doctrine of this Callistus having been 
noised abroad throughout the entire world, a 
cunning man, and full of desperation, one called 
Alcibiades, dwelling in Apamea, a city of Syria, 
examined carefully into this business. And con- 
sidering himself a more formidable character, 
and more ingenious in such tricks, than Callistus, 
he repaired to Rome ; and he brought some 
book, alleging that a certain just man, Elchasai,'^ 

^ This passage, of which there are different readings, has been 
variously interpreted. The rendering followed above does probably 
less violence to the text than others proposed. The variety of mean- 
ing generally turns on the word iva^ia. in Miller's text. Bunsen alters 
it into «V ojto . . . rj^LKia, i.e., were inflamed at a proper age Dr. 
Wordsworth reads liAiKiioTr) . . . ai'af iw, i.e., an unworthy comrade. 
Roeper reads >/AiKca . . . ava^i.ov, i.e., in the bloom of youth were 
enamoured with one undeserving of their choice. 

8 Dr. Wordsworth places 7repi6ecr;aeicreai in the first sentence, 
and translates thus: " women began to venture to bandage themselves 
with ligaments to produce abortion, and to deal with drugs in order to 
destroy what was conceived." 

9 [The prescience of Hennas and Clement is here iliustrated. 
See vol. ii. pp. 9, 32, 279, 597, etc.] 

>o [Elucidation XIV.) 
" [Bunsen, i. 115. Elucidation XV.] 

12 See Eusebius, Hi'si. Ecclcsiitst., vi. 38; Epiphanius, //^>- , xix.; 
and Theodoret, H<er. Fab., ii. 7. 

1^2 

Till-: REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[r.ooK IX 

had received this from Scro3, a town of Parthia, 
and that he gave it to one called Sobiai. Atui 
/he contents of this volume, he alleged, had been 
revealed by an angel whose height was 24 schcc- 
noi, which make 96 miles, and whose breadth 
is 4 schooioi, and from shoulder to shoulder 6 
schcc7ioi ; and the tracks of his feet extend to 
the length of three and a half scho:noi, which 
are c<]ual to fourteen miles, while the breadth is 
one schxnos and a half, and the height half a 
schanos. And he alleges that also there is a 
female with him, wliose measurement, he says, 
is according to the j-/a;//'/c?/'^jr already mentioned. 
And he asserts that the male (angel) is Son of 
God, but that the female is called Holy Spirit. 
By detailing these prodigies he imagines that 
he confounds fools, ivhile at the same time he 
utters the following sentence : " that there was 
preached unto men a new remission of sins in 
the third year of Trajan's reign." And Elchasai 
determines the nature of baptism, and even this 
I shall explain. He alleges, as to those who 
have been involved in every description of las- 
civiousness, and filthiness, and in acts of wicked- 
ness, if only any of them be a believer, that he 
determines that such a one, on being converted, 
and obeying the book, and believing its conteiits, 
should by baptism receive remission of sins. 

Elchasai, however, ventured to continue these 
Icnaveries, taking occasion from the aforesaid 
tenet of which Callistus stood fonvard as a cham- 
pion. For, perceiving that many were delighted 
at this sort of promise, he considered that he 
could opportunely make the TuXXo-xci^X. just alluded 
to. .'Vnd notwithstanding we offered resistance 
to this, and did not permit many for any length 
of time to become victims of the delusion.' For 
we carried conviction to the people, wheti we af- 
' firmed ihdii this was the operation of a spurious 
s]jirit, and the invention of a heart inflated with 
pride, and that this one like a wolf had risen up 
against many wandering sheep, which Callistus, 
by his arts of deception, had scattered abroad. 
But since we have commenced, we shall not be 
silent as regards the opinions of this 7?ian. And, 
in the first place, we .shall expose his life, and 
we shall prove that his supposed discipline is a 
mere pretence. And next, I shall adduce the 
principal heads of his assertions, in order that 
the reader, looking fixedly on the treatises of 
this (Elchasai), may be made aware what and 
what sort is the heresy which has been auda- 
ciously attempted by this man. 

CHAP. IX. — ELCHASAI DF.RIVED HIS SYSTEM FROM 
PVTHACOR.AS ; PR-ACnSKD INCANTATIONS. 

This Elchasai puts forward as a decoy a polity 
(authorized in the) Law, alleging that believers 

' For ■!r\avr]6^)vai Dr. Wordsworth reads JrAarvKfl^voi, i.e., did 
not BufTer the heresy to spread wide. 

ought to be circumcised and live according to 
the Law, (while at the same time) he forcibly 
rends certain frai^ments from the aforesaid here- 
sies. And he asserts that Christ was born a 
man in the same way as common to all, and that 
Christ was not for the first time on earth when 
born of a virgin, but that both previously and that 
frequently again He had been born and would 
be born. Christ would thus appear and exist 
among us from time to time, undergoing altera- 
tions of birth, and having his soul transferred 
from body to body. Now Elchasai adopted 
tliat tenet of pythagoras to which I have already 
alluded. But the ElcJiasaites have reached such 
an altitude of pride, that even they affirm them- 
selves to be endued with a power of foretelling 
futurity, using as a starting-point, obviously, the 
measures and numbers of the aforesaid Pythago- 
rean art. These also devote themselves to the 
tenets of mathematicians, and astrologers, ar>d 
magicians, as if they were true. And they resort 
to these, so as to confuse silly people, thus led 
to suppose that the heretics participate in a doc- 
trine of power. And they teach certain incanta- 
tions and formularies for those who have been 
bitten by dogs, and possessed of demons, and 
seized with other diseases ; and we shall not be 
silent respecting even such practices of these 
heretics. Having then sufficiently explained their 
principles, and the causes of their presumptuous 
attempts, I shall pass on to give an account of 
their writings, through which my readers will 
become acquainted with both the trifling and 
godless efforts of these Elchasaites. 

CHAP. X. — ELCHASAl'S MODE OF ADMINISTERING 
BAPTISM ; FORMULARIES. 

To those, then, that have been orally instructed 
by him, he dispenses baptism in this manner, 
addressing to his dupes some such words as the 
following : " If, therefore, (my) children,^ one 
shall have intercourse with any sort of animal 
whatsoever, or a male, or a sister, or a daughter,' 
or hath committed adultery, or been guilty of I 
fornication, and is desirous of obtaining remis-| 
sion of sins, from the moment that he hearkens 
to this book let him be baptized a second time 
in tJie nqime of the Great and Most High God, 
and in the name of His Son, the Mighty King. 
And by baptism let him be purified and cleansed, 
and let him ^adjure for himself those seven wit- 
nesses that have been described in this book — 
the heaven, and the water, and the holy spirits,! 
and the angels of prayer,^ and the oil, and the salt, ' 
and the earth." These constitute the astonishing 
mysteries of Elchasai, those ineffable and potent 

- Roeper reads rtVi/w, i.e., if any one is guilty of an unnatural 
crime. 

J [Concerning angels of repentance, etc., see Hennas, vol. iL 
pp. 19, 24, 2b ] 

Chap. XII.] 

THE REFUTATION" OF ALL HERESIES. 

133 

secrets which he delivers to deserving disciples. 
And with these that lawless one is not satisfied, 
but in the presence of two and three witnesses 
he puts the seal to his own wicked practices. 
Again expressing himself thus : " Again I say, O 
adulterers and adulteresses, and false prophets, 
if you are desirous of being converted, that your 
sins may be forgiven you, as soon as ever you 
hearken unto this book, and be baptized a second 
time along with your garments, shall peace be 
yours, and your portion with the just." But 
since we have stated that these resort to incanta- 
tions for those bitten "by dogs and for other 
mishaps, we shall explain these. Now Elchasai 
uses the following formulary : " If a dog rabid 
and furious, in which inheres a spirit of destruc- 
tion, bite any man, or woman, or youth, or girl, 
or may worry or touch them, in the same hour 
let such a one run with all their wearing apparel, 
and go down to a river or to a fountain wherever 
there is a deep spot. Let (him or her) be 
dipped with all their wearing apparel, and offer 
supplication to the Great and Most High God 
in faith of heart, and then let him thus adjure 
the seven witnesses described in this book : 
* Behold, I call to witness the heaven and the 
water, and the holy spirits, and the angels of 
prayer, and the oil, and the salt, and the earth. 
I testify by these seven witnesses that no more 
shall I sin, nor commit adultery, nor steal, nor 
be guilty of injustice, nor be covetous, nor be 
actuated by hatred, nor be scornful, nor shall I 
take pleasure in any wicked deeds' Having 
littered, therefore, these words, let such a one 
be baptized with the entire of his wearing ap- 
parel' in the name of the Mighty and Most 
High God." 

CHAP. XI. 

PRECEPTS OF ELCHASAI. 

But in very many other respects he talks folly, 
inculcating the use of these sentences also for 
those afflicted with consumption, and that they 
should be dipped in cold water forty times 
during seven days; and he prescribes similar 
treatment for those possessed of devils. Oh 
inimitable wisdom and incantations gorged with 
powers ! ' Who will not be astonished at such 
and such force of words? But since we have 
stated that they also bring into requisition astro- 
logical deceit, we shall prove this from their own 
formularies ; for Elchasai speaks thus : " There 
exist wicked stars of impiety. This declaration 
has been now made by us, O ye pious ones and 
disciples : beware of the power of the days 0/ 
the sovereignty of these stars, and engage not 
in the commencement of any undertaking dur- 
ing the ruling days of these. And baptize not 
inan or woman during the days of the power of 

I MUler suggests the singular number ifivvayitvi). 

these stars, when the moon, (emerging) from 
among them, courses the sky, and travels along 
with them. Beware of the very day up to that 
on which the moon passes out from these stars, 
and then baptize and enter on every beginning 
of your works. But, moreover, honour the day 
of the Sabbath, since that day is one of those 
during which prevails (the power) of these stars. 
Take care, however, not to commence your 
works the third day from a Sabbath, since when 
three years of the reign of the emperor Trajan 
are again completed from the time that he sub- 
jected the Parthians to his own sway, — when, / 
say, three years have been completed, war rages 
between the impious angels of the northern con- 
stellations; and on this account all kingdoms of 
impiety are in a state of confusion." 

CHAP. Xn. — THE HERESY OF THE ELCHASATTES A 
DERIVATIVE ONE. 

Inasmuch as (Elchasai) considers, then, that 
it would be an insult to reason that these mighty 
and ineffable mysteries should be trampled under 
foot, or that they should be committed to many, 
he advises that as valuable pearls ^ they should 
be preserved, expressing himself thus : " Do not 
recite this account to all men, and guard care- 
fully these precepts, because all men are not 
faithful, nor are all women straightforward." 
Books containing these (tenets), however, neithef 
the wise men of the Egyptians secreted in shrines, 
nor did Pythagoras, a sage of the Greeks, con- 
ceal them there. For if at that time Elchasai 
had happened to live, what necessity would there 
be that Pythagoras, or Thales, or Solon, or the 
wise Plato, or even the rest of the sages of the 
Greeks, should become disciples of the Egyptian 
priests, when they could obtain possession of 
such and such wisdom from Alcibiades, as the 
most astonishing interpreter of that wretched 
Elchasai? The statements, therefore, that have 
been made for the purpose of attaining a knowl- 
edge of the madness of these, would seem suf- 
ficient for those endued with sound mind. And 
so it is, that it has not appeared expedient to 
quote more of their formularies, seeing that these 
are very numerous and ridiculous. Since, how- 
ever, we have not omitted those practices that 
have risen up in our own day, and have not been 
silent as regards those prevalent before our time, 
it seerhs proper, in order that we may pass through 
all their systems, and leave nothing untold, to state 
what also are the (customs) of the Jews, and 
what are the diversities of opinion among them, 
for I imagine that these as yet remain behind /^r 
our consideration. Now, when I have broken 
silence on these points, I shall pass on to the 
demonstration of the Doctrine of the Truth, in 

] 3 Matt. viL 6. 

M4 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book IX 

order that, after the lengthened argumentative 
struggle against all heresies, we, devoutly press- 
ing forward towards the kingdom's crown, and 
believing the truth, may not be unsettled. 

CHAP. XIII. — THE JEWISH SECTS. 

Originally there prevailed but one usage ' 
among the Jews ; for one teacher was given 
unto them by God, naviely Moses, and one law 
by this same Moses. And there was one desert 
region and one Mount Sinai, for one God it was 
who legislated for these 'jfetvs. But, again, 
after they had crossed the river Jordan, and had 
inherited by lot the conquered country, they in 
various ways rent in sunder the law of God, each 
devising a different interpretation of the decla- 
rations made by God. And in this way they 
raised up for themselves teachers, (and) invented 
doctrines of an heretical nature, and they con- 
tinued to advance into (sectarian) divisions. 
Now it is the diversity of these jfews that I at 
present propose to explain. But though for 
even a considerable time they have been rent 
into very numerous sects, yet I intend to eluci- 
date the more principal of them, while those 
who are of a studious turn will easily become 
accjuainted with the rest. For there is a divis- 
ion amongst them into three sorts ; ^ and the 
adherents of the first are the Pharisees, but of 
the second the Sadducees, while the rest are 
Essenes. These practise a more devotional life, 
being filled with mutual love, and being temper- 
ate. And they turn away from every act of 
inordinate desire, being averse even to hearing 
of things of the sort. And they renounce matri- 
mony, but they take the boys of others, and thus 
have an offspring begotten for them. And they 
lead these adopted children into an observance 
of their own peculiar customs, and in this way 
bring them up and impel them to learn the 
sciences. They do not, however, forbid them 
to marry, though themselves refraining from 
matrimony. Women, however, even though 
they may be disposed to adhere to the same 
course of life,^ they do not admit, inasmuch as 
in no way whatsoever have they confidence in 
women. 

CHAP. XIV. — THE TENETS OF THE ESSENI. 

And they despise wealth, and do not turn 
dway from sharing their floods with those that 

' Or, " nation." 

2 See Josephus, Dc Bell. Judaic., ii. S, from whom Hippolytus 
seems to have taken his account of the Jewish sects, except, as 
Schneidewin remarks, we suppose some other writer whom Josephus 
and Hippolytus themselves followed. The Abbe Cruicc thinks that 
the author followed by Hippolytus was not Josephus, but a Chrir.tian 
writer of the first century, who derived his materials from the Jewish 
historian. Hippolytus' text sometimes varies from the text of Jose- 
phus, as well as of Porphyry, who has taken excerpts from Josephus' 
work. 

i Or "choice." 

are destitute. No one amongst them, however, 
enjoys a greater amount of riches than another. 
For a regulation with them is, that an individual 
coming forward to join the sect must sell his 
possessions, and present the price of them to the 
community. And on receiving the moticy, the 
head of the order distributes it to all according 
to their necessities. Thus there is no one among 
them in distress. And they do not use oil, re- 
garding it as a defilement to be anointed. And 
there are appointed overseers, who take care of 
all things that belong to them in common, and 
they all appear always in white clothing. 

CHAP. XV. THE TENETS OF THE ESSENI CON- 
TINUED, 

But there is not one city of them, but many 
of them settle in every city. And if any of the 
adherents of the sect may be present from a 
strange place, they consider that all things are 
in common for him, and those whom they had 
not previously known they receive as if they 
belonged to their own household and kindred. 
And they traverse their native land, and on each 
occasion that they go on a journey they carry 
nothing except arms. And they have also in 
their cities a president, who expends the moneys 
collected for this purpose in procuring clothing 
and food for them. And their robe and its 
shape are modest. And they do not own two 
cloaks, or a double set of shoes ; and when those 
that are in present use become antiquated, then 
they adopt others. And they neither buy nor 
sell anything at all ; but whatever any one lias 
he gives to him that has not, and that which one 
has not he receives. 

CHAP. XVI. THE TENETS OF THE ESSENI CON- 
TINUED. 

And they continue in an orderly manner, and 
with perseverance pray from early dawn, and tliey 
do not speak a word unless they have praised 
God in a hymn. And in this way they each go 
forth and engage in whatever employment they 
please ; and after having worked up to the fifth 
hour they leave off. Then again they come to- 
gether into one place, and encircle themselves 
With linen girdles, for the purpose of concealing 
their private parts. And in this manner they 
perform ablutions in cold water; and after 
being thus cleansed, they repair together into 
one apartment, — now no one who entertains a 
different opinion from themselves assembles in 
the house, — and they proceed to partake of 
breakfast. And when they have taken tlieir 
seats in silence, they set down loaves in order, 
and next some one sort of food to eat along with 
the bread, and each receives from these a suffi- 
cient portion. No one, however, tastes these 

Chap. XX.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

135 

before the priest utters a blessing,' and prays 
over the food. And after breakfast, when he 
has a second time offered up suppHcation, as 
at the beginning, so at the conckision of their 
meal they praise God in hymns. Next, after 
they have laid aside as sacred the garments in 
which they have been clothed while together 
taking their repast within the house — (now these 
garments are linen) — and having resumed the 
clothes which they had left in the vestibule, they 
hasten to agreeable occupations until evening. 
And they partake of supper, doing all things in 
like manner to those already mentioned. And 
no one will at any time cry aloud, nor will any 
other tumultuous voice be heard. But they 
each converse quietly, and with decorum one 
concedes the conversation to the other, so that 
the stillness of those within the house appears a 
sort of mystery to those outside. And they are 
invariably sober, eating and drinking all things 
by measure. 

CHAP. XVII. — THE TENETS OF THE ESSENI CON- 
^ TINUED. 

All then pay attention to the president ; and 
whatever injunctions he will issue, they obey as 
law. For they are anxious that mercy and assist- 
ance be extended to those that are burdened 
with toil. And especially they abstain from 
wrath and anger, and all such passions, inasmuch 
as they consider these to be treacherous to man. 
And no one amongst them is in the habit of 
swearing ; but whatever any one says, this is re- 
garded more binding than an oath. If, however, 
one will swear, he is condemned as one unworthy 
of credence. They are likewise solicitous about 
the readings of the law and prophets ; and 
moreover also, if there is any treatise of the 
faithful, about that likewise. And they evince the 
utmost curiosity concerning plants and stones, 
rather busying themselves as regards the opera- 
tive powers of these, saying that these things 
were not created in vain. 

CHAP. XVIII. THE TENETS OF THE ESSENI CON- 
TINUED. 

But to those who wish to become disciples of 
the sect, they do not immediately deliver their 
rules, unless they have previously tried them. 
Now for the space of a year they set before (the 
candidates) the same food, while the latter con- 
tinue to live in a different house outside the 
Essenes' own place of meeting. And they give 
(to the probationists) a hatchet and the linen 
girdle, and a white robe. When, at the expira- 
tion of this period, one affords proof of self- 

' [The Essenes practised many pious and edifying rites; and this 
became Christian usage, after our Lord's example. Matt. xiv. 19; 
I Tim. iv. 3-5.] 

control, he approaches nearer to the sect's 
method of living, and he is washed more purely 
than before. Not as yet, however, does he par- 
take of food along with the Essenes. For, after 
having furnished evidence as to whether he is. 
able to acquire self-control, — but for two years 
the habit of a person of this description (s on 
trial, — and when he has appeared desen-ing, he 
is thus reckoned amongst the members of the- 
sect. Previous, however, to his being allowed to 
partake of a repast along with them, he is bound 
under fearful oaths. First, that he will worship 
the Divinity ; next, that he will observe just 
dealings with men, and that he will in no way 
injure any one, and that he will not hate a per- 
son who injures him, or is hostile to him, but 
pray for them. He likewise swears that he will 
always aid the just, and keep faith with all, espe- 
cially those who are rulers. For, they argue, a 
position of authority does not happen to any one 
without God. And if the Escene himself be a 
ruler, he swears that he will not conduct him- 
self at any time arrogantly in the exercise of 
power, nor be prodigal, nor resort to any adorn- 
ment, or a greater state of magnificence than the 
usage permits. He likewise swears, however, to 
be a lover of truth, and to reprove him that is 
guilty of falsehood, neither to steal, nor pollute 
his conscience for the sake of iniquitous gain, 
nor conceal aught from those that are members 
of his sect, and to divulge nothing to others, 
though one should be tortured even unto death. 
And in addition to the foregoing promises, he 
swears to impart to no one a knowledge of the 
doctrines in a different manner from that in 
which he has received them himself. 

CHAP. XIX. THE TENETS OF THE ESSENI CON- 
TINUED. 

With oaths, then, of this description, they 
bind those who come forward. If, however, any 
one may be condemned for any sin, he is ex- 
pelled from the order ; but one that has been 
thus excommunicated sometimes perishes by an 
awful death. For, inasmuch as he is bound by 
the oaths and rites of the sect, he is not able to 
partake of the food in use among other people. 
Those that are excommunicated, occasionally, 
therefore, utterly destroy the body through star- 
vation. And so it is, that when it comes to the 
last the Essenes sometimes pity many of them 
who are at the point of dissolution, inasmuch as 
they deem a punishment even unto death, thus 
inflicted upon these culprits, a sufficient penalty. 

CHAP. XX. THE TENETS OF THE ESSENI CON- 
CLUDED. 

But as regards judicial decisions, the Essenes 
are most accurate and impartial. And they de- 

136 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book IX, 

liver their judgments when they have assembled 
together, niinilicriii::; at the very least one hun- 
dred ; and the sentence dehvercd by tlicm is 
irreversible. And they honour tlic legislator yicxt 
after God ; and if any one is guilty of blas- 
phemy against this /ramcr of la-ios, he is pun- 
ished. -And they are taught to yield obedience 
to rulers and elders ; and if ten occupy seats in 
the same room, one of /In- in will not speak unless 
it will appear expedient to the nine. And they 
are careful not to spit put into the midst of per- 
sons present, and to the right hand. They are 
more solicitous, however, about abstaining from 
work on the Sabbath-day than all- other Jews. 
For not only do they prepare their victuals for 
themselves one day previously, so as not (on the 
Sabbath) to kindle a fire, but not even would 
they move a utensil from one place to another 
(on that day), nor ease nature ; nay, some would 
not even rise from a couch. On other days, 
however, when they wish to relieve nature, they 
dig a hole a foot long with the mattock, — for of 
this description is the hatchet, which the presi- 
dent in the first instance gives those who come 
forward to gain admission as disciples, — and 
cover (this cavity) on all sides with their gar- 
ment, alleging that they do not necessarily ' 
insult the sunbeams. They then replace the 
upturned soil into the pit ; and this is their 
practice,- choosing the more lonely spots. But 
after ihey have performed this operation, im- 
mediately they undergo ablution, as if the ex- 
crement pollutes them. 

CHAP. XXI. — DIFFERENT SECTS OF THE ESSENT. 

The Essenes have, however, in the lapse of 
time, undergone divisions, and they do not pre- 
serve their system of training after a similar 
manner, inasmuch as they have been split up 
into four parties. For some of them discipline 
themselves above the requisite rules of the order, 
fio that even they would not handle a current 
■coin of the country, saying that they ought not 
either to carry,- or behold, or fashion an image :''> 
>vherefore no one of those goes into a city, lest 
(by so doing) he should enter through a gate at 
which statues are erected, regarding it a violation 
of law to pass beneath images. But the adher- 
ents of another party, if they happen to hear any 
one maintaining a discussion concerning God 
and His laws — supposing such to be an uncir- 
cumcised person, they will closely watch him ; 
and when they meet a person of this description 
in any place alone, they will threaten to slay him 

' [Query, itn 
^ rDeut. xxiii 
d this ortiinnr 

vwnecessarily ? This seems the sense required.] 
iii. 13. The very doRS scmlcli earth upon ihcir ordure; 
and this ordinnnce of decency is in exquisite consistency with the 
Tnodcsty pf utitnrr, n;:;ainst unirh Christians shoiilit never oflcnd.] 

-* ('I'his 7c.il for the iftUr oi ihc Sttond Comniaudmcnl was not 
Shared by our Lord (Matt. xxii. 20).] 

if he refuses to undergo the rite of circumcision. 
Now, if the latter does not wish to comply with 
this request, an Essene spares not, but even 
slaughters. And it is from this occurrence that: 
they have received their appellation, being de- 
nominated (by some) Zelotai, but by others 
Sicarii. And the adherents of another party call 
no one Lord except the Deity, even though one 
should put them to the torture, or even kilt 
them. But there are others of a later period, who 
have to such an extent declined from the dis- 
cipline (of the order), that, as far as those are 
concerned who continue in the primitive customs, 
they would not even touch these. And if they 
happen to come in contact with them, they im- 
mediately resort to ablution, as if they had 
touched one belonging to an alien tribe. But 
here also there are very many of them of so 
great longevity, as even to live longer than a 
hundred years. They assert, therefore, that a 
cause of this arises from their extreme devotion 
to religion, and their condemnation of all excess 
in regard of what is ser\-ed up (as food), and 
from their being temperate and incapable of 
anger. And so it is that they despise death, 
rejoicing when they can finish their course with 
a good conscience. If, however, any one would 
even put to the torture persons of this descrip- 
tion, in order to induce any amongst them either 
to speak evil of the law, or eat what is offered in 
sacrifice to an idol, he will not effect his pur- 
pose ; for one of this part}' submits to death and 
endures torment rather than violate his con- 
science. 

CH.\P. XXII. — BELIEF OF THE ESSENI IN THE 
RESURRECTION ; THEIR SVSTE.M A SUGGESTIVE 

ONE. 

Now the doctrine of the resurrection has also 
derived support among these ; for they acknowl- 
edge both that the fiesh will rise again, and that 
it will be immortal, in the same manner as the 
soul is already imperishable. And they main- 
tain that the soul, when separated in the present 
life, (departs) into one place, which is well ven- 
tilated and lightsome, 7C'here, they say, // rests 
until judgment. And this locality the Greeks 
were acquainted with by hearsay, and called it 
" Isles of the Blessed." And there are other 
tenets of these which many of the Greeks have 
appropriated, and thus have from time to time 
formed their own opinions.* For the discipli- 
nary system in regard of the Divinity, according 
to these (Jewish sects), is of greater antiquity 
than that of all nations. And so it is that the 
proof is at hand, that all those (Greeks) who 

* [Important corroborations of Justin and other Fathers, iiot L 
p. 3S6; ii. p. 333, alao 3i, 117, 148.] 

Chap. XXIV,] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

^Z7 

ventured to make assertions concerning God, or 
concerning the creation of existing things, de- 
rived their principles from no other source than 
from Jewish legislation. And among these may 
be particularized Pythagoras especially, and the 
Stoics, who derived (their systems) while resi- 
dent among the Egyptians, by having become 
disciples of these Jews.^ Now they affirm that 
there will be both a judgment and a conflagra- 
tion of the universe, and that the wicked will be 
eternally punished. And among them is culti- 
vated the practice of prophecy, and the predic- 
tion of future events. 

CHAP. XXIir. — ANOTHER SECT OF THE ESSENI : 
THE PHARISEES. 

There is then another order of the Essenes 
who use the same customs and prescribed 
method of living with the foregoing sects, but 
make an alteration from these in one respect, 
viz., marriage. Now they maintain that those 
who have abrogated matrimony commit some 
terrible offence, which is for the destruction of 
life, and that they ought not to cut off" the suc- 
cession of children ; for, that if all entertained 
this opinion, the entire race of men would easily 
be exterminated. However, they make a trial 
of their betrothed women for a period of three 
years; and when they have been three times 
purified, with a view of proving their ability of 
"bringing forth children, so then they wed. They 
do not, however, cohabit with pregnant women, 
evincing that they marry not from sensual mo- 
tives, but from the advantage of children. And 
the women likewise undergo ablution in a similar 
manner (with their husbands), and are them- 
selves also arrayed in a linen garment, after the 
mode in which the men are with their girdles. 
These things, then, are the statements which I 
have to make respecting the Esseni. 

But there are also others who themselves prac- 
tise the Jewish customs ; and these, both in re- 
.spect of caste and in respect of the laws, are 
called Pharisees. Now the greatest part of these 
is to be found in every locality, inasmuch as, 
though all are styled Jews, yet, on account of 
the peculiarity of the opinions advanced by them, 
they have been denominated by titles proper 
to each. These, then, firmly hold the ancient 
tradition, and continue to pursue in a disputative 
spirit a close investigation into the things re- 
garded according to the Law as clean and not 
clean. And they interpret the regulations of the 
Law, and put forward teachers, whom they qualify 
for giving instruction in such things. These 
Pharisees affirm the existence of fate, and that 

' Thus Plato's " Laws" presertt many parallels to the writings of 
Moses. Some have supposed that Plato became acquainted with the 
Pentateuch through the medium of an ancient Greek version extaiit 
srior to that of the Septuagint. 

some things are in our power, whereas others are 
under the control of destiny. In this way they 
maintain that some actions depend upon our- 
selves, whereas others upon fate. But (they 
assert) that God is a cause of all things, and 
that nothing is managed or happens without His 
will. These likewise acknowledge that there is 
a resurrection of flesh, and that soul is immortal, 
and that there will be a judgment and conflagra- 
tion, and that the righteous will be imperishable, 
but that the wicked will endure everlasting pun- 
ishment in unqenchable fire. 

CHAP. XXrV. — THE SADDUCEES. 

These, then, are the opinions even of the 
Pharisees. The Sadducees, however, are for 
abolishing fate, and they acknowledge that God 
does nothing that is wicked, nor exercises provi- 
dence over (earthly concerns) ; but they contend 
that the choice between good and evil lies within 
the power of men. And they deny that there is 
a resurrection not only of flesh, but also they 
suppose that the soul does not continue after 
death. The soul they consider nothing but mere 
vitality, and that it is on account of this that 
man has been created. However, (they main- 
tain) that the notion of the resurrection has been 
fully realized by the single circumstance, that we 
close our days after having left children upon 
earth. But (they still insist) that after ''death 
one expects to suffer nothing, either bad or good ; 
for that there will be a dissolution both of soul 
and body, and that man passes into non-exist- 
ence, similarly also with the material of \}cit animal 
creation. But as regards whatever wickedness a 
man may have committed in life, provided he 
may have been reconciled to the injured party, 
he has been a gainer (by transgression), inas- 
much as he has escaped the punishment (that 
otherwise would have been inflicted) by men. 
And whatever acquisitions a man may have 
made, and (in whatever respect), by becoming 
wealthy, he may have acquired distinction, he 
has so far been a gainer. But (they abide by 
their assertion) , that God has no solicitude about 
the concerns of an individual here. And while 
the Pharisees are full of mutual affection, the 
Sadducees, on the other hand, are actuated by 
self-love. This sect had its stronghold especially 
in the region around Samaria. And these also 
adhere to the customs of the law, saying that 
one ought so to live, that he may conduct him- 
self virtuously, and leave children behind him 
on earth. They do not, however, devote atten- 
tion to prophets, but neither do they to any other 
sages, except to the law of Moses only, in regard 
of which, however, they frame no interpretations. 
These, then, are the opinions which also the Sad- 
ducees choose to teach. 

138 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book IX. 

CHAP. XXV. — THE JEWISH RELIGION. 

Since, therefore, we have explained even the 
diversities among the Jews, it seems expedient 
Hkewise not to pass over in silence the system 
of their religion. The doctrine, therefore, among 
all Jews on the subject of religion is fourfold — 
theological, natural, moral, and ceremonial. And 
they affirm that there is one God, and that He 
is Creator and Lord of the universe : that He 
has formed all these glorious works which had 
no previous existence ; and this, too, not out of 
any coeval substance that lay ready at hand, but 
His Will — the efficient cause — was to create, 
and He did create. And (they maintain) that 
there are angels, and that these have been 
brought into being for ministering unto the cre- 
ation ; but also that there is a sovereign Spirit 
that always continues beside God, for glory and 
])raise. And that all things in the creation are 
endued with sensation, and that there is nothing 
inanimate. And they earnestly aim at serious 
habits and a temperate life, as one may ascertain 
from their laws. Now these matters have long 
ago been strictly defined by those who in ancient 
times have received the divinely-appointed law ; • 
so that the reader will find himself astonished at 
the amount of temperance, and of diligence, lav- 
ished on customs legally enacted in reference to 
man. The ceremonial service, however, which 
has been adapted to divine worship in a manner 
befitting the dignity of religion, has been prac- 
tised amongst them with the highest degree of 
elaboration. The superiority of their ritualism 
it is easy for those who wish it to ascertain, pro- 
vided they read the book which furnishes infor- 
mation on these points. They ivill thus perceive 
how that with solemnity and sanctity the ye7uish 
priests offer unto God the first-fruits of the gifts 
bestowed by Him for the use and enjoyment of 
men ; how they fulfil their ministradons with 
regularity and stedfastness, in obedience to His 
commandments. There are, however, some 
(liturgical usages adopted) by these, which the 
Sadducees refuse to recognise, for they are not 
disposed to acquiesce in the existence of angels 
or spirits. 

Still all/^;-//>-f alike expect Messiah, inasmuch 
as the Law certainly, and the prophets, preached 
beforehand that He was about to be present on 
earth. Inasmuch, however, as the Jews were 
not cognizant of the i)eriod of His advent, there 
remains the supposition that the declarations 
(of Scripture) concerning His coming have not 
been fiilfilled. Anil so it is, that uj) to this day 
they continue in anticipation of the future com- 
ing of the Christ, — from the fact of their not 
discerning Him when He was present in the 

' Or, "the law not of yesterday," oO vfuiaTi rhv voiiov, 
reads Scoktio'toj', as rendered above. 

Cruice 

7vorld. And (yet there can be little doubt but) 
that, on beholding the signs of the times of His- 
having been already amongst us, the yews are 
troubled ; and that they are ashamed to confess- 
that He has come, since they have with their 
own hands put Him to death, because they were 
stung with indignation in being convicted by 
Himself of not having obeyed the laws. And 
they affirm that He who was thus sent forth by 
God is not this Christ (whom they are looking 
for) ; but they confess that another Messiah 
will come, who as yet has no existence ; and 
that he will usher in some of the signs which 
the law and the prophets have shown before- 
hand, whereas, regarding the rest (of these indi- 
cations), they suppose that they have fallen into 
error. For they say that his generation will be 
from the stock of David, but not from a virgin 
and the Holy Spirit, but from a woman and a 
man, according as it is a rule for all to be pro- 
created from seed. And they allege that this 
Messiah will be King over them, — a warlike 
and powerful individual, who, after having gath- 
ered together the entire people of the Jews, and 
having done battle with all the nations, will re- 
store for them Jerusalem the royal city. And 
into this city He will collect together the entire 
Hebrew race, and bring it back once more into 
the ancient customs, that it may fulfil the regal 
and sacerdotal functions, and dwell in confi- 
dence for periods of time of sufficient duration. 
After this repose, it is their opinion that war 
would next be waged against them after being 
thus congregated ; that in this conflict Christ 
would fall by the edge of the sword ; and that, 
after no long time, would next succeed the ter- 
mination and conflagration of the universe ; and 
that in this way their opinions concerning the 
resurrection would receive completion, and a 
recompense be rendered to each man according 
to his works. 

CHAP. XXVI. — CONCLUSION TO THE WORK EX- 
PLAINED. 

It now seems to us that the tenets of both all 
the Greeks and barbarians have been sufficiently 
explained by us, and that nothing has remained 
unrefiited either of the points about which phil- 
osophy has been busied, or of the allegations 
advanced by the heretics. And from these very 
explanations the condemnation of the heretics 
is obvious, for having either purloined their doc- 
trines, or derived contributions to them from 
some of those tenets elaborately worked out by 
the Greeks, and for having advanced (these 
opinions) as if they originated from (iod. Since. 
therefore, we have hurriedly passed through all 
the systems of these, and with much labour have, 
in the nine books, proclaimed all their opinions, 

Chap. XXVI.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

139 

and have left behind us for all men a small viati- 
cum in life, and to those who are our contempo- 
raries have afforded a desire of learning (with) 
^Teat joy and delight, we have considered it 
reasonable, as a crowning stroke to the entire 
work, to introduce the discourse (already men- 
tioned) concerning the truth, and to furnish our 
delineation of this in one book, namely the 

tenth. Our object is, that the reader, not only 
when made acquainted with the overthrow of 
those who have presumed to establish heresies, 
may regard with scorn their idle /andes, but 
also, when brought to know the power of the 
truth, may be placed in the way of salvation, by 
reposing that faith in God which He so worthily 
deserves. 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

BOOK X. 

CONTENTS. 

The following are the contents of the tenth 
book of the Rejfutation of all Heresies : — 

An Epitome of all Philosophers. 

An Epitome of all Heresies. 

And, in conclusion to all, what the Doctrine 
of the Truth is. 

CHAP. I. — RECAPITULATION. 

After we have, not with violence, burst through 
the labyrinth ' of heresies, but have unravelled 
(their intricacies) through a refutation merely, 
or, in other words, by the force of truth, we 
approach the demonstration of the truth itself. 
For then the artificial sophisms of erroi* will be 
exposed in all their inconsistency, when we shall 
succeed in establishing whence it is that the 
definition of the truth has been derived. The 
truth has not taken its principles from the 
wisdom of the Greeks, nor borrowed its doc- 
trines, as secret mysteries, from the tenets of 
the Egyptians, which, albeit silly, are regarded 
amongst them with religious veneration as worthy 
of reliance. Nor has it been formed out of the 
fallacies which enunciate the incoherent (con- 
clusions arrived at through the) curiosity of the 
Chaldeans. Nor does the truth owe its exist- 
ence to astonishment, through the operations of 
demons, for the irrational frenzy of the Baby- 
lonians. But its definition is constituted after 
the manner in which every true definition is, viz., 
as simple and unadorned. A definition such as 
this, provided it is made manifest, will of itself 
refute error. And although we have very fre- 
quently propounded demonstrations, and with 
sufficient fulness elucidated for those willing (to 
learn) the rule of the truth ; yet even now, after 
having discussed all the opinions put forward by 
the Greeks and heretics, we have decided it not 
to be, at all events, unreasonable to introduce, 
as a sort of finishing stroke to the (nine) books 

' [This word is an index of authenticity. See on the " Little 
Labynnth," Bunsen, i. p. 243, and Wordsworth, pp. 100, 161, and 
his relcreoces to Routh, Lardner, etc.] 

140 

preceding,- this demonstration throughout the 
tenth book. 

CHAP. II. — SUMMARY OF THE OPINIONS OF PHIL- 
OSOPHERS. 

Having, therefore, embraced (a consideration 
of) the tenets of all the wise men among the 
Greeks in four books, and the doctrines pro- 
pounded by the heresiarchs in five, we shall now 
exhibit the doctrine concerning the truth in one, 
having first presented in a summary the supposi- 
tions entertained severally by all. For the dog- 
matists of the Greeks, dividing philosophy into 
three parts, in this manner devised from time to 
time their speculative systems ; ^ some denomi- 
nating their system Natural, and others Moral, 
but others Dialectical Philosophy. And the an- 
cient thinkers who called their science Natural 
Philosophy, were those mentioned in book i. 
And the account which they furnished was after 
this mode : Some of them derived tiSS. things from 
one, whereas others from more things than one. 
And of those who derived all things from one, 
some derived them from what was devoid of 
quality, whereas others from what was endued 
with quality. And among those who derived all 
things from quality, some derived thetn from fire, 
and some from air, and some from water, and 
some from earth. And among those 7vho derived 
the universe from more things than one, some 
derived it from numerable, but others from in- 
finite quantities. And among those who derived 
all things from numerable quantities, some de- 
rived them from two, and others from four, and 
others from five, and others from six. And 
among those who derived the utiiverse from in- 
finite quantities, some derived entities from things 
similar to those generated, whereas others from 
things dissimilar. And among these some derived 
entities from things incapable of, whereas others 
from things capable of, passion. From a body 
devoid of quality and endued with unity, the 

2 Hippolytus in what follows is indebted to Sextus Empiricus. 
I Adv. Pnys., X. 

Chap. V.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

141 

Stoics, then, accounted for the generation of the 
universe. For, according to them, matter devoid 
of quahty, and in all its parts susceptible of 
change, constitutes an originating principle of 
the universe. For, when an alteration of this 
ensues, there is generated fire, air, water, earth. 
The followers, however, of Hippasus, and Anaxi- 
mander, and Thales the Milesian, are disposed 
to think that all things have been generated from 
one (an entity), endued with quality. Hippasus 
of Metapontum and Heraclitus the Ephesian 
declared the origin of things to be from fire, 
whereas Anaximander from air, but Thales from 
water, and Xenophanes from earth. " For from 
earth," says he, "are all things, and all things 
terminate in the earth." ' 

CHAP. m. — SUMM.'UIY OF THE OPINIONS OF PHIL- 
OSOPHERS CONTINUED. 

But among those who derive all entities from 
more things than one, and from numerable quan- 
tities, the poet Homer asserts that the universe 
consists of two substances, namely earth and 
water ; at one time expressing himself thus : — 

"The source of gods was Sea and Mother Earth."* 

And on another occasion thus : — 

" But indeed ye all might become water and earth." ^ 

And Xenophanes of Colophon seems to coincide 
, with, him, for he says : — 

" We all are sprung from water and from earth." * 

Euripides, however, (derives the universe) from 
earth and air, as one may ascertain from the fol- 
lowing assertion of his : — 

" Mother of all, air and earth, I sing."* 

But Empedocles derives the universe from four 
principles, expressing himself thus : — 

" Four roots of all things hear thou first: 
Brilliant Jove, and life-giving Juno and Aidoneus, 
And Nestis, that with tears bedews the Mortal Font."* 

Ocellus, however, the Lucanian, and Aristotle, 
derive the imiverse from five principles ; for, 
along with the four elements, they have as- 
sumed the existence of a fifth, and (that this is) 
a body with a circular motion ; and they say 
that from this, things celestial have their being. 
But the disciples of Empedocles supposed the 
generation of the universe to have proceeded 
from six principles. For in the passage where 
he says, "Four roots of all things hear thou 
first," he produces generation out of four princi- 
ples. When, however, he subjoins, — 

' See Karst., Fragm.; viii. 45. 
^ Iliad, xiv. 201. 
3 J bid., vii. 99, 

* See Karst., Fragm., ix. p. 46. 

5 Fabricius, in his Commentary on Sextus Empiricus, considers 
that this is a quotation from the Hymns of Euripides. 
*• V. 55-57, ed. Karst. 

"Ruinous Strife apart from these, equal in every point. 
And with them F"riendship equal in length and 
breadth,"' — 

he also delivers six principles of the universe, 
four of them material — earth, water, fire, and 
air; but two of them formative — Friendship 
and Discord. The followers, however, of Anax- 
agoras of Clazomenas, and of Democritus, and 
of Epicurus, and multitudes of others, have given 
it as their opinion that the generation of the 
\xx(\vtTS,Q. proceeds from infinite numbers of atoms ; 
and we have previously made partial mention of 
these philosophers. But Anaxagoras derives the 
universe from things similar to those that are 
being produced ; whereas the followers of De- 
mocritus and Epicurus derived the ziniverse from 
things both dissimilar (to-the entities produced), 
and devoid of passion, that is, from atoms. But 
the followers of Heraclides of Pontus, and of 
Asclepiades, derived the universe from things 
dissimilar (to the entities produced), and capa- 
ble of passion, as if from incongruous corpuscles. 
But the disciples of Plato affirm that these entities 
are from three principles — God, and .Matter, 
and Exemplar. He divides matter, however, 
into four principles — fire, water, earth, and air. 
And (he says) that God is the Creator of this 
(matter), and that Mind is its exemplar.** 

CHAP. rv. — SUMMARY OF THE OPINIONS OF" PHIL« 
OSOPHERS CONTINUED. 

Persuaded, thenj that the principle of physi- 
ology is confessedly discovered to be encumbered 
with difficulties for all these philosophers, we 
ourselves also shall fearlessly declare concerning 
the examples of the truth, as to how they are, 
and as we have felt confident that they are. But 
we shall previously furnish an explanation, in the 
way of epitome, of the tenets of the heresiarchs, 
in order that, by our having set before our 
readers the tenets of all made well known by 
this (plan of treatment), we may exhibit the 
truth in a plain and familiar (form). 

CHAP, V. — THE NAASSENI. 

But since it so appears expedient, let us begin 
first from the public worshippers of the serpent. 
The Naasseni call the first principle of the uni- 
verse a Man, and that the same also is a Son of 
Man ; and they divide this 7nan into three por- 
tions. For they say one part of him Is rational, 
and another psychical, but a third earthly. And 
they style him Adamas, and suppose that the 
knowledge appertaining to him is the originating 
cause of the capacity of knowing God. And 
the Naassene asserts ihdX all these rational, and 

^ V. 106, 107, ed. Karst. 

8 [See De Legibus, lib. x., and note xli. p. jjg, Tayler Lewrs" 
Plato against the Atheists.'\ 

142 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book X. 

psychical, and earthly qualities have retired into 
Jesus, and that through Him these three sub- 
stances simultaneously have spoken unto the three 
genera of the universe. These allege that there 
are three kinds of existence — angelic, psychical, 
and earthly ; and that there are three churches 
— angelic, psychical, and earthly ; and that the 
names for these are — chosen, called, and cap- 
tive. These are the heads of doctrine advanced 
by them, as far as one may briefly comprehend 
them. They affirm that James, the brother of 
the Lord, delivered these tenets to Mariamne, 
by such a statement belying both. 

CHAP. VI. THE PERAT^. 

The Perataj, however, viz., Ademes the Carys- 
tian, and Euphrates the Peratic, say that there 
is some one world, — this is the denomination 
they use, — and affirming that it is divided into 
three parts. But of the threefold division, ac- 
cording to them, there is one principle, just like 
an immense fountain, capable of being by reason 
divided into infinite segments. And the first 
segment, and the one of more proximity, accord- 
ing to them, is the triad, and is called a perfect 
good, and a paternal magnitude. But the second 
portion of the triad is a certain multitude of, as 
it were, infinite powers. The third pa7-t, how- 
ever, is formal. And the first is unbegotten ; ' 
whence they expressly affirm that there are three 
Gods, three Logoi, three minds, (and) three 
men. For when the division has been accom- 
plished, to each part of the world they assign 
both Gods, and Logoi, and men, and the rest. 
But from above, from uncreatedness and the first 
segment of the world, when afterwards the world 
had attained to its consummation, the Peratic 
affirms that there came down, in the times of 
Herod, a certain man with a threefold nature, 
and a threefold body, and a threefold power, 
named Christ, and that He possesses from the 
three parts of the world in Himself all the con- 
cretions and capacities of the world. And they 
are disposed to think that this is what has been 
declared, " in whom dwelleth all the fulness of 
the Godhead bodily."^ And they assert that 
from the two worlds situated above — naniclw, 
both the unbegotten one and self-begotten one — 
there were borne down into this world in which 
we are, germs of all sorts of powers. And (they 
say) that Christ came down from above from 
uncreatedness, in order that, by His descent, all 
things that have been divided into three parts 
may be saved. For, says the Peratic, the things 
that have been borne down from above will 
ascend through Him ; and the things that have 
plotted against those that have been borne down 

' Cruice supplies from Theodoret: " and the second luhich is good 
is self-begotten, and the third is generated." 
^ Col. ii. 9. 

are heedlessly rejected, ^ and sent away to be 
punished. And the Peratic states that there are 
two parts which are saved — that is, those that 
are situated above — by having been separated 
from corruption, and that the third is destroyed, 
which he calls a formal world. These also are 
the tenets of the Peratse. 

CHAP. VII. — THE SETHIANS. 

But to the Sethians it seems that there exist 
three principles, which have been precisely de- 
fined. And each of the principles is fitted by 
nature for being able to be generated, as in a 
human soul every art whatsoever is developed 
which is capable of being learned. The result is 
the same as when a child, by being long con- 
versant with a musical instrument, becomes a 
musician ; or with geometry a geometrician, or 
with any other art, with a similar result. And 
the essences of the principles, the Sethians say, 
are light and darkness. And in the midst of 
these is pure spirit ; and the spirit, they say, is 
that which is placed intermediate between dark- 
ness, which is below, and light, which is above. 
It is not spirit, as a current of wind or a certain 
gentle breeze which may be felt, but just as if 
. some fragrance of ointment or incense made out 
of a refined mixture, — a power diffusing itself 
by some impulse of fragrance which is incon- 
ceivable and superior to what one can express. 
Since, therefore, the light is above and the dark- 
ness below, and the spirit is intermediate be- 
tween these, the light, also, as a ray of sun, 
shines from above on the underlying darkness. 
And the fragrance of the spirit is wafted on- 
wards, occupying an intermediate position, and 
proceeds forth, just as is diffused the odour of 
incense-offerings (laid) upon the fire. Now the 
power of the things divided threefold being of 
this description, the power simultaneously of the 
spirit and of the light is below, in the darkness 
that is situated beneath. The darkness, how- 
ever, they say, is a horrible water, into which the 
light along with the spirit is absorbed, and thus 
translated into a nature of this description. The 
darkness being then endued with intelligence, 
and knowing that when the light has been re- 
movetl from it the darkness continues desolate, 
devoid of radiance and splendour, power and 
efficiency, as well as impotent, (therefore,) by 
every effort of reflection and of reason, thii 
makes an exertion to comprise in itself bril- 
liancy, and a scintillation of light, along with the 
fragrance of the spirit. And of this tiiey intro- 
duce the following image, expressing themselves 
thus : Just as the pupil of the eye appears dark 
beneath the underlying humours, but is illumi- 
nated by the spirit, so the darkness earnestly 

i a(f>t€Tai e'lKfj: Bernays proposes b<j>ioeiSri, i.e., being of the form 
of the serpent. 

Chap. VIII.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

143 

strives after the spirit, and- has with itself all the 
powers which wish to retire and return. Now 
these are indefinitely infinite, from which, when 
commingled, all things are figured and generated 
like seals. For just as a seal, when brought into 
contact with wax, produces a figure, (and yet the 
seal) itself remains of itself what it was, so also 
the powers, by coming into communion (one 
with the other), form all the infinite kinds of 
animals. TJie Sethians assert that, therefore, 
from the primary concourse of the three prin- 
ciples was generated an image of the great seal, 
namely heaven and earth, having a form like a 
womb, possessing a navel in the midst. And so 
that the rest of the figures of all things were, 
like heaven and earth, fashioned similar to a 
womb. 

And the Sethiatis say that from the water was 
produced a first-begotten principle, namely a 
vehement and boisterous wind, and that it is a 
cause of all generation, which creates a sort of 
heat and motion in the world from the motion 
of the waters. And they maintain that this wind 
is fashioned like the hissing of a serpent into a 
perfect image. And on this the world gazes 
and hurries into generation, being inflamed as a 
womb ; and from thence they are disposed to 
think that the generation of the universe has 
arisen. And they say that this wind constitutes 
a spirit, and that a perfect God has arisen from 
the fragrance of the waters, and that of the spirit, 
and from the brilliant light. And they affirm 
that mind exists after the mode of generation 
from a female — (meaning by mind) the super- 
nal spark — and that, having been mingled be- 
neath with the compounds of body, it earnestly 
desires to flee away, that escaping it may depart 
and not find dissolution on account of the defi- 
ciency in the waters. Wherefore it is in the 
habit of crying aloud from the mixture of the 
waters, according to the Psalmist, as they say, 
^' For the entire anxiety of the light above is, 
that it may deliver the spark which is below from 
the Father beneath," ' that is, from wind. And 
the Father creates heat and disturbance, and 
produces for Himself a Son, namely mind, which, 
as they allege, is not the peculiar offspring of 
Himself. And these heretics affirm that the Son, 
on beholding the perfect Logos of the supernal 
light, underwent a transformation, and in the 
shape of a serpent entered into a womb, in order 
that he might be able to recover that Mind which 
is the scintillation from the light. And that this 
is what has been declared, '' Who, being in the 
form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal 
with God ; but made Himself of no reputation, 
and took upon Him the form of a servant." ^ 

' The commentators refer us to Ps. xxix. 3. 

2 Phil. ii. 6. 7. 

And the wretched and baneful Sethians are dis- 
posed to think that this constitutes the servile 
form alluiled to by the Apostle. These, then, 
are the assertions which likewise these Sethians 
advance. 

CHAP. VIII. — SIMON MAGUS. 

But that very sapient fellozv Simon makes his 
statement thus, that there is an indefinite power, 
and that this is the root of the universe. And 
this indefinite power, he says, which is fire, is in 
itself not anything which is simple, as the gross 
bulk of speculators maintain, when they assert 
that there are four incomposite elements, and 
have supposed fire, as one of these, to be un- 
compounded. Simon, on the other hand, alleges 
that the nature of fire is twofold ; and one por- 
tion of this twofold (nature) he calls a some- 
thing secret, and another (a something) manifest. 
And he asserts that the secret is concealed in 
the manifest /c/;-/.v of the fire, and that the mani- 
fest/^zr/y of the fire have been produced from 
the secret. And he says that all the parts of 
the fire, visible and invisible, have been supposed 
to be in possession of a capacity of perception. 
The world, therefore, he says, that is begotten, 
has been produced from the unbegotten fire. 
And it commenced, he says, to exist thus : The 
Unbegotten One took six primal roots of the 
principle of generation from the principle of 
that fire. For he maintains that these roots 
have been generated in pairs from the fire ; and 
these he denominates Tvlind and Intelligence, 
Voice and Name, Ratiocination and Reflection. 
And he asserts that in the six roots, at the same 
time, resides the indefinite power, which he 
affirms to be Him that stood, stands, and will 
stand. And when this one has been formed into 
a figure. He will, according to this he?-etic, exist 
in the six powers substantially and potentially. 
And He will be in magnitude and perfection one 
and the same with that unbegotten and indefinite 
power, possessing no attribute in any respect 
more deficient than that unbegotten, and un- 
alterable, and indefinite power. If, however, 
He who stood, stands, and will stand, continues 
to exist only potentially in the six powers, and 
has not assumed any definite figure. He be- 
comes, says Simon, utterly evanescent, and per- 
ishes. And this takes place in the same manner 
as the grammatical or geometrical capacity, 
which, though it has been implanted in man's 
soul, suffers extinction when it does not obtain 
(the assistance of) a master of either of these 
arts, who would indoctrinate that soul into its 
principles. Now Simon affirms that he himself 
is He who stood, stands, a?id will stand, and 
that He is a power that is abo\e all things. 
So far, then, for the opinions o^ Simon like- 
wise. 

144 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book X. 

CHAP. IX. ^ — VALENTIXUS. 

Valentinus,' however, ami tlie adherents of 
this scliool, though they agree in asserting that 
the originating ])rincii)le of the universe is the 
Father, still they are impelled into the adoption 
of a contrary opinion rcspecli)ii^ /Jim. For some 
of them main tain that (the Father) is solitary 
and generative ; whereas others iiold the impos- 
sibility, (in His as in other cases,) of procrea- 
tion without a female. They therefore add Sige 
as the spouse of this Father, and style the Father 
Himself Uythus. From this Father and His 
spouse some allege that there have been six pro- 
jections,— viz.. Nous and Aletheia, Logos and 
Zoe, Anthropos and Ecclesia, — and that this 
constitutes the procreative Ogdoad. And the 
Valentinians 7naintain that those are the first 
projections which have taken place within the 
limit, and have been again denominated " those 
within the Pleroma;" and the second are 
"those without the Pleroma"; and the third, 
" those witiiout the Limit." Now the genera- 
tion of these constitutes the Hysterema Acamoth. 
And he asserts that what has been generated 
from an ^on, that exists in the Hysterema and 
has been projected (beyond the Limit), is the 
Creator. But Valentinus is not disposed to 
affirm luhat is thus i^enc rated \.o be primal Deity, 
but speaks in detractive terms both of Him and 
the things made by Him. And (he asserts) that 
Christ came down from within the Pleroma for 
the salvation of the spirit who had erred. This 
spirit, (according to the Valentinians,) resides 
in our inner man; and they say that this inner 
7nan obtains salvation on account of this in- 
dwelling s/^irit. Valentinus, however, (to up- 
hold the doctrine,) determines that the flesh is 
not saved, and styles it "a leathern tunic," and 
the perishable /'t7;-//c7;/^/ man. I have (already) 
declared tiicsc tenets in the way of an ejjitome, 
inasmuch as in their systems there exists enlarged 
matter for discussion, and a variety of opinions. 
In this manner, then, it seems proper also to the 
school of Valentinus to propound their opinions. 

CHAP. X. — PASn.IDES. 

But Basilides also himself affirms that there is 
a non-existent God, who, being non-existent, has 
made the non-existent , world, that has been 
furmed out of things that are not, by casting 
down a certain seed, as it were a grain of mus- 
tard-seed, having in itself stem, leaves, branches, 
and fruit. Or this seed is as a i)eacock's egg, 
comprising in itself the varied multitude of col- 
ours. Antl this, say ///(" /)\^i77/V//<^//.f, constitutes 
the seed of the world, from which all things have 
been produced. 1-^or they maintain that it com- 

' Tins section dilTcrs consuk-rably from what Hippolylus has 
already stated concerning Valentinus, I" Sige," vol. i. p. Cz, note 5. j 

prises in itself all things, as it were those that 
as yet are non-existent, and which it has been 
predetermined to be brought into existence by 
the non-existent Deity. There was, then, he 
says, in the seed itself a threefold Sonship, in all 
respects of the same substance with the non- 
existent God, which has been begotten from 
things that are not. And of this Sonship, divided 
into three parts, one portion of it was refined, 
and another gross, and another requiring purifi- 
cation. The refined portion, when first the 
earliest putting down of the seed was accom- 
plished by the non-existent God, immediately 
burst forth, and ascended upwards, and pro- 
ceeded towards the non-existent Deity. ¥qx 
every nature yearns after that God on account 
of the excess of His beauty, but different (crea- 
tures desire Him) from different causes. The 
more gross portion, however, still continues in 
the seed ; and inasmuch as it is a certain imita- 
tive fiature, it was not able to soar upwards, for 
it was more gross than the subtle i)art. The 
?nore gross portion, however, equipped itself with 
the Holy Spirit, as it were with wings ; for the 
Sonship, thus arrayed, shows kindness to this 
Spirit, and in turn receives kindness. The third 
Sonship, however, requires purification, and there- 
fore this continued in the conglomeration of all 
germs, and this displays and receives kindness. 
And (Basilides asserts) that there is something 
which is called "world," and something else 
(which is called) supra-mundane ; for entities 
arc distributed by him into two primary- divisions. 
And what is intermediate between these he calls 
"Conterminous Holy Spirit," and (this Spirit) 
has in itself the fragrance of the Sonship. 

From the conglomeration of all germs -of the 
cosmical seed burst forth and was begotten the 
Great Archon, the head of the world, an .Fon 
of inexpressible beauty and size. This (Archon) 
having raised Himself as far as the firmament, 
supposed that there was not another above Him- 
self And accordingly He became more brilliant 
and powerful than all the underlying ^Eons, 
with the exception of the Sonship that had been 
left beneath, but which He was not aware was 
more wise than Himself. This one having Mis 
attention turned to the creation of the world, 
first begat a son unto Himself, superior to Him- 
self; and this son He caused to sit on His own 
righf hand, and this these Basilidians allege is 
the Ogdoad. The Great Archon Himself, then, 
produces the entire celestial creation. And an- 
other Archon ascended from (the conglomeration 
of) all the germs, who was greater than all the 
underlying /Eons, except the Sonship that had 
been left behind, yet far inferior to the former 
one. And they style this second Archon a Heb- 
domad. He is Maker, and Creator, and Con- 
troller of all things that are beneath Him, and 

Chap. XII ] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

HS 

this Archon produced for Himself a Son more 
prudent and wiser than Himself. Now they 
assert that all these things exist according to the 
predetermination of that non-existent God, and 
that there exist also worlds and intervals that are 
infinite. And the Basilidians affirm that upon 
Jesus, who was born of Mary, came the power 
of the Gospel, which descended and illuminated 
the Son both of the Ogdoad and of the Heb- 
domad. And this took place for the purpose of 
enlightening and distinguishing from the different 
orders of beings, and purifying the Sonship that 
had been left behind for conferring benefits on 
souls, and the receiving benefits in turn. And 
they say that themselves are sons, who are in 
the world for this cause, that by teaching they 
may purify souls, and along with the Sonship 
may ascend to the Father above, fron whom 
proceeded the first Sonship. And they allege 
that the world endures until the period when 
all souls may have repaired thither along with 
the Sonship. These, however, are the opinions 
which Basilides, who detailed them as prodigies, 
is not ashamed to advance. 

CHAP. XI. 

JUSTINUS. 

But Justinus also himself attempted to estab- 
lish similar opinions with these, and expresses 
himself thus : That there are three unbegotten 
principles of the universe, two males and one 
female. And of the males one principle is de- 
nominated " Good." Now this alone is called 
after this mode, and is endued with a foreknowl- 
edge of the universe. And the other is Father 
of all generated entities, and is devoid of fore- 
knowledge, and unknown, and invisible, and is 
called Elohim. The female principle is devoid 
of foreknowledge, passionate, with two minds, 
a7id with two bodies, as we have minutely de- 
tailed in the previous discourses concerning this 
heretic's system. This female principle, in her 
upper parts, as far as the groin, is, the Jnstinians 
say, a virgin, whereas from the groin downwards 
a snake. And such is denominated Edem and 
Israel. This heretic alleges that these are the 
principles of the universe, from which all things 
have been produced. And he asserts that Elo- 
him, without foreknowledge, passed into inordi- 
nate desire for the half virgin, and that having 
had intercourse with her, he begot twelve angels ; 
and the names of these he states to be those al- 
ready given. And of these the paternal ones are 
connected with the father, and the maternal 
with the mother. And Ji/stinus maintains that 
these are (the trees of Paradise), concerning 
which Moses has spoken in an allegorical sense 
the things \vritten in the law. And yiistintis 
affirms that all things were made by Elohim 
and Edem. And (he says) that animals, with 
the rest of the creatures of this kind, are from the 

part resembling a beast, whereas man from the 
parts above the groin. And Edem (is supposed 
by Justinus) to have deposited in man himself 
the soul, which was her own power, (but Elohim 
the spirit.) And Justinus alleges that this Elo- 
him, after having learned his origin, ascended 
to the Good Being, and deserted Edem. And 
this heretic asserts that Edem, enraged on ac- 
count of such (treatment), concocted all this 
plot against the spirit of Elohim which he de- 
posited in man. And (Justinus informs us) that 
for this reason the Father sent Baruch, and 
issued directions to the prophets, in order that 
the spirit of Elohim might be dehvered, and that 
all might be seduced away from Edem. But 
(this heretic) alleges that even Hercules was a 
prophet, and that he was worsted by Omphale, 
that is, by Babel ; and the J^ustitiiatis call the 
latter Venus. And (they say) that afterwards, 
in the days of Herod, Jesus was born son of 
Mary and Joseph, to whom he alleges Baruch 
had spoken. And (Justinus assents) that Edem 
plotted against this (Jesus), but could not de- 
ceive him ; and for this reason, that she caused 
him to be crucified. And the spirit of Jesus, 
(says Justinus,) ascended to the Good Bei7ig. 
And (the Justinians maintain) that the spirits 
of all who thus obey those silly and futile dis- 
courses will be saved, and that the body and 
soul of Edem have been left behind. But tlie 
foolish Justinus calls this (Edem) Earth. I 

CHAP. XII. THE DOCETyE. 

Now the Docetse advance assertions of this 
description : that the primal Deity is as a seed, 
of the fig-tree ; and that from this proceeded 
three ^ons as the stem, and the leaves and the 
fruit; and that these projected thirty w^ons, 
each (of them) ten ; and that they were all 
united in decades, but differed only in positions, 
as some were before others. And (the Docetse 
assert) that infinite ^ons were indefinitely pro- 
jected, and that all these were hermaphrodites. 
And (they say) that these /Eons formed a de- 
sign of simultaneously going together into one 
^on, and that from this the intermediate ^on 
and from the Virgin Mary they begot a Saviour 
of all. And this Redeemer was like in every 
respect to the first seed of the fig-tree, but in- 
ferior in this respect, from the fact of His" having 
been begotten ; for the seed whence the fig-tree 
springs is unbegotten. This, then, was the great 
light of the ^ons — it was entirely radiance — 
which receives no adornment, and comprises m 
itself the forms of all animals. And the Doceta; 
maintain that this light, on proceeding into the 
underlying chaos, afforded a cause (of exist- 
ence) to the things that were produced, and those 
actually existing, and that on coming down from 
above it impressed on chaos beneath the fornas 

146 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book X. 

of everlasting species. For the third ^on, which 
had tripled itself, when he perceives that all his 
characteristic attributes were forcibly drawn off 
into the nether darkness, and not being ignorant 
both of the terror of darkness and the simplicity 
of light, proceeded to create heaven ; and after 
having rendered firm what intervened, He sepa- 
rated the darkness from the light. As all the 
species of the third .4:^on were, he says, overcome 
by the darkness, the figure even of this ,^on be- 
came a living fire, having been generated by light. 
And from this (source), they allege, was gener- 
ated the Great Archon, regarding whom Moses 
converses, saying that He is a fiery Deity and 
Demiurge, who also continually alters the forms 
of all (.-Eons) into bodies. And the (Docetai) 
allege that these are the souls for whose sake the 
Saviour was begotten, and that He points out 
the way through which the souls will escape that 
are (now) overpowered (by darkness). And 
(the Docetae maintain) that Jesus arrayed. Him- 
self in that only-begotten power, and that for 
this reason He could not be seen by any, on 
account of the excessive magnitude of His glory. 
And they say that all the occurrences took place 
with Him as it has been written in the Gospels. 

CHAP. XIII. 

MONOIiMUS. 

But the followers 'of MonoVmus the Arabian 
assert that the originating principle of the uni- 
verse is a primal man and son of man ; and that, 
as Moses states, the things that have been pro- 
duced were produced not by the primal man, 
but by the Son of that primal man, yet not by 
the entire Son, but by part of Him. And (Mo- 
noimus asserts) that the Son of man is iota, 
which stands for ten, the principal number in 
•which is (inherent) the subsistence of all num- 
ber (in general, arid) through which every number 
(in particular) consists, as well as the generation 
of the universe, fire, air, water, and earth. But 
■inasmuch as this is one iota and one tittle, and 
what is perfect (emanates) from what is perfect, 
or, in other words, a tittle flows down from 
above, containing all things in itself; (therefore,) 
whatsoever things also the man possesses, the 
Father of the Son of man possesses likeivise. 
Moses, therefore, says that the world was made 
in six days, that is, by six powers, out of which 
the worid was made by the one titde. For cubes, 
and octahedrons, and pyramids, and all figures 
similar to these, having equal superficies, out of 
which consist fire, air, water, and earth, have 
been produced from numbers comprehended in 
that simple tittle of the iota, which is Son of 
man. When, therefore, says (Monoimus), Moses 
mentions the rod's being brandished for the pur- 
pose of dringinc; the plagues upon Egypt, he 
alludes allegorically to the (a:lter4tions of the) 
■world of iota^j nor did he frame more than ten 

plagues. If, however, says he, you wish to be- 
come acquainted with the universe, search within 
yourself who is it that says, " My soul, my flesh, 
and my mind," and who is it that appropriates 
each one thing unto himself, as another (would 
do) for himself. Understand that this is a per- 
fect one arising from (one that is) perfect, and 
that he considers as his own all so-called non- 
entities and all entities. These, then, are the 
opinions of Monoimus also. 

CHAP. XIV. — TATIAN. 

Tatian, however, similarly with Valentinus and 
the others, says that there are certain invisible 
i^ons, and that by some one of these the world 
below has been created, and the things existing in 
it. And he habituates himself to a very cynical ' 
mode of life, and almost in nothing differs from 
Marcion, as appertaining both to his slanders, 
and the regulations enacted concerning marriage. 

CHAP. XV. — MARCION AND CERDO. 

But Marcion, of Pontus, and Cerdon,^ his pre- 
ceptor, themselves also lay down that there are 
three principles of the universe — good, just, and 
matter. Some disciples, however, of these add 
a fourth, saying, good, just, evil, and matter. 
But they all affirm that the good (Being) has 
made nothing at all, though some denominate 
the just one likewise evil, whereas others that his 
only title is that of just. And they allege that 
(the just Being) made all things out of subjacent 
matter, for that he made them not well, but 
irrationally. For it is requisite that the things 
made should be similar to the maker ; wherefore 
also they thus employ the evangelical parables, 
saying, '' A good tree cannot bring forth evil 
fruit," 3 and the rest of the passage." Now Mar- 
cion alleges that the conceptions badly devised 
by the (just one) himself constituted the allu- 
sion in this passage. And (he says) that Christ 
is the Son of the good Being, and \vas sent for 
the salvation of souls by him whom he styles 
the inner man. And he asserts that he appeared 
as a man though not being a man, and as incar- 
nate though not being incarnate. And he tnain- 
tains that his manifestation was only phantastic, 
and that he underwent neither generation nor 
passion except in appearance. And he will not 
allow that flesh rises again ; but in affirming 
marriage to be destruction, he leads his disciples 
towards a very cynical life. And by these means 
he imagines that he annoys the Creator, if he 
should abstain from the things that are made or 
appointed by Him. 

" The allusion here is to the shamelessncss of the Cynics in regard 
to sexual intercourse. 

~ The account here given of Cerdon and Marcion does not accu- 
rntely correspond with that already furnished by Hippolytus of ihesa, 
heretics. 

i Malt. vii. 18. 

Chap. XXIL] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

147 

CHAP. XVI. 

■APELLES. 

But Apelles, a disciple of this heretic, was dis- 
pleased at the statements advanced by his pre- 
ceptor, as we have previously declared, and by 
another theory supposed that there are four gods. 
And the first of these he alleges to be the " Good 
Being," whom the prophets did Yiot know, and 
Christ to be His Son. And the second God, he 
affirms to be the Creator of the universe, and 
Him he does not wish to be a God. And the 
third God, he states to be the fiery one that was 
manifested j and the fourth to be an evil one. 
And Apelles calls these angels ; and by adding 
(to their number) Christ likewise, he will assert 
Him to be a fifth God. But this heretic is in 
the habit of devoting his attention to a book 
which he calls "Revelations" of a certain Philu- 
mene, whom he considers a prophetess. And 
he affirms that Christ did not receive his flesh 
from the Virgin, but from the adjacent substance 
of the world. In this manner he composed his 
treatises against the law and the prophets, and 
attempts to abolish them as if they had spoken 
falsehoods, and had not known God. And Apel- 
les, similarly with Marcion, affirms that the dif- 
ferent sorts of flesh are destroyed. 

CHAP. XVII, — CERINTHUS. 

Cerinthus, however, himself having been 
trained in Egypt, determined that the world was 
not made by the first God, but by a certain an- 
gelic power. And this power was {diX separated 
and distant from that sovereignty which is above 
the entire circle of existence, and it knows not 
ike God (that is) above all things. And he says 
that Jesus was not born of a virgin, but that He 
sprang from Joseph and Mary as their son, simi- 
lar to the rest of men ; and that He excelled in 
justice, and prudence, and understanding above 
all the rest oj 7nanki7id. And Cerinthus mam- 
tains that, after Jesus' baptism, Christ came down 
in the form of a dove upon Him from the sover- 
eignty that is above the whole circle of existence, 
and that then He proceeded to preach the un- 
known Father, and to work miracles. And he 
asserts that, at the conclusion of the passion, 
Chnst flew away from Jesus,' but that Jesus suf- 
fered, and that Christ remained incapable of 
suffering, being a spirit of the Lord. 

CHAP. XVIIl. — THE EBION^ANS. 

But the Ebionceans assert that the world is 
made by the true God, and they speak 0/ Christ 
in a similar manner with Cerinthus. They live, 
however, in all respects according to the law of 
Moses, alleging that they are thus justified. 

CHAP. XIX. — THEODOTUS.* 

But Theodotus of Byzantium introduced a 
heresy of the following description, alleging that 
all things were created by the true God ; whereas 
that Christ, he states, in a manner similar to that 
advocated by the Gnostics already mentioned, 
made His appearance according to some mode 
of this description. And Theodotus affirtns that 
Christ IS a man of a kindred nature with all men, 
but that He surpasses them in this respect, that, 
according to the counsel of God, He had been 
born of a virgin, and the Holy Ghost had over- 
shadowed His inother. This heretic, however, 
maintained that Jesus had not assumed flesh in 
the womb ^the Virgin, but that afterwards Chnst 
descended upon Jesus at His baptism in form of 
a dove. And from this circumstance, the fol- 
lowers of Theodotus affirm that at first miraculous 
powers did not acquire operating energy m the 
Saviour Himself. Theodotus, however, deter- 
mines to deny the divinity of Christ. Now, opin- 
ions of this description were advaned by Theodo- 
tus. 

CHAP. XX. — MELCHISEDECIANS. 

And others also make all their assertions simi- 
larly with those which have been already specified, 
introducing one only alteration, viz., in respect of 
regarding Melchisedec as a certain power. But 
they allege that Melchisedec himself is superior to 
all powers , and according to his image, they are 
desirous of maintaining that Christ likewise is 
generated. 

• Oi. - the Son. " oi, " the Son of Mary " (Crmce). 

CHAP. XXI. 

•THE PHRYGIANS OR MONTANISTS. 

The Phrygians, however, derive the principles 
of their heresy from a certain Montanus, and Pris- 
cilla, and Maximilla, and regard these wretched 
women as prophetesses, and Montanus as a 
prophet. In respect, however, of what apper- 
tains to the origin and creation of the universe, 
the Phrygians are supposed to express themselves 
correctly ; while in the tenets which they enun- 
ciate respecting Christ, they have not irrelevantly 
formed their opinions. But they are seduced into 
error in common with the heretics previously allud- 
ed to, and devote their attention to the discourses 
of these above the Gospels, thus laying down 
regulations concerning novel and strange fasts.J 

CHAP. XXII. — THE PHRYGIANS OR MONTANISTS 
CONTINUED. 

But others of them, being attached to the 
heresy of the Noetians, entertain similar opin- 

- [Vol. iii. p. 654, this series, where it should have been noted 
that the Appendix to TertuIUan is supposed by Waterland to be 
" little else bur an extract from Hippolytus " He pronounces it 
" ancient and of good value." See Wordsworth's remarks on the 
biblidarioti, p. 59.] 

' The MS. has the obviously corrupt reading trapaSoacit, which 
1 Duncker alters into irapaSd^ovs (strange). 

14S 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book X. 

ions to those relating to the silly women of the 
Phrygians, and to Montanus. As regards, how- 
ever,' the truths appertaining to the Father of 
the entire of existing things, they are guilty of 
blasphemy, because they assert that He is Son 
and Father, visible and invisible, begotten and 
unbegotten, mortal and immortal. These have 
taken occasion from a certain Noetus to put for- 
ward their heresy. 

CHAP. XXIII. — NOETUS AND CALLISTUS. 

But in like manner, also, Noetus, being by 
birth a native of Smyrna, and a fellov/ addicted 
to reckless babbling, as well as crafty withal, 
introduced (among us) this heresy which origi- 
nated from one Epigonus. It reached Rome, 
and was adopted by Cleomenes, and so has con- 
tinued to this day among his successors, Noe- 
tus asserts that there is one Father and God of 
the universe, and that He made all things, and 
was imperceptible to those that exist when He 
might so desire. Noetus inaiiitained that the 
Father then appeared when He wished ; and 
He is invisible when He is not seen, but visible 
when He is seen. And this heretic also alleges 
that the Father is unbegotten when He is not 
generated, but begotten when He is born of a 
virgin ; as also that He is not subject to suffer- 
ing, and is immortal when He does not suffer or 
die. When, however, His passion ' came upon 
Him, Noetus allows that the Father suffers and 
dies. And the Noetians suppose that this Father 
Himself is called Son, (and vice versa,) in refer- 
ence to the events which at their own proper 
periods happen to them severally. 

Callistus corroborated the heresy of these 
Noetians, but we have already carefully explained 
the details of his life. And Callistus himself 
produced likewise a heresy, and derived its 
starting-points from these Noetians, — namely, 
so far as he acknowledges that there is one 
Father and God, viz., the Creator of the universe, 
and that this (God) is spoken of, and called by 
the name of Son, yet that in substance He is one 
Spirit. For Spirit, as the Deity, is, he says, not 
any deing different from the Logos, or the Logos 
from the Deity ; therefore this one person, (ac- 
cording to Callistus,) is divided nominally, but 
substantially not so. He supposes this one 
Logos to be God, and affirms that there was in 
the case of the Word an incarnation. And he is 
disposed (to maintain), that He who was seen 
in the flesh and was crucified ^ is Son, but that 

* Cruice suggests the addition of the words " and death," in order 
to correspond with the remainder of the sentence. The punctuation 
followed above is conjectural, but gives substantially the meaning of 
the text as settled by Dunckcr. 

2 <rTaupouiLi.f i/oi/. The MS. reads Kparoviievoi', which would mean 
seized or vanquished The former yields no meaning, and the latter 
conveys an erroneous conception regarding the Blessed Lord, who, 
in yielding to suffering and death, showed Himself more than con- 
queror of both (John x. 17, 18). 

the Father it is who dwells in Him. Callistus 
thus at one time branches off into the opinion 
of Noetus, but at another into that of Theodotus, 
and holds no sure doctrine. These, then, are 
the opinions of Callistus. 

CHAP. XXIV. 

HERMOGENES. 

But one Hermogenes himself also being de- 
sirous of saying something, asserted that God 
made all things out of matter coeval with Him- 
self, and subject to His design. For Hermoge- 
nes i held it to be an impossibility that God 
should make the things that were made, except 
out of existent things. 

CHAP. XXV. — THE ELCHASAITES. 

But certain others, introducing as it were some 
novel tenet, appropriated parts of their system 
from all heresies, and procured a strange volume, 
which bore on the titlepage the name of one 
Elchasai. These, in like manner, acknowledge 
that the principles of the universe were origi- 
nated by the Deity. They do not, however, 
confess that there is but one Christ, but that 
there is one that is superior to the rest, and that 
He is transfused into many bodies frequently, 
and was now in Jesus. And, in like manner, 
these heretics maintain that at one time Christ 
was begotten of God, and at another time be- 
came the Spirit, and at another time was born 
of a virgin, and at another time not so. And 
they affirm that likewise this Jesus after\vards was 
continually being transfused into bodies, and was 
manifested in many (different bodies) at different 
times. And they resort to incantations and bap- 
tisms in their confession of elements. And they 
occupy themselves with bustling activity in re- 
gard of astrological and mathematical science, 
and of the arts of sorcery. But also they allege 
themselves to have powers of prescience. 

CHAP. XXVI. — JEWISH CHRONOLOGY. 

. . . From Haran, a city of Mesopotamia, 
(Abraham, by the command) -^ of God, transfers 
his residence into the country which is now called 
Palestine and Judea, but then the region of Ca- 
naan. Now, concerning this territory, we have 
in part, but still not negligently, rendered an 
account in other discourses. From the circum- 
stance, then, (of this migration) is traceable the 
beginning of an increase (of population) in 

3 Cruice considers that Theodoret has taken his account {Har. 
Fab., i. 19) from this tenth book of The Refuiaticii. 

* There is here a hiatus, which Abbe Cruice thinks is caused by 
those portions of the MS. being lost, in which Hippolytus furnishes 
his Summary of the Jewish Sects. The object of introducing these 
genealogical and ethnic remarks might at first seem irrelevant; but 
they are intended to be subservient to Hippolytus' P,-j:;o!istrntio>: of 
the Truth, by proving the superior antiquity, as coming down from 
Abraham, of revelation above all pa^an philosophy. [See, cap. xxvii. 
infra.\ Abbe Cruice refers us to his work (pp. T2.--n), Etudes sur- 
lie Nouveaux Documents Hiiioriques empruntes a L'Ouvragc 
des i)>i.koao<t>ovii€va, Paris, 1833. 

Chap. XXVII.] THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

149 

Judea, which obtained its name from Judah, 
fourth son of Jacob, whose natne was also called 
Israel, from the fact that a race of kings would 
be descended from him.' Abraham removes 
from Mesopotamia (when 75 years old, and) 
when 100 years old he begat Isaac. But Isaac, 
when 60 years of age, begat Jacob. And Jacob, 
when 86 years old, begat Levi ; and Levi, at 40 
years of age, begat Caath ; - and Caath was four 
years of age when he went down with Jacob into 
Egypt. Therefore the entire period during which 
Abraham sojourned, and the entire family de- 
scended from hmi by Isaac, in the country then 
called Canaanitis, was 215 years. But the father 
of this Abraham is Thare,^ and of this Tha^-e 
the father is Nachor, and of this Nachor the 
father is Serag, and of this Serag the father is 
Reu, and of this Reii the father is Peleg, and of 
this Peleg^ the father is Heber. And so it comes 
to pass that tJie Jews are denominated by the 
name of Hebrews. /;/ the time of Ph a /eg, ^ how- 
£ver, arose the dispersion of nations. Now these 
nations were 72,^ corresponding with the number 
if Abraham's children. And the names of these 
nations we have likewise set down in other books, 
not even omitting this point in its own proper 
place. And the reason of our particularity is 
our desire to manifest to those who are of a stu- 
dious disposition the love which we cherish to- 
wards the Divinity, and the indubitable knowledge 
respecting the Truth, which in the course of our 
labours ^ we have acquired possession of. But 
of this Heber the father is Salah ; and of this 
Sala/i the father is Cai'nan ; and of this Cainan 
the father is Arphaxad, whose father is Shem ; 
and of this Shem the father is Noah. And in 
Noah's time there occurred a flood throughout 
the entire world, which neither Egyptians, nor 
Chaldeans, nor Greeks recollect ; for the inun- 
dations which took place in the age of Ogyges 
and Deucalion prevailed only in the localities 
where these dwelt.^ There are, then, in the 

' [Vol. ii. p. 306, this series.] 

- That is, Kohath (see Gen. xlvi. ii). 

3 That is, Tera (see Gen. xi. 26). 

■* Gen. xi. 16. 

5 [Possibly a //^ywVrt/catastrophe. Gen. x. 25, and i Chron. i. 19.] 

* The system of seventy-two nations here adopted by Hippolytus 
is that advanced by Jewish writers generally,. and has been probably 
■deduced from the tenth chapter of Genesis. Another historian of the 
heresies of the Church adopts it — Epiphanius. A chronographer, 
however, contemporary with Hippolytus — Julius Africanus — dis- 
carded this number, as is proved by the fragments of his work pre- 
served by Eusebius and Syncellus. 

" The allusion here made constitutes a strong reason for ascribing 
The Refutation to Hippolytus, the author of which here states that 
he had written a Chronicle. But the fragment in our text corresponds 
with a Latin translation of a Chronicon given by Fabricius, and bear- 
ing the name of Hippolytus. The terms in which Hippolytus delivers 
himself above imply that he was the inventor of a chronological sys- 
tem, thus harmonizing with the fact that the Paschal Cycle, though 
ever so faulty, was selected out of all his writings for being inscribed 
on Hippolytus' statue, dug up on the road to Tivoli A D. 1551, in the 
vicinity of Rome, near the Church of St. Lorenzo. [This modest note 
is of no slight importance to the case, as elucidated by Bunsen and 
Wordsworth ] 

^ [Hippolytus does not call in the Greek fables to support the bib- 
lical story: he dismisses them with indifference. Vet the iini-:'ersality 
of such traditions is unaccountable save as derived from the history 
■of Noah.l 

case of these (patriarchs — that is, from Noab 
to Heber inclusive) — 5 generations, a;/r/ 495 
years.9 This Noah, inasmuch as he was a most 
religious and God-loving man, alone, with wife 
and children, and the three wives of these, es- 
caped the flood that ensued. And he owed his 
preservation to an ark ; and both the dimensions 
and relics of this ark are, as we have explained, 
shown to this day in the mountains called Ararat, 
which are situated in the direction of the country 
of the Adiabeni.'° It is then possible for those 
who are disposed to investigate the subject indus- 
triously, to perceive how clearly has been demon- 
strated the existence of a nation of worshippers 
of the true God, more ancient than all the Chal- 
deans, Egyptians, and Greeks. What necessity, 
however, is there at present to specify those who, 
anterior to Noah, were both devout men, and 
permitted to hold converse with the true God, 
inasmuch as, so far as the subject taken in hand 
is concerned, this testimony in regard of the an- 
tiquity of the people of God is sufficient ? 

CHAP. XXVIL — JEWISH CHRONOLOGY CONTINUED. 

But since it does not seem irrational to prove 
that these nations that had their attention en- 
grossed with the speculations of philosophy are of 
more modern date than those that had habitually 
worshipped the true God," it is reasonable that 
we should state both whence the family of these 
latter originated ; and that when they took up 
their abode in these countries, they did not re- 
ceive a name from the actual localities, but 
claimed for themselves names from those who 
were primarily born, and had inhabited these. 
Noah had three sons — Shem, Ham, and Japheth. 
From these the entire family of man was multi- 
plied, and every quarter of the earth owes its 
inhabitants in the first instance to these. For 
the word of God to them prevailed, when the 
Lord said, " Be fruitful, and multiply, and re- 
plenish the earth." So great efficacy had that 
one word that from the three sons of Noah are 
begotten in the family 72 children, — (viz.,) from 
Shem, 25 ; from Japheth, 15 ; and ixom. Ham, 32. 
Unto Ham, however, these 32 children are born 
in accordance with previous declarations. And 
among Ham's children are : Canaan,'- from whom 
came the Canaanites ; Mizraim, from whom the 
Egyptians ; Cush, from whom the Ethiopians ; 
and Phut, from whom the Libyans. These, 
according to the XsiWgwdigQ prevalent among them, 
are up to the present day styled by the appella- 
tion of their ancestors ; nay, even in the Greek 
tongue they are called by the names by which 

9 Cruice has 435 years. 

'■^ [That such relics were exhibited need not be doubted if the ac- 
count of Berosus is credited. W^e may doubt as to their genuineness 
of course.] 

" [See note 4, p. 148, supra.^ 

^- [The only son of Ham who did not go to Africa, vol iii. p. 3.' 

ISO 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book X. 

they have been now denominated. But even 
supposing that neither these locaHties had been 
previously inhabited, nor that it could be proved 
that a race of men from the beginning existed 
there, nevertheless these sons of Noah, a wor- 
shipper of God, are quite sufficient to prove the 
point at issue. For it is evident that Noah him- 
self must have been a disciple of devout people, 
for which reason he escaped the tremendous, 
though transient, threat of water. 

How, then, should not the worshippers of the 
true God be of greater antiquity than all Chal- 
deans, Egyptians, and Greeks, for we must bear 
in mind that the father of these Gentiles was 
born from this Japheth,' and received the name 
Javan, and became the progenitor of Greeks and 
lonians? Now, if the nations that devoted 
themselves to questions concerning philosophy 
are shown to belong to a period altogether more 
recent than the race of the worshippers of God 
as well as the time of the deluge, how would not 
the nations of the barbarians, and as many tribes 
as in the world are known and unknown, appear 
to belong to a more modern epoch than these ? 
Therefore ye Greeks, Egyptians, Chaldeans, and 
the entire race of men, become adepts in this 
doctrine, and learn from us, who are the friends 
of God, what the nature of God is, and what 
His well-arranged creation. And we have cul- 
tivated this system, not expressing ourselves in 
mere pompous language, but executing our trea- 
tises in terms that prove our knowledge of truth 
and our practice of good sense, our object being 
the demonstration of His Truth? 

CHAP. XXVIII. — THE DOCTRINE OF THE TRUTH. 

The first and only (one God),^ both Creator 
and Lord of all, had nothing coeval 7uith Him- 
self, not infinite chaos, nor measureless water, 
nor solid earth, nor dense air, not warm fire, nor 
refined spirit, nor the azure canopy* of the stu- 
pendous firmament. But He was One, alone in 
Himself. By an exercise of His will He created 
things that are, which antecedently had no ex- 
istence, except that He willed to make them. 
For He is fully acquainted with whatever is 
about to take place, for foreknowledge also is 
present to Him. The different principles, how- 

' [The fahle of lapetus cannot be expLiined away as a corrobora- 
tion of the biblical narrative. Hor., Od., i. 3, 27.] 

^ (Here the Edinburgh has " nature." The context seems to re- 
quire the more comprehensive word " Truth."] 

J The margin of the ms. has the words Oripcn and Origcn's 
opinion." This seemed to confirm the criticism which ascribes The 
Refutation to Origcn. Hiit even su^jposing Origen not the author, 
ihe copyet of the MS. might have written Origcn's n.ime on the m.ir- 
gin, as indicating the transcriber's opinion concerning the coincidence 
of creed between Origen and the author of The Refutatiou. The 
fad, however, is, that the doctrine of eternal punishment, asserted ifi 
the concluding cliapier of The Refutntiou, wa» aciu.'>lly controverted 
by Origen. See translator's Introductory Notice. | Sec also Words- 
worth (a lucid exposition), p. 20, etc., and /;//r<i, cap. xxix. note 

* 6po'/»)>' (Scott). The .MS. has Mop'^iji'. 

ever, of what will come into existence, He first 
fabricated, viz., fire and spirit, water and earth, 
from which diverse elements He proceeded to 
form His own creation. And some objects He 
formed of one essence, but others He com- 
pounded from two, and others from three, and 
others from four. And those/f^rw^-^of one sub- 
stance were immortal, for in their case dissolution 
does not follow, for what is one will never be 
dissolved. Those, on the other hand, which are 
formed out of two, or three, or four substances, 
are dissoluble ; wherefore also are they named 
mortal. For this has been denominated death, 
namely, the dissolution of substances connected. 
I now therefore think that I have sufficiently 
answered those endued with a sound mind, who, 
if they are desirous of additional instruction, and 
are disposed accurately to investigate the sub- 
stances of these things, and the causes of the 
entire creation, will become acquainted with 
these points should they peruse a work of ours 
comprised (under the title). Concerning the Sub- 
stance of the Universe. 5 I consider, however, 
that at present it is enough to elucidate those 
causes of which the Greeks, not being aware, 
glorified, in pompous phraseology, the parts of 
creation, while they remained ignorant of the 
Creator. And from these the heresiarchs have 
taken occasion, and have transformed the state- 
ments previously made by those Greeks into 
similar doctrines, and thus have framed ridiculous 
heresies. 

CHAP. XXIX. — THE DOCTRINE OF THE TRUTH 
CONTINUED. 

Therefore this solitary and supreme Deity, by 
an exercise of reflection, brought forth the Logos 
first ; not the word in the sense of being articu- 
lated by voice, but as a ratiocination of the 
universe, conceived and residing in the divine 
fnind. Him alone He produced from existing 
things ; for the Father Himself constituted ex- 
istence, and the being born from Him was the 
cause of all things that are produced.*^ The 
Logos was in the Father Himself, bearing the will 
of His progenitor, and not being unacquainted 

5 Here we have another reference intimately bearing on the author- 
ship of The Re/utcition. What follows corresponds with a fragment 
having a similar title lo that stated above, first publi'>hcd by Le Moyne, 
and inserted in Fabricius (i. pp. 220-222) as the work of Hippolytus. 
Photiiis mentions this work, and gives an extract from it correspond- 
ing wiih what is furnished by Hippolytus. I'hotius, however, men- 
tions that the book On the Sii/'staiue 0/ the i'«/7'C>-i.' was s.iid to 
be written by Josephiis, but discovers in marginal notes the ascription 
of it to Caius. Hut Caius cannot be the writer, since Photius states 
that the author of The Labyrinth affirmed that he had written On 
the Su/'stniue of the Universe. Now Hippolytus informs us that 
he is author of The Labyrinth. Hippolytus thus refers to three of 
his works in The Refutation : (:) trtpai (Ji^Aot, i.e., on Chronol- 
ogy: (2) Coneerning the Substanee of the Universe; (3) Little 
Labyrinth. Except Hippolytus and Photius refer to different works 
in speaking of The Labyrinth, the foregoing settles the question of 
the authorship of The Refutation. [See the case of Caius stated. 
Wordsworth, cap. iv. p. 27, etc. J 

0 [Elucidation XVI.] 

Chap. XXIX.] 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

151 

with the mind of the Father. For simultane- 
ously ' with His procession from His Progenitor, 
inasmuch as He is this Progenitor's first-bom, He 
has, as a voice in Himself, the ideas conceived 
in the Father. And so it was, tjat when the 
Father ordered the world to come ii|to existence, 
the Logos one by one completed each object of 
creation, thus pleasing God. And some things 
which multiply by generation ^ He formed male 
and female ; but whatsoever beings were designed 
for service and ministration He made €\\\\cx male, 
or not requiring females, or neither male nor 
female. For even the primary substances of 
these, which were formed out of nonentities, 
viz., fire and spirit, water and earth, are neither 
male nor female ; nor could male or female pro- 
ceed from any one of these, were it not that 
God, who is the source of all authority, wished 
that the Logos might render assistance ^ in ac- 
complishing a production of this kind. I con- 
fess that angels are of fire, and I maintain that 
female spirits are not present with them. And 
I am of opinion that sun and moon and stars, in 
like manner, are produced from fire and spirit, 
and are neither male nor female. And the will 
of the Creator is, that swimming and winged 
animals are from water, male and female. For 
so God, whose will it was, ordered that there 
should exist a moist substance, endued with pro- 
ductive power. And in like maiiner God com- 
manded, that from earth should arise reptiles and 
beasts, as well males and females of all sorts of 
animals ; for so the nature of the things pro- 
duced admitted. For as many things as He willed, 
God made from time to time. These things He 
created through the Logos, it not being possible 
for things to be generated otherwise than as they 
were produced. But when, according as He 
willed, He also formed (objects), He called 
them by names, and thus notified His creative 
efforts And making these. He formed the ruler 
of all, and fashioned him out of all composite 
substances.5 The Creator did not wish to make 
him a god, and failed in His aim ; nor an angel, — 
be not deceived, — but a man. For if He had 
willed to make thee a god. He could have done so. 
Thou hast the example of the Logos. His will, 
however, was, that you should be a man, and 
He has made thee a man. But if thou art de- 
sirous of also becoming a god, obey Him that 
has created thee, and resist not now, in order 

' This passage is differently rendered, according as we read ib^v'^ 
with Bunsen, or ^l>uivr\v with Dr. Wordsworth. The latter also alters 
the reading of the MS. (at the end of the next sentence), aTrtTtAfiTo 
afitoKmu t)t<ii, into in-exfAei to aptdKov, " he carried into effect what 
was pleasing to the Deity." 

- Dr. Wordsworth suggests for yet'eVei, eTrtyci/ccrft, i.e., a con- 
tinuous series of procreation. 

3 See Origen, tn Joann., torn. ii. sec. 8. 

•« [Rather, His 7t'/V/.] 

5 Compare Origen, in Joann.^ sec. 2, where we have a similar 
opinion slated. A certain parallel in this and other portions of Hip- 
polytus' concluding remarks, induces the transcriber, no doubt, to 
write " Origen's opinion" ia Uie margin. 

that, being found faithful in that which is small, 
you may be enabled to have entrusted to you 
also that which is great.^ 

The Logos alone of this God is from God 
himself; wherefore also the Logos is God, being 
//z? substance of God.^ Now the world was 
made from nothing ; wherefore // is not God ; 
as also because this world admits of dissolution 
whenever the Creator so wishes it. But God, 
who created //, did not, nor does not, make evil. 
He makes what is glorious and excellent ; for 
He who makes // is good. Now man, that was 
brought into existence, was a creature endued 
with a capacity of self-determination,* yet not 
possessing a sovereign intellect,'' nor holding 
sway over all things by reflection, and authority, 
and power, but a slave to his passions, and com- 
prising all sorts of contrarieties in himself. But 
man, from the fact of his possessing a capacity 
of self-determination, brings forth what is evil,'° 
that is, accidentally ; which evil is not consum- 
mated except you actually commit some piece 
of wickedness. For it is in regard of our de- 
siring anything that is wicked, or our meditating 
upon it, that what is evil is so denominated. 
Evil had no existence from the beginning, but 
came into being subsequently." Since man has 
free will, a law has been defined /^r his guidance 
by the Deity, not without answering a good pur- 
pose. For if man did not possess the power to 
will and not to will, why should a law be estab- 
lished ? For a law will not be laid down for an 
animal devoid of reason, but a bridle and a whip ; '* 
whereas to man has been given a precept and 
penalty to perform, or for not carrying into exe- 
cution what has been enjoined. For man thus 
constituted has a law been enacted by just men 
in primitive ages. Nearer our o\vJi day was there 
established a law, full of gravity and justice, by 
Moses, to whom allusion has been already made, 
a devout man, and one beloved of God. 

Now the Logos of God controls all these ; 
the first begotten Child of the Father, the voice 
of the Dawn antecedent to the Morning Star.'J 
Afterwards just men were born, friends of God ; 

^ Matt. XXV. 21, 23; Luke xvi. 10, 11, 12, [Also 2 Pet. i. 4, one 
of the king-texts of the inspired oracles.] 

' [Nicene doctrine, ruling out all conditions of time from the idea 
of the generation of the Logos.] 

8 auTffoOtrio?. Hippolytus here follows, his master Irenaeus 
(//(Pr., iv. g), and in domg so enunciates an opinion, and uses an 
expression adopted universally by patristic writers, up to the period 
of St. Augustine. This great philosopher and divine, however, shook 
the entire fabric of existing theology respecting the will, and started 
difficulties, speculative ones at least, which admit of no solution short 
of the annihilation of finite thought and volition. See translator's 
Treatise on Meta/<hysics, chap. x. [Also compare lrena;us, vol. 
i. p. 518; and Clement, vol. ii. pp. 319 />nssiii! to 525; aUo vol. iii. 301, 
and vol. iv. TertuU. and Origen. See/«</c-i<i on Free--will.\ 

9 Dr. Wordbworth translates the passage thus: " Endued with 
free will, but not dominant; having reason, but not able to govern," 

etc. . . , , 

'° [One of the most pithy of all statements as to the origin ol SUO': 
jecti-n- c\\\, i.e.. evil in humanity.] 

" See Origen, in Joann., torn. ii. sec. 7. 

'- Ps. xxxii. 9. 

'•> Ps. ex. 3; 2 Pet. i. 18, 19. 

152 

THE REFUTATION OF ALL HERESIES. 

[Book X. 

a7i(i these have been styled prophets,' on account 
of their foreshowing future events. And the 
word of prophecy - was committed unto them, 
not for one age on/v ; but also the utterances of 
events predicted throughout all generations, were 
vouchsafed in perfect clearness. And this, too, 
not at the time merely when seers furnished a 
reply to those present ; ■' but also events that 
would happen throughout all ages, have been 
manifested beforehand ; because, in speaking of 
incidents gone by, the prophets brought them 
back to the recollection of humanity ; whereas, 
in showing forth present occurrences, they en- 
deavoured to persuade men not to be remiss ; 
while, by foretelling future events, they have 
rendered each one of us terrified on beholding 
events that had been predicted long before, atid 
on expecting likewise those events predicted as 
still future. Such is our faith, O all ye men, — 
ours, I say, who are not persuaded by empty 
expressions, nor caught away by sudden impulses 
of the heart, nor beguiled by the plausibility of 
eloquent discourses, yet who do not refuse to 
obey words that have been uttered by divine 
power. And these injunctions has God given 
to the Word. But the Word, by declaring them, 
promulgated the divine commandments, thereby 
turning man from disobedience, not bringing 
him into servitude by force of necessity, but 
summoning him to liberty through a choice in- 
volving spontaneity. 

This Logos the Father in the latter days sent 
forth, no longer to speak by a prophet, and not 
wishing that the Word, being obscurely pro- 
claimed, should be made the subject of mere 
conjecture, but that He should be manifested, 
so that we could see Him with our own eyes. 
This Logos, I say, the Father sent forth, in order 
that the world, on beholding Him, might rever- 
ence Him who was delivering precepts not by 
ihe person of prophets, nor terrifying the soul by 
an angel, but who was Himself — He that had 
spoken — corporally present amongst us. This 
Logos we know to have received a body from a 
virgin, and to have remodelled the old man ■* by 
a new creation. And we believe the Logos to 

■ In making the Logos a living principle in the prophets, and as 
speaking through them to the Church of God in all ages, Hippolytus 
agrees with Origen. This constitutes another reason for the marginal 
note " Origen's opinion," already mentioned. (See Origen, llept 
'Xpxuiv, i. I.) 

^ Hippolytus expresses similar opinions respecting the economy 
of the prophets, in his work, De Aiitichristn, sec. 2. 

^ Hippolytus here compares the ancient prophets with the oracles 
of the (Jentiles. The heathen seers did not give forth their vaticina- 
tions spontaneously, but furnished responses to those only who made 
inquiries after them, says Dr. Wordsworth. 

■* irnitvoaKOTa. This is the reading adopted by Cruice and Words- 
worth. The translator has followed Cruice's rendering, refinxissi\ 
while Dr. Wordsworth construes the word " fashioned." The latter 
is more literal, as itnooiui means to knead, though the sense imparted 
to it by Cruice would seem more coincident with the scriptural ac- 
count (.1 Cor. V. 7; 2 Cor. v. 17: Gal. vi. 15). Bunsen does not 
alter 7rf'.'ioot)<oTa, the readmg of the MS , and translates it, " to have 
put on the old man through a new firmation." Sauppe reads - 'i - 
prjtoTa. See Hipixilytus, De Aiitichristo, sec. 26, in Danietem 
(p. 205, Mai) ; and Irena.us, v. 6. 

have passed through every period in this life, in 
order that He Himself might serve as a law for 
every age,5 and that, by being present (amongst) 
us, He might exhibit His own manhood as an 
aim for all men. And that by Himself in person 
He might prove that God made nothing evil, 
and that man possesses the capacity of self- 
determination, inasmuch as he is able to will 
and not to will, and is endued with power to do 
both.*" This Alan we know to have been made 
out of the compound of our hu/nanity. For if 
He were not of the same nature 7vith ourselves, 
in vain does He ordain that we should imitate 
the Teacher. For if that Man happened to be 
of a different substance from us, why does He 
lay injunctions similar to those He has received 
on myself, who, am born weak ; and how is this 
the act of one that is good and just? In order, 
however, that He might not be supposed to be 
different from us. He even underwent toil, and 
was willing to endure hunger, and did not refuse 
to feel thirst, and sunk mto the quietude of 
slumber. He did not protest against His Pas- 
sion, but became obedient unto death, and mani- 
fested His resurrection. Now in all these acts 
He offered up, as the first-fruits, His own man- 
hood, in order that thou, when thou art in 
tribulation, mayest not be disheartened, but, 
confessing thyself to be a man (of like nature 
with the Redeemer), mayest dwell in expecta- 
tion of also receiving what the Father has granted 
unto this SonJ 

CHAP. XXX. THE AUTHOR'S CONCLUDING 

ADDRESS. 

Such is the true doctrine in regard of the 
divine nature, O ye men, Greeks and Barbarians, 
Chaldeans and Assyrians, Egyptians and Lib- 
yans, Indians and Ethiopians, Celts, and ye 
Latins, who lead armies, and all ye that inhabit 
Europe, and Asia, and Libya.'' And to you I am 
become an adviser, inasmuch as I am a disciple 
of the benevolent Logos, and hence humane, in 
order that you may hasten and by us may be 
taught who the true God is, and 7vhat is His 
well-ordered creation. Do not devote your at- 
tention to the fallacies of artificial discourses, 
nor the vain promises of plagiarizing heretics,'^ 
but to the venerable simplicity of unassuming 

S [See Irenseus (a very beautiful passage), vol. i. p. 391.] 

<> [See vol. iv. pp. 255 and 383.] 

7 This is the reading adopted by Cruice and Bunsen. Dr. Words- 
worth translates the passage thus: " acknowledging thyself a man of 
like nature with Christ, and thou also waiting for the appearance of 
what thou gavest Him." The source of consolation to man which 
Hippolytus, according to Dr. Wordsworth, is here an.\ious to indi- 
cate, is the glorification of human nature in the person of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. Dr. Wordsworth therefore objects to liunsen's render- 
mg, as it gives to the passage a meaning different from this. 

* [The translator's excessive interpolations sometimes needlessly 
dilute the terse characteristics of the author. Thus, with confusing 
brackets, the Edinburgh reads: " who so often lead your armies to 
victory." This is not Hippolytus, and, in such instances, I fee! 
bound to reduce a plethoric text.] 

9 [Here the practical idea of the Philosophumena comes out ; 
and compare vol. iv. pp. 46^ and 570.] 

ELUCIDATIONS. 

153 

truth. Antl by means of this knowledge you 
shall escape the approaching threat of the fire of 
judgment, and the rayless scenery of gloomy 
Tartarus,' where never shines a beam from the 
irradiating voice of the Word ! 

You shall escape the boiling flood of hell's ^ 
eternal lake of fire, and the eye ever fixed in 
menacing glare of fallen angels chained in Tar- 
tarus as punishment for their sins ; and you shall 
escape the worm that ceaselessly coils for food 
around the body whose scum ^ has bred //. Now 
such (torments) as these shalt thou avoid by 
being instructed in a knowledge of the true God. 
And thou shalt possess an immortal body, even 
one placed beyond the possibility of corruption, 
just like the soul. And thou shalt receive the 
kingdom of heaven, thou who, whilst thou didst 
sojourn in this life, didst know the Celestial 
King. And thou shalt be a companion of the 
Deity, and a co-heir with Christ, no longer en- 
slaved by lusts or passions, and never again 
wasted by disease. For thou hast become God : "> 
for whatever sufferings thou didst undergo while 
being a man, these He gave to thee, because 
thou wast of mortal mould, but whatever it is 

' Dr. Wordsworth justifies Hippolytus' use of the pagan word 
" Tartarus," by citing the passage (2 Pet ii. 4), " For if God spared 
not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered 
them into chains of darkness (creipni? C,6<^ov Taprapuicra^), to be re- 
served unto judgment," etc. [Elucidation XVII. and vol. iv. 140.] 

2 Schneidewin suggests a comparison of this passage with Hip- 
polytus' fragment. Against Plato, concernitig the Cause of the 
Ujiiverse (p. 220, ed. Fabricii; p. 68, ed. de Lagarde). 

3 The different renderings of this passage, according to different 
readings, are as follow: " And the worm the scum of the body, turn- 
ing to the Body that foamed it forth as to that which nourisheth it " 
(Wordsworth). " The worm which winds itself without rest round 
the mouldering body, to feed upon it" (Bunsen and Scott). "The 
worm wriggling as over the filth of the (putrescent) flesh towards 
the exhaling body " ( Roeper) . " The worm turning itself towards the 
substance of the body, towards, (I say,) the exhalations of the decay- 
ing frame, as to food" (Schneidewin). The words chiefly altered 
are: an-ouo'iai', into (l) kv' ovaiav, (2) 6Jr' aAovcri^, (3) a7rau<rTa)s; 
and eTTicTTpec^oiu.ti'Oi' into (i) ejri(rTpe<i>o>', (2) k-n\ Tpo^r\v. 

•< [This startling expression is justified by such texts as 2 Pet. i. 4 
compTed with John xvii. 22, 23, and Rev. iii. 21. Thus, Christ over- 
r-jW .he Tempter (Gen. iii. 5), and gives more than was offered by 

- ' Father of Lies."] 

consistent with God to impart, these God has 
promised to bestow upon thee, because thou 
hast been deified, and begotten unto immor- 
tality.5 This constitutes the import of the prov- 
erb, " Know thyself; " i.e., discover God within 
thyself, for He has formed thee after His own 
image. For with the knowledge of self is con- 
joined the being an object of God's knowledge, 
for thou art called by the Deity Himself. Be 
not therefore inflamed, O ye men, with enmity 
one towards another, nor hesitate to retrace" 
with all speed your steps. For Christ is the 
God above all, and He has arranged to wash 
away sin from human beings, ^ rendering regen- 
erate the old man. And God called man His 
likeness from the beginning, and has evinced in 
a figure His love towards thee. And provided 
thou obeyest His solemn injunctions, and be- 
comest a faithful follower of Him who is good, 
thou shalt resemble Him, inasmuch as thou shalt 
have honour conferred upon thee by Him. For 
the Deity, (by condescension,) does not di- 
minish aught of the dignity of His divine ^ per- 
fection ; having made thee even God unto His 
glory ! 9 

5 [Compare John x. 34 with Rev. v. 10, Kings of the earth may 
be called " gods," in a sense; ergo, etc.] 

6 Bunsen translates thus: " Doubt not tha*^ you will exist again," 
— a rendering which Dr. Wordsworth controverts in favour of the 
one adopted above. 

7 Bunsen translates thus: " For Christ is He whom the God of 
all has ordered to wash away the sins," etc. Dr. Wordsworth se- 
verely censures this rendering in a lengthened note. 

8 TTTu>-)^evei. Bunsen translates, " for God acts the beggar towards 
thee," which is literal, though rather unintelligible. Dr. Wordsworth 
renders the word thus: " God has a longing for thee." 

9 Hippolytus, by his argument, recognises the duty not merely 
of overthrowing error but substantiating truth, or in other words, the 
negative and positive aspect of theology. His brief statement (chap, 
xxviii.-xxx.) in the latter department, along with being eminently 
reflective, constitutes a noble specimen of patristic eloquence. [This 
is most just; and it must be observed, that having summed up his 
argument against the heresies derived from carnal and inferior sources, 
and shown the primal truth, he advances (in chap, xxviii.) to the 
Nicene position, and proves himself one of the witnesses on whose 
traditive testimony that sublime formulary was given to the whole 
Church as the (cT^/u.a e? <i«i of Christendom, — a formal countersign 
of apostolic doctrine.] 

ELUCIDATIONS. 

(Who first propounded these heresies, p. 11.) 

Hippolytus seems to me to have felt the perils to the pure Gospel of many admissions made 
by Clement and other Alexandrian doctors as to the merits of some of the philosophers of the 
Gentiles. Very gently, but with prescient genius, he adopts this plan of tracing the origin and 
all the force of heresies to " philosophy falsely so called." The existence of this " cloud of 
locusts" is (i) evidence of the antagonism of Satan ; (2) of the prophetic spirit of the apostles ; 
(3) of the tremendous ferment produced by the Gospel leaven as soon as it was hid in the " three 
measures of meal " by " the Elect Lady," the Ecclesia Dei ; (4) of the fidelity of the witnesses, — 
that grand, heroic glory of the Ante-Nicene Fathers, — who never suffered these heresies to be mis- 

154 ELUCIDATIONS. 

taken for the faith, or to corrupt the Scriptures ; and (5) finally of the power of the Holy Spirit, 
who gave them victory over errors, and enabled them to define truth in all the crystalline beauty 
of that " Mountain of Light," that true Koh-i-noor, the Nicene Symbol. Thus, also, Christ's 
promises were fulfiUed. 

II. 

(Caulacau, p. 52.) 

See Irenseus, p. 350, vol. i., this series, where I have explained this jargon of heresy. But I 
think it worth while to make use here of two notes on the subject, which I made in 1845,' ^^^^ 
little foresight of these tasks in 1885. 

Fleury (tom. ii.) makes this statement : " Les Nicolaites donnaient une infinite de noms bar- 
bares aux princes et aux puissances qu'ils mettaient en chaque ciel. lis en nommaient un 
(aulaucauch^ abusant d'un passage d'Isaie, ou se lisent ces mots hebreux : cati-la-cau, cau-la- 
cau, pour representer I'insolence avec laquelle les impies se moquaient du proph^te, en rdp^tant 
plusieurs fois quelques-unes de ses paroles." Compare Guerricus, thus : " Vox ilia taedii et des- 
perationis, quae apud Isaiam ( xxviii. 13) legitur, quia, viz., moram faciente Domino, frequenti- 
bus nuntiis ejus increduli et illusores insultare videntur : 7?ianda re?nanda,'^ etc. See the spurious 
Bernardina, " de Adventu Dom., serm. i./* S. Bernard., opp. Paris (ed. Mabillon), vol. ii. 
p. 1799. 

IIL 

(The Phrygians call Papa, p. 54.) 

Hippolytus had little idea, when he wrote this, what the word Pa/>a was destined to 
signify in mediaeval Rome. The Adda of Holy Writ has its equivalent in many Oriental lan- 
guages, as well as in the Greek and Latin, through which it has passed into all the dialects of 
P^urope. It was originally given to all presbyters, as implied in their name of elders, and was a 
title of humility when it became peculiar to the bishops, as (i Pet. v. 3) tion Domini sed patres. 
St. Paul (i Cor. iv. 15) shows that " in Christ " — that is, under Him — we may have such " fathers ; " 
and thus, while he indicates the true sense of the precept, he leads us to recognise a prophetic 
force diXid admonition in our Saviour's words (Matt, xxiii.), "Call no man your father upon the 
earth." Thus interpreted, these words seem to be a warning against the sense to which this name,. 
Papa, became, long aftenvards, restricted, in Western Europe : A^otre St. Fere, le Pape, as they 
say in France. This was done by the decree of the ambitious Hildebrand, Gregory VII. (who 
died A.D. 1085), when, in a synod held at Rome, he defined that "the title Pope should be pecul- 
iar to one only in the Christian world." The Easterns, of course, never paid any respect to this 
novelty and dictation, and to this day their patriarchs are popes ; and not only so, for the parish 
priests of the Greek churches are called by the same name. I was once cordially invited to take 
a repast "with \k\t pope" on visiting a Greek church on the shores of the Adriatic. It is said, 
however, that a distinction is made between the words Tj-aTra? and TraTrSs ', the latter being peculiar 
to inferiors, according to the refinements of Goar, a Western critic. Valeat quantum. But I 
must here note, that as " words are things," and as infinite damage has been done to history and to 
Christian truth by tolerating this empiricism of Rome, I have restored scientific accuracy, in this 
series, whenever reference is made to the primitive bishops of Rome, who were no more " Popes " 
than Cincinnatus was an emperor. It is time that theological science should accept, like other 
sciences, the language of truth and the terminology of demonstrated fact. The early bishops 
of Rome were geographically important, and were honoured as sitting in the only apostolic see of 
\ ■ . . ■ _— — ^ 

' I venture to state this to encourage young students to keep pen in hand in all their researches, and always to make notes. 

ELUCIDATIONS. 155 

the West ; but they were almost inconsiderable in the structural work of the ante-Nicene ages, and 
have left no appreciable impress on its theology. After the Council of Nice they were recognised 
as patriarchs, though equals among brethren, and nothing more. The ambition of Boniface III. 
led him to name himself " universal bishop." This was at first a mere name " of intolerable 
pride," as his predecessor Gregory had called it; but Nicholas I. (a.d. 858) tried to make it 
real, and, by means of the false decretals, created himself the first " Pope " in the modem sense, 
imposing his despotism on the West, and identifying it with the polity of Western churches, which 
alone submitted to it. Thus^ it was never Catholic, and came into existence only by nullifying 
the Nicene Constitutions, and breaking away from Catholic communion with the parent churches 
of the Edst. Compare Casaubon {Exercit., xiv. p. 280, etc.) in his comments on Baronius. I 
Ihave thus stated with scientific precision what all candid critics and historians, even the Galileans 
included, enable us to prove. Why, then, keep up the language of fiction and imposture,' so con- 
fusing to young students? I believe the youthful Oxonians whom our modern Tertullian carried 
with him into the papal schism, could never have been made dupes but for the persistent empiri- 
cism of orthodox writers who practically adopt in words what they refute in argument, calling all 
bishops of Rome " Popes," and even including St. Peter's blessed name in this fallacious designa- 
tion.^ In this series I adhere to the logic of facts, calling (i) all the bishops of Rome from 
Linus to Sylvester simply bishops ; and (2) all their successors to Nicholas 1. " patriarchs " under the 
Nicene Constitutions, which th^y professed X.O honour, though, after Gregory the Great, they were 
ever vying with Constantinople to make. themselves greater. (3) Nicholas, who trampled on the 
Nicene Constitutions, and made the false decretals the canon law of the Western churches, was 
therefore the first " Pope" who answers to the Tridentine definitions. Even these, however, were 
never able to make dogmatic ^ the claim of " supremacy," which was first done by Pius IX. in 
our days. A canonical Primacy is one thing : a self-asserted Supremacy is quite another, as the 
French doctors have abundantly demonstrated. 

IV. 

(Contemporaneous heresy, p. 125.) 

Here begins that "duplicating of our knowledge" of primitive Rome of which Bunsen speaks 
so jusdy. A thorough mastery of this book will prepare us to understand the great Cyprian in 
all his relations with the Roman Province, and not less to comprehend the affairs of Novatian. 

Bunsen, with all respect, does not comprehend the primitive system, and reads it backward,. 
from the modern system, which travesties antiquity even in its apparent conformities. These 
conformities are only the borrowing of old names for new contrivances. Thus, he reads the 
cardinals of the eleventh century into the simple presbytery of comprovincial bishops of the third 
century,'* just as he elsewhere lugs in the Ave Maria of modern Italy to expound the Eve?iing 
Hymn to the Trinity ^ In a professed Romanist, like De Maistre, this would be resented as 
jugglery. But let us come to facts. Bunsen's preh'minary remarks ^ are excellent. But when he 
comes to note an " exceptional system " in the Roman " presbytery," he certainly confuses all 
things. Let us recur to Tertullian.7 See how much was already established in his day, which the 

* Pompey and others were called imperatores before the Csesars ; but who includes them with the Roman emperors? 

2 How St. Peter would regard it, see i Pet. v. 1-3. I am sorry to find Dr. Schaff, in his useful compilation, History of the Chris- 
iian Church, vol. ii. p 166, dropping into the old ruts of fable, after sufficiently proving just before, what I have maintained. He speaks 
of " the insignificance of the first Popes" — meaning the early Bishops of Rome, men who minded their own business, but could not have 
been " insignificant" had they even imagined themselves " Popes." 

3 See Bossuet,/«ij/>K, and all the Gallican doctors down to our own times. In England the " supremacy" was never acknowledged. 
nor in France, until now. 

* See his Hippol., vol. i. pp. 209, 311. 
5 See vol. ii. p. 298, this series. 

* p. 207. 

' Vol. IV p 114, Elucidation II., this series. 

i=;6 ELUCIDATIONS. 

Council of Nicaea recognised a century later as (to. apxaia Wrj) old primitive institutions. In all 
things the Greek churches were the exemplar and the model for other churches to follow. 
"Throughout //te provinces of Greece,'' he says, "there are held, in definite localities, those 
councils," etc. " If we also, in our diverse provinces, observe," etc. Now, these councils, or 
" meetings," in spite of the emperors or the senate who issued mandates against them, as appears 
from the same passage, were, in the Roman Province, made up of the comprovincial bishops : 
and their gatherings seem to have been called " the Roman presbytery ; " for, as is evident, the 
bishops and elders were alike called " presbyters," the word being as common to both orders as 
the word pastors or clers^ymefi in our days. According to the thirty-fourth of the " Canons 
Apostolical," as Bunsen remarks, " the bishops of the suburban towns, including Portus, also 
formed at that time an integral part of the Roman presbytery." This word also refers to all the 
presbyters of the diocese of Rome itself; and I doubt not originally the laity had their place, as 
they did in Carthage : " the apostles, elders, and brethren " being the formula of Scripture ; or, 
" with the whole Church," which includes them, — omni plebe adstanie.^ Now, all this accounts, 
as Bunsen justly observes, for the fact that one of the " presbytery " should be thus repeatedly 
called presbyter and " at the same time have the charge of the church at Portus, for which 
(office) there was no other title than the old one of bishop ; for such was the title of every man who 
presided over the congregation in any city, — at Ostia, at Tusculum, or in the other suburban cities. 

Now let us turn to the thirty-fourth^ "Apostolical Canon" (so called), and note as follows : 
" It is necessary that the bishops of every nation should know who is chief among them, and 
should recognise him as their head by doing nothing of great moment without his consent ; and 
that each of them should do such things only as pertain to his own parish and the districts under 
him. And neither let him do any thing without the consent of all, for thus shall there be unity 
of heart, and thus shall God be glorified through our Lord Jesus Christ." I do not pause to 
expound this %vord parish, for I am elucidating Hippolytus by Bunsen's aid, and do not intend 
to interpolate my own theory of the primitive episcopate. 

Let the " Apostolical Constitutions " go for what they are worth : ^ I refer to them only under 
lead of Dr. Bunsen. But now turn to the Nicene Council (Canon VI.) as follows: "Z^/ the 
ancient customs prevail in Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis, so that the Bishop of Alexandria have 
jurisdiction in all these pro\inces, since the like is customary in Rome also. Likewise in Antioch 
and the other provinces, let the churches retain their privileges." Here the Province of Rome is 
recognised as an ancient institution, while its jurisdiction and privileges are equalized with those 
of other churches. Now, Rufinus, interpreting this canon, says it means, " the ancient custom 
of Alexandria and Rome shall still be observed ; that the one shall have the care or government of 
the Eg)'ptian, and the other that of the suburhicary churches'' Bunsen refers us to Bingham, 
and from him we learn that the suburbicary region, as known to the Roman magistrates, included 
only " a hundred miles about Rome." + This seems to have been canonically extended even to 
Sicily on the south, but certainly not to Milan on the north. Suffice it, Hippolytus was one of 
those suburbicarian bishops who sat in the Provincial Council of Rome ; without consent of which 
the Bishop of Rome could not, canonically, do anything of importance, as the canon above 
cited ordains. Such are the facts necessary to a comprehension of conflicts excited by " the 
contemporaneous heresy," here noted. 

V. 

(Affairs of the Church, p. 125.) 

" Zephyrinus itnagines that he administers the affairs of the Church — an uninformed and 
shamefully corrupt man." This word imagines is common with Hippolytus in like cases, and 

' Even Qiiin^t notes this. See his UUramontanism, p. 40, ed. 1845. ^ Of which we shall learn in vol. viii., this series. 

^ Bunsen jives it as the thirty-fifth, vol. i. p. 311. * See Bingham, book ix. cap. i. sec. 9. 

ELUCIDATIONS. 157 

Dr. Wordsworth gives an ingenious explanation of this usage. But it seems to me to be based 
upon the relations of Hippolytus as one of the synod or " presbytery," without consent of which 
the bishop could do nothing important. Zephyrmus, on the contrary, imagined himself competent 
to decide as to the orthodoxy of a tenet or of a teacher, without his comprovincials. This, too, 
relieves our author from the charge of egotism when he exults in the defeat of such a bishop." 
He says, it is true, " Callistus threw off Sabellius through fear of ;«^," and we may readily believe 
that ; but he certainly means to give honour to others in the Province when he says, " IVe 
resisted Zephyrinus and Callistus ; " " We nearly converted Sabellius ; " " All were carried away 
by the hypocrisy of Callistus, except ourselves^ This man cried out to his episcopal brethren, 
''Ye are Ditheists," apparently in open council. His council prevailed over him by the wise 
leadership of Hippolytus, however ; and he says of the two guilty bishops, " Never, at any time, 
have we been guilty of collusion with the?n.'" They only imagined, therefore, that they were 
managing the " affairs of the Church." The fidelity of their comprovincials preserved the faith 
of the Apostles in apostolic Rome. 

VI. 

(We offered them opposition, p. 125.) 

H jre we see that Hippolytus had no idea of the sense some put upon the convenire of his master 
Irenaeus.^ It was not " necessary " for them to conform their doctrines to that of the Bishop of 
Rome, evidently ; nor to " the Church of Rome " as represented by him. To the church which 
' presided over a province, indeed, recourse was to be had by all belonging to that province ; but 
it is our author's grateful testimony, that to the council of co?nprovincials, and not to any one 
bishop therein, Rome owed its own adhesion to orthodoxy at this crisis. 

All this illustrates the position of Tertullian, who never thinks of ascribing to Rome any other 
jurisdiction than that belonging to other provmces. As seats of testimony, the apostolic sees, 
indeed, are all to be honou7-ed. " In Greece, go to Corinth ; in Asia Minor, to Ephesus ; if you 
are adjacent to Italy, you have Rome ; whence also (an apostolic) authority is at hand for us in 
Africa." Such is his view of " contemporaneous affairs." 

VII. 

(Heraclitus the Obscure, p. 126.) 

" Well might he weep," says Tayler Lewis, " as Lucian represents him, over his overflowing 
universe of perishing phenomena, where nothing stood ; . . . nothing was fixed, but, as in a mix- 
ture, all things were confounded." He was " the weeping philosopher." 

Here let me add Henry Nelson Coleridge's remarks on the Greek seed-plot of those philoso- 
phies which were begotten of the Egyptian mysteries, and which our author regards as, in turn, 
engendering " all heresies," when once their leaders felt, like Simon Magus, a power in the Gospel 
of which they were jealous, and of which they wished to make use without submitting to its yoke. 
" Bishop Warburton," says Henry Nelson Coleridge, " discovered, perhaps, more ingenuity than 
sound judgment in his views of the nature of the Greek mysteries ; entertaining a general opin- 
ion that their ultimate object was to teach the initiated a pure theism, and to inculcate the 
certainty and the importance of a future state of rewards and punishments. I am led by the 
arguments of Villoison and Ste. Croix to doubt the accuracy of this." In short, he supposes a 
" pure pantheism," or Spinosism, the substance of their teaching.^ 

' Wordsworth, chap. viii. p. 93. ^ See vol. i. pp. 415, 460, this series. 3 Introduction to Greek Classics, p. 228. 

158 ELUCIDATIONS. 

VIII. 

(Imagine themselves to be disciples of Christ, p. 126.) 

This and the foregoing chapter offer us a most overwhelming testimony to the independence 
of councils. In the late " Council of Sacristans " at the Vatican, where truth perished, Pius IX. 
refused to all the bishops of what he accounted " the Catholic universe " what the seven suburbi- 
carian bishops were able to enforce as a right, in the primitive age, against two successive Bishops 
of Rome, who were patrons of heresy. These heretical prelates persisted ; but the Province 
remained in communion with the other apostolic provinces, while rejecting all communion with 
them. All this will help us in studying Cyprian's treatise On Unity, and it justifies his own conduct, 

IX. 

v-,^ (The episcopal throne, p. 128.) 

The simple primitive cathedra,^ of which we may learn something from the statue of 
Hippolytus, was, no doubt, " a throne " in the eyes of an ambitious man. Callistus is here 
charged, by one who knew him and his history, with obtaining this position by knavish words and 
practices. The question may well arise, in our Christian love for antiquity. How could such things 
be, even in the age of martyrdoms ? Let us recollect, that under the good Bishop Pius, when his 
brother wrote the Hernias, the peril of wealth and love of money began to be imminent at Rome. 
Tertullian testifies to the lax discipline of that see when he was there. Minucius Felix lets us 
into the impressions made by the Roman Christians upon surrounding heathen : they were a set 
of conies burrowing in the earth ; a " light-shunning people," lurking in the catacombs. And 
yet, while this fact shows plainly that good men were not ambitious to come forth from these 
places of exile and suffering, and expose themselves needlessly to death, it leads us to compre- 
hend how ambitious men, studiosi novarum renim, could remain above ground, conforming very 
little to the discipline of Christ, making friends with the world, and yet using their nominal reli- 
gion on the principle that "gain is godliness." There were some wealthy Christians ; there were 
others, like Marcia in the palace, sufficiently awakened to perceive their own wickedness, and 
anxious to do favours to the persecuted flock, by way, perhaps, of compounding for sins not 
renounced. And when we come to the Epistles of Cyprian,^ we shall see what opportunities were 
given to desperate men to make themselves a sort of brokers to the Christian community ; for 
selfish ends helping them in times of peril, and rendering themselves, to the less conscientious, 
a medium for keeping on good terms with the magistrates. Such a character was Callistus, one 
of " the grievous wolves " foreseen by St. Paul when he exhorted his brethren night and day, 
with tears, to beware of them. How he made himself Bishop of Rome, the holy Hippolytus suffi- 
ciently explains. 

X. 

(Unskilled in ecclesiastical definitions, p. 128.) 

It has been sufficiently demonstrated by the learned Dollinger, than whom a more competent 
and qualified witness could not be named, that the late pontiff, Pius IX., was in this respect, as 
a bishop, very much like Callistus. Moreover, his chief adviser and prime minister, Antonelli, 
was notoriously Callistus over again ; standing towards him in the same relations which Callistus 
bore to Zephyrinus. Yet, by the bull hieffabilis, that pontiff has retrospectively clothed the 
definitions of Zephyrinus and Callistus with infallibility; thus making himself also a partaker 
in their heresies, and exposing himself to the afiat/iemas with which the Catholic councils over- 
whelmed his predecessor Honorius and others. That at such a crisis the testimony of Hippolytus 

• See vol. u. p. 13, also iv. 210. = See Treatise on the Lapsed, infra. 

ELUCIDATIONS. 159 

should come to light, and supply a reductio ad absurdum to the late papal definitions, may well 
excite such a recogtfition of divine providence as Dr. Bunsen repeatedly suggests. 

XI. 

(All consented — we did not, p. 128.) 

The Edinburgh editor supposes that the use of the plural we, in this place, is the official 
plural of a bishop. It has been already explained, however, that he is speaking of the provincial 
bishops with whom he withstood Callistus when the plebs were carried away by his hypocrisy. 
In England, bishops in certain cases, are a " corporation sole ; " and, as such, the plural is legaF 
phraseology. All bishops, however, use the plural in certain documents, as identifying themselves 
with the universal episcopate, on the Cyprianic principle — Episcopatus unus est, etc. 

In Acts v. 13 is a passage which may be somewhat explained, perhaps, by this: ^^ All con- 
sented . . . we did not." The plebs joined themselves to the apostles; "but 0/ l/ie rest dnxsl no 
man join himself to them : howbeit, the plebs magnified them, and believers were added," etc. 
"The rest" (roiv Se \0t7rwv) here means the priesjts, the Pharisees, and Sadducees, the classes 
■who were not \.]\q plebs, as appears by what immediately follows.' 

XII. 

(Our condemnatory sentence, p. 131.) 

Again : Hippolytus refers to the action of the suburbicarian bishops in provincial council. 
And here is the place to express dissatisfaction with the apologetic tone of some writers, who 
seem to think Hippolytus too severe, etc. As if, in dealing with such "wolves in sheep's clothing," 
this faithful leader could show himself a true shepherd without emphasis and words of abhorrence. 
Hippolytus has left to the Church the impress of his character^ as "superlatively sweet and amia- 
ble." Such was St. John, the beloved disciple ; but he was not less a " son of thunder." Our 
Divine Master was "the Lamb," and "the Lion ;" the author of the Beatitudes, and the author of 
those terrific woes; the "meek and gentle friend of publicans and sinners," and the "lash of small 
cords " upon the backs of those who made His Father's house a " den of thieves." Such was 
Chrysostom, such was Athanasius, such was St. Paul, and such have ever been the noblest of 
mankind ; tender and considerate, gentle and full of compassion ; but not less resolute, in the 
crises of history, in withstanding iniquity in the persons of arch-enemies of truth, and setting the 
brand upon their foreheads. Good men, who hate strife, and love study and quiet, and to be 
friendly with others ; men who never permit themselves to indulge a personal enmity, or to resent 
a personal affront ; men who forgive injuries to the last farthing when they only are concerned, — 
may yet crucify their natures in withstanding evil when they are protecting Christ's flock, or 
fulfilling the command to " contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the samts." What 
the Christian Church owes to the loving spirit of Hippolytus in the awful emergencies of his 
times, protecting the poor sheep, and grappling with wolves for their sake, the Last Day will fully 
declare. But let us who know nothing of such warfare concede nothing, in judgmg of his spirit, 
to the spirit of our unbelieving age, which has no censures except for the defenders of truth : — 

^' Eternal smiles its emptiness betray, 
As shallow streams run dimpling all the way." 

Bon Dieu, bon diable, as the French say, is the creed of the times. Every one who insults 
the faith of Christians, who betrays truths he was sworn to defend, who washes his hands but 

» Ver. 17. « See p. \:mpra. 

i6o ELUCIDATIONS. 

then gives Christ over to be crucified, must be treated with especial favour. Christ is good : so 
is Pilate ; and Judas must not be censured. My soul be with Hippolytus when the great Judge 
holds his assize. His eulogy is in the psalm : ■ " Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judg- 
ment : and so the plague was stayed. And that was counted unto him for righteousness unto all 
generations, for evermore." 

XIII. 

(As if he had not sinned, p. 131.) 

There is an ambiguity in the facts as given in the Edinburgh edition, of which it is hard to 
relieve the text. The word KnOia-TaaOai is rendered ^0 retain (their places) in the first instance, 
as if the case were all one with the second instance, where /AcVtiv is justly rendered to contitiue. 
The second case seems, then, to cover all the ground. What need to speak of men " twice or 
thrice married," if a man once married, after ordination is not to be retained? The word retained 
is questionable in the first instance ; and I have adopted Wordsworth's reading, to be enrolled, 
which is doubtless the sense. 

This statement of our author lends apparent countenance to the antiquity of the " Apostolic 
Constitutions," so called. Perhaps Hippolytus really supposed them to be apostolic. By Canon 
XVII. of that collection, a man twice married, after baptism cannot be "on the sacerdotal list at 
all." By Canon XXVI., an unmarried person once admitted to the clergy cannot be permitted 
to marry. These are the two cases referred to by our author. In the Greek churches this rule 
aolds to this day ; and the Council of Nice refused to prohibit the married clergy to live in that 
holy estate, while allowing the traditional discipline which Hippolytus had in view in speaking of 
a violation of the twenty-sixth traditional canon as a sin. As Bingham has remarked, however,, 
canons of discipline may be relaxed when not resting on fundamental and scriptural laws. 

XIV. 

(Attempt to call themselves a Catholic Church, p. 131.) 

fhe Caliistians, it seems, became a heretical sect, and yet presumed to call themselves a 
"Catholic Church." Yet this sect, while Callistus lived, was in full communion with the Bishop 
of Rome. Such communion, then, was no test of Catholicity. Observe the enormous crimes of 
which this lawless one was guilty ; he seems to antedate the age of Theodora's popes and Maro- 
zia's, and what Hippolytus would have said of them is not doubtful. It is remarkable that he 
employed St. Paul's expression, however, o ai/o/xos,^ "that wicked" or that "lawless one," seeing,. 
in such a bishop, what St. Gregory did in another, — "a forerunner of the Antichrist." 

XV. 

(Caliistians, p. 131.) 

Bunsen remarks that Theodoret speaks of this sect^ under the head of the "Noetians." 
Wordsworth quotes as follows : " Callistus took the lead in propagating this heresy after Noetus, 
md devised certain additions to the impiety of the doctrine." In other words, he was not merely 
ti heretic, hut himself a heresiarch. He gives the whole passage textually,'* and institutes interest- 
ing parallelisms between the Philosophuniena and Theodoret, who used our author, and boldl): 
borrowed from him. 

' Ps. cvi. 30-31. 3 Bunsen, p. 134: Theodor , torn. iv. pt. i. p. 343, ed. Ha!. 1772 

2 2 Thess. ii. 8. * St. Hippol., p 315. 

ELUCIDATIONS. i6i 

XVI. 

(The cause of all things, p. 150.) 

When one looks at the infinite variety of opinions, phrases, ideas, and the like, with which the 
heresies of three centuries threatened to obscure, defile, and destroy the revelations of Holy Scrip- 
ture, who can but wonder at the miracle of orthodoxy? Note with what fidelity the good fight of 
faith was maintained, the depositum preserved, and the Gospel epitomized at last in the Nicaeno- 
Constantinopolitan definitions, which Professor Shedd, as I have previously noted, declares to be 
the accepted confession of all the reformed, reputed orthodox, as well as of Greeks and Latins. 
Let us not be surprised, that, during these conflicts truth on such mysterious subjects was 
reflected from good men's minds with slight variations of expression. Rather behold the miracle 
of their essential agreement, and of their entire harmony in the Great Symbol, universally accepted 
as the testimony of the ante-Nicene witnesses. The Word was Himself the cause of all created 
things ; Himself increate ; His eternal generation implied in the eternity of His existence and 
His distinct personality. 

XVIL 
(Tartarus, p. 153.) 

I am a little surprised at the innocent statement of the learned translator, that " Dr. Words- 
worth justifies Hippolytus' use of this word." It must have occurred to every student of the 
Greek Testament that St. Peter justifies this use in the passage quoted by Wordsworth, which 
one would think must be self-suggested to any theologian reading our author's text. In shorty 
Hippolytus quotes the second Epistle of St. Peter ' (ii. 4) when he uses this otherwise startling 
word. Josephus also employs it j * it was familiar to the Jews, and the apostle had no scruple in 
adopting a word which proves the Gentile world acquainted with a Gehenna as well as a Sheol. 

XVIII. 

(For Christ is the God, p. 153.) 

Dr. Wordsworth justly censures Bunsen for his rendering of this passage,^ also for manu- 
facturing for Hippolytus a " Confession of Faith " out of his tenth book.* I must refer the student 
%» that all-important chapter in Dr. Wordsworth's work (cap. xi.) on the " Development of Chris- 
tian Doctrine." It is masterly, as against Dr. Newman, as well ; and the respectful justice which 
he renders at the same time to Dr. Bunsen is worthy of all admiration. Let it be noted, that, 
while one must be surprised by the ready command of literary and theological materials which 
the learned doctor and chevalier brings into instantaneous use for his work, it is hardly less sur- 
prising, in spite of all that, that he was willing to throw off his theories and strictures, without 
any delay, during the confusions of that memorable year 185 1, when I had the honour of meet- 
ing him among London notabilities. He says to his " dearest friend, Archdeacon Hare, . . . Dr. 
Tregelles informed me last week of the appearance of the work (of Hippolytus) .... I pro- 
cured a copy in consequence, and perused it as soon as I could; and I have already arrived at 
conclusions which seem to me so evident that I feel no hesitation in expressing them to you at 

« -Taprapuxrai, 2 Pet. ii. 4. A sufficient answer to Dr. Bunsen, vol. iv. p. 33, who says this Epistle was not known to the primitive 
Church. 

* See Speaker's Comm., ad loc, 

3 St. Uippol., p. 301, with original text. 

* Vol. i. p. 141, etc 

162 ELUCIDATIONS. 

once." These conclusions were creditable to his acumen and learning m general , eminently so. 
But the theories he had so hastily conceived, m other particulars, crop out in so many crudities of 
theological caprice, that nobody should try to study his theoretical opinions without the aid of that 
calm reviewal they have received from Dr. Wordsworth's ripe and sober scholarship and well- 
talanced mtelleci. 

GENERAL NOTE. 

1 avail myself of a little spare space to add, from Michelet's friend, E. Quinet,' the passage to 
which I have made a reference on p. 156. Let me say, however, that Quinet and Michelet are 
specimens of that intellectual revolt against Roman dogma which is all but universal in Europe in 
our day, and of which the history of M. Renan is a melancholy exposition. To Quinet, with all 
his faults, belongs the credit of having more thoroughly understood than any theological writer 
the absolute revolution created by the Council of Trent , and he justly remarks that the Jesuits 
showed their address " m making this revolution, without anywhere speaking of it." Hence a 
dull world has not observed it. Contrasting this pseudo-council with the free councils of antiquity, 
M. Quinet says " The Council of Trent has not its roots m all nations ; it does not assemble 
about It the representatives of all nations . . omm plebe adstante, according to the ancient 
formula. . . The East and the North are, almost equally, wanting; and this'is why the king of 
J^rance refused it the title of a council.'' He quotes noble passages from Bossuet.^ 

I A uaiuUuon of Quinet, on Ultramontanum, appeared tn London lo a semi-infidel series, 1845. * See pp. 40, «y. 

THE EXTANT WORKS AND FRAGMENTS 

HIPPOLYTUS. 

[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. S. D. F. SALMOND.] 

PART I.— EXEGETICAL. 
u'KAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES ON VARIOUS BOOKS OF SCRIPTURE. 

ON THE HEXAEMERON,* OR SIX DAYS' WORK. 

Now these things we are under the necessity 
of setting forth at length, in order to disprove 
the supposition of others. For some choose to 
maintain that paradise is in heaven, and forms 
no part of the system of creation. But since we 
see with our eyes the rivers that go forth from it, 
which are open, indeed, even in our day, to the 
inspection of any who choose, let every one con- 
clude from this that it did not belong to heaven, 
but was in reality planted in the created system. 
And, in truth, it is a locality in the east, and a 
place select. 

ON GENESIS.' 

Gen. I. 5. And it was evening, and it was 
morning, one day. 

HiPPOLYTUs. He did not say 3 "night and 
day," but " one day," with reference to the name 
of the light. He did not say the " first day ; " 
for if he had said the " first " day, he would also 
have had to say that the "second" day was 
made. But it was right to speak not of the " first 
day," but of " one day," in order that by saying 
"one," he might show that it returns on its orbit, 
and, while it remains one, makes up the week. 

Gen. I. 6. And God said. Let there be a fir- 
mament in the midst of the water. 

Hipp. On the first day God made what He 
made out of nothing. But on the other days 

« In John Damasc, 5afr-. Paral!., Works, ii. p. 787. That 
Hippolytus wrote on the Hexa'emeron is noticed by Eusebius, Hist. 
£ccl., vi. 22, and by Jerome, Syncellus, Honorius, etc. 

* These fragments are excerpts from a Commentary on Genesis, 
compiled from eighty-eight fathers, which is extant in manuscript in 
the Vienna Library. They are found also ia a Catena on Matthew, 
itsued at Leipsi( in 1772. 

3 i.e., vvxii^titftov. 

He did not make out of nothing, but out of 
what He had made on the first day, by moulding 
it according to His pleasure. 

Gen. I. 6, 7. And let it divide between water 
and water : and it was so. And God made the 
firmament ; and God divided between the water 
which was under the firmament, and the water 
above the firmament : and it was so. 

Hipp. As the excessive volume of water bore 
along over the face of the earth, the earth was by 
reason thereof " invisible " and " formless." 
When the Lord of all designed to make the in- 
visible visible, He fixed then a third part of the 
waters in the midst ; and another third part He 
set by itself on high, raising it together with the 
firmament by His own power ; and the remain- 
ing third He left beneath, for the use and benefit 
of men. JVow at '» this point we have an asterisk. 
The words are found in the Hebrew, but do not 
occur in the Septuagint. 

Gen. III. 8. And they heard the voice of the 
Lord God walking in the garden at even. 

Hipp. Rather they discerned the approach of 
the Lord by a certain breeze. As soon, there- 
fore, as they had sinned, God appeared to them, 
producing consciousness of their sin, and calling 
them to repentance. 

Gen. xlix. 3. Reuben, my first-born, thou art 
my strength, and the first of my children ; hard 
to bear with, and hard and self-willed: thou 
hast waxed wanton as water ; boil not over.s 

♦ This must refer, I suppose, to the words, " And it was «o." 
5 ^Ji cKfeajjs. 

1 64 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

Aquila. Reuben, my first-born, thou art my strength, 
and the sum of my sorrow: excelling in dignity and 
excelling in might : thou hast becH insensate as water ; 
excel not.' 

SymmaCHUS. Reuben, my first-born, and begin- 
ning of my ' pain : above measure grasping, and above 
measure hot as water, thou shall not more excel.' 

Hipp. For there was a great display of 
strength made by God in behalf of His first-bom 
people from Egypt. For in very many ways 
was the land of the Egyptians chastised. That 
first people of the circumcision is meant by " my 
strength, and the first of my children : " even as 
God gave the promise to Abraham and to his 
seed. But " hard to bear with," because the 
people hardened itself against the obedience of 
God. And " hard, self-willed," because it was 
not only hard against the obedience of God, but 
also self-willed so as to set upon the Lord. 
" Thou hast waxed wanton," because in the 
instance of our Lord Jesus Christ the people 
waxed wanton against the Father. But "boil 
not over," Says the Spirit, by way of comfort, 
that it might not, by boiling utterly over, be spilt 
abroad, — giving it hope of salvation. For what 
has boiled over and been spilt is lost. 

Gen. xldc 4. For thou wentest up to thy 
father's bed. 

Hipp. First he mentions the event, — that in 
the last days the people ^vill assault the bed of 
the Father, that is, the bride,* the Church, with 
intent to corrupt her; which thing, indeed, it 
does even at this present day, assaulting her by 
blasphemies. 

Gen. xlix. 5. Simeon and Levi, brethren. 

Hipp. Since from Simeon sprang the scribes, 
and from Levi the priests. For the scribes and 
priests fulfilled iniquity s of their own choice, 
and with one mind they slew the Lord. 

Gen, xldc. 5. Simeon and Levi, brethren, 
fulfilled iniquity of their own choice. Into their 
counsel let not my soul enter, and in their as- 
sembly let not my heart contend ; for in their 
anger they slew men, and in their passion they 
houghed a bull. 

Hipp. This he says regarding the conspiracy 
into which they were to enter against the Lord. 
And that he means this conspiracy, is evident to 
us. For the blessed David sings, " Rulers have 
taken counsel together against the Lord,"'' and 
so forth. And of this conspiracy the Spirit 
prophesied, saying, " Let not my soul contend," 
desiring to draw them off, if possible, so that 

• flTI JTfpiO'O'fVn?. 

2 " My " (/iou) is wanting in Origen's Hexapla. 

3 oiiic t<jf\ wepiffaoTtpos. 

•♦ [He makes the curse of Reuben applicable to all who corrupt 
the Church's truth and purity.] 

s ffaipt'ffews avTuic, " 01 set purpose." 

* Ps. ii. 2. 

that future crime might not happen through 
them. " They slew men, and houghed the bull ; " 
by the " strong bull " he means Christ. And 
"they houghed," since, when He was suspended 
on the tree, they pierced through His sinews. 
Again, " in their anger they houghed a bull." 
And mark the nicety of the expression ; for 
" they slew men, and houghed a bull." For 
they killed the saints, and they remain dead, 
awaiting the time of the resurrection. But as a 
young bull, so to speak, when houghed, sinks 
down to the ground, such was Christ in submit- 
ting voluntarily to the death of the flesh , but He 
was not overcome of death. But though as man 
He became one of the dead. He remained alive 
in the nature of divinity. For Christ is the 
bull, — an animal, above all, strong and neat and 
devoted to sacred use. And the Son is Lord 
of all power, who did no sin, but rather offered 
Himself for us, a savour of a sweet smell to His 
God and Father. Therefore let those hear who 
houghed this august bull : " Cursed be their 
anger, for it was stubborn ; and their wrath, for 
it was hardened." ^ But this people of the Jews 
dared to boast of houghing the bull : "Our 
hands shed this." ** For this is nothing different, 
I think, from the word of folly : "His blood " 
(be upon us), and so forth.^ Moses recalls"^ 
the curse against Levi, or, rather converts it into 
a blessing, on account of the subsequent zeal of 
the tribe, and of Phinehas in particular, in behalf 
of God. But that against Simeon he did not 
recall. Wherefore it also was fulfilled in deed." 
For Simeon did not obtain an inheritance like 
the other tribes, for he dwelt in the midst of 
Judah. Yet his tribe was preserved, although 
it was small in number.'* 

Gen. xlix. ii. Binding his foal unto the 
vine, and his ass's colt to the choice vine, — the 
tendril of the vine, — he will wash his garment 
in wine, and his clothes in the blood of the 
grape. 

Hipp. By the " foal " he means the calling of 
the Gentiles ; by the other, that of the circum- 
cision : " one ass," moreover, that is to signify 
that the two colts are of one faith ; in other 
words, the two callings. And one colt is bound 
to the " vine," and the other to the " vine ten- 
dril," which means that the Church of the Gen- 
tiles is bound to the Lord, but he who is of the 
circumcision to the oldness of the law. " He 
will wash his garment in wine ; " that is, by the 

7 Gen. xlix. 7. 

« After " this " (toCto) the word " blood" (to oimo) seems to have 
been dropped. 

9 Matt, xxvii. ag. 
'° Dcut. xxxiii. 8. 

" [ By the sin of Annas and Caiaphas, with others, the tribe of Levi 
became formally subject to this curse again, and with Simeon (ab- 
sorbed into Judahj inherited it. But compare Acts iv. 36 and vi. 7-1 
*^ [Luke ii. 25. j 

4 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

165 

Holy Spirit and the word of truth, he will 
cleanse the flesh, which is meant by the garment. 
.And " in the blood of the grape," trodden and 
giving forth blood, which means the flesh of the 
Lord, he cleanses the whole calling of the Gen- 
tiles. 

Gen. xlix. 12-15. ^^^ ^Y^^ ^^^ gladsome 
Tv'ith wine, and his teeth white as milk. Zabu- 
lun shall dwell by the sea, and he shall be by a 
haven of ships, and he shall extend to Sidon. 
Issachar desired, the good part, resting in the 
midst of the lots. And seeing that rest was 
good, and that the land was fat, he set his shoul- 
der to toil, and became a husbandman. 

Hipp. That is, his eyes are brilliant as with 
the word of truth ; for they regard all who 
believe upon him. And his teeth are white as 
milk ; — that denotes the luminous power of 
his words : for this reason he calls them white, 
and compares them to milk, as that which nour- 
ishes the flesh and the soul. And Zabulun is, 
by interpretation, '■'■fragrance " and " blessing.'" 

Then, after something from Cyril : — 

Hipp. Again, I think, it mystically signifies 
the ' sacraments of the New Testament of our 
Saviour ; and the words, " his teeth are white as 
milk," denote the excellency and purity of the 
sacramental food. And again, these words, 
" his teeth are white as milk," 've take in the 
sense that His words give light to those who 
believe on Him. 

And in saying, moreover, that Zabulun will 
■dwell by the sea, he speaks prophetically of his 
territory as bordering on the sea, and of Israel 
as mingling with the Gentiles, the two nations \ 
being brought as it were into one flock. And : 
this is manifest in the Gospel. " The land of 
Zabulun, and the land of Nephthalim," etc. i 
And you will mark more fully the richness of 
his lot as having both inland territory and sea- 
board, 

" And he is by a haven of ships ; " that is, as 
in a safe anchorage, referring to Christ, the 
anchor of hope. And this denotes the calling 
of the Gentiles — that the grace of Christ shall 
go forth to the whole earth and sea. For he 
says, "And (he is) by a haven of ships, and 
shall extend as far as Sidon." And that this is 
said prophetically of the Church of the Gen- 
tiles, is made apparent to us in the Gospel : 
" The land of Zabulun, and the land of Neph- 
thalim, by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, 
Galilee of the Gentiles ; the people which sat 
in darkness saw great light." ^ In saying, then, 
that he, namely Zabulun, would inhabit a terri- 
tory bordering on the sea, he plainly confirmed 
that, just as if he had said that in the future 

^ Toi ^utrTTjpta. 
2 Matt. iv. Is, 16. 

Israel would mingle with the Gentiles, the two 
peoples being brought together into one fold and 
under the hand of one chief Shepherd, the good 
(Shepherd) by nature, that is, Christ. In bless- 
ing him Moses said, " Zabulun shall rejoice." ' 
And Moses prophesies, that in the allocation of 
the land he should have abundance ministered 
of the good things both of land and sea, under 
the hand of One. " By a haven of ships ; " 
that is, as in an anchorage that proves safe, re- 
ferring to Christ, the anchor of hope. For by 
His grace he shall come forth out of many a 
tempest, and shall be brought hereafter to land, 
like ships secure in harbours. Besides, he said 
that " he extends as far even as Sidon," indi- 
cating, as it seems, that so complete a unity will 
be effected in the spirit's course between the 
two peoples, that those of the blood of Israel 
shall occupy those very cities which once were 
exceeding guilty in the sight of God.* 

After something from Cyril : — 

Hipp. And " that the land was fat ; " that is, the 
flesh of our Lord : " fat," that is, " rich ; " for it 
flows with honey and milk. The parts of the land 
are marked oft' for an inheritance and possession 
to him — that means the doctrine of the Lord. 
For this is a pleasant rest, as He says Himself: 
" Come unto me, all ye that labour and are 
heavy laden," ^ etc. For they who keep the 
commandments, and do not disclaim the ordi- 
nances of the law, enjoy rest both in them and 
in the doctrine of our Lord ; and that is the 
meaning of " in the midst of the lots." As the 
Lord says, " I am not come to destroy the law 
and the prophets, but to fulfil them." ^ For 
even our Lord, in the fact that He keeps the 
commandments, does not destroy the law and 
the prophets, but fulfils them, as He says in the 
Gospels. " He set his shoulder to toil, and 
became a husbandman." This the apostles did. 
Having received power from God, and having 
set themselves to labour, they became husband- 
men of the Lord, cultivating the earth — that is, 
the human race — with the preaching of our 
Lord. 

Gen. xlix. 16-20. Dan shall judge his peo- 
ple, as himself also one tribe in Israel. And 
let Dan become a serpent by the way, lying on 
the path, stinging the horse's heel ; and the 
horseman shall fall backward, waiting for the 
salvation of the Lord. Gad — a robber's troop 
shall rob him ; and he shall spoil it ? at the 
heels. Aser — his bread shall be fat, and he 
shall furnish dainties to princes. 

s Deut. xxxiii. i8. 

* [In thus spiritualizing, the Fathers do not deny a literal sense 
also, as in " Aser," p. i5fi, i>i/ra ; only they think that geography, 
history, etc., should pay tribute to a higher meaning.] 

5 Matt. xi. 28. 

* Matt. V. 17. 

1 Kara TroSaj, " quickly," " following close." 

166 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

After something from C>Til, ApoUinaris, and 
Diodorus : — 

Hipp. The Lx)rd is represented to us as a 
horseman ; and the " heel " points us to the 
*' last times." And His " faUing " denotes His 
death ; as it is written in the Gospel : *' Behold, 
this (child) is set for the fall and rising again 
of many." ' We take the "robber "to be the 
traitor. Nor was there any other traitor to the 
Lord save the (Jewish) people. " Shall rob 
him," i.e., shall plot against him. At the heels : 
that refers to the help of the Lord against 
those who lie in wait against Him. And again, 
the words " at the heels " denote that the Lord 
will take vengeance swiftly. He shall be well 
armed in the foot^ (heel), and shall overtake 
and rob the robber's troop. 

Aquila. "Girded, he shall gird himself;" that 
means that as a man of arms and war he shall arm him- 
self. " And he shall be armed in the heel : " he means 
this rather, that Gad shall follow behind his brethren in 
arms. For though his lot was beyond Jordan, yet they 
(the man of that tribe) were enjoined to follow their 
brethren in arms until they too got their lots. Or per- 
haps he meant this, that Gad's tribesmen were to live 
in the manner of robbers, and that he was to take up a 
confederacy of freebooters, which is just a "robber's 
troop," and to follow them, practising piracy, which is 
robbery, along with them. 

Whereas, on the abolition of the shadow in the law, 
and the introduction of the worship in spirit and truth, 
the world had need of greater light, at last, with this 
object, the inspired disciples were called, and put in 
possession of the lot of the teachers of the law. For 
thus did God speak with regard to the mother of the 
Jews — that is to say, Jerusalem — by the voice of the 
Psalmist: "Instead of thy fathers were thy sons;"^ 
that is, to those called thy sons was given the position 
of fathers. And with regard to our Lord Jesus Christ 
in particular: "Thou wilt appoint them rulers over all 
the earth." Yet presently their authority will not be 
by any means void of trouble to them. Nay rather, 
they were to experience unnumbered ills, and they were 
to be in perplexity; and the course of their apostleship 
they were by no means to find free of peril, as he inti- 
mated indeed by way of an example, when he said, 
" Let (Dan) be," meaning by that, that there shall be a 
multitude of persecutors in Dan like a "serpent lying 
by the way on the path, stinging the horse's heel," i.e., 
giving fierce and dangerous bites; for the bites of 
snakes are generally very dangerous. And they were 
" in the heel " in particular . for " he shall bruise thy 
head, and thou shalt bruise his heel."* And some did 
persecute the holy apostles in this way even to the death 
of the flesh. And thus we may say that their position 
was something like that when a horse stumbles and 
flings out his heels. For in such a case the horseman 
will be thrown, and, f.illing to the ground, I suppose, he 
waits* thus for some one alive. And thus, too, the in- 
spired apostles survive and wait for the time of their 
redemption, when they shall be called into a kingdom 
which cannot be moved, when Christ addresses them 

' Luke ii. 34. 

^ [An important hint that by " heel," in Gen. iii. 15, the "foot" 
is understood, by rhetorical figure.] 

■s Ps, xliv. 17 (English, xlv. 16). 

* Gen. iii. 15. [The rhetoric here puts the heel for the foot to 
emphasize the other part of the prophecy, i.e., the wouoded heel 
Coming down on the biter's head.l 

with the word, "Come, ye blessed of my Father/** 
etc. 

And again, if any one will take the words as meai> 
ing, not that there will be some lying in wait against 
Dan like serpents, but that this Dan himself lies in wait 
against others, we may say that those meant thereby are 
the scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites who, while in pos- 
session of the power of judgment and instruction among 
the people, fastened like snakes upon Christ,- and strove 
impiously to compass His fall, vexing Him with their 
stings as He held on in His lofty and gentle course. 
But if that horseman did indeed fall. He fell at. least of 
His own will, voluntarily enduring the death of the flesh. 
And, moreover, it was destined that He should come to 
life again, having the Father as His helper and conduct- 
or. For the Son, being the power of God the Father, 
endued the temple of His own body again with life. 
Thus is He said to have been saved by the Father, as 
He stood in peril as a man, though by nature He is God, 
and Himself maintains the whole creation, visible and 
invisible, in a state of wellbeing. In this sense, also, 
the inspired Paul says of Him: "Though He was 
crucified in weakness, yet He liveth by the power of 
God."' 

Aser obtained the parts about Ptolemais and Sidon. 
Wherefore he says, " His bread shall be fat, and he shall 
furnish dainties to princes." This we take to be a figure 
of our calling; for "fat" means "rich." And whose 
bread is rich, if not ours .' For the Lord is our bread, 
as He says Himself: "I am the bread of. life."' And 
who else will furnish dainties to princes but our Lord 
Jesus Christ? — not only to the believing among the 
Gentiles, but also to those of the circumcision, who are 
first in the faith, to wit, to the fathers, and the patri- 
archs, and the prophets, and to all who believe in His 
name and passion. 

Gen. xlk. 21-26. Nephthalim is a slender ^ 
trunk, showing beauty in' the shoot. Joseph is 
a goodly son ; my goodly, envied son ; my 
youngest son. Turn back to me. Against him 
the archers took counsel together, and reviled 
him, and pressed him sore. And their bows 
were broken with might, and the sinews of the 
arms of their hands were relaxed by the hand 
of the Mighty One of Jacob. Thence is he 
who strengthened Israel from the God of thy 
father. And my God helped thee, and blessed 
thee with the blessing of heaven above, and 
with the blessing of the earth which possesseth 
all things, with the blessing of the breasts and 
womb, with the blessing of thy father and thy 
mother. It prevailed above the blessings of 
abiding mountains, and above the blessings of 
everlasting hills ; which (blessings) shall be upon 
the head of Joseph, and upon the temples of 
his brothers, whose chief he was. 

Hipp. Who is the son goodly and envied, even 
to this day, but our Lord Jesus Christ ? An ob- 
ject of envy is He indeed to those who choose 
to hate Him, yet He is not by any means to be 
overcome. For though He endured the cross, 
yet as God He returned to life, having trampled 

* Matt. XXV. 34. 
' 2 Cor. xiii. 4. 

* John vi. 35. 

9 vTi\f\oi avtiiiiror. 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

16/ 

upon death, as His God and Father addresses 
Him, and says, " Sit Thou at my right hand." ' 
And that even those are brought to nought who 
strive with the utmost possible madness against 
Him, he has taught us, when he says, " Against 
Him the archers took counsel together, and re- 
viled Him." For the " archers " — that is, the 
leaders of the people — did convene their as- 
semblies, and take bitter counsel. "But their 
"bows were broken, and the sinews of their arms 
•were relaxed, by the hand of the Mighty One 
of Jacob," that is to say, by God the Father, 
who is the Lord of power, who also made His 
Son blessed in heaven and on earth. And he 
(Naphtali) is adopted as a figure of things per- 
taining to us, as the Gospel shows : " The land 
of Zabulun, and the land of Nephthalim, by the 
way of the sea, beyond Jordan," ^ etc, ; and, 
" To them that sat in darkness light has arisen," ^ 
And what other light was this but the calling of 
the Gentiles, which is the trunk, i.e,, the tree 
of the Lord, in whom engrafted it bears fruit ? 
And the word, " giving increase of beauty in the 
case of the shoot," expresses the excellency of 
our calling. And if the words, " giving increase 
of beauty in the case of the shoot," are under- 
stood, as perhaps they may, with reference to 
us, the clause is still quite intelligible. For, by 
progressing in virtue, and attaining to better 
things, " reaching forth to those things which are 
before," * according to the word of the blessed 
Paul, we rise ever to the higher beauty. I mean, 
however, of course, spiritual beauty, so that to us 
too it may be said hereafter, " The King greatly 
desired thy beauty," s 

After something from Apollinaris : — 
Hipp. The word of prophecy passes again to 
Immanuel Himself. For, in my opinion, what 
is intended by it is just what has been already 
stated in the words,y' giving increase of beauty 
in the case of the shoot." For he means that 
He increased and grew up into that which He 
had been from the beginning, and indicates the 
return to the glory which He had by nature.^ 
This, if we apprehend it correctly, is (we should 
say) just " restored " to Him. For ? as the only 
begotten Word of God, being God of God,^ 
emptied Himself, according to the Scriptures, 
humbling Himself of His own will to that which 
He was not before, and took unto Himself this 

« Ps. ex. 1. 
' Matt. iv. 15. 
3 Matt. iv. 17. 

* Phil. iii. 15. 
S Ps. xlv. II. 

*> The text is toOto wavrtat Kariyerai hpOuti ej^tiv iiirtiXrifintvov. 

"> This passage, down to the word "inseparably," was transcribed 
by Isaac Vosshis at Rome, and first edited by Grabe in the Annota- 
tions to Bul[s Defens.Jid. Nic, p. 103. 

* " God of God," Oebs imipxiMV tK 0eoO. Hippolytus uses here 
the exact phrase of the Nicene Council. So, too, in his Contra Noe- 
turn, chap. X., he has the exact phrase, "light of light" (<i)ii« «« 
«^uiT05) [See my concluding remarks (note 9) on the last chapters of 
the Philosophumena, p. 153, supra.] 

vile flesh, and appeared 9 in the " form of a ser- 
vant," and "became obedient to God the Father, 
even unto death," so hereafter He is said to be 
" highly exalted ; " and as if well-nigh He had it 
not by reason .of His humanity, and as if it were 
in the way of grace, He "receives the name 
which is above every name," '° according to the 
word of the blessed Paul. But the matter, in 
truth, was not a " giving," as for the first time, 
of what He had not by nature ; far othenvi^e. 
But rather we must understand a return and res- 
toration to that which existed in Him at the 
beginning, essentially and inseparably. And it 
is for this reason that, when He had assumed, 
by divine arrangement," the lowly estate of hu- 
manity. He said, " Father, glorify me with the 
glory which I had," " etc. For He who was 
co-existent with His Father before all time, and 
before the foundation of the world, always had 
the glory proper to Godhead. " He " too may 
very well be understood as the " youngest (son) ." 
For He appeared in the last times, after the 
glorious and honourable company of the holy 
prophets, and simply once, after all those who, 
previous to the time of His sojourn, were reck- 
oned in the number of sons by reason of excel- 
lence. That Immanuel, however, was an " object 
of envy," 'J is a somewhat doubtful phrase. Yet 
He is an "object of envy" or " emulation " to 
the saints, who aspire to follow His footsteps, 
and conform themselves to His divine beauty, 
and make Him the pattern of their conduct, and 
win thereby their highest glory. And again, He 
is an "object of envy" in another sense, — an 
" object of ill-will," namely, to those who are 
declared not to love Him, 1 refer to the lead- 
ing parties among the Jews, — the scribes, in 
sooth, and the Pharisees, — who travailed witli 
bitter envy against Him, and made the glory of 
which He could not be spoiled the ground of 
their slander, and assailed Him in many ways. 
For Christ indeed raised the dead to life again, 
when they already stank and were corrupt ; and 
He displayed other signs of divinity. And these 
should have filled them with wonder, and ha\e 
made them ready to believe, and to doubt no 
longer. Yet this was not the case with them ; 
but they were consumed with ill-will, and nursed 
its bitter pangs in their mind. 

After something from Cyril : — 

Hipp, Who else is this than as is shown us by 
the apostle, " the second man, the Lord from 
heaven?" '* And in the Gospel, 's He said that 
he who did the will of the Father was " the 

9 The words from "and appeared" down to "so hereafter " arc 
given by Grabe, but omitted in Fabricius. 
>° Phil, ii, 7;^. 

•- John xvii. 5. 

'■* I Cor. XV. 47. 
'5 Malt. xxi. 31. 

1 68 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

last." ' And by the words, "Turn back to me," 
is meant His ascension to His Father in heaven 
after His passion, .^nd in the phrase, " Against 
Him they took counsel together, and reviled 
Him," who are intended but just the people in 
their opposition to our Lord ? And as to the 
words, " they pressed Him sore," who pressed 
Him, and to this day still press Him sore? 
Those — these "archers," namely — who. think 
to contend against the Lord. But though they 
prevailed to put Him to death, yet " their bows 
were broken with might." This plainly means, 
that " after the resurrection " their bows were 
broken with might. And those intended are the 
leaders of the people, who set themselves in 
array against Him, and, as it were, sharpened 
the points of their weapons. But they failed to 
transfix Him, though they did what was unlaw- 
ful, and dared to assail Him even in the manner 
of wild beasts. 

"Thou didst prevail above the blessings of 
abiding mountains." By " eternal and abiding 
mountains and everlasting hills," he means the 
saints, because they are lifted above the earth, 
.and make no account of the things that perish, 
but seek the things that are above, and aspire 
earnestly to rise to the highest virtues. After 
the glory of Christ, therefore, are those of the 
Fathers who were most illustrious, and reached 
the greatest elevation in virtue. These, how- 
ever, were but servants ; but the Lord, the Son, 
supplied them with the means by which they 
became illustrious. Wherefore also they ac- 
knowledge (the truth of this word), "Out of His 
fulness have all we received." ^ 

" .And my God helped thee." This indicates 
clearly that the aid and support of the Son came 
from no one else but our God and Father in 
heaven. And by the word " my God," is meant 
that the Spirit speaks by Jacob.^ 

EirSEB. "The sinews of the arms." He could not 
say, of "the hands" or "shoulders;" but since the 
broad central parts of the bow are termed " arms," he 
says appropriately "arms." 

Hipp. " Blessings of the breasts and womb." 
By this is meant that the true blessing from 
heaven is the Spirit descending through the 
Word upon flesh. And by "breasts and womb" 
he means the blessings of the Virgin. And by 

• 6 «<r;^oTOT. Several manuscripts and versions and Fathers read 
((TXaTo? with Hippolytus instead of TTpCtTot. Jerome /'« /oc. remarks 
on the fact, and observes that with that reading the interpretation 
would be quite intelliRible; the sense then beinjj, that "the Jews 
understand the truth indeed, but evade it, and refuse to acknowledge 
what they perceive." Wetstein, in his JVew Test., i. p. 467, also cites 
this reading, and adds the conjecture, that " some, remembering what 
is said in Matt. xx. 16, viz., ' the last shall be first," thought that 
the ■ publicans ' would be called more properly ' the last,' and that 
then some one carried out this emendation so far as to Irsinspose the 
replies loo." 

^ John i. 16. 

3 Gen. xlviii. 3, 4. 

that of " thy father and thy mother," ■♦ he means 
also the blessing of the Father which we have re- 
ceived in the Church through our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

Gex. xlix. 27. "Benjamin is a ravening 
wolf; in the morning he shall devour still, antl 
till evening he apportions food." 

Hipp. This thoroughly suits Paul, who was of 
the tribe of Benjamin. For when he was young, 
he was a ravening wolf ; but when he believed, 
he " apportioned " food. This also is shown us 
by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that the 
tribe of Benjamin is among the first persecutors, 
which is the sense of " in the morning." For 
Saul, who was of the tribe of Benjamin, perse- 
cuted David, who was appointed to be a type of 
the Lord. 

II. 

From the Commentary of the holy Hippolytus of Rome upon 

Genesis. 5 

Gen. II. 7. " And God formed man of the 
dust of the ground." And what does this im- 
port? Are we to say, according to the opinion 
of some, that there were three men made, one 
spiritual, one animal, and one earthy? Not such 
is the case, but the whole narrative is of one 
man. For the word, " Let us make," is about 
the man that was to be ; and then comes the 
word, " God made man of the dust of the ground," 
so that the narrative is of one and the same man. 
For then He says, " Let him be made," and now 
He " makes him," and the narrative tells " how" 
He makes him. 

III. 

Quoted in Jerome, epist. 36, ad Damasitm, Nimi. xviii. (from 

Galland). 

^ Isaac conveys a figure of God the Father ; 
Rebecca of the Holy Spirit ; Esau of the first 
people and the devil ; Jacob of the Church, or 
of Christ. That Isaac was old, points to the end 
of the world ; that his eyes \vere dim, denotes 
that faith had perished from the world, and that 
the light of religion was neglected before him ; 
that the elder son is called, expresses the Jews' 
possession of the law ; that the father loves his 

* Grabe adduces another fragment of the comments of Hippol- 
ytus on this passage, found in some leaves deciphered at Rome. It is 
to this effect: Plainly and evidently the generation of the Only-be- 
gotten, which is at once from God the Father, and through the holy 
Virgin, is signified, even as He is believed and matiifested to be a 
man. For being by nature and in truth the Son of God the Father, 
on our account He submitted to birth by woman and the womb, and 
sucked the breast. For He did not, as some fancy, become man only 
in appearance, but He manifested Himself as in reality that which 
we are who follow the laws of nature, and supported Himself by food, 
though Himself giving life to the world. 

5 From the Second Book of the Res Sacra of Leontius and Jo- 
annes, in Mai, Script, vet., vii. p. 84. 

t" Jerome introduces this citation from the Commentary of Hip- 
polytus on Genesis in these terms: " Since, then, we promised to add 
what that (concerning Isaac and Rebecca, Gen. xxvii.) signifies fig- 
uratively, we may adduce the words of the martyr Hippolytus, with 
whom our Victorinus very much agrees : not that he has made out 
everything quite fully, but that he may give the reader the means for 
a broader understanding of the passage." 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

169 

meat and venison, denotes the saving of men 
from error, whom every righteous man seeks to 
gain (Ht. hunt for) by doctrine. The word of 
God here is the promise anew of the blessing 
and the hope of a kingdom to come, in which 
the saints shall reign with Christ, and keep the 
true Sabbath. Rebecca is full of the Holy Spirit, 
as understanding the word which she heard be- 
fore she gave birth, " For the elder shall serve 
the younger." ' As a figure of the Holy Spirit, 
moreover, she cares for Jacob in preference. 
She says to her younger son, " Go to the flock 
and fetch me two kids," ^ prefiguring the Sav- 
iour's advent in the flesh to work a mighty de- 
liverance for them who were held liable' to the 
punishment of sin ; for indeed in all the Scrip- 
tures kids are taken for emblems of sinners. His 
being charged to bring " two," denotes the re- 
ception of two peoples : by the " tender and 
good," are meant teachable and innocent souls. 
The robe or raiment of Esau denotes the faith 
and Scriptures of the Hebrews, with which the 
people of the Gentiles were endowed. The skins 
which were put upon his arms are the sins of 
both peoples, which Christ, when His hands 
were stretched forth on the cross, fastened to 
it along with Himself. In that Isaac asks of 
Jacob why he came so soon,^ we take him as 
admiring the quick faith of them that believe. 
That savoury meats are offered, denotes an offer- 
ing pleasing to God, the salvation of sinners. 
After the eating follows the blessing, and he 
delights in his smell. He announces with clear 
voice the perfection of the resurrection and the 
kingdom, and also how his brethren who believe 
in Israel adore him and serve him. Because 
iniquity is opposed to righteousness, Esau is 
excited to strife, and meditates death deceitfully, 
saying in his heart, " Let the days of the mourn- 
ing for my father come on, and I will slay my 
brother Jacob." '^ The devil, who previously 
exhibited the fratricidal Jews by anticipation in 
Cain, makes the most manifest disclosure of 
them now in Esau, showing also the time of the 
murder : " Let the days," says he, " of the 
mourning for my father come on, that I may 
slay my brother." Wherefore Rebecca — that 
is, patience — told her husband of the brother's 
plot : who, summoning Jacob, bade him go to 
Mesopotamia and thence take a wife of the 
family of Laban the Syrian, his mother's brother. 
As therefore Jacob, to escape his brother's evil 
designs, proceeds to Mesopotamia, so Christ, 
too, constrained by the unbelief of the Jews, 
goes into Galilee, to take from thence to Him- 
self a bride from the Gentiles, His Church. 

' Gen. XXV. 23. 
^ Gen. xxvii, 9. 
^ Gen. xxvii. 20. 
* Gen. xxvii. 41, 

ON NUMBERS. 

By the holy bishop and martyr Hippolytus, from Balaam's 
Blessings? 

Now, in order that He might be shown to have 
together in Himself at once the nature of God 
and that of man, — as the apostle, too, says : 
" Mediator between God and men, the man 
Christ Jesus.'' Now a mediator is not of one 
man,7 but tvvo,"^ — it was therefore necessary 
that Christ, in becoming the Mediator between 
God and men, should receive from both an ear- 
nest of some kind, that He might appear as the 
Mediator between two distinct persons. 

ON KINGS.9 
The question is raised, whether Samuel rose 
by the hand of the sorceress or not. And if, 
indeed, we were to allow that he did rise, we 
should be propounding what is false. For how 
could a demon call back the soul, I say not of a 
righteous man merely, but of any one whatever, 
when it had gone, and was tarrying one knew 
not where? But he says, how then was the 
woman dismayed, and how did she see in an 
extraordinary way men ascending? For if her 
vision had not been of an extraordinary kind, 
she would not have said, " I see gods '° ascend- 
ing out of the earth." She invoked one, and how 
did there ascend many ? What then ? Shall we 
say that the souls of all who appeared ascended, 
and those, too, not invoked by the woman ; " or 
: that what was seen was merely phantasms of 
them? Even this, however, will not suffice. 
How, he urges further, did Saul recognise (what 
appeared), and do obeisance? Well, Saul did 
not actually see, but only, on being told by the 
woman that the figure of one of those who as- 
cended was the figure he desired, and taking it 
to be Samuel, he consulted it as such, and did 
it obeisance. And it could be no difficult mat- 
ter for the demon to conjure up the form of 
Samuel, as it was known to him. How then, 
says he, did he foretell the calamities that were 
to befall Saul and Jonathan at the same time? 
He did foretell indeed the end of the war, and 
how Saul would be overcome, drawing that as an 
inference from the wrath of God against him. 
Just as a physician, who has no exact knowledge 

5 In Leontius Byzant., book i. Against Nestorijis and Etityches 
(from Galland) . The same fragment is found in Mai, Script, vet., 
vii. p. 134. [Galland was a French Orientalist, .^.d. 1646-1715.] 

° I Tim. li. 5. 

7 This word " man " agrees ill, not only with the text in Galatians, 
but even with the meaning of the writer here ; for he is treating, not 
of a mediator between " two" men, but between" God and men." — 

MiGNE. 

8 Gal. iii. 20. 

9 A fragment from the tractate of Hippolytus, O71 the Sorceress 
{ventriloquist) , or On Saul and the IVitch, i Sam. xxviii. From 
the Vatican MS. cccxxx. in AUat., Dc Engastr., edited by Simon, in 
the Acts of the Martyrs of Ostia, p. 160, Rome, 1795. 

'° [Rather " god," the plural of excellence, Elohim.] 
" [This passage is the scandal of commentators. As I read it, M^ 
Lord interfered, surprising the woman and horrifying her. The 
soul of tne prophet came back from Sheol, and prophesied by the powet 
of God. Our author misunderstands the Hebrew plural.] 

170 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

of the science, might yet, seeing a patient past 
cure, tell of his death, though he made an error 
as to the hour, so, too, the demon, knowing the 
wrath of God by Saul's deeds, and by this very 
attempt to consult the sorceress, foretells his 
defeat and his death at the same time, though 
in error as to the day of his death. 

ON THE PSALMS. 

The argument prefixed by Hipnolytus, bishop of Rome, to his 
Exposition of the Psalms^ 

The book of Psalms contains new doctrine 
after the law of Moses. And after the writing 
of Moses, it is the second book of doctrine. 
Now, after the death of Moses and Joshua, and 
after the judges, arose David, who was deemed 
worthy of bearing the name of father of the 
Saviour himself; and he first gave to the He- 
brews a new style of psalmody, by which he 
abrogates the ordinances established by Moses 
with respect to sacrifices, and introduces the 
new hymn and a new style of jubilant praise in 
the worship of God ; and throughout his whole 
ministry he teaches very many other things that 
went beyond the law of Moses.* 

ON PSALM \U 

From the exposition of the second Psalm, by the holy bishop 
Hippolytus. 

When he came into the world, He was mani- 
fested as God and man. And it is easy to per- 
ceive the man in Him, when He hungers and 
shows exhaustion, and is weary and athirst, and 
withdraws in fear, and is in prayer and in grief, 
and sleeps on a boat's pillow, and entreats the 
removal of the cup of suffering, and sweats in an 
agony, and is strengthened by an angel, and be- 
trayed by a Judas, and mocked by Caiaphas, and 
set at nought by Herod, and scourged by Pilate, 
and derided by the soldiers, and nailed to the 
tree by the Jews, and with a cry commits His 
spirit to His Father, and drops His head and 
gives up the ghost, and has His side pierced 
iwith a spear, and is wrapped in linen and laid in 
a tomb, and is raised by the Father on the third 
day. And the divine in Him, on the other hand, 
is equally manifest, when He is worshipped by 
angels, and seen by shepherds, and waited for 
by Simeon, and testified of by Anna, and in- 
ijuired after by wise men, and pointed out by a 
star, and at a marriage makes wine of water, and 
chides the sea when tossed by the violence of 
winds, and walks upon the deep, and makes one 
see who was blind from , birth, and raises Laza- 

' From Gallandi. 

* (i.e., Samuel prepares for the Christian era, introducing the 
"schools of the prophets" and the syn.-igogue service, which God 
raised up David to complete, by furnishing the Psalter. Compare 
Acts iii. 24, where Samuel's position in the "goodly fellowship" is 
marked. See Payne Smith's Frvthecy a Preparation for Christ.^ 

' i.e., in our version the third. From Theodorct, Dialogue 
^Secondj cniiiled Aoiiyx'"''"' P- '67. 

rus when dead for four days, and works many 
wonders, and forgives sins, and grants power to 
His disciples. 

ON PSALM XXn. OR XXIIL 

From the Commentary by the holy bishop and martyr Hip- 
polytus, on " The Lord is my Shepherd."* 

And, moreover, the ark made of imperishable 
wood was the Saviour Himself. For by this was 
signified the imperishable and incorruptible tab- 
ernacle of (the Lord) Himself, which gendered 
no corruption of sin. For the sinner, indeed, 
makes this confession : " My wounds stank, and 
were corrupt, because of my foolishness." s But 
the Lord was without sin, made of imperishable 
wood, as regards His humanity ; that is, of the 
virgin and the Holy Ghost inwardly, and out- 
wardly of the word of God, like an ark ovedaid 
with purest gold. 

ON PSALM XXin. OR XXIV. 

From the Commentary by the same, on Ps. xxiii.* 

He comes to the heavenly gates : angels ac- 
company Him : and the gates of heaven were 
closed. For He has not yet ascended into heav- 
en. Now first does He appear to the powers of 
heaven as flesh ascending. Therefore to these 
powers it is said by the angels, who are the cou- 
riers of the Saviour and Lord : " Lift up your 
gates, ye princes ; and be lifted up, ye everlast- 
ing doors : and the King of glory shall come in.' 

ON PSALM CIX. OR CX. 
From the Commentary by the same on the great Song.^ 

I. He who delivered from the lowest hell the 
man first made of earth, when lost and bound by 
the chains of death ; He who came down from 
above, and exalted earth-born man on high ; He 
who is becovTie the preacher of the Gospel to the 
dead, the redeemer of souls, and the resurrection 
of the buried ; — He became the helper of man 
in his defeat, and appeared in his likeness, the 
first-born Word, and took upon Himself the first 
Adam in the Virgin ; and though spiritual Him- 
self, He made acquaintance with the earthy in 
the womb ; though Himself the ever-living One, 
He made acquaintance with the dead in trans- 
gressions ; Himself the heavenly One, He bore 
the terrestrial on high ; Himself of lofty extrac- 
tion, He chose, by His own subjection, to set the 
slave free ; and making man, who turns to dust, 
and forms food for the serpent, unconquerable as 
adamant, and that, too, when hung upon the tree, 
He declared him lord over his victor, and is thus 
Himself proved conqueror by the tree. 

* Theodoret, In his First Dialogue. 
5 Ps. xxxviii. 6. 

*> Theodoret, in his First Dialogue. 
' Ps. xxiv. 7. 

* Theodoret, id his Second Dialogue. 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

171 

2. Those, indeed, who do not acknowledge 
the incarnate Son of God now, shall have to 
acknowledge Him as Judge, when He who is 
now despised in His inglorious body, comes in 
His glory. 

3. And when the apostles came to the sep- 
ulchre on the third day, they did not find the 
body of Jesus ; just as the children of Israel 
Avent up the mount to seek the tomb of Moses, 
and did not find it. 

ON PSALM LXXVII. OR LXXVIII.' 

45. He sent the dog-fly among them, and 
consumed them ; and the frog, and destroyed 
them. 

46. He gave also their fruits to the mildew, 
and their labours to the locust. 

47. He destroyed their vine with hail, and 
their sycamines with frost. 

Now, just as, in consequence of an irregular 
mode of living, a deadly bilious humour may be 
formed in the inwards, which the physician by 
his art may bring on to be a sick-vomiting, 
without being himself chargeable with producing 
the sick humour in the man's body ; for excess 
in diet was what produced it, while the physi- 
cian's science only made it show itself; so, 
although it may be said that the painful retribu- 
tion that falls upon those who are by choice 
■wicked comes from God, it would be only in 
accordance with right reason, to think that ills 
of that kind find both their beginnings and their 
causes in ourselves. For to one who lives with- 
out sin there is no darkness, no worm, no hell 
(Gehenna), no fire, nor any other of these words 
or things of terror ; just as the plagues of Egypt 
were not for the Hebrews, — those fine lice an- 
noying with invisible bites, the dog-fly fastening 
on the body with its painful sting, the hurricanes 
from heaven falling upon them with hailstones, 
the husbandman's labours devoured by the lo- 
custs, the darkened sky, and the rest. It is 
God's counsel, indeed, to tend the true vine, 
and to destroy the Egyptian, while sparing those 
•who are to " eat the grape of gall, and drink the 
deadly venom of asps."^ And the sycamine of 
Egypt is utterly destroyed] not, however, that 
one which Zaccheus climbed that he might be 
able to see my Lord. And the fruits of Egypt 
are wasted, that is, the works of the flesh, but 
not the fruit of the Spirit, love, joy, and peace.3 

48. He gave up their cattle also to the hail, 
and their substance to the fire. 

Symmachus renders it: "Who gave up their 
cattle to the plague, and their possessions to 
birds." For, having met an overwhelming ovcr- 

» Bandini, Catalog. Codd. Greet. Biblicth. Mtdicte-Laurtnt., 

^ Deut. xxxii. 33. 
3 Gal. V. 22. 

throw, they became a prey for carnivorous birds. 
But, according to the Seventy, the sense is not 
that the hail destroyed their cattle, and the fire 
the rest of their substance, but that hail, falling 
in an extraordinary manner along with fire, de- 
stroyed utterly their vines and sycamines first of 
all, which were entirely unable to stand out 
against the first attack ; then the cattle which 
grazed on the plains ; and then every herb and 
tree, which the fire accompanying the hail con- 
sumed ; and the affair was altogether portentous, 
as fire ran with the water, and was commingled 
with it. " For fire ran in the hail," he says ; 
and it was thus hail, and fire burning in the hail. 
David also calls the catde and the fruit of the 
trees " substance," or "riches." And it should 
be observed that, though the hail is recorded to 
have destroyed every herb and every tree, yet 
thei-e were left some which the locust, as it came 
upon them after the fiery hail, consumed ; of 
which it is said, that it eats up every herb, and 
all the fruit of the trees which the hail left behind 
it. Now, in a spiritual sense, there are some 
sheep belonging to Christ, and others belonging 
to the Egyptians. Those, however, which once 
belonged to others may become His, as the 
sheep of Laban became Jacob's ; and contrari- 
wise. Whichever of the sheep, moreover, Jacob 
rejected, he made over to Esau. Beware, then, 
lest, being found in the flock of Jesus, you be set 
apart when gifts are sent to Esau, and be given 
over to Esau as reprobate and unworthy of the 
spiritual Jacob. The single-minded are the sheep 
of Christ, and these God saves according to the 
word : " O Lord, Thou preserves! man and 
beast." 4 They who in their folly attach them- 
selves to godless doctrine, are the sheep of the 
Egyptians, and these, too, are destroyed by 
the hail. And whatsoever the Egyptians possess 
is given over to the fire, but Abraham's sub- 
stance is given to Isaac. 

49. He discharged upon them the wrath of 
His anger ; — anger, and wrath, and tribulation, 
a visitation by evil angels. 

Under anger, wrath, and tribulation, he in- 
tended bitter punishments ; for God is without 
passion. And by anger you will understand the 
lesser penalties, and by wrath the greater, and 
by tribulation the greatest. 5 The angels also are 
called evil, not because they are so in their 
nature, or by their own will, but because they have 
this office, and are appointed to produce pains and 
sufferings, — being so called, therefore, with ref- 
erence to the disposition of those who endure 
such things ; just as the day of judgment is called 
the evil day, as being laden with miseries and 

■* Ps. xxxvi. 6. 

5 Thcodrrel alsc, follouipg Hippolytus, un(^er';trod by "evil an- ' 
Rcls" here, net " dcmrns," but the ministers of temporal punishment. 
See on Ps. Ixxviii. 54, and on Jcr. xlix. 14. So, too, otliers, as may 
be seen in Poll S^nc/i., ii, col. luj. 

172 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

])a!ns for sinners. To the same effect is the 
word of Isaiah, " I, the Lord, make peace, and 
create evil ; " ' meaning by that, I maintain peace, 
and permit war. 

ON PROVERBS. 
From the Commentary of St. Hippolytus on Proverbs.* 

Proverbs, therefore, are words of exhortation 
serviceable for the whole path of life ; for to | 
those who seek their way to God, these serve as j 
guides and signs to revive them when wearied ; 
with the length of the road. These, moreover, 
are the proverbs of "Solomon," that is to say. 
the " peacemaker," who, in truth, is Christ the 
Saviour. And since we understand the words of 
the Lord without offence, as being the words 
of the Lord, that no one may mislead us by like- 
ness of name, he tells us who wrote these things, 
and of what people he was king, in order that 
the credit of the speaker may make the discourse 
acceptable and the hearers attentive ; for they are 
the words of that Solomon to whom the Lord said : 
" I will give thee a wise and an understanding 
heart ; so that there has been none like thee 
u])on the earth, and after thee there shall not 
arise any like unto thee," ^ and as follows in 
what is written of him. Now he was the wise 
son of a wise father ; wherefore there is added 
the name of David, by whom Solomon was be- 
gotten. From a child he was instructed in the 
sacred Scriptures, and obtained his dominion 
not by lot, nor by force, but by the judgment of 
the Spirit and the decree of God. 

" To know w'isdom and instruction." He w'ho 
knows the wisdom of God, receives from Him 
also instruction, and learns by it the mysteries 
of the Word ; and they who know the true 
lieavenly wisdom will easily understand the words 
of these mysteries. Wherefore he says : " To 
understand the difficulties of words ; " •• for things 
spoken in strange language by the Holy Spirit 
become intelligible to those who have their 
hearts right with God. 

5 These things he understands of the people 
of the Jews, and their guilt in the blood of 
Christ ; for they thought that He had His con- 
versation (citizenship) on earth only. 

'^ They will not simply obtain, but inherit. The 
wicked, again, even though they are exalted, are 
e.xalted only so as to have greater dishonour. 
For as one does not honour an ugly and mis- 
shapen fellow, if he exalts him, but only dis- 
honours him the more, by making his shame 
manifest to a larger number ; so also God exalts 
the wicked, in order that He may make their 

• Isa. xlv. 7. 

= Mai, Bibliotheca nova Patrum, vii. ii. 71, Rome, x8s4. 
3 I Kinii^s iii. 13. 

* Piov. I 3. 

5 Ch. i. II. 

6 Ch. iii. 35. 

disgrace patent. For Pharaoh was exalted, but 
only to have the world as his accuser. 

^ It must be noted, that he names the law a 
good gift, on account of the man who takes 
gifts into his bosom unrighteously. And he for- 
sakes the law who transgresses it ; the law, 
namely, of which he speaks, or which he has 
kept. 

''And what is meant by ''e.xalt (fortify) her?" 
Surround her with holy thoughts ; for you have 
need of large defence, since there are many 
things to imperil such a possession. But if it is 
in our power to fortify her, and if there are vir- 
tues in our power which exalt the knowledge of 
God, these will be her bulwarks, — as, for ex- 
ample, practice, study, and the whole chain of 
other virtues ; and the man vvho observes these, 
honours wisdom ; and the reward is, to be ex- 
alted to be with her, and to be embraced by her 
in the chamber of heaven. 

9 The heterodox are the "wicked," and the 
transgressors of the law are " e\il men," whose 
"ways" — that is to say, their deeds — he bids 
us not enter. 

'° He " looks right on " who has thoughts free 
of passion ; and he has true judgments, who is 
not in a state of excitement about external ap- 
pearances. When he says, " Let thine eyes look 
right on," he means the vision of the soul ; and 
when he gives the exhortation, " Eat honey, my 
son, that it may be sweet to thy palate," he uses 
" honey " figuratively, meaning divine doctrine, 
which restores the spiritual knowledge of the 
soul. But wisdom embraces the soul also ; for, 
says he, " love her, that she may embrace thee." 
And the soul, by her embrace being made one 
with wisdom, is filled with holiness and purity. 
Yea more, the fragrant ointments of Christ are 
laid hold of by the soul's sense of smell. 

"Virtue occupies the middle position ; whence 
also he says, that manly courage is the mean 
between boldness and cowardice. And now 
he mentions the " right," not meaning thereby 
things which are right by nature, such as the vir- 
tues, but things which seem to thee to be right 
on account of their pleasures. Now j)leasures 
are not simply sensual enjoyments, but also 
riches and luxury. And the " left " indicates 
envy, robberies, and the like. For " Boreas," 
says he, " is a bitter wind, and yet is called by 
name right." '^ For, symbolically, under Boreas 
he designates the wicked devil by whom every 
flame of evil is kindled in the earth. And this 
has the name " right," because an angel is 
called by a right (propidous) name. Do thou, 

^ Prov. iv. 2. 

8 Ch. iv. 8. 

9 Ch. iv. 14. 
10 Ch. iv. 25. 
" Ch. iv. 27. 

•2 This is the Septuagint translation of ch. x.wii. 16. 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

73 

says he, turn aside from evil, and God will take 
care of thine end ; for He will go before thee, 
scattering thine enemies, that thou mayest go in 
peace. 

' He shows also, by the mention of the creature 
(the hind), the purity of that pleasure ; and by 
the roe he intimates the quick responsive affec- 
tion of the wife. And whereas he knows many 
things to excite, he secures them against these, 
and puts upon them the indissoluble bond of 
affection, setting constancy before them. ' And 
as for the rest, wisdom, figuratively speaking, 
like a stag, can repel and crush the snaky doc- 
trines of the heterodox. Let her therefore, 
says he, be with thee, like a roe, to keep all vir- 
tue fresh. And whereas a wife and wisdom 
are not in this respect the same, let her rather 
lead thee ; for thus thou shalt conceive good 
thoughts. 

^That thou mayest not say, What harm is 
there' in the eyes, when there is no necessity that 
he should be perverted who looks? he shows 
thee that desire is a fire, and the flesh is like a 
garment. The latter is an easy prey, and the 
former is a tyrant. And when anything harmful 
is not only taken within, but also held fast, it 
will not go forth again until it has made an exit 
for itself. For he who looks upon a woman, 
even though he escape the temptation, does not 
come away pure of all lust. And why should 
one have trouble, if he can be chaste and free 
of trouble ? See what Job says : " I made a 
covenant with mine eyes, that I should not think 
of another's wife." ^ Thus well does he know 
the power of abuse. And Paul for this reason 
kept " under his body, and brought it into sub- 
jection." And, figuratively speaking, he keeps 
a fire in his breast who permits an impure thought 
to dwell in his heart. And he walks upon coals 
who, by sinning in act, destroys his own soul. 

The " cemphus " -• is a kind of wild sea-bird, 
which has so immoderate an impulse to sexual 
enjoyment, that its eyes seem to fill with blood 
in coition ; and it often blindly falls into snares, 
or into the hands of men.5 To this, therefore, 
he compares the man who gives himself up to 
the harlot on account of his immoderate lust ; 
or else on account of the insensate folly of the 
creature, for he, too, pursues his object like one 
senseless. And they say that this bird is so 
much pleased with foam, that if one should hold 

' Prov. V. ig. 

2 Ch. vi. 27. 

3 Job xxxi. I. 

■• Prov. vii. 22. The Hebrew word, rendered "straightway" in 
our version, is translated K£iT<t><a9ei^ in the SeptiiaG;int, i.e., " ensnared 
Hke a cepphus." [Q/ias! agnns lasch'icn^, according to the Vul- 
gate.] 

s [If the " cemphus " of the text equals " cepphus " of note, then 
" cepphus" equals " cebus " or " cepus," which equals (c^Sos.a sort 
of monkey. The " Kophim " of i Kings x. 22 seems to supply the 
root of the word. The KfTrcfcoc, however, is said to be a sea-bird 
" driven about by every wind," so that it is equal to a fool. So used 
by Aristophanes.] 

foam in his hand as he sails, it will sit upon his 
hand. And it also brings forth with pain. 

^ You have seen her mischief Wait not to 
admit the rising of lust ; for her death is ever- 
lasting. And for the rest, by her words, her 
arguments in sooth, she wounds, and by her sins 
she kills those who yield to her. For many are 
the forms of wickedness that lead the foolish 
down to hell. And the chambers ^ of death 
mean either its depths or its treasure. How, 
then, is escape possible? 

^ He intends the new Jerusalem, or the sanc- 
tified flesh. By the seven pillars he means the 
sevenfold unity of the Holy Spirit resting upon 
it ; as Isaiah testifies, saying, " She has slain " her 
"victims." 

9 Observe that the wise man must be useful 
to many ; so that he who is useful only to him- 
self cannot be wise. For great is the condem- 
nation of wisdom if she reserves her power 
simply for the one possessing her. But as poison 
is not injurious to another body, but only to that 
one which takes it, so also the man who turns 
out wicked will injure himself, and not another. 
For no man of real virtue is injured by a wicked 
man. 

'°The fruit of righteousness and the tree of 
life is Christ. He alone, as man, fulfilled all 
righteousness. And with His own underived 
hfe " He has brought forth the fruits of knowl- 
edge and virtue like a tree, whereof they that 
eat shall receive eternal life, and shall enjoy the 
tree of life in paradise, with Adam and all the 
righteous. But the souls of the unrighteous 
meet an untimely expulsion from the presence 
of God, by whom they shall be left to remain in 
the flame of torment. 

'^ Not from men, but with the Lord, will he 
obtain favour. 

'3 He asks of wisdom, who seeks to know what 
is the will of God. And he will show himself 
prudent who is sparing of his words on that 
which he has come to learn. If one inquires 
about wisdom, desiring to learn something about 
wisdom, while another asks nothing of wisdom, 
as not only wishing to learn nothing about wis- 
dom himself, but even keeping back his neigh- 
bours from so doing, the former certainly is 
deemed to be more prudent than the latter. 

'•*As to the horse-leech. There were three 
daughters fondly loved by sin — fornication, 
murder, '5 and idolatry. These three did not 
satisfy her, for she is not to be satisfied. In 

^ Prov. vii. 26. 

7 Tajieia, " magazines." 

8 Ch. ix. I. 

9 Ch. ix. 12. 
'° Ch. xi. 30. 

11 UJ9 auTo^tojj. 

12 Ch. xii. 2. 
'3 Ch. xvii. 27. 
U Ch. XXX. 15. 

>S Other reading (^fldi-os) = " envy." 

174 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

destroying man by these actions, sin never varies, 
but only grows continually. For the fourth, he 
continues, is never content to say "enough," 
meaning that it is universal lust. In naming the 
" fourth," he intends lust in the universal. For 
as the body is one, and yet has many members ; 
so also sin, being one, contains within it many] 
various lusts by which it lays its snares for men.] 
Wherefore, in order to teach us this, he uses the' 
examples of Sheol (Hades), and the love of 
■women, and hell ' (Tartarus), and the earth that 
is not filled with water. And water and fire, 
indeed, will never say, " It is enough." And the 
grave ^ (Hades) in no wise ceases to receive the 
souls of unrighteous men ; nor does the love of 
sin, in the instance of the love of women, cease 
to be given to fornication, and it becomes the 
betrayer of the soul. And as Tartarus, which 
is situated in a doleful and dark locality, is not 
touched by a ray of light, so is every one who 
is the slave of sin in all the passions of the flesh. 
Like the earth not filled with water, he is never 
able to come to confession, and to the laver of 
regeneration, and like water and fire, never says, 
" It is enough." 

3 For as a serpent cannot mark its track upon 
a rock, so the devil could not find sin in the 
body of Christ. For the Lord says, " Behold, 
the prince of this world cometh, and will find 
nothing in me." ■♦ — For as a ship, sailing in the 
sea, leaves no traces of her way behind her, so 
neither does the Church, which is situate in the 
-world as in a sea, leave her hope upon the earth, 
because she has her life reserved in heaven ; and 
as she holds her way here only for a short time, 
it is not possible to trace out her course. — As 
the Church does not leave her hope behind in 
the world, her hope in the incarnation of Christ 
which bears us all good, she did not leave the 
track of death in Hades. — Of whom but of 
Him who is born of the Holy Spirit and the 
Virgin? — who, in renewing the perfect man in 
the world, works miracles, beginning from the 
baptism of John, as the Evangelist also testifies : 
And Jesus was then beginning to be about thirty 
years of age. This, then, was the youthful and 
blooming period of the age of Him who, in 
'journeying among the cities and districts, healed 
the diseases and infirmities of men. 

5 " The eye that mocketh at his father, and 
dishonours the old age of his mother." That is 
to say, one that blasphemes God and despises 
the mother of Christ, the wisdom of God, — his 
eyes may ravens from the caves tear out, i.e., 
him may unclean and wicked spirits deprive of 

• [The place of torment (2 Pet. ii. 4). Vol. iv. 140.) 

^ [SAeo/, rather, — the receptacle of departed spihls. See vol. iii. 
pp. 59 and 595; alw vol. iv. p. 194. 1 
■3 Prov. XXX. 19. 

* John xiv. 30. 
f Ch. XXX. 17. 

the clear eye of gladness ; and may the young 
eagles devour him : and such shall be trodden 
under the feet of the saints. 

^ " There be three things which I cannot 
understand, and the fourth I know not : the 
tracks of an eagle flying," i.e., Christ's ascen- 
sion ; " and the ways of a serpent upon a rock," | 
i.e., that the devil did not find a trace of sin in 
the body of Christ ; " and the ways of a ship 
crossing the sea," i.e., the ways of the Church, 
which is in this life as in a sea, and which is 
directed by her hope in Christ through the cross ; 
" and the ways of a man in youth," ^ — the ways 
of Him, namely, who is bom of the Holy Spirit 
and the Virgin. For behold, says the Scripture, 
a man whose name is the Rising.^ 

9 "Such is the way of an adulterous woman, 
who, when she has done the deed of sin, wipeth, 
herself, and will say that no wickedness has been 
done." Such is the conduct of the Church that 
believes on Christ, when, after committing forni-j 
cation with idols, she renounces these and the 
devil, and is cleansed of her sins, and receives 
forgiveness, and then asserts that she has done 
no wickedness. 

'° " By three things the earth is moved," viz., by ^ 
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. " And J 
the fourth it cannot bear," viz., the last appearing 
of Christ. "When a servant reigneth : " Israel 
was a slave in Egypt, and in the land of promise! 
became a ruler. " And a fool when he is filled 
with meat : " i.e., getting the land in possession 
readily, and eating its fruit, and being filled, it 
(the people) kicked. "And a handmaid when 
she casts out her mistress : " i.e., the synagogue 
which took the life of the Lord, and crucified 
the flesh of Christ. 

" " There be four things which are least upon 
the earth, and these are wiser than the wise:' 
The ants have no strength, yet they prepare their ^ 
meat in the summer." .'Xnd in like manner, the 
Gentiles by faith in Christ prepare for themselves! 
eternal life through good works. " And the 
conies,'^ a feeble folk, have made their houses in 
the rocks." The Gentiles, that is to say, are 
built upon Christ, the spiritual rock, which is 
become the head of the corner. "The spider,'^ 
that supports itself upon its hands, and is easily 
caught, dwells in the strongholds of kings.". 
That is, the thief with his hands extended (on 
the cross), rests on the cross of Christ and dwells: 
in Paradise, the stronghold of the three Kings — i 
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 

^ Prov. xx.x. 18, 19. 

7 [The .\uthori2e(J Version roads vtry differently; but cur author 
follows the Sept., with which agrees the Vulgate] 

8 The refcrrncc probably is to Zcch vi. 12, where the word tS 
rendered " Branch." The word in the text is ik'OToA)}. 

9 Ch. XXX. 20. 

■° Ch. XXX. 21-23. 

" Ch. XXX. 24-28. 

'^ :^oi^uYpuAAoi, i.e., " grunting hoga."/ 

'J at^KoAu^Hiriit. i.e.* a " liurd." 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

^75 

" The locust has no king, and yet marches out 
in array as by one command." The Gentiles 
had no king, for they were ruled by sin ; but 
now, believing God, they engage in the heavenly 
warfare. 

' " There be three things which go well,' and 
the fourth which is comely in going ; " that is, 
the angels in heaven, the saints upon earth, 
and the souls of the righteous under the earth. 
And the fourth, viz., God, the Word Incarnate, 
passed in honour through the Virgin's womb ; 
and creating our Adam anew, he passed through 
the gates of heaven, and became the first-fruits 
of the resurrection and of the ascension for 
all. 

" The whelp of the lion is stronger than the 
beasts : " i.e., Christ as prophesied of by Jacob 
in the person of Judah. " A cock walking with 
high spirit among his dames : " such was Paul, 
when preaching boldly among the churches the 
word of the Christ of God. "A goat heading 
the herd : " such is He who was offered for the 
sins of the world. "And a king speaking among 
the people : " so Christ reigns over the nations, 
and speaks by prophets and apostles the word 
of truth. 

^ That is one confirmed in wickedness.^ The 
apostle, too, says, "Them that sin, rebuke before 
all ; " i that is to say, all but reprobate. Who 
are meant by the " conies," •♦ but we ourselves, 
who once were like hogs, walking in all the filthi- 
ness of the world ; but now, believing in Christ, 
■we build our houses upon the holy flesh of Christ 
as upon a rock? 

5 The shaking (of the earth) signifies the 
change of things upon earth. — Sin, then, which 
in its own nature is a slave, has reigned in the 
mortal body of men : once, indeed, at the time 
of the flood ; and again in the time of the Sod- 
omites, who, not satisfied with what the land 
yielded; offered violence to strangers ; and a 
third time in the case of hateful Egypt, which, 
though it obtained in Joseph a man who distrib- 
uted food to all, that they might not perish of 
famine, yet did not take well with his prosperity, 
but persecuted the children of Israel. "The 
handmaid casting out her mistress : " i.e., the 
Church of the Gentiles, which, though itself a 
slave and a stranger to the promises, cast out 
the free-born and lordly synagogue, and became 
the wife and bride of Christ. By Father, Son, 
and Holy Spirit, the whole earth is moved. The 
" fourth it cannot bear : " for He came first by 
lawgivers, and secondly by prophets, and thirdly 

by the Gospel, manifesting Himself openly ; and 
in the fourth instance He shall come as the 
Judge of the living and the dead, whose glory 
the whole creation will not be able to endure. 

ANOTHER FRAGMENT.* 

St. Hippolytus^ on Prov. ix. i, "Wisdom hath builded her 

house."' 

Christ, he means, the wisdom and power of 
God the Father, hath builded His house, i.e., 
His nature in the flesh derived from the Virgin, 
even as he (John) hath said beforetime, "The 
Word became flesh, and dwelt among us."* As 
likewise the wise prophet*^ testifies: VVisdom 
that was before the world, and is the source of 
life, the infinite " VVisdom of God, hath builded 
her house " by a mother who knew no man, — 
to wit, as He assumed the temple of the body. I 
" And hath raised '° her seven pillars ; " that is, I 
the fragrant grace of the all-holy Spirit, as Isaiah I 
says: "And the seven spirits of God shall restj 
upon Him."" But others say that the sevenj 
pillars are the seven divine orders which sustain j 
the creation by His holy and inspired teaching ;i 
to wit, the prophets, the apostles, the martyrs, 
the hierarchs, the hermits, the saints, and the 
righteous. And the phrase, "She hath killed 
her beasts," denotes the prophets and martyrs 
who in every city and country are slain like sheep 
every day by the unbelieving, in behalf of the 
truth, and cry aloud, " For thy sake we are killed! 
all the day long, we were counted as sheep for the' 
slaughter." '^ And again, "She hath mingled her 
wine " in the bowl, by which is meant, that the 
Saviour, uniting his Godhead, like pure wine, 
with the flesh in the Virgin, was born of her at 
once God and man without confusion of the one 
in the other. "And she hath furnished her 
table : " that denotes the promised knowledge 
of the Holy Trinity ; it also refers to His hon- 
oured and undefiled body and blood, which 
day by day are administered and offered sacri- 
ficially at the spiritual divine table, as a memorial 
of that first and ever-memorable table of the 
spiritual divine supper. And a^ain, " She hath 
sent forth her servants : " Wisdom, that is to say, 
has done so — Christ, to wit — summoning them 
with lofty announcement. " Whoso is simple, 
let him turn to me," she says, alluding manifestly 
to the holy apostles, who traversed the whole 

' Prov. XXX. 29, etc. [As in Vulgate.] 

= Cf. xxvii. 22, the Septuagint rendering being: "Though thou 
shouldest disgrace and scourge a fool in the midst of the council, thou 
wilt not strip^him of his folly." [What version did our author use ?] 

^ I 1 ini. V. 30. 

* Literally, " grunting hogs." 

5 C"h. XXX. 21, etc. [As to version, see Burgon, Lett, from 
J\omt, i^. 34.] 

6 From Galiandi. 

7 [I omit here the suffix " Pope of Rome," for obvious reasons. 
He was papa of Portus at a time when all bishops were so called- 
but this is a misleading absurdity, borrowed from the Galland MS., 
where it could hardly have been placed earlier. A mere mediaeval 
blunder.] 

8 John i. 14. 

9 I.e., Solomon. 

'0 Other reading, "hewn out.** 

" Isa. xi. 2. 

'» Ps. xliv. 2 ; Rom. viii. 36. 

176 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

world, and called the nations to the knowledge 
of Him in truth, with their lofty and divine 
preaching. And again, "And to those that want 
understanding she said " — that is, to those who 
have not yet obtained the power of the Holy 
Ghost — " Come, eat of my bread, and drink of 
the wine which I have mingled for you ; " by 
which is meant, that He gave His divine flesh 
and honoured blood to us, to eat and to drink it 
for the remission of sins. 

ON THE SONG OF SONGS.* 

1 . Arise, O north wind, and come, thou south ; 
blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof 
may flow out (Canticles iv. 16). As Joseph was 
delighted with these spices, he is designated the 
King's son by God ; as the Virgin Mary was 
anointed with them, she conceived the Word : 
then new secrets, and new truth, and a new 
kingdom, and also great and inexplicable mys- 
teries, are made manifest. 

2. And where is all this rich knowledge? and 
where are these mysteries? and where are the 
books ? For the only ones extant are Proverbs, 
and Wisdom, and Ecclesiastes, and the Song of 
Songs. What then? Does the Scripture speak 
falsely? God forbid. But the matter of his 
writings was various, as is shown in the i)hrase | 
" Song of Songs ; " for that indicates that in this 
one book he digested the contents of the 5,000 
songs.^ In the days moreover of Hezekiah, 
there were some of the books selected for use, I 
and others set aside. Whence the Scripture 
says, " These are the mixed ^ Proverbs of Solo- 
mon, which the friends of Hezekiah the king 
copied out."-* And whence did they take them, 
but out of the books containing the 3,000 para- 
bles and the 5,000 songs? Out of these, then, 
the wise friends of Hezekiah took those portions 
which bore upon the etlification of the Church. 
And the books of Solomon on the " Parables " 
and "Songs," in which he wrote of the jjhysiol- 
ogy of plants, and all kinds of animals belonging 
to the dry land, and the air, and the sea, and 
of the cures of disease, Hezekiah did away with, 
because the people looked to these for the reme- 
dies for their diseases, and neglected to seek 
their healintr from God. 5 

' Simon de Magistris, in his Acta Martyr. Ostiens., p. 274, ad- 
duces the following fragment in Latin and Syriac, from a Vatican 
codex, and prefaces it with these words: Hippolytus wrote on the 
Song of Solomon, and showed that thus early did God the Word seek 
His pleasure in the Church gathered from among the (>entiles, and 
especially in His most holy mother the Virgin; and thus the Syrians, 
who boasted that the Virgin was born among them, translated the 
Commentary of Hippolytus at a very early period from the ("ireek into 
their own tongue, of which some fragments still remain, — as, for ex- 
ample, one to this effect on the above words. 

- I Kings iv. 32. 

3 oSiditpiToi, " mixed," or "dark." 

* Prov. XXV. I. 

5 In Gallandi, from Anastasius Siiiaiia, quxst. 41, p 320. 

ON THE PROPHET ISAIAH.' 

I. 

Hippolytus, (Bishop) of Rome, on Hezekiah.' 

When Hezekiah, king of Judah, was still sick 
and weeping, there came an angel, and said to 
him : " I have seen thy tears, and I have heard 
thy voice. Behold, I add unto thy time fifteen 
years. And this shall be a sign to thee from 
the Lord : Behold, I turn back the shadow of the 
degrees of the house of thy father, by which 
the sun has gone down, the ten degrees by which 
the shadow has gone down," ^ so that that day 
be a day of thirty-two hours. For when the sun 
had run its course to the tenth hour, it returned 
again. And again, when Joshua the son of Nun 
was fighting against the Amorites, when the sun 
was now inclining to its setting, and the bat- 
tle was being pressed closely, Joshua, being anx- 
ious lest the heathen host should escape on the 
descent of night, cried out, saying, " Sun, stand 
thou still in Gibeon ; and thou moon, in the 
valley of Ajalon," ^ until I vanquish this "people. 
And the sun stood still, and the moon, in their 
places, so that that day was one of twenty-four 
hours. And in the time of Hezekiah the moon 
also turned back along with the sun, that there 
might be no collision between the two elemental 
bodies, by their bearing against each other in 
defiance of law. ' And Merodach the Chaldean, 
king of Babylon, being struck with amazement 
at that time — for he studied the science of 
astrology, and measured the courses of these 
bodies carefully — on learning the cause, sent a 
letter and gifts to Hezekiah. just as also the wise 
men from the east did to Christ. 

II. 

From the Discourse of St. Hippolytus on the beginning of 

Isaiah.'° 

Under Egypt he meant the world, and under 
things made with hands its idolatrv, and under 
the shaking its subversion and dissolution. " .And 
the Lord, the Word, he represented as upon a 
light cloud, referring to that most pure taber- 
nacle, in which setting up His throne, our Lord 
Jesus Christ came into the world to shake error. 

III. 

We find in the commentaries, written by our 
predecessors, that that day had thirty-two hours. 

6 In Gallandi, from a codex of the Coislin Library, Num. 193, 
fol. 36. 

7 [Here we have the blunder (noted supra, p. 175) repeated as 
to Rome, which must be here taken as meaning the Roman Province, 
not the See. The word " Rishop," which avoids the ambiguity above 
noted, I have therefore put into parenthesis.] 

" Isa. x.xxviii. 5, 7, 8. 
9 Josh. X. 12. 

'° TTheodoret, in his First Dialogue.] 

■■ The text is evidently corrupt: Ki'piof ti t'ov .Voyor, vfhiKrjv Se 
Kovi^y]v TO xadapuiTaTOf a/c^vos, etc. The reference must be to ch. 

XIX. I. 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

177 

For when the sun had run its course, and reached 
the tenth hour, and the shadow had gone down 
by the ten degrees in the house of the temple, 
the sun turned back again by the ten degrees, 
according to the word of the Lord, and there 
were thus twenty hours. . And again, the sun ac- 
complished its own proper course, according to 
the common law, and reached its setting. -And 
thus there were thirty-two hours.' 

ON JEREMIAH AND EZEKIEL.= 

What were the dimensions, then, of the tem- 
ple of Solomon? Its length was sixty cubits, and 
its breadth twenty. And it was not turned to the 
east, that the worshippers might not worship the 
rising sun, but the Lord of the sun. And let no 
one marvel if, when the Scripture gives the 
length at forty cubits, I have said sixty. For a 
little after it mentions the other twenty, in de- 
scribing the holy of holies, which it also names 
Dabir. Thus the holy place was forty cubits, 
and the holy of holies other twenty. And Jose- 
phus says that the temple had two storeys,^ and 
that the whole height was one hundred and 
twenty cubits. For so also the book of Chroni- 
cles indicates, saying, " And Solomon began to 
build the house of God. In length its first 
measure was sixty cubits, and its breadth twenty 
cubits, and its height one hundred and twenty ; 
and he overlaid it within with pure gold.""* 

ON DANIEL. 

Preface by the most holy Hippolytus, (Bishop) of Rome.* 

As I wish to give an accurate account of the 
times of the captivity of the children of Israel in 
Babylon, and to discus? the prophecies con- 
tained in the visions of the blessed Daniel, (as 
well as) his manner of life from his boyhood in 
Babylon, I too shall proceed to bear my testi- 
mony to that holy and righteous man, a prophet 
and witness of Christ, who not only declared the 
visions of Nebuchadnezzar the king in those 
times, but also trained youths of like mind with 
himself, and raised up faithful witnesses in the 
world. He is born, then, in the tinie of the pro- 
phetic ministry of the blessed Jeremiah, arid in 
the reign of Jehoiakim or Eliakim. Along with 

' Hippolytus wrote on Isaiah with the view of making the most 
of the favourable disposuion entertained by the Emperor Alexander 
Severus towards the Christians, and particularly on that part where 
the retrogression of the sun is recorded as a sign of an extension of 
life to He^ekiah. 

- That Hippolytus wrote on Jeremiah is recorded, so far as I 
know, by none of the ancients; for the quotation given in the Catena 
of Greek fathers on Jer, xvii. 11 is taken from his book Ok Anti- 
christ, chap. Iv. Rufinus mentions that Hippolytus wrote on a cer- 
tain part of the prophet Ezekiel, viz., on those chapters which contain 
the description of the temple of Jerusalem; and of that commentary 
the following fragments are preserved. — Dc Magistris. 

^ &L0f>0li)0L'. 

* 2 Chron. iii. i, 3, 4. 

5 Simon de Magistris, Daniel secundum Sepluaginta, from the 
Codex Ckisianus, Rome, 1772; and Mai, Script, vet. coUectio nova, 
L iii. ed. 1831, pp. 29-56. 

the Other captives, he ' is carried off a prisoner 
to Babylon. Now there are born to the blessed 
Josiah these five sons — Jehoahaz, Eliakim, Jo- 
hanan, Zedekiah, or Jeconiah, and Sadum.^ And 
on his father's death, Jehoahaz is anointed as 
king by the people at the age of twenty-three 
years. Against him comes up Pharaoh-Necho, 
in the third month of his reign ; and he takes 
him (Jehoahaz) prisoner, and carries him into 
Egypt, and imposes tribute on the land to the 
extent of one hundred talents of silver and ten 
talents of gold. And in his stead he sets up his 
brother Eliakim as king over the land, whose 
name also he changed to Jehoiakim, and who 
was then eleven years old. Against him came 
up Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, ^ and carries 
him off prisoner to Babylon, taking with him also 
some of the vessels of the house in Jerusalem. 
Thrown into prison as a friend of Pharaoh, and 
as one set up by him over the kingdom,^ he is 
released at length in the thirty-seventh year by 
Evil-Merodach king of Babylon ; and he cut 
his hair short, and was courtsellor to him, and 
ate at his table until the day that he died. On 
his removal, his son Jehoiakim'' reigns three 
years. '° And against him came up Nebuchad- 
nezzar, and transports him and ten thousand of 
the men of his people to Babylon, and sets up 
in his stead his father's brother, whose name he 
changed also to Zedekiah ; and after making 
agreement with him by oath and treaty, he re- 
turns to Babylon. This (Zedekiah), after a 
reign of eleven years, revolted from him and 
went over to Pharaoh king of Egypt. And in 
the tenth year Nebuchadnezzar came against 
him from the land of the Chaldeans, and sur- 
rounded the city with a stockade, and environed 
it all round, and completely shut it up. In this 
way the larger number of them perished by fam- 
ine, and others perished by the sword, and some 
were taken prisoners, and the city was burned 
with fire, and the temple and the wall were 
destroyed. And the army of the Chaldeans 
seized all the treasure that was found in the 
house of the Lord, and all the vessels of gold 
and silver; and all the brass, Nebuzaradan, 
chief of the slaughterers," stripped off, and car- 
ried it to Babylon. And the army of the Chal- 
deans pursued Zedekiah himself as he fled by 
night along with seven hundred men, and sur- 
prised him in Jericho, and brought him to the 
king of Babylon at Reblatha. And the king 
pronounced judgment upon him in wrath, be- 
cause he had violated the oath of the Lord, and 
the agreement he had made with him ; and he 

6 Shallum. See i Chron. iii. 15. 

7 2 Kings xxiv. 10. 

8 2 Kings XXV. 27. Note the confusion between Jehoiakim and- 
Jehoiachin \n what follows. 

9 i.e., Jehoiachin. 

'° Others Tp«M')fioi' = three months. 
»t ap;(ifioycipos, " chief cook." 

178 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

slew his sons before his face, and put out Zede- 1 
kiah's eyes. And he cast him into chains of 
iron, and carried him to Babylon ; and there he | 
remained grinding at the mill until the day of 
his death. And when he died, they took his 
body and cast it behind the wall of Nineveh. ! 
In his case is fulfilled the prophecy of Jeremiah, 
saying, " (As) I live, saith the Lord, though 
Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim king of Judah should j 
become the signet upon my right hand, yet will ' 
I pluck thee thence ; and I will give thee into 
the hands of them that seek thy life, of them 
whose face thou fearest, even into the hands of 
the Chaldeans. And I will cast thee out, and 
thy mother that bare thee, into a country where 
thou wast not born ; and there ye shall die. 
But to the land which they desire in their souls, 
I will not send thee back. Dishonoured is 
Jeconias, like an unserviceable vessel, of which 
there is no use, since he is cast out and expelled 
into a land which he knew not. O earth, hear 
the word of the Lord. ^Vrite this man, a man 
excommunicate ; for no man of his seed shall 
prosper (grow up), sitting upon the throne of 
David, ruling any more in Judah." ' Thus the 
captivity in Babylon befell them after the exodus 
from Egypt. When the whole people, then, 
was transported, and the city made desolate, 
and the sanctuary destroyed, that the word of 
the Lord might be fulfilled which He spake by the 
mouth of the prophet Jeremiah, saying, " The 
sanctuary shall be desolate seventy years ; " ^ 
then we find that the blessed Daniel prophesied 
in Babylon, and appeared as the vindicator of 
Susanna. 

n. 

The interpretation by Hippolytus, (bishop) of Rome, of the 
visions of Daniel and Nebuchadnezzar, taken in conjunc- 
tion.' 

I. In speaking of a "lioness from the sea,"* 
he meant the rising of the kingdom of Babylon, 
and that this was the " golclen head of the 
image." And in speaking of its " eagle wings," 
he meant that king Nebuchadnezzar was exalted, 
and that his glory was lifted up against God. 
Then he says " its wings were plucked off," i.e., 
that his glory was destroyed ; for he was driven 
out of his kingdom. And the words, " A man's 
heart was given it, and it was made stand upon 
the feet of a man," mean that he came to him- 
self again, and recognised that he was but a man, 
and gave the glory to God. Then after the lion- 
ess he sees a second beast, " like a bear," which 

• Jer. xxii. 24, etc. 
^ Jer. XXV. II. 

3 The same method of expl.iining the two visions is also adopted by 
Jacobus Nisibenus, serm. v., and by his illustrious disciple Ephraem 
Syrus on Dan. vii. 4. [Let me again refer to Dr. Pusey's work on 
Daniel, as invaluable in this connection. The comments of our au- 
thor on this book and on " the Antichrist," infra, deserve special 
attention, as from a disciple of the disciples of St. John himself.] 

* Dan. vii. 

signified the Persians. For after tiie Babylo- 
nians the Persians obtained the power. And in 
saying that " it had three ribs in its mouth," he 
pointed to the three nations, Persians, Medes, 
and Babylonians, which were expressed in the 
image by the silver after the gold. Then comes 
the third beast, "a leopard," which means the 
Greeks ; for after the Persians, Alexander of 
Macedon had the power, when Darius was over- 
thrown, which was also indicated by the brass 
in the image. And in saying that the beast 
" had four wings of a fowl, and four heads," he 
showed most clearly how the kingdom of Alex- 
ander was parted into four divisions. For in 
speaking of four heads, he meant the four kings 
that arose out of it. For Alexander, when dying, 
divided his kingdom into four parts. Then he 
says, "The fourth beast (was) dreadful and 
terrible : it had iron teeth, and claws of brass." 
Who, then, are meant by this but the Romans, 
whose kingdom, the kingdom that still stands, 
is expressed by the iron ? " for," says he, " its 
legs are of iron." 

2. After this, then, what remains, beloved, but 
the toes of the feet of the image, in which " part 
shall be of iron and part of clay mixed together? " 
By the toes of the feet he meant, mystically, the 
ten kings that rise out of that kingdom. As 
Daniel says, " I considered the beast ; and, lo, 
(there were) ten horns behind, among which 
shall come up another little horn springing from 
them ; " by which none other is meant than the 
antichrist that is to rise ; and he shall set up the 
kingdom of Judah. And in saying that " three 
horns " were " plucked up by the roots " by this 
one, he indicates the three kings of Egypt, Libya, 
and Ethiopia, whom this one will slay in the 
array of war. And when he has conquered all, 
he will prove himself a terrible and savage tyrant, 
and will cause tribulation and persecution to the 
saints, exalting himself against them. And after 
him, it remains that " the stone " shall come 
from heaven which " smote the image " and 
shivered it, and subverted all the kingdoms, and 
gave the kingdom to the saints of the Most 
High. This " became a great mountain, and 
filled the whole earth." 

3. As these things, then, are destined to come 
to pass, and as the toes of the image turn out 
to be democracies, 5 and the ten horns of the 
beast are distributed among ten kings, let us 
look at what is before us more carefully, and 
scan it, as it were, with open eye. The " golden 
head of the image" is identical with the "lion- 
ess," by which the Babylonians were represented. 
" The golden shoulders and the arms of silver " 
are the same with the " bear," by which the 
Persians and Medes are meant. " The belly and 

5 [True in A. D. 1885. Avery pregnant testimony to our own times.] 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

1/9 

thighs of brass" are the "leopard," by which 
the Greeks who ruled from Alexander onwards 
are intended. The " legs of iron " are the 
'* dreadful and terrible beast," by which the 
Romans who hold the empire now are meant. 
The " toes of clay and iron " are the " ten horns " 
which are to be. The " one other little horn 
springing up in their midst " is the " antichrist." 
The stone that " smites the image and breaks 
it in pieces," and that filled the whole earth, is 
Christ, who comes from heaven and brings 
judgment on the world. 

4. But that we may not leave our subject at 
this point undemonstrated, we are obliged to 
discuss the matter of the times, of which a man 
should not speak hastily, because they are a 
light to him. For as the times are noted from 
the foundation of the world, and reckoned from 
Adam, they set clearly before us the matter with 
which our inquiry deals. For the first appear- 
ance of our Lord in the flesh took place in Beth- 
lehem, under Augustus, in the year 5500; and 
He suffered in the thirty-third year. And 6,000 
years must needs be accomplished, in order that 
the Sabbath may come, the rest, the holy day 
" on which God rested from all His works." ' 
For the Sabbath is the type and emblem of the 
future kingdom of the saints, when they " shall 
reign with Christ," when He comes from heaven, 
as John says in his Apocalypse : for " a day with 
the Lord is as a thousand years." ^ Since, then, 
in SIX days God made all things, it follows that 
6,000 years must be fulfilled. And they are not 
yet fulfilled, as John says : " five are fallen ; one 
is," that is, the sixth ; " the other is not yet 
come." 3 

5. In mentioning the "other," moreover, he 
specifies the seventh, in which there is rest. But 
some one may be ready to say. How will you 
prove to me that the Saviour was born in the 
year 5500? Learn that easily, O man; for the 
things that took place of old in the wilderness, 
under Moses, in the case of the tabernacle, were 
constituted types and emblems of spiritual mys- 
teries, in order that, when the truth came in 
Christ in these last days, you might be able to 
perceive that these things were fulfilled. For 
He says to him, " And thou shalt make the ark 
of imperishable wood, and shalt overlay it with 
pure gold within and without ; and thou shalt 
make the length of it two cubits and a half, and 
the breadth thereof one cubit and a half, and a 
cubit and a half the height ; " + which measures, 
when summed up together, make five cubits and 

' This is what Photius condemned In Hippolytus. Irenseus, how- 
e\ier, held the same opinion ("book v. c. 28 and 29) . The same view 
is expressed yet earlier in the Epistle of Barnabas (sec. 15). It was 
an opinion adopted from the rabbis. 

- Ps. xc. 4. 

3 Apoc. xvii. 10, 

* Ex. XXV. 10. 

a half, so that the 5500 years might be signified, 
thereby. 

6. At that time, then, the Saviour appeared 
and showed His own body to the world, (born) 
of the Virgin, who was the " ark overlaid with 
pure gold," with the Word within and the Holy 
Spirit without ; so that the truth is demonstrated, 
and the " ark " made manifest. From the birth 
of Christ, then, we must reckon the 500 years 
that remain to make up the 6000, and thus the 
end shall be. And that the Saviour appeared in 
the world, bearing the imperishable ark. His ow^n 
body, at a time which was the fifth and half, 
John declares : " Now it was the sixth hour," 5 
he says, intimating by that, one-half of the day. 
But a day with the Lord is 1000 years ; and the 
half of that, therefore, is 500 years. For it was 
not meet that He should appear earlier, for the 
burden of the law still endured, nor yet when 
the sixth day was fulfilled (for the baptism is 
changed), but on the fifth and half, in order that 
in the remaining half time the gospel might be 
preached to the whole world, and that when the 
sixth day was completed He might end the 
present life. 

7. Since, then, the Persians held the mastery 
for 330 years,*^ and after them the Greeks, who 
were yet more glorious, held it for 300 years, of 
necessity the fourth beast, as being strong and 
mightier than all that were before it, will reign 
500 years. When the times are fulfilled, and 

I the ten horns spring from the beast in the last 

j (times), then Antichrist will appear among 

them. When he makes war against the saints, 

and persecutes them, then may we expect the 

manifestation of the Lord from heaven. 

8. The prophet having thus instructed us with 
all exactness as to the certainty of the things 
that are to be, broke off from his present sub- 
ject, and passed again to the kingdom of the 
Persians and Greeks, recounting to us another 
vision which took place, and was fulfilled in its 
proper time ; in order that, by establishing our 
belief in this, he might be able to present us to 
God as readier believers in the things that are 
to be. Accordingly, what he had narrated in 
the first vision, he again recounts in detail for 
the edification of the faithful. For by the " ram 
pushing westward, and northward, and south- 
ward," he means Darius, the king of the Per- 
sians, who overcame all the nations ; " for," 
says he, " these beasts shall not stand before 
him." And by the " he-goat that came from 
the west," he means Alexander the Macedonian, 

5 John xix. 14. 

' Migne thinks we should read SiaKocria TpidKOvra, i.e , 230, as 
it is also in Julius Africanus, whovsas contemporary with Hippolytus. 
As to the duration of the Greek empire, Hippolytus and Africanus 
make it both 300 years, if we follow Jerome's version of the latter in 
his comment on Dan. ix. 24. Eusebius makes it seventy years longsl 
in his Dcmonstr. Eva/ig., viii. 2. 

i8o 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

the king of llic rirccks ; and in that lie " came 
against thai very ram, and was moved with 
choler, and smote him upon the face, and shiv- 
ered him, and cast liim upon the ground, and 
stamped uj)on liim," this expresses just what has 
hapi>ened. 

9. For Alexander waged war against Darius, 
and overcame him, and made himself master of 
tile whole sovereignty, after routing and destroy- 
ing his camp. Then, after the exaltation of the 
lie-goat, his horn — the great one, namely — 
was broken ; and there arose four horns under 
it, toward the four winds of heaven. For, when 
.Alexander had made himself master of all the 
land of l\'rsia, and had reduced its people into 
subjection, he thereupon died, after dividing 
his kingdom into four principalities, as has been 
shown above. And from that time " one horn 
was exalted, and waxed great, even to the power 
of heaven ; and by him the sacrifice," he says, 
"was disturbed, and righteousness cast down to 
the ground." 

1 o. For .Antiochus arose, surnamed Epiphanes, 
who was of the line of Alexander. And after 
he had reigned in Syria, and brought under him 
all Fgypt, he went up to Jerusalem, and entered 
the sanctuary, and seized all the treasures in the 
house of the Lord, and the golden candlestick, 
and the table, and the altar, and made a great 
slaughter in the land ; even as it is written : 
" .And the sanctuary shall be trodden under 
foot, unto evening and unto morning, a thousand 
and three huntired days." For it happened 
that the sanctuary remained desolate during that 
period, three years and a half, that the thousand 
and three hundred days might be fulfilled ; until 
Judas Maccabieus arose after the death of his 
father Matthias, and withstood him, and de- 
stroyed the encampment of .Antiochus, and 
delivered the city, and recovered the sanctuary, 
and restored it in strict accordance with the 
law. 

II. Since, then, the angel Gabriel also re- 
counted these things to the prophet, as they 
have been understood by us, as they have also 
taken place, and as they have been all clearly 
described in the books of the Maccabees, let us 
see further what he says on the other weeks. 
For when he read the book of Jeremiah the 
])rophet, in which it was written that the sanctu- 
ary would be desolate seventy years, he made 
confession with fastings and supplications, and 
])rayed that the people might return sooner from 
their captivity to the city Jerusalem. Thus, 
then, he speaks in his account : " In the first 
year of Darius the son of .Ahasuerus, of the seed 
of the Medes, who was king over the realm of 
the Chaldeans, I Daniel understood in the books 
the number of the years, as the word of the 
Lord had come to Jeremiah the prophet, for 

the accomplishment of the desolation of Jeru- 
salem in seventy years," etc. 

12. .After his confession and supplication, the 
angel says to him, " Thou art a man ' greatly 
beloved : " for thou desirest to see things of 
which thou shalt be informed by me ; and in 
their own time these things will be fulfilled ; and 
he touched me, saying, " Seventy weeks are 
determined upon thy people, and upon the holy 
city, to seal up sins and to blot out transgres- 
sions, and to seal up vision and prophet, and 
to anoint the Most Holy ; and thou shalt know 
and understand, that from the going forth of 
words for the answer, and for the building of 
Jerusalem, unto Christ the Prince, shall be seven 
weeks, and threescore and two weeks." 

13. Having mentioned therefore seventy 
wrecks, and having divided them into two parts, 
in order that what was spoken by him to the 
prophet might be better understood, he proceeds 
thus, " Unto Christ the Prince shall be seven 
weeks," which make forty-nine years. It was in 
the twenty-first year that Daniel saw these things 
in Babylon. Hence, the forty-nine years added, 
to the twenty-one, make up the seventy years, of 
which the blessed Jeremiah spake : "The sanc- 
tuary shall be desolate seventy years from the 
captivity that befell them under Nebuchadnezzar ; 
and after these things the people will return, and 
sacrifice and offering will be presented, when 
Christ is their Prince." ^ 

14. Now of what Christ does he speak, but of 
Jesus the son of Josedech, who returned at that 
time along w'ith the people, and offered sacrifice 
according to the law, in the seventieth year, when 
the sanctuary was built? For all the kings and 
priests were styled Christs, because they were 
anointed with the holy oil, which Moses of old pre- 
pared. These, then, bore the name of the Lord 
in their own persons, showing aforetime the type, 
and presenting the image until the perfect King 
and Priest appeared from heaven, who alone did 
the will of the Father; as also it is written in 
Kings : "And I will raise me up a faithful priest, 
that shall do all things according to my heart." ^ 

15. In order, then, to show the time when 
He is to come whom the blessed Daniel desired 
to see, he says, " And after seven weeks there 
are other threescore and two weeks," which 
period embraces the space of 434 years. For 
after the return of the people from Babylon 
under the leadership of Jesus the son of Jose- 
dech, and Ezra the scribe, and Zerubbabel the 
son of Salathiel, of the tribe of David, there were 
434 years unto the coming of Christ, in order 
that the Priest of priests might be manifested in 

' Literally, "a man of desires." [Our author plays on this 
word, as if the desire of knowlcdse w^re referred to. Our Authorized 
Version is better, and the tendering might be "a man of loves." J 

- Jer. XXV. II. 

•5 I Sam. ii. 35. 

FRAGMENTS FROM COIMMENTARIES. 

i8l 

the world, and that He who taketh away the sins 
of the world might be evidently set forth, as 
John speaks concerning Him : " Behold the 
Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin of the 
■world ! " ' And in like manner Gabriel says : 
"To blot out transgressions, and make recon- 
ciliation for sins." But who has blotted out our 
transgressions ? Paul the apostle teaches us, say- 
ing, " He is our peace who made both one ; " - 
and then, " Blotting out the handwriting of sins 
that was against us."^ 

1 6. That transgressions, therefore, are blotted 
out, and that reconciliation is made for sins, is 
shown by this. But who are they who have rec- 
onciliation made for their sins, but they who 
believe on His name, and propitiate His coun- 
tenance by good works? And that after the re- 
turn of the people from Babylon there was a 
space of 434 years, until the time of the birth 
of Christ, may be easily understood. For, since 
the first covenant was given to the children of 
Israel after a period of 434 years, it follows that 
the second covenant also should be defined by 
the same space of time, in order that it might 
be expected by the people and easily recognised 
by the faithful. 

1 7. And for this reason Gabriel says : •' And 
to anoint the Most Holy." And the Most Holy 
is none else but the Son of God alone, who, 
Avhen He came and manifested Himself, said to 
them, " The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, be- 
cause He has anointed me ; " * and so forth. 
Whosoever, therefore, believed on the heavenly 
Priest, were cleansed by that same Priest, and 
their sins were blotted out. And whosoever 
beheved not on Him, despising Him as a man, 
had their sins sealed, as those which could not 
be taken away ; whence the angel, foreseeing 
that not all should believe on Him, said, "To 
finish sins, and to seal up sins." For as many 
as continued to disbelieve Him, even to the end, 
had fheir sins not finished, but sealed to be kept 
for judgment. But as many as will believe on 
Him as One able to remit sins, have their sins 
"blotted out. Wherefore he says : " And to seal 
tip vision and prophet." 

18. For when He came who is the fulfilling 
of the law and of the prophets (for the law and 
the prophets were till John), it was necessary 
that the things spoken by them should be con- 
firmed (sealed), in order that at the coming of 
the Lord all things loosed should be brought to 
light, and that things bound of old should now 
be loosed by Him, as the Lord said Himself to 
the rulers of the people, when they were indig- 
nant git the cure on the Sabbath-day : " Ye hypo- 

' John i. 29. 

* Eph. ii. 14. 

5 Col. ii. 14. 

^ Isa. Ixi. t ; Luke iv. i8. 

crites, doth not each one of you loose his ox or 
his ass from the stall, and lead him away to 
watering? and ought not this woman, being a 
daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bound 
these eighteen years, be loosed on the Sabbath- 
day?" s Whomsoever, therefore, Satan bound 
in chains, these did the Lord on His comintr 
loose from the bonds of death, having bound 
our strong adversary and delivered humanity. 
As also Isaiah says : " Then will He say to those 
in chains, Go forth ; and to them that are in 
darkness, Show yourselves." ^ 

19. And that the things spoken of old by the 
law and the prophets were all sealed, and that 
they were unknown to men, Isaiaji declares when 
he says : " And they will deliver the book that 
is sealed to one that is learned, and will say to 
him, Read this ; and he will say, I cannot read 
it, for it is sealed." ? It was meet and necessary 
that the things spoken of old by the prophets 
should be sealed to the unbelieving Pharisees, 
who thought that they understood the letter of 
the law, and be opened to the believing. The 
things, therefore, which of old were sealed, are 
now by the grace of God the Lord all open to 
the saints. 

20. For He was Himself the perfect Seal, and 
the Church is the key : " He who openeth, and 
no man shutteth ; and shutteth, and no man 
openeth," ** as John says. And again, the same 
says : " And I saw, on the right hand of Him 
that sat on the throne, a book written within and 
without, sealed with seven seals ; and I saw an 
angel proclaiming with a loud voice, AVho is 
worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals 
thereof? " and so forth. " And I beheld in the 
midst of the throne, and of the four beasts, a 
Lamb standing slain, having seven horns, and 
seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God 
sent forth into all the earth. And He came and 
took the book out of the right hand of Him 
that sat upon the throne. And when He had 
taken the book, the four beasts and four-and- 
twenty elders fell down before the Lamb, having 
harps and golden vials full of incense, which is 
the prayers of the saints. And they sing a new 
song, saying. Thou art worthy to take the book, 
and to open the seals thereof: for Thou wast 
slain, and hast redeemed us to God by Thy 
blood." 9 He took the book, therefore, and loosed 
it, in order that the things spoken concerning 
Him of old in secret, might now be proclaimed 
with boldness upon the house-tops. '° 

21. For this reason, then, the angel says to 
Daniel, " Seal the words, for the vision is until 

S Luke xiii. 15, i6. 
* Isa. xlix. 9. 
7 Isa. xxix. It. 
' Apoc. iii. 7. 
9 Apoc. V. 
•o Cf. Matt. X. if 

l82 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

the end of the time." But to Christ it was not 
said " seal," but " loose " the things bound of 
old ; in order that, by His grace, we might know 
the will of the Father, and believe upon Him 
whom He has sent for the salvation of men, 
Jesus our Lord. He says, therefore, "They 
shall return, and the street shall be built, and the 
wall ; " which in reality took place. For the peo- 
ple returned and built the city, and the temple, 
and the wall round about. Then he says : 
" After threescore and two weeks the times will 
be fulfilled, and one week will make a covenant 
with many ; and in the midst (half) of the week 
sacrifice and oblation will be removed, and in 
the temple will be the abomination of deso- 
lations." 

22. For when the threescore and two weeks 
are fulfilled, and Christ is come, and the Gospel 
is preached in every place, the times being then j 
accomplished, there will remain only one week, 
the last, in which Flias will appear, and Enoch, 
and in the midst of it the abomination of deso- 
lation will be manifested,' viz., Antichrist, an- 
nouncing desolation to the world. And when 
he comes, the sacrifice and oblation will be re- 
moved, which now are offered to God in every 
place by the nations. These things being thus 
recounted, the prophet again describes another 
vision to us. For he had no other care save to 
be accurately instructed in all things that are to 
be, and to prove himself an instructor in such. 

23. He says then : " In the third year of 
Cyrus king of Persia, a word was revealed unto 
Daniel, whose name was Belshazzar ; and the 
word was true, and great power and understand- 
ing were given him in the vision. In those days, 
I Daniel was mourning three weeks of days. I 
ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor 
wine into my mouth, neither did I anoint my- 
self at all, till three weeks of days were fulfilled. 
On the fourth day of the first month I humbled 
myself," says he, " one and twenty days," pray- 
ing to the living God, and asking of Him the 
revelation of the mystery. And the Father in 
truth heard me, and sent His own Word, to show 
what should happen by Him. And that took 
l)lace, indeed, by the great river. For it was 
meet that the Son should be manifested there, 
where also He was to remove sins. 

24. " And I lifted up mine eyes," he says, 
"and, behold, a man clothed in linen." = In 
the first vision he says, " Behold, the angel Ga- 
briel (was) sent." Here, however, it is not so ; 
but he sees the Lord, not yet indeed as perfect 
man, but with the apiK'arance and form of man, 
as he says : " And, behold, a man clothed in 
linen." For in being clothed in a various-col- 

' In the text, the word tios, " until," is introduced, which seems 
spnrious. 

oured coat, he indicated mystically ^ the variety 
of the graces of our calling. For the priestly 
coat was made up of different colours, as various 
nations waited for Christ's coming, in order that 
we might be made up (as one body) of many 
colours. " And his loins were girded with the 
gold of Ophaz." 

25. Now the word " Ophaz," which is a word 
transferred from Hebrew to Greek, denotes pure 
gold. With a pure girdle, therefore, he was 
girded round the loins. For the Word was to 
bear us all, binding us like a girdle round His 
body, in His own love. The complete body 
was His,-* but we are members in His body, 
united together, and sustained by the Word 
Himself. " And his body was like Tharses." 5 
Now "Tharses," by interpretation, is " Ethiopi- 
j ans." For that it would be difficult to recognise 
Him, the prophet had thus already announced 
beforehand, intimating that He would be mani- 
fested in the flesh in the world, but that many 

flesh 

would find it difficult to recognise Him. " And 
his face as lightning, and his eyes as lamps of 
fire ; " for it was meet that the fierj' and judicial 
power of the Word should be signified aforetime, 
in the exercise of which He will cause the fire 
(of His judgment) to light with justice upon 
the impious, and consume them. 

He added also these words : " And his 

26 

arms 
note 

and 
the 

calling like unto it. 

his feet like polished brass ; " to de- 
first calling of men, and the second 
viz., of the Gentiles. ^' " For 
the last shall be as the first ; for I will set thy 
rulers as at the beginning, and thy leaders as 
before. And His voice was as the voice of a 
great multitude." ^ For all we who believe on 
Him in these days utter things oracular, as 
speaking by His mouth the things appointed 
by Him. 

27. And after a little He says to him : " Know- 
est thou wherefore I come unto thee ? And now 
will I return to fight with the prince of Persia. 
But I will show thee that which is noted in the 
Scripture of truth : and there is none that hold- 
eth with me in these things but Michael your 
prince, and I left him there. For from the day 
that thou didst give thy countenance to be af- 
flicted before the Lord thy God, thy prayer was 
heard, and I was sent to fight with the prince 
of Persia : " for a certain counsel was formed 
not to send the people away : " that therefore 
thy prayer might be si^eediiy granted, I with- 
stood him, and left Michael there." 

3 In the text, nva-rripiuv (of" mysteries "), for which livtrnqpiui- 
Sius or joiiio-TiKu)?, " mystically," is proposed. 

4 The Latin translation renders: His body was perfect. 

5 "Tharses" (@ap<rci«) in Hippolytus. The Septuagint gives 

©apo-i's as the translation of the Hebrew E^'C'^J?. rendered in our 

version as "beryl " (Dan. x. 6). 
*> Isa. i. 26. 
'' Apoc. xix. 6. 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

183 

28. And who was he that spake, but the angel 
Avho was given to the people, as he says in the 
law of Moses : " I will not go with you, because 
the people is stiff-necked ; but my angel shall go 
before along with you?"' This (angel) with- 
stood Moses at the inn, when he was bringing 
the child uncircumcised into Egypt. For it was 
not allowed Moses, who was the elder (or legate) 
and mediator of the law, and who proclaimed 
the covenant of the fathers, to introduce a child 
uncircumcised, lest he should be deemed a false 
prophet and deceiver by the people. "And 
now," says he, " will I show the truth to thee." 
Could the Truth have shown anything else but 
the truth? 

29. He says therefore to him ; " Behold, there 
shall stand up three kings in Persia : and the 
fourth shall be far richer than they all ; and 
when he has got possession of his riches, he 
shall stand up against all the realms of Grecia. 
And a mighty king shall stand up, and shall rule 
with great dominion, and do according to his 
will ; and when his kingdom stands, it shall be 
broken, and shall be divided toward the four 
winds of heaven." These things we have already 
discussed above, when we discoursed upon the 
four beasts. But since Scripture now again sets 
them forth explicitly, we must also discourse 
upon them a second time, that we may not 
leave Scripture unused and unexplained. 

30. "There shall stand up yet three kings," 
he says, " in Persia ; and the fourth shall be far 
richer than they all." This has been fulfilled. 
For after Cyrus arose Darius, and then Artax- 
erxes. These were the three kings ; (and) the 
Scripture is fulfilled. " And the fourth shall be 
far richer than they all." Who is that but 
Darius, who reigned and made himself glorious, 
— who was rich, and assailed all the realms of 
Cireece ? Against him rose Alexander of Mace- 
don, who destroyed his kingdom ; and after he 
had reduced the Persians, his own kingdom was 
divided toward the four winds of heaven. For 
Alexander at his death divided his kingdom into 
four principalities. " And a king shall stand up, 
and shall enter into the fortress of the king of 
Egypt." 

3 1 . For Antiochus became king of Syria. He 
held the sovereignty in the 107th year of the 
kingdom of the Greeks. And in those same 
times indeed he made war against Ptolemy king 
of Egypt, and conquered him, and won the 
power. On returning from Egypt he went up to 
Jerusalem, in the 103d year, and carrying off 
with him all the treasures of the Lord's house, 
he marched to Antioch. And after two years 
of days the king sent his raiser of taxes ^ into 
the cities of Judea, to compel the Jews to for- 

' Ex. xxxii. 4, xxxiii. j. 

2 (^opoAo-yov. 

sake the laws of their fathers, and submit to the 
decrees of the king. And he came, and tried 
to compel them, saying, " Come forth, and do 
the commandment of the king, and ye shall 
live." 

32. But they said, "We will not come forth. 
neither will we do the king's commandment ; 
we will die in our innocency : and he slew of 
them a thousand souls." ^ The things, there- 
fore, which were spoken to the blessed Daniel 
are fulfilled : " And my servants shall be afilicted, 
and shall fall by famine, and by sword, and by 
captivity." 4 Daniel, however, adds : "And they 
shall be holpen with a little help." For at that 
time Matthias arose, and Judas Maccabaeus, and 
helped them, and delivered them from the hand 
of the Greeks. 

T,T„ That therefore was fulfilled which was 
spoken in the Scripture. He proceeds then 
thus : " And the (king's) daughter of the South 
shall come to the king of the North to make an 
agreement with him ; and the arms of him that 
bringeth her shall not stand ; and she, too, shall 
be smitten, and shall fall, and he that bringeth 
her." For this was a certain Ptolemais,^ queen 
of Egypt. At that time indeed she went forth 
with her two sons, Ptolemy and Philometor, to 
make an agreement with Antiochus king of 
Syria ; and when she came to Scythopolis, she 
was slain there. For he who brought her be- 
trayed her. At that same time, the two brothers 
made war against each other, and Philometor 
was slain, and Ptolemy gained the power. 

34. War, then, was again made by Ptolemy 
against Antiochus, (and) Antiochus met him. 
For thus saith the Scripture : " And the king of 
the South shall stand up against the king of the 
North, and her seed shall stand up against him." 
And what seed but Ptolemy, who made war with 
Antiochus? And Antiochus having gone forth 
against him, and having failed to overcome him, 
had to flee, and returned to Antioch, and col- 
lected a larger host. Ptolemy accordingly took 
his whole equipment, and carried it into Egypt. 
And the Scripture is fulfilled, as Daniel says : 
And he shall carry off into Egypt their gods, 
and their cast-works, and all their precious (ves- 
sels of) gold. 

35. And after these things Antiochus went 
forth a second time to make war against him, 
and overcome Ptolemy. And after these events 
Antiochus commenced hostilities again against 
the children of Israel, and despatched one 
Nicanor with a large army to subdue the Jews, at 
the time when Judas, after the death of Matthias, 
ruled the people ; and so forth, as is written in 

3 I Mace. ii. 33. 

* Dan. xi. 33. 

5 He seems to refer to Cleopatra, wife and iiiece of Physco. For 
Lathyrus was sometimes called Philometor in ridicule (sttI xAcuao-MSc), 
as Pausanias says in the Attica. 

1 84 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

the Maccabees. These events having taken 
place, the Scripture says again : " And there 
shall stand up another king, and he shall prevail 
upon the earth ; and the king of the South shall 
stand up, and he shall obtain his daughter to 
wife." 

36. For it happened that there arose a certain 
Alexander,' son of Philip. He withstood An- 
tiochus ^ at that time, and made war upon him, 
and out him off, and gained possession of the 
kingdom. Then he sent to Ptolemy king of 
Egypt, saying, Give me thy daughter Cleopatra 
to wife. And he gave her to Alexander to wife. 
And thus the Scripture is fulfilled, when it says : 
"And he shall obtain his daughter to wife." 
And it says further : " And he shall corrupt her, 
and she shall not be his wife." This also has 
been truly fulfilled. For after Ptolemy had given 
him his daughter, he returned, and saw the mighty 
and glorious kingdom of Alexander. And covet- 
ing its possession, he spoke falsely to Alexander, 
as the Scripture says : " And the two kings shall 
speak lies at (one) table." And, in sooth, 
Ptolemy betook himself to Egypt, and collected 
a great army, and attacked the city at the time 
■when Alexander had marched into Cilicia. 

37. Ptolemy then invaded the country, and 
established garrisons throughout the cities ; and 
on making himself master of Judea, set out for 
his daughter, and sent letters to Demetrius in 
the islands, saying. Come and meet me here, 
and I will give thee my daughter Cleopatra to 
■wife, for Alexander has sought to kill me. De- 
metrius came accordingly, and Ptolemy received 
him, and gave him her who had been destined 
for Alexander. Thus is fulfilled that which is 
written : " And he shall corrupt her, and she 
shall not be his wife." Alexander was slain. 
Then Ptolemy wore two crowns, that of Syria 
and that of Egypt, and died the third day after 
he had assumed them. Thus is fulfilled that 
which is written in Scripture : " And they shall 
not give him the glory of the kingdom." For 
he died, and received not honour from all as 
king. 

38. The prophet then, after thus recounting 
the things which have taken plact already, and 
been fulfilled in their times, declares yet another 
mystery to us, while he points out the last times. 
For he says : " And there shall rise up another 
shameless king ; and he shall exalt himself above 
every god, and shall magnify himself, and shall 
speak marvellous things, and shall prosper till 

' He refers to Alexander I. king of Syria, ol whom we read in 
1 Mace. X. He pretended to be the son of Antiochus Epiphanes, 
and even gained a decree of the senate of Rome in his favour as such. 
Yet he was a person of unknown origin, as indeed he acknowledged 
himself in his choice of the designation Theopator. Livy calls him 
"a man unknown, and of uncertain parentage" {homo ignotus et 
inctrtit stirpis). So Hippolytus calls him here, " a certain Alex- 
ander" (rica). He had also other surnames, e.g., Euergctes, Balas, 
etc. 

» For " Antiochus " in the text, read " Demetrius." 

the indignation be accomplished ; " and so forth. 
" And these shall escape out of his hand, Edom, 
and Moab, and the chief (or principality) of the 
children of Ammon. And he shall stretch forth 
his hand upon the land ; and the land of Egypt 
shall not escape. And he shall have power over 
the secret treasures of gold and silver, and over 
all the precious things of Egypt and of the 
Libyans, and the Ethiopians in their strong- 
holds." 

39. Thus, tlien, does the prophet set forth 
these things concerning the Antichrist, who shall 
be shameless, a war-maker, and despot, who, 
exalting himself above all kings and above every 
god, shall build the city of Jerusalem, and restore 
the sanctuary. Him the impious will worship as 
God, and will bend to him the knee, thinking 
him to be the Christ. He shall cut off the two 
witnesses and forerunners of Christ, who proclaim 
His glorious kingdom from heaven, as it is said : 
" And I will give (power) unto my two witnesses, 
and they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred 
and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth." ^ As 
also it was announced to Daniel : " And one 
week shall confirm a covenant with many ; and 
in the midst of the week it shall be that the 
sacrifice and oblation shall be removed " — that 
the one week might be shown to be divided into 
two. The two witnesses, then, shall preach three 
years and a half; and Antichrist shall make war 
upon the saints during the rest of the week, and 
desolate the world, that what is written may be 
fulfilled : " And they shall make the abomination 
of desolation for a thousand two hundred and 
ninety days." 

40. Daniel has spoken, therefore, of two 
abominations ; the one of destruction, and the 
other of desolation. What is that of destruction, 
but that which Antiochus established there at the 
time? And what is that of desolation, but that 
which shall be universal when Antichrist comes? 
" And there shall escape out of his hand, Edom, 
and Moab, and the chief of the children of Am- 
mon." For these are they who ally themselves 
with him on account of their kinship, and first 
address him as king. Those of Edom are the 
sons of Esau, who inhabit Mount Seir. And 
Moab and Ammon are they who are descended 
from his two daughters, as Isaiah also says : 
" And they shall fly (extend themselves) in the 
ships of strangers, and they shall also plunder 
the sea ; and those from the east, and from the 
west, and the north, shall give them honour : 
and the children of Ammon shall first obey 
them."* He shall be proclaimed king by them, 
and shall be magnified by all, and shall prove 
himself an abomination of desolation to the 
world, and shall reign for a thousand two hun- 

i Apoc. xi. 3. 
* Isa. xi. 14. 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

.85 

dred and ninety days. " Blessed is he that 
waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hun- 
dred and five and thirty days ; " for when the 
abomination cometh and makes war upon the 
saints, whosoever shall survive his days, and 
reach the forty-five days, while the other period 
•of fifty days advances, to him the kingdom of 
heaven comes. Antichrist, indeed, enters even 
into part of the fifty days, but the saints shall 
inherit the kingdom along with Christ. 

41. These things being thus narrated, Daniel 
proceeds : " And, behold, there stood two men, 
the one on this side of the bank of the river, and 
the other on that side ; and they made answer 
to the man that stood upon the bank of the 
river, and said to him, How long shall it be to 
the end of these wonderful words which thou 
hast spoken? And I heard the man clothed in 
linen, who was upon the water of the river ; and 
he lifted up his right hand and his left hand 
unto heaven, and sware by Him that liveth for 
ever, that it shall be for a time, times, and an 
half ; and they shall know all these things, when 
the dispersion is accomplished." 

42. Who, then, were the two men who stood 
on the bank of the river, but the law and the 
prophets? And who was he who stood upon 
the water, but He concerning whom they proph- 
esied of old, who in the last times was to be 
borne witness to by the Father at the Jordan, 
and to be declared to the people boldly by 
John, " who wore the casty ' of tlie scribe about 
his loins, and was clothed with a linen coat of 
various colours?" These, therefore, interrogate 
Him, knowing that to Him were given all gov- 
ernment and power, in order to learn accurately 
of Him when He will bring the judgment on the 
world, and when the things spoken by Him will 
be fulfilled. And He, desiring by all means to 
convince them, lifted His right hand and His 
left hand to heaven, and sware by Him that 
liveth for ever. Who is He that swore, and by 
whom sware He? Manifestly the Son by the 
Father, saying. The Father liveth for ever, but 
in a time, and times, and an half, when the dis- 
persion is accomplished, they shall know all 
these things. 

43. By the stretching forth of His two hands 
He signified His passion ; and by mentioning 
*' a time, and times, and an half, when the dis- 
persion is accomplished," He indicated the three 
years and a half of Antichrist. For by "a time " 
He means a year, and by " times " two years, 
and by an " half time " half a year. These are 
the thousand two hundred and ninety days of 
which Daniel prophesied for the finishing of the 
passion, and the accomplishment of the disper- 
sion when Antichrist comes. In those days they 

> Girdle. 

shall know all these things. And from the time 
of the removal of the continuous sacrifice there 
are also reckoned one thousand two hundred 
and ninety days. (Then) inicjuity shall abound, 
as the Lord also says : " Because iniquity shall 
abound, the love of many shall wax cold." ^ 

44. And that divisions will arise when the fall- 
ing away takes place, is without doubt. And 
when divisions arise, love is chilled. The words, 
" Blessed is he that waiteth and cometh to the 
thousand three hundred and five and thirty days," 
have also their value, as the Lord said : "But he 
that shall endure unto the end, the same shall 
be saved." Wherefore let us by no means ad- 
mit the falling away, lest iniquity abound, and the 
abomination of desolation — that is, the adver- 
sary— overtake us. And He said to him, "unto 
evening" — that is, unto the consummation — 
"and morning." What is "morning?" The 
day of resurrection. For that is the beginning 
of another age, as the morning is the beginning of 
the day. And the thousand and four hundred 
days are the light of the world. For on the 
appearing of the light in the world (as He says, 
"I am the light of the world"), the sanctuary 
shall be purged, as he said,^ (of) the adversary. 
For it cannot by any means be purged but by 
his destruction. 

III. 

SCHOLIA ON DANIEL.* 

Chap. i. i. "In the third year of the reign 
of Jehoiakim." The Scripture narrates these 
things, with the purpose of intimating the second 
captivity of the people, when Jehoiakim and the 
three youths with him, together with Daniel, were 
taken captive and carried off. 

2. " And the Lord gave," etc. These words, 
" and the Lord gave," are written, that no one, 
in reading the introduction to the book, may 
attribute their capture to the strength of the 
captors and the slackness of their chief. And 
it is well said, " with part," for the deportation 
was for the correction, not the ruin, of the whole 
nation, that there might be no misapplication of 
the cause. 

8. " And Daniel purposed in his heart." Oh, 
blessed are they who thus kept the covenant of 
the fathers, and transgressed not the law given 
by Moses, but feared the God proclaimed by 
him. These, though captives in a strange land, 
were not seduced by delicate meats, nor were they 
slaves to the pleasures of wine, nor were they 
caught by the bait of princely glory. But 
they kept their mouth holy and pure, that pure 
speech might proceed from pure mouths, and 
praise with such (mouths) the heavenly Father. 

1 

* Matt. xxiv. 12. 

3 The text gives 6 avriKeliitvo^, which is corrupt. 

* Mai, Scrip, vet. eoUectio nova, i. p. iii. pp. !ig-S& 

i86 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

12. "Prove now thy sen-ants." They teach 
that it is not earthly meats that give to men their 
beauty and strength, but the grace of God be- 
stowed by the Word. " .\nd after a Httle." 
Thou hast seen the incorruptible faith of the 
youths, and the unalterable fear of God. They 
asked an interval of ten days, to prove therein 
that man cannot otherwise find grace with God 
than by believing the word preached by the 
Lord. 

19. "And among them all, was found none 
like Daniel." These men, who were proved 
faithful witnesses in Babylon, were led by the 
Word in all wisdom, that by their means the 
idols of the Babylonians should be put to shame, 
and that Nebuchadnezzar should be overcome 
by three youths, and that by their faith the fire 
in the furnace should be kept at bay, and the 
desire of the wicked elders (or chiefs) proved 
vain. 

Chap. ii. 3. " I have dreamed a dream." The 
dream, then, which was seen by the king was not 
an earthly dream, so that it might be interpreted 
by the wise of the world ; but it was a heavenly 
dream, fulfilled in its proper times, according to 
the counsel and foreknowledge of God. And 
for this reason it was kept secret from men who 
think of earthly things, that to those who seek 
after heavenly things heavenly mysteries might 
be revealed. And, indeed, there was a similar 
case in Egypt in the time of Pharaoh and 
Joseph. 

5. "The thing is gone from me." For this 
purpose was the vision concealed from the king, 
that he who was chosen of God., viz., Daniel, 
might be shown to be a prophet. For when 
things concealed from some are revealed by an- 
other, he who tells them is of necessity shown to 
be a prophet. 

10. "And they say, There is not a man." 
Whereas, therefore, they declared it to be im- 
possible that what was asked by the king should 
be told by man ; God showed them, that what 
is impossible with man is possible with God. 

14. " Arioch, the captain of the king's guard" 
(literally, " the chief slaughterer or cook "). For 
as the cook slays all animals and cooks them, of 
a similar nature was his occupation. And the 
rulers of the world slay men, butchering them 
like brute beasts. 

23. " Because Thou hast given me wisdom 
antl might." We ought therefore to mark the 
goodness of God, how He straightway reveals 
antl shows (Himself) to the worthy, and to those 
that fear Him, fulfilling their prayers and suppli- 
cations, as the prophet says : " Who is wise, and 
he shall understand these things? and prudent, 
and he shall know them ? " ' 

IIos. 

XIV. 9. 

27. "Cannot the wise men, the magicians." 
He instructs the king not to seek an explanation 
of heavenly mysteries from earthly men, for they 
shall be accomplished in their due time by God. 

29. " As for thee, O king, thy thoughts." For 
the king, on making himself master of the land 
of Egypt, and getting hold of the country of 
Judea, and carrying off the people, thought upon 
his bed what should be after these things ; and 
He who knows the secrets of all, and searcheth 
the thoughts of the hearts, revealed to him by 
means of the image the things that were to be. 
And He hid from him the vision, in order that 
the counsels of God might not be interpreted by 
the wise men of Babylon, but that by the blessed 
Daniel, as a prophet of God, things kept secret 
from all might be made manifest. 

31. "Behold a great image." How, then, 
should we not mark the things prophesied of 
old in Babylon by Daniel, and now yet in the 
course of fulfilment in the world? For the im- 
age shown at that time to Nebuchadnezzar fur- 
nished a type of the whole world. In these 
times the Babylonians were sovereign over all, 
and these were the golden head of the image. 
And then, after them, the Persians held the 
supremacy for 245 years, and they were repre- 
sented by the silver. Then the Greeks had the 
supremacy, beginning with Alexander of Mace- 
don, for 300 years, so that they were the brass. 
After them came the Romans, who were the iron 
legs of the image, for they were strong as iron. 
Then (we have) the toes of clay and iron, to 
signify the democracies that were subsequently 
to rise, partitioned among the ten toes of the 
image, in which shall be iron mixed with clay. 

31. "Thcu sawest," etc. Apollinaris on this : 
He looked, and behold, as it were, an image. 
For it did not appear to him as an actual object, 
presented to the view of an onlooker, but as an 
image or semblance. And while it contains in 
it many things together, that is in such a way 
that it is not really one, but manifold. For it 
comprised a summary of all kingdoms ; and its 
exceeding splendour was on account of the glory 
of the kings, and its terrible appearance on 
account of their power. Eusebius Pamphili, 
and Hippolytus the most holy bishop of Rome, 
compare the dream of Nebuchadnezzar now in 
question with the vision of the prophet Daniel. 
Since these have given a different interpretation 
of this vision now before us in their expositions, 
I deemed it necessary to transcribe what is said 
by Eusebius of Caisarea, who bears the surname 
Pamphili, in the 15th book of his Gospel Dem- 
onstration ; ^ for he expounds the whole vis- 
ion in these terms: "I think that this (i.e., the 
vision of Nebuchadnezzar) differs in nothing 

^ This book is not now extant, the first ten alone having reached 
our time. 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

187 

from the vision of the prophet. For as the 
prophet saw a great sea, so the king saw a great 
image. And again, as the prophet saw four 
beasts, which he interpreted as four kingdoms, 
so the king was given to understand four king- 
doms under the gold, and silver, and brass, and 
iron. And again, as the prophet saw the divis- 
ion of the ten horns of the last beast, and three 
horns broken by one ; so the king, in like man- 
ner, saw in the extremities of the image one part 
iron and another clay. And besides this, as the 
prophet, after the vision of the four kingdoms, 
saw the Son of man receive dominion, and power, 
and a kingdom ; so also the king thought he saw 
a stone smite the whole image, and become a 
great mountain and fill the sea. And rightly so. 
For it was quite consistent in the king, whose 
view of the spectacle of life was so false, and 
who admired the beauty of the mere sensibl: 
colours, so to speak, in the picture set up to 
view, to liken the life of all men to a great 
image ; but (it became) the prophet to compare 
the great and mighty tumult of life to a mighty 
sea. And it was fitting that the king, who prized 
the substances deemed precious among men, 
gold, and silver, and brass, and iron, should 
liken to these substances the kingdoms that held 
the sovereignty at different times in the life of 
men ; but that the prophet should describe these 
same kingdoms under the likeness of beasts, in 
accordance with the manner of their rule. And 
again, the king — who was puffed up, as it seems, 
in his own conceit, and plumed himself on the 
power of his ancestors — is shown the vicissitude 
to which affairs are subject, and the end destined 
for all the kingdoms of earth, with the view of 
teaching him to lay aside his pride in himself, 
and understand that there is nothing stable 
among men, but only that which is the appointed 
end of all things — the kingdom of God. For 
after the first kingdom of the Assyrians, which 
was denoted by the gold, there will be the sec- 
ond kingdom of the Persians, expressed by the 
silver ; and then the third kingdom of the Mace- 
donians, signified by the brass ; and after it, 
the fourth kingdom of the Romans will succeed, 
more powerful than those that went before it ; 
for which reason also it was likened to iron. For 
of it it is said : " And the fourth kingdom shall 
be strong as iron ; as iron breaketh and sub- 
dueth all things, so shall it break and subdue all 
things." And after all these kingdoms which 
have been mentioned, the kingdom of God is 
represented by the stone that breaks the whole 
image. And the prophet, in conformity with 
this, does not see the kingdom which comes at 
the end of all these things, until he has in order 
described the four dominions mentioned under 
the four beasts. And I think that the visions 
shown, both to the king and to the prophet, 

were visions of these four kingdoms alone, and 
of none others, because by these the nation of 
the Jews was held in bondage from the times 
of the prophet." 

2)2,- " His feet," etc. Hippolytus : In the vis- 
ion of the prophet, the ten horns are the things 
that are yet to be. 

34. " Thou sawest till that a stone was cut." 
Thou sawest, as it were, a stone cut without 
hands, and smiting the image upon its feet. For 
the human kingdom was decisively separated 
from the divine ; with reference to which it is 
written, " as it were cut." The stroke, however, 
smites the extremities, and in these it broke all 
dominion that is upon earth. 

45. -'And the dream is certain," That no 
one, therefore, may have any doubt whether the 
things announced shall turn out so or not, the 
prophet has confirmed them with the words, 
" And the dream is certain, and the interpreta- 
tion thereof sure ; " I have not erred in the in- 
terpretation of the vision. 

46. " Then king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his 
face." Nebuchadnezzar hearing these things, 
and being put in remembrance of his vision, 
knew that what was spoken by Daniel was true. 
How great is the power of the grace of God, 
beloved, that one who a little before was doomed 
to death with the other wise men of Babylon, 
should now be worshipped by the king, not as 
man, but as God ! " He commanded that they 
should offer manaa"' (i.e., in Chaldee, "obla- 
tion") "and sweet odours unto him." Of old, 
too, the Lord made a similar announcement to 
Moses, saying, " See, I have made thee a god to 
Pharaoh ; " ^ in order that, on account of the 
signs wrought by him in the land of Egypt, 
Moses might no longer be reckoned a man, but 
be worshipped as a god by the Egyptians. 

48. " Then the king made Daniel a great 
man." For as he had humbled himself, and 
presented himself as the least among all men, 
God made him great, and the king established 
him as ruler over the whole land of Babylon. 
Just as also Pharaoh did to Joseph, appointing 
him then to be ruler over the whole land of 
Egypt. 

49. "And Daniel requested," etc. For as 
they had united with Daniel in prayer to God 
that the vision might be revealed to him, so 
Daniel, when he obtained great honour from the 
king, made mention of them, explaining to die 
king what had been done by them, in order that 
they also should be deemed worthy of some 
honour as fellow-seers and worshippers of God. 
For when they asked heavenly things from the 
Lord, they received also earthly things from 
the king. 

' [The minchah, that is.J 
^ Ex. vii. I. ■ 

i88 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

Chap. hi. i. " In the eighteenth year," etc. 
(These words are wanting in the Vulgate, etc.) 
A considerable space of time having elapsed, 
therefore, and the eighteenth year being now in 
its course, the king, calling to mind his vision, 
" made an image of gold, whose height was 
threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof six 
cubits." For as the blessed Daniel, in interpret- 
ing the vision, had answered the king, saying, 
"Thou art this head of gold in the image," the 
king, being puffed up with this address, and 
elated in heart, made a copy of this image, in 
order that he might be worshipped by all as 
God. 

7. " All the people fell." Some (did so) be- 
cause they feared the king himself; but all (or 
"most"), because they were idolaters, obeyed 
the word commanded by the king. 

16. "Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego an- 
swered," etc. These three youths are become 
an example to all faithful men, inasmuch as they 
did not fear the crowd of satraps, neither did 
they tremble when they heard the king's words, 
nor did they shrink when they saw the flame of 
the blazing furnace, but deemed all men and the 
whole world as nought, and kept the fear of God 
alone before their eyes. Daniel, though he stood 
at a distance and kept silence, encouraged them 
to be of good cheer as he smiled to them. And 
he rejoiced also himself at the witness they bore, 
understanding, as he did, that the three youths 
would receive a crown in triumph over the 
devil. 

19. "And commanded that they should heat 
the furnace one seven times more." He bids 
the vast furnace be heated one seven times more, 
as if he were already overcome by them. In 
earthly things, then, the king was superior ; but 
in faith toward God the three youths were supe- 
riox. Tell me, Nebuchadnezzar, with what pur- 
pose you order them to be cast into the fire 
bound? Is it lest they might escape, if they 
should have their feet unbound, and thus be able 
to extinguish the fire ? But thou doest not these 
things of thyself, but there is another who work- 
eth these things by thy means. 

47.' "And the flame streamed forth." The 
fire, he means, was driven from within by the 
angel, and burst forth outwardly. See how even 
the fire appears intelligent, as if it recognised 
and punished the guilty. For it did not touch 
the servants of God, but it consumed the unbe- 
lieving and impious Chaldeans. Those who were 
within were besprinkled with a (cooling) dew by 
the angel, while those who thought they stood in 
safety outside the furnace were destroyed by the 
fire. TTie men who cast in the youths were 
burned by the flame, which caught them on all 

' The verses are numbered according to the Greek translation, 
which incorporates the apocryphal " song of the three holy children." 

sides, as I suppose, when they went to bind the 
youths. 

92 (i.e., 25). ".\nd the form of the fourth is 
like the Son of God." Tell me, Nebuchadnez- 
zar, when didst thou see the Son of God, that 
thou shouldst confess diat this is the Son of God ? 
And who pricked thy heart, that thou shouldst 
utter such a word? And with what eyes wert 
thou able to look into this light? And why was 
this manifested to thee alone, and to none of 
the satraps about thee? But, as it is written, 
"The heart of a king is in the hand of God : " the 
hand of God is here, whereby the Word pricked 
his heart, so that he might recognise Him in the 
furnace, and glorify Him. And this idea of ours 
is not without good ground. For as the children 
of Israel were destined to see God in the world, 
and yet not to believe on Him, the Scripture 
showed beforehand that the Gentiles would rec- 
ognise Him incarnate, whom, while not incar- 
nate, Nebuchadnezzar saw and recognised of old 
in the furnace, and acknowledged to be the Son 
of God. 

93 (i.e., 26). "And he said, Shadrach, Me- 
shach, and Abednego." The three youths he 
thus called by name. But he found no name by 
which to call the fourth. For He was not yet 
that Jesus born of the Virgin. 

97 (i.e., 30). "Then the king promoted," etc. 
For as they honoured God by giving themselves 
up to death, so, too, they were themselves hon- 
oured not only by God, but also by the king. 
And they taught strange and foreign nations also 
to worship God. 

Chap. vii. i. "And he wrote the dream." 
The things, therefore, which were revealed to the 
blessed prophet by the Spirit in visions, these he 
also recounted fully for others, that he might 
not appear to prophesy of the future to himself 
alone, but might be proved a prophet to others 
also, who wish to search the divine Scriptures. 

2. " And behold the four winds." He means 
created existence in its fourfold division. 

3. "And four great beasts." As various beasts 
then were shown to the blessed Daniel, and these 
different from each other, we should understand 
that the truth of the narrative deals not with cer- 
tain beasts, but, under the type and image of 
different beasts, exhibits the kingdoms that have 
risen in this world in power over the race of 
man. For by the great sea he means the whole 
world. 

4. "Till the wings thereof were plucked." 
For this happened in reality in the time of Neb- 
uchadnezzar, as has been shown in the preced- 
ing book. And he bears witness directly that 
this very thing was fulfilled in himself; for he 
was driven out of the kingdom, and stripped of 
his glory, and of the greatness which he formerly 
possessed. "And after a little :" the words, "It 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

189 

■was made stand upon the feet as a man,, and a 
man's heart was given to it," signify that Nebu- 
chadnezzar, when he humbled himself, and ac- 
knowledged that he was but a man, in subjection 
under the power of God, and made supplication 
to the Lord, found mercy with Him, and was 
restored to his own kingdom and honour. 

5. "A second beast like to a bear." To rep- 
resent the kingdom of the Persians. "And it 
had three ribs." The three nations he calls 
three ribs. The meaning, therefore, is this : that 
beast had the dominion, and these others under 
it were the Medes, Assyrians, and Babylonians. 
" And they said thus to it, Arise, devour." For 
the Persians arising in these times, devastated 
every land, and made many men subject to 
them, and slew them. For as this beast, the 
bear, is a foul animal, and carnivorous, tearing 
with claws and teeth, such also was the kingdom 
of the Persians, who held the supremacy for two 
hundred and thirty years. 

6. "And, lo, another beast like a leopard," 
In mentioning a leopard, he means the kingdom 
of the Greeks, over whom Alexander of Macedon 
was king. And he likened them to a leopard, 
because they were quick and inventive in thought, 
and bitter in heart, just as that animal is many- 
coloured in appearance, and quick in wounding 
and in drinking man's blood. 

" The beast had also four heads." When the 
kingdom of Alexander was exalted, and grew, 
and acquired a name over the whole world, his 
kingdom was divided into four principalities.. 
For Alexander, whqn near his end, partitioned 
his kingdom among his four comrades of the 
same race, viz., " Seleucus, Demetrius, Ptolemy, 
and Philip ; " and all these assumed crowns, as 
Daniel prophesies, and as it is written in the first 
book of Maccabees. 

7. " And behold a fourth beast." Now, that 
there has arisen no other kingdom after that of 
the Greeks except that which stands sovereign 
at present, is manifest to all. This one has iron 
teeth, because it subdues and reduces all by its 
strength, just as iron does. And the rest it did 
tread with its feet, for there is no other kingdom 
remaining after this one, but from it will spring 
ten horns. 

" And it had ten horns." For as the prophet 
said already of the leopard, that the beast had 
four heads, and that was fulfilled, and Alexander's 
, kingdom was divided into four principalities, so 
also now we ought to look for the ten horns 
which are to spring from it, when the time of 
the beast shall be fulfilled, and the little horn, 
which is Antichrist, shall appear suddenly in 
their midst, and righteousness shall be banished 
from the earth, and the whole world shall reach 
its consummation. So that we ought not to 
anticipate the counsel of God, but exercise pa- 

tience and prayer, that we fall not on such 
times. We should not, however, refuse to be- 
lieve that these things will come to pass. For 
if the things which the prophets predicted in 
former times have not been realized, then we 
need not look for these things. But if those 
former things did happen in their proper sea- 
sons, as was foretold, these things also shall cer- 
tainly be fulfilled. 

8. " I considered the horns." That is to say, 
I looked intently at the beast, and was aston- 
ished at everything about it, but especially at 
the number of the horns. For the appearance 
of this beast differed from that of the other 
beasts in kind. 

13. "And came to the Ancient of days." 
By the Ancient of days he means none other 
than the Lord and God and Ruler of all, and 
even of Christ Himself, who maketh the days 
old, and yet becometh not old Himself by times 
and days. 

14. " His dominion is an everlasting domin- 
ion." The Father, having put all things in sub- 
jection to His own Son, both things in heaven 
and things on earth, showed Him forth by all as 
the first-begotten of God, in order that, along 
with the Father, He might be approved the Son 
of God before angels, and be manifested as the 
Lord also of angels : (He showed Him forth 
also as) the first-begotten of a virgin, that He 
might be seen to be in Himself the Creator 
anew of the first-formed Adam, (and) as the 
first-begotten from the dead, that- He might 
become Himself the first-fruits of our resur- 
rection. 

" Which ^liall not pass away." He exhibited 
all the dominion given by the Father to His 
own Son, who is manifested as King of all in 
heaven, and on earth, and under the earth, and 
as Judge of all : of all in heaven, because He 
was bom the Word, of the heart of the Father 
before all ; and of all in earth, because He was 
made man, and created Adam anew of Himself; 
and of all under the earth, because He was also 
numbered among the dead, and preached to the 
souls of the saints, (and) by death overcame 
death. 

1 7. " Which shall arise." For when thethree 
beasts have finished their course, and been re- 
moved, and the one still stands in vigour, — if 
this one, too, is removed, then finally earthly 
things (shall) end, and heavenly things begin ; 
tl)at the indissoluble and everlasting kingdom of 
the saints may be brought to view, and the 
heavenly King manifested to all, no longer in 
figure, like one seen in vision, or revealed in a 
pillar of cloud upon the top of a mountain, but 
amid the powers and armies of angels, as God 
incarnate and man, Son of God and Son of man 
— coming from heaven as the world's Judge. 

190 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

19. " And I inquired about the fourth beast." 
It is to the fourth kingdom, of which we have 
already spoken, that he here refers : that king- 
dom, than which no greater kingdom of Hke 
nature has arisen upon the earth ; from which 
also ten horns are to spring, and to be appor- 
tioned among ten crowns. And amid these 
another little horn shall rise, which is that of 
Antichrist. And it shall pluck by the roots the 
three others before it ; that is to say, he shall 
subvert the three kings of Egypt, Libya, and 
Ethiopia, with the view of acquiring for himself 
universal dominion. And after conquering the 
remaining seven horns, he will at last begin, in- 
flated by a strange and wicked spirit, to stir up 
war against the saints, and to persecute all every- 
where, with the aim of being glorified by all, and 
being worshipped as God. 

22. "Until the Ancient of days come." That 
is, when at length the Judge of judges and the 
King of kings comes from heaven, who shall 
subvert the whole dominion and power of the 
adversary, and shall consume all with the eternal 
fire of punishment. But to His servants, and 
prophets, and martyrs, and to all who fear Him, 
He will give an everlasting kingdom ; that is, they 
shall possess the endless enjoyment of good. 

25. " Until a time, and times, and the dividing 
of time." This denotes three years and a half. 

Chap. IX. 21. "And, behold, the man Ga- 
briel . . . flying." You see how the prophet 
likens the speed of the angels to a winged bird, 
on account of the light and rapid motion with 
which these spirits fly so quickly in discharge of 
orders. 

Chap. x. 6. " And the voice of His words." 
For all we who now believe on Him declare the 
words of Christ, as if we spake by His mouth 
the things enjoined by Him. 

7. " And I saw," etc. For it is to His saints 
that fear Him, and to them alone, that He re- 
veals Himself. For if any one seems to be liv- 
ing now in the Church, and yet has not the fear 
of God, his companionship with the saints will 
avail him nothing. 

12. "Thy words were heard." Behold how 
much the piety of a righteous man availeth, that 
to him alone, as to one worthy, things not yet to 
be manifested in the world should be revealed. 

13. "And lo, Michael." Who is Michael but 
the angel assigned to the people? As (God) 
says to Moses, " I will not go with you in the 
way, because the people are stiff-necked ; but 
my angel shall go with you." 

16. "My inwards are turned" (A. V., "my 
sorrows are turned upon me"). For it was 
meet that, at the appearing of the Lord, what 
was above should be turned beneath, in order 
that also what was beneath might come above. 
— I rec^uire time, he says, to recover myself, and 

to be able to endure the words and to make 
reply to what is said. — But while I was in this 
position, he continues, I was strengthened be- 
yond my hope. For one unseen touched me, 
and straightway my weakness was removed, and 
I was restored to my former strength. For when- 
ever all the strength of our life and its glory pass 
from us, then are we strengthened by Christ, who 
stretches forth His hand and raises the living: 
from among the dead, and as it were from Hades 
itself, to the resurrection of life. 

18. "And he strengthened me." For when- 
ever the Word has made us of good hope with 
regard to the future, we are able also readily to 
hear His voice. 

20. "To fight with the prince of Persia." For 
from the day that thou didst humble thyself be- 
fore the Lord thy God thy prayer was heard, and 
I was sent " to fight with the prince of Persia." 
For there was a design not to let the people go. 
Therefore, that thy prayer might be speedily 
answered, " I stood up against him." 

Chap. xii. i. "There shall be a time of trou- 
ble." For at that time there shall be great 
trouble, such as has not been from the founda- 
tion of the world, when some in one way, and 
others in another, shall be sent through every 
city and country to destroy the faithful ; and the 
saints shall travel from the west to the east, and 
shall be driven in persecution from the east to 
the south, while others shall conceal themselves 
in the mountains and caves ; and the abomina- 
nation shall war against them everywhere, and 
shall cut them off by sea and by land by his 
decree, and shall endeavour by every means to 
destroy them out of the world ; and they shall 
not be able any longer to sell their own property, 
nor to buy from strangers, unless one keeps and 
carries with him the name of the beast, or bears 
its mark upon his forehead. For then they shall 
all be driven out from every place, and dragged 
from their own homes and haled into prison, and 
punished with all manner of punishment, and 
cast out from the whole world. 

2. "These shall awake to everlasting life." 
That is, those who have believed in the true life, 
and who have their names written in the book 
of life. "And these to shame." That is, those 
who are attached to Antichrist, and who are cast 
with him into everlasting i)unishment. 

3. "And they that be wise shall shine." And 
the Lord has said the same thing in the Gospel : 
"Then shall the righteous shine forth as the 
sun." ' 

7. " For a time, times, and an half" By this 
he indicated the three and a half years of Anti- 
christ. For by a time he means a year ; and by 
times, two years ; and by an half time, half a year. 

' Matt. xiii. 43. « 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

191 

These are the "one thousand two hundred and 
ninety days " of which Daniel prophesied. 

9. "The words are closed up and sealed." 
For as a man cannot tell what God has prepared 
for the saints ; for neither has eye seen nor ear 
heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man 
(to conceive) these things, into which even the 
saints, too, shall then eagerly desire to look ; so 
He said to him, " For the words are sealed until 
the time of the end ; until many shall be chosen 
and tried with fire." And who are they who are 
chosen, but those who believe the word of truth, 
so as to be made white thereby, and to cast off 
the filth of sin,- and put on the heavenly, pure, 
and glorious Holy Spirit, in order that, when the 
Bridegroom comes, they may go in straightway 
with Him? 

II. "The abomination of desolation shall be 
given (set up)." Daniel speaks, therefore, of 
two abominations : the one of destruction, which 
Antiochus set up in its appointed time, and 
which bears a relation to that of desolation, and 
the other universal, when Antichrist shall come. 
For, as Daniel says, he too shall be set up for 
the destruction of many.' 

rv. 

OTHER FRAGMENTS ON DANIEL.^ 

For when the iron legs that now hold the 
sovereignty have given place to the feet and 
the toes, in accordance with the representation 
of the terrible beast, as has also been signified in 
the former times, then from heaven will come the 
stone that smites the image, and breaks it ; and 
it will subvert all the kingdoms, and give the 
kingdom to the saints of the Most High. This 
is the stone which becomes a great mountain, 
and fills the earth, and of which it is written : 
" I saw in the night-visions, and, behold, one 
like the Son of man came with the clouds of 
heaven, and came to the Ancient of days. And 
there was given Him dominion, and glory, and 
a kingdom ; and all peoples, nations, and lan- 
guages shall serve Him : His power is an ever- 
lasting power, which shall not pass away, and His 
kingdom shall not be destroyed." ^ 

V. 
ON THE SONG OF THE THREE CHILDREN.-i 

" O Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, bless ye the 
Lord ; O ye apostles, prophets, and martyrs of 
the Lord, bless ye the Lord : praise Him, and 
exalt Him above all, for ever." 

I "By the most holy Hippolytus, (bishop) of Rome: The Ex- 
act Account of the Times," etc. From Gallandi. This fragment 
seems to have belonged to the beginning or introduction to the com- 
mentary of Hippolytus on Daniel. 

^ In A>iastasiiis Sinaita, quaest. xlviii. p. 327. 

3 Dan. vil. 13. 

* From the Catena Patrum in Psalmos et Cantica, vol. iii. ed. 
Corderianae, pp. 951, ad v. 87. 

We may well marvel at the words of the three 
youths in the furnace, how they enumerated all 
created things, so that not one of them might 
be reckoned free and independent in itself; but, 
summing up and naming them all together, both 
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things 
under the earth, they showed them to be all 
the servants of God, who created all things by the 
Word, that no one should boast that any of 
the creatures was without birth and beginning. 

VI. 

ON SUSANNAH.s 

What is narrated here, happened at a later 
time, although it is placed before the first book 
(at the beginning of the book) . For it was a 
custom with the writers to narrate many things 
in an inverted order in their writings. For we 
find also in the prophets some visions recorded 
among the first and fulfilled among the last ; and 
again, on the other hand, some recorded among 
the last and fulfilled first. And this was done 
by the disposition of the Spirit, that the devil 
might not understand the things spoken in par- 
ables by the prophets, and might not a second 
time lay his snares and ruin man. 

Ver. I. " Called Joacim." This Joacim, being 
a stranger in Babylon, obtains Susannah in mar- 
riage. And she was the daughter of Chelcias 
the priest,*^ who found the book of the law in 
the house of the Lord, when Josiah the king 
commanded him to purify the holy of holies. 
His brother was Jeremiah the prophet, who was 
carried, with the remnant that was left after the 
deportation of the people to Babylon, into Egypt, 
and dwelt in Taphnae ; ^ and, while prophesying 
there, he was stoned to death by the people. 

" A very fair woman, and one that feared the 
Lord," etc. For by the fruit produced, the tree 
also is easily known. For men who are pious and 
zealous for the law, bring into the world children 
worthy of God ; such as he was who became 
a prophet and witness of Christ, and she who 
was found chaste and faithful in Babylon, whose 
honour and chastity were the occasion of the 
manifestation of the blessed Daniel as a prophet. 

4. " Now Joacim was a great rich man," etc. 
We must therefore seek the explanation of this. 
For how could those who were captives, and had 
been made subject to the Babylonians, meet 
together in the same place, as if they were their 
own masters? In this matter, therefore, we 
should observe that Nebuchadnezzar, after their 

5 This apocryphal story of Susannah is found in the Greek texts 
of the LXX. and Theodotion, in the old Latin and Vulgate, and in 
the Syriac and Arabic versions. But there is no evidence that it ever 
formed part of the Hebrew, or of the original Syriac text. It is gen- 
erally placed at the beginning of the book, as in the Greek MSS. and 
the old Latin, but is also sometimes set at the end, as in the Vulgate, 
ed. Compl. 

^ 2 Kings xxii. S. 

7 Jer. xliii. 8. ^ 

192 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

deportation, treated them kindly, and permitted 
them to meet together, and do all things accord- 
ing to the law. 

7. " And at noon Susannah went into (her 
husband's garden)." Susannah prefigured the 
Church ; and Joacim, her husband, Christ ; and 
the garden, the calling of the saints, who are 
planted like fruitful trees in the Church. And 
Babylon is the world ; and the two elders are 
set forth as a figure of the two peoples that plot 
against the Church — the one, namely, of the 
circumcision, and the other of the Gentiles. 
For the. words, "were appointed rulers of the 
people and judges," (mean) that in this world 
they exercise authority and rule, judging the 
righteous unrighteously. 

8. "And the two elders saw her." These 
things the rulers of the Jews wish now to ex- 
punge from the book, and assert that these 
things did not happen in Babylon, because they 
are ashamed of what was done then by the 
elders. 

9. " And they perverted their own mind." 
For how, indeed, can those who have been the 
enemies and corruptors of the Church judge 
righteously, or look up to heaven with pure 
heart, when they have become the slaves of the 
prince of this world ? 

10. "And they were both wounded with her 
(love)." This word is to be taken in truth; 
for always the two peoples, being wounded (in- 
stigated) by Satan working in them, strive to 
raise persecutions and afflictions against the 
Church, and seek how they may corrupt her, 
though they do not agree with each other. 

12. "And they watched diligently." And 
this, too, is to be noted. For up to the present 
time both the Gentiles and the Jews of the cir- 
cumcision watch and busy themselves with the 
dealings of the Church, desiring to suborn false 
witnesses against us, as the apostle says : " And 
that because of. false brethren unawares brought 
in, who came in privily to spy out our liberty 
which we have in Christ Jesus." ' 

It is a kind of sin to be anxious to give the 
mind to women. 

14. "And when they were gone out, they 
parted the one from the other." As to their 
parting the one from the other at the hour of 
dinner (luncheon), this signifies that in the 
matter of earthly meats the Jews and the Gen- 
tiles are not at one ; but in their views, and in 
all worldly matters, they are of one mind, and 
can meet each other. 

14. "And asking one another, they acknowl- 
edged their lust." Thus, in revealing themselves 
to each other, they foreshadow the time when 
they shall be proved by their thoughts, and shall 

» Gal. 

11.4. 

have to give account to God for all the sin which 
they have done, as Solomon says : " And scrutiny 
shall destroy the ungodly." ' For these are con- 
victed by the scrutiny. 

15. "As they watched a fit time." What fit 
time but that of the passover, at which the laver 
is prepared in the garden for those who burn, 
and Susannah washes herself, and is presented as 
a pure bride to God? 

" With two maids only." Forwhen the Church 
desires to take the laver according to use, she 
must of necessity have two handmaids to accom- 
pany her. For it is by faith on Christ and love 
to God that the Church confesses and receives 
the laver. 

18. "And she said to her maids, Bring me 
oil." For faith and love prepare oil and un- 
guents to those who are washed. But what were 
these unguents, but the commandments of the 
holy Word ? And what was the oil, but the power 
of the Holy Spirit, with which believers are 
anointed as with ointment after the laver of 
washing? All these things were figuratively rep- 
resented in the blessed Susannah, for our sakes, 
that we who now believe on God might not 
regard the things that are done now in the Church 
as strange, but believe them all to have been set 
forth in figure by the patriarchs of old, as the 
apostle also says : " Now these things happened 
unto them for ensamples : and they were written 
for our instruction, on whom the ends of the 
world are come." ^ 

1 8. " And they went out at privy doors ; " 
showing thus by anticipation, that he who desires 
to partake of the water in the garden must re- 
nounce the broad gate, and enter by the strait 
and narrow.'' 

"And they saw not the elders." For as ot 
old the devil was concealed in the serpent in 
the garden, so now too, concealed in the elders, 
he fired them with his own lust, that he mighr 
again a second time corrupt Eve. 

20. " Behold, the garden doors are shut." 0 
wicked rulers, and filled with the workings of the 
devil, did Moses deliver these things to you? 
And while ye read the law yourselves, do ye 
teach others thus? Thou that sayest, "Thou 
shalt not kill," dost thou kill ? Thou that sayest, 
"Thou shall not covet," dost thou desire to cor- 
rupt the wife of thy neighbour? 

"And we are in love with thee." Why, ye 
lawless, do ye strive to gain over a chaste and 
giiileless soul by deceitful words, in order to 
satisfy your own lust ? 

21. "If thou wilt not, we will bear witness 
against thee." This wicked audacity with which 

- Prov. i. 32: in our version given as, "The prosperitj' of fools 
shall destroy them." 
3 I Cor. X. II. 
* Malt. vii. 13, 14. 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

193 

you begin, comes of the deceitfulness that lurks 
in you from the beginning And there was in 
reality a young man with her, that one ' of yours ; 
one from heaven, not to have intercourse with 
her, but to bear witness to her truth. 

22. "And Susannah sighed." The blessed 
Susannah, then, when she heard these words, was 
troubled in her heart, and set a watch upon her 
mouth, not wishing to be defiled by the wicked 
elders. Now it is in our power also to ap- 
prehend ihe real meaning of all that befell 
Susannah. For you may find this also fulfilled 
in the present condition of the Church. For 
when the two peoples conspire to destroy any 
of the saints, they watch for a fit time, and enter 
the house of God while all there are praying and 
praising God, and seize some of them, and carry 
them off, and keep hold of them, saying. Come, 
consent with us, and worship our Gods ; and if 
not, we will bear witness against you. And when 
they refuse, they drag them before the court, 
and accuse them of acting contrary to the de- 
crees of Csesar, and condemn them to death. 

" I am straitened on every side." Behold the 
words of a chaste woman, and one dear to God : 
" I am straitened on every side." For the Church 
is afflicted and straitened, not only by the Jews, 
but also by the Gentiles, and by those who are 
called Christians, but are not such in reality. 
For they, observing her chaste and happy life, 
strive to ruin her. 

" For if I do this thing, it is death to me." 
For to be disobedient to God, and obedient to 
men, works eternal death and punishment. 

"And if I do it not, I cannot escape your 
hands." And this indeed is said with truth. 
For they who are brought into judgment for the 
sake of God's name, if they do what is com- 
manded them by men, die to God, and shall live 
in the world. But if they refuse to do what is 
commanded them by men, they escape not the 
hands of their judges, but are condemned by 
them. 

23. "It is better for me not to do it." For 
it is better to die by the hand of wicked men 
and live with God, than, by consenting to them, 
to be delivered from them and fall into the hands 
of God. 

24. "And Susannah cried with a loud voice." 
And to whom did Susannah cry but to God ? as 
Isaiah says : "Then shalt thou call, and the Lord 
shall answer thee ; whilst thou art yet speaking. 
He shall say, Lo, here I am." ^ 

" And the two elders cried out against her." 
For the wicked never cease to cry out against 
us, and to say : Away with such from off the 
earth, for it is not fit that they should live. In 
an evangelical sense, Susannah despised them 

' That is, Daniel, present in the spirit of prophecy. — Combkf. 
^ Isa. Iviii. 9. 

who kill the body, in order that she might save 
her soul from death. Now sin is the death of 
the soul, and especially (the sin of) adultery. 
For when the soul that is united with Christ for- 
sakes its faith, it is given over to perpetual death, 
viz., eternal punishment. And in confirmation 
of this, in the case of the transgression and vio- 
lation of marriage unions in the flesh, the law 
has decreed the penalty of death. 

25. "Then ran the one and opened the gates ; " 
pointing to the broad and spacious way on which 
they who follow such persons perish. 

31. " Now Susannah was a very dehcate wo- 
man." Not that she had meretricious adorn- 
ments about her person, as Jezebel had, or eyes 
painted with divers colours ; but that she had the 
adornment of faith, and chastity, and sanctity. 

34. "And laid their hands upon her head;" 
that at least by touching her they might satisfy 
their lust. 

35. "And she was weeping." For by her 
tears she attracted the (regard of) the Word 
from heaven, who was with tears to raise the 
dead Lazarus. 

41. "Then the assembly believed them." It 
becomes us, then, to be stedfast in every duty, 
and to give no heed to lies, and to yield no ob- 
sequious obedience to the persons of rulers, 
knowing that we have to give account to God ; 
but if we follow the truth, and aim at the exact 
rule of faith, we shall be well-pleasing to God. 

44. " And the Lord heard her voice." For 
those who call upon Him from a pure heart, God 
heareth. But from those who (call upon Him) in 
deceit and hypocrisy, God turneth away His face. 

52. " O thou that art waxen old in wickedness." 
Now, since at the outset, in the introduction, we 
explained that the two elders are to be taken as 
a type of the two peoples, that of the circum- 
cision and that of the Gentiles, which are always 
enemies of the Church ; let us mark the words 
of Daniel, and learn that the Scripture deals 
falsely with us in nothing. For, addressing the 
first elder, he censures him as one instructed in 
the law ; while he addresses the other as a Gen- 
tile, calling him "the seed of Chanaan," although 
he was then among the circumcision. 

55. " For even now the angel of God." He 
shows also, that when Susannah prayed to God, 
and was heard, the angel was sent then to help 
her, just as was the case in the instance of 
Tobias ^ and Sara. For when they prayed, the 
supplication of both of them was heard in the 
same day and the same hour, and the angel 
Raphael was sent to heal them both. 

61. " And they arose against the two elders ;" 
that the saying might be fulfilled, " Whoso dig- 
geth a pit for his neighbour, shall fall therein." ■< 

3 Tobit iii. 17. 
* Prov. xxvi. 27. 

194 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

To all these things, therefore, we ought to ] 
give heed, beloved, fearing lest any one be over- 
taken in any transgression, and risk the loss of | 
his soul, knowing as we do that God is the Judge 
of all ; and the Word' Himself is the Eye which 
nothing that is done in the world escapes. There- 
fore, always watchful in heart and pure in life, let 
us imitate Susannah. 

ox MATTHEW.^ 
Matt. vi. 1 1.3 

For this reason we are enjoined to ask what 
is sufificient for the preservation of the substance 
of the body : not luxury, but food, which re- 
stores what the body loses, and prevents death 
by hunger ; not tables to inflame and drive on 
to pleasures, nor such things as make the body 
wax wanton against the soul ; but bread, and 
that, too, not for a great number of years, but 
what is sufficient for us to-day. 

ON LUKE.* 

Chap. ir. 7. And if you please, we say that 
the Word was the first-born of God, who came 
down from heaven to the blessed Mary, and was 
made a first-born man in her womb, in order 
that the first-born of God might be manifested 
in union with a first-born man. 

22. When they brought Him to the temple to 
nresent Him to the Lord, they offered the obla- 
tions of purification. For if the gifts of purifi- 
•cation according to the law were offered for Him, 
in this indeed He was made under the law. But 
the Word w^as not subject to the law in such wise 
as the sycophants 5 fancy, since He is the law 
Himself; neither did God need sacrifices of 
]Kirification, for He purifieth and sanctifieth all 
things at once in a moment. But though He 
took to Himself the frame of man as He received 
it from the Virgin, and was made under the law, 
and was thus purified after the manner of the 
first-born, it was not because He needed this 
ceremonial that He underwent its services, but 
only for the purpose of redeeming from the 
bondage of the law those who were sold under 
the judgment of the curse. 

Chap, xxiii. For this reason the warders of 
Hades trembled when they saw Him ; and the 
gates of brass and the bolts of iron were broken. 
For, lo, the Only-begotten entered, a soul among 
souls, God the Word with a (human) soul. For 
His body lay in the tomb, not emptied of divinity ; 
but as, while in Hades, He was in essential 
being with His Father, so was He also in the 

' Cotelerius reads oAo? instead of 6 Aoyo«, and so = and He is 
Himself the whole or universal eye. 

^ I)e Magistris, Acta Martyrum Osliens., p. 405. 

3 He is giving his opinion on the iiriovinov, i.e., the "daily 
bread." 

* Mai, Script, vet. collectio nova, vol. ix. p. 645, Rome, 1837. 

5 oi auKOi^GLKTat. 

body and in Hades.^ For the Son is not con- 
tained in space, just as the Father ; and He 
comprehends all things in Himself. But of His 
own will he dwelt in a body animated by a soul, 
in order that with His soul He might enter 
Hades, and not with His pure divinity. 

DOUBTFUL FRAGMENTS ON THE PENTA- 
TEUCH." 

PREFACE. 

In the name of the Father, and the Son, and 
the Holy Spirit, one God. This is a transcript 
of the excellent law. But before beginning to 
give the transcript of the book of the law, it will 
be worth while to instruct you, O brother, as to 
its excellence, and the dignity of its disposition. 
Its first excellence is, that God delivered it by 
the hand of our most blessed ruler, the chief 
of the prophets, and first of the apostles, or those 
who were sent to the children of Israel, viz., 
Moses the son of Amram, the son of Kohath, 
of the sons of Levi. Now he was adorned with 
all manner of wisdom, and endowed with the 
best genius. Illustrious in dignity, remarkable 
for the integrity of his disposition, distinguished 
for power of reason, he talked with God. And 
He chose him as an instrument of value. By 
His leader and prophet, God Most High sent it 
down to us, and committed it to us (blessed be 
His name) in the Syriac tongue of the Targum, 
which the Seventy translated into the Hebrew 
tongue, to wit, into the tongue of the nation, 
and the idiom of the common people. Moses, 
therefore, received it from the eternal Lord, and 
was the first to whom it was entrusted, and who 
obeyed its rules and ordinances. Then he taught 
it to the children of Israel, who also embraced 
it. And he explained to them its profound 
mysteries and dark places. And he expounded 
to them those things which were less easy, as 
God permitted him, and concealed from them 
those secrets of the law, as God forbade him (to 
reveal them). Nor did there rise among them 
one who was better practised in His judgments 
and decrees, and who communicated more clearly 
the mysteries of His doctrine, until God trans- 
lated him to Himself, after He had made him 
perfect by forty whole years in the wilderness. 

And these following are the names of the 
teachers who handed down the law in continuous 
succession after Moses the prophet, until the 
advent of Messiah : — 

Know, then, my brother, whom may God 
bless, that God delivered the most excellent law 
into the hands of Moses the prophet, the son of 
Amram. 

* Pearson 0« the Creed, an. iv. p. 355. 

" These are edited in Arabic and Latin by Fabricius, Opfi. Hippol., 
ii. j33. That these are spurious is now generally agreed. The trans- 
lation is from the Latin version, which alone is given by Migne. 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

195 

And Moses delivered it to Joshua the sou of 
Nun. 

And Joshua the son of Nun deUvered it to 
Anathal. 

And Anathal delivered it to Jehud. 

And Jehud delivered it to Samgar. 

And Samgar delivered it to Baruk. 

And Baruk delivered it to Gideon. 

And Gideon delivered it to Abimelech. 

And Abimelech delivered it to Taleg. 

And Taleg delivered it to Babin the Gileadite. 

And Babin delivered it to Jiphtach. 

And Jiphtach delivered it to Ephran. 

And Ephran delivered it to Elul of the tribe 
Zebulon. 

And Elul delivered it to Abdan. 

And Abdan delivered it to Shimshon the brave. 

And Shimshon delivered it to Helkanah, the 
son of Jerachmu, the son of Jehud. Moreover, 
he was the father of Samuel the prophet. Of 
this Helkanah mention is made in the beginning 
of the first book of Kings (Samuel). 

And Helkanah delivered it to Eli the priest. 

And Eli delivered it to Samuel the prophet. 

And Samuel delivered it to Nathan the 
prophet. 

And Nathan delivered it to Gad the prophet. 

And Gad the prophet delivered it to Shemaiah 
the teacher. 

And Shemaiah delivered it to Iddo the teacher. 

And Iddo delivered it to Achia. 

And Achia delivered it to Abihu. 

And Abihu delivered it to Elias the prophet. 

And Elias delivered it to his disciple Ehsaeus. 

And Elisaeus delivered it to Malachia the 
prophet. 

And Malachia delivered it to Abdiahu. 

And Abdiahu delivered it to Jehuda. 

And Jehuda delivered it to Zacharias the 
teacher. 

In those days came Bachthansar king of Babel, 
and laid waste the house of the sanctuary, and 
carried the children of Israel into captivity to 
Babel. 

And after the captivity of Babel, Zacharia the 
teacher delivered it to Esaia the prophet, the son 
of Amos. 

And Esaia delivered it to Jeremia the prophet. 

And Jeremia the prophet delivered it to Chiz- 
kiel. 

And Chizkiel the prophet delivered it to Ho- 
sea tlie prophet, the son of Bazi. 

And Hosea delivered it to Joiel the prophet. 

And Joiel delivered it to Amos the prophet. 

And Amos delivered it to Obadia. 

And Obadia delivered it to Jonan the prophet, 
the son of Mathi, the son of Armelah, who was 
the brother of Elias the prophet. 

And Jonan delivered it to Micha the Moras- 
thite, who delivered it to Nachum the Alcusite. 

And Nachum delivered it to Chabakuk the 
prophet. 

And Chabakuk delivered it to Sophonia the 
prophet. 

And Sophonia delivered it to Chaggaeus the 
prophet. 

And Chaggaeus delivered it to Zecharia the 
prophet, the son of Bershia. 

And Zecharia, when in captivity, delivered it 
to Malachia. 

And Malachia delivered it to Ezra the teacher. 

' And Ezra delivered it to Shamai the chief 
priest, and Jadua to Samean, (and) Samean de- 
livered it to Antigonus. 

And Antigonus delivered it to Joseph the son 
of Johezer, (and) Joseph the son of Gjuchanan. 

And Joseph delivered it to Jehosua, the son of 
Barachia. 

And Jehosua delivered it to Nathan the Ar- 
belite. 

And Nathan delivered it to Shimeon, the elder 
son of Shebach. This is he who carried the 
Messias in his arms. 

Simeon delivered it to Jehuda. 

Jehuda delivered it to Zecharia the priest. 

And Zecharia the priest, the father of John the 
Baptist, delivered it to Joseph, a teacher of his 
own tribe. 

And Joseph delivered it to Hanan and Caia- 
phas. Moreover, from them were taken away 
the priestly, and kingly, and prophetic offices. 

These were teachers at the advent of Messias ; 
and they were both priests of the children of Is- 
rael. Therefore the whole number of venerable 
and honourable priests put in trust of this most 
excellent law was fifty-six, Hanan (i.e., Annas) 
and Caiaphas being excepted. 

And those are they who delivered it in the 
last days to the state of the children of Israel ; 
nor did there arise any priests after them. 

This is the account of what took place with 
regard to the most excellent law. 

Armius, author of the book of Times, has said : 
In the nineteenth year of the reign of King Ptol- 
emy, he ordered the elders of the children of 
Israel to be assembled, in order that they might 
put into his hands a copy of the law, and that 
they might each be at hand to explain its mean- 
ing. 

The elders accordingly came, bringing with 
them the most excellent law. Then he com- 
manded that every one of them should interpret 
the book of the law to him. 

But he dissented from the interpretation which 
the elders had given. And he ordered the elders 
to be thrust into prison and chains. And seizing 
the book of the law, he threw it into a deep 
ditch, and cast fire and hot ashes upon it for 

' See Tsemach David, and Maimon. Praefat. ad Seder Zeraim, 
in Pocockii Porta Moses, p. 36. 

196 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

seven days. Then afterwards he ordered them 
to throw the filth of the city into that ditch in 
which was the book of the law. And the ditch 
was filled to the very top. 

The law remained seventy years under the filth 
in that ditch, yet did not perish, nor was there 
even a smgle leaf of it spoilt. 

In the twenty-first year of the reign of King 
Apianutus they took the book of the law out of 
the ditch, and not one leaf thereof was spoilt. 

And after the ascension of Christ into heaven, 
came King Titus, son of Aspasianus king of 
Rome, to Jerusalem, and besieged and took it. 
And he destroyed the edifice of the second house, 
which the children of Israel had built. Titus 
the king destroyed the house of the sanctuary, 
and slew all the Jews who were in it, and built 
Tsion (sic) in their blood. And after that depor- 
tation the Jews were scattered abroad in slavery. 
Nor did they assemble any more in the city of 
Jerusalem, nor is there hope anywhere of their 
returning. 

After Jerusalem was laid waste, therefore, 
Shemaia and Antalia (Abtalion) delivered the 
law, — kings of Baalbach,' a city which Soliman, 
son of King David, had built of old, and which 
was restored anew in the days of King Menasse, 
who sawed Esaia the prophet asunder. 

King Adrian, of the children of Edom, be- 
sieged Baalbach, and took it, and slew all the 
Jews who were in it, (and) as many as were of 
the family of David he reduced to slavery. And 
the Jews were dispersed over the whole earth, as 
(iod Most High had foretold : " And I will scat- 
ter you among the Gentiles, and disperse you 
among the nations." 

And these are the things which have reached 
us as to the history of that most excellent book. 
The Preface is ended. 

THE LAW. 

In the name of God eternal, everlasting, most 
mighty, merciful, compassionate. 

By the help of God we begin to describe the 
book of the law, and its interpretation, as the 
holy, learned, and most excellent fathers have 
interpreted it. 

The following, therefore, is the interpretation 
of the first book, which indeed is the book of the 
creation (and) of created beings. 

SECTION I. 

Of the creation of heaven and earth. " In the beginning God 
created," etc. 

An exposition of that which God said. 

And the blessed prophet, indeed, the great 
Moses, wrote this book, and designated and 
marked it with the title, The Book of Being, 
i.e., " of created beings," etc. 

' Heliopolis of Syria. 

SECTIONS II., III. 

And the Lord said : '• And I will bring the waters of the 
flood upon the earth to destroy all flesh," etc. ' 

Hippolytus, the Targumist expositor, said r 
The names of the wives of the sons of Noah 
are these : the name of the wife of Sem, Naha- 
lath Mahnuk ; and the name of the wife of 
Cham, Zedkat Nabu ; and the name of the wife 
of Japheth, Arathka. These, moreover, are their 
names in the Syriac Targum.^ The name of 
the wife of Sem was Nahalath Mahnuk ; the 
name of the wife of Cham, Zedkat Nabu ; the 
name of the wife of Japheth, Arathka. 

Therefore God gave intimation to Noah, and 
informed him of the coming of the flood, and 
of the destruction of the ruined (wicked). 

And God Most High ordered him to descend 
from the holy mount, him and his sons, and the 
wives of his sons, and to build a ship of three 
storeys. The lower storey was for fierce, wild, 
and dangerous beasts. Between them there 
were stakes or wooden beams, to separate them 
from each other, and prevent them from having 
intercourse with each other. The middle storey 
was for birds, and their different genera. Then 
the upper storey was for Noah himself and his 
sons — for his own wife and his sons' wives. 

Noah also made a door in the ship, on the 
east side. He also constructed tanks of water, 
and store-rooms of provisions. 

When he had made an end, accordingly, of 
building the ship, Noah, with his sons, Sem, 
Cham, and Japheth, entered the cave of depos- 
its .^ 

And on their first approach, indeed, they hap- 
pily found the bodies of the fathers, Adam, 
Seth, Enosh, Kainan, Mahaliel, Jared, Mathusa- 
lach, and Lamech. Those eight bodies were in 
the place of deposits, viz., those of Adam, Seth, 
Enosh, Kainan, Mahaliel, Jared, Mathusalach, 
and Lamech. 

Noah, moreover, took the body of Adam. 
And his sons took with them offerings. Sem 
carried gold, Cham myrrh, and Japheth frankin- 
cense. Then, leaving the cave of deposits, 
they transferred the offerings and the body of 
Adam to the holy mount.^ 

And when they sat down by the body of 
Adam, over against paradise, they began to 
lament and weep for the loss of paradise. 

Then, descending from the holy mount, and 
lifting up their eyes towards paradise, they re- 
newed their weeping and wailing, (and) uttered 
an eternal farewell in these terms : Farewell ! 
peace to thee, O paradise of God ! Farewell, 
O habitation of religion and purity ! Fare- 
well, O seat of pleasure and delight ! 

- What follows was thus expressed probably in Syriac in some 
Syriac version. 

^ Cavernam thesauronim. [Cant. iv. 6, i.e., Paradise.] 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

197 

Then they embraced the stones and trees of 
the holy mount, and wept, and said : Farewell, 
O habitation of the good ! Farewell, O abode 
•of holy bodies ! 

Then, after three days, Noah, with his sons 
and his sons' wives, came down from the holy 
mount to the base of the holy mount, to the 
ship's place. For the (ark) was under the pro- 
jecting edge of the holy mount. 

And Noah entered the ship, and deposited 
the body of Adam, and the offerings, in the 
middle of the ship, upon a bier of wood, which 
he had prepared for the reception of the body. 

And God charged Noah, saying : Make for 
thyself rattles ' of boxwood (or cypress) . Now 
•ixa'Oiy is the wood called Sagh, i.e., Indian 
plane. 

Make also the hammer (bell) thereof of the 
same wood. And the length of the ratde shall 
be three whole cubits, and its breadth one and 
a half cubit. 

And God enjoined him to strike the rattles 
three times every day, to wit, for the first time 
at early dawn, for the second time at mid-day, 
and for the third time at sunset. 

And it happened that, as soon as Noah had 
struck the rattles, the sons of Cain and the 
sons of Vahim ran up straightway to him, and 
he warned and alarmed them by telling of the 
immediate approach of the flood, and of the 
destruction already hasting on and impend- 
ing. 

Thus, moreover, was the pity of God toward 
them displayed, that they might be converted 
and come to themselves again. But the sons 
of Cain did not comply with what Noah pro- 
claimed to them. And Noah brought together 
pairs, male and female, of all birds of every 
kind ; and thus also of all beasts, tame and wild 
ahke, pair and pair. 

SECTION rv. 
On Gen. vii. 6. 

Hippolytus, the Syrian expositor of the Tar- 
gum, has said : We find in an ancient Hebrew 
■copy that God commanded Noah to range the 
wild beasts in order in the lower floor or storey, 
and to separate the males from the females by 
putting wooden stakes between them. 

And thus, too, he did with all the cattle, and 
also with the birds in the middle storey. And 
God ordered the males thus to be separated 
from the females for the sake of decency and 
purity, lest they should perchance get inter- 
mingled with each other. 

Moreover, God said to Moses : Provide vict- 
uals for yourself and your children. And let 

' Crepitacula. 

them be of wheat, ground, pounded, kneaded 
with water, and dried. And Noah there and 
then bade his wife, and his sons' wives, diligently 
attend to kneading dough and laying it in the 
oven. They kneaded dough accordingly, and 
prepared just about as much as might be suffi- 
cient for them, so that nothing should remain 
over but the very least. 

And God charged Noah, saying to him : 
Whosoever shall first announce to you the ap- 
proach of the deluge, him you shall destroy that 
very moment. In the meantime, moreover, the 
wife of Cham was standing by, about to put a 
large piece of bread into the oven. And sud- 
denly, according to the word of the Lord, water 
rushed forth from the oven, and the flow of 
water penetrated and destroyed the bread. 
Therefore the wife of Cham exclaimed, address- 
ing herself to Noah : Oh, sir, the word of God 
is come good : " that which God foretold is 
come to pass ; " execute, therefore, that which 
the Lord commanded. And when Noah heard 
the words of the wife of Cham, he said to her : 
Is then the flood already come ? The wife of 
Cham said to him : Thou hast said it. God, 
however, suddenly charged Noah, saying : De- 
stroy not the wife of Cham ; for from thy mouth is 
the beginning of destruction — " thou didst first 
say. The flood is come." At the voice of Noah 
the flood came, and suddenly the water destroyed 
that bread. And the floodgates of heaven were 
opened, and the rains broke upon the earth. 
And that same voice, in sooth, which had said 
of old, " Let the waters be gathered together 
into one place, and let the dry land appear," ^ 
gave permission to the fountain of waters and 
the floods of the seas to break forth of their 
own accord, and brought out the waters. 

Consider what God said about the world : 
Let all its high places be brought low, and they 
were brought low ; and let its low places be raised 
from its depths. 

And the earth was made bare and empty of 
all existence, as it was at the beginning. 

And the rain descended from above, and the 
earth burst open beneath. And the frame of 
the earth was destroyed, and its primitive order 
was broken. And the world became such as it 
was when desolated at the beginning by the 
waters which flowed over it. Nor was any one 
of the existences upon it left in its integrity. 

Its former structure went to wreck, and the 
earth was disfigured by the flood of waters that 
burst upon it, and by the magnitude of its inun- 
dations, and the multitude of showers, and the 
eruption from its depths, as the waters continu- 
ally broke forth. In fine, it was left such as it 
was formerly.^ 

2 Geo. i. 9. 

198 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

SECTION V. 
On Gen. viii. i. 

Hippolytus, the expositor of the Targiim, and 
my master, Jacobus Rohaviensis, have said : On 
the twenty-seventh day of the month Jiar, which 
is the second Hebrew month, the ark rose from 
the base of the holy mount ; and already the 
waters bore it, and it was carried upon them 
round about towards the four cardinal points of 
the world. The ark accordingly held off from 
the holy mount towards the east, then returned 
towards the west, then turned to the south, and 
finally, bearing off eastwards, neared Mount Kar- 
du on the first day of the tenth month. And 
that is the second month Kanun. 

And Noah came out of the ark on the twenty- 
seventh day of the month Jiar, in the second 
year : for the ark continued sailing five whole 
months, and moved to and fro upon the waters, 
and in a period of fifty-one days neared the 
land. Nor thereafter did it float about any 
longer. But it only moved successively toward 
the four cardinal points of the earth, and again 
finally stood toward the east. We say, more- 
over, that that was a sign of the cross. And the 
ark was a symbol of the Christ who was expected. 
For that ark was the means of the salvation of 
Noah and his sons, and also of the cattle, the 
wild beasts, and the birds. And Christ, too, 
when He suffered on the cross, deliv-ered us 
from accusations and sins, and washed us in His 
own blood most pure. 

And just as the ark returned to the east, and 
neared Mount Kardu, so also Christ, when the 
work was accomplished and finished which He 
had proposed to Himself, returned to heaven 
to the bosom of His Father, and sat down upon 
the throne of His glory at the Father's right 
hand. 

As to Mount Kardu, it is in the east, in the 
land of the sons of Raban, and the Orientals call 
it Mount Godash ; ' the Arabians and Persians 
call it Ararat.^ 

And there is a town of the name Kardu, and 
that hill is called after it, which is indeed very 
lofty and inaccessible, whose summit no one has 
ever been able to reach, on account of the vio- 
lence of the winds and the storms which always 
prevail there. And if any one attempts to as- 
cend it, there are demons that rush upon him, 
and cast him down headlong from the ridge of 
the mountain into the plain, so that he dies. No 
one, moreover, knows what there is on the top 
of the mountain, except that certain relics of the 
wood of the ark still lie there on the surface of 
the top of the mountain.^ 

' Gordyseum. 

2 See Fuller, Misc. Sacr., i. 4; and Bochart, Phaleg., p. 22. 

* [See p. 149, note 10, sitpra.\ 

SECTION X. 
On Deut. xxxiii. 11. 

Hippolytus, the expositor of the Targum, has 
said that Moses, when he had finished this 
prophecy, also pronounced a blessing upon all 
the children of Israel, by their several tribes, 
and prayed for them. Then God charged Moses, 
saying to him, Go up to Mount Nebo, which in- 
deed is known by the name of the mount of the 
Hebrews, which is in the land of Moab over 
against Jericho. 

And He said to him : View the land of 
Chanaan, which I am to give to the children of 
Israel for an inheritance. Thou, however, shalt 
never enter it ; wherefore view it well from afar 
off. When Moses therefore viewed it, he saw- 
that land, — a land green, and abounding with 
all plenty and fertility, planted thickly with trees ; 
and Moses was greatly moved, and wept. 

And when Moses descended from Mount Ne- 
bo, he called for Joshua the son of Nun, and 
said to him before the children of Israel : Pre- 
vail, and be strong ; for thou art to bring the 
children of Israel into the land which (}od 
promised to their fathers that He would give 
them for an inheritance. Fear not, therefore, 
the people, neither be afraid of the nations : for 
God will be with thee. 

And Moses wrote that Senna ^ (Hebr. njiyD 
= "secondary law," or "Deuteronomy"), and 
gave it to the priests the sons of Levi, and com- 
manded them, saying : For seven years keep 
this Senna hid, and show it not within the entire 
course of seven years. ("And then") in the 
feast of tabernacles, the priests the sons of Levi 
will read this law before the children of Israel, 
that the whole people, men and women alike, 
may observe the words of God : Command them 
to keep the word of God, which is in that law. 
And whosoever shall violate one of its precepts, 
let him be accursed. 

Accordingly, when Moses had finished the 
writing of the law, he gave it to Joshua the son 
of Nun, and enjoined him to give it to the sons 
of Levi, the priests. Moses also enjoined anil 
charged them to place the book of the law again 
within the ark of the covenant of the Lord, that 
it might remain there for a testimony for ever. 

.'^nd when Moses had made an end of his 
injunctions, God bade him go up Mount Nebo, 
which is over against Jericho. The Lord showed 
him the whole land of promise in its four (juar- 
ters, from the wilderness to the sea, and from 
sea to sea. And the Lord said to him, Tliou 
hast seen it indeed with thine eyes, but thou 
shalt never enter it. There accordingly Moses 
died, the servant of God, by the command of 

■♦ 'I'hat is the name the Mohammedans give to their Traditions. 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

199 

God. And the angels buried him on Mount 
Nebo, which is over against Beth-Phegor. And 
no one knows of his sepulchre, even to this day. 
For God concealed his grave. 

And Moses lived 1 20 years ; nor was his eye 
dim, nor was the skin of his face wrinkled. 

Moses died on a certain day, at the third hour 
of the day, on the seventh day of the second 
month, which is the month Jiar. 

And the children of Israel wept for him in the 
plains of Moab three days. 

And Joshua the sun of Nun was filled with the 
spirit of wisdom ; for Moses had laid his hand 
upon him. And all the children of Israel obeyed 
him. And God charged Joshua the son of Nun 
on a certain day, — namely, the seventh day of 
the month Nisan. 

And Joshua the son of Nan lived no years, 
and died on the fourth day, which was the first 
day of the month Elul. And they buried him 
in the city Thamnatserach, on Mount Ephraim. 

Praise be to God for the completion of the 
work. 

ON THE PSALMS.' 

The argument of the exposition of the Psalms by Hippolytus, 
(bishop) of Rome. 

I. The book of Psalms contains new doctrine 
after the law which was given by Moses ; and 
thus it is the second book of doctrine after the 
Scripture of Moses. After the death, then of 
Moses and Joshua, and after the judges, David 
arose, one deemed worthy to be called the father 
of the Saviour, and he was the first to give the 
Hebrews a new style of psalmody, by which he 
did away with the ordinances established by 
Moses with respect to sacrifice, and introduced 
a new mode of the worship of God by hymns 
and acclamations ; and many other things also 
beyond the law of Moses he taught through his 
whole ministry. And this is the sacredness of 
the book, and its utility. And the account to 
be given of its inscription is this : (for) as most 
of the brethren who believe in Christ think that 
this book is David's, and inscribe it " Psalms of 
David," we must state what has reached us with 
respect to it. The Hebrews give the book the 
title "Sephra Thelim," ^ and in the "Acts of 
the Apostles " it is called the " Book of Psalms " 
(the words are these, "as it is written in the 
Book of Psalms"), but the name (of the author) 
in the inscription of the book is not found there. 
And the reason of that is, that the words written 
there are not the words of one man, but those 
of several together ; Esdra, as tradition says. 

' Simon de Magistris, /If/a Martyrum Osii'ensiu in, Append., 

V- 439- ' 

2 That is an attempt to express in Greek letters the Hebrew title, 

yiz., D^yHD ^3D = Book of Praises. 

having collected in one volume, after the cap- 
tivity, the psalms of several, or rather their 
words, as they are not all psalms. Thus the 
name of David is prefixed in the case of some, 
and that of Solomon in others, and that of Asaph 
in others. There are some also that belong to 
Idithum (Jeduthun) ; and besides these there 
are others that belong to the sons of Core (Ko- 
rah), and even to Moses. As they are therefore 
the words of so many thus collected together, 
they could not be said by any one who under- 
stands the matter to be by David alone. 

2. As regards those which have no inscription,, 
we must also inquire to whom we ought to as- 
cribe them. For why is it that even the simplest 
inscription is wanting in them — such as the one 
which runs thus, " A psalm of David," or " Of 
David," without any addition? Now, my idea 
is, that wherever this inscription occurs alone, 
what is written is neither a psalm nor a song, 
but some sort of utterance under guidance of 
the Holy Spirit, recorded for the behoof of him 
who is able to understand it. But the opinion 
of a certain Hebrew on these last matters has 
reached me, who held that, when there were 
many without any inscription, but preceded by 
one with the inscription " Of David," all these 
should be reckoned also to be by David. And 
if this be the case, it follows that those without 
any inscription are by those (writers) who are 
rightly reckoned, according to the titles, to be 
the authors of the psalms preceding these. This 
book of Psalms before us has also been called 
by the prophet the " Psalter," because, as they 
say, the psaltery alone among musical instruments 
gives back the sound from above when the brass 
is struck, and not from beneath, after the man- 
ner of others. In order, therefore, that those 
who understand it may be zealous to carry out 
the analogy of such an appellation, and may also 
look above, from which direction its melody 
comes — for this reason he has styled it the 
Psalter. For it is entirely the voice and utter- 
ance of the most Holy Spirit. 

3. Let us inquire, further, why there are one 
hundred and fifty psalms. That the number 
fifty is sacred, is manifest from the days of the 
celebrated festival of Pentecost, which indicates 
release from labours, and (the possession of) 
joy. For which reason neither fasting nor bend- 
ing the knee is decreed for those days.^ For 
this is a symbol of the great assembly that is 
reserved for future times. Of which times there 
was a shadow in the land of Israel in the year 
called among the Hebrews "Jobel" (Jubilee), 
which is the fiftieth year in number, and brings 
with it liberty for the slave, and release from 
debt, and the like. And the holy Gospel knows 

3 [See vol. iii. pp. 94, 103.] 

200 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

also the remission of the number fifty, and of 
that number which is cognate with it, and stands 
by it, viz., five hundred ; ' for it is not without 
a purpose that we have gi\'en us there the remis- 
sion of fifty pence and of five hundred. Thus, 
then, it was also meet that the hymns to God on 
account of the destruction of enemies, and in 
thanksgiving for the goodness of God, should 
contain not simply one set of fifty, but three 
such, for the name of Father, and Son, and Holy 
Spirit. 

4. The number fifty, moreover, contains seven 
sevens, or a Sabbath of Sabbaths ; and also over 
and above these full Sabbaths, a new beginning, 
in the eight, of a really new rest that remains 
above the Sabbaths. And let any one who is 
able, observe this (as it is carried out) in the 
Psalms with more, indeed, than human accuracy, 
so as to find out the reasons in each case, as we 
shall set them forth. Thus, for instance, it is 
not without a purpose that the eighth psalm has 
the inscription, " On the wine-presses," as it com- 
prehends the perfection of fruits in the eight ; 
for the time for the enjoyment of the fruits of 
the true vine could not be before the eight. And 
again, the second psalm inscribed " On the wine- 
presses," is the eightieth, containing another 
eighth number, viz., in the tenth multiple. The 
eighty-third, again, is made up by the union of 
two holy numbers, viz., the eight in the tenth 
multiple, and the three in the first multiple. 
And the fiftieth psalm is a prayer for the remis- 
sion of sins, and a confession. For as, accord- 
ing to the Gospel, the fiftieth obtained remission, 
confirming thereby that understanding of the 
jubilee, so he who offers up such petitions in full 
confession hopes to gain remission in no other 
number than the fiftieth. And again, there are 
also certain others which are called " Songs of 
degrees," in number fifteen, as was also the 
number of the steps of the temple, and which 
show thereby, perhaps, that the " steps " (or 
"degrees") are comprehended within the num- 
ber seven and the number eight. And these 
songs of degrees begin after the one hundred 
and twentieth psalm, which is called simply " a 
psalm," as the more accurate copies give it. 
And this is the number - of the perfection of the 
life of man. And the hundredth ^ psalm, which 
begins thus, " I will sing of mercy and judgment, 
O Lord," embraces the life of the saint in fellow- 
ship with God. And the one hundred and fifti- 
eth ends with these words, " Let every thing that 
hath breath praise the Lord." 

5. But since, as we have already said, to do 
this in the case of each, and to find out the 
reasons, is very difficult, and too much for human 

' Luke vii. 41. [Dan. viii. 13, {Margin.) " Palmoni," etc.] 

^ Gen vi. 3. 

^ i.e., in our version the loist. 

nature to accomplish, we shall content ourselves 
with these' things by way of an outline. Only 
let us add this, that the psalms which deal with 
historical matter are not found in regular histori- 
cal order. And the only reason for this is to 
be found in the numbers according to which the 
psalms are arranged. For instance, the history 
in the fifty-first is antecedent to the history in 
the fiftieth. For everybody acknowledges that 
the matter of Doeg the Idumean calumniating 
David to Saul is antecedent to the sin with the 
wife of Urias ; yet it is not without good reason 
that the history which should be second is placed 
first, since, as we have before said, the place re- 
garding remission has an affinity with the number 
fifty. He, therefore, who is not worthy of remis- 
sion, passes the number fifty, as Doeg the Idu- 
mean. For the fifty-first is the psalm that treats 
of him. And, moreover, the third is in the same 
position, since it was written when David fled 
from the face of Absalom his son ; and thus, as 
all know who read the books of Kings, it should 
come properly after the fifty-first and the fiftieth. 
And if any one desires to give further attention 
to these and such like matters, he will find more 
exact explanations of the history for himself, as 
well as of the inscriptions and the order of the 
psalms. 

6. It is likely, also, that a similar account is 
to be given of the fact, that David alone of the 
prophets prophesied with an instrument, called 
by the Greeks the " psaltery," + and by the 
Hebrews the " nabla," which is the only musical 
instrument that is quite straight, and has no 
curve. And the sound does not come from the 
lower parts, as is the case with the lute and cer- 
tain other instruments, but from the upper. For 
in the lute and the lyre the brass when struck 
gives back the sound from beneath. But this 
psaltery has the source of its musical nun.bers 
above, in order that we, too, may practise seek- 
ing things above, and not suffer ourselves to be 
borne down by the pleasure of melody to the 
passions of the flesh. And I think that this 
truth, too, was signified deeply and clearly to us 
in a prophetic way in the construction of the 
instrument, viz., that those who have souls well- 
ordered and trained, have the way ready to 
things above. And again, an instrument havmg 
the source of its melodious sound in its upper 
parts, may be taken as like the body of Christ 
and His saints — the only instrument that main- 
tains rectitude ; " for He did no sin, neither was 
guile found in his mouth." 5 This is indeed an 
instrument, harmonious, melodious, well-ordered, 
that took in no human discord, and did nothing 
out of measure, but maintained in all things, as 

* [See learned remarks of Pusey, p. 27 of his Lectures on 
Dante/.] 

S Isa. liii. 9. [Vol. i. cap. iv. p. 50.] 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

20I 

it were, harmony towards the Father ; for, as 
He says : " He that is of the earth is earthly, 
and speaketh of the earth : He that cometh 
from heaven, testifies of what He has seen and 
heard." ' 

7. As there are " psahns," and "songs," and 
" psahns of song," and " songs of psahnody," ^ 
it remains tliat we discuss the difference between 
these. We think, then, that the " psahiis " are 
those which are simply played to an instrument, 
without the accompaniment of the voice, and 
(which are composed) for the musical melody 
of the instrument ; and that those are called 
"songs" which are rendered by the voice in 
concert with the music ; and that they are called 
" psalms of song " when the voice takes the lead, 
while the appropriate sound is also made to 
accompany it, rendered harmoniously by the 
instruments ; and " songs of psalmody," when 
the instrument takes the lead, while the voice 
has the second place, and accompanies the music 
of the strings. And thus much as to the letter 
of what is signified by these terms. But as to 
the mystical interpretation, it would be a "psalm" 
when, by smiting the instrument, viz., the body, 
with good deeds we succeed in good action, 
though not wholly proficient in speculation ; and 
a "song," when, by revolving the mysteries of 
the truth, apart from the practical, and assenting 
fully to them, we have the noblest thoughts of 
God and His oracles, while knowledge enlightens 
us, and wisdom shines brightly in our souls ; and 
a " song of psalmody," when, while good action 
takes the lead, according to the word, " If thou 
desire wisdom, keep the commandments, and 
the Lord shall give her unto thee," ^ we under- 
stand wisdom at the same time, and are deemed 
worthy by God to know the truth of things, till 
now kept hid from us ; and a " psalm of song," 
when, by revolving with the light of wisdom 
some of the more abstruse questions pertaining 
to morals, we first become prudent in action, 
and then also able to tell what, and when, and 
how action is to be taken. And perhaps this is 
the reason why the first inscriptions nowhere 
contain the word " songs," but only " psalm " or 
" psalms ; " for the saint does not begin with 
speculation ; but when he has become in a sim- 
ple way a believer, according to orthodoxy, he 
devotes himself to the actions that are to be 
done. For this reason, also, are there many 
" songs " at the end ; and wherever there is the 
word " degrees," there we do not find the word 
" psalm," whether by itself alone or with any 
addition, but only " songs." For in the " de- 
grees " (or "ascents"), the saints will be en- 

' John iii. 31. 

^ The Greek is: optuji' KJjaKfiuiv, Koi ovauf toSuiv, xaX \jia\iiiijv 
jtjXy Kai tadi'ii' »//aA/uov, 
3 Ecclus. i. 26. 

gaged in nothing but in speculation alone. And 
let the account which we have offered, following 
the indications given in the interpretation of the 
Seventy, suffice for this subject in general. 

8. But again, as we found in the Seventy, and 
in Theodotion, and in Symmachus, in some 
psalms, and these not a few, the word Sidij/aXfxa 
inserted,-* we endeavoured to make out whether 
those who placed it there meant to mark a 
change at those places in rhythm or melody, or 
any alteration in the mode of instruction, or in 
thought, or in force of language. It is found, 
however, neither in Aquila nor in the Hebrew ; 
but there, instead of SuLif/aXfjia ( = an interven- 
ing musical symphony), we find the word del. 
( = ever) . And further, let not this fact escape 
thee, O man of learning, that the Hebrews also 
divided the Psalter into five books, so that it 
might be another Pentateuch. For from Ps. i. 
to xl. they reckoned one book ; and from xli. to 
Ixxi. they reckoned a second ; and from Ixxii. 
to Ixxxviii. they counted a third book ; and from 
Ixxxix. to cv. a fourth ; and from cvi. to cl. they 
made up the fifth. For they judged that each 
psalm closing with the words, " Blessed be the 
Lord, Amen, amen," formed the conclusion of 
a book. And in them we have " prayer," viz., 
supplication offered to God for anything requi- 
site ; and the " vow," i.e., engagement ; and the 
" hymn," which is the song of blessing to God 
for benefits enjoyed; and "praise" or "extol- 
ling," which is the laudation of the wonders of 
God. For laudation is nothing else but just the 
superlative of praise, 

9. However it may be with the " time when 
and the manner" in which this idea of the Psalms 
was hit upon by the inspired David, he at least 
seems to have been the first, and indeed the only 
one, concerned in it, and that, too, at the earliest 
period, when he taught his fingers to tune the 
psaltery. For if any other before him showed 
the use of the psaltery and lute, it was at any 
rate in a very different way that such an one did 
it, only putting together some rude and clumsy 
contrivance, or simply employing the instrument, 
without singing either to melody or to words, but 
only amusing himself with a rude sort of pleasure. 
But after such he was the first to reduce the 
affair to rhythm, and order, and art, and also to 
wed the singing of the song with the melody. 
And, what is of greater importance, this most 
inspired of men sang to God, or of God, begin- 
ning in this wise even at the period when he was 
among the shepherds and youths in a simpler 
and humbler style, and afterwards when he be- 
came a man and a king, attempting something 
loftier and of more public interest. And he is 
said to have made this advance, especially after 

* [Our author throws no great light on this vexed word, but the 
article Selak in Smith's Diet. 0/ the jJitU is truly valuable.] 

202 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

he had brought back the ark into the city. At 
that time he often danced before the ark, and 
often sang songs of thanksgiving, and songs to 
celebrate its recovery. And then by and by, 
allocating the whole tribe of the Levites to the 
duty, he appointed four leaders of the choirs, 
viz., Asaph, Aman (Heman), Ethan, and Idithum 
(Jeduthun), inasmuch as there are also in all 
things visible four primal principles. And he 
then formed choirs of men, selected from the 
rest. And he fixed their number at seventy-two, 
having respect, I think, to the number of the 
tongues that were confused, or rather divided, at 
the time of the building of the tower. And what 
was typified by this, but that hereafter all tongues 
shall again unite in one common confession, when 
the Word takes possession of the whole world ? 

OTHER FRAGMENTS ON THE PSALMS.' 

II. 

On Psalm xxxi. 22. Of the triumpli of the Christian faith. 

The mercy of God is not so " marvellous " 
when it is shown in humbler cities as when it is 
shown in " a strong city," ^ and for this reason 
" God is to be blessed." 

in. 

On Psalm Iv. 15. 

One of old used to say that those only descend 
alive into Hades who are instructed in the knowl- 
edge of things divine ; for he who has not tasted 
of the words of life is dead. 

IV. 

On Psalm Iviii. 11. 

But since there is a time when the righteous 
shall rejoice, and sinners shall meet the end fore- 
told for them, we must with all reason fully ac- 
knowledge and declare that God is inspector and 
overseer of all that is done among men, and 
judges all who dwell upon earth. It is proper 
further to inquire whether the prophecy in hand, 
which quite corresponds and fits in with those 
preceding it, may describe the end. 

IV/ien Hippolytus dictated these words,^ the 
f;rammarian asked him why he hesitated about 
that prophecy, as if he mistrusted the divine power 
in that calamity of exile. 

The learned man calls attention to the ques- 
tion why the word ?)Laypdcf>r) (= may describe) 
was used by me in the subjunctive mood, as if 
silently indicating doubt. 

Hippolytus accordingly replied : — 

You know indeed quite well, that words of that 
form are used as conveying by implication a re- 

' De Mr.gistiis, Acta Martyriiin Ostien., p. 256. 
- The allusion probably is to the seat of imperial power itself. 
^ He is addressing his amanuensis, a man not without learning, 
as it seems Hippolytus dictates these words. 

buke to those who study the prophecies about 
Christ, and talk righteousness with the mouth, 
while they do not admit His coming, nor listen 
to His voice when He calls to them, and says, 
" He that hath ears to hear, let him hear ; " who 
who have made themselves like the serpent, and 
have made their ears like those of a deaf viper, 
and so forth. God then does, in truth, take care 
of the righteous, and judges their cause when 
injured on the earth ; and He punishes those 
who dare to injure them. 

On Psalm lix. 11. Concerning the Jews. 

For this reason, even up to our day, though 
they see the boundaries (of their country), and 
go round about them, they stand afar off. And 
therefore have they no longer king or high priest 
or prophet, nor even scribes and Pharisees and 
Sadducees among them. He does not, however, 
say that they are to be cut off; wherefore their 
race still subsists, and the succession of their 
children is continued. For they have not been 
cut off nor consumed from among men — but 
they are and exist still — yet only as those who 
have been rejected and cast down from the hon- 
our of which of old they were deemed worthy 
by God. But again, " Scatter them," he says, 
" by Thy power ; " which word has also come to 
pass. For they are scattered throughout the 
whole earth, in servitude everywhere, and enga- 
ging in the lowest and most servile occupations, 
and doing any unseemly work for hunger's sake. 

For if they were destroyed from among men, 
and remained nowhere among the living, they 
could not see my people, he means, nor know 
my Church in its prosperity. Therefore " scat- 
ter" them everywhere on earth, where my Church 
is to be established, in order that when they see 
the Church founded by me, they may be roused 
to emulate it in piety. And these things did the 
Saviour also ask on their behalf. 

VI. 

On Psalm Ixii. 6. 

Aliens (yucTavao-Tai) properly so called are those 
who have been despoiled by some enemies or ad- 
versaries, and have then become wanderers ; a 
thing which we indeed also endured formerly at 
the hand of the demons. But from the time 
that Christ took us up by faith in Him, we are 
no longer aliens from the true country — the 
Jerusalem which is above — nor have we to bear 
alienation in error from the truth. 

VII, 

On Psalm Ixviii. 18. Of the enlargement of the Church. 

And the unbelieving, too. He sometimes draws 
by means of sickness and outward circumstances ; 

FRAGMENTS FROM COMMENTARIES. 

203 

yea, many also by means of visions have come 
to make their abode with Jesus. 

VIII. 
On Psalm Ixxxix. 4. Of the Gentiles. 

And around us are the wise men of the Greeks, 
mocking and jeering us, as those who beheve 
without inquiry, and foohshly. 

On the v.'ords in Psalm xcvi. 11. " Let the sea roar (be 
moved), and the fulness thereof." 

By these words it is signified that the preach- 
ing ot the Gospel will be spread abroad over the 
seas and the islands in the ocean, and among 
the people dwelling therein, who are here called 
" the fulness thereof" And that word has been 
made good. For churches of Christ fill all the 
islands, and are being multiplied every day, and 
the teaching of the Word of salvation is gaining 
accessions. 

On Psalm cxix. 30-32, 

He who loves truth, and never utters a false 
word with his mouth, may say, " I havo chosen 
the way of truth." Moreover, he who always 
sets the judgments of God before his eyes, and 
remembers them in every action, will say, " Thy 
judgments have I not forgotten." And how is 
our heart enlarged by trials and afflictions ! For 
these pluck out the thorns of anxious thoughts 

enlarge 

within us, and 

tion of the divine 

affliction Thou hast enlarged me." 

the heart for the recep- 

laws. For, says he, " in 

Then do we 

walk in the way of God's commandments, well 
prepared for it by the endurance of trials. 

XI. 

On the words in Psalm cxxvii. 7 : " On the wrath of mine 
enemies," etc. 

Hast thou - seen that the power (of God) is 
most mighty on every side? For (says he) 
Thou wilt be able to save me when in the midst 
of troubles, and to keep them in check when 
they rage, and rave, and breathe fire. 

XII. 

On the words in Psalm cxxxix. 15 : " My substance or (bones) 
was not hid from Thee, which Thou niadest in secret." 

It is said also by those who treat of the nature 
and generation of animals, that the change of 
the blood into bone is something invisible and 
intangible, although in the case of other parts, I 
mean the flesh and nerves, the mode of their 
formation may be seen. And the Scripture also, 
in Ecclesiastes, adduces this, saying, "As thou 
knowest not the bones in the womb of her that 
is with child, so thou shalt not know the works 
of God." 2 But from Thee was not hid even my 
substance, as it was originally in the lowest parts 
of the earth. 

' To his amanuen»is. 
^ Eccles. xi. 5. 

THE EXTANT WORKS AND FRAGMENTS 

HIPPOLYTUS. 

Part II. — Dogmatical and historical. 

TREATISE ON CHRIST AND ANTICHRIST' 

I. As it was your desire, my beloved brother 
Theophilus,^ to be thoroughly informed on those 
topics which I put summarily before you, I have 
thought it right to set these matters of inquiry 
clearly forth to your view, drawing largely from 
the Holy Scriptures themselves as from a holy 
fountain, in order that you may not only have 
the pleasure of hearing them on the testimony of 
men,3 but may also be able, by surveying them 
in the light of (divine) authority, to glorify God 
in all. For this will be as a sure supply furnished 
you by us for your journey in this present life, so 
that by ready argument applying things ill under- 
stood and apprehended by most, you may sow 
them in the ground of your heart, as in a rich 
and clean soil.^ By these, too, you will be able 
to silence those who oppose and gainsay the 
word of salvation. Only see that you do not 
give these things over to unbelieving and blas- 
phemous tongues, for that is no common danger. 
But impart them to pious and faithful men, who 
desire to live holily and righteously with fear. 
For it is not to no purpose that the blessed apos- 
tle exhorts Timothy, and says, " O Timothy, keep 
that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding 
profane and vain babblings, and oppositions of 
science falsely so called ; which some professing 
have erred concerning the faith." 5 And again, 
" Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace 

' Gallandi, liihl. 7<et. Pair., ii. p. 417, Venice, 1765. 

- Perhaps the same Thcophihis whom Methodius, a contemporary 
of Hippolytiis, addresses as Epiphanius. [See vol. vi., this series.] 
From this introduction, too, it is clear that they are in error who take 
this book to be a homily. (Fabriciiis.) 

^ In the te.xt the reading is twc oi'tioi', for which tmv oitwi' ^ of 
the ears, is proposed by some, and avSpuitruji' ^ nf iiu'tt, by others. 
In the manuscripts the abbreviation ai'wi'is often found for arSpioTrioi-. 

■♦ In the text we find ia<; jticui- xaOapri yr), for which grammar re- 
quires ui<; niovi KaBapa y>j. Combefisius proposes uianep oui' KaSapa 
yi'i ^ as in clean ground. Others would read ws n-updi', etc., ^ 
like grain in clean ground. 

5 I Tim. vi. 20, 21. 

204 

that is in Christ Jesus. And the things that thou 
hast heard of me in many exhortations, the same 
commit thou to faithful men,^ who shall be able 
to teach others also." ^ If, then, the blessed 
(apostle) delivered these things with a pious 
caution, which could be easily known by all, as 
he perceived in the spirit that "all men have not 
faith," *^ how much greater will be our danger, if, 
rashly and without thought, we commit the rev- 
elations of God to profane and unworthy men ? 

2. For as the blessed prophets were made, so 
to speak, eyes for us, they foresaw through faitii 
the mysteries of the word, and became ministers 
of these "^ things also to succeeding generations, 
not only reporting the past, but also announcing 
the present and the future, so that the prophet 
might not appear to be one only for the time 
being, but might also predict the future for all 
generations, and so be reckoned a (true) 
prophet. For these fathers were furnished with 
the Spirit, and largely honoured by the Word 
Himself; and just as it is with instruments of 
music, so had they the Word always, like the 
plectrum, '° in union with them, and when moved 
by Him the prophets announced what God 
willed. For they spake not of their own power " 
(let there be no mistake as to that'=), neither 
did they declare what pleased themselves. But 
first of all they were endowed with wisdom by 
the Word, and then again were rightly instructed 

6 This reading, TrapaicAjjo-etoi' {or naprvpiav (= witnesses), which 
is peculiar to Flippolytus alone, is all the more remarkable as so 
thoroughly suiting P.-iul's meaning in the passage. 

7 2 Tim. ii. i, 2. 

8 2 Thess. iii. 2. 

9 The text reads aTKva = which. Gudius proposes riva ^ some. 
'° The plectrum was the instrument with which the lyre was struck. 

The text is in confusion here. Combefisius corrects it, as we render 
it, noydviav &iKr\v rji'w/jLCfOJ' i\oiir(<; iv eai;Toi«. 

" 2 Pet. i. 21. 

'- The text reads nt) irXavia (= that I may not deceive). Some 
propose lus irAoi-oi ^ as deceivers. 

TREATISE ON CHRIST AND ANTICHRIST. 

205 

in the future by means of visions. And then, 
when thus themselves fully convinced, they spake 
those things which ' were revealed by God to 
them alone, and concealed from all others. For 
with what reason should the prophet be called a 
prophet, unless he in spirit foresaw the future ? 
For if the prophet spake of any chance event, 
he would not be a prophet then in speaking of 
things which were under the eye of all. But one 
who sets forth in detail things yet to be, was 
rightly judged a prophet. Wherefore prophets 
were with good reason called from the very first 
" seers." ^ And hence we, too, who are rightly 
instructed in what was declared aforetime by 
them, speak not of our own capacity. For we 
do not attempt to made any change one way or 
another among ourselves in the words that were 
spoken of old by them, but we make the Scrip- 
tures in which these are written public, and read 
them to those who can believe rightly ; for that 
is a common benefit for both parties : for him 
who speaks, in holding in memory and setting 
forth correctly things uttered of old ; ^ and for 
him who hears, in giving attention to the things 
spoken. Since, then, in this there is a work as- 
signed to both parties together, viz., to him who 
speaks, that he speak forth faithfully without 
regard to risk,'* and to him who hears, that he 
hear and receive in faith that which is spoken, I 
beseech you to strive together with me in prayer , 
to God. 

3. Do you wish then to know in what manner 
the Word of God, who was again the Son of 
God, 5 as He was of old the Word, communi- 
cated His revelations to the blessed prophets in 
former times? Well, as the Word shows His 
compassion and His denial of all respect of per- 
sons by all the saints, He enlightens them ^ and 
adapts them to that which is advantageous for 
us, like a skilful physician, understanding the 
weakness of men. And the ignorant He loves 
to teach, and the erring He turns again to His 
own true way. And by those who live by faith 
He is easily found ; and to those of pure eye and 
holy heart, who desire to knock at the door. He 
opens immediately. For He casts away none of 
His servants as unworthy of the divine mysteries. 
He does not esteem the rich man more highly 
than the poor, nor does He despise the poor 
man for his poverty. He does not disdain the 
barbarian, nor does He set the eunuch aside as 
no man.7 He does not hate the female on ac- 

' This is according to the emendation of Combefisius. [And note 
this primitive theory of inspiration as ilhistrating the words, " who 
spake by the prophets," in the Nicene Symbol ] 

- I Sam. ix. 9. 

3 In the text it is wpoKeiiJ.eva (=: things before us or proposed to 
us) , for which Combefisius proposes, as in our rendering, TrpoeipTj/neca. 

* The original is aKifSwov. 

5 Isa. xlii i; Matt. xii. iS. The text is avrhq ndXiv 6 toO ©coO 
iraU. See Macarius, Di'.'initas D. N. S. C, book iv. ch. xiii. p. 
460, and Grabe on Bull's Defcns. Fid. Nic, p. loi. 

*' Reading ai/rous for avTov. 

7 [Isa. Ivi. 3, 4.] 

count of the woman's act of disobedience in the 
beginning, nor does He reject the male on ac- 
count of the man's transgression. But He seeks 
all, and desires to save all, wishing to make all 
the children of God, and calling all the saints 
unto one perfect man. For there is also one Son 
(or Servant) of God, by whom we too, receiving 
the regeneration through the Holy Spirit, desire 
to come all unto one perfect and heavenly 
man.** 

4. For whereas the Word of God was without 
flesh,'5 He took upon Himself the holy flesh by 
the holy Virgin, and prepared a robe which He 
wove for Himself, like a bridegroom, in the suf- 
ferings of the cross, in order that by uniting His 
own power with our motal body, and by mixing '° 
the incorruptible with the corruptible, and the 
strong with the weak, He might save perishing 
man. The web-beam, therefore, is the passion 
of the Lord upon the cross, and the warp on it 
is the power of the Holy Spirit, and the woof is 
the holy flesh wrought (woven) by the Spirit, 
and the thread is the grace which by the love of 
Christ binds and unites the two in one, and the 
combs or (rods) are the Word ; and the workers 
are the patriarchs and prophets who weave the 
fair, long, perfect tunic for Christ ; and the Word 
passing through these, like the combs or (rods), 
completes through them that which His Father 
willeth.'° 

5. But as time now presses for the considera- 
tion of the question immediately in hand, and as 
what has been already said in the introduction 
with regard to the glory of God, may suffice, it 
is proper that we take the Holy Scriptures them- 
selves in hand, and find out from them what, and 
of what manner, the coming of Antichrist is ; on 
what occasion and at what time that impious one 
shall be revealed ; and whence and from what 
tribe (he shall come) ; and what his name is, 
which is indicated by the number in the Scrip- 
ture ; and how he shall work error among the 
people, gathering them from the ends of the 
earth ; and (how) he shall stir up tribulation and 
persecution against the saints ; and how he shall 
glorify himself as God ; and what his end shall 
be ; and how the sudden appearing of the Lord 
shall be revealed from heaven ; and what the 
conflagration of the whole world shall be ; and 
what the glorious and heavenly kingdom of the 
saints is to be, when they reign together with 
Christ ; and what the punishment of the wicked 
by fire. 

^ Eph. iv. 13. 

9 The text has mv = being, for which read V = was. 

'° Mif'i?. Thomassin, Pe Incarnaiione I'erbi, lii. 5, cites the 
most distinguished of the Greek and Latin Fathers, who taught that a 
mingling (coiniiu'stw), without confusion indeed, but yet most 
thorough, of the two natures, is the bond and nexus of the personal 
unity. 

" [This analogy of weaving is powerfully employed by Gray 
(" Weave the warp, and weave the woof," etc.) . See his Pindaric ode, 
The Bard.} 

206 

TREATISE ON CHRIST AND ANTICHRIST. 

6. Now, as our Lord Jesus Christ, who is also 
God, was prophesied of under the figure of a 
Hon,' on account of His royalty and glory, in the 
same way have the Scriptures also aforetime 
spo"ken of Antichrist as a lion, on account of his 
tyranny and violence. For the deceiver seeks 
to liken himself in all things to the Son of God. 
Christ is a lion, so Antichrist is also a lion ; 
Christ is a king,- so Antichrist is also a king. The 
Saviour was manifested as a lamb ; ^ so he too, 
in like manner, will appear as a lamb, though 
within he is a wolf. The Saviour came into the 
world in the circumcision, and he will come in 
the same manner. The Lord sent apostles among 
all the nations, and he in like manner will send 
false apostles. The Saviour gathered together 
the sheep that were scattered abroad,-* and he in 
like manner will bring together a people that is 
scattered abroad. The Lord gave a seal to those 
who believed on Him, and he will give one in 
like manner. The Saviour appeared in the form 
of man, and he too will come in the form of a 
man. The Saviour raised up and showed His 
holy flesh like a temple, 5 and he will raise a tem- 
ple of stone in Jerusalem. And his seductive 
arts we shall exhibit in what follows. But for the 
present let us turn to the question in hand. 

7. Now the blessed Jacob speaks to the fol- 
lowing effect in his benedictions, testifying pro- 
phetically of our Lord and Saviour : " Judah, 
let thy brethren praise thee : thy hand shall be 
on the neck of thine enemies ; thy father's chil- 
dren shall bow down before thee. Judah is a 
lion's whelp : from the shoot, my son, thou art 
gone up : he stooped down, he couched as a 
lion, and as a lion's whelp ; who shall rouse him 
up ? A ruler shall not depart from Judah, nor a 
leader from his thighs, until he come for whom 
it is reserved ; and he shall be the expectation 
of the nations. Binding his ass to a vine, and 
his ass's colt to the vine tendril ; he shall wash 
his garment in wine, and his clothes, in the blood 
of the grapes. His eyes shall be gladsome as 
with wine, and his teeth shall be whiter than 
milk." ^' 

S. Knowing, then, as I do, how to explain 
these things in detail, I deem it right at present 
to (juote the words themselves. But since the 
expressions themselves urge us to speak of 
them, I shall not omit to do so. For these are 
truly divine antl glorious things, and things well 
calculated to benefit the soul. The prophet, in 
using the expression, a lion 'x whelp, means him 
who sprang from Judah and David according to 
the flesh, who was not made indeed of the seed 

' Rev. V. 5 : [also Gen. xlix. 8. See below, 7, 8]. 

^ John xviii. 37. 

3 John i. 29. 

* John xi. 52. 

5 John ii. 19. 

*> Gen. xlix. 8-ia. 

of David, but was conceived by the (power of 
the) Holy Ghost, and came forth ^ from tlie holy 
shoot of earth. For Isaiah says, "There shall 
come forth a rod out of the root of Jesse, and a 
flower shall grow up out of it."^ That which is 
called by Isaiah a flmvcr, Jacob calls a shoot. 
For first he shot forth, and then he flourished in 
the world. And the expression, " he stooped 
down, he couched as a lion, and as a lion's 
whelp," refers to the three days' sleep (death, 
couching) of Christ ; as also Isaiah says, " How 
is faithful Sion become an harlot ! it was full 
of judgment ; in which righteousness lodged 
(couched) ; but now murderers." ^ And David 
says to the same effect, " I laid me down 
(couched) and slept ; I awaked : for the Lord 
will sustain me ; " '° in which words he j)oints to 
the fact of his sleep and rising again. And 
Jacob says, "Who shall rouse him up?" And 
that is just what David and Paul both refer to, as 
when Paul says, "and God the Father, who 
raised Him from the dead." " 

9. And in saying, " A ruler shall not depart 
from Judah, nor a leader from his thighs, until he 
come for whom it is reserved ; and he shall be 
the expectation of the nations," he referred the 
fulfilment (of that prophecy) to Christ. For 
He is our expectation. For we expect Him, 
(and) by faith we behold Him as He comes 
from heaven with power. 

10. " Binding his ass to a vine : " that means 
that He unites His people of the circumcision 
with His own calling (vocation). For He was 
the vine.'- " And his ass's colt to the vine-ten- 
dril : " that denotes the people of the Gentiles, 
as He calls the circumcision and the uncircum- 
cision unto one faith. 

11. "He shall wash his garment in wine," 
that is, according to that voice of His Father 
which came down by the Holy Ghost at the 
Jordan.'^ " And his clothes in the blood of 
the grape." In the blood of what grape, then, 
but just His own flesh, which hung upon the tree 
like a cluster of grapes ? — from whose side also 
flowed two streams, of blood and water, in which 
the nations are washed and purified, which (na- 
tions) He may be supposed to have as a robe 
about Him.'^ 

7 The text has tovtou — n-poepxo/iiei'ov, for which we read, with 

Combefisius, npoepxaiievov. 

8 Isa. xi. I. 

9 Isa. i. 21. 
'o Ps. iii. 5. 
»i Gal. i. I. 
'- John .w. I. 

■3 The text gives simply, rrji' toi" ayiov. etc., = the fiatcrnal 
voice of the Holy Ghost, etc. As this would seem to represent the 
Holy Ghost as the Father of Christ, Combefisius propo.ses, as in our 
renUering, Kara t'i\v 6ia toO ayiou, etc. The wine, therefore, is 
taken as a figure of His deity, and the garment as a figure of His 
hiiiitanity; and the sense would be, that He has the latter imbued 
with the former in a way peculiar to Himself — even as the voice at 
the Jordan declared Him to be the Father's Son, not His Son by 
adoption, but His own Son, anointed as man with divinity itself 

'■» The nations are compared to a robe about Christ, as something 
foreign to Himself, and deriving all their gifts from Him. 

TREATISE ON CHRIST AND ANTICHRIST. 

20'/ 

12. "His eyes gladsome with wine." .And 
"what are the eyes of Christ but the blessed 
prophets, who foresaw in the Spirit, and an- 
nounced beforehand, the sufferings that were to 
befall Him, and rejoiced in seeing Him in power 
with spiritual eyes, being furnished (for their 
vocation) by the word Himself and His grace? 

13. And in saying, " And his teeth (shall be) 
whiter than milk," he referred to the command- 
ments that proceed from the holy mouth of 
■Christ, and which are pure (purify) as milk. 

14. Thus did the Scriptures preach before- 
time of this lion and lion's whelp. And in like 
manner also we find it written regarding Anti- 
christ. For Moses speaks thus : " Dan is a 
lion's whelp, and he shall leap from Bashan." ' 
But that no one may err by supposing that this 
is said of the Saviour, let him attend carefully 
to the matter. " Dan," he says, " is a lion's 
whelp ; " and in naming the tribe of Dan, he 
declared clearly the tribe from which Antichrist 
is destined to spring. For as Christ springs 
from the tribe of Judah, so Antichrist is to 
spring from the tribe of Dan.^ And that the 
case stands thus, we see also from the words of 
Jacob : " Let Dan be a serpent, lying upon the 
ground, biting the horse's heel." ^ What, then, 
is meant by the serpent but Antichrist, that 
deceiver who is mentioned in Genesis,"* who 
deceived Eve and supplanted Adam {irTepvLo-as, 
bruised Adam's heel) ? But since it is necessary 
to prove this assertion by sufficient testimony, 
we shall not shrink from the task. 

15. That it is in reality out of the tribe of Dan, 
then, that that tyrant and king, that dread judge, 
that son of the devil, is destined to spring and 
arise, the prophet testifies when he says, " Dan 
shall judge his people, as (he is) also one tribe 
in Israel." 5 But some one may say that this 
refers to Samson, who sprang from the tribe of 
Dan, and judged the people twenty years. Well, 
the prophecy had its partial fulfilment in Sam- 
son, but its complete fulfilment is reserved for 
Antichrist. For Jeremiah also speaks to this 
effect : " From Dan we are to hear the sound of 
the swiftness of his horses : the whole land trem- 
bled a^ the sound of the neighing, of the driving 
of his horsesy^ And another prophet says: 
^' He shall gather together all his strength, from 
the east even to the west. They whom he calls, 
and they whom he calls not, shall go with him. 
He shall make the sea white with the sails of 
his ships, and the plain black with the shields 

' Deut. xxxiii. 22. 

2 [See Irenaeus, vol. i. p. 559. Dan's name is excepted in Rev. 
vii., and this was always assigned as the reason. The learned Calmet 
[sub voce Dan) makes a prudent reflection on this idea. The his- 
tory given in Judg. xviii. is more to the purpose.] 

3 Gen. xlix. 17. 
■♦ Gen. iii. i. 

5 Gen. xlix. 16. 
* Jer. viii. i6. 

of his armaments. And whosoev^er shall oppose 
him in war shall fall by the sword." ? That these 
things, then, are said of no one else but that 
tyrant, and shameless one, and adversary of God, 
we shall show in what follows. 

16. But Isaiah also speaks thus: "And it 
shall come to pass, that when the Lord hath per- 
formed His whole work upon Mount Zion and 
on Jerusalem, He will punish (visit) the stout 
mind, the king of Assyria, and the greatness 
(height) of the glory of his eyes. For he said. 
By my strength will I do it, and by the wisdom 
of my understanding I will remove the bounds of 
the peoples, and will rob them of their strength : 
and I will make the inhabited cities tremble, and 
will gather the whole world in my hand like a 
nest, and I will lift it up like eggs that are left. 
And there is no one that shall escape or gainsay 
me, and open the mouth and chattel-. Shall 
the axe boast itself without him that heiueth 
therewith ? or shall the saw magnify itself with- 
out him that shake th {draweth) it? As if one 
should raise a rod or a staff, and the staff should 
lift itself up : and not thus. But the Lord shall 
send dishonour unto thy honour ; and into thy 
glory a burning fire shall burn. And the light 
of Israel shall be a fire, and shall sanctify him 
in flame, and shall consume the forest like 
grass." ^ 

1 7. And again he says in another place : 
" How hath the exactor ceased, and how hath 
the oppressor ceased ! ^ God hath broken the 
yoke of the rulers of sinners. He who smote 
the people in wrath, and with an incurable stroke : 
He that strikes the people with an incurable 
stroke, which He did not spare. He ceased 
(rested) confidently : the whole earth shouts 
with rejoicing. The trees of Lebanon rejoiced 
at thee, and the cedar of Lebanon, (saying). 
Since thou art laid down, no feller is come up 
against us. Hell from beneath is moved at 
meeting thee : all the mighty ones, the rulers of 
the earth, are gathered together — the lords 
from their thrones. All the kings of the nations, 
all they shall answer together, and shall say, 
And thou, too, art taken as we ; and thou art 
reckoned among us. Thy pomp is brought 
down to earth, thy great rejoicing : they will 
spread decay under thee ; and the worm shall 
be thy covering.'" How art thou fallen from 
heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning ! ' ' He is 
cast down to the ground who sends off to all the 
nations. And thou didst say in thy mind, I 
will ascend into heaven, I will set my throne 
above the stars of heaven : I will sit down upon 
the lofty mountains towards the north : I will 

7 Perhaps from an apocrj'phal book, as also below in ch. liv. 

^ Isa. X. 12-17. 

9 e7ri<r7rou6o<TTrJ5. 

■° KaTaKaAuja/ua; other reading, KaraAei/ixjua = remains. 

" Lit., that risest early. 

208 

TREATISE ON CHRIST AND ANTICHRIST. 

ascend above the clouds : I will be like the Most 
High. Yet now thou shalt be brought down to 
hell, and to the foundations of the earth ! They 
that see thee shall wonder at thee, and shall say, 
This is the man that excited the earth, that did 
shake kings, that made the whole world a wil- 
derness, and destroyed the cities, that released 
not those in prison." All the kings of the earth 
did lie in honour, every one in his own house ; 
but thou shalt be cast out on the mountains like 
a loathsome carcase, with many who fall, pierced 
through with the sword, and going down to hell. 
As a garment stained with blood is not pure, so 
neither shalt thou be comely (or clean) ; because 
thou hast destroyed my land, and slain my peo- 
ple. Thou shalt not abide, enduring for ever, a 
wicked seed. Prepare thy children for slaugh- 
ter, for the sins of thy father, that they rise not, 
neither possess my land." == 

1 8. Ezekiel also speaks of him to the same 
effect, thus : "Thus saith the Lord God, Because 
thine heart is lifted up, and thou hast said, I am 
Ciod, I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of 
the sea ; yet art thou a man, and not God, 
(though) thou hast set thine heart as the heart 
of God. Art thou wiser than Daniel? Have 
the wise not instructed thee in their wisdom? 
With thy wisdom or with thine understanding 
hast thou gotten thee power, and gold and silver 
in thy treasures ? By thy great wisdom and by 
thy traffic ^ hast thou increased thy power? Thy 
heart is lifted up in thy power. Therefore thus 
saith the Lord God : Because thou hast set thine 
heart as the heart of God : behold, therefore I 
will bring strangers •» upon thee, plagues from 
the nations : and they shall draw their swords 
against thee, and against the beauty of thy wis- 
dom ; and they shall level thy beauty to destruc- 
tion ; and they shall bring thee down ; and thou 
shalt die by the death of the wounded in the 
midst of the sea. Wilt thou yet say before thejn 
that slay thee, I am God? But thou art a man, 
and no God, in the hand of them that liuuind 
thee. Thou shalt die the deaths of the uneir- 
cumcised by the hand of strangers : for I have 
spoken it, saith the Lord." s 

19. These words then being thus presented, 
let us observe somewhat in detail what Daniel 

his visions. For in distinguisliing the 

says m 
kingdoms 

that are to rise after these things, he 
showed also the coming of Antichrist in the last 
times, and the consummation of the whole world. 
\\\ expounding the vision of Nebuchadnezzar, 
then, he speaks thus : " Thou, O king, sawest, 

l)efore thy 

and behold a great 

image 

standing 

' The text gives tTraytoyjj. Combefisius prefers a7ra'y<Dy)j = />-/a/. 
" Isa. xiv. 4-21. 

3 i.e., according to the reading, e/juropio. The text is €(ur€tpio = 
txperience. 

* There is another reading, Aiftoi/f {^famines) juv i$vu>v. 
5 Rzek. xxviii. 2-10. 

face : the head of which was of fine gold, its arms 
and shoulders of silver, its belly and its thighs 
of brass, and its legs of iron, (and) its feet part 
of iron and part of clay. Thou sawest, then, 
till that a stone was cut out without hands, and 
smote the image upon the feet that were of iron 
and clay, and brake them to an end. Then 
were the clay, the iron, the brass, the silver, 
(and) the gold broken, and became like the 
chaff from the summer threshing-floor ; and 
the strength (fulness) of the wind carried them 
away, and there was no place found for them. 
And the stone that smote the image became a 
great mountain, and filled the whole earth." ^ 

20. Now if we set Daniel's own visions also 
side by side with this, we shall have one exposi- 
tion to give of the two together, and shall (be 
able to) show how concordant with each other 
they are, and how true. For he speaks thus : 
" I Daniel saw, and behold the four winds of 
the heaven strove upon the great sea. And four 
great beasts came up from the sea, diverse one 
from another. The first (was) like a lioness, 
and had wings as of an eagle. I beheld till the 
wings thereof were plucked, and it was lifted up 
from the earth, and made stand upon the feet as 
a man, and a man's heart was given to it. And 
behold a second beast like to a bear, and it was 
made stand on one part, and it had three ribs 
in the mouth of it.^ I beheld, and lo a beast 
like a leopard, and it had upon the back of it 
four wings of a fowl, and the beast had four 
heads. After this I saw, and behold a fourth 
beast, dreadful and terrible, and strong exceed- 
ingly ; it had iron teeth and elaws of brass^ 
which devoured and brake in pieces, and it 
stamped the residue with the feet of it ; and 
it was diverse from all the beasts that were be- 
fore it, and it had ten horns. I considered its 
horns, and behold there came uj) among them 
another litUe horn, and before it there were three 
of the first horns plucked up by the roots ; and 
behold in this horn were eyes like the eyes of 
man, and a mouth speaking great things." ^ 

21. "I beheld till the thrones were set, and 
the Ancient of days did sit : and His garment 
was white as snow, and the hair of His head like 
pure wool : His throne was a flame of fire. His 
wheels were a burning fire. A stream of fire 
flowed before Him. Thousand thousands min- 
istered unto Him, and ten thousand times ten 
thousand stood around Him : the judgment was 
set, and the books were opened. I beheld then, 
because of the voice of the great words which 
the horn spake, till the beast was slain and per- 

'i Dan. ii. 31-35. 

' Combcfisius adds, "between the teeth of it: and they said thus 
to it, Arise, devour much flesh." 

* Combefisius inserted these words, because he thou^jht that they 
must have been in the vision, as they occur subsequently in the ex- 
planation of the vision (v. 19). 

9 Dan. vii. 2-8. 

TREATISE ON CHRIST AND ANTICHRIST. 

209 

ished, and his body given to the burning of fire. 
And the dominion of the other beasts was taken 
away." ' 

22. "T saw in the night vision, and, behold, 
one hke the Son of man was coming with the 
clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of 
days, and was brought near before Him. And 
there was given Him dominion, and honour, 
and the kingdom ; and all peoples, tribes, and 
tongues shall serve Him : His dominion is an 
everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, 
and His kingdom shall not be destroyed." - 

23. Now since these things, spoken as they 
are with a mystical meaning, may seem to some 
hard to understand, we shall keep back nothing 
fitted to impart an intelligent apprehension of 
them to those who are possessed of a sound 
mind. He said, then, that a " lioness came up 
from the sea," and by that he meant the king- 
dom of the Babylonians in the world, which also 
was the head of gold on the image. In saying 
that " it had wings as of an eagle," he meant that 
Nebuchadnezzar the king was lifted up and was 
exalted against God. Then he says, " the wings 
thereof were plucked," that is to say, his glory 
was destroyed ; for he was driven out of his 
kingdom. And the words, " a man's heart was 
given to it, and it was made stand upon the feet 
as a man," refer to the fact that he repented 
and recognised himself to be only a man, and 
gave the glory to God. 

24. Then, after the lioness, he sees a " second 
beast like a bear," and that denoted the Persians. 
For after the Babylonians, the Persians held the 
sovereign power. And in saying that there were 
"three ribs in the mouth of it," he pointed to 
three nations, viz., the Persians, and the Medes, 
and the Babylonians ; which were also repre- 
sented on the image by the silver after the gold. 
Then (there was) " the third beast, a leopard," 
which meant the Greeks. For after the Persians, 
Alexander of Macedon obtained the sovereign 
power on subverting Darius, as is also shown by 
the brass on the image. And in saying that it 
had " four wings of a fowl," he taught us most 
clearly how the kingdom of Alexander was par- 
titioned. For in speaking of " four heads," he 
made mention of four kings, viz., those who 
arose out of that (kingdom). 3 For Alexander, 
when dying, partitioned out his kingdom into 
four divisions. 

25. Then he says: "A fourth beast, dreadful 
and terrible ; it had iron teeth and claws of 
brass." And who are these but the Romans ? 
which (kingdom) is meant by the iron — the 
kingdom which is now established ; for the legs 

' Dan vii. 9-12. 

2 Dan. vii. 13, 14. 

3 See Curtius, x. 10. That Alexander himself divided his king- 
dom is asserted by Josephus Gorionides (iii.) and Cyril of Jerusalem 
{Caicc/i., 4, £>e Sacra Scriptura), and others. 

of that (image) were of iron. And after this, 
what remains, beloved, but the toes of the feet 
of the image, in which part is iron and part clay, 
mixed together ? And mystically by the toes of 
the feet he meant the kings who are to arise 
from among them ; as Daniel also says (in the 
words), "I considered the beast, and lo there 
were ten horns behind it, among which shall rise 
another (horn), an offshoot, and shall pluck up 
by the roots the three (that were) before it." 
And under this was signified none other than 
Antichrist, who is also himself to raise the king- 
dom of the Jews. He says that three horns are 
plucked up by the root by him, viz., the three 
kings of Egypt, and Libya, and Ethiopia, whom 
he cuts off in the array of battle. And he, after 
gaining terrible power over all, being neverthe- 
less a tyrant,-* shall stir up tribulation and per- 
secution against men, exalting himself against 
them. For Daniel says : " I considered the 
horn, and behold that horn made war with the 
saints, and prevailed against them, till the beast 
was slain and perished, and its body was given 
to the burning of fire." 5 

26. After a little space the stone ''will come 
from heaven which smites the image and breaks 
it in pieces, and subverts all the kingdoms, and 
gives the kingdom to the saints of the Most High. 
This is the stone which becomes a great moun- 
tain, and fills the whole earth, of which Daniel 
says : " I saw in the night visions, and behold one 
like the Son of man came with the clouds of 
heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and 
was brought near before Him. And there was 
given Him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom ; 
and all peoples, tribes, and languages shall serve 
Him : and His dominion is an everlasting domin- 
ion, which shall not pass away, and His kingdom 
shall not be destroyed." ^ He showed all power 
given by the Father to the Son,** who is ordained 
Lord of things in heaven, and things on earth, 
and things under the earth, and Judge of all : "^ 
of things in heaven, because He was born, the 
Word of God, before all (ages) ; and of things 
on earth, because He became man in the midst 
of men, to re-create our Adam through Himself; 
and of things under the earth, because He was 
also reckoned among the dead, preaching the 
Gospel to the souls of the saints,'" (and) by death 
overcoming death. 

27. As these things, then, are in the future, 
and as the ten toes of the image are equivalent 
to (so many) democracies," and the ten horns of 

4 For o\i.ai%i=- nevertheless, Gudius suggests (ijoid?=: savage. 

5 Dan. vii. 21, 11. 

6 Dan. ii. 34, 45. 

7 Dan. vii. 13, 14. 

8 Matt, xxviii. 18. 

Phil. ii. 10. 

I Pet. iii. 19. 

[Deserving of especial note. Who could have foreseen the uni- 
versal spirit of democracy in this century save by the light of this 
prophecy ? Comp. 2 Tim. iii. 1-3.] 

9 

10 
II 

2IO 

TREATISE ON CHRIST AND ANTICHRIST. 

the fourth beast are distributed over ten king- 
doms, let us look at the subject a little more 
closely, and consider these matters as in the clear 
light of a personal survey.' 

28. The golden head of the image and the 
lioness denoted the Babylonians ; the shoulders 
and arms of silver, and the bear, represented the 
Persians and Medes ; the belly and thighs of 
brass, and the leopard, meant the Greeks, who 
held the sovereignty from Alexander's time ; the 
legs of iron, and the beast dreadful and terrible, 
expressed the Romans, who hold the sovereignty 
at present ; the toes of the feet which were part 
clay and part iron, and the ten horns, were em- 
blems of the kingdoms that are yet to rise ; the 
other little horn that grows up among them meant 
the Antichrist in their midst ; the stone that 
smites the earth and brings judgment upon the 
world was Christ. 

29. These things, beloved, we impart to you 
with fear, and yet readily, on account of the love 
of Christ, which surpasseth all. For if the blessed 
prophets who preceded us did not choose to 
])roclaim these things, though they knew them, 
openly and boldly, lest they should disquiet the 
souls of men, but recounted them mystically in 
])arables and dark sayings, speaking thus, " Here 
is the mind which hath wisdom," - how much 
greater risk shall we run in venturing to declare 
openly things spoken by them in obscure terms ! 
Let us look, therefore, at the things which are to 
befall this unclean harlot in the last days ; and 
(let us consider) what and what manner of tribu- 
lation is destined to visit her in the wrath of God 
before the judgment as an earnest of her doom. 

30. Come, then, O blessed Isaiah ; arise, tell us 
clearly what thou didst prophesy with respect to 
the mighty Babylon. For thou didst speak also 
of Jerusalem, and thy word is accomplished. 
For thou didst speak boldly and openly : " Your 
country is desolate, your cities are burned with 
fire ; your land, strangers devour it in your pres- 
ence, and it is desolate as overthrown by many 
strangers.^ The daughter of Sion shall be left as 
a cottage in a vineyard, and as a lodge in a 
garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city." •♦ What 
then? Are not these things come to pass? Are 
not the things announced by thee fulfilled ? Is 
not their country, Judea, desolate? Is not the 
holy place burned with fire? Are not their walls 
cast down? Are not their cities destroyed? 
Their land, do not strangers devour it ? Do not 
the Romans rule the country? And indeed 
these impious people hated thee, and did saw 
thee asunder, and they crucified Christ. Thou 
art dead in the world, but thou livest in Christ. 

' o(t>9a\no<f>av<o';. 

^ Rev. xvii. 9. 

3 For iiir'o noWiav Combefisius has i/ir'o Aauf ^ by peoples. 

* Isa. i. 7, 8. 

31. Which of you, then, shall I esteem more 
than thee? Yet Jeremiah, too, is stoned. But 
if I should esteem Jeremiah most, yet Daniel 
too has his testimony. Daniel, I commend thee 
above all ; yet John too gives no false witness. 
With how many mouths and tongues would I 
praise you ; or rather the Word who spake in 
you ! Ye died with Christ ; and ye will live 
with Christ. Hear ye, and rejoice ; behold the 
things announced by you have been fulfilled in 
their time. For ye saw these things yourselves 
first, and then ye proclaimed them to all genera- 
tions. Ye ministered the oracles of God to all 
generations. Ye prophets were called, that ye 
might be able to save all. For then is one a 
prophet indeed, when, having announced be- 
foretime things about to be, he can afterwards 
show that they have actually happened. Ye 
were the disciples of a good Master. These 
words I address to you as if alive, and with 
propriety. For ye hold already the crown of 
life and immortality which is laid up for you in 
heaven.5 

32. Speak with me, O blessed Daniel. Give 
me full assurance, I beseech thee. Thou dost 
prophesy concerning the lioness in Babylon ; ^ 
for thou wast a captive there. Thou hast un- 
folded the future regarding the bear ; for thou 
wast still in the v/orld, and didst see the things 
come to pass. Then thou speakest to me of 
the leopard ; and whence canst thou know this, 
for thou art already gone to thy rest? Who 
instructed thee to announce these things, but 
He who formed 7 thee in (from) thy mother's 
womb?^^ That is God, thou sayest. Thou hast 
spoken indeed, and that not falsely. The leop- 
ard has arisen ; the he-goat is come ; he hath 
smitten the ram ; he hath broken his horns in 
pieces ; he hath stamped upon him with his 
feet. He has been exalted by his fall; (the) 
four horns have come up from under that one.'^ 
Rejoice, blessed Daniel ! thou hast not been in 
error : all these things have come to pass. 

^;^. After this again thou hast told me of the 
beast dreadful and terrible. " It had iron teeth 
and claws of brass : it devoured and brake in 
pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet 
of it." '° Already the iron rules ; already it sub- 
dues and breaks all in pieces ; already it brings 
all the unwilling into subjection ; already we see 
these things ourselves. Now we glorify God, 
being instructed by thee. 

34. But as the task before us was to speak of 
the harlot, be thou with us, O blessed Isaiah. 

s 2 Tim. iv. 3. 
* Dan. vii. 4. 

7 For irAacras Gudius propose.s oytdaas (sanctified) or Ka\e<rat 
(called). 

8 Jer. i. 5. 

9 Dan. viii. 2-8. 
"^ Dau. vii. 6. 

TREATISE ON CHRIST AND ANTICHRIST. 

2 I I 

Let us mark what thou sayest about Babylon. 
" Come down, sit upon the ground, O virgin 
daughter of Babylon ; sit, O daughter of the 
Chaldeans ; thou shalt no longer be called ten- 
der and delicate. Take the millstone, grind 
meal, draw aside thy veil,' shave the grey hairs, 
make bare the legs, pass over the rivers. Thy 
shame shall be uncovered, thy reproach shall be 
seen : I will take justice of thee, I will no more 
give thee over to men. As for thy Redeemer, 
(He is) the Lord of hosts, the Holy One of 
Israel is his name. Sit thou in compunction, 
^et thee into darkness, O daughter of the Chal- 
deans : thou shalt no longer be called the 
strength of the kingdom. 

35. "I was wroth with my people; I have 
polluted mine inheritance, I have given them 
into thine hand : and thou didst show them no 
mercy ; but upon the ancient (the elders) thou 
hast very heavily laid thy yoke. And thou saidst, 
I shall be a princess for ever : thou didst not 
lay these things to thy heart, neither didst re- 
member thy latter end. Therefore hear now 
this, thou that art delicate ; that sittest, that art 
confident, that sayest in thine heart, I am, and 
there is none else ; I shall not sit as a widow, 
neither shall I know the loss of children. But 
now these two things shall come upon thee in 
one day, widowhood and the loss of children : 
they shall come upon thee suddenly in - thy 
sorcery, in the strength of thine enchantments 
mightily, in the hope of thy fornication. For 
thou hast said, I am, and there is none else. 
And thy fornication shall be thy shame, because 
thou hast said in thy heart, I am. And destruc- 
tion shall come upon thee, and thou shalt not 
know it. {And there sliall be\ a pit, and thou 
shalt fall into it; and misery shall fall upon thee, 
and thou shalt not be able to be made clean ; and 
destruction shall come upon thee, and thou shalt 
not know it. Stand now with thy enchantments, 
and with the multitude of thy sorceries, which 
thou hast learned from thy youth ; if so be thou 
shalt be able to be profited. Thou art wearied 
in thy counsels. Let the astrologers of the 
heavens stand and save thee ; let the star-gazers 
announce to thee what shall come upon thee. 
Behold, they shall all be as sticks for the fire ; 
so shall they be burned, and they shall not de- 
liver their soul from the flame. Because thou 
hast coals of fire, sit upon them ; so shall it be 
for thy help. Thou art wearied with change 
from thy youth. Man has gone astray (each 
one) by himself; and there shall be no salva- 
tion for thee." 2 These things does Isaiah 
prophesy for thee. Let us see now whether 
John has spoken to the same effect. 

* For ava^ypiaov others read ava.Ka.Kv\liai. = uncover. 
- Isa. xlvii. 1-15. 

36. For he sees, when in the isle Patmos, a 
revelation of awful mysteries, which he recounts 
freely, and makes known to others. Tell me, 
blessed John, apostle and disciple of the Lord, 
what didst thou see and hear concerning Bal)y- 
lon ? Arise, and speak ; for it sent thee also 
into banishment.^ " And there came one of 
the seven angels which had the seven vials, and 
talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither ; 
I will show unto thee the judgment of the great 
whore that sitteth upon many waters ; with 
whom the kings of the earth have committed 
fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have 
been made drunk with the wine of her fornica- 
tion. And he carried me away in the spirit into 
the wilderness : and I saw a woman sit upon a 
scarlet-coloured beast, full of names of blas- 
phemy, having seven heads and ten horns. And 
the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet 
colour, and decked with gold, and precious 
stone,'* and pearls, having a golden cup in her 
hand, full of abominations and filthiness 5 of the 
fornication of the earth. Upon her forehead 
was a name written. Mystery, Babylon the Great, 
the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the 
Earth. 

37. "And I saw the woman drunken with 
the blood of the saints, and with the blood of 
the martyrs of Jesus : and when I saw her, I 
wondered with great admiration. And the angel 
said unto me, Wherefore didst thou marvel? I 
will tell thee the mystery of the woman, and of 
the beast that carrieth her, which hath the se\en 
heads and the ten horns. The beast that thou 
sawest was, and is not ; and shall ascend out of 
the bottomless pit, and go into perdition : and 
they that dwell on the earth shall wonder (whose 
name was not written in the book of life from 
the foundation of the world) when they behold 
the beast that was, and is not, and yet shall 
be.6 

38. " /\.nd here is the mind that has wisdom. 
The seven heads are seven mountains, on which 
the woman sitteth. And there are seven kings : 
five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not 
yet come ; and when he cometh, he must con- 
tinue a short space. And the beast that was and 
is not, (even he is the eighth,) and is of the 
seven, and goeth into perdition. And the ten 
horns which thou sawest are ten kings, which 
have received no kingdom as yet ; but receive 
power as kings one hour with the beast. These 
have one mind, and shall give their power and 
strength unto the beast. These shall make war 
with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome 
them : for he is Lord of lords, and King of 

3 [Note this token, that, with all his prudence, he identifies 
" Babylon " with Rome.] 
♦ " Stones," rather. 

5 TO. oLKaBapTa, for the received afcaSapToTijTo?. 

6 Kal napearat., for the received KaiTrtp co-ti. 

212 

TREATISE ON CHRIST AND ANTICHRIST. 

kings ; and they that arc with Hinn are called, [ 
and chosen, and faithful. ! 

39. " -And he saith to me. The waters which 
thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are peoples, 
and multitudes, and nations, and tongues. And 
the ten horns which thou sawest, and ' the beast, 
these shall hate the whore, and shall make her 
desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and 
burn her with fire. For God hath put in their 
hearts to fulfil His will, and to agree, and give 
their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of 
God shall be fulfilled. And the woman which 
thou sawest is that great city, which reigneth over 
the kings of the earth. 

40. " After these things I saw another angel 
come down from heaven, having great power ; 
and the earth was lightened with his glory. And 
he cried mightily- with a strong voice, saying, 
Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is be- 
come the habitation of devils, and the hold of 
every foul spirit, and a ca'^e of every iDicIean and 
hatefiil bird. For all nations have drunk of the 
wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the 
kings of the earth have committed fornication 
with her, and the merchants of the earth are 
waxed rich through the abundance of her delica- 
cies. And I heard another voice from heaven, 
saying. Come out of her, my pco])le, that ye be 
not i)artakers of her sins, and that ye receive 
not of her plagues : for her sins did cleave even 
unto heaven,' and God hath remembered her 
inifiuities. 

41. " Reward her even as she rewarded (you), 
and double unto her double, according to her 
works : in the cup which she hath filled, fill to 
her double. How much she hath glorified her- 
self, and lived deliciously, so much torment and 
sorrow give her : for she saith in her heart, I sit 
a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sor- 
row. Therefore shall her plagues come in one | 
day, death, and mourning, and famine ; and she 
shall be utterly burned with fire : for strong is 
the Lord (iod who jndgeth her. .•Xnd the kings 
of the earth, who have committed fornication, 
and lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, 
and lament for her, when they shall see the 
smoke of her burning, standing afar off for the j 
fear of her torment, saying, .Alas, alas ! that great 
city Babylon, that mighty city ! for in one hour 
is thy judgment come. .And the merchants of 
the earth shall weep and mourn over her ; for 
no man shall buy their merchandise •* any more. 
The merchandise of gold, and silver, and pre- 
cious stones, and of pearls, and fine linen, and 
purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyine wood, 
and all manner vessels of ivory, and all manner 

' jcai, for the received iiti. 

2 i.<j\vpa for iv ><r\vi. 

3 iKo\Krfir\a a.v , for the received i\Ko\av6r\aa.v, 
* dyopdati, for the received ayopoi^ti. 

vessels of most precious wood, and of brass, and 
iron, and marble, and cinnamon, and spices,^ 
and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, 
and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and 
beasts, and sheep, and goats,** and horses, and 
chariots, and slaves (bodies), and souls of men. 
.And the fruits that thy soul lusted after are 
departed from thee, and all things which were 
dainty and goodly have perished 7 from thee, and 
thou shalt find them no more at all. The mer- 
chants of these things, which were made rich "^ 
by her, shall stand afar off for the fear of her 
torment, weeping and wailing, and saying, Alas,, 
alas ! that great city, that was clothed in fine 
linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with 
gold, and precious stones, and pearls ! for in one 
hour so great riches is come to nought. And 
every shipmaster, and all the company in ships,, 
and sailors, and as many as trade by sea, stood 
afar off, and cried, when they saw the smoke of 
her burning, saying. What city is like unto tliis 
great city? .And they cast dust on their heads, 
and cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, 
alas ! that great city, wherein were made rich 
all that had ships in the sea by reason of her 
fatness ! ^ for in one hour is she made desolate. 

42. " Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye 
angels, '° and apostles, and prophets ; for (iod 
hath avenged you on her. And a mighty angel 
took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast 
it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall 
that great city Babylon be thrown down, and 
shall be found no more at all. .And the voice 
of harpers and musicians, and of pipers and 
trumpeters, shall l)e heard no more at all in 
thee ; and no craftsman, of whatsoever craft he 
be, shall be found any more in thee ; and the 
sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at 
all in thee ; and the light of a candle shall shine 
no more at all in thee; and the voice of the 
bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no 
more at all in thee : for thy merchants were the 
great men of the earth ; for by thy sorceries were 
all nations deceived. And in her was found the 
blood of jiro])hets and of saints, and of all that 
were slain upon the earth."" 

43. With respect, then, to the particular judg- 
ment in the torments that are to come upon it 
in the last times by the hand of the tyrants who 
shall arise then, the clearest statement has been 
given in these passages. l>ut it becomes us fur- 
ther diligently to examine and set forth the period 
at which these things shall come to pass, and how 
the little horn shall spring up in their midst. For 

5 dfniifiov, omitted in tlic received text. 

^ Ka'i Tpdyov<;, omitted in the received text. 

7 airioAfTo, for the received an-TjAOei'. 

8 TrAovTicjaiTt?, for the received n\ovTr}(TavTe^. 

9 7ri6T)7TO?, for the received riiaioTrjTO?. 

t° Ka\ oi dyycAoc, which the received omits. 
" Rev. xvii., xviii. 

TREATISE ON CHRIST AND ANTICHRIST. 

213 

when the legs of iron have issued in the feet and 
toes, according to the similitude of the image 
and that of the terrible beast, as has been shown 
in the above, (then shall be the time) when the 
iron and the clay shall be mingled together. Now 
Daniel will set forth this subject to us. For he 
says, "And one week will make ' a covenant with 
many, and it shall be that in the midst (half) of 
the week my sacrifice and oblation shall cease." ^ 
By one week, therefore, he meant the last week 
which is to be at the end of the whole world ; 
of which week the two prophets Enoch and Elias 
will take up the half. For they will preach 1,260 
days clothed in sackcloth, proclaiming repent- 
ance to the people and to all the nations. 

44. For as two advents of our Lord and Sav- 
iour are indicated in the Scriptures, the one 
being His first advent in the flesh, which took 
place without honour by reason of His being 
set at nought, as Isaiah spake of Him aforetime, 
saying, " We saw Him, and He had no form nor 
comeliness, but His form was despised (and) 
rejected (ht. = deficient) above all men ; a 
man smitten and familiar with bearing infirmity, 
(for His face was turned away) ; He was de- 
spised, and esteemed not." ^ But His second 
advent is announced as glorious, when He shall 
come from heaven with the host of angels, and 
the glory of His Father, as the prophet saith, 
" Ye shall see the King in glory ; " ■♦ and, " I saw 
one like the Son of man coming with the clouds 
of heaven ; and he came to the Ancient of days, 
and "he was brought to Him; And there were 
given Him dominion, and honour, and glory, 
and the kingdom ; all tribes and languages shall 
serve Him : His dominion is an everlasting 
dominion, which shall not pass away." 5 Thus 
also two forerunners were indicated. The first 
was John the son of Zacharias, who appeared in 
all things a forerunner and herald of our Saviour, 
preaching of the heavenly light that had appeared 
in the world. He first fulfilled the course of 
forerunner, and that from his mother's womb, 
being conceived by Elisabeth, in order that to 
those, too, who are children from their mother's 
womb he might declare the new birth that was 
to take place for their sakes by the Holy Ghost 
and the Virgin. 

45. He, on hearing the salutation addressed 
to Elisabeth, leaped with joy in his mother's 
womb, recognising God the Word conceived in 
the womb of the Virgin. Thereafter he came 
forward preaching in the wilderness, proclaiming 
the baptism of repentance to the people, (and 
thus) announcing prophetically salvation to the 
nations living in the wilderness of the world. 

I Siadria-ei. = will make; others, Suva/xuio'ec = will confirm. 
^ Dan. ix. 27. 
3 Isa. liii. 2-5. 
* Isa. xxxiii. 17. 
5 Dan. vii. 13, 14. 

After this, at the Jordan, seeing the Saviour with 
his own eye, he points Him out, and says, " Be- 
hold the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin 
of the world ! " ^ He also first preached to those 
in Hades,7 becoming a forerunner there when he 
was put to death by Herod, that there too he 
might intimate that the Saviour would descend 
to ransom the souls of the saints from the hand 
of death. 

46. But since the Saviour was the beginning 
of the resurrection of all men, it was meet that 
the Lord alone should rise from the dead, by 
whom too the judgment is to enter for the whole 
world, that they who have wrestled worthily may 
be also crowned worthily by Him, by the illus- 
trious Arbiter, to wit, who Himself first accom- 
plished the course, and was received into the 
heavens, and was set down on the right hand of 
God the Father, and is to be manifested again 
at the end of the world as Judge. It is a matter 
of course that His forerunners must appear first, 
as He says by Malachi and the angel,'* " I will 
send to you Elias the Tishbite before the day 
of the Lord, the great and notable day, comes ; 
and he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the 
children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of 
the just, lest I come and smite the earth utter- 
ly." 9 These, then, shall come and proclaim 
the manifestation of Christ that is to be from 
heaven ; and they shall also perform signs and 
wonders, in order that men may be put to shame 
and turned to repentance for their surpassing 
wickedness and impiety. 

47. For John says, "And I will give power 
unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy 
a thousand two hundred and threescore days, 
clothed in sackcloth." '" That is the half of the 
week whereof Daniel spake. "These are the 
two olive trees and the two candlesticks standing 
before the Lord of the earth. And if any man 
will hurt them, fire will proceed out of their 
mouth, and devour their enemies ; and if any 
man will hurt them, he must in this manner be 
killed. These have power to shut heaven, that 
it rain not in the days of their prophecy ; and 
have power over waters, to turn them to blood, 
and to smite the earth with all plagues as often 
as they will. And when they shall have finished 
their course and their testimony," what saith the 
prophet ? " the beast that ascendeth out of the 
bottomless pit shall make war against them, and 

'^ John i. 29. 

" It was a common opinion among the Greeks, that the Baptist 
was Christ's forerunner also among the dead. See Leo Allatius, Dt 
litris Eccles. Gracornin, p. 303. 

8 Or it may be, " Malachi, even the messenger." 'A-yvcAou is 
the reading restored by Combefisius instead oV \yyaiov. The words 
of the angel in Luke i. 17 (" and the disobedient to the wisdom of the 
just") are thus inserted in the citation from Malachi; and to that 
Hippolytus may refer in the addition " and the angel." Or perhaps, 
as Combefisius rather thinks, the addition simply refers to the mean- 
ing of the name Malachi, viz., messenger. 

9 Mai. iv. 5, 6. 
'o Rev. xi. 3. 

214 

TREATISE ON CHRIST AND ANTICHRIST. 

shall overcome them, and kill them," ' because 
they will not give glory to Antichrist. For this 
is meant by the little horn that grows up. He, 
being now elated in heart, begins to exalt him- 
self, and to glorify himself as God, persecuting 
the saints and blaspheming Christ, even as 
Daniel says, " I considered the horn, and, be- 
hold, in the horn were eyes like the eyes of man, 
and a mouth speaking great things ; and he 
opened his mouth to blaspheme God. And that 
horn made war against the saints, and prevailed 
against them until the beast was slain, and per- 
ished, and his body was given to be burned." - 

48. But as it is incumbent on us to discuss 
this matter of the beast more exactly, and in 
particular the question how the Holy Spirit has 
also mystically indicated his name by means of 
a number, we shall proceed to state more clearly 
what bears upon him. John then speaks thus : 
" And I beheld another beast coming up out of 
the earth ; and he had two horns, like a lamb, 
and he spake as a dragon. And he exercised 
all the power of the first beast before him ; and 
he made the earth and them which dwell therein 
to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound 
was healed. And he did great wonders, so that 
he maketh fire come down from heaven on the 
earth in the sight of men, and deceiveth them 
that dwell on the earth by means of those mira- 
cles which he had power to do in the sight of 
the beast, saying to them that dwell on the earth, 
that they should make an image to the beast 
which had the wound by a sword and did live. 
And he had power to give life unto the image 
of the beast, thai the ima^e of the beast shoiiht 
both speak, and cause that as many as would 
not worship the image of the beast should be 
killed. And he caused all, both small and great, 
rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark 
in their right hand or in their forehead ; and that 
no man might buy or sell, save he that had the 
mark, the name of the beast, or the number of 
his name. Here is wisdom. Let him that hath 
understanding count the number of the beast ; 
for it is the number of a man, and his number 
is six hundred threescore and six." •' 

49. By the beast, then, coming up out of the 
earth, he means the kingdom of Antichrist ; and 
by the two horns he means him and the false 
prophet after him."* And in speaking of "the 
horns being like a lamb," he means that he will 
make himself like the Son of God, and set him- 
self forward as king. And the terms, " he si)ake 
like a dragon," mean that he is a deceiver, and 
not truthful. And the words, " he exercised all 

* Rev. xi. 4-6. 
^ Dan. vii. 8, 9. 

3 Rev. xlii. 11-18. 

* The text is simply itoi tov juer' avrov = the false prophet after 
him. Gudius and Combefisius propose as above, icat avTov t* koI 
Tof ner' o.\jtov, or nfx' ainov = him and the false prophet with him. 

the power of the first beast before him, and 
caused the earth and them which dwell therein 
to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound 
was healed," signify that, after the manner of 
the law of Augustus, by whom the empire of 
Rome was established, he too will rule and 
govern, sanctioning everything by it, and taking 
greater glory to himself. For this is the fourth 
beast, whose head was wounded and healed 
again, in its being broken up or even dishonoured^ 
and partitioned into four crowns ; and he then 
(Antichrist) shall with knavish skill heal it, as it 
were, and restore it. For this is what is meant 
by the prophet when he says, " He will give life 
unto the image, and the image of the beast will 
speak." For he will act with vigour again, and 
prove strong by reason of the laws established 
by him ; and he will cause all those who will not 
worship the image of the beast to be put to 
death. Here the faith and the patience of the 
saints will appear, for he says : " And he will 
cause all, both small and great, rich and poor, 
free and bond, to receive a mark in their right 
hand or in their forehead ; that no man might 
buy or sell, save he that had the mark, the name 
of the beast, or the number of his name." For, 
being full of guile, and exalting himself against 
the servants of God, with the wish to afflict 
them and persecute them out of the world, be- 
cause they give not glory to him, he will order 
incense-pans 5 to be set up by all everywhere, 
that no man among the saints may be able to 
buy or sell without first sacrificing ; for this is 
what is meant by the mark received upon the 
right hand. And the word — " in their forehead " 
— indicates that all are crowned, and put on a 
crown of fire, and not of life, but of death. For 
in this wise, too, did Antiochus Epiphanes the 
king of Syria, the descendant of Alexander of 
Macedon, devise measures against the Jews. 
He, too, in the exaltation of his heart, issued a 
decree in those times, that "all should set up 
shrines before their doors, and sacrifice, and that 
they should march in procession to the honour 
of Dionysus, waving chaplets of ivy ; " and that 
those who refused obedience should be put to 
death by strangulation and torture. But he 
also met his due recompense at the hand of 
the Lord, the righteous Judge and all-searching 
God ; for he died eaten up of worms. And if 
one desires to inquire into that more accurately, 
he will find it recorded in the books of the 
Maccabees.^ 

50. But now we shall speak of what is before 
us. For such measures will he, too, devise, 
seeking to afflict the saints in every way. For 

S irvpeta = censers, incense-pans, or sacrificial tripods. This 
offering of incense was a test very commonly proposed by the pagans 
to those whose religion they suspected. 

*> [Not referred to as Scripture, but as authentic history.] 

TREATISE ON CHRIST AND ANTICHRIST. 

2 I 

the prophet and apostle says : " Here is wisdom, 
Let him that hath understanding count the num- 
ber of the beast ; for it is the number of a man, 
and his number is six hundred threescore and 
six." With respect to his name, it is not in our 
power to explain it exactly, as the blessed John 
understood it and was instructed about it, but 
only to give a conjectural account of it ; ' for when 
he appears, the blessed one will show us what we 
seek to know. Yet as far as our doubtful ap- 
prehension of the matter goes, we may speak. 
Many names indeed we find,- the letters of which 
are the equivalent of this number : such as, for 
instance, the word Titan,^ an ancient and notable 
name ; or Evanthas,-* for it too makes up the 
same number; and many others which might 
be found. But, as we have already said,^ the 
wound of the first beast was healed, and he (the 
second beast) was to make the image speak,^ 
that is to say, he should be powerful ; and it is 
manifest to all that those who at present still 
hold the power are Latins. If, then, we take the 
name as the name of a single man, it becomes 
Latinus. Wherefore we ought neither to give it 
out as if this were certainly his name, nor again 
Ignore the fact that he may not be otherwise 
designated. But having the mystery of God in 
our heart, we ought in fear to keep faithfully 
what has been told us by the blessed prophets, 
in order that when those things come to pass, 
we may be prepared for them, and not deceived. 
For when the times advance, he too, of whom 
these thing are said, will be manifested. ^ 

5 1 . But not to confine ourselves to these words 
and arguments alone, for the purpose of con- 
vincing those who love to study the oracles of 
God, we shall demonstrate the matter by many 
other proofs. For Daniel says, "And these shall 
escape out of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, 
and the chief of the children of Ammon." ^ 
Ammon and Moab^ are the children born to 
Lot by his daughters, and their race survives 
even now. And Isaiah says : " And they shall 
fly in the boats of strangers, plundering the sea 
together, and (they shall spoil) them of the 
east : and they shall lay hands upon Moab first ; 
and the children of Ammon shall first obey 
them." '° 

^ o<Tov fxdi'Oi' yTroi'O^O'at. 

2 i<76i|/i)i|)a. 

3 TetTov. Hippolytus here follows his master Irenseus, who in his 
Contra Heeres.,\. 30, § 3, has the words, " Titan . . . et ayitiqutim 
et fide dignuni et regale . , . noinen" = Titan . . . both an an- 
cient and good and royal . . . name. [See this series, vol. i. p. 559.] 

•♦ Evdvdai, mentioned also by Irenaeus in the passage already re- 
ferred to. 

5 TTpoe<j>0riij.ei', the reading proposed by Fabricius instead of Trpoe- 

6 7roi>)<7ei, Combef. cn-oiTjcre. 

7 [Let us imitate the wisdom of our author, whose modest com- 
mentary upon his master Irenaeus cannot be too much applauded. 
The mystery, however, does seem to turn upon something in the 
Latin race and its destiny.] 

^ Dan. .\i. 41. 
9 Gen. .\ix. 37, 38. 
^^ Isa. xi. 14. 

52. In those times, then, he shall arise and 
meet them. And when he has overmastered 
three horns out of the ten in the array of war, 
and has rooted these out, viz., Egyi^t, and Libya, 
and Ethiopia, and has got their spoils and trap- 
pings, and has brought the remaining horns 
which suffer into subjection, he will begin to be 
lifted up in heart, and to exalt himself against 
God as master of the whole world. And his 
first expedition will be against Tyre and Berytus, 
and the circumjacent territory. For by storm- 
ing these cities first he will strike terror into the 
others, as Isaiah says, " Be thou ashamed, O 
Sidon ; the sea hath spoken, even the strength 
of the sea hath spoken, saying, 1 travailed not, 
nor brought forth children ; neither did I nurse 
up young men, nor bring up virgins. But when 
the report comes to Egypt, pain shall seize them 
for Tyre." " 

53. These things, then, shall be in the future, 
beloved ; and when the three horns are cut off, 
he will begin to show himself as God, as Ezekiel 
has said aforetime : " Because thy heart has been 
lifted up, and thou hast said, I am God." '^ And 
to the like effect Isaiah says : " For thou hast 
said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I 
will exalt my throne above the stars of heaven : 
I will be like the Most High. Yet now thou 
shall be brought down to hell (Hades), to the 
foundations of the earth." '-^ In like manner also 
Ezekiel : " Wilt thou yet say to those who slay 
thee, I am God? But thou (shalt be) a man, 
and no God." '•♦ 

54. As his tribe, then, and his manifestation, 
and his destruction, have been set forth in these 
words, and as his name has also been indicated 
mystically, let us look also at his action. For 
he will call together all the people to himself, 
out of every country of the dispersion, making 
them his own, as though they were his own chil- 
dren, and promising to restore their country, and 
establish again their kingdom and nation, in 
order that he may be worshipped by them as 
God, as the prophet says : " He will collect his 
whole kingdom, from the rising of the sun even 
to its setting : they whom he summons and they 
whom he does not summon shall march with 
him." '5 And Jeremiah speaks of him thus in a 
parable: "The partridge cried, (and) gathered 
what he did not hatch, making himself riches 
without judgment : in the midst of his days they 
shall leave him, and at his end he shall be a 
fool." -'^ 

55. It will not be detrimental, therefore, to 
the course of our present argument, if we explain 

II Isa. xxiii. 4, 5. 

t- Ezek. xxviii. 2. 

'3 Isa. xiv. 13-15. 

-* Ezek. xxviii. 9. 

'5 Quoted already in chap. XV. as from one of the prophets. 

^^ Jer. xvii. 11. 

2l6 

TREATISE ON CHRIST AND ANTICHRIST. 

the art of that creature, and show that the 
prophet has not spoken ' without a purpose in 
using the parable (or simiUtude) of the creature. 
For as the partridge is a vainglorious creature, 
when it sees near at hand the nest of another 
])artridge with young in it, and with the parent- 
bird away on the wing in quest of food, it imitates 
the cry of the other bird, and calls the young to 
itself ; and they, taking it to be their own parent, 
run to it. And it delights itself proudly in the 
alien pullets as in its own. But when the real 
parent-bird returns, and calls them with its own 
familiar cry, the young recognise it, and forsake 
the deceiver, and betake themselves to the real 
parent. This thing, then, the prophet has adopted 
as a simile, applying it in a similar manner to 
Antichrist. For he will allure mankind to him- 
self, wishing to gain possession of those who are 
not his own, and promising deliverance to all, 
while he is unable to save himself. 

56. He then, having gathered to himself the 
unbelieving everywhere throughout the world, 
comes at their call to persecute the saints, their 
enemies and antagonists, as the apostle and 
evangelist says : " There was in a city a judge, 
which feared not God, neither regarded man : 
and there was a widow in that city, who came 
unto him, saying. Avenge me of mine adversary. 
And he would not for a while : but afterward he 
said within himself. Though I fear not God, nor 
regard man ; yet because this widow troubleth 
me, I will avenge her."^ 

57. By the unrighteous judge, who fears not 
God, neither regards man, he means without 
doubt Antichrist, as he is a son of the devil and 
a vessel of Satan. For when he has the power, 
he will begin to exalt himself against God, 
neither in truth fearing God, nor regarding the 
Son of God, who is the Judge of all. .-Xnd in 
saying that there was a widow in the city, he 
refers to Jerusalem itself, which is a widow in- 
deed, forsaken of her perfect, heavenly s];)ouse, 
God. She calls Him her adversary, and not her 
Saviour ; for she does not understand that which 
was said by the projihet Jeremiah : " Because 
they obeyed not the truth, a spirit of error shall 
speak then to this people and to Jerusalem." ^ 
And Isaiah also to the like effect : " Forasmuch 
as the people refuseth to drink the water of 
Siloam that goeth softly, but chooseth to have 
Rasin and Romeliah's son as king over you : 
therefore, lo, the Lord bringeth up upon you 
the water of the river, strong and full, even the 
king of Assyria." '» By the king he means meta- 
phorically Antichrist, as also another prophet 
saith : "And this man shall be the peace from me. 

' Re.idmg aTrei^^faro for airexpiVaTO. 
- Luke xviii. 2-5. 
^ Jer. iv. II. 
* Is.i. viii. 6, 7. 

when the Assyrian shall come up into your land, 
and when he shall tread in your mountains." 5 

58. And in like manner Moses, knowing be- 
forehand that the people would reject and dis- 
own the true Saviour of the world, and take part 
with error, and choose an earthly king, and set 
the heavenly King at nought, says : "Is not this 
laid up in store with me, and sealed up among 
my treasures? In the day of vengeance I will 
recompense (them), and in the time when their 
foot shall slide." ^ They did slide, therefore, 
in all things, as they were found to be in har- 
mony with the truth in nothing : neither as 
concerns the law, because they became trans- 
gressors ; nor as concerns the prophets, because 
they cut off even the prophets themselves ; nor 
as concerns the voice of the Gospels, because 
they crucified the Saviour Himself; nor in be- 
lieving the apostles, because they persecuted 
them. At all times they showed themselves 
enemies and betrayers of the truth, and were 
found to be haters of God, and not lovers of 
Him ; and such they shall be then when they 
find opiiortunity : for, rousing themselves against 
the servants of God, they will seek to obtain 
vengeance by the hand of a mortal man. And 
he, being puffed up with pride by their subser- 
viency, will begin to despatch missives against 
the saints, commanding to cut them all off 
everywhere, on the ground of their refusal to 
reverence and worship him as God, according to 
the word of Esaias : " Woe to the wings of the 
vessels of the land,'' beyond the rivers of Ethio- 
pia : (woe to him) who sendeth sureties by the 
sea, and letters of papyrus (upon the water ; 
for nimble messengers will go) to a nation^ anx- 
ious and expectant, and a people strange and 
bitter against them ; a nation hopeless and trod- 
den down." "^ 

59. But we who hope for the Son of God are 
persecuted and trodden down by those unbe- 
lievers. For the 7C'///gs of the 7'c'sstis are the 
churches ; and the sea is the world, in which 
the Church is set, like a ship tossed in the deep, 
but not destroyed ; for she has with her the 
skilled Pilot, Christ. And she bears in her 
midst also the trophy (which is erected) over 
death ; for she carries with her the cross of the 
Lord.'° For her prow is the east, and her stern 
is the west, and her hold " is the south, and her 

5 Mic. V. 5. The Septuagint re«ds aOx)) = And (he) shall be 
the peace to it. Hippolytus follows the Hebrew, but makes the pro- 
noun feminine, aim) referring to the peace. Again Hippolytus reads 
oprj = mountains, where the Septuagmt has x^pav = land, and where 
the Hebrew word = fortresses or palaces. [He must mean that " the 
Assyrian" = Antichrist. "The peace" is attributable only to the 
" Prince of peace." So the Fathers generally.] 

f" Deut. xxxii. 34, 35. 

7 ouai yrf<; ttAoiwv n'Tepuyes. 

* MtTeiopoi'. 

9 Isa. xviii. i, 2. 

'0 Wordsworth, reading (o« itnov for w? Tor, would add, h'ke a 
»tasi. See his Commentary on Acts xxvii. 40. 

" (ciiTos, a conjecture of Combefisius for kvkKov. 

TREATISE ON CHRIST AND ANTICHRIST. 

217 

tillers are the two Testaments ; and the ropes 
that stretch around her are the love of Christ, 
which binds the Church ; and the net ' which 
she bears with her is the laver of the regenera- 
tion which renews the believing, whence too are 
these glories. As the wind the Spirit from 
heaven is present, by whom those who believe 
are sealed : she has also anchors of iron accom- 
panying her, viz., the holy commandments of 
Christ Himself, which are strong as iron. She 
has also mariners on the right and on the left, 
assessors like the holy angels, by whom the 
Church is always governed and defended. The 
ladder in her leading up to the sailyard is an 
emblem of the passion of Christ, which brings 
the faithful to the ascent of heaven. And the 
top-sails ^ aloft ^ upon the yard are the company 
of prophets, martyrs, and apostles, who have 
entered into their rest in the kingdom of Christ. 

60. Now, concerning the tribulation of the 
persecution which is to fall upon the Church from 
the adversary, John also speaks thus : " And I 
saw a great and wondrous sign in heaven ; a 
woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under 
her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve 
stars. And she, being with child, cries, travailing 
in birth, and pained to be delivered. And the 
dragon stood before the woman which was ready 
to be delivered, for to devour her child as soon 
as it was born. And she brought forth a man- 
child, who is to rule all the nations : and the 
child was caught up unto God and to His throne. 
And the woman fled into the wilderness, where 
9he hath the place prepared of God, that they 
should feed her there a thousand two hundred 
and threescore days. And then when the dragon 
saw it, he persecuted the woman which brought 
forth the man-c/u'M. And to the woman were 
given two wings of the great eagle, that she 
might fly into the wilderness, where she is nour- 
ished for a time, and times, and half a time, 
from the face of the serpent. And the serpent 
cast (out of his mouth water as a flood after the 
woman, that he might cause her to be carried 
away of the flood. And the earth helped the 
woman, and opened her mouth, and swallowed 
up the flood which the dragon cast) out of his 
mouth. And the dragon was wroth with the 
woman, and went to make war with the saints 
of her seed, which keep the commandments of 
God, and have the testimony of Jesus." ■♦ 

61. By the "woman then clothed with the 
sun," he meant most manifestly the Church, en- 
dued wth the Father's word,5 whose brightness 

1 Kivov, proposed by the same for Tr\oiov, boat. 

2 iJjr)<j>ai)oi., a term of doubtful meaning. May it refer to the 

3 The text reads here aiyoufievoi, for which aipoi/MCfoc is pro- 
posed, or better, ijujpov/ne^'oi. 

* Rev. xii. i-(5, etc. 

■5 Tiiv AoYoi' Toi' HarpiZoy, 

is above the sun. And by " the moon under her 
feet" he referred to her being adorned, like 
the moon, with heavenly glory. And the words, 
" upon her head a crown of twelve stars," refer 
to the twelve apostles by whom the Church was 
founded. And those, " she, being with child, 
cries, travailing in birth, and pained to be deliv- 
ered," mean that the Church will not cease to 
bear from her heart ^ the Word that is perse- 
cuted by the unbelieving in the world. " And 
she brought forth," he says, " a man-child, who 
is to rule all the nations ; " by which is meant 
that the Church, always bringing forth Christ, the 
perfect man-child of God, who is declared to be 
God and man, becomes the instructor of all the 
nations. And the words, " her child was caught 
up unto God and to His throne," signify that he 
who is always born of her is a heavenly king, and 
not an earthly ; even as David also declared of 
old when he said, " The Lord said unto my Lord, 
Sit Thou at my right hand, until I make Thine 
enemies Thy footstool." 7 " And the dragon," 
he says, " saw and persecuted the woman which 
brought forth the man-c/iiM. And to the woman 
were given two wings of the great eagle, that she 
might fly into the wilderness, where she is nour- 
ished for a time, and times, and half a time, 
from the face of the serpent." ^ That refers to 
the one thousand two hundred and threescore 
days (the half of the week) during which the 
tyrant is to reign and persecute the Church,'' 
which flees from city to city, and seeks conceal- 
ment in the wilderness among the mountains, 
possessed of no other defence than the two 
wings of the great eagle, that is to say, the faith 
of Jesus Christ, who, in stretching forth His 
holy hands on the holy tree, unfolded two wings, 
the right and the left, and called to Him all who 
believed upon Him, and covered them as a hen 
her chickens. For by the mouth of Malachi also 
He speaks thus : " And unto you that fear my 
name shall the Sun of righteousness arise with 
healing in His wings." '° 

62. The Lord also says, "When ye shall see 
the abomination of desolation stand in the holy 
place (whoso readeth, let him understand), then 
let them which be in Judea flee into the moun- 
tains, and let him which is on the housetop not 
come down to take his clothes ; neither let him 
which is in the field return back to take anything 
out of his house. And woe unto them that are 
with child, and to them that give suck, in those 
days ! for then shall be great tribulation, such as 
was not since the beginning of the world. And 
except those days should be shortened, there 

^ y€i'vui(Ta gic Ka.pSias. 
7 Ps. ex. I. 
' Rev. xi. 3. 

9 [Concerning Antichrist, two advents, etc., see vol. iv. p. 219. 
this series ] 
1° Mai. iv. 2. 

2l8 

TREATISE ON CHRIST AND ANTICHRIST. 

should no flesh be saved." ' And Daniel says, 
" And they shall place the abomination of deso- 
lation a thousand two hundred and ninety days. 
Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the 
thousand two hundred and ninety-five days." - 

63. And the blessed Apostle Paul, writing to 
the Thessalonians, says : " Now we beseech you, 
brethren, concerning the coming of our Lord 
fesus Christ, and our gathering together at it,^ 
that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be 
troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by 
letters as from us, as that the day of the Lord is 
at hand. Let no man deceive you by any means ; 
for (that day shall not come) except there come 
the falling away first, and that man of sin be re- 
vealed, the son of perdition, who opposeth and 
exalteth himself above all that is called God, or 
that is worshipped : so that he sitteth in the 
temple of God, showing himself that he is God. 
Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, 
I told you these things? And now ye know 
what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in 
his time. For the mystery of iniquity doth 
already work ; only he who now letteth (will 
let), until he be taken out of the way. And 
then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the 
Lord Jesus shall consume with the Spirit of His 
mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of 
His coming : (even him) whose coming is after 
the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, 
and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness 
of unrighteousness in them that perish ; because 
they received not the love of the truth. And 
for this cause God shall send them strong delu- 
sion, that they should believe a lie : that they 
all might be damned who believed not the truth, 
but had pleasure in unrighteousness." ■» .'\nd 
Esaias says, " Let the wicked be cut off, that he 
behold not the glory of the Lord." 5 

64. These things, then, being to come to pass, 
beloved, and the one week being divided into 
two parts, and the abomination of desolation 
being manifested then, and the two prophets 
and forerunners of the Lord having finished 
their course, and the whole world finally ap- 
proaching the consummation, what remains but 
the coming of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ 
from heaven, for whom we have looked in ho])e ? 
who shall bring the conflagration and just judg- 
ment upon all who have refused to believe on 
Him. For the Lord says, "And when these 
things begin to come to pass, then look up, and 
lift up your heads ; for your redemption draweth 
nigh." *" " And there shall not a liair of your 

■ Matt. xxiv. 15-22; Mark xiii. 14-20: Luke xxi. 20-23. 

2 Dan. xi. 31, xii. 11, 12. The Hebrew has 1,335 as the number 
in the second verse. 

^ Hippolylus reads here c»r' aiirij? instead of eV outoi', and makes 
the pronoun therefore refer to the coming. 

* 2 Thess. ii. i-ii. 

^ Isa. xxvi 10, 

>> Luke .\xi. 28. 

head perish." ' " For as the lightning cometh 
out of the east, and shineth even unto the west, 
so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. 
For wheresoever the carcase is, there will the 
eagles be gathered together." ^ Now the fall '-* 
took place in paradise ; for Adam fell there. 
.\nd He says again, " Then shall the Son of man 
send His angels, and they shall gather together 
His elect from the four winds of heaven." '° And 
David also, in announcing prophetically the judg- 
ment and coming of the Lord, says, " His going 
forth is from the end of the heaven, and His cir- 
cuit unto the end of the heaven : and there is 
no one hid from the heat thereof."" By the 
heat he means the conflagration. And Esaias 
speaks thus : " Come, my people, enter thou 
into thy chamber, (and) shut thy door : hide 
thyself as it were for a little moment, until the 
indignation of the Lord be overpast." '^ And 
Paul in like manner : " For the wrath of God is 
revealed from heaven against all ungodliness 
and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth 
of God in unrighteousness." '^ 

65. Moreover, concerning the resurrection and 
the kingdom of the saints, Daniel says, " .•\nd 
many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth 
shall arise, some to everlasting life, (and some 
to shame and everlasting contempt)."'-* Esaias 
says, " The dead men shall arise, and they that 
are in their tombs shall awake ; for the dew 
from thee is healing to them." '5 The Lord says, 
" Many in that day shall hear the voice of the 
Son of God, and they that hear shall live." "^ 
And the prophet says, " Awake, thou that sleep- 
est, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall 
give thee light." '^ And John says, " Blessed and. 
holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection : 
on such the second death hath no power." '** For 
the second death is the lake of fire that burneth. 
And again the Lord says, "Then shall the right- 
eous shine forth as the sun shineth in his glory." "^ 
And to the saints He will say, "Come, ye blessed 
of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for 
you from the foundation of the world." '=° But 
what saith He to the wicked ? " Depart from 
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for 
the devil and his angels, which my Father hath 

7 Luke xxi. 1 8. 

8 Matt. xxiv. 2j, a8. 

9 The word n-Tto/ao, used in the Greek as = carcase, is thus inter- 
preted by Hippolytus as = fall, which is its literal sense. 

'o Matt. xxiv. 31. 

" Ps. xix. 6. 

'2 Isa. xxvi. 20, 

'3 Rom. i. 17. 

'* Dan. xii. 2. 

'5 Isa. xxvi. 19. 

"> John v. 25. 

'" Eph. v. 14. Epiphanius and others suppose that the words thus 
cited by Paul are taken from the apocryphal writings of Jeremiah: 
others that they are a free version of Isa. Ix. i. [But their metrical 
form justifies the criticism that they are a quotation from a hymn of 
the Church, based, very likely, on the passage from Isaiah.] 

'" Rev. XX. 6. 

'9 Matt. xiii. 43. 

20 Matt. .Nxv. 34. 

EXPOSITORY TREATISE AGAINST THE JEWS. 

219 

prepared." And John says, " Without are dogs, 
and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, 
and idolaters, and whosoever maketh and loveth 
a lie ; for your part is in the hell of fire." ' And 
in like manner also Esaias : " And they shall go 
forth and look upon the carcases of the men that 
have transgressed against me. And their worm 
shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched ; 
and they shall be for a spectacle to all flesh." ^ 

66. Concerning the resurrection of the right- 
eous, Paul also speaks thus in writing to the 
Thessalonians : " We would not have you to be 
ignorant concerning them which are asleep, that 
ye sorrow not even as others which have no 
hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and 
rose again, even so them also which sleep in 
Jesus will God bring with Him. For this we 
say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we 
which are alive (and) remain unto the coming 
of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are 

' Rev. xxii. 15. 
^ Isa. Ixvi. 24. 

asleep. For the Lord Himself shall descend 
from heaven with a shout, with the voice and 
trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise 
first. Then we which are alive (and) remain 
shall be caught up together with them in the 
clouds to meet the Lord in the air ; and so shall 
we ever be with the Lord." ^ 

67. These things, then, I have set shortly be- 
fore thee, O Theophilus, drawing them from 
Scripture itself,"^ in order that, maintaining in 
faith what is written, and anticipating the things 
that are to be, thou mayest keep thyself void of 
offence both toward God and toward men, 
" looking for that blessed hope and appearing 
of our God and Saviour," 5 when, having raised 
the saints among us, He will rejoice with them, 
glorifying the Father. To Him be the glory 
unto the endless ages of the ages. Amen. 

3 I Thess. iv. 12. 

•* [The immense value of these quotations, authenticating the 
Revelations and other Scriptures, must be apparent. Is not this 
treatise a voice to our own times of vast significance?] 

s Tit. ii. 13. 

EXPOSITORY TREATISE AGAINST THE JEWS. 

1. Now, then, incline thine ear to me, and 
hear my words, zzxd give heed, thou Jew. Many 
a time dost thou boast thyself, in that thou didst 
condemn Jesus of Nazareth to death, and didst 
give Him vinegar and gall to drink ; and thou 
dost vaunt thyself because of this. Come there- 
fore, and let us consider together whether per- 
chance thou dost not boast unrighteously, O 
Israel, (and) whether that small portion of vine- 
gar and gall has not brought down this fearful 
threatening upon thee, (and) whether this is 
not the cause of thy present condition involved 
in these myriad troubles. 

2. Let him then be introduced before us who 
speaketh by the Holy Spirit, and saith truth — 
David the son of Jesse. He, singing a certain 
strain with prophetic reference to the true Christ, 
celebrated our God by the Holy Spirit, (and) 
declared clearly all that befell Him by the hands 
of the Jews in His passion ; in which (strain) 
the Christ who humbled Himself and took unto 
Himself the form of the servant Adam, calls 
upon God the Father in heaven as it were in 
our person, and speaks thus in the sixty-ninth 
Psalm : " Save me, O God ; for the waters are 
come in unto my soul. I am sunk in the mire 
of the abyss," that is to say, in the corruption 
of Hades, on account of the transgression in 
paradise ; and " there is no substance," that is, 
help. " My eyes failed while I hoped (or, from 

my hoping) upon my God ; when will He come 
and save me?" ' 

3. Then, in what next follows, Christ speaks, as 
it were, in His own person : " Then I restored 
that," says He, " which I took not away ; " that 
is, on account of the sin of Adam I endured the 
death which was not mine by sinning. " For, 
O God, Thou knowest my foolishness ; and my 
sins are not hid from Thee," that is, " for I did 
not sin," as He means it ; and for this reason 
(it is added), "Let not them be ashamed who 
want to see " my resurrection on the third day, 
to wit, the apostles. " Because for Thy sake," 
that is, for the sake of obeying Thee, " I have 
borne reproach," namely the cross, when " they 
covered my face with shame," that is to say, the 
Jews ; when " I became a stranger unto my 
brethren after the flesh, and an alien unto my 
mother's children," meaning (by the mother) 
the synagogue. " For the zeal of Thine house. 
Father, hath eaten me up ; and the reproaches 
of them that reproached Thee are fallen on me," 
and of them that sacrificed to idols. Wherefore 
"they that sit in the gate spoke against me," 
for they crucified me without the gate. " And 
they that drink sang against me," that is, (they 
who drink wine) at the feast of the passover. 
" But as for me, in my prayer unto Thee, O 

' Ps. Ixix. I g. 

220 

EXPOSITORY TREATISE AGAINST THE JEWS. 

Lord, I said, Father, forgive them," namely the 
Gentiles, because it is the time for favour with 
Gentiles. " Let not then the hurricane (of 
temptations) overwhelm me, neither let the deep 
(that is, Hades) swallow me up: for Thou wilt 
not leave my soul in hell (Hades) ; neither let 
the pit shut her mouth upon me," ' that is, the 
sepulchre. " By reason of mine enemies, deliver 
me," that the Jews may not boast, saying, Let 
us consume him. 

4. Now Christ prayed all this economically^ 
as man ; being, however, true (iod. But, as I 
have already said, it was the " form of the ser- 
vant " 3 that spake and suffered these things. 
Wherefore He added, " My soul looked for re- 
proach and trouble," that is, I suffered of my 
own will, (and) not by any compulsion. Yet 
" I waited for one to mourn with me, and there 
was none," for all my disciples forsook me and 
fled ; and for a " comforter, and I found none." 

5. Listen with understanding, O Jew, to what 
the Christ says : " They gave me gall for my 
meat ; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to 
drink." And these things He did indeed en- 
dure from you. Hear the Holy Ghost tell you 
also what return He made to you for that little 
portion of vinegar. For the prophet says, as in 
the person of God, " Let their table become a 
snare and retribution." Of what retrilxition does 
He speak ? Manifestly, of the misery which has 
now got hold of thee. 

6. And then hear what follows : " Let their 
eyes be darkened, that they see not." And 
surely ye have been darkened in the eyes of 
your soul with a darkness utter and everlasting. 
For now that the true light has arisen, ye wander 
as in the night, and stumble on places with no 
roads, and fall headlong, as having forsaken the 
way that saith, " I am the way." * Furthermore, 
hear this yet more serious word : " And their 
back do thou bend always ; " that means, in 
order that they may be slaves to the nations, not 
four hundred and thirty years as in Fgyi)t, nor 
seventy as in Babylon, but bend them to servi- 
tude, he says, " always." In fine, then, how 
dost thou indulge vain hopes, expecting to be 
delivered from the misery which holdeth thee ? 
For that is somewhat strange. And not unjustly 
has he imprecated this blindness of eyes upon 
thee. But because thou didst cover the eyes of 
Christ, (and') thus thou didst beat Him, for 
this reason, too, bend thou thy back for servitude 
always. And whereas thou didst pour out His 
blood in indignation, hear what thy recompense 
shall be : " Four out Thine indignation upon 

■ Ps. xvi. 10. 

2 oiKofoixiKux;. [The Fathers find Christ everywhere in Scrip- 
ture, and often understand the expressions of David to be those of 
our Lord's humanity, by economy.] 

3 Phil. ii. 7. 

* John xiv. 6. 

5 The text is ovr««, for which read perhaps ore = when. 

them, and let Thy wrathful anger take hold of 
them ; " and, " Let their habitation be desolate," 
to wit, their celebrated temple. 

7. But why, O prophet, tell us, and for what 
reason, was the temple made desolate ? Was it 
on account of that ancient fabrication of the 
calf? Was it on account of the idolatry of the 
people ? Was it for the blood of the prophets ? 
Was it for the adultery and fornication of Israel ? 
By no means, he says ; for in all these trans- 
gressions they always found pardon open to 
them, and benignity ; but it was because they 
killed the Son of their Benefactor, for He is co- 
eternal with the Father. Whence He saith, 
" Father, let their temple be made desolate ; '' 
for they have persecuted Him whom Thou didsi 
of Thine own will smite for the salvation of the 
world ; " that is, they have persecuted me with 
a violent and unjust death, " and they have 
added to the pain of my wounds." In former 
time, as the Lover of man, I had pain on ac- 
count of the straying of the (ientiles ; but to 
this pain they have added another, by going also 
themselves astray. Wherefore " add iniquity to 
their iniquity, and tribulation to tribulation, and 
let them not enter into Thy righteousness," that 
is, into Thy kingdom ; but " let them be blotted 
out of the book of the living, and not be written 
with the righteous," that is, with their holy fathers 
and patriarchs. 

8. What sayest thou to this, O Jew? It is 
neither Matthew nor Paul that saith these things, 
but David, thine anointed, who awards and 
declares these terrible sentences on account 
of Christ. And like the great Job. addressing 
you who speak against the righteous and true, 
he says, " Thou didst barter the Christ like a 
slave, thou didst go to Him like a robber in the 
garden." 

9. I produce now the prophecy of Solomon, 
which speaketh of Christ, and announces clearly 
and perspicuously things concerning the Jews ; 
and those which not only are befalling them at 
the present time, but those, too, which shall be- 
fall them in the future age, on account of the 
contumacy and audacity which they exhibited 
toward the Prince of Life ; for the prophet says, 
" The ungodly said, reasoning with themselves, 
but not aright," that is, about Christ, " Let us 
lie in wait for the righteous, because he is not 
for our turn, and he is clean contrary to our 
doings and words, and upbraideth us with our 
offending the law, and professeth to have knowl- 
edge of (iod ; and he calleth himself the Child 
of God." 7 And then he says, " He is grievous 
to us even to behold ; for his life is not like 
other men's, and his ways are of another fashion. 
We are esteemed of him as counterfeits, and he 

6 Cf. Matt, xxiii. 38. 

7 Wisd. ii. I, 12, 13. 

AGAINST PLATO, ON THE CAUSE OE THE UNIVERSE. 221 

abstaineth from our ways as from filthiness, and 
pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed." ' 
And again, listen to this, O Jew ! None of the 
righteous or prophets called himself the Son of 
God. And therefore, as in the person of the 
Jews, Solomon speaks again of this righteous 
one, who is Christ, thus : " He was made to 
reprove our thoughts, and he maketh his boast 
that God is his Father. Let us see, then, if his 
words be true, and let us prove what shall hap- 
pen in the end of him ; for if the just man be 
the Son of God, He will help him, and deliver 
him from the hand of his enemies. Let us con- 
demn him with a shameful death, for by his own 
saying he shall be respected." ^ 

10. And again David, in the Psalms, says with 
respect to the future age, " Then shall He " 
(namely Christ) " speak unto them in His wrath, 
and vex them in His sore displeasure." ^ And 
again Solomon says concerning Christ and the 

' Wisd. ii. 15, 16. 

2 Wisd. ii. 14, 16, 17, 20. [The argument is ad hotninevi. The 
Jews valued this book, but did not account it to be Scripture; yet 
this quotation is a very remarkable comment on what ancient Jews 
understood concerning the Just One. Comp. Acts iii. 14, vii. 52, 
and xxii. 14. J 

3 Ps. ii. 3. 

Jews, that " when the righteous shall stand in 
great boldness before the face of such as have 
afflicted Him, and made no account of His 
words, when they see it they shall be troubled 
with terrible fear, and shall be amazed at the 
strangeness of His salvation \ and they, repent- 
ing and groaning for anguish of spirit, shall say 
within themselves, This is He whom we had 
sometimes in derision and a proverb of reproach ; 
we fools accounted His life madness, and His 
end to be without honour. How is He num- 
bered among the children of God, and His lot 
is among the saints? Therefore have we erred 
from the way of truth, and the light of righteous- 
ness hath not shined unto us, and the sun of 
righteousness rose not on us. We wearied our- 
selves in the way of wickedness and destruction ; 
we have gone through deserts where there lay 
no way : but as for the way of the Lord, we have 
not known it. What hath our pride profited us ? 
all those things are passed away like a shadow."* 

THE CONCLUSION IS WANTING.^ 

* Wisd. V. 1-9. 

5 [Compare Justin, vol. i. p. 194; Clement, vol. ii. pp. 334-343; 
TertuUian, vol. iii. p. 151; Origen, vol. iv. p. 402, etc.; and Cyprian, 
vol. v., this series.] 

AGAINST PLATO, ON THE CAUSE OF THE UNIVERSE. 

I. And 'this is the passage regarding demons.^ 
But now we must speak of Hades, in which the 
souls both of the righteous and the unrighteous 
are detained. Hades is a place in the created 
system, rude,^ a locality beneath the earth, in 
which the light of the world does not shine ; and 
as the sun does not shine in this locality, there 
must necessarily be perpetual darkness there. 
This locality has been destined to be as it were 
a guard-house for souls, at which the angels are 
stationed as guards, distributing according to 
each one's deeds the temporary* punishments 
for (different) characters. And in this locality 
there is a certain place 5 set apart by itself, a 
lake of unquenchable fire, into which we suppose 
no one has ever yet been cast ; for it is prepared 
against the day determined by God, in which 
one sentence of righteous judgment shall be 

■ Gallandi, I'et. Pair.,\\. 451. Two fragments of this discourse 
are extant also in the Parallela Daiititscenica Rupc/iicaUiitta, pp. 
755.789. [Compare Justin, vol. i. p. 273: Tatian, ii. 65; Athenag- 
oras, 130, and Clement /«j^«w / vol. iii. TertuUian, 129: Origen, iv. 
p. 412. This is a fragment from Hippol. Agai7ist the Greeks.\ 

^ The reading in the te.\t is e wept &aiix6vuiv tottos; others read 
Ao-yo5 for tottos = thus far the discussion on demons. 

3 a)caTa<ricevo<TTOS. 

■* Or it may be " seasonable," irpoaKapoiv^. 

5 Tpommv. There is another reading, roTrui'ssof the places. 

justly applied to all. And the unrighteous, and 
those who believed not God, who have honoured 
as God the vain works of the hands of men, 
idols fashioned (by themselves), shall be sen- 
tenced to this endless punishment. But the 
righteous shall obtain the incorruptible and un- 
fading kingdom, who indeed are at present de- 
tained in Hades,^ but not in the same place wit'- 
the unrighteous. For to this locality there is 
one descent, at the gate whereof we believe an 
archangel is stationed with a host. And when 
those who are conducted by the angels ^ ap- 
pointed unto the souls have passed through this 
gate, they do not proceed on one and the same 
way ; but the righteous, being conducted in the 
light toward the right, and being hymned by 
the angels stationed at the place, are brought to a 

* Hades, in the view of the ancients, was the general receptacle 
of souls after their separation from the body, where the good abode 
happily in a place of light ((bunfivS), and the evil all in a place of 
darkness (o-KOTiujTepu)) . SeeColomesii h.tLixriKia h'ttcraria, 28, and 
Suicer on u6>;?. Hence Abraham's bosom and paradise were placed 
in Hades. See Olympiodorus on Eccles., iii. p. 264. The Macedo- 
nians, on the authority of Hugo Broughton, prayed in the Lord's 
words, " Our Father who art in Hades (llariip rifjuov 6 iv afiy/) (Fabri- 
cius). [Hippolytus is singular in assigning the itliiinaie receptacle 
of lost spirits to this Hades. But compare vol. iii. p. 428, and vol. 
iv. pp 293, 495, 541, etc.] 

7 Cf. Constant. ApostoL, viii. 41. 

222 AGAINST PLATO, ON THE CAUSP: OF THE UNIVERSE. 

locality full of light. And there the righteous 
from the beginning ' dwell, not niled by neces- 
sity, but enjoying always the contemplation of 
the blessings which are in their view, and de- 
lighting themselves with the expectation of others 
ever new, and deeming those ever better than 
these. And that place brings no toils to them. 
There, there is neither fierce heat, nor cold, nor 
thorn ; ^ but the face of the fathers and the right- 
eous is seen to be always smiling, as they wait 
for the rest and eternal revival in heaven which 
succeed this location. And we call it by the 
name Abraham's bosoni. But the unrighteous 
are dragged toward the left by angels who are 
ministers of punishment, and they go of their 
own accord no longer, but are dragged by force 
as prisoners. And the angels appointed over 
them send them along,^ reproaching them and 
threatening them with an eye of terror, forcing 
them down into the lower parts. And when 
they are brought there, those appointed to that 
service drag them on to the confines or hell.'' 
And those who are so near hear incessantly the 
agitation, and feel the hot smoke. And when 
that vision is so near, as they see the terrible and 
excessively glowing 5 spectacle of the fire, they 
shudder in horror at the expectation of the fu- 
ture judgment, (as if they were) already feeling 
the power of their punishment. And again, 
where they see the place of the fathers and the 
righteous,^ they are also punished there. For a 
deep and vast abyss is set there in the midst, so 
that neither can any of the righteous in sympathy 
think to pass it, nor any of the unrighteous dare 
to cross it. 

2. Thus far, then, on the subject of Hades, in 
which the souls of all are detained until the time 
which God has determined ; and then ^ He will 
accomplish a resurrection of all, not by transfer- 
ring souls into other bodies,- but by raising the 
bodies themselves. And if, O Greeks, ye refuse 
credit to this because ye see these (bodies) in 
their dissolution, learn not to be incredulous. 
For if ye believe that the soul is originated and 
is made immortal by God, according to the opin- 
ion of Plato,'' in time, ye ought not to refuse to 
believe that God is able also to raise the body, 
which is composed of the same elements, and 

' [They do not pass into an intermediate /»<r^a<or)', nor require 
prayers for " the repose of their souls."] 

2 Tpi^oAo^. [Also the Pindaric citation in my note.vol. i. 74.] 
^ In the ParalUla is inserted here the word iTn.ytKii>vti%, derid- 
ing them. 

s According to the reading in Parallela, which inserts ^a.v6'i\v = 

red. 

• ^ The text reads icai of, and luhere. But in Parallela it is <cai 
•uToi = and these see, etc. In the same we find ws M>JT< for icat tou? 
Sticaioif?. 

1 [It would be hard to frame a system of belief concerning the 
state of the dead more entirely exclusive q{ purgatory, i e., a place 
where the ■ia\\\^ of the fnith/ul ^xc detained till (by Masses and the 
like) they are relieved and .admitted to glor>', before the resurrection. 
See vol. iit. p. 706.] 

* nieT«r<T<ouaTu)i', in opposition to the dogma of metempsychosis. 

9 In the Timetus. 

make it immortal.'" To be able in one thing, and 
to be unable in another, is a word which cannot 
be said of God, We therefore believe that the 
body also is raised. For if it become corrupt, 
it is not at least destroyed. For the earth re- 
ceiving its remains preserves them, and they, 
becoming as it were seed, and being wrapped up 
with the richer part of earth, spring up and 
bloom. And that which is sown is sown indeed 
bare grain ; but at the command of God the Ar- 
tificer it buds, and is raised arrayed and glorious, 
but not until it has first died, and been dissolved, 
and mingled with earth. Not, therefore, with- 
out good reason do we believe in the resurrec- 
tion of the body. Moreover, if it is dissolved in 
its season on account of the primeval transgres- 
sion, and is committed to the earth as to a fur- 
nace, to be moulded again anew, it is not raised 
the same thing as it is now, but pure and no 
longer corruptible. And to every body its own 
proper soul will be given again ; and the soul, 
being endued again with it, shall not be grieved, 
but shall rejoice together with it, abiding itself 
pure with it also pure. And as it now sojourns 
with it in the world righteously, and finds it in 
nothing now a traitor, it will receive it again (the 
body) with great joy. But the unrighteous will 
receive their bodies unchanged, and unransomed 
from suffering and disease, and unglorified, and 
still with all the ills in which they died. And 
whatever manner of persons they (were when 
they) lived without faith, as such they shall be 
faithfully judged." 

3.'^ For all, the righteous and the unrighteous 
alike, shall be brought before God the Word. 
For the Father hath committed all judgment to 
Him ; and in fulfilment of the Father's counsel, 
He cometh as Judge whom we call Christ. For 
it is not Minos and Rhadamanthys that are to 
judge (the world), as ye fancy, O Greeks, but 
He whom God the Father hath glorified, of 
whom we have spoken elsewhere more in par- 
ticular, for the profit of those who seek the truth. 
He, in administering the righteous judgment of 
the Father to all, assigns to each what is righteous 
according to his works. .And being present at 
His judicial decision, all, both men and angels 
and demons, shall utter one voice, saying, '' Right- 
eous is Thy judgment." '^ Of which voice the 
justification will be seen in the awarding to each 
that which is just ; since to those who have done 
well shall be assigned righteously eternal bliss, 
and to the lovers of ini(]uity shall be given eter- 
nal punishment. -And the fire which is un- 
(luenchable and without end awaits these latter, 
and a certain fiery worm which dieth not, and 

■° The first of the two fragments in the Parallela ends here. 
" [The te.\t Eccles. .\i. 3 may be .accommodated to this truth, but 
seems to have no force as proof. ] 

'- The second fragment extant in the Parallela begins here. 
'3 Ps. cxix. 137. 

Against the heresy of one noetus. 

223 

which does not waste the body, but continues 
bursting forth from the body with unending pain. 
No sleep will give them rest ; no night will soothe 
them ; no death will deliver them from punish- 
ment ; no voice of interceding friends will profit 
them.' For neither are the righteous seen by 
them any longer, nor are they worthy of remem- 
brance. But the righteous will remember only 
the righteous deeds by which they reached the 
heavenly kingdom, in which there is neither 
sleep, nor pain, nor corruption, nor care,^ nor 
night, nor day measured by time ; nor sun trav- 
ersing in necessary course the circle of heaven, 
which marks the limits of seasons, or the points 
measured out for the life of man so easily read ; 
nor moon waning or waxing, or inducing the 
changes of seasons, or moistening the earth ; no 
burning sun, no changeful Bear, no Orion coming 
forth, no numerous wandering of stars, no pain- 

' [It is not the unrighteous, be it remembered, who go to" purga- 
tory," according to the Trent theology, but only true Christians, 
dymg in full communion with the Church. Hippolytus is here speak- 
H ing of the ultimate doom of the wicked, but bears in mind the im- 
^ agery of Luke xvi. 24 and the appeal to Abraham. 1 

^ The second fragment in the Parallela ends here. 

fully-trodden earth, no abode of paradise hard to 
find ; no furious roaring of the sea, forbidding 
one to touch or traverse it ; but this too will be 
readily passable for the righteous, although it 
lacks no water. There will be no heaven inac- 
cessible to men, nor will the way of its ascent be 
one impossible to find ; and there will be no earth 
unwrought, or toilsome for men, but one produ- 
cing fruit spontaneously in beauty and order ; 
nor will there be generation of wild beasts again, 
nor the bursting ^ substance of other creatures. 
Neither with man will there be generation again, 
but the number of the righteous remains inde- 
fectible with the righteous angels and spirits. Ye 
who believe these words, O men, will be partakers 
with the righteous, and will have part in these 
future blessings, which " eye hath not seen nor 
ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of 
man the things which God hath prepared for 
them that love Him."-* To Him be the glory and 
the power, for ever and ever. Amen. 

3 €/c^pa<r(ro/u.€ci]. 
* I Cor. ii. 9. 

AGAINST THE HERESY OF ONE NOETUS.' 

I. Some others are secretly introducing an- 
other doctrine, who have become disciples of 
one Noetus, who was a native of Smyrna,^ (and) 
lived not very long ago.^ This person was greatly 
puffed up and inflated with pride, being inspired 
by the conceit of a strange spirit. He alleged 
that Christ was the Father Himself, and that the 
Father Himself was born, and suffered, and died. 
Ye see what pride of heart and what a strange 
inflated spirit had insinuated themselves into 
him. From his other actions, then, the proof is 
already given us that he spoke not with a pure 
spirit ; for he who blasphemes against the Holy 
Ghost is cast out from the holy inheritance. He 
alleged that he was himself Moses, and that 
Aaron was his brother.* When the blessed pres- 
byters heard this, they summoned him before 
the Church, and examined him. But he denied 

^ Gallandi, p. 454. 

2 That Noetus vvas a native of Smyrna is mentioned also by 
Theodoret, book iii. Hceret. Fab., c. iii., and Damascenus, sec. Ivii. 
(who is accustomed to follow Bpiphanius) ; and yet in Epiphanius, 
Hceres., 57, we read that Noetus waS an Asian of the city of Ephesus 
('AcTtai'oi' T>j? "&>\>i<jov TroAeios). (Fabricius.) 

3 Epiphanius says that Noetus made his heresy public about 130 
years before his time (ou irpb erwr rrAeiorioi' aA.V' lu? ttdo \fi6vou 
Toui' TonTu)!' e/carbi' TpidKoi-Ta, TrAfico >) iAd(Tau>) ; and as Epiphanius 
wrote in the year 375, that would make the date of Noetus about 245. 
He says also that Noetus died soon after (ei'ay^^o?), along with his 
brother. (Fabricius.) 

*■ So also Epiphanius and Damascenus. But Philastrius, Heresy, 
53, puts Elijah for Aaron; hie etiam dicebat se Moysem esse, et 
ifratrem suum Eliam prophetam. 

at first that he held such opinions. After\vards, 
however, taking shelter among some, and having 
gathered round him some others 5 who had em- 
braced the same error, he wished thereafter to 
uphold his dogma openly as correct. And the 
blessed presbyters called him again before them, 
and examined him. But he stood out against 
them, saying, " What evil, then, am I doing in 
glorifying Christ ? " And the presbyters replied 
to him, " We too know in truth one God ; ^ we 
know Christ ; we know that the Son suffered 
even as He suffered, and died even as He died, 
and rose again on the third day, and is at the 
right hand of the Father, and cometh to judge 
the living and the dead. And these things 
which we have learned we allege." Then, after 
examining him, they expelled him from the 
Church. And he was carried to such a pitch 
of pride, that he established a school. 

2. Now they seek to exhibit the foundation 
for their .dogma by citing the word in the law^ 
" I anj the God of your fathers : ye shall have 
no other gods beside me ; " 7 and again in another 
passage, " I am the first," He saith, " and the 

5 Epiphanius remarks that they were but ten in number. 

^ The following words are the words of the Syinhotuiit, as it is 
extant in Irena;us, i. lo, etc., and iii. 4; and in Tertullian, Cotttra 
Praxeam, ch. ii., and De Prtescript., ch. xiii., and De i.irginibiis 
velaiidis, ch. i. [See vol. iii., this series.] 

7 Ex. iii. 6 and xx. 3. 

224 

AGAINST THE HERESY OF ONE NOETUS. 

last ; and beside me there is none other." ' 
Thus they say they prove that God is one. And 
then they answer in this manner : " If therefore 
I acknowledge Christ to be Ood, He is the 
Father Himself, if He is indeed God ; and Christ 
suffered, being Himself God ; and consequently 
the Father suffered, for He was the Father Him- 
self." But the case stands not thus ; for the 
Scriptures do not set forth the matter in this 
manner. But they make use also of other testi- 
monies, and say, Thus it is written : " This is 
our God, and there shall none other be accounted 
of in comparison of Him. He hath found out 
all the way of knowledge, and hath given it unto 
Jacob His servant (son), and to Israel His be- 
loved. Afterward did He show Himself upon 
earth, and conversed with men." ^ You see, then, 
he says, that this is God, who is the only One, 
and who afterwards did show Himself, and con- 
versed with men." And in another place he 
says, " Egypt hath laboured ; and the merchan- 
dise of Ethiopia and the Sabeans, men of stature, 
shall come over unto thee, (and they shall be 
slaves to thee) ; and they shall come after thee 
])Ound with manacles, and they shall fall down 
unto thee, because God is in thee ; and they 
shall make supplication unto thee : and there 
is no God beside thee. For Thou art God, and 
we knew not ; God of Israel, the Saviour." ^ Do 
you see, he says, how the Scriptures proclaim 
one God ? And as this is clearly exhibited, and 
these passages are testimonies to it, I am under 
necessity, he says, since one is acknowledged, 
to make this One the subject of suffering. For 
Christ was God, and suffered on account of us, 
being Himself the Father, that He might be able 
also to save us. And we cannot express our- 
selves otherwise, he says ; for the apostle also 
acknowledges one God, when he says, " Whose 
are the fathers, (and) of whom as concerning 
the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God 
blessed for ever." ■♦ 

8. In this way, then, they choose to set forth 
these things, and they make use only of one 
class of passages; 5 just in the same one-sided 
manner that Theodotus employed when he 
sought to prove that Christ was a mere man. 
But neither has the one party nor the other 

* Isa. xliv. 6. 

- Baruch iii. 35-38. TBased on Prov. viii., but so remarkable 
that (jrotius presumptuously declared it an interpolation. It reflects 
canonical Scripture, but has no canonical value othervvi.se. 1 

^ Isa. xlv. 14. 

* Rom. ix. 5. 

5 Kai oi/Toi? nofOKu>!,a xP^^Mfoi. etc. The word fiOvoKuiAa 
appears to be used adverbially, instead o( noi'OKui\ui<; and /not'oriiwu)?, 
which are the terms employed by Epiphanius (p. 481). The mean- 
ing is, that the Noetians, in e.xplaining the words of Scripture con- 
cerning Christ, looked only to one side of the question — namely, to 
the divine nature; just as Theodotus, on his part going to the oppo- 
site extreme, kept by the human nature exclusively, and held that 
Christ was a mere man. Besides others, the presbyter 'I'imotheus, 
in Cotelcrii Mo>tiiiitc>it., vol. iii. p. 389, mentions Theodotus in 
these terms: "They say that this Theodotus was the leader and 
father of the heresy of the Samosatan, having first alleged that Christ 
was a mere man." LSee vol. iii. p. 654, this series.] 

understood the matter rightly, as the Scriptures 
themselves confute their senselessness, and attest 
the truth. See, brethren, what a rash and auda- 
cious dogma they have introduced, when they 
say without shame, the Father is Himself Christ, 
Himself the Son, Himself was born. Himself 
suffered. Himself raised Himself. But it is not 
so. The Scriptures speak what is right ; but 
Noetus is of a different mind from them. Yet, 
though Noetus does not understand the truth, 
the Scriptures are not at once to be repudiated. 
For who will not say that there is one God? 
Yet he will not on that account deny the econ* 
omy (i.e., the number and disposition of persons 
in the Trinity). The proper way, therefore, to 
deal with the question is first of all to refute the 
interpretation put upon these passages by these 
men, and then to explain their real meaning. 
For it is right, in the first place, to expound the 
truth that the Father is one God, " of whom is 
every family," ^ " by whom are all things, of 
whom are all things, and we in Him." 7 

4. Let us, as I said, see how he is confuted, 
and then let us set forth the truth. Now he 
quotes the words, " Egypt has laboured, and the 
merchandise of Ethiopia and the Sabeans," and 
so forth on to the words, " For Thou art the 
God of Israel, the Saviour." And these words 
he cites without understanding what precedes 
them. For whenever they wish to attempt any- 
thing underhand, they mutilate the Scriptures. 
But let him quote the passage as a whole, and 
he will discover the reason kept in view in writ- 
ing it. For we have the beginning of the sec- 
tion a little above ; and we ought, of course, to 
commence there in showing to whom and about 
whom the passage speaks. For above, the be- 
ginning of the section stands thus : " Ask me 
concerning my sons and my daughters, and con- 
cerning the work of my hands command ye me. 
I have made the earth, and man upon it : I 
with my hand have stal)lished the heaven ; I have 
commanded all the stars. I have raised him 
up, and all his ways are straight. He shall build 
my city, and he shall turn back the captivity ; 
not for price nor reward, said the Lord of hosts. 
Thus said the Lord of hosts, Egypt hath la- 
boured, and the merchandise of Ethiopia and 
the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come ever 
unto thee, and they shall be slaves to thee ; and 
they shall come after thee bound with manacles, 
and they shall fall down unto thee ; and they 
shall make supplication unto thee, because God 
is in thee ; and there is no God beside thee. 
For Thou art God, and we knew not ; the God 
of Israel, the Saviour." ^ " In thee, therefore," 
says he, " God -is." But in whom is God except 

* Eph. iii. 15. 

7 1 Cor. viii. 6. 

* Isa. xlv. 11-15. 

AGAINST THE HERESY OF ONE NOETUS. 

225 

in Christ Jesus, the Father's Word, and the mys- 
tery of the economy ? ' And again, exhibiting the 
truth regarding Him, he points to the fact of 
His being in the flesh when He says, " I have 
raised Him up in righteousness, and all His ways 
are straight." For what is this ? Of whom does 
the Father thus testify? It is of the Son that the 
Father says, " I have raised Him up in righteous- 
•yness." And that the Father did raise up His 
^' Son in righteousness, the Apostle Paul bears 
witness, saying, " But if the Spirit of Him that 
raised up Christ Jesus from the dead dwell in 
rSiLjou, He that raised up Christ Jesus from the 
dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by 
His Spirit that dwelleth in you." ^ Behold, the 
word spoken by the prophet is thus made good, 
" I have raised Him up in righteousness." And 
in saying, " God is in thee," he referred to the 
mystery of the economy, because when the Word 
was made incarnate and became man, the Father 
was in the Son, and the Son in the Father, while 
the Son was livmg among men. This, therefore, 
was signified, brethren, that in reality the mystery 
of the economy by the Holy Ghost and the Vir- 

tin was this Word, constituting yet one Son to 
rod.3 And it is not simply that I say this, but 
He Himself attests it who came down from 
heaven ; for He speaketh thus : " No man hath 
ascended up to heaven, but He that came down 
from heaven, even the Son of man which is in 
heaven." * What then can he seek beside what 
is thus written ? Will he say, forsooth, that flesh 
was in heaven? Yet there is the flesh which 
was presented by the Father's Word as an offer- 
ing, — the flesh that came by the Spirit and the 
Virgin, (and was) demonstrated to be the per- 
fect Son of God. It is evident, therefore, that 
He offered Himself to the Father. And before 
this there was no flesh in heaven. Who, then, 
was in heaven s but the Worei unincarnate, who 
was despatched to show that He was upon earth 
and was also in heaven? For He was Word, 
He was Spirit, He was Power. The same took 
to Himself the name common and current among 
men, and was called from the beginning the Son 
'jf man on account of what He was to be, al- 
though He was not yet man, as Daniel testifies 
when he says, " I saw, and behold one like the 
Son of man came on the clouds of heaven." ^ 
Rightly, then, did he say that He who was in 
heaven was called from the beginning by this 
name, the Word of God, as being that from the 
beginning. 

1 [Bull, qpp., V. pp. 367, 734, 740-743. 753-756 ] 

2 Rom. viii. 11. 

3 Turrian has the following note: " The Word of God constituted 
(operatum est) one Son to God; i.e., the Word of God effected, that 
He who was the one Son of God was also one Son of man, because 
as His hypostasis He assumed the flesh. For thus was the Word 
made flesh." 

•* John iii. 13. 
5 IJohn iii. 13,] 
* IJan. vii, 13, 

5. But what is meant, says he, in the other 
passage : " This is God, and there shall none 
other be accounted of in comparison of Him ? " 7 
That said he rightly. . For in comparison of the 
Father who shall be accounted of? But he says : 
" This is our God ; there shall none other be 
accounted of in comparison of Him, He hath 
found out all the way of knowledge, and hath 
given it unto Jacob His servant, and to Israel 
His beloved." He saith well. For who is 
Jacob His servant, Israel His beloved, but He of 
whom He crieth, saying, "This is my beloved Son, 
in whom I am well pleased: hear ye Him?"** 
Having received, then, all knowledge from the 
Father, the perfect Israel, the true Jacob, after- 
ward did show Himself upon earth, and con- 
versed with men. And who, again, is meant by 
Israel 9 but a man zvho sees God? and there is 
no one who sees God except the Son alone, the 
perfect man who alone declares the will of the 
Father. For John also says, " No man hath seen 
God at any time ; the only-begotten Son, which 
is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared '° 
Him."" And again: "He who came down 
from heaven testifieth what He hath heard and 
seen." '^ This, then, is He to whom the Father 
hath given all knowledge, who did show Himself 
upon earth, and conversed with men. 

6. Let us look next at the apostle's word : 
" Whose are the fathers, of whom as concerning 
the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God 
blessed for ever." '^ This word declares the 
mystery of the truth rightly and clearly. He 
who is over all is God ; for thus He speaks 
boldly, " All things are delivered unto me of my 
Father." '+ He who is over all, God blessed, has 
been born ; and having been made man, He is 
(yet) God for ever. For to this effect John also 
has said, " Which is, and which was, and which 
is to come, the Almighty." '5 And well has he 
named Christ the Almighty. For in this he has 
said only what Christ testifies of Himself. For 
Christ gave this testimony, and said, " All things 
are delivered unto me of my Father ; " "'' and 
Christ rules all things, and has been appointed '7 

7 Baruch iii. 36, etc. 

8 Matt. xvii. 5. 

9 The word Israel is explained by Philo, De priEmiis et palm's, 
p. 710, and elsewhere, as = a tnan seeing God, opuiv Weoi", i.e., 

7K nX"! ty'K. So also in the Cotistiiutiones ApostoL, vii. 37, 
viii. 15; Eusebius, Pmparai., xi. 6, p. 519, and in many others. 
To the same class may be referred those who make Israel = opariicbs 
avTf)p Kai SecopTjTiKos, a man apt to see and speculate , as Eusebius, 
Praparat., p. 310, or = voOs opiov fe)€o»', as Optatus in the end of 
the second book; pidymus in Jerome, and Jerome himself in various 
passages; Maximus, i. p. 284: Olympiodorus on Ecclesiastes, ch. i. ; 
Leontius, De Sectis, p. 392; Theophanes, Cerain. homil., iv. p. 22, 
etc. Justin Martyr, Dialog, cum Tryph. [see vol. i. pp. 226, 262], 
adduces another etymology, avflpion-o; vi.Kuiv bwaijuv. 

"^ Hippolytus reads (iiriY^craTo for e^rjyrjaaTo. 

" John i. 18. 

'- John iii. 11, 13. 

■3 Rom. ix. 5. 

'■» Matt. xi. 27. 

'5 Apoc. i. 8. 

'<> Matt. xi. 27. [Compare John V. 22.] 

'7 [Strictly scriptural as to the humanity of Messiah, Heb. i. 9.] 

226 

AGAINST THE HERESY OF ONE NOETUS. 

Almighty by the Father. And in Hke manner 
Paul also, in setting forth the truth that all things 
are delivered unto Him, said, " Christ the first- 
fmits ; afterwards they that are Christ's at His 
coming. Then cometh the end, when He shall 
have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the 
Father ; when He shall have put down all rule, 
and all authority, and power. For He must 
reign, till He hath put all enemies under His 
feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is 
death. For all things are put under Him. But 
when He saith, All things are put under Him, it 
is manifest that He is excepted which did put 
all things under Him. Then shall He also Him- 
self be subject to Him who put all things under 
Him, that God may be all in all." ' If, there- 
fore, all things are put under Him with the ex- 
ception of Him who put them under Him, He 
is Lord of all, and the Father is Lord of Him, 
that in all there might be manifested one God, 
to whom all things are made subject together 
with Christ, to whom the Father hath made all 
things subject, with the exception of Himself. 
And this, indeed, is said by Christ Himself, as 
when in the Gospel He confessed Him to be 
His Father and His Gdd. For He speaks thus : 
'' I go to my Father and your Father, and to my 
God and your God." ^ If, then, Noetus ventures 
to say that He is the Father Himself, to what 
father will he say Christ goes away according to 
the word of the Gospel? But if he will have us 
abandon the Gospel and give credence to his 
senselessness, he expends his labour in vain ; for 
*' we ought to obey God rather than men." ^ 

7. If, again, he allege His own word when 
He said, " I and the Father are one," •* let him 
attend to the fact, and understand that He did 
not say, " I and the Father am one, but are 
oner 5 
person, 

povver.7 He has Himself made this clear, when 
He spake to His Father concerning the disciples, 
" The glory which Thou gavest me I have given 
them ; that they may be one, even as we are 
one : I in them, and Thou in me, that they may 
he made perfect in one ; that the world may 
know that Thou hast sent me." ^ What have 
the Noetians to say to these things ? Are all one 
body in respect of substance, or is it that we be- 
come one in the power and disposition of unity 
of mind ? ^ In the same manner the Son, who 
was sent and was not known of those who are in 
the world, confessed that He was in the Father 

I Cor. XV. 23-28. 
John XX. 17. 
Acts V. 29, iv. 19. 
John X. 30. 

e'yui Koi 6 jraTijp — iv eiTfitv, not (V et/uii. 
€(r)uci'. 
SOvamv. 

John xvii. ja, 23. 
9 i] Tjj Svydfiti, Kai Trj SiaOeixei rfji 6/Lio<^po>'iat ev yivotneOa. 

"I 

For the word are^ is not said of one 
but it refers to two persons, and one 

in power and disposition. For the Son is the one 
mind of the Father. We who have the Father's 
mind believe so (in Him) ; but they who have it 
not have denied the Son. And if, again, they 
choose to allege the fact that Philip inquired 
about the Father, saying, " Show us the Father, 
and it sufificeth us," to whom the Lord made 
answer in these terms : " Have I been so long 
time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, 
Philip? He that hath seen me hath seen the 
Father. Believest thou not that I am in the Fa- 
ther, and the Father in me ? " '° and if they choose 
to maintain that their dogma is ratified by this 
passage, as if He owned Himself to be the Father, 
let them know that it is decidedly against them, 
and that they are confuted by this very word. 
For though Christ had spoken of Himself, and 
showed Himself among all as the Son, they had 
not yet recognised Him to be such, neither had 
they been able to apprehend or contemplate His 
real power. And Philip, not having been able 
to receive this, as far as it was possible to see it, 
requested to behold the Father. To whom then 
the Lord said, " Philip, have I been so long time 
with you, and yet hast thou not known me ? Hm| 
that hath seen me hath seen the Father." B^^ 
which He means. If thou hast seen me, thou 
mayest know the Father through me. For 
through the image, which is like (the original), 
the Father is made readily known. But if thou 
hast not known the image, which is the Son, how 
dost thou seek to see the Father ? And that this 
is the case is made clear by the rest of the chap- 
ter, which signifies that the Son who " has been 
set forth " was sent from the Father,'^ and goeth 
to the Father." '^ 

8. Many other passages, or rather all of them, 
attest the truth. A man, therefore, even though 
he will it not, is compelled to acknowledge God 
the Father Almighty, and Christ Jesus the Son 
of God, who, being God, became man, to whom 
also the Father made all things subject, Him*elf 
excepted, and the Holy Spirit ; and that these, 
therefore, are three. But if he desires to learn 
how it is shown still that there is one God, let 
him know that His powj^r .'+ is one. As far as 
regards the power, therefore. God is one. But 
as far as regards the economy there is a three- 
fold manifestation, as sliall be ])roved afterwards 
when we give account of the true doctrine. In 
these things, however, which are thus set forth 
by us, we are at one. For there is one God in 
whom we must believe, but unoriginated, impass- 
ible, immortal, doing all things as He wills, in 
the way He wills, and when He wills. What, 

'" John xiv. 8, 9. 

" Rom. iii. 25. 

■- Jolin V. 30, vi. 29, viii. 16, 18, etc. 

'^ John xiii. i, xiv. 12. 

AGAINST THE HERESY OF ONE NOETUS. 

227 

then, will this Noetus, who knows ' nothing of 
the truth, dare to say to these things? And 
now, as Noetus has been confuted, let US' turn 
to the exhibition of the truth itself, that we may 
establish the truth, against which all these mighty 
heresies - have arisen without being able to state 
anything to the purpose. 

9. There is, brethren, one God, the knowl- 
edge of whom we gain from the Holy Scriptures, 
and from no other source. For just as a man, 
if he wishes to be skilled in the wisdom of this 
world, will find himself unable to get at it in any 
other way than by mastering the dogmas of 
philosophers, so all of us who wish to practise 
piety will be unable to learn its practice from 

^any other quarter than the oracles of God.^ 
Whatever things, then, the Holy Scriptures de- 
clare, at these let us look ; and whatsoever 
things they teach, these let us learn ; and as the 
Father wills our belief to be, let us believe ; and 
as He wills the Son to be glorified, let us glorify 
Him ; and as He wills the Holy Spirit to be 
bestowed, let us receive Him. Not according 
to our own will, nor according to our own mind, 
^,;nor yet as using violently those things which are 
'' 'given by God, but even as He has chosen to 
teach them by the Holy Scriptures, so let us 
discern them, 

10. God, subsisting alone, and having nothing 
contemporaneous with Himself, determined to 
create the world. And conceiving the world in 
mind, and willing and uttering the word, He 
made it ; and straightway it appeared, formed 
as it had pleased Him. For us, then, it is suf- 
ficient simply to know that there was nothing 
contemporaneous with God. Beside Him there 
was nothing ; but '^ He, while existing alone, yet 
existed in plurality. 5 For He was neither with- 
out reason, nor wisdom, nor power, nor counsel.^ 
And all things were in Him, and He was the AH. 
When He willed, and as He willed, ^ He mani- 
fested His word in the times determined by 
Him, and by Him He made all things. When 
He wills. Fie does ; and when He thinks. He 
executes ; and when He speaks, He manifests ; 
when He fashions. He contrives in wisdom. 
For all things that are made He forms by reason 
and wisdom — creating them in reason, and ar- 
ranging them in wisdom. He made them, then, 
as He pleased, for He was God And as the 

' There is perhaps a play on the words here — NdrjTo? ht) vomv. 

2 i.e., the other thirty-one heresies, which Hippolytus had already 
attacked. From these words it is apparent also that this treatise was 
the closing portion of a book against the heresies (Fabricius). 

3 [This emphatic testimony of our author to the sufficiency of the 
Scriptures is entirely in keeping with the entire system of the Ante- 
Nicene Fathers. Note our teeming inde.xes of Scripture texts.] 

* See, on this passage. Bull's De/eus. Fid. Nic, sec. iii. cap. viii. 
5 2, p. 219. 

" aAoyo?, a<70<f)09, afivraro?, ajSovXeuTO?. 

^ On these words see Bossuet's explanation and defence, /I z'fr^/w., 
vi. § 68, sur Us leitres de M. jfurieu. 

Author, and fellow-Counsellor, and Framer^ of 
the things that are in formation. He begat 9 the 
Word ; and as He bears this Word in Himself, 
and that, too, as (yet) invisible to the world 
which is created, He makes Him visible; (and) 
uttering the voice first, and begetting Him as 
Light of Light, ■° He set Him forth to the world 
as its Lord, (and) His own mind ; " and whereas 
He was visible formerly to Himself alone, and 
invisible to the world which is made, He makes 
Him visible in order that the world might see 
Him in His manifestation, and be capable of 
being saved. 

1 1 . And thus there appeared another beside 
Himself. But when I say another,^^ I do not 
mean that there are two Gods, but that it is only 
as light of light, or as water from a fountain, or 
as a ray from the sun. For there is but one 
power, which is from the All ; '^ and the Father 
is the All, from whom cometh this Power, the 
Word. And this is the mind '■* which came forth 
into the world, and was manifested as the Son '5 
of God. All things, then, are by Him, and He 
alone is of the Father. Who then adduces a 
multitude of gods brought in, time after time? 
For all are shut up, however unwillingly, to ad- 
mit this fact, that the All runs up into one. If, 
then, all things run up into one, even according 
to Valentinus, and Marcion, and Cerinthus, and 
all their fooleries, they are also reduced, how- 
ever unwillingly, to this position, that they must 
acknowledge that the One is the cause of all 
things. Thus, then, these too, though they wish 
it not, fall in with the truth, and admit that one 
God made all things according to His good 
pleasure. And He gave the law and the proph- 
ets ; and in giving them, He made them speak 
by the Holy Ghost, in order that, being gifted 
with the inspiration of the Father's power, they 
might declare the Father's counsel and will. 

12. Acting then in these (prophets), the Word 
spoke of Himself. For already He became His 
own herald, and showed that the Word would 

* ao^rjvdf, KaX tTVftPov\ov, Koi fpyixTr)v. 

9 The " begetting " of which Hippolytus speaks here is not the 
generation, properly so called, but that manifestation and bringing 
forth of the Word co-existing from eternity with the Father, which 
referred to the creation of the world. So at least Bull and Bossuct, 
as cited above; also Maranus, De DiviJiit. y. C, lib. iv. cap. xiii. 
§3, p. 458. 

'° (^cus 6K i^ioTos. This phrase, adopted by the Nicene Fathers, 
occurs before their time not only here, but also in Justin Martyr, 
Tatian, and Athenagoras, as is noticed by Grabe, nd Irenceum, lib. 
ii. c. xxiii. Methodius also, in his Homily 0}i Siiiteoti attd Anna, 
p. 152, has the expression, cru el (/xi? <x.ky\6i.v'ov 4k (^uito! d\riOivoii 
©eb? aArjSti'b? eK HeoO aApSii'oO. Athanasius himself also uses the 
phrase Av^i'oj' ex Aii;^fov, vol. i. p. 88i, ed. Lips. [Illustrating my 
remarks (p. v. of this volume), in the preface, as to the study of 
Nicene theology in Ante-Nicene authors] 

'' fovy, 

'2 Justin Martyr also says that the Son is eVepdi' ri, sottiething 
other, from the Father; and TertuUian affirms, Filiton et Pat rem 
esse aliud ab alio, with the same intent as Hippolytus here, viz., to 
express the distinction of persons. [See vol. i. pp. 170, 216, 263, and 
vol. iii. p. 604.] 

^•5 k< ToO Trat'Toy. 

'* Or reason. 

'3 jrais. 

2 28 

AGAINST THE HERESY OF ONE NOETUS. 

be manifested among men. And for this reason 
He cried thus : " I am made manifest to them 
that sought me not ; I am found of them that 
asked not for me." ' And who is He that is 
made manifest but the Word of the Father? — 
whom the Father sent, and in whom He showed 
to men the power proceeding from Him. Thus, 
then, was the AV'ord made manifest, even as the 
blessed John says. For he sums up the things 
that were said by the prophets, and shows that 
this is the Word, by whom all things were made. 
For he speaks to this effect : " In the beginning 
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and 
the Word was God. All things were made by 
Him, and without Him was not anything made."- 
And beneath He says, "The world was made 
by Him, and the world knew Him not; He 
came unto His own, and His own received Him 
not." 3 If, then, said he, the world was made 
by Him, according to the word of the prophet, 
" By the Word of the Lord were the heavens 
made," ■* then this is the AVord that was also 
made manifest. We accordingly see the Word 
incarnate, and we know the Father by Him, and 
we believe in the Son, (and) we worship the 
Holy Spirit. Let us then look at the testimony 
of Scripture with respect to the announcement 
of the future manifestation of the Word. 

13. Now Jeremiah says, "Who hath stood in 
the counsel s of the Lord, and hath perceived 
His Word?"^' But the Word of God alone is 
visible, while the word of man is audible. When 
lie speaks of seeing the Word, I must believe 
that this visible (Word) has been sent. And 
there was none other (sent) but the Word. And 
that He was sent Peter testifies, when he says 
to the centurion Cornelius : " God sent His 
^^'o^(l unto the children of Israel by the preach- 
ing of Jesus Christ. This is the God who is 
Lord of all." ^ If, then, the Word is sent by 
Jesus Christ, the wilP of the Fatlier is Jesus 
Christ. 

14. These things then, brethren, are declared 
by the Scriptures. And the blessed John, in the 
testimony of his Gospel, gives us an account of 
this economy (disposition) and acknowledges 
tills Word as God, when he says, " In the begin- 

' Isa. Ixv. I. 

^ John i. 1-3. Hippolytus evidently puts the full stop at the 
O'lSe iv, attaching the o ykyovtv to the following. So also frena;iis, 
Clemens Alex., Origen, Theophilus of Antioch, and Eusebius, in 
several places; so, too, of the Latin Fathers — Tertullian, Lactantius, 
Victorinus, Augustine: and long after these, Honorius Augusto- 
dunensis, in his De iiiingiiif Miiiuii. This punctuation was also 
adopted by the heretics Valentinus, Heracleon, Theodotus, and the 
Macedonians and Kunomians; and hence it is rejected by Epiphanius, 
ii. p. 80, and Chrysostom. (I'abricius.) 

^ John i. 10, II. 

* Ps. xxxiii. 6. 

■'• inroarriixaTi, foundation. Victor reads ev ttj vno(rTa<T(i, in the 
substance, nature; Symm.ichus has iv rrj bfiiAia, in the fellowship. 

'' Jer. xxiii. 18. 

7 Acts X. 36. 

8 TO OtAij^a. Many of the patristic theologians called the Son 
the Father's (SoiiArjai? or StAtjuia. Sec the passages in Petavius, L>e 
S. S. Trinitate, lib. vi. c. 8, § ai, and vii. 12, § 12. [Dubious.] 

ning was the Word, and the Word was with God, 
and the Word was God." If, then, the Word 
was with God, and was also God, what follows? 
Would one say that he speaks of two Gods ? '* 
I shall not indeed speak of two Gods, but of 
one ; of two Persons however, and of a third 
economy (disposition), viz., the grace of the 
Holy Ghost, For the Father indeed is One, 
but there are two Persons, because there is also 
the Son ; and then there is the third, the Holy 
Spirit. The Father decrees, the Word executes; 
and the Son is manifested, through whom the 
Father is believed on. The economy '° of har- 
mony is led back to one God ; for God is One. 
It is the Father who commands," and the Son 
who obeys, and the Holy Spirit who gives un- 
derstanding: "^ the Father who is above all, ''^ ^XiA 
the Son who is through all, and the Holy Spirit 
who is in all. And we cannot otherwise think 
of one God,''^ but by believing in truth in Father 
and Son and Holy Spirit. For the Jews glorified 
(or gloried in) the Father, but gave Him not 
thanks, for they did not recognise the Son. The 
disciples recognised the Son, but not in the Holy 
Ghost; wherefore they also denied Him. '5 The 
Father's Word, therefore, knowing the economy 
(disposition) and the will of the Father, to wit, 
that the Father seeks to be worshipped in none 
other way than this, gave this charge to the dis- 
ciples after He rose from the dead : " Go ye 
and teach all nations, baptizing them in the 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost." '^ And by this He showed, that 
whosoever omitted any one of these, failed in 
glorifying God perfectly. For it is through this 
Trinity '^ that the Father is glorified. For the 
Father willed, the Son did, the Spirit manifested. 
The whole Scriptures, then, proclaim this truth. 

9 From this passage it is clear that Hippolytus taught the doc- 
trine of one (lod alone and three Persons. A little before, in the 
eighth chapter, he said that there is one God, according to substance 
or divine essence, which one substance is in three Persons: and that 
according to disposition or economy, there are three Persons mani 
fested. By the term economy, therefore, he understands, with Ter- 
tullian, atlversus Praxtiiiii, ch. iii., the number and disposition of 
the Trinity {nnmeruin ct ciispositiouein 'J'rinitaiis). Here he 
also calls the grace of the Holy Spirit the third economy, but in the 
.same way as Tertullian, who calls the Holy Spirit the third grade 
{tertium gradum). For the terms gradtts, /ttrma, species, dis- 
positio, and cecoiiomia mean the same in Tertullian. (Maranus.) 
( Another proof that the Nicene Creed was a compilation from -Ante- 
Nicene theologians.] 

■° oiKoronia (rvix<t>tavia^ trvvayeTai eU eVa ©edi', perhaps = the 
economy as being one of harmony, leads to one God. 

" This mode of speaking of the Father's commanding' and the 
Son's obeying, was used without any offence, not only by Irenasus, 
Hippolytus, Origen, and others before the Council of N'icaea, but also 
after that council by the keenest opponents of the .■\rian heresy — 
Athanasius, Basil, Marius Victorinus, Hilary, Prosper, and others. 
See Petavius, De Trin., i. 7, § 7; and Bull, De/eiis Fid. Nic, pp. 
138, 164, 167, 170. (Fabricius.) 

'3 Referring probably to Eph. iv. 6. 

'* The Christian doctrine, Klaranus remarks, could not be set forth 
more accurately; for he contends not only that the number of Per- 
sons in no manner detracts from the unity of God, but that the unity 
of (Jod itself can neither consist nor be adored without this number 
of Persons. 

'5 This is said probably with reference to Peter's denial. 

"> Matt, xxviii. 19. 

'7 TpioSos. [See Theophilus, vol. ii. p. 101, note ] 

AGAINST THE HERESY OF ONE NOETUS. 

229 

15. But some one will say to me, You adduce 
a thing strange to me, when you call the Son the 
Word. For John indeed speaks of the Word, 
but it is by a figure of speech. Nay, it is by no 
figure of speech."- For while thus presenting 
this Word that was from the beginning, and has 
BOW been sent forth, he said below in the Apoca- 
lypse, " And I saw heaven opened, and behold 
a white horse ; and He that sat upon him (was) 
Faithful and True ; and in righteousness He doth 
judge and make war. And His eyes (were) as 
flame of fire, and on His head were many crowns ; 
and He had a name written that no man knew 
but He Himself. And He (was) clothed in a 
vesture dipped in blood : and His name is called 
the Word of God." ^ See then, brethren, how 
the vesture sprinkled with blood denoted in sym- 
bol the flesh, through which the impassible Word 
of God came under suffering, as also the proph- 
ets testify to me. For thus speaks the blessed 
Micah : " The house of Jacob provoked the Spirit 
of the Lord to anger. These are their pursuits. 
Are not His words good with them, and do they 
walk rightly ? And they have risen up in enmity 
against His countenance of peace, and they have 
stripped off His glory." ^ That means His suffer- 
ing in the flesh. And in like manner also the 
blessed Paul says, " For what the law could not 
<lo, in that it was weak, God, sending His own 
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, condemned 
sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the law 
might be shown in us, who walk not after the 
flesh, but after the Spirit." •♦ What Son of His 
own, then, did God send through the flesh but 
the Word, 5 whom He addressed as Son because 
He was to become such (or be begotten) in the 
future? And He takes the common name for 
tender affection among men in being called the 
Son. For neither was the Word, prior to incar- 
nation and when by Himself,^ yet perfect Son, 
although He was perfect Word, only-begotten. 
Nor could the flesh subsist by itself apart from 
the Word, because it has its subsistence ^ in the 
Word.*^ Thus, then, one perfect Son of God 
•was manifested. 

' <iAA' dAAio? aAArj^opei. The words in Italics are given only in 
the Latin. They may have dropped from the Greek text. At any 
rate, some such addition seems necessary for the sense. 

2 Apoc. xix. 11-13. 

3 Mic. ii. 7, 8. ho^av: In the present text of the Septuagint it is 
£opai', skin. 

* Hippolytus omits the words Sia t^s aapKO'; and Kal nepl a/j-ap- 
Tia?, and reads (j>av€pu)9ii for TrArjptoflr). 

5 ov Y'lbu 7rpo<7rjy6p€ve 5ta. to ju.eAAetv auTOi' yeve<T0at. 

* Hippolytus thus gives more definite expression to this tempo- 
rality of the Sonship, as Dorner remarks, than even Tertullian. See 
Dorner's Doctrine of the Person of Christ (T. & T. Clark), div. i. 
vol. ii. p. 88, etc. [Pearson On the Creed, art. ii. p. 199 et seqq. 
The patristic citations are sufficient, and Hippolytus may be harmo- 
nized with them.] 

7 TT)f av<na.(jx.v. 

8 " 2uo-To(Ti?," says Dorner, " be it obsers-ed, is not yet equiva- 
lent to personality. The sense is, it had its subsistence in the Logos; 
He was the connective and vehicular force. This is thoroughly iin- 
objectionable. He does not thus necessarily pronounce the humanity 
■of Christ impersonal; although in view of what has preceded, and 
what remains to be adduced, there can be no doubt [?] that Hippol- 

16. And these indeed are testimonies bearing 
on the incarnation of the Word ; and there are 
also very many others. But let us also look at 
the subject in hand, — namely, the question, 
brethren, that in reality the Father's power, 
which is the Word, came down from heaven, 
and not the Father Himself. For thus He 
speaks : " I came forth from the Father, and 
am come." 9 Now what subject is meant in 
this sentence, " I came forth from the Father," '° 
but just the Word? And what is it that is 
begotten of Him, but just the Spirit," that is to 
say, the Word ? But you will say to me, How 
is He begotten? In your own case you can 
give no explanation of the way in which you 
were begotten, although you see every day the 
cause according to man ; neither can you tell 
with accuracy the economy in His case.'^ For 
you have it not in your power to acquaint your- 
self with the practised and indescribable art '^ 
(method) of the Maker, but only to see, and 
understand, and believe that man is God's work. 
Moreover, you are asking an account of the gen- 
eration of the Word, whom God the Father in 
His good pleasure begat as He willed. Is it 
not enough for you to learn that God made the 
world, but do you also venture to ask whence 
He made it ? Is it not enough for you to learn 
that the Son of God has been manifested to you 
for salvation if you believe, but do you also 
inquire curiously how He was begotten after the 
Spirit? No more than two,'^ in sooth, have 
been put in trust to give the account of His 
generation after the flesh ; and are you then so 
bold as to seek the account (of His generation) 
after the Spirit, which the Father keeps with 
Himself, intending to reveal it then to the holy 
ones and those worthy of seeing His face? 
Rest satisfied with the word spoken by Christ, 
viz., " That which is born of the Spirit is spirit," '^ 
just as, speaking by the prophet of the genera- 
tion of the Word, He shows the fact that He is 
begotten, but reserves the question of the man- 
ner and means, to reveal it only in the time 
determined by Himself. For He speaks thus : 
" From the womb, before the morning star, i 
have begotten Thee." ''' 

ytus would have defended the impersonality, had the question been 
agitated at the period at which he lived." See Dorner, as above, 
i. 95. [But compare Burton, Testimonies of the Atite-Nicene Fa- 
thers, etc., pp. 60-87, where Tertullian and Hippolytus speak for 
themselves. Note also what he says of the latter, and his variations 
of expression, p. 87.] 

9 John xvi. 28. 

■° Reading ef ijAdoi'. The Latin interpreter seems to read k^(.k96v 
= what is this that came forth. 

" TTveOna. The divine in Christ is thus designated in the Ante- 
Nicene Fathers generally. See Grotius on Mark ii. 8; and for a full 
history of the term in this use, Dorner's Person of Christ, i. p. 
390, etc. (Clark). 

'2 -x'-f^v Trept Tovrov o\.KOVOp.t.a.v , 

'3 T^v ToO STj^xiovpy^crai-TO? iy.itf.i.pov koI aveKSirjyyiTO* Tex*^"- 

'■» i.e., Matthew and Luke in their Gospels. 

'S John iii. 6. 

** Ps. ex. 3. 

230 

AGAINST THE HERESY OF ONE NOETUS. 

1 7. These testimonies are sufficient for the 
l)elieving who study truth, and the unbelieving 
credit no testimony.' For the Holy Spirit, in- 
deed, in the person of the apostles, has testified ; 
to this, saying, " And who has believed our 
report? " ^ Therefore let us not prove ourselves 
unbelieving, lest the word spoken be fulfilled in 
us. Let us believe then, dear-' brethren, ac- 
cording to the tradition of the apostles, that 
God the Word came down from heaven, (and 
entered) into the holy Virgin Mary, in order 
that, taking the flesh from her, and assuming 
also a human, by which I mean a rational soul, 
and becoming thus all that man is with the ex- 
ception of sin. He might save fallen man, and 
confer immortality on men who believe on His 
name. In all, therefore, the word of truth is 
demonstrated to us, to wit, that the Father is 
One, whose word is present (with Him), by 
whom He made all things ; whom also, as we 
have said above, the Father sent forth in later 
times for the salvation of men. This (Word) 
was preached by the law and the prophets as 
destined to come into the world. And even as 
He was preached then, in the same manner also 
did He come and manifest Himself, being by 
the Virgin and the Holy Spirit made a new man ; 
for in that He had the heavenly (nature) of the 
Father, as the Word and the earthly (nature), 
as taking to Himself the flesh from the old 
.^dam by the medium of the Virgin, He now, 
coming forth into the world, was manifested as 
(jod in a body, coming forth too as a perfect 
man. For it was not in mere appearance or by 
conversion,^ but in truth, that He became man. 

1 8. 5 Thus then, too, though demonstrated as 
God, He does not refuse the conditions proper 
to Him as man,^ since He hungers and toils and 
thirsts in weariness, and flees in fear, and prays 
in trouble. And He who as God has a sleepless 
nature, slumbers on a pillow. And He who for 
this end came into the world, begs off from the 
cup of suffering. And in an agony He sweats 
blood, and is strengthened by an angel, who 
Himself strengthens those who believe on Him, 
and taught men to despise death by His work. 7 
And He who knew what manner of man Judas 
was, is betrayed by Judas. And He, who for- 
merly was honoured by him as God, is con- 

■ [A noble aphorism. See Shcdd, //isl. of Tlirol., i. pp. 300, 301, 
nn<l tribute to Pearson, p. 319, note. The loving spirit of Auberlen, 
on the defeat of rationalism, may be noted with profit in his Divine 
Kii'fintions, translation, Clark's ed., 1867.] 

- Isa. liii. I. 

3 /uiaKapiot. 

^ Kara ^avTatriav r) TpOJr^c. 

■■' [The sublimity of this concluding chapter marks our author's 
place among the most eloquent of Ante-Nicene Fathers.] 

<> The following pass.ige agrees almost word for word with what 
is cited as from the Memoria Itwresium of Hijjpolylus by (Jclasius, 
in the Dc duahus naturis Christi, vol. viii. Bibl. Pair., edit. 
I.ugd. p. 704. [Compare St. Ignatius, vol. i. cap. vii. p. 52, this 
series; and for the crucial point {■yivviyro'i xai oycvfijTos) see Jacob- 
ion, ii. p. 278.] 

' Or, by deed, tpyw. I 

temned by Caiaphas.^ And He is set at nought 
by Herod, who is Himself to judge the whole 
earth. .And He is scourged by Pilate, who took 
upon Himself our infirmities. And by the sol- 
diers He is mocked, at whose behest stand thou- 
sands of thousands and myriads of myriads of 
angels and archangels. And He who fixed the 
heavens like a vault is fastened to the cross by 
the Jews. And He who is inseparable from the 
Father cries to the Father, and commends to 
Him His spirit ; and bowing His head, He gives 
up the ghost, who said, " I have power to lay 
down my life, and I have power to take it 
again ; " '> and because He was not overmastered 
by death, as being Himself Life, He said this : 
" I lay it down of myself." ^ And He who gives 
life bountifully to all, has His side pierced with 
a spear. And He who raises the dead is wrapped 
in linen and laid in a sepulchre, and on the third 
day He is raised again by the Father, though 
Himself the Resurrection and the Life. For 
all these things has He finished for us, who for 
our sakes was made as we are. For " Himself 
hath borne our infirmities, and carried our dis- 
eases ; and for our sakes He was afflicted," '° as 
Isaiah the prophet has said. This is He who 
was hymned by the angels, and seen by the 
shepherds, and waited for by Simeon, and wit- 
nessed to by Anna. This is He who was in- 
quired after by the wise men, and indicated In- 
the star ; He who was engaged in His Father's 
house, and pointed to by John, and witnessed to 
by the Father from above in the voice, "This 
is my beloved Son; hear ye Him."" He is 
crowned victor against the devil.'- This is Jesus 
of Nazareth, who was invited to the marriage- 
feast in Cana, and turned the water into wine,, 
and rebuked the sea when agitated by the vio- 
lence of the winds, and walked on the deep as 
on dry land, and caused the blind man from birth 
to see, and raised Lazarus to life after he had 
been dead four days, and did many mighty works, 
and forgave sins, and conferred power on the 
disciples, and had blood and water flowing from 
His sacred side when pierced with the spear. 
For His sake the sun is darkened, the day has 
no light, the rocks are shattered, the veil is rent, 
the foundations of the earth are shaken, the 
graves are opened, and the dead are raised, 
and the rulers are ashamed when they see the 
Director of the universe upon the cross closing 
His eye and giving uj) the ghost. Creation saw, 
and was troubled ; and, unable to bear the sight 
of His exceeding glory, shrouded itself in dark- 

* ieparevoMti'ov, referring to John xi. 51 

9 John X. 18. 

»o Isa. liii. 4. 

" Matt. xvii. 5. fit may be convenient for some to turn to the 
Oxford translation of I'.ishop Hull's Dc/cnsio, ya.n i. pp. 103-216, 
where Tertullian and Hippolytus are nobly vindicated on Nicene 
grounds. The notes are also valuable.] 

'- Matt, x.wii. 29. art<^a>ovTai. Kara 6ia/36Aov, [i.e., with thomsl. 

52- 

AGAINST BERON AND HELIX. 

231 

ness." This (is He who) breathes upon the 
disciples, and gives them the Spirit, and comes 
in among them when the doors are shut, and is 
taken up by a cloud into the heavens while the 
disciples gaze at Him, and is set down on the 

' [Hippolytus confirms Tertullian's testimony. Compare vol. iii. 
pp. 35 and 58.J 

right hand of the Father, and comes again as 
the Judge of the living and the dead. This i& 
the God who for our sakes became man, to 
whom also the Father hath put all things in sub- 
jection. To Him be the glory and the power, 
with the Father and the Holy Spirit, in the holy 
Church both now and ever, and even for ever- 
more. Amen. 

AGAINST BERON AND HELIX. 

FRAGMENTS OF A DISCOURSE, ALPHABETICALLY DIVIDED,' ON THE DIVINE NATURE ^ AND 
THE INCARNATION, AGAINST THE HERETICS BERON AND HELIX,^ THE BEGINNING OF 
WHICH WAS IN THESE WORDS, "HOLY, HOLY, HOLY, LORD GOD OF 
VOICE NEVER SILENT THE SERAPHIM EXCLAIM AND GLORIFY GOD." 

SABAOTH, WITH 

FRAGMENT I. 

By the omnipotent will of God all things are 
made, and the things that are made are also 
preserved, being maintained according to their 
several principles in perfect harmony by Him 
who is in His nature the omnipotent God and 
maker of all things,* His divine will remaining 
unalterable by which He has made and moves 
all things, sustained as they severally are by their 
own natural laws. 5 For the infinite cannot in 
any manner or by any account be susceptible of 
movement, inasmuch as it has nothing towards 
which and nothing around which it shall be 
moved. For in the case of that which is in its 
nature infinite, and so incapable of being moved, 
movement would be conversion.'' Wherefore 
also the Word of God being made truly man in 
our manner, yet without sin, and acting and 
enduring in man's way such sinless things as are 
proper to our nature, and assuming the circum- 
scription of the flesh of our nature on our behalf, 
sustained no conversion in that aspect in which 
He is one with the Father, being made in no 
respect one with the flesh through the exinani- 
tion.7 But as He was without flesh,*^ He remained 

' Kara o-Toixeioi'. The Latin title in the version of Anastasius 
renders it " ex sermone qui est per elementum." 

^ nepi fleoAoyia?. 

3 For'H/VtKO? the Codex Regius el Colberit'iius of Nicephorus 
prefers HAiiciui'os. Fabricius conjectures that we should read 
»)Ai)ctioTa> aiperiiccoi', so that the title would be, Against Beron and 
his fellow-heretics. [N.B. Beron = Vero.] 

* aiiTw Tcu . . . (yetii. 

S Tois eKacrra <j>v<Ti.Kot^ 6ie|oyd|a€i'a vofiOLi;. Anastasius makes 
it natiiralibus producta legibus; Capperonnier, sicis quxque Icgibus 
tetnperata vel orditiata. 

•> TpoTTi) yaf) ToO (cara iiv<j\.v aneipov, Kiveladai /oir) 7r6(|)U)c6TOS, 
») icii'r)cri9; or may the sense be, " for a change in that which is in its 
nature infinite would just be the moving of that which is incapable of 
movement ? " 

7 fjLTiS' ivl TravTsAis o ravTov «<rTi tw Harpl yevofievo'; TavTov 
rfi (TaoKi Sia Trji/ KeVoxrti'. Thus in effect Combefisius, correcting 
the Latin version of Anastasius. Baunius adopts the reading in the 
Greek Codex Nicephori, viz.,evu)crLv for xei/wcrip, and renders it, " In 
■lothing was the Word, who is the same with the F.Tther, made the 
same with the flesh through the union: " nulla re Verbum quod idem 
est cum Patre factum est idem cum carne propter unionem. 

* 6ixa aapKos, i.e., what He was before assuming the flesh, that 
He continued to be in Himself, viz., independent of limitation. 

without any circumscription. And through the 
flesh He wrought divinely 9 those things which 
are proper to divinity, showing Himself to have 
both those natures in both of which He wrought, 
I mean the divine and the human, according to 
that veritable and real and natural subsistence, '° 
(showing Himself thus) as both being in reality 
and as being understood to be at one and the 
same time infinite God and finite man, having 
the nature" of each in perfection, with the same 
activity,'^ that is to say, the same natural proper- 
ties ; '3 whence we know that their distinction 
abides always according to the nature of each, 
and without conversion. But it is not (i.e., the 
distinction between deity and humanity), as 
some say, a merely comparative (or relative) 
matter,'"* that we may not speak in an unwar- 
rantable manner of a greater and a less in one 
who is ever the same in Himself.'^ For compari- 
sons can be instituted only between objects of 
like nature, and not between objects of unlike 
nature. But between God the Maker of all 
things and that which is made, between the in- 
finite and the finite, between infinitude and fini- 
tude, there can be no kind of comparison, since 
these differ from each other not in mere com- 
parison (or relatively), but absolutely in essence. 
And yet at the same time there has been effected 
a certain inexpressible and irrefragable union of 
the two into one substance, "" which entirely passes, 
the understanding of anything that is made. 

9 flfilCW?. 

'° Or existence, vnap^iv. 
'^ ovaiav, 
'2 evepyet'a?. 

14 

Anastasius makes it substantia. 

Kara a^vyKpicrtf. Migne follows Capperonnier in taking trvy- 
(cpio-i? in this passage to mean not *' comparison " or " relation," but 
" commixture," the " concretion and commixture " of the divine and 
human, which was the error of ApoUinaris and Eutyches in their doc- 
trine of the incarnation, and which had been already refuted by Ter- 
luUian, Contra Praxeain, c. xxvii. 

'5 Or, " for that would be to speak of the same being as greater 
and less than Himself." 

"> \>-n6ataai.v. 

232 

AGAINST BERON AND HELIX. 

For the divine is just the same after the incarna- 
tion that it was before the incarnation ; in its 
essence infinite, iUimitable, impassible, incom- 
parable, unchangeable, inconvertable, self-po- 
tent,' and, in short, subsisting in essence alone 
the infinitely worthy good. 

FRAGMENT II. 

The God of all things therefore became truly, 
according to the Scriptures, without conversion, 
sinless man, and that in a manner known to 
Himself alone, as He is the natural Artificer 
of things which are above our comprehension. 
And by that same saving act of the incarnation ^ 
He introduced into the flesh the activity of His 
proper divinity, yet without having it (that ac- 
tivity) either circumscribed by the flesh through 
the exinanition, or growing naturally out of the 
flesh as it grew out of His divinity,^ but mani- 
fested through it in the things which He wrought 
in a divine manner in His incarnate state. For 
the flesh did not become divinity in nature by 
a transmutation of nature, as though it became 
essentially flesh of divinity. But what it was 
before, that also it continued to be in nature 
and activity when united with divinity, even as 
the Saviour said, " The spirit indeed is willing, 
but the flesh is weak." ■* And working and en- 
during in the flesh things which were proper to 
sinless flesh, He proved the evacuation of divin- 
ity (to be) for our sakes, confirmed as it was by 
wonders and by sufferings of the flesh naturally. 
For with this purpose did the (iod of all things 
become man, viz., in order that by suffering in 
the flesh, which is susceptible of suffering, He 
might redeem our whole race, which was sold 
to death ; and that by working wondrous things 
by His divinity, which is unsusceptil)le of suffer- 
mg, through the medium of the flesh He might 
restore it to that incorruptible and blessed life 
from which it fell away by yielding to the 
devil ; and that He might establish the holy 
orders of intelligent existences in the heavens 
in mimutability by the mystery of His incarna- 
tion,5 the doing of which is the recapitulation 
of all things in himself.^ He remained there- 
fore, also, after His incarnation, according to 
nature, God infinite, and more,^ having the 
activity proper and suitable to Himself, — an 
activity growing out of His divinity essentially, 
and manifested through His perfectly holy flesh 
by wondrous acts economically, to the intent 
that He might be believed in as God, while 

2 auiTrjpiov <rapK(oa'ii'. 

3 oilS' utaiTfp T^? OUTOO fleOTTJTOS oiJTW (Col aUT^S <^U71KUIS iK(}>VO- 

* Matt. xxvi. 41. 

^ Referring probably to Eph. L lOt 
7 vircpdircipot. 

working out of Himself^ by the flesh, which by 
nature is weak, the salvation of the universe. 

FRAGMENT III. 

Now, with the view of explaining, by means 
of an illustration, what has been said concern- 
ing the Saviour, (I may say that) the power of 
thought 9 which I have by nature is proper and 
suitable to me, as being possessed of a rational 
and intelligent soul ; and to this soul there per- 
tains, according to nature, a self-moved energy 
and first power, ever-moving, to wit, the thought 
that streams from it naturally. This thought I 
utter, when there is occasion, by fitting it to 
words, and expressing it rightly in signs, using 
the tongue as an organ, or artificial characters, 
showing that it is heard, though it comes into 
actuality by means of objects foreign to itself, 
and yet is not changed itself by those foreign 
objects. '° For my natural thought does not 
belong to the tongue or the letters, although I 
effect its utterance by means of these ; but it 
belongs to me, who speak according to my 
nature, and by means of both these express it 
as my own, streaming as it does always from 
my intelligent soul according to its nature, and 
uttered by means of my bodily tongue organ- 
ically, as I have said, when there is occasion. 
Now, to institute a comparison with that which 
is utterly beyond comparison, just as in us the 
power of thought that belongs by nature to the 
soul is brought to utterance by means of our 
bodily tongue without any change in itself, so. 
too, in the wondrous incarnation " of God is the 
omnipotent and all-creating energy of the entire 
deity '^ manifested without mutation in itself, by 
means of His perfectly holy flesh, and in the 
works which He wrought after a divine man- 
ner, (that energy of the deity) remaining in its 
essence free from all circumscription, although 
it shone through the flesh, which is itself essen- 
tially limited. For that which is in its nature 
unoriginated cannot be circumscribed by an 
originated nature, although this latter may have 
grown into one with it '^ by a conception which 
circumscribes all understanding : '-♦ nor can this 
be ever brought into the same nature and natural 
activity with that, so long as they remain each 
within its own proper and inconvertible nature. '5 
For it is only in objects of the same nature that 
there is the motion that works the same works. 

'■ ouTovpyuii'. 
9 A070?. 

'° The text is, 5id tuii' ivoiioCuv litv virdfixofra. Anastasiu* 
reads m") for fifi'. 

'2 T^5 oAtjs 9edTr)T0S. 

'3 <TVVf<l>V. 

■* Kara <Tv\\ri\j/Lv iravra nfpiypdtjiovaay voiiv, 

'S ouT€ iJi'rji' eU T avTov avTii ^iparOai (j>v<X(uii nore icai (frucriK^s 
(vepyeiai;, ecus av fKartpov T^« i5ias ivTO'i liivei 4>v<Ti,Krii oTpci^ias. 
To (frepetrdoi wc supply again 7r«<^uic«, 

AGAINST BERON AND HELIX. 

233 

showing that the being ' whose power is natural 
is incapable in any manner of being or becoming 
the possession of a being of a different nature 
without mutation.- 

FRAGMENT IV. 

For, in the view of apostles and prophets and 
teachers, the mystery of the divine incarnation 
has been distinguished as having two points of 
contemplation natural to it,^ distinct in all things, 
inasmuch as on the one hand it is the subsistence 
of perfect deity, and on the other is demonstra- 
tive of full humanity. As long, therefore,'* as the 
VV^ord is acknowledged to be in substance one, 
of one energy, there shall never in any way be 
known a movements in the two. For while 
God, who is essentially ever-existent, became 
by His infinite power, according to His will, 
sinless man. He is what He was, in all wherein 
God is known ; and what He became. He is in 
all wherein man is known and can be recognised. 
In both aspects of Himself He never falls out 
of Himself,^ in His divine activities and in His 
human alike, preserving in both relations His 
own essentially unchangeable perfection. 

FRAGMENT V. 

For lately a certain person, Beron, along with 
some others, forsook the delusion of Valentinus, 
only to involve themselves in deeper error, af- 
firming that the flesh assumed to Himself by the 
Word became capable of working like works with 
the deity ? by virtue of its assumption, and that 
the deity became susceptible of suffering in the 
same way with the flesh * by virtue of the exin- 
anition ; ^ and thus they assert the doctrine that 
there was at the same time a conversion and a 
mixing and a fusing'" of the two aspects one with 
the other. For if the flesh that was assumed 
became capable of working like works with the 
deity, it is evident that it also became God in 
essence in all wherein God is essentially known. 
And if the deity by the exinanition became sus- 
ceptible of the same sufferings with the flesh, it 
is evident that it also became in essence flesh 
in all wherein flesh essentially can be known. 

2 The sense is extremely doubtful here. The text runs thus: 
bu.oipvuii' yap iMOVuyv rj TauTOUpYOS ecTTi (ciVtjitis (TrjuaivoviTa. Triv 
oy<Ti.ay, ^s (j>v<7i.Kr) Kafle'crTijKe Sura/iiis, iT€poit>vov<; iSiOTijTOs oucias 
iivai. KaT ov&eva \6yov, rj yevicrOai. Si^a Tpoffij? SvvafXfVTjv. Anas- 
tasius renders it: Connaturalium enim tantum per se operans est 
motus, manifestans substantiam, cujus naturalem constat esse virtu- 
tem: diversae naturae proprietatis substantia nulla natura; esse vel 
fieri sine convertibilitate valente. 

3 6i,TTr)v xai &La<j>opa.v ixou 5teyi'(o(7Tai Trji' iv Traai (^ucriKJjf 
Oeujpiav, 

* The text goes, iia^ av oiix, which is adopted by Combefisius. 
But Capperonnier and Migne read 061' for ovx, as we have rendered 
it. 

5 Change, KifTjo'ts. 

^ p.ei'ei (xre'icTrTuiTos. 

^ yeveaOai. Tavrovpy'ov Trj flednjTi, 

^ TauTOTra^^ T^ (rapKi, 

9 Keyu}(Tii', 

10 

<rvy\v<ri.i'. 

For objects that act in like manner," and work 
like works, and are altogether of like kind, and 
are susceptible of like suffering with each other, 
admit of no difference of nature ; and if the 
natures are fused together,'^ Christ will be a 
duality ; '^ and if the persons '■♦ are separated, 
there will be a quaternity,'5 — a thing which is 
altogether to be avoided. And how will they 
conceive of the one and the same Christ, who 
is at once God and man by nature ? And what 
manner of existence will He have according to 
them, if He has become man by a conversion 
of the deity, and if he has become God by a 
change of the flesh ? For the mutation '^ of 
these, the one into the other, is a complete 
subversion of both. Let the discussion, then, 
be considered by us again in a different way. 

FRAGMENT VI. 

Among Christians it is settled as the doctrine 
of piety, that, according to nature itself, and to 
the activity and to whatever else pertains there- 
unto, God is equal and the same with Himself, '^ 
having nothing that is His unequal to Himself at 
all and heterogeneous.'^ If, then, according to 
Beron, the flesh that He assumed to Himself 
became possessed of the like natural energy with 
them, it is evident that it also became possessed 
of the like nature with Him in all wherein that 
nature consists, — to wit, non-origination, non- 
generation, infinitude, eternity, incomprehensi- 
bility, and whatever else in the way of the 
transcendent the theological mind discerns in 
deity ; and thus they both underwent conver- 
sion, neither the one nor the other preserving 
any more the substantial relation of its own 
proper nature."? For he who recognises an 
identical operation ^° in things of unlike nature, 
introduces at the same time a fusion of natures 
and a separation of persons,^' their natural ex- 
istence" being made entirely undistinguishable 
by the transference of properties.^^ 

FRAGMENT VII. 

But if it (the flesh) did not become of like 
nature with that (the deity), neither shall it ever 
become of like natural energy with that; that 
He may not be shown to have His energy un- 
equal with His nature, and heterogeneous, and, 
through all that pertains to Himself, to have 

'^ crvyKe\vnevuiv. [Vol. iii. p. 623]. 

'4 7rpo<Ta>7r(oj'. 

'5 Terpas, i.e., instead of Trinity [the Tpias]. 

'& p.eTd7rT(ocri?. [Compare the Athanasian Confession]. 

*^ icror eauTcu Kai ravTov, 

'8 a.KaTa.Wr)\ot'. 

'9 T^s iSias <j>v(T€oj^ ova^ititSr] \6yov, 

2° TauToupyiai/. 

^' SiaipecTLv TTpo<T<»7ri.Krjv, 

22 vndp^€ui<;, 

*-^ i6iu>jaa7'u>c. 

234 

THE DISCOURSE ON THE HOLY THEOPHANY. 

entered on an existence outside of His natural 
equality and identity,' which is an impious sup- 
position. 

FRAGMENT VIII. 

Into this error, then, have they been carried, 
by believing, unhappily, that that divine energy 
was made the property of the flesh which was 
only manifested through the flesh in His miracu- 
lous actions ; by which energy Christ, in so far 
as He is apprehended as God, gave existence to 
the universe, and now maintains and governs it. 
For they did not perceive that it is impossible 
for the energy of the divine nature to become 
the property^ of a being of a different nature ^ 
apart from conversion ; nor did they under- 
stand that that is not by any means the property 
of the flesh which is only manifested through it, 
and does not spring out of it according to nature ; 
and yet the proof thereof was clear and evident 
to them. For I, by speaking with the tongue 
and writing with the hand, reveal through both 
these one and the same thought of my intelligent 
soul, its energy (or operation) being natural ; in 
no way showing it as springing naturally out of 
tongue or hand ; nor yet (showing) even the 
spoken thought as made to belong to them in 
virtue of its revelation by their means. For no 
intelligent person ever recognised tongue or 
hand as capable of thought, just as also no one 
ever recognised the perfectly holy flesh of God, 
in virtue of its assumption, and in virtue of the 
revelation of the divine energy through its me- 
dium, as becoming in nature creative.'' But the 
pious confession of the believer is that, with a 
view to our salvation, and in order to connect 

' ^v<riKrit «fa> 7eyoi'<u5 io-OTTjTOS KOt TauTOTrjTOS. 

3 eTepo(t>avov<; ovcria?. 
* irffjL.LOvpyoi', 

the universe with unchangeableness, the Creator 
of all things incorporated with Himself s a 
rational soul and a sensible ^ body from the all- 
holy Mary, ever-virgin, by an undefiled concep- 
tion, without conversion, and was made man in 
nature, but separate from wickedness : the same 
was perfect God, and the same was perfect man : 
the same was in nature at once perfect God and 
man. In His deity He wrought divine things 
through His all-holy flesh, — such things, namely, 
as did not pertain to the flesh by nature ; and 
in His humanity He suffered human things, — 
such things, namely, as did not pertain to deity 
by nature, by the upbearing of the deity.^ He 
wrought nothing divine without the body ; * nor 
did the same do anything human without the 
participation of deity ."^ Thus He preserved for 
Himself a new and fitting method '° by which 
He wrought (according to the manner of) both, 
while that which was natural to both remained 
unchanged ; " to the accrediting'- of His perfect 
incarnation,'^ which is really genuine, and has 
nothing lacking in it.'-* Beron, therefore, since 
the case stands with him as I have already stated, 
confounding together in nature the deity and the 
humanity of Christ in a single energy, '5 and again 
separating them in person, subverts the life, not 
knowing that identical operation "^ is indicative 
of the connatural identity only of connatural 
persons. '7 

^ Or sensitive, alcrB-qTiKov, 

7 avo\fi TTacr^uji' fleoTijTOS, 

^ yvfxi'by crajfiaT05. 

9 aiixoipoi' 6pa(70? SednjTOS. 
'o KaLPonp€TTrj rpoTroi'. 
'^ TO Kar' aju</)aj (i>v<riKui^ avaWoiuiToi'. 
^2 et? ni(TTu}(7iv. 

'3 evai>6ptoTTri(T(io<;. [See Athanasian Creed, in Dutch Hymnal.} 
'4 jur)6ei' e^oi/CTT)? (^auAoTrjTOs. 
*S ei'tpytias pioi'd&i. 
'6 ravTOVpyiav. 
'7 fiovrii Tijs Tiiv 6fi.o<l>v<ov ■npoaioTTiav biio<f>vovi tovtotijtos. 

THE DISCOURSE ON THE HOLY THEOPHANY. 

I. Good, yea, very good, are all the works of 
our God and Saviour — all of them that eye 
seeth and mind perceiveth, all that reason inter- 
prets and hand handles, all that intellect com- 
prehends and human nature understands. For 
what richer beauty can there be than tliat of the 
circle ' of heaven ? And what form of more 
blooming fairness than that of earth's surface? 
And what is there swifter in the course than the 
chariot of the sun? And what more graceful 
car than the lunar orb ? ^ And what work more 

' hicKOv, 

2 0'«\>)i'iaxot; VTOixeiov. 

wonderful than the compact mosaic of the stars ? * 
And what more productive of supplies than the 
seasonable winds? And what more spotless 
mirror than the light of day ? .'Vnd what crea- 
ture more excellent than man? Very good, 
then, are all the works of our God and Saviour. 
And what more requisite gift, again, is there than 
the element •♦ of water ? For with water all things 
are washed and nourished, and cleansed and 
bedewed. Water bears the earth, water produces 
the dew, water exhilarates the vine ; water ma- 

3 7roAu7ri)yT)TOU riiv aarpiov jixovo'iov. 

THE DISCOURSE ON THE HOLY THEOPHANY. 

235 

tares the corn in the ear, water ripens the grape- 
cluster, water softens the oHve, water sweetens 
the palm-date, water reddens the rose and decks 
the violet, water makes the lily bloom with its 
brilliant cups. And why should I speak at 
length ? Without the element of water, none of 
the present order of tilings can subsist. So 
necessary is the element of water ; for the other 
elements ' took their places beneath the highest 
vault of the heavens, but the nature of water 
obtained a seat also above the heavens. And to 
this the prophet himself is a witness, when he 
exclaims, " Praise the Lord, ye heavens of heav- 
ens, and the water that is above the heavens." - 

2. Nor is this the only thing that proves the 
dignity 3 of the water. But there is also that 
which is more honourable than all — the fact 
that Christ, the Maker of all, came down as the 
rain,* and was known as a spring,^ and diffused 
Himself as a river,*^ and was baptized in the 
Jordan.7 For you have just heard how Jesus 
came to John, and was baptized by him in the 
Jordan. Oh things strange beyond compare ! 
How should the boundless River ^ that makes 
glad the city of God have been dipped in a little 
water ! The illimitable Spring that bears life to 
all men, and has no end, was covered by poor 
and temporary waters ! He who is present 
everywhere, and absent nowhere — who is in- 
comprehensible to angels and invisible to men — 
comes to the baptism according to His own 
good pleasure. When you hear these things, 
beloved, take them not as if spoken literally, but 
accept them as presented in a iigure.^ Whence 
also the Lord was not unnoticed by the watery 
element in what He did in secret, in the kind- 
ness of His condescension to man. " For the 
waters saw Him, and were afraid." '° They well- 
nigh broke from their place, and burst away 
from their boundary. Hence the prophet, hav- 
ing this in his view many generations ago, puts 
the question, " What aileth thee, O sea, that 
thou fleddest ; and thou, Jordan, that thou wast 
driven back?"" And they in reply said, We 
have seen the Creator of all things in the " form 
of a servant," '^ and being ignorant of the mys- 
tery of the economy, we were lashed with fear. 

3. But we, who know the economy, adore 
His mercy, because He hath come to save and 
not to judge the world. Wherefore John, the 
forerunner of the Lord, who before knew not 

' CTTOijfeia. 

2 Ps. cxlviii. 4. [Pindar ('Api<TTO>' nev ij&mp, Olymp., i. i), is 
here expounded and then transcended.] 

3 oflOTTlCTTioV. 

* Hos. vi. 3. 
5 John iv. 14. 

* John vii. 38. 
' Matt. iii. 13. 

8 Ps. xlvi. 4. 

9 Economically. 
'° Ps. Ixxvii. 16. 
" Ps. cxiv. 5. 

" PhU. ii. 7. 

this mystery, on learning that He is Lord in 
truth, cried out, and spake to those who came 
to be baptized of him, "O generation of vipers," '^ 
why look ye so earnestly at me ? "I am not 
the Christ ;"'■♦ I am the servant, and not the 
lord ; I am the subject, and not the king ; I am 
the sheep, and not the shepherd ; I am a man, 
and not God. By my birth I loosed the bar- 
renness of my mother ; I did not make virginity 
barren. "5 I was brought up from beneath ; I 
did not come down from above. I bound the 
tongue of my father ; '^ I did not unfold divine 
grace. I was known by my mother, and I was 
not announced by a star. '7 I am worthless, and 
the least ; but " after me there comes One who 
is before me " '* — after me, indeed, in time, but 
before me by reason of the inaccessible and un- 
utterable light of divinity. " There comes One 
mightier than \, whose shoes I am not worthy 
to bear : He shall baptize you with the Holy 
Ghost, and with fire." '^ I am subject to author- 
ity, but He has authority in Himself. I am 
bound by sins, but He is the Remover of sins. 
I apply ^° the law, but He bringeth grace to light. 
I teach as a slave, but He judgeth as the Mas- 
ter. I have the earth as my couch, but He 
possesses heaven. I baptize with the baptism 
of repentance, but He confers the gift of adop- 
tion : " He shall baptize you with the Holy 
Ghost, and with fire." Why give ye attention 
to me ? I am not the Christ. 

4. As John says these things to the multitude, 
and as the people watch in eager expectation of 
seeing some strange spectacle with their bodily 
eyes, and the devil-' is struck with amazement at 
such a testimony from John, lo, the Lord ap- 
pears, plain, solitary, uncovered,^- without escort,-^ 
having on Him the body of man like a garment, 
and hiding the dignity of the Divinity, that He 
may elude the snares of the dragon. And not 
only did He approach John as Lord without royal 
retinue ; but even like a mere man, and one 
involved in sin. He bent His head to be bap- 
tized by John. Wherefore John, on seeing so 
great a humbling of Himself, was struck with 
astonishment at the affair, and began to prevent 
Him, saying, as ye have just heard, " I have 
need to be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou 

■3 Matt. iii. 7. 

''' John i. 20. 

■5 oil napBeviav ccTTeipwo-o. So Gregory Thaumaturgus, Sancta 
Thcophaiiia, p. 106, edit. Vossiir " Thou, when born of the Virgin 
Mary, . . . didst not loose her virginity; but didst preserve it, and 
gifted her with the name of mother." 

"" Luke i. 20. 

'^ Matt. ii. 9. 

'^ John i. 27. 

■9 Matt. iii. 11. 

^° TrapaTTTw. 

2' It was a common opinion among the ancient theologians that 
the devil was ignorant of the mystery of the economy, founding on 
such passages as Matt. iv. 3, i Cor. ii. 8. (Fabricius.) [See Igna- 
tius, vol. i. p. 57, this series.] 

-3 ajrpoCTTaTevTos. 

236 

THE DISCOURSE ON THE HOLY THEOPHANY. 

to me?'" What doest Thou, O Lord? Thou 
teachest things not according to rule.- I have 
preached one thing (regarding Thee), and Thou 
perforinest another ; the devil has heard one 
thing, and perceives another. Baptize me with 
the fire of Divinity ; whywaitest Thou for water? 
EnHghten me with the Spirit; why dost Thou 
attend upon a creature? Baptize me, the Bap- 
tist, that Thy pre-eminence may be known. I, 

0 Lord, baptize with the baptism of repentance, 
and I cannot baptize those who come to me 
unless they first confess fully their sins. Be it 
so then that I baptize Thee, what hast Thou to 
confess? Thou art the Remover of sins, and 
wilt Thou be baptized with the baptism of re- 
pentance ? Though I should venture to baptize 
Thee, the Jordan dares not to come near Thee. 
" I have need to be baptized of Thee, and 
comest Thou to me?" 

5. And what saith the Lord to him? "Suffer! 
it to be so now, for thus it becometh us to ful- 
fil all righteousness." ^ "Suffer it to be so now," 
John ; thou art not wiser than L Thou seest 
as man ; I foreknow as God. It becomes me 
to do this first, and thus to teach. I engage in 
nothing unbecoming, for I am invested with 
honour. Dost thou marvel, O John, that I am 
not come in my dignity? The purple robe of 
kings suits not one in private station, but military 
splendour suits a king : am I come to a prince, 
and not to a friend ? " Suffer it to be so now, 
for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteous- 
ness : " I am the Fulfiller of the law ; I seek to 
leave nothing wanting to its whole fulfilment, 
that so after me Paul may exclaim, " Christ is 
the fulfilling of the law for righteousness to every 
one that believeth." •♦ " Suffer it to be so now, 
for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteous- 
ness." Baptize me, John, in onler that no one 
may despise baptism. I am baplizcil by thee, 
the servant, that no one among kings or digni- 
taries may scorn to be baptized by the hand of 
a poor priest. Suffer me to go down into the 
Jordan, in order that they may hear my Father's 
testimony, and recognise the power of the Son. 
" Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becometh us 
to fulfil all righteousness." Then at length John 
suffers Him. " And Jesus, when He was bap- 
tized, went up straightway out of the water : and 
the heavens were opened unto Him ; and, lo, 
the Spirit of God descended like a dove, and 
rested upon Him. And a voice (came) from 
heaven, saying. This is my beloved Son, in whom 

1 am well pleased." 5 

6. Do you see, beloved, how many and how 
great blessings we would have lost, if the Lord 

' Matt. iii. 14. 

2 axavovKTTa SoYHOTi^en. 

3 Matt. iii. 15. 
^ Rom. X. 4. 

5 Matt. iii. 16, 17. 

had yielded to the exhortation of John, and 
declined baptism ? For the heavens were shut 
before this ; the region above was inaccessible. 
We would in that case descend to the lower 
parts, but we would not ascend to the upper. 
But was it only that the Lord was baptized ? He 
also renewed the old man, and committed to 
him again the sceptre of adoption. For straight- 
way " the heavens were opened to Him." A 
reconciliation took place of the visible with the 
invisible ; the celestial orders were filled with 
joy ; the diseases of earth were healed ; secret 
things were made known ; those at enmity were 
restored to amity. For you have heard the word 
of the evangelist, saying, " The heavens were 
opened to Him," on account of three wonders. 
For when Christ the Bridegroom was baptized, 
it was meet that the bridal-chamber of heaven 
should open its brilliant gates. And in like 
manner also, when the Holy Spirit descended in 
the form of a dove, and the Father's voice spread 
everywhere, it was meet that " the gates of 
heaven should be lifted up."^ "And, lo, the 
heavens were opened to Him ; and a voice was 
heard, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom 
I am well pleased." 

7. The beloved generates love, and the light 
immaterial the light inaccessible.'' " This is my 
beloved Son," He who, being manifested on 
earth and yet unseparated from the Father's 
bosom, was manifested, and yet did not appear.** 
For the appearing is a different thing, since in 
appearance the baptizer here is superior to the 
baptized. For this reason did the Father send 
down the Holy Spirit from heaven upon Him 
who was baptized. For as in the ark of Noah 
the love of God toward man is signified by the 
dove, so also now the Spirit, descending in the 
form of a dove, bearing as it were the fruit of 
the olive, rested on Him to whom the witness 
was borne. For what reason ? That the faith- 
fulness of the Father's voice might be made 
known, and that the prophetic utterance of a 
long time past might be ratified. And what ut- 
terance is this? "The voice of the Lord (is) 
on the waters, the God of glory thundered ; the 
Lord (is) upon many waters.'"^ And what 
voice ? " This is my beloved Son, in whom I 
am well pleased." This is He who is named 
the son of Joseph, and (who is) according to 
the divine essence my Only-begotten. " This 
is my beloved Son " — He who is hungry, and 
yet maintains myriads ; who is weary, and yet 
gives rest to the weary ; who has not where to 

* Ps. xxiv. 7- . . , , 

7 cj)(is av\oi' yei'i'oi <J)ws a-npocriTOf. The Son is called " Light 
of Light " in the Discourse .against Noetus, ch. x. [See p. 227 
su^ra.] In <i>uji anpoaiTov the reference is to i Tim. vi. 16. 

8 sTreitaiT) oiiK ifdvi). See Dorner's Doctrine 0/ the Person 0/ 
Christ, div. i. vol. it. p. 97 (Clark). 

9 Ps. xxix. 3. 

DISCOURSE ON THE HOLY THEOPHANY. 

237 

lay His head,' and yet bears up all things in His 
hand ; who suffers, and yet heals sufferings ; who 
is smitten,^ and yet confers liberty on the world ; ^ 
who is pierced in the side/ and yet repairs the 
side of Adam. 5 

8. But give me now your best attention, I 
pray you, for I wish to go back to the fountain 
of life, and to view the fountain that gushes with 
healing. The Father of immortality sent the 
immortal Son and Word into the world, who 
came to man in order to wash him with water 
and the Spirit ; and He, begetting us again to 
incorruption of soul and body, breathed into us 
the breath (spirit) of life, and endued us with 
an incorruptible panoply. If, therefore, man 
has become immortal, he will also be God.^ 
And if he is made God by water and the Holy 
Spirit after the regeneration of the laver^ he is 
found to be also joint-heir with Christ ^ after the 
resurrection from the dead. Wherefore I preach 
to this effect : Come, all ye kindreds of the na- 
tions, to the immortality of the baptism. I 
bring good tidings of life to you who tarry in 
the darkness of ignorance. Come into liberty 
from slavery, into a kingdom from tyranny, into 
incorruption from corruption. And how, saith 
one, shall we come ? How ? By water and the 
Holy Ghost. This is the water in conjunction 
with the Spirit, by which paradise is watered, 
by which the earth is enriched, by which plants 
grow, by which animals multiply, and (to sum 
up the whole in a single word) by which man is 
begotten again and endued with life, in which 
also Christ was baptized, and in which the 
Spirit descended in the form of a dove. 

9. This is the Spirit that at the beginning 
"moved upon the face of the waters ;"9 by 
whom the world moves ; by whom creation con- 
sists, and all things have life ; who also wrought 
mightily in the prophets, '° and descended in 
flight upon Christ." This is the Spirit that was 

' Luke ix. 5. [Compare the Paradoxes, attributed to Bacon, 
in his Works, vol. xiv. p. 143; also the Appendix, pp. 139-142.] 

- pawi^ofici'os, referring to the slap in the process of manumit- 
ting slaves. 

i Heb. i. 3. 

* Matt. xxvi. 67. [From which proceeds His Church.] 

5 That is, the sin introduced by Eve, who was formed by God out 
of Adam's side. (Fabricius.) 

* etnai koX ©eos, referring probably to 2 Pet. i. 4, "iva hia TovTiav 
yevr)a0e fleias KOivtuvol tjyxKTfux;, " that by these ye might be partak- 
ers of the divine nature." [See vol. iii. p. 317, note 11. Tertulliarr 
anticipates the language of the " Athanasian Confession," — " taking 
the manhood into God; " applicable, through Christ, to our redeemed 
humanity. Eph. ii. 6.; Rev. iii. 21.] 

^ icoAu|a|3rj0pa?. 

8 Rom. viii. 17. 

9 Gen. i. 2. 

'° Acts xxviii. 25. 
" Matt. iii. 16. 

given to the apostles in the form of fiery tongues.'^ 
This is the Spirit that David sought when he 
said, " Create in me a clean heart, O God, and 
renew a right spirit within me." '^ Of this Spirit 
Gabriel also spoke to the Virgin, " The Holy 
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of 
the Highest shall overshadow thee." '■• By this 
Spirit Peter spake that blessed word, "Thou 
art the Christ, the Son of the living God." '5 By 
this Spirit the rock of the Church was stab- 
lished.'^ This is the Spirit, the Comforter, that 
is sent because of thee,'^ that He may show thee 
to be the Son '^ of God. 

lo. Come then, be begotten again, O man, 
into the adoption of God. And how? says one. 
If thou practisest adultery no more, and commit- 
test not murder, and servest not idols ; if thou 
art not overmastered by pleasure ; if thou dost 
not suffer the feeling of pride to rule thee ; if 
thou cleanest off the filthiness of impurity, and 
puttest off the burden of sin ; if thou castest off 
the armour of the devil, and puttest on the 
breastplate of faith, even as Isaiah saith, " Wash 
you, and seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, 
judge the fatherless, and plead for the widow. 
And come and let us reason together, saith the 
Lord. Though your sins be as scarlet, I shall 
make them white as snow ; and though they be 
like crimson, I shall make them white as wool. 
And if ye be willing, and hear my voice, ye shall 
eat the good of the land." '^ Do you see, be- 
loved, how the prophet spake beforetime of the 
purifying power of baptism ? For he who comes 
down in faith to the laver of regeneration, and 
renounces the devil, and joins himself to Christ ; 
who denies the enemy, and makes the confession 
that Christ is God ; who puts off the bondage, 
and puts on the adoption, — he comes up from 
the baptism brilliant as the sun,^° flashing forth the 
beams of righteousness, and, which is indeed the 
chief thing, he returns a son of God and joint- 
heir with Christ. To Him be the glory and the 
power, together with His most holy, and good, 
and quickening Spirit, now and ever, and to all 
the ages of the ages. Amen. 

'2 Acts ii. 3. 

>3 Ps Ii. 10. 

'"i Luke i. 35. 

^5 Matt. xvi. 16. 

'* Matt. xvi. 18. 

'^ John xvi. 26. » 

■9 Isa. i. 16-19. 

'° This seems to refer to what the poets sing as to the sun rising 
out of tile waves of ocean. (Fabricius.) [Note, this is not said of 
such as Simon Magus, but of one who puis off the bondage, i.e., of 
corruption. Our author's peroraiions are habitually sublime.] 

238 

FRAGMENTS OF DISCOURSES OR HOMILIES. 

FRAGMENTS OF DISCOURSES OR HOMILIES. 

I.' 

From the Discourse of Hippolytus, Bishop of Rome, on the 
Resurrection and Incorruption. 

Men, he says, " in the resurrection will be like 
the angels of God," ^ to wit, in incorruption, and 
immortality, and incapacity of loss.^ For the 
incorruptible nature is not the subject of genera- 
tion ; * it grows not, sleeps not, hungers not, thirsts 
not, is not wearied, suffers not, dies not, is not 
pierced by nails and spear, sweats not, drops 
not with blood. Of such kind are the natures of 
the angels and of souls released from the body. 
For both these are of another kind, and differ- 
ent from these creatures of our world, which are 
visible and perishing. 

II.5 

From the Discourse of St. Hippolytus, Bishop and Martyr, 
on the Divine Nature.*" 

God is capable of willing, but not of not will- 
ing,7 for that pertains only to one that changes 
and makes choice ; ^ for things that are being 
made follow the eternal will of God, by which 
also things that are made abide sustained. 

m.9 

St. Hippolytus, Bishop and Martyr, in his Homily on the 
Paschal Supper. 

He was altogether '° in all, and everywhere ; 
and though He filleth the universe up to all the 
principalities of the air. He stripped Himself 
again. And for a brief space He cries that the 
cup might pass from Him, with a view to show 
truly that He was also man." But remembering, 
too, the purpose for which He was sent. He ful- 
fils the dispensation (economy) for which He 
was sent, and exclaims, " Father, not my will," '^ 
and, "The si)irit is willing, but the flesh is 
weak." '3 

' ' From a Discourse on the Resurrection, in Anastasius Sinaita, 
Hodegus, p. 350. This treatise is nientioncci in the list of his works 
given on the statue, and also by Jerome, Sophronius, Nicephorus, 
Honorius, etc. 

^ Matt. xxii. 30. 

3 apevaia, 

4 yfyyarai, 

5 From the Discourse on the Theology or the Doctrine of Christ's 
Divine Nature, extant in the Acts 0/ the Lateran Council, under 
Martinus i., ann. 649, secret, v. p. 287, vol. vii. edit. Veneto-Labb. 

*" Trept fleoAoyias. 
' oil TO /uii) 9f\(t.v. 
* TperrToC Kal irpoatp€ToC. 

9 From a Homily on the Lord's Paschal Supper, ibid., p. 293. 
•o bAo9. 

" nol dvepuiTTo?, also man. See Grabe, Bull's Defens. Fid. Nic, 
p. 103. 

'^ Luke XXII. 42. 
'^ Matt. XXVI. 41. 

1. Take me, O Samuel, the heifer brought to 
Bethlehem, in order to show the king begotten 
of David, and him who is anointed to be king 
and priest by the Father, 

2. Tell me, O blessed Mary, what that was 
that was conceived by thee in the womb, and 
what that was that was born by thee in thy virgin 
matrix. For it was the first-born Word of God 
that descended to thee from heaven, and was 
formed as a first-born man in the womb, in order 
that the first-born Word of God might be shown 
to be united with a first-born man. 

3. And in the second (form), — to wit, by 
the prophets, as by Samuel, calling back and 
delivering the people from the slavery of the 
aliens. And in the third (form), that in which 
He was incarnate, taking to Himself humanity 
from the Virgin, in which character also He saw 
the city, and wept over it. 

V.'S 

And for this reason three seasons of the year 
prefigured the Saviour Himself, so that He should 
fulfil the mysteries prophesied of Him. In the 
Passover season, so as to exhibit Himself as one 
destined to be sacrificed like a sheep, and to 
prove Himself the true Paschal-lamb, even as 
the apostle says, " Even Christ," who is God, 
" our passover was sacrificed for us." "^' And at 
Pentecost so as to presignify the kingdom of 
heaven, as He Himself firstascended to heaven 
and brought man as a gift to God.'^ 

VI 

i8 

And an ark of imperishable wood was the 
Saviour Himself. For by this was signified the 
imperishable and incorruptible tabernacle (of 
His body), which engendered no corruption 
of sin. P'or the man who has sinned also has 
this confession to make : " My wounds stank, 
and were corrupt, because of my foolishness." ''> 
But the Lord was without sin, being of imperish- 
able wood in respect of His humanity, — that is 

•* From a Discourse on Elkanah and Hannah. In Theodoret, 
Dial. I., bearing the title "Unchangeable" (orpcirros) ; Works, 

vol. iv. p. 36. . T-v- 1 

'S From the same Discourse. From Theodoret's Second Dialogue, 

bearing the title " Unmixed," a<7uyxuTo?; Works, vol. iv. p. 88. 
■<> I Cor. V. 7. 
'" I Man's nature was never before in heaven. John^u. 13; Acts 

18 j.^, 

rom an Oration on " The Lord is my Shepherd." In Theod- 
oret, Dial. I. p. 36. 
'9 Ps. xxxviii. 5. 

FRAGMENTS OF DISCOURSES OR HOMILIES. 

239 

to say, being of the Virgin and the Holy Spirit, 
covered, as it were, within and without with the 
purest gold of the Word of God. 

VII.' 

1. He who rescued from the lowest hell the 
first-formed man of earth when he was lost and 
bound with the chains of death ; He who came 
down from above, and raised the earthy on 
high ; 2 He who became the evangelist of the 
dead, and the redeemer of the souls, and the 
resurrection of the buried, — He was constituted 
the helper of vanquished man, being made.Hke 
him Himself, (so that) the first-born Word ac- 
quainted Himself with the first-formed Adam in 
the Virgin ; He who is spiritual sought out the 
earthy in the womb ; He who is the ever-living 
One sought out him who, through disobedience, 
is subject to death ; He who is heavenly called 
the terrene to the things that are above ; He who 
is the nobly-born sought, by means of His own 
subjection, to declare the slave free ; He trans- 
formed the man into adamant who was dissolved 
into dust and made the food of the serpent, and 
declared Him who hung on the tree to be Lord 
over the conqueror, and thus through the tree 
He is found victor. 

2. For they who know not now the Son of God 
incarnate, shall know in Him who comes as Judge 
in glory, Him who is now despised in the body 
of His humiliation. 

3. And the apostles, when they came to the 
sepulchre on the third day, did not find the body 
of Jesus ; just as the children of Israel went up 
the mount and sought for the tomb of Moses, but 
did not find it. 

VIII.3 

Under the figure of Egypt he described the 
world ; and under things made with hands, idola- 
try ; and under the earthquake, the subversion 
and dissolution of the earth itself. And he repre- 
sented the Lord the Word as a light cloud, the 
purest tabernacle, enthroned on which our Lord 
Jesus Christ entered into this life in order to 
subvert error. 

IX.'* 

Now Hippolytus, the martyr and bishop of 
[the Province of] Rome, in his second discourse 
on Daniel, speaks thus : — 

' From a Discourse on the " Great Song ' 
Bunsen, i. p. 285. Some suppose it Ps. cxix.j 

' [i.e., Ps. xc. See 

In Theodorel, Dial. 

II. pp. 88, 89 

2 Tov koltuj ei? Ta dru}. [See p. 238, note 17, supra.] 

3 From a Discourse on the beginning of Isaiah. In Theodoret, 
Dial. I. p. 36. 

* From a second Oration on Daniel. In the tractate of Eustratius, 
a presbyter of the Church of Constantinople, " Against those who 

Then indeed Azarias, standing along with the 
others, made their acknowledgments to God 
with song and prayer in the midst of the furnace. 
Beginning thus with His holy and glorious and 
honourable name, they came to the works of the 
Lord themselves, and named first of all those of 
heaven, and glorified Him, saying, " Bless the 
Lord, all ye works of the Lord." Then they 
passed to the sons of men, and taking up their 
hymn in order, they then named the spirits [that 
people Tartarus 5 beneath the earth,] and the 
souls of the righteous, m order that they might 
praise God together with them. 

Now a person might say that these men, and 
those who hold a different opinion, are yet near 
neighbours, being involved in like error. For 
those men, indeed, either profess that Christ 
came into our life a mere man, and deny the 
talent of His divinity, or else, acknowledging 
Him to be God, they deny, on the other hand. 
His humanity, and teach that His appearances 
to those who saw Him as man were illusory, 
inasmuch as He did not bear with Him true 
manhood, but was rather a kind of phantom 
manifestation. Of this class are, for example, 
Marcion and Valentinus, and the Gnostics, who 
sunder the Word from the flesh, and thus set 
aside the one talent, viz., the incarnation. 

XI.7 

1 . The body of the Lord presented both these 
to the world, the sacred blood and the holy 
water. 

2. And His body, though dead after the man- 
ner of man, possesses in it great power of life. 
For streams which flow not from dead bodies 
flowed forth from Him, viz., blood and water ; 
in order that we might know what power for life 
is held by the virtue that dwelt in His body, so 
as that it appears not to be dead like others, 
and is able to shed forth for us the springs of 
life. 

3. And not a bone of the Holy Lamb is 
broken, this figure showing us that suffering 
toucheth not His strength. For the bones are 
the strength of the body. 

allege that souls, as soon as they are released from the body, cease 
to act," ch. xix., as edited by AUatius in his work on the Continuous 
Harmony of the Western and the Eastern Church on the Dogma 
of Purgatory, p. 402. [Conf. Macaire, Theoi. Orthod., ii. p. 725 j 

5 [Nothing of this in the hymn: hence my brackets.] 

6 From an Oration on the Distribution of Talents. In Theodoret, 
Dial. II. p. 88. 

^ From a Discourse on " The two Robbers." In Theodoret's 
Third Dialogue, bearing the title " Impassible" (ajra9i)?), p 156. 

240 FRAGMENTS FROM OTHER WRITINGS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

FRAGMENTS FROM OTHER WRITINGS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

I. 

Now Hippolytus, a martyr for piety, who was 
bishop of the place called Portus, near Rome, 
in his book Against all Heresies, wrote in these 
terms : — 

I perceive, then, that the matter is one of 
contention. For he == speaks thus : Christ kept 
the supper, then, on that day, and then suffered ; 
whence it is needful that I, too, should keep it 
in the same manner as the Lord did. But he 
has fallen into error b}' not perceiving that at 
the time when Christ suffered He did not eat 
the passover of the law.3 For He was the pass- 
over that had been of old proclaimed, and that 
was fulfilled on that determinate day. 

II. 

From the same. 

And again the same (authority), in the first 
book of his treatise on the Holy Supper, speaks 
thus : — 

Now that neither in the first nor in the last 
there was anything false is evident ; for he who 
said of old, " I will not any more eat the pass- 
over," •♦ probably partook of supper before the 
passover. But the passover He did not eat, but 
He suffered ; for it was not the time for Him to ' 
eat. 

III.5 
Hippolytus, Bishop and Martyr, in a letter to a certain queen.'' 

1. He calls Him, then, " the first-fruits of 
them that sleep," 7 as the " first-begotten of the 
dead." ** For He, having risen, and being de- 
sirous to show that that same (body) had been 
raised which had also died, when His disciples 
were in doubt, called Thomas to Him, and said, 
" Reach hither ; handle me, and see : for a spirit 
hath not bone and flesh, as ye see me have." '^ 

2. In calling Him the first-fruits, he testified 
to that which we have said, viz., that the Saviour, 
taking to Himself the flesh out of the same 
lump, raised this same flesh, and made it the 

> Preserved by the author of the Chronicon PaschaU, ex ed. 
Cangii, p. 6. 

^ i.e., the opponent of Hippolytus, one of the forerunners of the 
Quartodecinians. 

3 \Yqx pro if con .see Speaker's Com., note to Matt, xxvi.] 

* Luke xxii. i6. 

S From a letter of Hippolytus to a certain queen. In Theod- 
oret's Dial. II., bearing the title" Unmixed" (ao-iiyxuTo?). 
and Dial. III., entitled " Impassible" (arrodr)?) [pp. 238-239 supra]. 

^ On the question as to who this queen was, see Steplien le iSloyne, 
in notes to the I 'aria Sacra, pp. 1103, 1112. In the marble monu- 
ment mention is made of a letter of Hippolytus to Severina. [Bun- 
sen decides that she was only a princess, a daughter of Alexander 
Severus. See his Hippolytus, i. p. 276.] 

' 1 Cor. XV. 20. 

« Col. i. 18. 

9 John XX. 27; Luke xxiv. 39. 

first-fruits of the flesh of the righteous, in order 
that all we who have believed in the hope of 
the Risen One may have the resurrection in ex- 
pectation. 

THE STORY OF A MAIDEN OF CORINTH, AND 
A CERTAIN MAGISTRIANUS. 

The account given by Hippolytus, the friend of the apostles '° 

In another little book bearing the name of 
Hippolytus, the friend of the apostles, I found a 
story of the following nature : — 

There lived a certain most noble and beauti- 
ful maiden " in the city of Corinth, in the careful 
exercise of a virtuous life. At that time some 
persons falsely charged her before the judge 
there, who was a Greek, with cursing the times, 
and the princes, and the images. Now those 
who trafficked in such things, brought her beauty 
under the notice of the impious judge, who lusted 
after women. And he gladly received the ac- 
cusation with his equine ears and lascivious 
thoughts. And when she was brought before the 
bloodstained (judge), he was driven still more 
frantic with profligate passion. But when, after 
bringing every device to bear upon her, the pro- 
fane man could not gain over this woman of 
God, he subjected the noble maiden to various 
outrages. And when he failed in these too, and 
was unable to .seduce her from her confession 
of Christ, the cruel judge became furious against 
her, and gave her over to a punishment of the 
following nature : Placing the chaste maiden in 
a brothel, he charged the manager, saying, Take 
this woman, and bring me three nummi by heh 
every day. And the man, exacting the money 
from her by her dishonour, gave her up to any 
who sought her in the brothel. And when the 
women-hunters knew that, they came to the 
brothel, and, paying the price put upon their 
iniquity, sought to seduce her. But this most 
honourable maiden, taking counsel with herself 
to deceive them, called them to her, and ear- 
nestly besought them, saying : I have a certain 
ulceration of the pudenda, which has an ex- 
tremely hateful stench ; and I am afraid that ye 
might come to hate me on account of the abomi- 
nable sore. Grant me therefore a few days, 
and then ye may have me even for nothing. 
With these words the blessed maiden gained 
over the profligates, and dismissed them for a 
time.'^ And with most fitting prayers she impor- 

■° Extract in Pall.idius, Historia Lausiaca, chap, cxlviii.; Gal- 
landi, BibUoth., ii. 513. 

" Nicephorus also mentions her in his Hist. Eccl., vii. 13. 
'^ [On the morality of this, see vol. ii. pp. 538, 556.] 

ELUCIDATION. 

241 

tuned God, and with contrite supplications she 
sought to turn Him to compassion. God, there- 
fore, who knew her thoughts, and understood 
how the chaste maiden was distressed in heart 
for her purity, gave ear to her ; and the Guardian 
of the safety of all men in those days inter- 
posed with His arrangements in the following 
manner : — 

of a certain person Magistrianus.' 

There was a certain young man, Magistrianus,^ 
comely in his personal appearance, and of a 
pious mind, whom God had inspired with such 
a burning spiritual zeal, that he despised even 
death itself. He, coming under the guise of 
profligacy, goes in, when the evening was far 
gone, to the fellow who kept the women, and 
pays him five nummi, and says to him, Permit 
me to spend this night with this damsel. Enter- 
ing then with her into the private apartment, he 
says to her, Rise, save thyself. And taking off 
her garments, and dressing her in his own attire, 

• From the same, chap, cxlix. 

* Nicephorus gives this story also. Hist. Eccl., vii. ij. 

his night-gown, his cloak, and all the habiliments 
of a man, he says to her. Wrap yourself up with 
the top of your cloak, and go out ; and doing so, 
and signing herself entirely with the mystery of 
the cross, she went forth uncorrupted from that 
place, and was preserved perfectly stainless by 
the grace of Christ, and by the instrumentality 
of the young man, who by his own blood deliv- 
ered her from dishonour. And on the following 
day the matter became known, and Magistrianus 
was brought before the infuriated judge. And 
when the cruel tyrant had examined the noble 
champion of Christ, and had learned all, he 
ordered him to be thrown to tt.e wild beasts, — 
that in this, too, the honour-hating demon might 
be put to shame. For, whereas he thought to 
involve the noble youth in an unhallowed pun- 
ishment, he exhibited him as a double martyr 
for Christ, inasmuch as he had both striven nobly 
for his own immortal soul, and persevered man- 
fully in labours also in behalf of that noble and 
blessed maiden. Wherefore also he was deemed 
worthy of double honour with Christ, and of the 
illustrious and blessed crowns by His goodness. 

ELUCIDATION. 

The conduct of Father Abraham, although not approved of by Inspiration, but simply 
recorded (Gen. xxvi. 7), gave early Christians an opinion that the wicked may be justly foiled, 
by equivocation and deception, for the preservation of innocence or the life of the innocent. In 
such case the person deceived, they might argue, is not injured, but benefited (Gen. xxvi. 10), 
being saved from committing violence and murder. The Corinthian maiden was accustomed ta 
be veiled (as Tertullian intimates) , and was taught alike to cherish her own purity and to have 
no share in affording occasion of sin to others. See vol. iv. pp. 32, 33. Let us call this narra- 
tive " The Story of Corinthia and Magistrianus." 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

CONTAINING DUBIOUS AND SPURIOUS PIECES. 

A DISCOURSE' BY THE MOST BLESSED HIPPOLYTUS, BISHOP AND MARTYR, ON THE END 
OF THE WORLD, AND ON ANTICHRIST, AND ON THE SECOND COMING OF OUR LORD 
JESUS CHRIST. 

I. 

Since, then, the blessed prophets have been 
•eyes to us, setting forth for our behoof the clear 
declaration of things secret, both through life, 
and through declaration, and through inspiration - 
of the Holy Spirit, and discoursing, too, of things 
not yet come to pass,^ in this way also •♦ to all 
generations they have pictured forth the grandest 
■subjects for contemplation and for action. Thus, 
too, they preached of the advent of God 5 in the 
flesh to the world, His advent by the spotless 
and God-bearing'' Mary in the way of birth and 
irrovvth, and the manner of His life and conver- 
sation with men, and His manifestation by bap- 
tism, and the new birth that was to be to all 
men, and the regeneration by the laver ; and the 
multitude of His miracles, and His blessed pas- 
sion on the cross, and the insults which He bore 
at the hands of the Jews, and His burial, and His 
descent to Hades, and His ascent again, and re- 
demption of the spirits that were of old,^ and 
the destruction of death, and His life-giving 
awaking from the dead, and His re-creation of 
the whole world, and His assumption and return 
to heaven, and His reception of the Spirit, of 
which the apostles were deemed worthy, and 
again the second coming, that is destined to de- 
clare all things. For as being designated seers,^ 
they of necessity signified and spake of these 
things beforetime. 

' This discourse seems to have been a homily addressed to the 
people. Fabricius, IVorks of Hippolytus, vol. ii. 

^ €7ri0otTri(Ttw? 

3 ycfovoTo.. Codex Baroccianus gives ei/pijicbTa. 

< o6(v Kat, etc. 

s Others, tou uioO toC 0«oO, of the Son of God. 

6 fleoTOKou. [The epithet applied to the Blessed Virgin by the 
"Council of Ephesus," against Nestorius, a.d. 431. Elucidation, 
p. 259. ] This is one of those terms which some allsge not to have been 
yet in use in the time of Hippolytus. But, as Migne observes, if there 
were no other argument than this against the genuineness of this dis- 
course, this would not avail much, as the term is certainly used by 
■Origeii, Methodius, and Dionysius Alex., who were nearly coeval 
■with Hippolytus. 

* ^AcTToi-ret. 

243 

II. 

Hence, too, they indicated the day of the con- 
summation to us, and signified beforehand the 
day of the apostate that is to appear and deceive 
men at the last times, and the beginning and end 
of his kingdom, and the advent of the Judge, 
and the life of the righteous, and the punish- 
ment of the sinners, in order that we all, bearing 
these things in mind day by day and hour by 
hour, as children of the Church, might know that 
" not one jot nor one tittle of these things shall 
fail," 9 as the Saviour's own word announced. 
Let all of you, then, of necessity, open the eyes 
of your hearts and the ears of your soul, and 
receive the word which we are about to speak. 
For I shall unfold to you to-day a narration full 
of horror and fear, to wit. the account of the 
consummation, and in particular, of the seduc- 
tion of the whole world by the enemy and devil : 
and after these things, the second coming of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

III. 

Where, then, ye friends of Christ, shall I be- 
gin? and with what shall I make my commence- 
ment, or what shall I expound ? and what witness 
shall I adduce for the things spoken ? But let 
us take those (viz., the prophets) with whom we 
began this discourse, and adduce them as credi- 
ble witnesses, to confirm our exposition of the 
matters discussed ; and after them the teaching, 
or rather the proi)hecy, of the aposUes, (so as 
to see) how throughout the whole world they 
herald the day of the consummation. Since 
these, then, have also shown beforetime things 
not yet come to pass, and have declared the 
devices and deceits of wicked men, who are 
destined to be made manifest, come and let us 
bring forward Isaiah as our first witness, inas- 
much as he instructs us in the times of the con- 

9 Matt, v, x3. 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

24: 

summation. What, then, does he say? "Your 
country is desolate, your cities are burned with 
fire : your land, strangers devour it in your pres- 
ence : the daughter of Zion shall be left as a 
cottage in a vineyard, and as a lodge in a garden 
of cucumbers, as a besieged city." ' You see, 
beloved, the prophet's illumination, whereby he 
announced that time so many generations before. 
For it is not of the Jews that he spake this word 
of old, nor of the city of Zion, but of the Church. 
For all the prophets have declared Sion to be 
the bride brought from the nations. 

IV. 

Wherefore let us direct our discourse to a 
second witness. And of what sort is this one ? 
Listen to Osea, as he speaks thus grandly : " In 
those days the Lord shall bring on a burning 
wind from the desert against them, and shall 
make their veins dry, and shall make their springs 
desolate ; and all their goodly vessels shall be 
spoiled. Because they rose up against God, 
they shall fall by the sword, and their women 
with child shall be ripped up." ^ And what else 
is this burning wind from the east, than the Anti- 
christ that is to destroy and dry up the veins of 
the waters and the fruits of the trees in his times, 
because men set their hearts on his works ? For 
which reason he shall indeed destroy them, and 
they shall serve him in his pollution. 

Mark the agreement of prophet with prophet. 
Acquaint yourself also with another prophet who 
expresses himself in like manner. For Amos 
prophesied of the same things in a manner quite 
in accordance : " Thus saith the Lord, Foras- 
much therefore as ye have beaten the poor with 
the fist,^ and taken choice gifts from liim : ye 
have built houses, but ye shall not dwell in 
them : ye have planted pleasant vineyards, but 
ye shall not drink wine of them. For I know 
your manifold transgressions, in trampling justice 
beneath your foot, and taking a bribe, and turn- 
ing aside the poor in the gate from their right. 
Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that 
time, for it is an evil time." ■♦ Learn, beloved, 
the wickedness of the men of that time, how 
they spoil houses and fields, and take even jus- 
tice from the just ; for when these things come 
to pass, ye may know that it is the end. For 
this reason art thou instructed in the wisdom of 
the prophet, and the revelation that is to be in 
those days. And all the prophets, as we have 
already said, have clearly signified the things 

' Isa. i. 7. 

^ Hos. xiii. 15. 

3 KaTriyKovSvAiaeTe in the text, for which read KaT€KovSvKi<ra.Ti, 

* Amos V. II, 12, 13. 

that are to come to pass in the last times, just 
as they also have declared things of old. 

vr. 

But not to expend our argument entirely in 
going over the words of all the prophets, s after 
citing one other, let us revert to the matter in 
hand. What is it, then, that Micah says in his 
prophecy? "Thus saith the Lord concerning 
the prophets that make my people err, that bite 
with their teeth, and cry to him. Peace ; and if it 
was not put into their mouth,'^ they prepared ^ war 
against him. Therefore night shall be unto you, 
that ye shall not have a vision ; ^ and it shall be 
dark unto you, that ye shall not divine ; and the 
sun shall not go down over the prophets, and 
the day shall be dark over them. And the seers 
shall be ashamed, and the diviners confounded."'* 
These things we have recounted beforehand, in 
order that ye may know the pain that is to be 
in the last tmies, and the perturbation, and the 
manner of life on the part of all men toward 
each other,'" and their envy, and hate, and strife, 
and the negligence of the shepherds toward the 
sheep, and the unruly disposition of the people 
toward the priests." 

vir. 

Wherefore all shall walk after their own will. 
And the children will lay hands on their parents. 
The wife will give up her own husband to death, 
and the husband will bring his own wife to judg- 
ment like a criminal. Masters will lord it over 
their servants savagely,'^ and servants will assume 
an unruly demeanour toward their masters. None 
will reverence the grey hairs of the elderly, and 
none will have pity upon the comeliness of the 
youthful. The temples of God will be like 
houses, and there will be overturnings of the 
churches everywhere. The Scriptures will be de- 
spised, and everywhere they will sing the songs 
of the adversary. '3 Fornications, and adulteries, 
and perjuries will fill the land ; sorceries, and 
incantations, and divinations will follow after 
these with all force and zeal. And, on the 
whole, from among those who profess to be 
Christians will rise up then false prophets, false 

5 Manuscript E gives the better reading, \6yov aivavTa toU tmv 
TTpoibriTuiv 'pinj-OLiTi, " our whole argument on the words of the proph- 
ets." 

* ei ouK eSdflTj. Manuscript B omits ei = and it was not put into 
their mouth. 

^ The text reads r\yia.aaLV. Manuscript B reads riyyiaav. Migne 
suggests 7)yii.pav. 
" ef opacreiu?. 
9 Mic. iii. 5-7. 

'° For Tr]v n-po? aAAijAou? avaaTpOKJyyii', Codex B reads &i.a<TTpo<t>riv 
Kal (pdopdv. 

" For awTTOTaKTOv SidBefTiv, Codex B reads ara^iav = unruliness, 
and adds, Ka\ yot>(l<; tol reVra ixiarjaovcri., Kai rexfa Tois yoi'ivtrii' 
em^oiAAot'Tai xelpas, " and parents shall hate their children, and chil- 
dren lay hands on their parents." 

'^ For eis Tous 6ov\ovi arrdvOpuTroi, avflei-Ttjo'Oi'Tat, Codex B 
reads, Trpb? tou? SovAou? dnauSpuiWLai' KTTjaoi'TfXL . 
'•* For ix.^po\j. Codex B reads, Sia^oAou, the devil. 

244 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

apostles, impostors, mischief-makers, evil-doers, 
liars against each other, adulterers, fornicators, 
robbers, grasping, perjured, mendacious, hating 
each other. The shepherds will be like wolves ; 
the priests will embrace falsehood ; the monks ' 
will lust after the things of the world ; the rich 
will assume hardness of heart ; the rulers will 
not help the poor ; the powerful will cast off all 
pity ; the judges will remove justice from the 
just, and, bhnded with bribes, they will call in 
unrighteousness. 

VIII. 

And what am I to say with respect to men,- 
when the very elements themselves will disown 
their order? There will be earthquakes in every 
city, and plagues in every country ; and mon- 
strous 3 thunderings and frightful lightnings will 
burn up both houses and fields. Storms of 
winds will disturb both sea and land excessively ; 
and there will be unfruitfulness on the earth, 
and a roaring in the sea, and an intolerable agi- 
tation on account of souls and the destruction 
of men.'* There will be signs in the sun, and 
signs in the moon, deflections in the stars, dis- 
tresses of nations, intemperateness in the atmos- 
phere, discharges of hail upon the face of the 
earth, winters of excessive severity, different 5 
frosts, inexorable scorching winds, unexpected 
thunderings, unlooked-for conflagrations ; and in 
general, lamentation and mourning in the whole 
earth, without consolation. For, " because in- 
iquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax 
cold." '' By reason of the agitation and confu- 
sion of all these, the Lord of the universe cries 
in the Gospel, saying, " Take heed that ye be 
not deceived ; for many shall come in my name, 
saying, I am Christ, and the time draweth near : 
go ye not therefore after them. But when ye 
shall hear of wars and commotions, be not ter- 
rified : for these things must first come to pass ; 
but the end is not yet by and by." ^ Let us ob- 
serve the word of the Saviour, how He always 
admonished us with a view to our security : 
" Take heed that ye be not deceived : for many 
shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ." 

IX. 

Now after He was taken up again to the 
Father, there arose some, saying, " I am Christ," 
like Simon Magus and the rest, whose names we 
have not time at present to mention. Where- 

* This does not agree with the age of Hippolytus. 

2 TTtpi avtipujnuit', which is the reading of Codex B, instead of 
an'o av0f>ui}nojy, 

3 anfTpoL, the reading of Codex B instead o( avfuoi. 

* The text is, oiTrb i^u^wt' kul aTrtoAeia? oi'^pwTruji'. We may 
suggest some such correction as anro\liv\6vTuiv itar' airioAtia? avOpuj- 
irtov = " men's hearts faihng them concerning the destruction." 

5 &ia<t>opoi, Better with 1'., a.&id<i)opoi = promiscuous, tvithout 
distinction^ and so perhaps continuous or unscasonabli. 

* Matt. xxiv. 12. 
1 Luke xxi. 8, 9. 

fore also in the last day of the consummation, it 
must needs be that false Christs will arise again, 
saying, '' I am Christ," and they will deceive 
many. And multitudes of men will run from 
the east even to the west, and from the north 
even to the sea, saying. Where is Christ here? 
where is Christ there ? But being possessed of 
a vain conceit, and failing to read the Scriptures 
carefully, and not being of an upright mind, they 
will seek for a name which thev shall be unable 
to find. For these things must first be ; and 
thus the son of perdition — that is to say, the 
devil — must be seen. 

X. 

And the apostles, who speak of God,* in es- 
tablishing the truth of the advent of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, have each of them indicated the 
appearing of these abominable and ruin-working 
men, and have openly announced their lawless 
deeds. First of all Peter, the rock of the faith, 
whom Christ our God called blessed, the teacher 
of the Church, the first disciple, he who has the 
keys of the kingdom, has instructed us to this 
effect : " Know this first, children, that there 
shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after 
their own lusts.^ And there shall be false 
teachers among you, who privily shall bring in 
damnable heresies." '° After him, John the theo- 
logian," and the beloved of Christ, in harmony 
with him, cries, " The children of the devil are 
manifest ; "^ and even now are there many anti- 
christs ; '3 but go not after them.'-* Believe not 
every spirit, because many false prophets are 
gone out into the world." '5 And then Jude. the 
brother of James, speaks in like manner : " In 
the last times there shall be mockers, walking 
after their own ungodly lusts. There be they 
who, without fear, feed '^ themselves." '^ You 
have observed the concord of the theologians 
and apostles, and the harmony of their doctrine. 

XI. 

Finally, hear Paul as he speaks boldly, and 
mark how clearly he discovers these : " Beware 
of evil workers, beware of the concision.'* Be- 
ware lest any man spoil you through philosophy 
and vain deceit.''^ See that ye walk circumspect- 
ly, because the days are evil." -° In fine, then, 
what man shall have any excuse who hears these 

8 fleTjydpoi. Codex B gives 9toAdyoi. 

9 2 Pet. iii. 3. 
>o 2 Pet. ii. I. 
't SeoAoyo?. 

'^ I John iii. lo. 
'^ I John ii. 18. 
'< Luke xxi. 8. 
'5 I John iv. I. 

'* oi a(<)d|3u»? tauTous Troifioii'Oi'Tts, instead of the receivsd oi- 
aTTofiiopi^oi'Te? kavTOVS, 
'7 Jude i8, 19. 
"8 Phil. iii. 2. 
'9 Col. ii. 8. 
2° Eph. V. 15, i«. 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

245 

things in the Church from prophets and apostles, 
and from the Lord Himself, and yet will give no 
heed to the care of his soul, and to the time of 
the consummation, and to that approaching hour 
when we shall have to stand at the judgment- 
seat of Christ? 

XII. 

But having now done with this account of the 
consummation, we shall turn our exposition to 
those matters which fall to be stated by us next 
in order. I adduce, therefore, a witness alto- 
gether worthy of credit, — namely, the prophet 
Daniel, who interpreted the vision of Nabucho- 
donosor, and from the beginning of the kings 
down to their end indicated the right ' way to 
those who seek to walk therein — to wit, the 
manifestation of the truth. For what saith the 
prophet ? He presignified the matter clearly to 
Nabuchodonosor in the following terms : "Thou, 
O king, sawest, and behold a great image stand- 
ing before thee, whose head was of gold, its arms 
and shoulders of silver, its belly and thighs of 
brass, its legs of iron, its feet part of iron and part 
of clay. Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out 
without hand ; and it smote the image upon its 
feet, which were part of iron and part of clay, 
and brake them to pieces. Then was the clay, 
and the iron, and the brass, and the silver, and 
the gold broken to pieces together, and became 
like the chaff of the summer threshing-floor ; and 
the stone that smote the image became a great 
mountain, and filled the whole earth." ^ 

xm. 

Wherefore, bringing the visions of Daniel into 
conjunction with these, we shall make one narra- 
tive of the two, and show how true and consistent 
were the things seen in vision by the prophet 
with those which Nabuchodonosor saw before- 
hand. For the prophet speaks thus : " I Dan- 
iel saw, and, behold, the four winds of the heaven 
strove upon the great sea. And four great beasts 
came up from the sea, diverse one from another. 
The first was like a lioness, and had eagle's 
wings : I beheld till the wings thereof were 
plucked, and it was lifted up from the earth, and 
made stand upon the feet as a man, and a man's 
heart was given it. And behold a second beast, 
like to a bear, and it raised up itself on one side, 
and it had three ribs in the mouth of it between 
the teeth of it : and they said thus unto it. Arise, 
devour much flesh. After this I beheld, and lo 
a third beast, like a leopard, which had upon the 
back of it four wings of a fowl : the beast had 
also four heads. After this I saw, and behold a 
fourth beast, dreadful and terrible, and strong 

' Unchangeable, an-aparpoTTOv. 
^ Dan. ii. 31-35. 

exceedingly ; its great iron teeth and its claws 
of brass ^ devoured and brake in pieces, and it 
stamped the residue with the feet of it : and 
it was diverse exceedingly from all the beasts that 
were before it ; and it had ten horns. I con- 
sidered its horns, and, behold, there came up 
among them a little horn, and before it there 
were three of the first horns plucked up by the 
roots : and, behold, in this horn were eyes like 
the eyes of man, and a mouth speaking great 
things." * 

XIV. 

Now, since these things which are thus spoken 
mystically by the prophet seem to all to be hard 
to understand, we shall conceal none of them 
from those who are possessed of sound mind. 
By mentioning the first beast, namely the lioness 
that comes up out of the sea, Daniel means the 
kingdom of the Babylonians which was set up 
in the world ; and that same is also the " golden 
head " of this image. And by speaking of its 
"wings Hke an eagle," he shows that king Nab- 
uchodonosor was elevated and exalted himself 
against God. Then he says that its "wings were 
plucked out," and means by this that his glory was 
subverted : for he was driven from his kingdom. 
And in stating that a " man's heart was given it, 
and it was made stand upon the feet like a man," 
he means that he repented, and acknowledged 
that he was himself but a man, and gave the glory 
to God. Lo, I have thus unfolded the similitude 
of the first beast. 

XV. 

Then after the lioness, the prophet sees a sec- 
ond beast like a bear, which denoted the Per- 
sians ; for after the Babylonians the Persians had 
the sovereignty. And in saying, " I saw three 
ribs in the mouth of it," he referred to three 
nations, the Persians, Medes, and Babylonians, 
which were also expressed by the silver that came 
after the gold in the image. Behold, we have 
explained the second beast too. Then the third 
was the leopard, by which were meant the Greeks. 
For after the Persians, Alexander king of the 
Macedonians held the sovereignty, when he had 
destroyed Darius ; and this is expressed by the 
brass in the image. And in speaking of " four 
wings of a fowl, and four heads in the beast," 
he showed most clearly how the kingdom of 
Alexander was divided into four parts. For it 
had four heads, — namely, the four kings that 
rose out of it. For on his death-bed 5 Alexander 
divided his kingdom into four parts. Behold, 
we have discussed the third also. 

3 These words, kox oi Qvv\f<; aiiTov x^i^to', are strange both to 
the Greek and the Hebrew text of Daniel. 
* Dan. vii. 2-8. 
5 See Hippolytus on Antichrist, ch. xxiv. p 209, supra. 

246 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

XVI. 

Next he tells us of the " fourth beast, dreadful 
and terrible ; its teeth were of iron, and its claws 
of brass." And what is meant by these but the 
kingdom of the Romans, which also is meant 
by the iron, by which it will crush all the seats 
of empire that were before it, and will lord it 
over the whole earth ? After this, then, what is 
left for us to interpret of all that the prophet 
saw, but the " toes of the image, in which part 
was of iron and part of clay, mingled together 
in one ? " For by the ten toes of the image he 
meant figuratively the ten kings who sprang out 
of it, as Daniel also interpreted the matter. For 
he says, " I considered the beast, namely the 
fourth ; and behold ten horns after it, among 
which another horn arose like an offshoot ; and 
it will pluck up by the root three of those before 
it." And by this offshoot horn none other is 
signified than the Antichrist that is • to restore 
the kingdom of the Jews. And the three horns 
which are to be rooted out by it signify three 
kings, namely those of Egypt, Libya, and Ethio- 
])ia, whom he will destroy in the array of war ; 
and when he has vanquished them all, being a 
savage tyrant, he will raise tribulation and perse- 
cution against the saints, exalting himself against 
them. 

XVII. 

You see how Daniel interpreted to Nabucho- 
donosor the dominion of the kingdoms ; you see 
how he explained the form of the image in all 
its parts ; ' you have observed how he indicated 
prophetically the meaning of the coming up of 
the four beasts out of the sea. It remains that 
we open up to you the things done by the Anti- 
christ in particular ; and, as far as in our power, 
declare to you by means of the Scriptures and 
the prophets, his wandering over the whole earth, 
and his lawless advent. 

XVIII. 

As the Lord Jesus Christ made His sojourn 
with us in the flesh (which He received) from 
the holy, immaculate Virgin, and took to Him- 
self the tribe of Judah, and came forth from it, 
the Scripture declared His royal lineage in the 
word of Jacob, when in his benediction he 
addressed himself to his son in these terms : 
" Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall 
praise : thy hands shall be on the neck of thine 
enemies ; thy father's children shall bow down 
before thee. Judah is a lion's whelp ; from a 
sprout,^ my son, thou art gone up : he stoo])ed 
down, he couched as a lion, and as a lion's 

' 7ra<rt Tot? Trcpao'ic 
^ ^AaaroO. 

whelp : 3 who shall rouse him up? A ruler* 
shall not depart from Judah, nor a leader s from 
his thighs,^ until what is in store for him 7 shall 
come, and he is the expectation ** of the na- 
tions." 9 Mark these words of Jacob which were 
spoken to Judah, and are fulfilled in the Lord. 
To the same effect, moreover, does the patriarch 
express himself regarding Antichrist. Wherefore, 
as he prophesied with respect to Judah, so did 
he also with respect to his son Dan. For Judah 
was his fourth son ; and Dan, again, was his 
seventh son. And what, then, did he say of 
him ? " Let Dan be a serpent sitting by the way, 
that biteth the horse's heel? " '° And what ser- 
pent was there but the deceiver from the begin- 
ning, he who is named in Genesis, he who 
deceived Eve, and bruised Adam in the heel? " 

XIX. 

But seeing now that we must make proof of 
what is alleged at greater length, we shall not 
shrink from the task. For it is certain that he 
is destined to spring from the tribe of Dan,'^ and 
to range himself in opposition like a princely 
tyrant, a terrible judge and accuser, '^ as the 
prophet testifies when he says, " Dan shall judge 
his people, as one tribe in Israel." '■♦ But some 
one may say that this was meant of Samson, 
who sprang from the tribe of Dan, and judged 
his people for twenty years. That, however, was 
only partially made good in the case of Samson ; 
but this shall be fulfilled completely in the case 
of Antichrist. For Jeremiah, too, speaks in this 
manner : " From Dan we shall hear the sound 
of the sharpness '5 of his horses ; at the sound of 
the neighing '^ of his horses the whole land trem- 
bled." '' And again, Moses says : " Dan is a 
lion's whelp, and he shall leap from Bashan." '^' 
And that no one may fall into the mistake of 
thinking that this is spoken of the Saviour, let 
him attend to this. " Dan," says he, " is a lion's 
whelp ; " and by thus naming the tribe of Dan 
as the one whence the accuser is destined to 
spring, he made the matter in hand quite clear. 
For as Christ is born of the tribe of Judah, so 
Antichrist shall be born of the tribe of Dan. 
And as our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, the 

■J <TKVit.VO%, 

S rjyov/Mei'O?. 

* (K Tuir fxijpuii'. 

7 Ta ikTtOKti.\i.iva., 

^ *cai aiiTO? TrpocrSoKio* 

9 Gen. xlix. 8-10. 
•° 2 Gen. xlix. 17. 
'^ TTTepviaas. 

'- After Irenaeus, book v. ch. xxx. [vol. i. p. 559, this series], 
many of the ancients express this opinion. See too Bellarmine, £>e 
Pontifice Rom., iii. 12. 
■3 6td/3oAo?. 
'^ Gen. xlix. 16. 

'? (/xovijc 6|iiT7)Tov. There is another reading, <r7rov6^v = haste. 
'* xpeticTiayiOv, [Conf. p. 207, supra.^ 
" Jer. viii. 16. 
'* Dent, xxxiii. 23. 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

247 

Son of God, was spoken of in prophecy as a lion 
on account of His royalty and glory, in the same 
manner also has the Scripture prophetically de- 
scribed the accuser as a lion, on account of his 
tyranny and violence. 

XX. 

For in every respect that deceiver seeks to 
make himself appear like the Son of God. 
Christ is a lion, and Antichrist is a lion. Christ 
is King of things celestial and things terrestrial, 
and Antichrist will be king upon earth. The 
Saviour was manifested as a lamb ; and he, too, 
will appear as a lamb, while he is a wolf within. 
The Saviour was circumcised, and he in like 
manner will appear in circumcision. The Sav- 
iour sent the apostles unto all the nations, and he 
in like manner will send false apostles. Christ 
gathered together the dispersed sheep, and he 
in like manner will gather together the dispersed 
people of the Hebrews. Christ gave .to those 
who believed on Him the honourable and life- 
giving cross, and he in like manner will give his 
own sign. Christ appeared in the form of 
man, and he in like manner will come forth in 
the form of man. Christ arose from among the 
Hebrews, and he will spring from among the 
Jews. Christ displayed His flesh like a temple, 
and raised it up on the third day ; and he too 
will raise up again the temple of stone in Jerusa- 
lem. And these deceits fabricated by him will 
become quite intelligible to those who listen to 
us attentively, from what shall be set forth next 
in order. 

XXI. 

For through the Scriptures we are instructed 
in two advents of the Christ and Saviour. And 
the first after the flesh was in humiliation, be- 
cause He was manifested in lowly estate. So 
then His second advent is declared to be in 
glory ; for He comes from heaven with power, 
and angels, and the glory of His Father. His 
first advent had John the Baptist as its forerun- 
ner ; and His second, in which He is to come 
in glory, will exhibit Enoch, and Elias, and John 
the Divine.' Behold, too, the Lord's kindness 
to man ; how even in the last times He shows 
His care for mortals, and pities them. For He 
will not leave us even then without prophets, 
but will send them to us for our instruction and 
assurance, and to make us give heed to the 

' Or, the theologian. The Apocalypse (xi. 3) mentions only two 
witnesses, who are understood by the ancients in general as Enoch | 
and Elias. The author of the Chronicon Paschale, p. 21, on Enoch, 
says: " This is he who, along with Elias, is to withstand Antichrist 
in the last days, and to confute his deceit, according to the tradition 
of the Church." This addition as to the return of John the Evangel- 
i>t is somewhat more uncommon. And yet Ephraem of Antioch, in 
Photius, cod. ccxxi.v., states that this too is supported by ancient 
ecclesiastical tradition, Christ's saying in John xxi. 22 being under- 
.'itood to that effect. See also Hippolytus, De Aiiiichrisio, ch. 1. 
,p. 21^, supra. — MiGNE. [Enoch and Elias are not dead. But see 
Heb. ix. 27.] 

advent of the adversary, as He intimated also 
of old in this Daniel. For he says, " I shall 
make a covenant of one week, and in the 
midst of the week my sacrifice and libation will 
be removed." For by one week he indicates 
the showing forth of the seven years which shall 
be in the last times.^ And the half of the week 
the two prophets, along with John, will take for 
the purpose of proclaiming to all the world the 
advent of Antichrist, that is to say, for a " thou- 
sand two hundred and sixty days clothed in 
sackcloth ; " ^ and they will work signs and won- 
ders with the object of making men ashamed 
and repentant, even by these means, on account 
of their surpassing lawlessness and impiety. 
" And if any man will hurt them, fire will pro- 
ceed out of their mouth, and devour their ene- 
mies. These have power to shut heaven, that it 
rain not in the days of the advent of Antichrist, 
and to turn waters into blood, and to smite the 
earth with all plagues as often as they will." ^ 
And when they have proclaimed all these things 
they will fall on the sword, cut off by the accuser.^ 
And they will .fulfil their testimony, as Daniel 
also says ; for he foresaw that the beast that 
came up out of the abyss would make war with 
them, namely with Enoch, Elias, and John, and 
would overcome them, and kill them, because 
of their refusal to give glory to the accuser, 
that is the little horn that sprang up.^ And he, 
being lifted up in heart, begins in the end to, 
exalt himself and glorify himself as God, perse- 
cuting the saints and blaspheming Christ. 

XXII. 

But as, in accordance with the train of our 
discussion, we have been constrained to come 
to the matter of the days of the dominion of 
the adversary, it is necessary to state in the first 
place what concerns his nativity and growth ; 
and then we must turn our discourse, as we have 
said before, to the expounding of this matter, 
viz., that in all respects the accuser and son of 
lawlessness ^ is to make himself like our Saviour. 
Thus also the demonstration makes the matter 
clear to us. Since the Saviour of the world, 
with the purpose of saving the race of men, was 
born of the immaculate and virgin Mary,^ and 
in the form of the flesh trod the enemy under 
foot, in the exercise of the power of His own 
proper divinity ; in the same manner also will 
the accuser come forth from an impure woman 
upon the earth, but shall be born of a virgin 

^ Dan. ix. 27. [Note our author's adoption of the plan of a year 
for a day, Ezek. iv. 6. See Pusey, Daniel, p. 165.] 

3 Rev. xi. 3. 

* Rev. xi. 6; [i Kings xvii. i; Ecclus. xlviii. 3]. 

5 napa. toO 5ia0oAoi'. [That is, by the devil.] 

b a.va(^aviv. But Cod. B reads a.vii<i>viv. 

7 ai/ofiia?. Cod. B gives airwAeia?, perdition; and for fitAAei, = 
is to, it reads 6iKii = wishes. [2 Thess. ii. 3, 4-8.] 

^ Cod. B gives aimapdivov, ever-virgin. 

248 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

spuriously.' For our God sojourned with us in 
the flesh, after that very flesh of ours which He 
made for Adam and all Adam's posterity, yet 
without sin. But the accuser, though he take 
up the flesh, will do it only in appearance ; for 
how should we wear that flesh which he did not 
make himself, but against which he warreth 
daily? And it is my opinion, beloved, that he 
will assume this phenomenal kind of flesh ^ as 
an instrument.3 For this reason also is he to be 
born of a virgin, as if a spirit, and then to the 
rest he will be manifested as flesh. For as to a 
virgin bearing, this we have known only in the 
case of the all-holy Virgin, who bore the Saviour 
verily clothed in flesh.'* For Moses says, " Every 
male that openeth the womb shall be called holy 
unto the Lord." 5 This is by no means the case 
with him ; ^ but as the adversary will not open 
the womb, so neither will he take to himself real 
flesh, and be circumcised as Christ was circum- 
cised. And even as Christ chose His apostles, 
so will he too assume a whole people of disci- 
ples like himself in wickedness. 

XXIII. 

Above all, moreover, he will love the nation 
of the Jews. And with all these he will work 
signs and terrible wonders, false wonders and 
not true, in order to deceive his impious equals. 
For if it were possible, he would seduce even 
the elect 7 from the love of Christ. But m his 
first steps he will be gentle, loveable, quiet, 
pious, pacific, hating injustice, detesting gifts, 
not allowing idolatry ; loving, says he, the Scrip- 
tures, reverencing priests, honouring his elders, 
repudiating fornication, detesting adultery, giving 
no heed to slanders, not admitting oaths, kind 
to strangers, kind to the poor, compassionate. 
And then he will work wonders, cleansing lepers, 
raising paralytics, expelling ilemons, proclaiming 
things remote just as things present, raising the 
dead, helping widows, defending orplians, loving 
all, reconciling in love men who contend, and 
saying to such, " Let not the sun go down upon 
your wrath ; " ^ and he will not acquire gold, 
nor love silver, nor seek riches. 

xxrv. 

And all this he will do corruptly and deceit- 
fully, and with the purpose of deluding all to 

■ kv ■nKo.v^. Cod. B reads aKpt|3a)?, exactly. Many of the an- 
cients hold that Antichrist will be a demon in human figure. See 
Augustine, Sulpicius Severus, in Dialogue II., and Philippus Diop- 
tra, iii. ii, etc. 

2 >\><ivTa.ar\.Ki\v t^? (TapKot aiiToC ovaiav. 

3 Organ, o(iya.vov. 

* Cod. H reads t'i\v 0(ot6kov iyvia\i.iv traoKiicmi Koi airXai'ix;, 
instead of the text, txapKoibopov oTrAarw?, etc. [Conf. vol. iii. p. 523.] 

5 Ex. xxxiv. 19; Num. viii. 16; Luke ii. 23. 

' ov fjirfv ovSafiCis. 

7 Matt. xxiv. 24. 

* Ef h. iv. 26. 

make him king. For when the peoples and 
tribes see so great virtues and so great powers 
in him, they will all with one mind meet together 
to make him king. And above all others shall 
the nation of the Hebrews be dear to the tyrant 
himself, while they say one to another, Is there 
found indeed in our generation such a man, so 
good and just? That shall be the way with the 
race of the Jews pre-eminently, as I said before, 
who, thinking, as they do, that they shall behold 
the king himself in such power, will approach 
him to say, We all confide in thee, and acknowl- 
edge thee to be just upon the whole earth ; we 
all hope to be saved by thee ; and by thy mouth 
we have received just and incorruptible judg- 
ment. 

XXV. 

And at first, indeed, that deceitful and lawless 
one, with crafty deceitfulness, will refuse such 
glory ; but the men persisting, and holding by 
him, will declare him king. And thereafter he 
will be lifted up in heart, and he who was for- 
merly gentle will become violent, and he who pur- 
sued love will become pitiless, and the humble 
in heart will become haughty and inhuman, and 
the hater of unrighteousness will persecute the 
righteous. Then, when he is elevated to his 
kingdom, he will marshal war ; and in his wrath 
he will smite three mighty kings, — those, namely, 
of Egypt, Libya, and Ethiopia. And after that 
he will build the temple in Jerusalem, and will 
restore it again speedily, and give it over to the 
Jews. And then he will be lifted up in heart 
against every man ; yea, he will speak blasphemy 
also against God, thinking in his deceit that he 
shall be king upon the earth hereafter for ever ; 
not knowing, miserable wretch, that his kingdom 
is to be quickly brought to nought, and that he 
will quickly have to meet the fire which is pre- 
pared for him, along with all who trust him and 
serve him. For when Daniel said, " I shall make 
my covenant for one week,'"' he indicated seven 
years ; and the one half of the week is for the 
preaching of the prophets, and for the other half 
of the week — that is to say, for three years and 
a half — Antichrist will reign upon the earth. 
And after this his kingdom and his glory shall 
be taken away. Behold, ye who love God, what 
manner of tribulation there shall rise in those 
days, such as has not been from the foundation 
of the world, no, nor ever shall be, except in 
those days alone. Then the lawless one, being 
lifted up in heart, will gather together his de- 
mons in man's form, and \vill abominate those 
who call him to the kingdom, and will pollute 
many souls. 

9 Dan. ix. 27. [The arojiia which more and more prevails in our 
age in all nations, makes all this very significant to us, of " the last 
days."] 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

249 

XXVI. 

For he will appoint princes over them from 
among the demons. And he will no longer seem 
to be pious, but altogether and in all things he 
will be harsh, severe, passionate, wrathful, ter- 
rible, inconstant, dread, morose, hateful, abomi- 
nable, savage, vengeful, iniquitous. And, bent 
on casting the whole race of men into the pit 
of perdition, he will multiply false signs. For 
when all the people greet him with their accla- 
mations at his displays, he will shout with a strong 
voice, so that the place shall be shaken in which 
the multitudes stand by him : " Ye peoples, and 
tribes, and nations, acquaint yourselves with my 
mighty authority and power, and the strength of 
my kingdom. What prince is there so great as 
I am ? What great God is there but I ? Who 
will stand up against my authority?" Under 
the eye of the spectators he will remove moun- 
tains from their places, he will walk on the sea 
with dry feet, he will bring down fire from 
heaven, he will turn the day into darkness and 
the night into day, he will turn the sun about 
wheresoever he pleases ; and, in short, in pres- 
ence of those who behold him, he will show all 
the elements of earth and sea to be subject to 
him in the power of his specious manifestation. 
For if, while as yet he does not exhibit himself 
as the son of perdition, he raises and excites 
against us open war even to battles and slaugh- 
ters, at that time when he shall come in his own 
proper person, and men shall see him as he is in 
reality, what machinations and deceits and de- 
lusions will he not bring into play, with the pur- 
pose of seducing all men, and leading them off 
from the way of truth, and from the gate of the 
kingdom ? 

xxvii. 

Then, after all these things, the heavens will 
not give their dew, the clouds will not give their 
rain, the earth will refuse to yield its fruits, the 
sea shall be filled with stench, the rivers shall be 
dried up, the fish of the sea shall die, men shall 
perish of hunger and thirst ; and father embra- 
cing son, and mother embracing daughter, will 
die together, and there will be none to bury 
them. But the whole earth will be filled with the 
stench arising from the dead bodies cast forth. 
And the sea, not receiving the floods of the 
rivers, will become like mire, and will be filled 
with an unlimited smell and stench. Then there 
will be a mighty pestilence upon the whole 
earth, and then, too, inconsolable lamentation, 
and measureless weeping, and unceasing mourn- 
ing Then men will deem those happy who are 
dead before them, and will say to them, " Open 
your sepulchres, and take us miserable beings 
in ; open your receptacles for the reception 
of your wretched kinsmen and acquaintances. 

Happy are ye, in that ye have not seen our days. 
Happy are ye, in that ye have not had to wit- 
ness this painful life of ours, nor this irremediable 
pestilence, nor these straits that possess our 
souls." 

XXVIII. 

Then that abominable one will send his com- 
mands throughout every government by the 
hand at once of demons and of visible men, who 
shall say, " A mighty king has arisen upon the 
earth ; come ye all to worship him ; come ye all 
to see the strength of his kingdom : for, behold, 
he will give you corn ; and he will bestow upon 
you wine, and great riches, and lofty honours. 
For the whole earth and sea obeys his command. 
Come ye all to him." And by reason of the 
scarcity of food, all will go to him and worship 
him ; and he will put his mark on their right 
hand and on their forehead, that no one may 
put the sign of the honourable cross upon his 
forehead with his right hand ; but his hand is 
bound. And from that time he shall not have 
power to seal any one of his members, but he 
sKall be attached to the deceiver, and shall serve 
him ; and in him there is no repentance. But 
such an one is lost at once to God and to men, 
and the deceiver will give them scanty food by 
reason of his abominable seal. And his seal 
upon the forehead and upon the right hand is 
the number, "Six hundred threescore and six." ' 
And I have an opinion as to this number, though 
I do not know the matter for certain ; for many 
names have been found in this number when it 
is expressed in writing.^ Still we say that per- 
haps the scription of this same seal will give us 
the word / deny.^ For even in recent days, by 
means of his ministers — that is to say, the idola- 
ters— that bitter adversary took up the word 
deny, when the lawless pressed upon the wit- 
nesses of Christ, with the adjuration, " Deny thy 
God, the crucified One." + 

• XXIX. 

Of such kind, in the time of that hater of all 
good, will be the seal, the tenor of which will be 
this : I deny the Maker of heaven and earth, I 
deny the baptism, I deny my (former) service, 
and attach myself to thee, and I believe in thee. 
For this is what the prophets Enoch and Elias 
w°ill preach : Believe not the enemy vv'ho is to 
come and be seen ; for he is an adversary s and 
corrupter and son of perdition, and deceives 

' Rev. xiii. 18. 

3 apvoiifiai. But the letters of the word apvoviJiai in their numeri- 
cal value will not give the number 666 unless it is written dpi-oOfie. 
See Haymo on the Apocalypse, book iv. 

■» The text is in confusion: €7rei6>) icai Trpcoiji' 5ia Twr iiirripeTMv 
avTOv 6 oi'TiSiico? ixOpbi;, ri yovi' Tiav tliuiKoKaTputv, TOis (napTuat 
ToC XptCTToO npoeTpe-rrov oi avofioi, etc. 

S ayTiSi.Ko<:, In B, n-Aacos = deceiver. 

250 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

you ; ' and for this reason he will kill you, and 
smite them with the sword. Behold the deceit 
of the enemy, know the machinations of the be- 
<;uiler, how he seeks to darken the mind of men 
utterly. For he will show forth his demons 
brilliant like angels, and he will bring in hosts 
of the incorporeal without number. And in the 
presence of all he exhibits himself as taken up 
into heaven with trumpets and sounds, and the 
mighty shouting of those who hail him with in- 
describable hymns ; the heir of darkness him- 
self shining like light, and at one time soaring to 
the heavens, and at another descending to the 
earth with great glory, and again charging the 
demons, like angels, to execute his behests with 
much fear and trembling. Then will he send 
the cohorts of the demons among mountains 
and caves and dens of the earth, to track out 
those who have been concealed from his eyes, 
and to bring them forward to worship him. And 
those who yield to him he will seal with his seal ; 
but those who refuse to submit to him he will 
consume with incomparable pains and bitterest 
torments and machinations, such as never haf e 
been, nor have reached the ear of man, nor have 
been seen by the eye of mortals. 

XXX. 

Blessed shall they be who overcome the tyrant 
then. For they shall be set forth as more illus- 
trious and loftier than the first witnesses ; for 
the former witnesses overcame his minions only, 
but these overthrow and conquer the accuser 
himself, the son of perdition. With what eulo- 
gies and crowns, therefore, will they not be 
adorned by our King, Jesus Christ ! 

XXXI. 

But let us revert to the matter in hand. When 
men have received the seal, then, and find neither 
food nor water, they 7vill approach him with a 
voice of anguish, saying, Give us to eat and 
drink, for we all faint with hunger and all manner 
of straits ; ^ and bid the heavens yield us water, 
and drive off from us the beasts that devour 
men. Then will that crafty one make answer, 
mocking them with absolute inhumanity, and 
saying, The heavens refuse to give rain, the 
earth yields not again its fruits ; whence then 
can I give you food? Then, on hearing the 
words of this deceiver, these miserable men will 
perceive that this is the wicked accuser, and will 
mourn in anguish, and weep vehemently, and 
beat their face with their hands, and tear their 
hair, and lacerate their cheeks with their nails, 
while they say to each other : A\'oe for the ca- 
lamity ! woe for the bitter contract ! woe for the 
deceitful covenant ! woe for the mighty mis- 

' Vt reads toi- k6<hi.ov, the world. 
* 15 reads Cii-i/ij?, pain. 

chance ! How have we been beguiled by the 
deceiver ! how have we been joined to him \ 
how have we been caught in his toils ! how have 
we been taken in his abominable net ! how have 
we heard the Scriptures, and understood them 
not ! For truly those who are engrossed with 
the affairs of life, and with the lust of this world, 
will be easily brought over to the accuser then, 
and sealed by him. 

XXXII. 

But many who are hearers of the divine Scrip- 
tures,^ and have them in their hand, and keep 
them in mind with understanding, will escape 
his imposture. For they will see clearly through 
his insidious appearance and his deceitful impos- 
ture, and will flee from his hands, and betake 
themselves to the mountains, and hide them- 
selves in the caves of the earth ; and they will 
seek after the Friend of man with tears and a 
contrite heart ; and He will deliver them out of 
his toils, and with His right hand He will save 
those from his snares who in a worthy and 
righteous manner make their supplication to 
Him. 

XXXIII. 

You see in what manner of fasting and prayer 
the saints will exercise themselves at that time. 
Observe, also, how hard the season and the 
times will be that are to come upon those in 
city and country alike. At that time they will 
be brought from the east even unto the west ; 
and they will come up from the west even unto 
the east, and will weep greatly and wail vehe- 
mently. And when the day begins to dawn 
they will long for the night, in order that they 
may find rest from their labours ; and when the 
night descends upon them, by reason of the con- 
tinuous earthquakes and the tempests in the air. 
they will desire even to behold the light of the 
day, and will seek how they may hereafter meet 
a bitter death. "• At that time the whole earth 
will bewail the life of anguish, and the sea and 
air in like manner will bewail it ; and the sun, 
too, will wail ; and the wild beasts, together with 
the fowls, will wail ; mountains and hills, and 
the trees of the plain, will wail on account of the 
race of man, because all have turned aside fronn 
the holy God, and obeyed the deceiver, and re- 
ceived the mark of that abominable one, the 
enemy of God, instead of the quickening cross 
of the Saviour. 

XXXIV. 

And the churches, too, will wail with a mighty 
lamentation, because neither " oblation nor in- 

3 [Note this. The faithful are to have the Holy Scriptures /;/ ihcir 
hatici . Hut this has been condemned by repeated bulls and anathemas 
of Roman pontifTs; e.j;., by Clement XI., a. D 1713: and no Bible irv 
the vulgar tongue ever appeared in Rome till A.l). 1870, on the over- 
throw of the papal kingdom.] 

•* [Deut. xxviii. 66', 67.] 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

251 

cense " is attended to, nor a service acceptable 
to God ; ' but the sanctuaries of the churches will 
become like a garden-watcher's hut," and the 
holy body and blood of Christ will not be shown 
in those days. The public service of God shall 
be extinguished, psalmody shall cease, the read- 
ing of the Scriptures shall not be heard ; ^ but 
for men there shall be darkness, and lamenta- 
tion on lamentation, and woe on woe. At that 
time silver and gold shall be cast out in the 
streets, and none shall gather them ; but all 
things shall be held an offence. For all shall be 
eager to escape and to hide themselves, and 
they shall not be able anywhere to find conceal- 
ment from the woes ■♦ of the adversary ; but as 
they carry his mark about them, they shall be 
readily recognised and declared to be his. 
Without there shall be fear, and within trem- 
bling, both by night and by day. In the street 
and in the houses there shall be the dead ; in 
the streets and in the houses there shall be hunger 
and thirst ; in the streets there shall be tumults, 
and in the houses lamentations. And beauty of 
countenance shall be withered, for their forms 
shall be like those of the dead ; and the beauty 
of women shall fade, and the desire of all men 
shall vanish. 

XXXV. 

Notwithstanding, not even then will the mer- 
ciful and benignant God leave the race of men 
without all comfort ; but He will shorten even 
those days and the period of three years and a 
half, and He will curtail those times on account 
of the remnant of those who hide themselves 
in the mountains and caves, that the phalanx of 
all those saints fail not utterly. But these days 
shall run their course rapidly ; and the kingdom 
of the deceiver and Antichrist shall be speedily 
removed. And then, in fine, in the glance of an 
eye shall the fashion of this world pass away, and 
the power of men s shall be brought to nought, 
and all these visible things shall be destroyed. 

XXXVI. 

As these things, therefore, of which we have 
spoken before are in the future, beloved, when 
the one week is divided into parts, and the 
abomination of desolation has arisen then, and 
the forerunners of the Lord have finished their 
proper course, and the whole world, in fine, 
comes to the consummation, what remains but 
the manifestation^ of our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ, the Son of God, from heaven, for whom 

' [The reference is to Mai. i. 11, and incense is expounded 
spiritually by ihe Ante-Nicene Fathers generally See Irenaeus, 
vol. i. p. 574, Tertullian, iii. p. 346 3.v\A passim. \ 

^ [Isa. i. 8.] 

3 I The public reading of Scripture-lessons is implied. Acts xv. 
21. See Hooker, Eccl. Pol., book v. cap. xix.] 

*■ T!o.6iav. B reads ■nayihmv, snares. 

5 B reads ho-K^Lovuiv , demons. 

we have hoped ; who shall bring forth fire and 
all just judgment against those who have refused 
to believe in Him ? For the Lord says, " For 
as the lightning cometh out of the east, and 
shineth even unto the west, so shall also the 
coming of the Son of man be ; for wheresoever 
the carcase is, there will the eagles be gathered 
together." 7 For the sign of the cross ^ shall 
arise from the east even unto the west, in bright- 
ness exceeding that of tlie sun, and shall an- 
nounce the advent and manifestation of the 
Judge, to give to every one according to his 
works. For concerning the general resurrection 
and the kingdom of the saints, Daniel says : 
" And many of them that sleep in the dust of 
the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, 
and some to shame and everlasting contempt." ^ 
And Isaiah says : " The dead shall rise, and 
those in the tombs shall awake, and those in the 
earth shall rejoice." '° And our Lord says : 
" Many ' ' in that day shall hear the voice of the 
Son of God, and they that hear shall live." " 

XXXVII. 

For at that time the trumpet shall sound,'^ and 
awake those that sleep from the lowest parts of 
the earth, righteous and sinners alike. And every 
kindred, and tongue, and nation, and tribe shall 
be raised in the twinkling of an eye ; '■* and they 
shall stand upon the face of the earth, waiting 
for the coming of the righteous and terrible 
Judge, in fear and trembling unutterable. For 
the river of fire shall come forth in fury like an 
angry sea, and shall burn up mountains and hills, 
and shall make the sea vanish, and shall dissolve 
the atmosphere with its heat like wax.'^ The 
stars of heaven shall fall,'*" the sun shall be turned 
into darkness, and the moon into blood. '^ The 
heaven shall be rolled together like a scroll : '^ 
the whole earth shall" be burnt up by reason of 
the deeds done in it, which men did corruptly, '^ 
in fornications, in adulteries, and in lies and un- 
cleanness, and in idolatries, and in murders, and 
in battles. For there shall be the new heaven 
and the new earth .^° 

XXXVIII. 

Then shall the holy angels run on their com- 
mission to gather together all the nations, whom 

^ Matt. xxiv. 27, 28. 

8 See Jo. Voss, Theses Theolog., p. 228. [And compare, concern- 
ing Constantine's vision, Robertson and his notes, Hist., vol. i. p. 
186, and Newman's characteristic argument in his Essay on Mira' 
cles, prefixed to the third volume of his Fleury, pp. 133-143.] 

9 Dan. xii. 2. 
° Isa. xxvi. ig. 

' jToAAoi, for the received oi ceKpoi. 
- John V. 25. 
3 I Thess. iv. 16. 
* I Cor. XV. 52. 
S 2 Pet. iii. 12. 
'' Matt. xxiv. 29. 
1 Acts li. 20. 

8 Rev. vi. 14. 

9 hi.i<i>S(.ipa.v . B reads iKpa(av. 
2° Rev. xxi. I. N 

252 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

that terrible voice of the trumpet shall awake out 
of sleep. And before the judgment-seat of 
Christ shall stand those who once were kings 
and rulers, chief priests and priests ; and they 
shall give an account of their administration, and 
of the fold, whoever of them through their negli- 
gence have lost one sheep out of the flock. 
And then shall be brought forward soldiers who 
were not content with their provision," but op- 
pressed widows and orphans and beggars. Then 
shall be arraigned the collectors of tribute, who 
despoil the poor man of more than is ordered, 
and who make real gold like adulterate, in order 
to mulct the needy, in fields and in houses and 
in the churches. Then shall rise up the lewd 
with shame, who have not kept their bed unde- 
filed, but have been ensnared by all manner of 
fleshly beauty, and have gone in the way of their 
own lusts. Then shall rise up those who have 
not kept the love of the Lord, mute and gloomy, 
because they contemned the light commandment 
of the Saviour, which says. Thou shalt love thy 
neighbour as thyself. Then they, too, shall weep 
who have possessed the unjust balance, and un- 
just weights and measures, and dry measuies, as 
they wait for the righteous Judge. 

XXXIX. 

And why should we add many words concern- 
ing those who are sisted before the bar? Then 
the righteous shall shine forth like the sun, while 
the wicked shall be shown to be mute and 
gloomy. For both the righteous and the wicked 
shall be raised incorruptible : the righteous, to be 
honoured eternally, and to taste immortal joys ; 
and the wicked, to be punished in judgment 
eternally. PLach ponders - the question as to 
what answer he shall give to the righteous Judge 
for his deeds, whether good or bad. With all 
men each one's actions shall environ him, whether 
he be good or evil. For the powers of the heav- 
ens shall be shaken,^ and fear and trembling 
shall consume all things, both heaven and earth 
and things under the earth. And every tongue 
shall confess Him openly,-* and shall confess Him 
who comes to judge righteous judgment, the 
mighty God and Maker of all things. Then with 
fear and astonishment shall come angels, thrones, 
powers, principalities, dominions, s and the cheru- 
bim and seraphim with their many eyes and six 
wings, all crying aloud with a mighty voice, 
" Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts, omnipo- 
tent ; the heaven and the earth are full of Thy 
glory." ^ And the King of kings and Lord of 
lords, the Judge who accepts no man's person, 

' I.uke iii. 14. 

2 The text gives cvflv/xijflti re, for which B reads ivOvixtlrai.. 

3 Matt. xxiv. 29. 
•• Phil. ii. II. 

S Col. i. 16. 
*> Isa. vi. 3. 

and the Jurist who distributes justice to every 
man, shall be revealed upon His dread and lofty 
throne ; and all the flesh of mortals shall see 
His face with great fear and trembling, both the 

righteous and the sinner 

XL. 

Then shall the son of perdition be brought for- 
ward, to wit, the accuser, with his demons and 
with his servants, by angels stern and inexorable. 
And they shall be given over to the fire that is 
never quenched, and to the worm that never 
sleepeth, and to the outer darkness. For the 
people of the Hebrews shall see Him in human 
form, as He appeared to them 7Cf/u'n He came by 
the holy Virgin in the flesh, and as they crucified 
Him. And He will show them the prints of the 
nails in His hands and feet, and His side pierced 
with the spear, and His head crowned with thorns, 
and His honourable cross. And once for all shall 
the people of the Hebrews see all these things, 
and they shall mourn and weep, as the prophet 
exclaims, " They shall look on Him whom they 
have pierced ; " ^ and there shall be none to help 
them or to pity them, because they repented not, 
neither turned aside from the wicked way. And 
these shall go away into everlasting punishment 
with the demons and the accuser. 

XLI. 

Then He shall gather together all nations, as 
the holy Gospel so strikingly declares. For what 
says Matthew the evangelist, or rather the Lord 
Himself, in the Gospel? "When the Son of 
man shall come in His glory, and all the holy 
angels with Him, then shall He sit upon the 
throne of His glory : and before Him shall be 
gathered all nations ; and He shall separate them 
one from another, as a shepherd divideth his 
sheep from the goats : and He shall set the 
sheep on His right hand, but the goats on the 
left. Then shall the King say unto them on 
His right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, 
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world." ^ Come, ye prophets, 
who were cast out for my name's saki. Come, 
ye patriarchs, who before my advent were obe 
dient to me, and longed for my kingdom. Come, 
ye apostles, who were my fellows in my sufferings 
in my incarnation, and suffered ivith me in the 
Gospel. Come, ye martyrs, who confessed me 
before despots, and endured many torments and 
pains. Come, ye hierarchs, who did me sacred 
service blamelessly day and night, and made the 
oblation of my honourable body and blood 
daily.'' 

^ Zech. xii. 10; John xix. 37. 

* Matt. XXV. 31-34- , . . ... 

9 [All this is in the manner of Hippolytiis: and here is a sinking 
testimony to a daily Eucharist, if this be genuine.] 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

•Do 

XLII. 

Come, ye saints, who disciplined yourselves 
in mountains and ca\es and dens of the earth, 
who honoured my name by continence and 
prayer and virginity. Come, ye maidens, who 
desired my bride-chamber, and loved no other 
bridegroom than me, who by your testimony 
and habit of life were wedded to me, the im- 
mortal and incorruptible Bridegroom. Come, 
ye friends of the poor and the stranger. Come, 
ye who kept my love, as I am love. Come, ye 
who possess peace, for I own that peace. Come, 
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you, ye who esteemed not riches, 
ye who had compassion on the poor, who aided 
the orphans, who helped the widows, who gave 
drink to the thirsty, who fed the hungry, who re- 
ceived strangers, who clothed the naked, who 
visited the sick, who comforted those in prison, 
who helped the blind, who kept the seal of the 
faith inviolate, who assembled yourselves together 
in the churches, who listened to my Scriptures, 
who longed for my words, who observed my law 
day and night, who endured hardness with me 
like good soldiers, seeking to please me, your 
heavenly King. Come, inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you from the foundation of the 
world. Behold, my kingdom is made ready ; 
behold, paradise is opened ; behold, my immor- 
tality is shown in its beauty.' Come all, inherit 
the kingdom prepared for you from the founda- 
tion of the world. 

XLIII. 

Then shall the righteous answer, astonished at 
the mighty and wondrous fact that He, whom 
the hosts of angels cannot look upon openly, ad- 
dresses them as friends, and shall cry out to Him, 
Lord, when saw we Thee an hungered, and fed 
Thee ? Master,^ when saw we Thee thirsty, and 
gave Thee drink? Thou Terrible One,3 when 
saw we Thee naked, and clothed Thee? Im- 
mortal,"* when saw we Thee a stranger, and took 
Thee in ? Thou Friend of man, 5 when saw we 
Thee sick or in prison, and came unto Thee?'' 
Thou art the ever-living One. Thou art without 
beginning, like the Father,^ and co-eternal with 
the Spirit. Thou art He who made all things 
out of nothing. Thou art the prince of the an- 
gels. Thou art He at whom the depths tremble.^ 
Thou art He who is covered with light as with 
a garment.9 Thou art He who made us, and 
fashioned us of earth. Thou art He who formed '° 

I KfKakKutiriaTai. [Isa. xxxiii. 17.] 
2" 6€<r7roTa. 

* aOdvaTf. 

5 <|)tAal'^puJ7rc, 

*> Matt. XXV. 37, etc. 

' 4 Esdr. iii. 8. 
9 Ps. civ. 2. 
■° &rifi.i.ovpyi^<Tmt, 

things invisible." From Thy presence the whole 
earth fleeth away,'- and how have we received 
hospitably Thy kingly power and lordship ? 

XLIV. 

Then shall the King of kings make answer 
again, and say to them, Inasmuch as ye have 
done it unto one of the least of these my breth- 
ren, ye have done it unto me. Inasmuch as ye 
have received those of whom I have already 
spoken to you, and clothed them, and fed them, 
and gave them to drink, I mean the poor who 
are my members, ye have done it unto me. But 
come ye into the kingdom prepared for you 
from the foundation of the world ; enjoy for ever 
and ever that which is given you by my Father 
in heaven, and the holy and quickening Spirit. 
And what mouth then will be able to tell out 
those blessings which eye hath not seen, nor ear 
heard, neither have entered into the heart of 
man, the things which God hath prepared for 
them that love Him ? '^ 

XLV. 

Ye have heard of the ceaseless joy, ye have 
heard of the immoveable kingdom, ye have 
heard of the feast of blessings without end. 
Learn now, then, also the address of anguish 
with which the just Judge and the benignant 
God shall speak to those on the left hand in 
unmeasured anger and wrath. Depart from me, 
ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the 
devil and his angels. Ye have prepared these 
things for yourselves ; take to yourselves also 
the enjoyment of them. Depart from me, ye 
cursed, into the outer darkness, and into the 
unquenchable fire, prepared for the devil and 
his angels. I made you, and ye gave yourselves 
to another. I am He who brought you forth 
from your mother's womb, and ye rejected me. 
I am He who fashioned you of earth by my word 
of command, and ye gave yourselves to another. 
I am He who nurtured you, and ye served an- 
other. I ordained the earth and the sea for 
your maintenance and the bound '■> of your life, 
and ye listened not to my commandments. I 
made the light for you, that ye might enjoy the 
day, and the night also, that ye might have rest ; 
and ye vexed me, and set me at nought with 
your wicked words, and opened the door to the 
passions. Depart from me, ye workers of in- 
iquity. I know you not, I recognise you not : ye 
made yourselves the workmen of another lord — 
namely, the devil. With him inherit ye the dark- 
ness, and the fire that is not quenched, and the 
worm that sleepeth not, and the gnashing of teeth. 

" Col. i. 16. 

'^ Rev. XX. II. 

'3 Isa. Ixiv. 4; I Cor. 

254 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

XLVI. 

For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no 
meat : I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink : 
I was a stranger, and ye took me not in ; naked, 
and ye clothed me not ; sick, and ye visited me 
not : I was in prison, and ye came not unto me. 
I made your ears that ye might hear the Scrip- 
tures ; and ye prepared them for the songs of 
demons, and lyres, and jesting. I made your 
eyes that you might see the hght of my com- 
mandments, and keep them ; and ye called in 
fornication and wantonness, and opened them to 
all other manner of uncleanness. I prepared 
your mouth for the utterance of adoration, and 
praise, and psalms, and spiritual odes, and for 
the exercise of continuous reading ; and ye fitted 
it to railing, and swearing, and blasphemies, while 
ye sat and spake evil of your neighbours. I 
made your hands that ye might stretch them 
forth in prayers and supplications, and ye put 
them forth to robberies, and murders, and the 
killing of each other. I ordained your feet to 
walk in the preparation of the Gospel of peace, 
both in the churches and the houses of my 
saints ; and ye taught them to run to adulteries, 
and fornications, and theatres, and dancings, and 
elevations.' 

XLvir. 

At last the assembly is dissolved, the spectacle 
of this life ceaseth : its deceit and its semblance 
are passed away. Cleave to me, to whom every 
knee boweth, of things in heaven, and things on 
earth, and things under the earth. For all who 
have been negligent, and have not shown pity 
in well-doing there, have nothing else due them 
than the unquenchable fire. For I am the friend 
of man, but yet also a righteous Judge to all. 
For I shall award the recompense according to 
desert ; I shall give the reward to all, according 
to each man's labour ; I shall make return to 
all, according to each man's conflict. I wish to 
have pity, but I see no oil in your vessels. I 
desire to have mercy, but ye have passed through 
life entirely without mercy. I long to have com- 
])assion, but your lamps are dark by reason of 
your hardness of heart. Depart from me. For 
judgment is without mercy to him that hath 
showed no mercy.^ 

XLVIII. 

Then shall they also make answer to the dread 
Judge, who accepteth no man's person: Lord, 
when saw we Thee an hungered, or athirst, or a 
stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and 
ministered not unto Thee? Lord, dost Thou 
know us not ? Thou didst form us. Thou didst 
fashion us. Thou didst make us of four elements, 

■ Tossings, M6Tf (upto-jiouv. [" Tossings," etc. Does it refer to the 
somersaults of harlequins?] 
^ Jas. ii. 13. 

Thou didst give us spirit and soul. On Thee 
we believed ; Thy seal we received. Thy baptism 
we obtained ; we acknowledged Thee to be (iod, 
we knew Thee to be Creator ; in Thee we wrought 
signs, through Thee we cast out demons, for 
Thee we mortified the flesh, for Thee we pre- 
served virginity, for Thee we practised chastity, 
for Thee we became strangers on the earth ; 
and Thou sayest, I know you not, depart from 
me ! Then shall He make answer to them, and 
say, Ye acknowledged me as Lord, but ye kept 
not my words. Ye were marked with the seal 
of my cross, but ye deleted it by your hardness 
of heart. Ye obtained my baptism, but ye ob- 
served not my commandments. Ye subdued 
your body to virginity, but ye kept not mercy, 
but ye did not cast the hatred of your brother 
out of your souls. For not every one that saith 
to me. Lord, Lord, shall be saved, but he that 
doeth my will.3 And these shall go away into 
everlasting punishment, but the righteous into 
life eternal.* 

XLIX. 

" Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give 
thee the crown of life." 

Ye have heard, beloved, the answer of the 
Lord ; ye have learned the sentence of the 
Judge ; ye have been given to imderstand what 
kind of awful scrutiny awaits us, and what day 
and what hour are before us. Let us therefore 
ponder this every day ; let us meditate on this 
both day and night, both in the house, and by 
the way, and in the churches, that we may not 
stand forth at that dread and impartial judgment 
condemned, abased, and sad, but with jnirity of 
action, life, conversation, and confession ; so that 
to us also the merciful and benignant Ciod may 
say, " Thy faith hath saved thee, go in peace ; " 5 
and again, " ^Vell done, good and faithful ser- 
vant ; thou hast been faithful over a few things, 
I will make thee ruler over many things : enter 
thou into the joy of thy Lord.'"" \\'hich joy 
may it be ours to reach, by the grace and kind- 
ness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom pertain 
glory, honour, and adoration, with His Father, 
who is without beginning, and His holy, and 
good, and quickening Spirit, now and ever, and 
to the ages of the ages. Amen.^ 

HIPPOLYTUS ON THE TWELVE APOSTLES- 

WHERE EACH OF THEM PREACHED, AND WHERE HE MET 

HIS END. 

I. Peter preached the Gospel in Pontus, and 
Galatia, and Cappadocia, and Betania, and Italy, 
and Asia, and was afterwards crucified by Nero 

3 Matt. vii. 23. 

* Matt. .\xv. 46. 

5 I.uke vii. 50. 

'' Matt. XXV. 23. 

^ [Here follows the text, Apoc. ii. 10, transposed above.] 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

in Rome with his head downward, as he had 
himself desired to suffer in that manner. 

2. Andrew preached to the Scythians and 
Thracians, and was crucified, suspended on an 
ohve tree, at Patrae, a town of Achaia ; and 
there too he was buried. 

3. John, again, in Asia, was banished by Do- 
mitian the king to the isle of Patmos, in which 
also he wrote his Gospel and saw the apocalyp- 
tic vision ; and in Trajan's time he fell asleep at 
Ephesus, where his remains were sought for, but 
could not be found. 

4. James, his brother, when preaching in 
Judea, was cut off with the sword by Herod the 
tetrarch, and was buried there. 

5. Philip preached in Phrygia, and was cruci- 
fied in Hierapolis with his head downward in 
the time of Domitian, and was buried there. 

6. Bartholomew, again, preached to the In- 
dians, to whom he also gave the Gospel accord- 
ing to Matthew, atid was crucified with his head 
downward, and was buried in AUanum,' a town 
of the great Armenia.^ 

7. And Matthew wrote the Gospel in the 
Hebrew tongue,^ and published it at Jerusalem, 
and fell asleep at Hierees, a town of Parthia. 

8. And Thomas preached to the Parthians, 
Medes, Persians, Hyrcanians, Bactrians, and 
Margians,* and was thrust through in the four 
members of his body with a pine spear s at 
Calamene,*^ the city of India, and was buried 
there. 

9. And James the son of Alphseus, when 
preaching in Jerusalem, was stoned to death by 
the Jews, and was buried there beside the temple. 

10. Jude, who is also called Lebbaeus, preached 
to the people of Edessa,^ and to all Mesopo- 
tamia, and fell asleep at Berytus, and was buried 
there. 

11. Simon the Zealot,^ the son of Clopas, who 
is also called Jude, became bishop of Jerusalem 
after James the Just, and fell asleep and was 
buried there at the age of 120 years. 

12. And Matthias, who was one of the seventy, 
was numbered along with the eleven apostles, 
and preached in Jerusalem, and fell asleep and 
was buried there. 

13. And Paul entered into the apostleship a 
year after the assumption of Christ ; and begin- 
ning at Jerusalem, he advanced as far as lUyri- 
cum, and Italy, and Spain, preaching the Gospel 
for five-and-thirty years. And in the time of 

Nero he was beheaded at Rome, and was buried 
there. 

THE S.\ME HIPPOLYTUS ON THE SEVENTY 
AP0STLES.9 

1. James the Lord's brother,'" bishop of 
Jerusalem. 

2. Cleopas, bishop of Jerusalem. 

3. Matthias, who supplied the vacant place 
in the number of the twelve apostles. 

4. Thaddeus, who conveyed the episrie to 
Augarus. 

5. Ananias, who baptized Paul, and was 
bishop of Damascus. 

6. Stephen, the first martyr. 

7. Philip, who baptized the eunuch. 

8. Prochorus, bishop of Nicomedia, who also 
was the first that departed," believing together 
with his daughters. 

9. Nicanor died when Stephen was martyred. 

10, Timon, bishop of Bostra. 

11. Parmenas, bishop of Soli. 
\i2. Nicolaus, bishop of Samaria. 

13. Barnabas, bishop of Milan. 

14. Mark the evangelist, bishop of Alexandria. 

15. Luke the evangelist. 
These two belonged to the seventy disciples 

who were scattered '^ by the offence of the word 
which Christ spake, " Except a man eat my 
flesh, and drink my blood, he is not worthy of 
me." '^ But the one being induced to return to 
the Lord by Peter's instrumentality, and the 
other by Paul's, they were honoured to preach 
that Gospel ■+ on account of which they also 
suffered martyrdom, the one being burned, and 
the other being crucified on an olive tree. 

16. Silas, bishop of Corinth. 

17. Silvanus, bishop of Thessalonica. 

18. Crisces (Crescens), bishop of Carchedon 
in Gaul. 

19. Epcenetus, bishop of Carthage. 

20. Andronicus, bishop of Pannonia. 

21. AmpUas, bishop of Odyssus. 

22. Urban, bishop of Macedonia. 

23. Stachys, bishop of Byzantium. 

24. Barnabas, bishop of Heraclea. 

25. Phygellus, bishop of Ephesus. He was 
of the party also of Simon. '5 

26. Hermogenes. He, too, was of the same 
mind with the former. 

' Or Albanum. 

2 [The general tradition is, that he was flayed alive, and then 
crucified.] 

■3 [See Scrivener, Introduction, p. 282, note i, and Lardner, 
Credtb., ii. 494, etc.] 

■» Mdpyoi?. Combefisius proposes Map6oi?. Jerome has " Magis " 

5 The text is kKa.K-i]hi\ iKay\\.a.aSy), eAaKijSij being probably for 

6 KaAaju.^i'j). Steph. le Moyne reads Kapa/u-^i'T). 
* 6 Kavai/in]?. 

9 In the Codex Baroccian. 206. This is found also, along with 
the former piece. On the Tiuelve Apostles, in two codices of the 
Coislinian or Seguierian Library, as Montfaucon states m his recen- 
sion of the Greek manuscripts of that library. He mentions also a 
third codex of Hippolytus, On the Twelve Apostles. [Probably 
spurious, but yet antique.] 

'° a6eA<f)6Seo?. 

" efeASuii'. 

13 The text is o5toi 01 ^' tmv 6 Tvyxa.v6vTuiv 6ia(TKopiri<Taei>T-oi'. 
It may be meant for, " these two of the seventy were scattered," etc. 

■i John vi. 53, 66. , , ,^ , i. r • 

■•♦ €vayyf\t<^i(Tdat, perhaps = write of that Gospel, as the L3ti» 
version puts it. [But St. Mark's body is said to be iv. Venice.] 
'5 Magus. 

256 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

27. Demas, who also became a priest of idols. 

28. Apelles, bishop of Smyrna. 

29. Aristobulus, bishop of Britain. 

30. Narcissus, bishop of Athens. 

31. Herodion, bishop of Tarsus. 

32. Agabus the prophet. 

;^^. Rufus, bishop of Thebes. 

34. Asyncritus, bishop of Hyrcania. 

35. Phlegon, bishop of Marathon. 

36. Hermes, bishop of Dalmatia. 

37. Patrobulus,' bishop of Puteoli. 

38. Hermas, bishop of Philippi. 

39. Linus, bishop of Rome. 

40. Caius, bishop of Ephesus. 

41. Philologus, bishop of Sinope. 

42. 43. Olympus and Rhodion were martyred 
in Rome. 

44. Lucius, bishop of Laodicea in Syria. 

45. Jason, bishop of Tarsus. 

46. Sosipater, bishop of Iconium. 

47. Tertius, bishop of Iconium. 

48. Erastus, bishop of Panellas. 

49. Quartus, bishop of Berytus. 

50. Apollo, bishop of Caesarea. 

51. Cephas. 2 

52. Sosthenes, bishop of Colophonia. 

53. Tychicus, bishop of Colophonia. 

54. Epaphroditus, bishop of Andriace. 

55. Csesar, bishop of Dyrrachium. 

56. Mark, cousin to Barnabas, bishop of Apol- 
lonia. 

57. Justus, bishop of Eleutheropolis. 

58. Artemas, bishop of Lystra. 

59. Clement, bishop of Sardinia. 

60. Onesiphorus, bishop of Corone. 

61. Tychicus, bishop of Chalcedon. 

62. Carpus, bishop of Berytus in Thrace. 

63. Evodus, bishop of Antioch. 

64. Aristarchus, bishop of Apamea. 

65. Mark, who is also John, bishop of Bib- 
loupolis. 

66. Zenas, bishop of Diospolis. 

67. Philemon, bishop of Gaza. 

68. 69. Aristarchus and Pudes. 

70. Trophimus, who was martyred along with 
Paul. 

HEADS OF THE CANONS OF ABULIDES OR 
HIPPOLYTUS, 

WHICH ARE USED BY THE ETHIOPIAN CHRISTIANS.^ 

1. Of the holy faith of Jesus Christ.* 

2. Of bishops.5 

' Rom. xvi. 14, IlaTpo^a?. 

* In the inanusciipt there is a laciinn here. 

3 These were first piibhshcd in French by Jo. Michael Wanslebius 
in his book De EccUsia Alcxmiiirina, Paris, 1677, p. 12; then in 
Latni, by Job Ludolfus, in his Comiiteiitnr. mi histpriniii j'KtItio- 
picnm, Frankfort, 1691, p. 333: and by William W'histon, in vol. iii. 
of his Priinitive Christianity Revived, published in English at 
I^ndon, 171 1, p. 543. He has also noted the passages in the Con- 
ititutiones Apostolica, treating the same matters. 

* Constit, Apostol., lib. vi. ch. 11, etc. 
5 Lib. vii. ch. 41. 

3. Of prayers spoken on the ordination of 
bishops, and of the order of the Missa.^ 

4. Of the ordination of presbyters. 

5. Of the ordination of deacons. 

6. Of those who suffer persecution for the 
faith.7 

7. Of the election of reader and sub-deacon.* 

8. Of the gift of healing.^ 

9. Of the presbyter who abides in a place 
inconvenient for his office.'" 

10. Of those who are converted to the Chris- 
tian religion. 

11. Of him who makes idols. '° 

12. Various pursuits " are enumerated, the fol- 
lowers of which are not to be admitted to the 
Christian religion until repentance is exhibited."* 
^ 13. Of the place which the highest kings or 
princes shall occupy in the temple. '^ 

14. That it is not meet for Christians to bear 
arms. '3 

15. Of works which are unlawful to Chris- 
tians.'^ 

16. Of the Christian who marries a slave- 
woman.' ' 

17. Of the free woman.'^ 

18. Of the midwife ; and that the women ought 
to be separate from the men in prayer.'"* 

19. Of the catechumen who suffers martyrdom 
before baptism. 's 

20. Of the fast of the fourth and sixth holiday ; 
and of Lent.'^ 

2 1 . That presbyters should assemble daily with 
the people in church."'' 

22. Of the week of the Jews' passover ; and 
of him who knows not passover (Easter).'^ 

23. That every one be held to learn doctrine.'* 

24. Of the care of the bishop over the sick.^° 

25. Of him on whom the care of the sick is 
enjoined ; and of the time at which prayers are 
to be made.^' 

26. Of the time at which exhortations are to 
be heard. '3 

27. Of him who frequents the temple every, 
day.^^ 

28. That the faithful ought to eat nothing 
before the holy communion.^^ 

6 Lib. vii. ch. 4, 5, lo. [The service of the faithful, Missa Fi- 
deliiiiii, not the modern Mass. See Bingham, book xv. The Missa 
was an innocent word for the disiiiissian of those not about to receive 
the Communion. .See Guettee, Exposition, etc., p. 433 ] 

' Lib. viii. ch. 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, 45. 

8 Lib. viii. ch. 21, 22. 

9 Lib. viii. ch. i, 2. 
'° Lib. viii. ch. 46, 3a. 
" Stiidia. 

'2 Wanting. 

'3 Lib. viii. ch. 32. 

■* Lib. ii. ch. 57. 

'5 Lib. V. ch. 6. 

'*> Lib. V. ch. 13, 15. 

■7 Lib. ii. ch. 36. 

'8 Lib. V. ch. 15, etc. 

■9 Lib. vii. ch. 39, 40, 41. 

^° Lib. iv. ch. 2. 

-' Lib. iii. ch. 19, viii. ch. 34. 

^2 Lib. ii. ch. 59. 

23 Wanting. 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

257 

29. That care is to be well taken that nothing 
fall from the chalice to the ground.' 

30. Of catechumens.2 

31. That a deacon may dispense the Eucha- 
rist to the people with permission of a bishop 
or presbyter.3 

32. That widows and virgins ought to pray 
constantly/ 

;^^. That commemoration should be made of 
the faithful dead every day, with the exception 
of the Lord's day.s i--'' 

34. Of the sober behaviour of the secular ^ in 
church. 7 

35. That deacons may pronounce the benedic- 
tion and thanksgiving at the love-feasts when a 
bishop is not present.*^ 

36. Of the first-fruits of the earth, and of 
vows.'' 

37. When a bishop celebrates the holy com- 
munion (Synaxis),'° the presbyters who stand by 
him should be clothed in white." ^^^ 

^8. That no one ought to sleep on the night 
of the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ.'^ 

• CANONS OF THE CHURCH OF ALEXANDRIA. 

WRONGLY ASCRIBED TO HIPPOLYTUS." 

I-n the name of the Father, and the Son, and 
the Holy Spirit, Amen. Those are the canons 
of the Church, ordinances which Hippolytus 
wrote, by whom f/ie Church speaketh \ and the 
number of them is thirty-eight canons. Greet- 
ing from the Lord. 

Canon First. Of the Catholic faith. Before 
all things should we speak of the faith, holy and 
right, regarding our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son 
of the living God ; and we have consequently 
placed that canon in the faith (the symbol) ; 
and we agree in this with all reasonable certi- 
tude, that the Trinity is equal perfectly in honour, 
and equal in glory, and has neither beginning 
nor end. The Word is the Son of God, and is 
Himself the Creator of every creature, of things 
visible and invisible. This we lay down with one 
accord, in opposition to those who have said 
boldly, that it is not right to speak pf the Word 
of God as our Lord Jesus Christ spake. We 
come together chiefly to bring out the holy 
truth ■•* regarding God ; and we have separated 

' Wanting. 

^ Lib. vii. ch. 39, etc. 

3 Lib. viii. ch. 28. 

* Lib. iii. ch. 6, 7, 13. 

5 Lib iv. ch. 14, viii. ch. 41-44. 
*" i.e., laymen. 
^ Lib. ii. ch. 57. 

* Wanting. 

9 Or offerings. Lib. ii. ch. 25. 

'° [Synaxis. Elucidation IL] 

" Lib. vii. ch. 29, viii. 30, 31. [See the whole history of ecclesi- 
astical antiquity, on this point, in the learned work of Wharton B. 
Marriott, Vestiarium Christianiim, London, Rivingtons, 1868.] 

'^ Lib. viii. ch. 12, v. ch. 19. 

'3 De Magistris, Acta Martyrum ad Ostia Tiberina, Rome," 
1795, fol. Append., p. 478. [Bunsen, vol. ii. p. 302.] 

'* \^Ad pro/erendunt sancte. A very primitive token.] 

them, because they do not agree with the Church 
in theology, nor with us the sons of the Scrip- 
tures. On this account we have sundered them 
from the Church, and have left what concerns 
them to God, who will judge His creatures with 
justice. 's To those, moreover, who are not cogni- 
sant of them, we make this known without ill-will, 
in order that they may not rush into an evil death, 
like heretics, but may gain eternal life, and teach 
their sons and their posterity this one true faith. 

Canon Second. Of bishops. A bishop should 
be elected by all the people, and he should be 
unimpeachable, as it is written of him in the 
apostle ; in the week in which he is ordained, 
the whole people should also say. We desire ^ 
him ; and there should be_silence in the whole -^ 
hall, and they should all pray in his behalf, and 
say, O God, stablish him whom Thou hast pre- 
pared for us, etc. 

Canon Third. Prayer in behalf of him who 
is made bishop, and the ordinance of the Missa.'^ 
O God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Father of mercies, and the God of all consola- 
tion, etc. 

Canon Fourth. Of the ordination of a pres- 
byter. 

Canon Fifth. Of the constituting a deacon. 

Canon Sixth. Of those who have suffered for 
the faith. 

Canon Seventh. Of him who is elected readej 
and sub-deacon. 

Canon Eighth. Of the gift of healings. 

Canon Ninth. That a presbyter should not 
dwell in unbefitting places ; and of the honour 
of widows. 

Canon Tenth. Of those who wish to become 
Nazarenes (Christians). 

Canon Eleventh. Of him who makes idols 
and images, or the artificer. 

Canon Twelfth. Of the prohibition of those 
works, the authors of which are not to be re- 
ceived but on the exhibition of repentance. 

Canon Thirteenth. Of a prince or a soldier, 
that they be not received indiscriminately. 

Canon Fourteenth. That a Nazarene may 
not become a soldier unless by order. 

Canon Fifteenth. Enumeration of works which 
are unlawful. 

Canon Sixteenth. Of him who has a lawful — ' 
wife, and takes another beside her. 

Canon Seventeenth. Of a free-born woman, 
and her duties. Of midwives, and of the sep- 
aration of men from women. Of virgins, that ' 
they should cover their faces and their heads. 

Canon Eighteenth. Of women in childbed, 
and of midwives again. 

Canon Nineteenth. Of catechumens, and the 
ordinance of Baptism and the Missa. 

'5 [Note this mild excommunication of primitive ages.] 

"> Ordinatio missee. [Missa. See note 6, p. 256, supra.] 

258 

APPENDIX TO THE WORKS OF HIPPOLYTUS. 

Canon Twentieth. Of the fast the six days, 
and of that of Lent. 

Canon Twenty-first. Of the daily assembhng 
of priests and people in the church. 

Canon Twenty-second. Of the week of the 
Jews' passover, wherein joy shall be put away, 
and of what is eaten therein ; and of him who, 
being brought up abroad, is ignorant of the 
Calendar.' 

Canon Twenty-third. Of doctrine, that it 
should be continuous, greater thufi the sea, and 
that its words ought to be fulfilled by deeds. 

Canon Twenty-fourth. Of the bishop's visita- 
tion of the sick ; and that if an infirm man has 
prayed in the church, and has a house, he should 
go to him. 

Canon Twenty-fifth. Of the procurator ap- 
pointed for the sick, and of the bishop, and the 
times of prayer. 

Canon Twenty-sixth. Of the hearing of the 
word in church, and of praying in it. 

Canon Twenty-seventh. Of him who does 

not come to church daily, — let him read books ; 

and of prayer at midnight and cock-crowing, 

. /and of the washing of hands at the time of any 

^ prayer. 

Canon Twenty-eighth. That none of the be- 
lievers should taste anything, but after he has 
taken the sacred mysteries, especially in the days 
of fasting. 

Canon Twenty-ninth. Of the keeping of ob- 
lations which are laid upon the altar, — that 
nottung fall into the sacred chalice, and that noth- 
ly ing fall from the priests, nor from the boys when 
they take communion ; that an evil spirit rule 
them not, and that no one speak in the protec- 
tion,= except in prayer ; and when the oblations 
of the people cease, let psalms be read with all 
^.attention, even to the signal of the bell; and of 
^ ' the sign of the cross, and the casting of the dust 
•of the altar into the pool.^ 

Canon Thirtieth. Of catechumens and the 
■like. 

' Connection, textum 

* SancUiar>' [Guettee, p. 424 Within the chancel-rails] 

' f B'jlls first used in the fourth century by Paulinas in Campania.] 

Canon Thirty-first. Of the bishop and pres- 
byter bidding the deacons present the commu- 
nion. 

Canon Thirty-second. Of virgins and widows, 
that they should pray and fast in the church. 
Let those who are given to the clerical order 
pray according to their judgment. Let not a 
bishop be bound to fasting but with the clergy. 
.And on account of a feast or supper, let him 
prepare for the poor.'* 

Canon Thirty-third. Of the Atalmsas (the 
oblation), which they shall present for those who 
are dead, that it be not done on the Lord's day. 

Canon Thirty-fourth. That no one speak 
much, nor make a clamour ; and of the entrance 
of the saints into the mansions of the faithful. 

Canon Thirty-fifth. Of a deacon present at 
a feast at which there is a presbyter present, — 
let him do his part in prayer and the breaking 
of bread for a blessing, and not for the body ; 
and of the discharge of widows. 

Canon Thirty-sixth. Of the first-fruits of the 
earth, and the first dedication of them ; and of 
presses, oil, honey, milk, wool, and the like, which 
may be offered to the bishop for his blessing. 

Canon Thirty-seventh. As often as a bishop 
takes of the sacred mysteries, let the deacons 
and presbyters be gathered together, clothed in 
white robes, brilliant in the view of all the peo- 
ple ; and in like manner with a reader. 

Canon Thirty-eighth. Of the night on which 
our Lord Jesus Christ rose. That no one shall , 
sleep on that night, and wash himself with water \J 
and a declaration concerning such a one ; and 
a declaration concerning him who sins after 
baptism, and of things lawful and unlawful. 

The sacred canons of the holy patriarch Hip- 
polytus, the first patriarch of the great city of 
Rome, 5 which he composed, are ended ; and 
the number of them is thirty-eight canons. May 
the Lord help us to keep them. And to God 
be glory for ever, and on us be His mercy for 
ever. Amen. 

* And of the preparing a table for the poor. 

5 [A very strange title in many respects. But see p. 239 sufra.\ 

ELUCIDATIONS. 259 

ELUCIDATIONS. 
I- 

(The God-bearing Mary, p. 242.) 

"This name " (^eoro/cos), says Pearson, "was first in use in the Greek Church, which, delight- 
ing in the happy compositions of that language, so called the Blessed Virgin ; from which the 
Latins, in imitation, styled her Virginem Deiparam" etc. . . . Yet those ancient Greeks which call 
the Virgin 6€ot6ko<;, did not call her ixrjTcpa tov ©cot), " Mother of God." This was very different 
to a pious ear, and rests on no synodical authority. The very learned notes of Pearson, On the 
Creed, pp. 297, 299, should by all means be consulted. Leo of Rome, called "the Great," seems 
to have coined the less orthodox expression, relying on Holy Scripture, indeed, in the salutation 
of Elisabeth (Luke i. 43). This term has been sadly abused for Mariolatry. 

II. 

(Synaxis, p. 257.) 

It seems to me worth while to quote a few words from the new and critical edition of Leighton's 
Works, which should be consulted for fuller information.' The editor says : " Leighton uses a 
word for the Holy Communion which is worth noting, because it is rarely used by Western theo- 
logians." The word Synaxis is but a Christianized form of the word Synagogue ; but, like the 
word Koivinvia, it points to Christ's mystical body, — " gathering together in one the children of 
God." Synaxis = a-wdyu cts Iv. It sums up the idea, "We, being many, are one Bread and 
one Body, for we are all partakers of that one Bread." Compare John xi. 52 and i Cor. x. 15. 

St. Chrysostom calls the Synaxis cftpiKoiSea-TaTr], which is a very different thing from niaxime 
tremenda, as applied to the modem " Mass," in behalf of which it is quoted. For Chrysostom 
applies it to the participation of the " Synaxis," and not to the " oblation," much less to the 
" Host " as an object of adoration, of which he never heard or dreamed. He calls " the Synaxis " 
Sliiidderful (to borrow a word from the Germans), because the unworthy recipient, in the Synaxis, 
eats and drinks his own condemnation.^ One must ever be on his guard against the subtlety 
which reads into the Fathers itiodern ideas under ancient phrases.^ Precisely so Holy Scripture 
itself is paraphrased into Trent doctrine, as in Acts xiii. 2 the Louvain versionists rendered the 
text, " And while they offered the sacrifice of the Mass and fasted." 

' Leighton, Works, edited by West, of Nairn, vol. vi. p. 243, note. London, Longmans, 1870. 

^ I Cor. xi. 29-34. Chrysostom evidently has in view the apostle's argument, based on the Communion as a Synaxis, and not on its 
liierurgic aspects. 

3 Mendham's Literary Policy of the Church of Rome {passitn), and also the old work of James, On the Corruptions of Scripture, 
Councils, and Fathers, a new edition. London: Parker, 1843. 

CYPRIAN. 

ITRANSLATED BY THE REV. ERNEST WALLIS, Ph.D.] 

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE TO CYPRIAN. 

[a.d. 200-258.] If Hippolytus reflects the spirit of Irenaeus in all his writings, it is not 
remarkable. He was the spiritual son of the great Bishop of Lyons, and deeply imbued with the 
family character imparted to his disciples by the blessed presbyter of Patmos and Ephesus. But 
while Cyprian is the spiritual son and pupil of Tertullian, we must seek his characteristics and the 
key to his whole ministry in the far-off See and city where the disciples were first called Christians. 
Cyprian is the Ignatius of the West. We see in his works how truly historical are the writings of 
Ignatius, and how diffused was his simple and elementary system of organic unity. It embodies 
no hierarchical assumption, no " lordship over God's heritage," but is conceived in the spirit of 
St. Peter when he disclaimed all this, and said, " The presbyters who are among you I exhort, who 
am also a presbyter.'" Cyprian was indeed a strenuous asserter of the responsibilities of his 
office ; but he built upon that system universally recognised by the Great Councils, which the popes 
and their adherents have ever laboured to destroy. Nothing can be more delusive than the idea 
that the mediaeval system derives any support from Cyprian's theory of the episcopate or of 
Church organization. His was the system of the universal parity and community of bishops. In 
his scheme the apostolate was perpetuated in the episcopate, and the presbyterate was an apos- 
tolic institution, by which others were associated with bishops in all their functions as co-presbyters, 
but not in those reserved to the presidency of the churches. Feudal ideas imposed a very dif- 
ferent system upon the simple framework of original Catholicity. But a careful study of that 
primitive framework, and of the history of papal development, makes evident the following 
propositions : — 

1. That Cyprian's maxim, Ecclesia in Episcopo, whatever else he may have meant by it, is an 
aphoristic statement of the Nicene Constitutions. These were embedded in the Ignatian theory 
of an episcopate without a trace of a papacy ; and Cyprian's maxims had to be practically 
destroyed in the West before it was possible to raise the portentous figure of a supreme pontiff, 
and to subject the Latin churches to the entirely novel principle of Ecclesia in Papa. To this 
novelty Cyprian's system is essentially antagonistic. 

2. It will be seen that Cyprian, far from being the patron of ecclesiastical despotism, is the 
expounder of early canons and constitutions, in the spirit of order and discipline, indeed, but 
with the largest exemplification of that " liberty " which is manifested wherever " the Spirit of the 
Lord " is operative. Cyprian is the patron and defender of the presbytery and of lay co-opera- 
tion, as well as of the regimen of the episcopate. His letters illustrate the Catholic system as it 
was known to the Nicene Fathers ; but, of all the Christian Fathers, he is the most clear and 
comprehensive in his conception of the body of Christ as an organic whole, in which every 
member has an honourable function.' Popular government and representative government, the 
legitimate power and place of the laity, the organization of the Christian plebs into their faculty 
as the dvTiAi^i//£ts of St. Paul,"- the development of synods, omni plebe adstante, — all this is 
embodied in the Catholic system as Cyprian understood it. 

» Eph. iv. 15, 16; I Cor. xii. 12-30. 1 have little doubt that our author's theory was guided by his conceptions ef this passage, and 
ty Ignatian traditions. 
" I Cor. xii. 28. 

263 

264 INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. 

3. The Orientals ' in large degree, even under their yoke of bondage and the superstitions 
engendered by their decay, have ever adhered to this Ignatian theory, of which Cyprian was the 
great expounder in the West; while the terrible schism of the ninth century, which removed 
the West from the Nicene basis, and placed the Latin churches upon the foundation of the forged 
Decretals,^ was effected by ignoring the Cyprianic maxims, and then by a practical pulverizing of 
their fundamental principle of unity. This change involved a subversion of the primitive episco- 
pate, an annihilation of the rights of the presbytery, and a total abasement of the laity ; in a 
'vord, the destruction of synodical constitutions and of constitutional freedom. 

4. The constitutional primacy, of which Cyprian was an early promotor, had to be entirely 
destroyed by decretalism before the papacy could exist. Gregory the Great stood upon the 
Cyprianic base when he pronounced the author of a scheme for a " universal bishopric " to be a 
forerunner of Antichrist. It was the spirit of the Decretals to substitute the fictitious idea of a 
divine supremacy in one bishop and one See, for the canonical presidency of a bishop who was 
only primus inter pares. 

5. Hence the Cyprianic system has ever been the great resource of the "Galileans against 
the Ultramontanes " in the cruel but most interesting history of the West. From the Council of 
Frankfort to our own times Cyprian's spirit is reflected in Hincmar, in Gerbert, in the Gallican 
canonists, in De Marca, in Bossuet, in Launoy, in Dupin, in Pascal, in the Jansenists (Augus- 
tinians), and by the Old Catholics in their late uprising against the dogmatic triumph of Ultra- 
montanism. Nobody can understand the history of Latin Christianity without mastering the 
system of Cyprian, and comprehending the entirely hostile and uncatholic system of the 
Decretals. 

6. I am not anxious to conceal the fact that I profoundly sympathize with the free spirit, the 
true benignity, and the moral purity which are everywhere reflected in the writings of Cyprian. If 
ever .American Romanism becomes sufficiently enlightened and purified to comprehend this great 
Carthaginian Father, and to speak in his tones to the Bishop of Rome, a glorious reformation of 
this alien religion will be the result ; and then we may comprehend the mysterious Providence 
which has transferred to these shores so many subjects of the despotism of the Vatican. Mean- 
while the student of the Ante-Nicene Fathers will not be slow to perceive that he has, in the 
eight volumes of this series, all that is needful to disarm Romanism, to refute its pretensions, and 
to direct honest and truth-loving spirits in the Roman Obedience to the door of escape opened 
by DoUinger and his associates in the " Old Catholic " effort for the restoration of the Latin 
churches. Let us " speak the truth in love," and pray the Lord to bless this and every endeavour 
to promote and to sanctify the spirit of enlightened research after the " pattern in the mount." 
For " thus saith the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see and ask for the old paths : " to. dpxala 
Wrj. The following Introduction, from the Edinburgh editor, supplies further answers to in- 
quiry, and suffices to elucidate the subjoined narrative of Pontius. 

LriTLE is known of the early history of Thascius Cyprian (bom probably about 200 a.d.) until 
the period of his intimacy with the Carthaginian presbyter Caecilius, which led to his conversion 
A.D 246. That he was born of respectable parentage, and highly educated for the profession of 
a rhetorician, is all that can be said with any degree of certainty. At his baptism he assumed the 
name of his friend Caecilius, and devoted himself, with all the energies of an ardent and vigorous 
mind, to the study and practice of Christianity. 

HiJ ordination and his elevation to the episcopate rapidly followed his conversion. With some 
resistance on his own part, and not without great objections on the part of older presbyters, who 
•saw themselves su])erseded by his promotion, the popular urgency constrained him to accept the 
office of Bishop of Carthage (a.d. 248), which he held until his martyrdom (a.d. 258). 

' See Guettee's Exposition, p. 93. ' Of which, hereafter, in an elucidation. See Guett^e, p. 383. 

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. 265 

The writings of Cyprian, apart from their intrinsic worth, have a very considerable historical 
interest and value, as illustrating the social and religious feelings and usages that then prevailed 
among the members of the Christian community. Nothing can enable us more vividly to realize 
the intense convictions — the high-strained enthusiasm — which formed the common level of the 
Christian experience, than does the indignation with which the prelate denounces the evasions of 
those who dared not confess, or the lapses of those who shrank, from martyrdom. Living in the 
atmosphere of persecution, and often in the immediate presence of a lingering death, the professors 
of Christianity were nerved up to a wonderful contempt of suffering and of worldly enjoyment, and 
saw every event that occurred around them in the glow of their excited imagination ; so that many 
circumstances were sincerely believed and honestly recorded, which will not be for a moment 
received as true by the calm and critical reader. The account given by Cyprian in his treatise on 
the Lapsed ' may serve as an illustration. Of this Dean Milman observes : " In what a high- 
wrought state of enthusiasm must men have been, who could relate and believe such statements 
as miraculous ! "^ 

Before being advanced to the episcopate, Cyprian had written his Epistle to Donatus shortly 
after his baptism (a.d. 246) ; his treatise, or fragment of a treatise, on the Vanity of Idols ; and 
his three books of Testimonies against the Jews. In the following translation the order of Migne 
has been adopted, which places the letter to Donatus, as seems most natural, first among the 
Epistles, instead of with the Treatises. 

The breaking out of the Decian persecution (a.d. 250) induced Cyprian to retire into con- 
cealment for a time ; and his retreat gave occasion to a sharp attack upon his conduct, in a letter 
from the Roman to the Carthaginian clergy.^ During this year he wrote many letters from his 
place of concealment to the clergy and others at Rome and at Carthage, controlling, warning, 
directing, and exhorting, and in every way maintaining his episcopal superintendence in his 
absence, in all matters connected with the well-being of the Church. 

The first 39 of the epistles, excepting the one to Donatus, were probably written during the 
period of Cyprian's retirement. He appears to have returned to his public duties early in June, 
251. Then follow many letters bevveen himself and Cornelius bishop of Rome, and others, on 
subjects connected with the schisms of Novatian, Novatus, and Felicissimus, and with the con- 
dition of those who had been perverted by them. The question proposed in Epistle 52 was 
settled in the Council that was held in May, 252 ; and the reference to that anticipated decision 
limits the date of the letter to about April in the same year. In the 53d Epistle, Cyprian is 
alluding to the impending persecution of Gallus, under which Cornelius was banished in July, 252. 
The 56th Epistle was a letter of congratulation to Cornelius on his banishment ; and therefore it 
must have been written before September 14th in that year, the date of the death of Cornelius. 
Lucius, his successor, was also banished, and was congratulated on his return by Cyprian in Epis- 
tle 57, which therefore must have been written about the end of November, 252. The 59th Epis- 
tle is referred by Bishop Pearson to the beginning of the year 253. 

There seems nothing to suggest the date of Epistles 60 and 61, except the probability that 
they were written during a time of peace ; and for this reason they are referred to the beginning 
of Cyprian's episcopate, before the outbreak of the Decian persecution, a.d. 249. It is usual to 
assign Epistle 64 to the same year, or at least to a very early period of Cyprian's official life ; but 
it seems scarcely likely that his episcopal counsel should have been sought by a brother bishop in 
a matter of practice, until he had had some experience ; and as it was probably written at a time 
of peace, when discipline had become relaxed, the date 253 seems preferable. The 68th Epistle 
is easily dated by the reference, on page 246, to an episcopate of six years' duration ; and it must 
therefore have been written in a.d. 254. On the 14th September, Cyprian was banished to Curubis 
by the Emperor Valerian. From his place of exile he wrote Epistle 76, which was replied to in 

' p. 368, vol. i. Edin. edition. ^ Milman's History of Christianity, vol. ii. p. 190, note i. See note, p. 266. 3 Epistle ii. 

266 INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. 

Epistles 77, 78, and 79. Doubts are entertained as to the date of Epistle 80, whether it should 
be referred to a.d. 250 or 257. Pamelius prefers the latter date, on the ground that the Roga- 
tianus to whom it is inscribed was one who survived the Decian persecution, and a younger man 
than the one who, as he supposes, was declared to have suffered martyrdom at the date of this 
Epistle." This, however, seems very unsatisfactory ; and the weight of authority is in favour of 
the earlier date. The remaining Epistles are easily limited by their contents to the period imme- 
diately preceding Cyprian's martyrdom. 

For the sake of uniformity, it has been thought well to adhere to the arrangement of Migne, 
in the order of the Epistles as well as in their divisions. For the convenience of reference, how- 
ever, the number of each Epistle in the Oxford edition is appended in a note. For a similar 
reason, the general form of Migne's text has been used in the following translation ; but the use 
of other texts and of preceding translations has not been rejected in the endeavour to approxi- 
mate to the sense of the author. Moreover, such various readings as might suggest different 
shades of meaning in doubtful passages have been given. 

The Translator has only to add, that, as a rule, an exact rendering has been sought after, 
sometimes in preference to a version in fluent English. But, except in cases where the corruption 
or obscurity of the text seems insurmountable, the meaning of the writer is believed to be given 
fairly and intelligibly. The style of Cyprian, like that of his master Tertullian, is marked much 
more by vehemence than perspicuity, and it is often no easy matter to give exact expression in 
another language to the idea contained in the original text. Cyprian's Life, as written by his own 
deacon Pontius, is subjoined. 

NOTE BY THE AMERICAN EDITOR.^ 

It is easy to speak with ridicule of such instances as. Dean Milman here treats so philosoph- 
ically. But, lest believers should be charged with exceptional credulity, let us recall what the 
father of English Deism relates of his own experiences, in the conclusion of his Autobiography : 
" I had no sooner spoken these words (of prayer to the Deist's deity) but a loud though yet a 
gentle noise came from the heavens, for it was like nothing on earth, which did so comfort and 
cheer me, that I took my petition as granted, and that I had the sign I demanded. . . . This, 
how strange soever it may seem, I protest, before the eternal God, is true," etc. Life of Herberty 
p. 52, Popular Authors (no date). London. From Horace Walpole's edition. 

* p. 328, Ed. Edinburgh. , ^ See p. 165. 

THE LIFE AND PASSION 

CYPRIAN, BISHOP AND MARTYR. 

BY PONTIUS THE DEACON. 

I . Although Cyprian, the devout priest ' and 
glorious witness of God, composed many writ- 
lags whereby the memory of his worthy name 
survives ; and although the profuse fertility of 
his eloquence and of God's grace so expands 
itself in the exuberance and richness of his dis- 
course, that he will probably never cease to 
speak even to the end of the world ; yet, since 
to his works and deserts it is justly due that his 
example should be recorded in writing, I have 
thoaght it well to prepare this brief and com- 
])endious narrative. Not that the life of so great 
a man can be unknown to any even of the 
heathen nations, but that to our posterity also 
this incomparable and lofty pattern may be pro- 
longed into immortal remembrance. It would 
assuredly be hard that, when our fathers have 
given such honour even to lay-people and cate- 
chumens who have obtained martyrdom, for 
reverence of their very martyrdom, as to record 
manw or I had nearly said, well nigh all, of the 
circumstances of their sufferings, so that they 
might be brought to our knowledge also who as 
yet were not born, the passion of such a priest 
and such a martyr as Cyprian should be passed 
over, who, independently of his martyrdom, had 
much to teach, and that what he did while he 
lived should be hidden from the world. And, 
indeed, these doings of his were such, and so 
great, and so admirable, that I am deterred by 
the contemplation of their greatness, and confess 
myself incompetent to discourse in a way that 
shall be worthy of the honour of his deserts, and 
unable to relate such noble deeds in such a way 
that they may appear as great as in fact they are, 
except that the multitude of his glories is itself 
sufficient for itself, and needs no other heraldry. 
It enhances my difficulty, that you also are anx- 
ious to hear very much, or if it be possible 

* [Here put for the chief in the sacerdocy. See p. 260, i/i/ra.'\ 

every thing, about him, longing with eager 
warmth at least to become acquainted with his 
deeds, although now his living words are silent. 
And in this behalf, if I should say that the pow- 
ers of eloquence fail me, I should say too little. 
For eloquence itself fails of suitable powers fully 
to satisfy your desire. And thus I am sorely 
pressed on both sides, since he burdens me with 
his virtues, and you press me hard with your 
entreaties. 

2. At what point, then, shall I begin, — from 
what direction shall I approach the description 
of his goodness, except from the beginning of 
his faith and from his heavenly birth ? inasmuch 
as the doings of a man of God should not be 
reckoned from any point except from the time 
that he was born of God. He may have had 
pursuits previously, and liberal arts may have 
imbued his mind while engaged therein ; but 
these things I pass over ; for as yet they had 
nothing to do with anything but his secular ad- 
vantage. But when he had learned sacred 
knowledge, and breaking through the clouds of 
this world had emerged into the light of spiritual 
wisdom, if I was with him in any of his doings, 
if I have discerned any of his more illustrious 
labours, I will speak of them ; only asking mean- 
while for this indulgence, that whatever I shall 
say too little (for too little I must needs say) 
may rather be attributed to my ignorance than 
subtracted from his glory. While his faith was* 
in its first rudiments, he believed that before God 
nothing was worthy in comparison of the observ- 
ance of continency. For he thought that the. 
heart might then become what it ought to be, 
and the mind attain to the full capacity of truth, 
if he trod under foot the lust of the flesh with 
the robust and healthy vigour of holiness. Who 
has ever recorded such a marvel ? His second 
birth had not yet enlightened the new man with 
the entire splendour of the divine light, yet he 

267 

268 

THE LIFE AND PASSION OF CYPRIAN. 

was already overcoming the ancient and pristine 
darkness by the mere tlawning of the Hght. 
Then — what is even greater — when he had 
learned from the reading of Scrijjture certain 
things not according to the condition of his no- 
viciate, but in proportion to the earliness of his 
faith, he immediately laid hold of what he had 
discovered, for his own advantage in deserving 
well of God.' By distributing his means for the 
relief of the indigence of the poor, by dispensing 
the purchase-money of entire estates, he at once 
realized two benefits, — the contempt of this 
world's ambition, than which nothing is more 
pernicious, and the observance of that mercy 
which God has preferred even to His sacrifices, 
and which even he did not maintain who said 
that he had kept all the commandments of the 
law; whereby with premature swiftness of piety 
he almost began to be perfect before he had 
learnt the way to be perfect. Who of the an- 
cients, I pray, has done this ? Who of the most 
celebrated veterans in the faith, whose hearts and 
ears have throbbed to the divine words for many 
years, has attempted any such thing, as this man 
— of faith yet unskilled, and whom, perhaps, as 
yet nobody trusted — surpassing the age of an- 
tiquity, accomplished by his glorious and admira- 
ble labours ? No one reaps immediately upon 
his sowing ; no one presses out the vintage har- 
\'est from the trenches just formed ; no one ever 
yet sought for ripened fruit from newly planted 
*ilips. But in him all incredible things concurred. 
In him the threshing preceded (if it may be 
said, for the thing is beyond belief) — preceded 
the sowing, the vintage the shoots, the fruit the 
root. 

3. The apostle's epistle says ^ that novices 
should be passed over, lest by the stupor of 
heatlienism that yet clings to their unconfirmed 
minds, their untaught inexperience should in 
any respect sin against Ciod. He first, and I 
think he alone, furnisiied an illustration that 
greater progress is made by faith than by time, 
i'or although in the Acts of the Apostles ^ the 
eunuch is described as at once baptized by Philip, 
liecause he believed with his whole heart, this is 
not a fair parallel. For he was a Jew,-^ and as 
he came from the temple of the Lord he was 
reading the prophet Isaiah, and he hoped in 
Christ, altiiough as yet he did not believe that 
He had come ; while the other, coming from 
the ignorant heathens, liegan with a faith as ma- 
ture as that with which few perhaps have finished 
their course. In short, in respect of God's grace, 
there was no delay, no postponement, — I have 
said but little, — he immediately received the 

• [St. Luke XX. 35. CreatuTC-fierit is not implied, but, through 
grace, the desert of Matt. xxv. 21.] 
- I Tim. iii. 6. 

3 Acts viii. 37. 

4 [A proselyte rather, known in legends as Indich. Vol. i. p. 433.] 

presbyterate and the priesthood. ^ For who i.s 
there that would not entrust every grade of hon- 
our to one who believed with such a disposition? 
There are many things which he did while still 
a layman, and many things which now as a pres- 
byter he did — many things which, after the ex- 
amples of righteous men of old, and following 
them with a close imitation, he accomplished 
with the obedience of entire consecration — that 
deserved well of the Lord.-' For his discourse 
concerning this was usually, that if he had read 
of any one being set forth with the praise of God, 
he would persuade us to inquire on account of 
what doings he had pleased God. If Job, glo- 
rious by God's testimony, was called a true wor- 
shipper of God, and one to whom there was 
none upon earth to be compared, he taught that 
we should do whatever Job had previously done, 
so that while we are doing like things we may 
call forth a similar testimony of God for our- 
selves. He, contemning the loss of his estate, 
gained such advantage by his virtue thus tried, 
that he had no perception of the temporal losses 
even of his affection. Neither poverty nor pain 
broke him down ; the persuasion of his wife did 
not influence him ; the dreadful suffering of his 
own body did not shake his firmness. His vir- 
tue remained established in its own home, and 
his devotion, founded upon deep roots, gave way 
under no onset of the devil tempting him to ab- 
stain from blessing his God with a grateful faith 
even in his adversity. His house was open to 
every comer. No widow returned from him 
with an empty lap ; no blind man was unguided 
by him as a companion ; none faltering in step was 
unsupported by him for a staff; none stripped- 
of help by the hand of the mighty was not pro- ' 
tected by him as a defender. Such things ought 
they to do, he was accustomed to say, who de ■ 
sire to please God. And thus running througli 
the examples of all good men, by always imitat- 
ing those who were better than others he made 
himself also worthy of imitation. 

4. He had a close association among us with 
a just man, and of j^raiseworthy memory, by 
name Ca^cilius, and in age as well as in honour 
a presbyter, who had converted him from his 
worldly errors to the acknowledgment of the 
true divinity. This man he loved with entire 
honour and all observance, regarding him with 
an obedient veneration, not only as the friend 
and comrade of his soul, but as the parent of 
his new life. And at length he, influenced by 
his attentions, was, as well he might be, stimu- 
lated to such a pitch of excessive love, that when 
he was departing from this world, and his sum- 
mons was at hand, he commended to him his 
wife and children ; so that him whom he had 

5 [Elucidation I.] 

<> [See above note i, this page.] 

THE LIFE AND PASSION OF CYPRIAN. 

269 

made a partner in the fellowship of his way of 
life, he afterwards made the heir of his affection. 

5. It would be tedious to go through individ- 
ual circumstances, it would be laborious to enu- 
merate all his doings. For the proof of his good 
works I think that this one thing is enough, that 
by the judgment of God and the favour of the< 
people, he was chosen to the office of the priest- 
hood and the degree of the episcopate while still 
a neophyte, and, as it was considered, a novice. 
Although still in the early days of his faith, and 
in the untaught season of his spiritual life, a 
generous disposition so shone forth in him, that 
although not yet resplendent with the glitter of 
office, but only of hope, he gave promise of en- 
tire trustworthiness for the priesthood that was 
coming upon him. Moreover, I will not pass 
over that 'remarkable fact, of the way in which, 
when the entire people by God's inspiration 
leapt forward in his love and honour, he humbly 
withdrew, giving place to men of older standing, 
and thinking himself unworthy of a claim to so 
great honour, so that he thus became more 
worthy. For he is made more worthy who dis- 
penses with what he deserves. And with this 
excitement were the eager people at that time 
inflamed, desiring with a spiritual longing, as the 
event proved, not only a bishop, — for in him 
whom then with a latent foreboding of divinity 
they were in such wise demanding, they were 
seeking not only a priest, — but moreover a 
future martyr. A crowded fraternity was be- 
sieging the doors of the house, and throughout 
all the avenues of access an anxious love was 
circulating. Possibly that apostolic experience 
might then have happened to him, as he desired, 
of being let down through a window, had he 
also been equal to the apostle in the honour of 
ordination.' It was plain to be seen that all 
the rest were expecting his coming with an anx- 
ious spirit of suspense, and received him when 
he came with excessive joy. I speak unwillingly, 
but I must needs speak. Some resisted him, 
even that he might overcome them ; yet with 
what gentleness, how patiently, how benevolently 
he gave them indulgence ! how mercifully he 
forgave them, reckoning them afterwards, to the 
astonishment of many, among his closest and 
most intimate friends ! For who would not be 
amazed at the forgetfulness of a mind so reten- 
tive ? 

6. Henceforth who is sufficient to relate the 
manner in which he bore himself? — what pity 
was his? what vigour? how great his mercy? 
how great his strictness? So much sanctity and 
grace beamed from his face that it confounded 
the minds of the beholders. His countenance 
was grave and joyous. Neither was his severity 

' [The charismata of a higher ministiy.] 

gloomy, nor his affability excessive, but a min- 
gled tempering of both ; so that it might be 
doubted whether he most deserved to be revered 
or to be loved, except that he deserved both to 
be revered and to be loved. And his dress was 
not out of harmony with his countenance, being 
itself also subdued to a fitting mean. The pride 
of the world did not inflame him, nor yet did 
an excessively affected penury make him sordid, 
because this latter kind of attire arises no less 
from boastfulness, than does such an ambitious 
frugality from ostentation. But what did he as 
bishop in respect of the poor, whom as a cate- 
chumen he had loved ? Let the priests of piety 
consider, or those whom the teaching of their 
very rank has trained to the duty of good works, 
or those whom the common obligation of the 
Sacrament has bound to the duty of manifesting 
love. Cyprian the bishop's cathedra received 
such as he had been before, — it did not make 
him so. 2 f 

7. And therefore for such merits "he at once 
obtained the glory of proscription also. For 
nothing else was proper than that he who in the 
secret recesses of his conscience was rich in 
the full honour of religion and faith, should more- 
over be renowned in the publicly diffused report 
of the Gentiles. He might, indeed, at that 
time, in accordance with the rapidity wherewith 
he always attained everything, have hastened to 
the crown of martyrdom appointed for him, 
especially when with repeated calls ■ he was fre- 
quently demanded for the lions, had it not been 
needful for him to pass through all the grades 
of glory, and thus to arrive at the highest, and 
had not the impending desolation needed the 
aid of so fertile a mind. For conceive of him 
as being at that time taken away by the dignity 
of martyrdom. Who was there to show the 
advantage of grace, advancing by faith? Who 
was there to restrain virgins to the fitting dis- 
cipline of modesty and a dress worthy of holi- 
ness, as if with a kind of bridle of the lessons of 
the Lord? Who was there to teach penitence 
to the lapsed, truth to heretics, unity to schis- 
matics, peacefulness and the law of evangelical 
prayer to the sons of God ? By whom were the 
blaspheming Gentiles to be overcome by retort- 
ing upon themselves the accusations which they 
heap upon us? By whom were Christians of too^, 
tender an affection, or, what is of more impor- 
tance, of a too feeble faith in respect of the loss 
of their friends, to be consoled with the hope of 
futurity? Whence should we so learn mercy? 
whence patience? Who was there to restrain 
the ill blood arising fi-om the envenomed malig- 
nity of envy, with the sweetness of a wholesome 
remedy? Who was there to raise up such great 

- [Nor does it make any one so. But the Fathers seem to hav« 
thought it made good men more humble. 1 

270 

THE LIFE AND PASSION OF CYPRIAN. 

martyrs by the exhortation of his divine dis- 
course? Who was there, in short, to animate so 
many confessors sealed with a second inscription 
on their distinguished brows, and reserved ahve 
for an example of martyrdom, kindling their 
ardour with a heavenly trumpet? Fortunately, 
fortunately it occurred then, and truly by the 
Si)irit's direction, that the man who was needed 
for so many and so excellent pur])oses was with- 
lield from the consummation of martyrdom. Do 
you wish to be assured that the cause of his 
withdrawal was not fear? to allege nothing else, 
he did suffer subsequently, and this suffering he 
assuredly would have evaded as usual, if he had 
evaded it before. It was indeed that fear — 
and rightly so — that fear which would dread 
to offend the Lord — that fear which prefers to 
obey God's commands rather than to be crowned 
in disobedience. For a mind dedicated in all 
things to God, and thus enslaved to the divine 
admonitions, believed that even in suffering itself 
it would sin, unless it had obeyed the Lord, who 
then bade him seek the place of concealment. 

8. Moreover, I think that something may here 
be said about the benefit of the delay, although 
I have already touched slightly on the matter. 
By what appears subsequently to have occurred, 
it follows that we may prove that that withdrawal 
was not conceived by human pusillanimity, but, 
as indeed is the case, was truly divine. The 
unusual and violent rage of a cruel persecution 
had laid waste God's people ; and since the art- 
ful enemy could not deceive all by one fraud, 
wherever the incautious soldier laid bare his 
side, there in various manifestations of rage he 
had destroyed individuals with different kinds of 
overthrow. There needed some one who could, 
wiicn men were wounded and hurt by the various 
arts of the attacking enemy, use the remedy of 
the celestial medicine according to the nature 
of the wound, either for cutting or for cherishing 
them. Thus was preserved a man of an intelli- 
gence, besides other excellences, also spiritually 
trained, who between the resounding waves of 
the opposing schisms could steer the middle 
course of the Church in a steady path. Are not 
sucli plans, I ask, divine? Could this have been 
done without God? Let them consider who 
think that such things as these can hai)pen by 
chance. To them the Church replies with clear 
voice, saying, " I do not allow and do not be- 
lieve that such needful men are reser\-ed without 
the decree of God." 

9. Still, if it seem well, let me glance at the 
rest. Afterwards there broke out a dreadful 
plague, and excessive destruction of a hateful 
disease invaded every house in succession of the 
trenibling j)opulace, carrying off day by day with 
abrupt attack numberless people, every one from 
his own house. All were shuddering, fleeing, 

shunning the contagion, impiously exposing their 
own friends, as if with the exclusion of the per- 
son who was sure to die of the plague, one could 
exclude death itself also. There lay about the 
meanwhile, over the whole city, no longer bodies, 
but the carcases of many, and, by the contem- 
plation of a lot which in their turn would be 
theirs, demanded the pity of the passers-by for 
themselves. No one regarded anything besides 
his cruel gains. No one trembled at the re- 
membrance of a similar event. No one did to 
another what he himself wished to experience. 
In these circumstances, it would be a wrong to 
pass over what the pontiff ' of Christ did, who 
excelled the pontiffs of the world as much in 
kindly affection as he did in truth of religion. 
On the people assembled together in one place 
he first of all urged the benefits of mercy, teach- 
ing by examples from divine lessons, how greatly 
the duties of benevolence avail to deserve well 
of God. Then afterwards he subjoined, that 
there was nothing wonderful in our cherishing 
our own people only with the needed attentions 
of love, but that he might become perfect who 
would do something more than the publican or 
the heathen, who, overcoming evil with good, 
and practising a clemency which was like the 
divine clemency, loved even his enemies, who 
would pray for the salvation of those that per- 
secute him, as the Lord admonishes and exhorts. 
God continually makes His sun to rise, and from 
time to time gives showers to nourish the seed, 
exhibiting all these kindnesses not only to His 
people, but to aliens also. And if a man pro- 
fesses to be a son of God, why does not he 
imitate the example of his Father? " It becomes 
us," said he, " to answer to our birth ; and it is 
not fitting that those who are evidently born of 
God should be degenerate, but rather that the 
propagation of a good Father should be proved 
in His offspring by the emulation of His good- 
ness." 

10. I omit many other matters, and, indeed, 
many important ones, which the necessity of a 
limited space does not permit to be detailed in 
more lengthened discourse, and concerning which 
this much is sufficient to have been said. But 
if the Gentiles could have heard these things as 
they stood before the rostrum, they would prob- 
ably at once have believed. What, then, should 
a Christian people do, whose ver)' name pro- 
ceeds from faith? Thus the ministrations are 
constantly distributed according to the quality 
of the men and their degrees. Many who, by 
the straitness of poverty, were unable to mani- 
fest the kindness of wealth, manifested more 
than wealth, making up by their own labour a 
service dearer than all riches. And under such 

' [This heathen word thus comes into use as applicable to all 
bishops. It was used derisively by Tertullian, vol. iv. p. 74.] 

THE LIFE AND PASSION OF CYPRIAN. 

271 

a teacher, who would not press forward to be 
found in some part of such a warfare, whereby 
he might please both God the Father, and Christ 
the Judge, and for the present so excellent a 
priest? Thus what is good was done in the 
liberality of overflowing works to all men, not 
to those only who are of the household of faith. 
Something more was done than is recorded of 
the in'^omparable benevolence of Tobias. He 
must forgive, and forgive again, and frequently 
forgive ; or, to speak more truly, he must of 
right concede that, although very much might 
be done before Christ, yet that something more 
might be done after Christ, since to His times 
all fulness is attributed. Tobias collected together 
those who were slain by the king and cast out, 
of his own race only. 

II. Banishment followed these actions, so 
good and so benevolent. For impiety always 
makes this return, that it repays the better with 
the worse. And what God's priest replied to 
the interrogation of the proconsul, there are 
Acts which relate. In the meantime, he is ex- 
cluded from the city who had done some good 
for the city's safety ; he who had striven that the 
eyes of the living should not suffer the horrors 
of the infernal abode ; he, I say, who, vigilant 
in the watches of benevolence, had provided — 
oh wickedness ! with unacknowledged goodness 
— that when all were forsaking the desolate 
appearance of the city, a destitute state and a 
deserted country should not perceive its many 
exiles. But let the world look to this, which 
accounts banishment a penalty. To them, their 
country is too dear, and they have the same 
name as their parents ; but we abhor even our 
l^arents themselves if they would persuade us 
against God. To them, it is a severe punish- 
ment to live outside their own city; to the 
Christian, the whole of this world is one home. 
Wherefore, though he were banished into a 
hidden and secret place, yet, associated with the 
affairs of his God, he cannot regard it as an exile. 
In addition, while honestly serving God, he is a 
stranger even in his own city. For while the 
continency of the Holy Spirit restrains him from 
carnal desires, he lays aside the conversation of 
the former man, and even among his fellow- 
citizens, or, I might almost say, among the 
parents themselves of his earthly life, he is a 
stranger. Besides, although this might other- 
wise appear to be a punishment, yet in causes 
and sentences of this kind, which we suffer for 
the trial of the proof of our virtue, it is not a 
punishment, because it is a glory. But, indeed, 
suppose banishment not to be a punishment to 
us, yet the witness of their own conscience may 
still attribute the last and worst wickedness to 
those who can lay upon the innocent what they 
think to be a punishment. I will not now de- 

scribe a charming place ; and, for the present, I 
pass over the addition of all possible delights. 
Let us conceive of the place, filthy in situation, 
squalid in appearance, having no wholesome 
water, no pleasantness of verdure, no neighbour- 
ing shore, but vast wooded rocks between the 
inhospitable jaws of a totally deserted solitude, 
far removed in the pathless regions of the world. 
Such a place might have borne the name of 
exile, if Cyprian, the priest of God, had come 
thither ; although to him, if the ministrations of 
men had been wanting, either birds, as in the 
case of Elias, or angels, as in that of Daniel, 
would have ministered. Away, away with the 
belief that anything would be wanting to the 
least of us, so long as he stands for the confes- 
sion of the name. So far was God's pontiff, 
who had always been urgent in merciful works, 
from needing the assistance of all these things. 

12. And now let us return with thankfulness 
to what I had suggested in the second place, 
that for the soul of such a man there was divinely 
provided a sunny and suitable spot, a dweUing, 
secret as he wished, and all that has before been 
promised to be added to those who seek the 
kingdom and righteousness of God. And, not 
to mention the number of the brethren who 
visited him, and then the kindness of the citizens 
themselves, which supplied to him everything 
whereof he appeared to be deprived, I will not 
pass over God's wonderful visitation, whereby He 
wished His priest in exile to be so certain of his 
passion that was to follow, that in his full con- 
fidence of the threatening martyrdom, Curubis 
possessed not only an exile, but a martyr too. 
For on that day whereon we first abode in the 
place of banishment (for the condescension of 
his love had chosen me among his household 
companions to a voluntary exile : would that he 
could also have chosen me to share his passion !),' 
" there appeared to me," said he, " ere yet I was 
sunk in the repose of slumber, a young man of 
unusual stature, who, as it were, led me to the 
praetorium, where I seemed to myself to be led 
before the tribunal of the proconsul, then sitting. 
When he looked upon me, he began at once to 
note down a sentence on his tablet, which I 
knew not, for he had asked nothing of me with 
the accustomed interrogation. But the youth, 
who was standing at his back, very anxiously 
read what had been noted down. And because 
he could not then declare it in words, he showed 
me by an intelligible sign what was contained in 
the writing of that tablet. For, with hand ex- 
panded and flattened like a blade, he imitated 
the stroke of the accustomed punishment, and 
expressed what he wished to be understood as 
clearly as by speech, — I understood the future 

' [Pontius is said to have followed his beloved bishop, a.d. 25^ 
dying a martyr.] 

272 

THE LIFE AND PASSION OF CYPRIAN. 

sentence of my passion. I began to ask and to 
beg immediately that a delay of at least one day 
should be accorded me, until I should have 
arranged my property in some reasonable order. 
And when I had urgently repeated my entreaty, 
he began again to note down, I know not what, 
on his tablet. But I perceived from the calm- 
ness of his countenance that the judge's mind 
was moved by my petition, as being a just one. 
Moreover, that youth, who already had disclosed 
to me the intelligence of my passion by gesture 
rather than by words, hastened to signify repeat- 
edly by secret signal that the delay was granted 
which had been asked for until the morrow, 
twisting his fingers one behind the other. And 
I, although the sentence had not been read, 
although I rejoiced with very glad heart with joy 
at the delay accorded, yet trembled so with fear 
of the uncertainty of the interpretation, that the 
remains of fear still set my exulting heart beat- 
ing with excessive agitation." 

13. What could be more plain than this reve- 
lation? What could be more blessed than this 
condescension ? Everything was foretold to him 
beforehand which subsequently followed. Noth- 
ing was diminished of the words of God, nothing 
was mutilated of so sacred a promise. Carefully 
consider each particular in accordance with its 
announcement. He asks for delay till the mor- 
' row, when the sentence of his passion was under 
deliberation, begging that he might arrange his 
affairs on the day which he had thus obtained. 
This one day signified a year^ which he was 
about to pass in the world after his vision. For, 
to speak more plainly, after the year was expired, 
he was crowned, on that day on which, at the 
commencement of the year, the fact had been 
announced to him. For although we do not 
read of the day of the Lord as a year in sacred 
Scripture, yet we regard that space of time as due 
in making promise of future things.' Whence 
is it of no conse(}uence if, in this case, under the 
ordinary expression of a day, it is only a year 
that in this place is implied, because that which 
is the greater ought to l)e fiiller in meaning. 
Moreover, that it was explained rather by signs 
than by speech, was because the utterance of 
speech was reserved for the manifestation of the 
time itself. For anything is usually set forth in 
words, whenever what is set forth is accom- 
jilished. For, indeed, no one knew why this had 
been shown to him, until afterwards, when, on 
the very day on which he had seen it, he was 
crowned. Nevertheless, in the meantime, his 
impending suffering was certainly known l)y all, 
but the exact day of his passion was not spoken 
of by any of the same, just as if they were igno- 
rant of it. And, indeed, I find something simi- 

' [See Origen, '' weeks of years," vol. iv. p. 353.] 

lar in the Scriptures. For Zacharias the priest, 
because he did not believe the promise of a son, 
made to him by the angel, became dumb ; so 
that he asked for tablets by a sign, being about 
to write his son's name rather than utter it. 
With reason, also in this case, where God's mes- 
senger declared the impending passion of His 
priest rather by signs, he both admonished his 
faith and fortified His priest. Moreover, the 
ground of asking for delay arose out of his wish 
to arrange his affairs and settle his will. Yet 
what affairs or what will had he to arrange, ex- 
cept ecclesiastical concerns ? And thus that last 
delay was received, in order that whatever had 
to be disposed of by his final decision concern- 
ing the care of cherishing the poor might be 
arranged. And I think that for no other reason, 
and indeed for this reason only, indulgence was 
granted to him even by those very persons who 
had ejected and were about to slay him, that, 
being at hand, he might relieve the poor also 
who were before him with the final or, to speak 
more accurately, with the entire outlay of his last 
stewardship. And therefore, having so benevo- 
lently ordered matters, and so arranged them 
according to his will, the morrow drew near. 

14. Now also a messenger came to him from 
the city from Xistus, the good and peace-making 
priest, and on that account most blessed martyr. 
The coming executioner was instantly looked 
for who should strike through that devoted neck 
of the most sacred victim ; and thus, in the daily 
expectation of dying, every day was to him as 
if the crown might be attributed to each. In 
the meantime, there assembled to him many 
eminent people, and people of most illustrious 
rank and family, and noble with the world's dis- 
tinctions, who, on account of ancient friendship 
with him, repeatedly urged his withdrawal ; and, 
that their urgency might not be in some sort 
hollow, they also offered places to which he 
might retire. But he had now set the world 
aside, having his mind suspended upon heaven, 
and did not consent to their tempting persua- 
sions. He would perhaps even then have done 
what was asked for by so many and faithful 
friends, if it had been bidden him by divine 
command. But that lofty glory of so great a 
man must not be passed over without announce- 
ment, that now, when the world was swelling, 
and of its trust in its princes bi*;ithing out hatred 
of the name, he was instructing Ciod's servants, 
as opportunity was given, in the exhortations of 
the Lord, and was animating them to tread 
under foot the sufferings of this j^resent time by 
the contemi)lation of a glory to come hereafter. 
Indeed, such was his love of sacred discourse, that 
he wished that his prayers in regard to his suffer- 
ing might be so answered, that he would be pat 
to death in the very act of speaking about God. 

THE LIFE AND PASSION OF CYPRIAN. 

273 

15. And these were the daily acts of a priest 
destined for a pleasing sacrifice to God, when, 
behold, at the bidding of the proconsul, the offi- 
cer with his soldiers on a sudden came unex- 
pectedly on him, — or rather, to speak more 
truly, thought that he had come unexpectedly 
on him, at his gardens, — at his gardens, I say, 
which at the beginning of his faith he had sold, 
and which, being restored by God's mercy, he 
would assuredly have sold again for the use of 
the poor, if he had not wished to avoid ill-will 
from the persecutors. But when could a mind 
ever prepared be taken unawares, as if by an 
unforeseen attack ? Therefore now he went for- 
ward, certain that what had been long delayed 
would be settled. He went forward with a lofty 
and elevated mien, manifesting cheerfulness in 
his look and courage in his heart. But being 
delayed to the morrow, he returned from the 
prsetorium to the officer's house, when on a sud- 
den a scattered rumour prevailed throughout all 
Carthage, that now Thascius was brought for- 
ward, whom there was nobody who did not know 
as well for his illustrious fame in the honourable 
opinion of all, as on account of the recollection 
of his most renowned work. On all sides all 
men were flocking together to a spectacle, to us 
glorious from the devotion of faith, and to be 
mourned over even by the Gentiles. A gentle 
custody, however, had him in charge when taken 
and placed for one night in the officer's house ; 
so that we, his associates and friends, were as 
usual in his company. The whole people in the 
meantime, in anxiety that nothing should be 
done throughout the night without their knowl- 
edge, kept watch before the officer's door. The 
goodness of God granted him at that time, so 
truly worthy of it, that even God's people should 
watch on the passion of the priest. Yet, per- 
haps, some one may ask what was the reason of 
his returning from the praetorium to the officer. 
And some think that this arose from the fact, 
that for his own part the proconsul was then un- 
willing. Far be it from me to complain, in mat- 
ters divinely ordered, of slothfulness or aversion 
in the proconsul. Far be it from me to admit 
such an evil into the consciousness of a religious 
mind, as that the fancy of man should decide 
the fate of so blessed a martyr. But the mor- 
row, which a year before the divine condescen- 
sion had foretold, required to be literally the 
morrow.' 

16. At last that other day dawned — that des- 
tined, that promised, that divine day — which, if 
even the tyrant himself had wished to put off, 
he would not have had any power to do so ; the 
day rejoicing at the consciousness of the future 
martyr ; and, the clouds being scattered through- 

' Ihat is, Providence ensured the respite, to fulfil the promise. 

out the circuit of the world, the day shone upon, 
them with a brilliant sun. He went out from 
the house of the officer, though he was the offi- 
cer of Christ and God, and was walled in on all; 
sides by the ranks of a mingled multitude. And 
such a numberless army hung upon his company,, 
as if they had come with an assembled troop to- 
assault death itself. Now, as he went, he had 
to pass by the race-course. And rightly, and as 
if it had been contrived on purpose, he had to 
pass by the place of a corresponding struggle, 
who, having finished his contest, was running to 
the crown of righteousness. But when he had 
come to the praetorium, as the proconsul had 
not yet come forth, a place of retirement was 
accorded him. There, as he sat moistened after 
his long journey with excessive perspiration (the 
seat was by chance covered with linen, so that 
even in the very moment of his passion he might 
enjoy the honour of the episcopate ),2 one of the 
officers ("Tesserarius"), who had formerly been 
a Christian, offered him his clothes, as if he 
might wish to change his moistened garments 
for drier ones ; and he doubtless coveted noth- 
ing further in respect of his proffered kindness 
than to possess the now blood-stained sweat of 
the martyr going to God. He made reply to- 
him, and said, " We apply medicines to annoy- 
ances which probably to-day will no longer exist." 
Is it any wonder that he despised suffering in 
body who had despised death in soul? Why 
should we say more? He was suddenly an- 
nounced to the proconsul ; he is brought for- 
ward ; he is placed before him ; he is interrogated 
as to his name. He answers who he is, and 
nothing more. 

1 7. And thus, therefore, the judge reads from, 
his tablet the sentence which lately in the vision 
he had not read, — a spiritual sentence, not 
rashly to be spoken, — a sentence worthy of 
such 'a bishop and such a witness ; a glorious sen- 
tence, wherein he was called a standard-bearer 
of the sect, and an enemy of the gods, and one 
who was to be an example to his people ; and 
that with his blood discipline would begin to be 
established. Nothing could be more complete, 
nothing more true, than this sentence. For all 
the things which were said, although said by a 
heathen, are divine. Nor is it indeed to be 
wondered at, since priests are accustomed to. 
prophesy of the passion. He had been a stand- 
ard-bearer, who was accustomed to teach con- 
cerning the bearing of Christ's standard ; he had 
been an enemy of the gods, who commanded 
the idols to be destroyed. Moreover, he gave 
example to his friends, since, when many were 
about to follow in a similar manner, he was the 
first in the province to consecrate the first-fruits- 

2 [See note at end of this memoir ] 

2 74 

THE LIFE AND PASSION OF CYPRIAN. 

of martyrdom. And by his blood discipline be- 
gan to be established ; but it was the discipline 
of martyrs, who, emulating their teacher, in the 
imitation of a glory like his own. themselves also 
gave a confirmation to discipline by the very 
blood of their own example. 

1 8. And when he left the doors of the prae- 
torium, a crowd of soldiery accompanied him ; 
and that nothing might be wanting in his passion, 
centurions antl tribunes guarded his side. Now 
the place itself where he was about to suffer is 
level, so that it affords a noble spectacle, with its 
trees thickly planted on all sides. But as, by the 
extent of the space l)eyond, the view was not 
attainable to the confused crowd, persons who 
favoured him had climbed up into the branches 
of the trees, that there might not even be want- 
ing to him (what happened in the case of 
Zacchoeus), that he was gazed upon from the 
trees. And now, having with his own hands 
bound his eyes, he tried to hasten the slowness 
of the executioner, whose office was to wield the 
sword, and who with ditificulty clasped the blade 
in his failing right hand with trembling fingers, 
until the mature hour of glorification strength- 
ened the hand of the centurion with power 
granted from above to accomplish the death of 
the excellent man, and at length supplied him 
with the permitted strength. O blessed people 
of the Church, who as well in sight as m feeling, 
and, what is more, in outspoken words, suffered 
with such a bishop as theirs ; and, as they had 
ever heard him in his own discourses, were 
crowned by God the Judge ! For although that 
which the general wish desired could not occur, 
viz., that the entire congregation should suffer at 
once in the fellowship of a like glory, yet who- 
ever under the eyes of Christ beholding, and in 

the hearing of the priest, eagerly desired to 
suffer, by the sufficient testimony of that desire 
did in some sort send a missive to God, as his 
ambassador. 

19. His passion being thus accomplished, it 
resulted that Cyprian, who had been an example 
to all good men, was also the first who in .\frica 
imbued his priestly crown ' with blood of mar- 
tyrdom, because he was the first who began to 
be such after the apostles. For from the time 
at which the episcopal order is enumerated at 
Carthage, not one is ever recorded, even of good 
men and priests, to have come to suffering. 
xAlthough devotion surrendered to God is always 
in consecrated men reckoned instead of martyr- 
■dom ; yet Cyprian attained even to the perfect 
crown by the consummation of the Lord ; so 
that in that very city in which he had in such 
wise lived, and in which he had been the first 
to do many noble deeds, he also was the first to 
decorate the insignia- of his heavenly priest- 
hood with glorious gore- What shall I do now? 
Between joy at his passion, and grief at still 
remaining, my mind is divided in different direc- 
tions, and twofold affections are burdening a 
heart too limited for them. Shall I grieve that 
I was not his associate ? But yet I must triumph 
in his victory. Shall I triumph at his victory? 
Still I grieve that I am not his companion. Vet 
still to you I must in simplicity confess, what you 
also are aware of, that it was my intention to be 
his companion. Much and excessively I exult 
at his glory ; but still more do I grieve that I 
remained behind. 

I 

2 

doubt 
p. 12. 

He was the first of the province, that is. See p 273, supra.\ 
The simple attire of Hippolytus, as seen in his statue, was 
ess what is here meant by insignia. But see Hermas, vol it. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

EPISTLE 1/ 

TO DONATUS. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN HAD PROxMISED DONATUS 
THAT HE WOULD HAVE A DISCOURSE WITH HIM 
CONCERNING THINGS DIVINE, AND NOW BEING 
REMINDED OF HIS PROMISE, HE FULFILS IT. 
COMMENDING AT LENGTH THE GRACE OF GOD 
CONFERRED IN BAPTISM, HE DECLARES HOW 
HE HAD BEEN CHANGED THEREBY ; AND, FI- 
NALLY, POINTING OUT THE ERRORS OF THE 
WORLD, HE EXHORTS TO CONTEMPT OF IT, 
AND TO READING AND PRAYER. 

I . C/ECiLius Cyprian to Donatus sends, greet- 
ing. You rightly remind me, dearest Donatus ; 
for I not only remember my promise, but I con- 
fess that this is the appropriate time for its fulfil- 
ment, when the vintage festival invites the mind 
to unbend in repose, and to enjoy the annual 
and appointed respite of the declining year.^ 
Moreover, the place is in accord with the season, 
and the pleasant aspect of the gardens harmo- 
nizes with the gentle breezes of a mild autumn 
in soothing and cheering the senses. In such 
a place as this it is delightful to pass the day in 
discourse, and, by the (study of the sacred) 
parables,^ to train the conscience of the breast 
to the apprehension of the divine precepts. And 
that no profane intruder may interrupt our con- 
verse, nor any unrestrained clatter of a noisy 
household disturb it, let us seek this bower.^ 
The neighbouring thickets ensure us solitude, 
and the vagrant trailings of the vine branches 
creeping in pendent mazes among the reeds 
that support them have made for us a porch of 
vines and a leafy shelter. Pleasantly here we 
clothe our thoughts in words ; and while we 
gratify our eyes with the agreeable outlook upon 
trees and vines, the mind is at once instructed 
by what we hear, and nourished by what we see, 
although at the present time your only pleasure 
and your only interest is in our discourse. De- 
spising the pleasures of sight, your eye is now 

' In the Oxford edition this epistle is given among the treatises. 

2 Wearying, scil. " fatigantis." 

3 " Fabulis." [Our " Thanksgiving Day "= the " Vindemia."] 

* [A lover of gardens and of nature. The religion of Christ gave 
a new and loftier impulse to such tastes universally. Vol. ii. p. 9.] 

fixed on me. With your mind as well as your 
ears you are altogether a listener ; and a listener, 
too, with an eagerness proportioned to your 
affection. 

2. And yet, of what kind or of what amount 
is anything that my mind is likely to communi- 
cate to yours? The poor mediocrity of my 
shallow understanding produces a very limited 
harvest, and enriches the soil with no fruitful 
deposits. Nevertheless, with such powers as I 
have, I will set about the matter ; for the subject 
itself on which I am about to speak will assist 
me. In courts of justice, in the public assembly, 
in political debate, a copious eloquence may be 
the glory of a voluble ambition ; but in speak- 
ing of the Lord God, a chaste simplicity of 
expression strives for the conviction of faith 
rather with the substance, than with the powers, 
of eloquence. Therefore accept from me things, 
not clever but weighty, words, not decked up 
to charm a popular audience with cultivated 
rhetoric, but simple and fitted by their unvar- 
nished truthfulness for the proclamation of the 
divine mercy. Accept what is felt before it is 
spoken, what has not been accumulated with 
tardy painstaking during the lapse of years, but 
has been inhaled in one breath of ripening grace. 

3. While I was still lying in darkness and 
gloomy night, wavering hither and thither, tossed 
about on the foam of this boastful age, and un- 
certain of my wandering steps, knowing nothing 
of my real life, and remote from truth and light, 
I used to regard it as a difficult matter, and 
especially as difficult in respect of my character 
at that time, that a man should be capable of 
being born again 5 — a truth which the divine 
mercy had announced for my salvation, — and 
that a man quickened to a new life in the laver 
of saving water should be able to put off what 
he had previously been ; and, although retaining 
all his bodily structure, should be himself changed 
in heart and soul. " How," said I, " is such a 
conversion possible, that there should be a sud- 
den and rapid divestment of all which, either 
innate in us has hardened in the corruption of 
our material nature, or acquired by us has be- 

[ Another Nicodemus, John 

27i 

276 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

come inveterate by long accustomed use ? These 
things have become deeply and radically en- 
grained within us. When does he learn thrift 
who has been used to liberal banquets and sump- 
tuous feasts ? And he who has been glittering 
in gold and purple, and has been celebrated for 
his costly attire, when does he reduce himself 
to ordinary and simple clothing? One who has 
felt the charm of the fasces and of civic honours 
shrinks from becoming a mere private and in- 
glorious citizen. The man who is attended by 
crowds of clients, and dignified by the numerous 
association of an officious train, regards it as a 
punishment w^hen he is alone. It is inevitable, 
as it ever has been, that the love of wine should 
entice, pride inflate, anger inflame, covetousness 
disquiet, cruelty stimulate, ambition delight, lust 
hasten to niin, with allurements that will not let 
go their hold." 

4. These were my frequent thoughts. For as 
I myself was held in bonds by the innumerable 
errors of my previous life, from which I did not 
believe that I could by possibility be delivered, 
so I was disposed to acquiesce in my clinging 
vices , and because I despaired of better things, 
I used to indulge my sins as if they were actually 
parts of me, and indigenous to me. But after 
that, by the help of the water of new birth, the 
stain of former years had been washed avvay, and 
a light from above, serene and pure, had been 
infused into my reconciled heart, — after that, 
by the agency of the Spirit breathed from heav- 
en, a second birth had restored me to a new 
man ; — then, in a wondrous manner, doubtful 
things at once began to assure themselves to me, 
hidden things to be revealed, dark things to be 
enlightened, what before had seemed difficult 
began to suggest a means of accomplishment, 
what had been thought impossible, to be capable 
of being achieved ; so that I was enabled to 
acknowledge that what previously, being born 
of the flesh, had been living in the practice of 
sins, was of the earth earthly, but had now begun 
to be of Ciod, and was animated by the Spirit of 
holiness. You yourself assuredly know and recol- 
lect as well as I do what was taken away from 
us, and what was given to us by that death of 
evil, and that life of virtue. You yourself know 
this without my information. Anything like 
boasting in one's own praise is hateful, although 
we cannot in reality boast Ijut only be grateful 
for whatever we do not ascjil^ to man's virtue 
but declare to be the gift of (lod ; so that now 
we sin not is the beginning of the work of faith, 
whereas that we sinned before was the result of 
human error. .All our power is of (Jod ; I say, 
of God. From Him we have life, from Him we 
have strength, by power derived antl conceived 
from Him we do, while yet in this world, fore- 
know the indications of things to come. Only 

let fear be the keeper of innocence, that the 
Lord, who of His mercy has flowed ' into our 
hearts in the access of celestial grace, may be 
kept by righteous submissiveness in the hostelry 
of a grateful mind, that the assurance we have 
gained may not beget carelessness, and so the 
old enemy creep upon us again. -/ 

5. But if you keep the way of innocence, the 
way of righteousness, if you walk with a firm ami 
steady step, if, depending on God with your 
whole strength and with your whole heart, you 
only be what you have begun to be, liljerty and 
power to do is given you in proportion to the 
increase of your spiritual grace. For there is 
not, as is the case with earthly benefits, any 
measure or stint in the dispensing of the heav- 
enly gift. The Spirit freely flowing forth is re- 
strained by no limits, is checked by no closed 
barriers within certain bounded spaces ; it flows 
perpetually, it is exuberant in its affluence. Let 
our heart only be athirst, and be ready to re- 
ceive : in the degree in which we bring to it a 
capacious faith, in that measure we draw from it 
an overflowing grace. Thence is given power, 
with modest chastity, with a sound mind, with a 
simple voice, with unblemished virtue, that is 
able to quench the virus of poisons for the heal- 
ing of the sick, to purge out the stains of foolish 
souls by restored health, to bid peace to those 
that are at enmity, repose to the violent, gentle- 
ness to the unruly, — by startling threats to force 
to avow themselves the impure and vagrant 
spirits that have betaken themselves into the 
bodies of men whom tliey purpose to destroy, 
to drive them with heavy blows to come out of 
them, to stretch them out struggling, howling, 
groaning with increase of constantly renewing 
pain, to beat them with scourges, to roast them 
with fire : the matter is carried on there, but is 
not seen ; the strokes inflicted are hidden, but 
the penalty is manifest. Thus, in respect of 
what we have already begun to be, the Spirit 
that we have received possesses its own liberty 
of action ; while in that we have not yet changetL 
our body and members, the carnal view is still 
darkened by the clouds of this Vvorld. How 
great is this empire of the mind, ami what a 
power it has, not alone that itself is withdrawn 
from the mischievous associations of the world, 
as one who is purged and pure can suffer no stain 
of a hostile irruption, but that it becomes still 
greater and stronger in its might, so that it can 
rule over all the imperious host of the attacking 
adversary with its sway ! 

t'G. But in order that the characteristics of the 
divine may shine more brightly by the develop- 
ment of the truth, I will give you light to api)re- 
hend it, the obscurity caused by sin being wiped 

' Or, " shone," " infulsit." 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

277 

away. I will draw away the veil from the dark- 
ness of this hidden world. For a brief space 
conceive yourself to be transported to one of 
the loftiest peaks of some inaccessible mountain, 
thence gaze on the appearances of things lying 
below you, and with eyes turned in various di- 
rections look upon the eddies of the billowy 
world, while you yourself are removed from 
earthly contacts, — you will at once begin to 
feel compassion for the world, aud with self- 
recollection and increasing gratitude to God, you 
will rejoice with all the greater joy that you have 
escaped it. Consider the roads blocked up by 
robbers, the seas beset with pirates, wars scat- 
tered all over the earth with the bloody horror 
of camps. The whole world is wet with mutual 
blood ; and murder, which in the case of an 
individual is admitted to be a crime, is called 
a virtue when it is committed wholesale. Im- 
punity is claimed for the wicked deeds, not on 
the plea that they are guiltless, but because the 
cruelty is perpetrated on a grand scale. 

7. And now, if you turn your eyes and your 
regards to the cities themselves, you will behold 
a concourse more fraught with sadness than any 
solitude. The gladiatorial games are prepared, 
that blood may gladden the lust of cruel eyes. 
The body is fed up with stronger food, and the 
vigorous mass of limbs is enriched with brawn 
and muscle, that the wretch fattened for punish- 
ment may die a harder death. Man is slaugh- 
tered that man may be gratified, and the skill 
that is best able to kill is an exercise and an art. 
Crime is not only committed, but it is taught. 
What can be said more inhuman, — what more 
repulsive? Training is undergone to acquire the 
power to murder, and the achievement of mur- 
der is its glory. What state of things, I pray 
you, can that be, and what can it be like, in 
which men, whom none have condemned, offer 
themselves to the wild beasts — men of ripe age, 
of sufficiently beautiful person, clad in costly 
garments ? Living men, they are adorned for a 
voluntary death ; wretched men, they boast of 
their own miseries. They fight with beasts, not 
for their crime, but for their madness. Fathers 
look on their own sons ; a brother is in the arena, 
and his sister is hard by ; and although a grand- 
er display of pomp increases the price of the 
•exhibition, yet, oh shame ! even the mother will 
pay the increase in order that she may be pres- 
ent at her own miseries. And in looking upon 
scenes so frightful and so impious and so deadly, 
they do not seem to be aware that they are par- 
ricides with their eyes. 

8. Hence turn your looks to the abominations, 
not less to be deplored, of another kind of spec- 
tacle.' In the theatres also vou will behold what 

' [Alas, that in the modern theatre and opera all this has been 
reproduced, and Christians applaud!] 

may w^ell cause you grief and shame. It is the 
tragic buskin which relates in verse the crimes 
of ancient days. The old horrors ^ of parricidew^ 
and incest are unfolded in action calculated to 
express the image of the truth, so that, as the 
ages pass by, any crime that was formerly com- 
mitted may not be forgotten. Each generation 
is reminded by what it hears, that whatever has 
once been done may be done again. Crimes 
never die out by the lapse of ages ; wickedness 
is never abolished by process of time ; impiety 
is never buried in oblivion. Things which have 
now ceased to be actual deeds of vice become 
examples. In the mimes, moreover, by the 
teaching of infamies, the spectator is attracted 
either to reconsider what he may have done in 
secret, or to hear what he may do. Adultery is 
learnt while it is seen ; and while the mischief 
having public authority panders to vices, the 
matron, who perchance had gone to the specta- 
cle a modest woman, returns from it immodest. 
Still further, what a degradation of morals it is, 
what a stimulus to abominable deeds, what food 
for vice, to be polluted by histrionic gestures, 
against the covenant and law of one's birth, to 
gaze in detail upon the endurance of incestuous 
abominations ! v Men are emasculated, and all 
the pride and vigour of their sex is effeminated 
in the disgrace of their enervated body ; and he 
is most pleasing there who has most completely 
broken down the man into the woman. He 
grows into praise by virtue of his crime ; and 
the more he is degraded, the more skilful he is 
considered to be. Such a one is looked upon — 
oh shame ! and looked upon with pleasure. 
And what cannot such a creature suggest ? He 
inflames the senses, he flatters the affections, he 
drives out the more vigorous conscience of a 
virtuous breast ; nor is there wanting authority 
for the enticing abomination, that the mischief 
may creep upon people with a less perceptible 
approach. They picture Venus immodest. Mars 
adulterous ; and that Jupiter of theirs not more 
supreme in dominion than in vice, inflamed with 
earthly love in the midst of his own thunders, 
now growing white in the feathers of a swan, 
now pouring down in a golden shower, now 
breaking forth by the help of birds to violate 
the purity of boys. And now put the question. 
Can he who looks upon such things be healthy- 
minded or modest? Men imitate the gods 
whom they adore, and to such miserable beings 
their crimes become their religion.^ * 

9. Oh, if placed on that lofty watch-tower 
you could gaze into the secret places — if you 
could open the closed doors of sleeping cham- 
bers, and recall their dark recesses to the per- 
ception of sight, — you would behold things 

- Errors, v. I. 

^ [Compare Tertullian, vol. iii. pp. 87 et seqq.] 

278 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

done by immodest persons which no chaste eye ' 
could look upon ; you would see what even to 
see is a crime ; you would see what people em- 
bruted with the madness of vice deny that they 
have done, and yet hasten to do, — men with 
frenzied lusts rushing upon men, doing things 
which afford no gratification even to those who 
do them. I am deceived if the man who is 
guilty of such things as these does not accuse 
others of them. The depraved maligns the 
depraved, and thinks that he himself, though 
conscious of the guilt, has escaped, as if con- 
sciousness were not a sufficient condemnation. 

^ The same people who are accusers in public are 
criminals in private, condemning themselves at 
the same time as they condemn the culprits ; 
they denounce abroad what they commit at 
home, willingly doing what, when they have 
done, they accuse, — a daring which assuredly 
is fitly mated with vice, and an impudence quite 
in accordance with shameless people. And I 
beg you not to wonder at the things that persons 
of this kind speak : the offence of their mouths 
in words is the least of which they are guilty.' 

10. But after considering the public roads full 
of pitfalls, after battles of many kinds scattered 
abroad over the whole world, after exhibitions 
either bloody or infamous, after the abomina- 
tions of lust, whether exposed for sale in broth- 
els or hidden within the domestic walls — 
abominations, the audacity of which is greater 
in proportion to the secrecy of the crime, — 
possibly you may think that the Forum at least 
is free from such things, that it is neither exposed 
to exasperating wrongs, nor polluted by the as- 
sociation of criminals. Then turn your gaze in 
that direction : there you will discover things 
more odious than ever, so that thence you will 
be more desirous of turning away your eyes, 
although the laws are carved on twelve tables, 
and the statutes are publicly prescribed on bra- 
zen tablets. Yet wrong is done in the midst of 
the laws themselves ; wickedness is committed 
in the very face of the statutes ; innocence is 

y not preserved even in the place where it is de- 
fended. By turns the rancour of disputants 
rages ; and when peace is broken among the 
togas,^ the Forum echoes with the madness of 
strife. There close at hand is the spear and the 
sword, and the executioner also ; there is the 
claw that tears, the rack that stretches, the fire 
that burns up, — more tortures for one poor 
human body than it has limbs. And in 
cases who is there to help ? One's patron ? 
makes a feint, and deceives. The judge? 
he sells his sentence. He who sits to 
crimes commits them, and the judge becomes 

' I Rom. i. 26, 27. The enormous extent of this diabolical form 
e( lust is implied in all these patristic rebukes.] 
* The dresses of peace. 

such 

He 

But 

avenge 

the culprit, in order that the accused may perish 
innocently. Crimes are everywhere common ; 
and everywhere in the multiform character of 
sin, the pernicious poison acts by means of de- 
graded minds. One man forges a will, another 
by a capital fraud makes a false deposition ; 
on the one hand, children are cheated of their 
inheritances, on the other, strangers are endowed 
with their estates. The opponent makes his 
charge, the false accuser attacks, the witness de- 
fames, on all sides the venal impudence of hired 
voices sets about the falsification of charges, 
while in the meantime the guilty do not even 
perish with the innocent. There is no fear about 
the laws ; no concern for either inquisitor or 
judge ; when the sentence can be bought off for 
money, it is not cared for. It is a crime now 
among the guilty to be innocent ; whoever does 
not imitate the wicked is an offence to them. 
The laws have come to terms with crimes, and 
■ whatever is public has begun to be allowed. 
What can be the modesty, what can be the in- 
tegrity, that prevails there, when there are none 
to condemn the wicked, and one only meets with 
those who ought themselves to be condemned? 
II. But that we may not perchance appear 
as if we were picking out extreme cases, and 
with the view of disparagement were seeking to 
attract your attention to those things whereof the 
sad and revolting view may offend the gaze of a 
better conscience, I will now direct you to such 
things as the world in its ignorance accounts 
good. Among these also you will behold things 
that will shock you. In respect of what you re- 
gard as honours, of what you consider the fasces, 
what you count affluence in riches, what you 
think power in the camp, the glory of the purple 
in the magisterial office, the power of licence in 
the chief command, — there is hidden the virus 
of ensnaring mischief, and an appearance of 
smiling wickedness, joyous indeed, but the 
treacherous deception of hidden calamity. Just 
as some poison, in which the flavour having been 
medicated with sweetness, craftily mingled in 
its deadly juices, seems, when taken, to be an 
ordinary draught, but when it is drunk up, the 
destruction that you have swallowed assails you. 
You see, forsooth, that man distinguished by his 
brilliant dress, glittering, as he thinks, in his pur- 
ple. Yet with what baseness has he purchased 
this glitter ! What contempts of the proud has 
he had first to submit to ! what haughty thresh- 
olds has he, as an early courtier, besieged ! How 
many scornful footsteps of arrogant great men 
has he had to precede, thronged in the crowd 
of clients, that by and by a similar procession 
might attend and precede him with salutations, 
— a train waiting not upon his person, but upon 
his power ! for he has no claim to be regarded 
for his character, but for his fasces. Of these, 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

279 

finally, you may see the degrading end, when 
the time-serving sycophant has departed, and 
the hanger-on, deserting them, has defiled the 
exposed side of the man who has retired into a 
private condition.' It is then that the mischiefs 
done to the squandered family-estate smite upon 
the conscience, then the losses that have ex- 
hausted the fortune are known, — expenses by! 
which the favour of the populace was bought, j 
and the people's breath asked for with fickle and 
empty entreaties. Assuredly, it was a vain and 
foolish boastfulness to have desired to set forth 
in the gratification of a disappointing spectacle, 
what the people would not receive, and what 
wpuld ruin the magistrates. 

^ 12. But those, moreover, whom you consider 
rich, who add forests to forests, and who, exclud- 
ing the poor from their neighbourhood, stretch 
■out their fields far and wide into space without 
any limits, who possess immense heaps of silver 
and gold and mighty sums of money, either in 
built-up heaps or in buried stores, — even in the 
midst of their riches those are torn to pieces by 
the anxiety of vague thought, lest the robber 
should spoil, lest the murderer should attack, 
lest the envy of some wealthier neighbour should 
become hostile, and harass them with malicious 
lawsuits. Such a one enjoys no security either 
in his food or in his sleep. In the midst of the 
banquet he sighs, although he drinks from a 
jewelled goblet ; and when his luxurious bed 
has enfolded his body, languid with feasting, in 
its yielding bosom, he lies wakeful in the midst 
of the down ; nor does he perceive, poor wretch, 
that these things are merely gilded torments, 
that he is held in bondage by his gold, and that 
he is the slave of his luxury and wealth rather 
than their master. And oh, the odious blind- 
ness of perception, and the deep darkness of 
senseless greed ! although he might disburden 
himself and get rid of the load, he rather contin- 
ues to brood over his vexing wealth, — he goes 
on obstinately clinging to his tormenting hoards. 
From him there is no liberality to dependents, 
no communication to the poor. And yet such 
people call that their own money, which they 
guard with jealous labour, shut up at home as if 
it were another's, and from which they derive no 
benefit either for their friends, for their children, 
or, in fine, for themselves. Their possession 
' amounts to this only, that they can keep others 
from possessing it ; and oh, what a marvellous 
perversion of names ! they call those things goo(/s, 
which they absolutely put to none but />ai/ uses. 
13. Or think you that even those are secure, 
— that those at least are safe with some stable 
permanence among the chaplets of honour and 
vast wealth, whom, in the glitter of royal palaces, 

' [Confirmed by all the Roman satirists, as will be recalled by 
the reader. Conf. Horace, Sai., vi. book i.J 

the safeguard of watchful arms surrounds ? They 
have greater fear than others. A man is con- 
strained to dread no less than he is dreaded. 
Exaltation exacts its penalties equally from the 
more powerful, although he may be hedged in 
with bands of satellites, and may guard his per- 
son with the enclosure and protection of a numer- 
ous retinue. Even as he does not allow his 
inferiors to feel security, it is inevitable that he 
himself should want the sense of security. The 
power of those whom power makes terrible to 
others, is, first of all, terrible to themselves. It 
smiles to rage, it cajoles to deceive, it entices to 
slay, it lifts up to cast down. With a certain 
usury of mischief, the greater the height of dig- 
nity and honours attained, the greater is the 
interest of penalty required. 

14. Hence, then, the one peaceful and trust- 
worthy tranquillity, the one solid and firm and 
constant security, is this, for a man to withdraw 
from these eddies of a distracting world, and, 
anchored on the ground of the harbour of salva- 
tion, to lift his eyes from earth to heaven •; and 
having been admitted to the gift of God, and 
being already very near to his God in mind, he 
may boast, that whatever in human affairs others 
esteem lofty and grand, lies altogether beneath 
his consciousness. He who is actually greater 
than the world can crave nothing, can desire 
nothing, from the world. How stable, how free 
from all shocks is that safeguard ; how heavenly 
the protection in its perennial blessings, — to be 
loosed from the snares of this entangling world, 
and to be purged from earthly dregs, and fitted 
for the light of eternal immortality ! He will 
see what crafty mischief of the foe that pre- 
viously attacked us has been in progress against 
us. We are constrained to have more love for 
what we shall be, by being allowed to know and to 
condemn what we were. Neither for this pur- 
pose is it necessary to pay a price either in the 
way of bribery or of labour ; so that man's 
elevation or dignity or power should be begotten 
in him with elaborate effort ; but it is a gratui- 
tous gift from God, and it is accessible to all. 
As the sun shines spontaneously, as the day 
gives light, as the fountain flows, as the shower 
yields moisture, so does the heavenly Spirit in- 
fuse itself into us. When the soul, in its gaze 
into heaven, has recognised its Author, it rises 
higher than the sun, and far transcends all this 
earthly power, and begins to be that which it 
believes itself to be.^ 

15. Do you, however, whom the celestial 
warfare has enlisted in the spiritual camp, only 
observe a discipline uncorrupted and chastened 
in the virtues of religion. Be constant as well 

^ [What a testimony to regeneration I Cyprian speaks from 
heathen experience, then from the experience of a new birth. Few 
specimens of simple eloquence surpass this.] 

2 8o 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

in prayer as in reading ; now speak with God, 
now let God speak with you. let Him instruct 
you in His precepts, let Him direct you. Whom 
He has made rich, none shall make poor ; for, 
in fact, there can be no poverty to him whose 
breast has once been supplied with heavenly 
food. Ceilings enriched with gold, and houses 
adorned with mosaics of costly marble, w-ill seem 
mean to you, now when you know that it is you 
yourself who are rather to be perfected, you who 
are rather to be adorned, and that that dwelling 
in which God has dwelt as in a temple, in which 
the Holy Spirit has begun to make His abode, 
is of more importance than all others. Let us 
embellish this house with the colours of inno- 
cence, let us enlighten it with the light of jus- 
tice : this will never fall into decay with the wear 
of age, nor shall it be defiled by the tarnishing 
of the colours of its walls, nor of its gold. What- 
ever is artificially beautified is perishing ; and 
such things as contain not the reality of posses- 
sion afford no abiding assurance to their possess- 
ors. But this remains in a beauty perpetually 
•vivid, in perfect honour, in permanent splendour. 
It can neither decay nor be destroyed ; it can 
•only be fashioned into greater perfection when 
the body returns to it. 

1 6. These things, dearest Donatus, briefly for 
the present. For although what you profitably 
hear delights your patience, indulgent in its good- 
ness, your well-balanced mind, and your assured 
faith — and nothing is so pleasant to your ears 
as what is pleasant to you in God, — yet, as we 
are associated as neighbours, and are likely to 
talk together frequently, we ought to have some 
moderation in our conversation ; and since this 
is a holiday rest, and a time of leisure, whatever 
remains of the day, now that the sun is sloping 
towards the evening,' let us spend it in gladness, 
nor let even the hour of repast be without 
heavenly grace. Let the temperate meal re- 
sound with psalms ;^ and as your memory is tena- 
cious and your voice musical, undertake this 
office, as is your wont. You will provide a better 
entertainment for your dearest friends, if, while 
we have something spiritual to listen to, the 
sweetness ol religious music charm our ears. 

EPISTLE 11.3 

FROM THE ROMAN CLERGY TO THE CARTHA- 
GIMAN CLERGY, ABOUT THE RETIREMENT 
OF THE BLESSED CYPRL\N. 

ARGUMENT. — THE ROMAN CLERGY HAD LEARNT 
FROM CREMENTIUS THE SUB-DEACON, THAT IN 
THE TIME OF PERSECUTION CYPRIAN HAD WITH- 
DRAWN HIMSELF. THEREFORE, \VHH THEIR AC- 

' [See Cowper, on "the Sabine bard," Task, b. iv. But com- 

fare even the best of Horatian epi>tles willi this: " O nodes cojnaeque 
)eum," etc. What a blessed contrast in Christian society!] 
' [Here recall the Evettins Hymn, vol. ii. p. 298. J 
3 Oxford ed. : Ep. viii. 

CUSTOMED ZEAL FOR THE FAITH, THEY REMIND 
THE CARTHAGINIAN CLERGY OF THEIR DUTY, 
AND INSTRUCT THEM WHAT TO DO IN THE 
CASE OF THE LAPSED, DURING THE INTERVAL 
OF THE bishop's ABSENCE. 

I. ^^'e have been informed by Crementius the 
sub-deacon, who came to us from you, that the 
blessed father •* Cyprian has for a certain reason 
withdrawn ; " in doing which he acted quite 
rightly, because he is a person of eminence, and 
because a conflict is impending," which God 
has allowed in the world, for the sake of co-op- 
erating with His servants in their struggle against 
the adversary, and was, moreover, willing that 
this conflict should show to angels and to men 
that the victor shall be crowned, while the van- 
quished shall in himself receive the doom which 
has been made manifest to us. Since, moreover, 
it devolves upon us who appear to be placed on 
high, in the place of a shepherd, 5 to keep watch 
over the flock ; if we be found neglectful, it will 
be said to us, as it was said to our predecessors 
also, who in such wise negligent had been placed 
in charge, that " we have not sought for that 
which was lost, and have not corrected the wan- 
derer, and have not bound up that which was 
broken, but have eaten their milk, and been 
clothed with their wool ; " ^ and then also the 
Lord Himself, fulfilling what had been written 
in the law and the prophets, teaches, saying, " I 
am the good shepherd, who lay down my life for 
the sheep. But the hireling, whose own the 
sheep are not, seeth the w-olf coming, and leav- 
eth the sheep, and fleeth, and the wolf scatter- 
eth them." ^ To Simon, too, He speaks thus : 
" Lovest thou me ? He answered, I do love 
Thee. He saith to him. Feed my sheep."** We 
know that this saying arose out of the very cir- 
cumstance of his withdrawal, and the rest of the 
disciples did likewise.^ 

2. We are unwilling, therefore, beloved breth- 
ren, that you should be found hirelings, but we 
desire you to be good shepherds, since you are 
aware that no slight danger threatens you if you 
do not exhort our brethren to stand stedfast in 
the faith, so that the brotherhood be not abso- 
lutely rooted out, as being of those who rush 
headlong into idolatry. Neither is it in words 
only that we exhort you to this ; but you will be 

< Papam. [The Roman clergy give this title to Cyprian.] 

5 fl'his exercise oijuriidictiou, vice episcopi, is to be noted.] 

* Ezek. xxxiv. 3, 4. 
7 John X. II, 12. 

* John xxi. 17. 

9 This is a very obscure passage, and is variously understood. It 
seems most probable that the allusion is to Peter's denial of his Lord, 
and following Him afar off; and is intended to bear upoti Cyprian's 
retirement. There seems no meaning vn interpreting (he passage as a 
reference to Peter's death. [It seems, in a slight degree, to reflect 
on Cyprian's withdrawal. But note, it asserts that the pasce oves 
iiieai was a reproach to St. Peter, and was understood to be so by his 
fellow-apostles. In other words, our Lord, so these clergy argue, 
bade St. Peter not again to forsake the brethren whom he should 
strengthen. Luke xxii. 32.] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

281 

able to ascertain from very many who come to 
you from us, that, God blesshig us, we both have 
done and still do all these things ourselves with 
all anxiety and worldly risk, having before our 
eyes rather the fear of God and eternal suffer- 
ings than the fear of men and a short-lived dis- 
comfort, not forsaking the brethren, but exhorting 
them to stand firm in the faith, and to be ready 
to go with the Lord. And we have even recalled 
those who were ascending ' to do that to which 
they were constrained. The Church stands in 
faith, notwithstanding that some have been driven 
to fall by very terror, whether that they were per- 
sons of eminence, or that they were afraid, when 
seized, with the fear of man : these, however, we 
did not abandon, although they were separated 
from us, but exhorted them, and do exhort them, 
to repent, if in any way they may receive pardon 
from Him who is able to grant it ; lest, haply, if 
they should be deserted by us, they should be- 
come worse. 

3^ You see, then, brethren, that you also ought 
to do the like, so that even those who have fallen 
may amend their minds by your exhortation ; 
and if they should be seized once more, may 
confess, and may so make amends for their pre- 
vious sin. And there are other matters which 
are incumbent on you, which also we have here 
added, as that if any who may have fallen into 
this temptation begin to be taken v/ith sickness, 
and repent of what they have done, and desire 
communion, it should in any wise be granted 
them. Or if you have widows or bedridden 
people ^ who are unable to maintain themselves, 
or those who are in prisons or are excluded from 
their own dwellings, these ought in all cases to 
have some to minister to them. Moreover, cate- 
chumens when seized with sickness ought not to 
be deceived,^ but help is to be afforded them. 
And, as matter of the greatest importance, if the 
bodies of the martyrs and others be not buried, 
a considerable risk is incurred by those whose 
duty it is to do this office. By whomsoever of 
you, then, and on whatever occasion this duty 
may have been performed, we are sure that he 
is regarded as a good servant, — as one who has 
been faithful in the least, and will be appointed 
ruler over ten cities. May God, however, who 
gives all things to them that hope in Him, grant 
to us that we may all be found in these works. 
The brethren who are in bonds greet you, as do 
the elders, and the whole Church, which itself 
also with the deepest anxiety keeps watch over 
all who call on the name of the Lord. And we 
likewise beg you in your turn to have us in re- 
membrance. Know, moreover, that Bassianus 
has come to us ; and we request of you who 

' That is to say, " to the Capitol to sacrifice." 

* Clinomeni. 

s Le., as to the implied promise of their preparation for baptism. 

have a zeal for God, to send a copy of this letter 
to whomsoever you are able, as occasions may 
serve, or make your own opportunities, or send 
a message, that they may stand firm and stedfast 
in the faith. We bid you, beloved brethren, ever 
heartily farewell. • 

EPISTLE III.4 

TO THE PRESBYTERS .\ND DEACONS ABIDING 
AT ROME. A.D. 250. 

ARGUMENT. — THIS IS A FAMILIAR AND FRIENDLY 
EPISTLE ; SO THAT IT REQUIRES NO FORMAL 
ARGUMENT, ESPECIALLY AS IT CAN BE SUFFI- 
CIENTLY GATHERED FROM THE TITLE ITSELF. 
THE LEITER OF THE ROM.4.N CLERGY, TO WHICH 
CYPRL\N IS REPLYING, IS MISSING. 

I. Cyprian to the elders and deacons, breth- 
ren abiding at Rome, sends, greeting. When 
the report of the departure of the excellent man, 
my colleague,5 was ^till uncertain among us, my 
beloved brethren, and I was wavering doubtftilly 
in my opinion on the matter, I received a letter 
sent to me from you by Crementius the sub- 
deacon, in which I was most ' abundantly in- 
formed of his glorious end ; and I rejoiced 
greatly that, in harmony with the integrity of 
his administration, an honourable consumma- 
tion also attended him. Wherein, moreover, I 
greatly congratulate )^.bu, that you honour his 
memory with a testimany so public and so illus- 
trious, so that by"'your means is made known to 
me, not only what is glorious to you in connec- 
tion with the memoT^ of your bishop, but what 
ought to afford to me also an example of faith 
and virtue. Ffep-in proportion as the fall of a 
bishop is an event which tends ruinously to the 
fall of -his followers, so on the other hand it is a 
useful ' andr'helpful thing when a bishop, by the 
firmness 6{ his faith, sets himself forth to his 
brethren as an object of imitation. 
. 2. I have, moreover, read another epistle,^ in 
vvhich neither the person who wrote nor the per- 
sons to whom it was written were plainly de- 
^clared ; and inasmuch as in the same letter both 
the writing and the matter, and even the paper 
itself, gave me the idea that something had been 
taken away, or had been changed from the ori- 
ginal, I have sent you back the epistle as it actu- 
ally came to hand, that you may examine whether 
it is the very same which you gave to Crementius 
the sub-deacon, to carry. For it is a very seri- 
ous thing if the truth of a clerical letter is cor- 
rupted by any falsehood or deceit. In order, 
then, that we may know this, ascertain whether 

*■ Oxford ed. : Ep. ix. 

S Fabian, bishop of Rome. [Cyprian's " colleague," but their 
bishop. See Greek of Philip, ii. 25. He is an example to his breth- 
ren: such the simple position of a prmiitive Bishop of Rome.] 

'■ The foregoing letter, Ep. ii. 

282 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

the writing and subscription are yours, and write 
me again what is the truth of the matter. I bid 
you, dearest brethren, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE IV.' 

TO THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN EXHORTS HIS CLERGY 
FROM HIS PLACE OF RETIREMENT, THAT IN HIS AB- 
SENCE THEY SHOULD BE UNITED ; THAT NOTHING 
SHOULD BE WANTING TO PRISONERS OR TO THE 
REST OF THE POOR ; AND FURTHER, THAT THEY 
SHOULD KEEP THE PEOPLE IN QUIET, LEST, IF 
THEY SHOULD RUSH IN CROWDS TO VISIT THE 
MARTYRS IN PRISON, THIS PRIVILEGE SHOULD AT 
LENGTH BE FORBIDDEN THE.M. A.D. 25O. 

1. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his 
beloved brethren, greeting. Being by the grace 
of God in safety, dearest brethren, I salute you, 
rejoicing that I am informed of the prosperity of 
all things in respect of your safety also ; and as 
the condition of the place ^ does not permit me 
to be with you now, I beg you, by your faith and 
your religion, to discharge there both your own 
office and mine, that there maybe nothing want- 
ing either to discipline or diligence. In respect 
of means, moreover, for meeting the expenses, 
whether for those who, having confessed theic 
Lord with a glorious voice, have been put in 
prison, or for those who are labouring in poverty 
and want, and still stand fast in the Lord, I en- 
treat that nothing be wanting, since the whole 
of the small sum which was collected there was 
distributed among the clergy for cases of that 
kind, that many might have means whence they 
could assist the necessities and burthens of in- 
dividuals. 

2. I beg also that there may be no lack, on 
your parts, of wisdom and carefulness to preserve 
peace. For although from their affection the 
brethren are eager to approach and to visit those 
good confessors, on whom by their glorious be- 
ginnings the divine consideration has already 
shed a brightness, yet I think that this eagerness 
must be cautiously indulged, and not in crowds, 
— not in numbers collected together at once, 
lest from this very thing ill-will be aroused, and 
the means of access be denied, and thus, while 
we insatiably wish for all, we lose all. Take 
counsel, therefore, and see that this may be 
more safely managed with moderation, so that 
the presbyters also, who there offer ^ with the 
confessors, may one by one take turns with the 
deacons individually ; because, by thus chan- 
ging the persons and varying the people that 
come together, suspicion is diminished. For, 

' Oxford cd.: Ep. v. 

2 <;cil. Carthage, where the populace had already demanded Cyp- 
rian's blood. 

3 "Qui illic apiid confessores offerimt," scil. "the oblation" 
(7rpoCT<^o/jo, Ro!.'.. .\v. 16), i.e., " who celebrate thie Eucharist." 

meek and humble in all things, as befits the ser- 
vants of God, we ought to accommodate our- 
selves to the times, and to provide for quietness, 
and to have regard to the people. I bid you, 
brethren, beloved and dearly longed-for, alwa)s 
heartily farewell ; and have me in remembrance. 
Greet all the brotherhood. Victor the deacon, 
and those who are with me, greet \-ou. Fare- 
well ! 

EPISTLE V.^ 

TO THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS. 
ARGUMENT. — THE ARGUMENT OF THIS LETTER IS 
NEARLY THE SAME AS IHAT OF THE PRECED- 
ING ONE, EXCEFF TH.AT THE WRITER DIRECTS 
THE CONFESSORS ALSO TO BE ADMONISHED BY 
THE CLERGY OF THEIR DUTY, TO GIVE .■ATTEN- 
TION TO HUMILITY, AND OBEY THE PRESBYTERS 
AND DEACONS. HIS OWN RETIREMENT INCI- 
DENTALLY FURNISHES AN OCCASION FOR THIS. 

I. Cyprian to the j^resbyters and deacons, his 
brethren, greeting. I had wished indeed, be- 
loved brethren, with this my letter to greet the 
whole of my clergy in health and safety. But 
since the stormy time which has in a great 
measure overwhelmed my people, has, moreover, 
added this enhancement to my sorrows, that it 
has touched with its desolation even a portion 
of the clergy, I pray the Lord that, by the divine 
mercy, I may hereafter greet you at all events as 
safe, who, as I have learned, stand fast both in 
faith and virtue. And although some reasons 
might appear to urge me to the duty of myself 
hastening to come to you, firstly, for instance, 
because of my eagerness and desire for you, 
which is the chief consideration in my prayers, 
and then, that we might be able to consult to- 
gether on ''those matters which are required by 
the general advantage, in respect of the govern- 
ment of the Church, and having carefully ex- 
amined them with abundant counsel, might 
wisely arrange them ; — yet it seemed to me 
better, still to preserve my retreat and my quiet 
for a while, with a view to other advantages con- 
nected with the peace and safety of us all : — of 

given 

you 

which advantages an account will be 
by our beloved brother Tertullus, who, besides 
his other care which he zealously bestows on 
divine labours, was. moreover, the author of this 
counsel ; that I should be cautious and moder- 
ate, and not rashly trust myself into the sight of 
the public ; and especially that I should beware 
of that place where I had been so often inquired 
for and sought after. 

2. Relying, therefore, upon your love and your 
piety, which I have al)undantly known, in this 
letter I both exhort and command you, that 
those of you whose presence there is least sus- 
picious and least perilous, should in my stead 

* O.xforded.: Ep. xiv. .^.u. 250. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

283 

discharge my duty, in respect of doing those 
things which are required for the reUgious ad- 
ministration. In the meantime let the poor be 
taken care of as much and as well as possible ; 
but especially those who have stood with un- 
shaken faith and have not forsaken Christ's flock, 
that, by your diligence, means be supplied to 
them to enable them to bear their poverty, so 
that what the troublous time has not effected in 
respect of their faith, may not be accomplished 
by want in respect of their afflictions. Let a 
more earnest care, moreover, be bestowed upon 
the glorious confessors. And although I know 
that very many of those have been maintained 
by the vow ' and by the love of the brethren, 
yet if there be any who are in want either of 
clothing or maintenance, let them be supplied 
with whatever things are necessary, as I formerly 
wrote to you, while they were still kept in prison, 
— only let them know from you and be in- 
structed, and learn what, according to the au- 
thority of Scripture, the discipline of the Church 
requires of them, that they ought to be humble 
and modest and peaceable, that they should 
maintain the honour of their name, so that those 
who have achieved glory by what they have 
testified, may achieve glory also by their char- 
acters, and in all things seeking the Lord's 
approval, may show themselves worthy, in con- 
summation of their praise, to attain a heavenly 
crown. For there remains more than what is 
yet seen to be accomplished, since it is written, 
''Praise not any man before his death j"^ and 
again, " Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee a crown of life." ^ And the Lord also 
says, " He that endureth to the end, the same 
shall be saved." ■♦ Let them imitate the Lord, 
who at the very time of His passion was not 
more proud, but more humble. For then He 
washed His disciples' feet, saying, " If I, your 
Lord and Master, have washed your feet, ye 
ought also to wash one another's feet. For I 
have given you an example, that ye should do 
as I have done to you." 5 Let them also follow 
the example of the Apostle Paul, who, after 
often-repeated imprisonment, after scourging, 
after exposures to wild beasts, in everything con- 
tinued meek and humble ; and even after his 
rapture to the third heaven and paradise, he did 
not proudly arrogate anything to himself when 
he said, '' Neither did we eat any man's bread 
for nought, but wrought with labour and travail 
night and day, that we might not be chargeable 
to any of you." '' 

' It is thought that Cyprian here speaks of an order of men called 
" Parabolani," who systematically devoted themselves to the service 
of the sick and poor and imprisoned. [Acts iv. 6, ot I'curepot.j 

2 Ecclus. xi. 28. [Conf. Solon, A'froa'., i. 86.] 

3 Apoc. ii. 10. 
* Matt. X. 22. 

5 John xiii. 14, 15. [The/.'ir«/Wa«/were so called circa a.d. 415.] 
*> 2 Thess. iii. S. 

3. These several matters, I pray you, suggest 
to our brethren. And as " he who humbleth 
himself shall be exalted," i now is the time when 
they should rather fear the ensnaring adversary, 
who more eagerly attacks the man that is strong- 
est, and becoming more virulent, for the very 
reason that he is conquered, strives to overcome 
his conqueror. The Lord grant that I may soon 
both see them again, and by salutary exhortation 
may establish their minds to preserve their glory. 
For I am grieved when I hear that some of them 
run about wickedly and proudly, and give them- 
selves up to follies or to discords ; that members 
of Christ, and even members that have confessed 
Christ, are defiled by unlawful concubinage, and 
cannot be ruled either by deacons or by presby- 
ters, but cause that, by the wicked and evil 
characters of a few,** the honourable glories of 
many and good confessors are tarnished ;9 whom 
they ought to fear, lest, being condemned by 
their testimony and judgment, they be excluded 
from their fellowship. That, finally, is the illus- 
trious and true confessor, concerning whom after- 
wards the Church does not blush, but boasts. 

4. In respect of that which our fellow-presby- 
ters, Donatus and Fortunatus, Novatus and Gor- 
dius, wrote to me, I have not been abje to reply 
by myself, since, from the first commencement 
of my episcopacy, I made up my mind, to do' 
nothing on my own private opinion, without 
your advice and without the corjsent of the peo- 
ple.'° But as soon as, by the grace of God, I 
shall have come .to you; then we will discuss in 
common, as our respectiye dignity requires, those 
things which either have been or are to be .done. 
I bid you, brethren beloved and dearly, longed-' 
for, eve^ heartily farewell, and be' mindful of me. 
Greet the brotherhood that is with -you earnestly 
from me, and tell them to remembei- me. Fare- 
well. 

EPISTLE- VI.-" 

TO ROGATIANUS THE fRESBYTER, AND THE 
OTHER CONFESSORS, a.c. 250. 

ARGUMENT. HE EXHORTS ROGATIANUS AND THE 

OTHER CONFESSORS TO MAINTAIN DISCIPLINE, 
THAT NONE WHO HAD CONFESSED CHRIST IN 
WORD SHOULD SEEM TO DENY HLM IN DEED ; 
CASUALLY REBUKING SOME OF THEM, WHO, BE- 
ING EXILED ON ACCOUNT OF THE FAITH, WERE 
NOT AFRAID TO RETURN UNBIDDEN INTO THEIR 
COUNTRY. 

I . Cyprian to the presbyter Rogatianus, and to 
the other confessors, his brethren, greeting. I 

' Luke xiv. 11. 

8 [Strange, indeed, that such should be found amid the persecuted 
sheep of Christ; but it illustrates the history of Callistus at Rome, 
and the possibility' of such characters enlisting in the Church.] 

9 ["Whence hath it tares?" Ans. : "An enemy hath done 
this." See Matt. xiii. 27: Acts xx. 29-31.] 

■° [Elucidation II. This vi-as the canonical duty neglected by Cal- 
listus and his predecessor, who " imagined," etc. See p. 156, S7i/>ra.\ 
" Oxford ed.: Ep. xiii. [Rogatian was a bishop afterwards.] 

284 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

had both heretofore, dearly beloved and bravest 
brethren, sent you a letter, in which I congratu- 
lated your faith and virtue with exulting words, 
and now my voice has no other object, first of 
all, than with joyous mind, repeatedly and always 
to announce the glory of your name. For what 
ran I wish greater or better in my prayers than 
to see the flock of Christ enlightened by the hon- 
our of your confession? For although all the 
brethren ought to rejoice in this, yet, in the com- 
mon gladness, the share of the bishop is the 
greatest. For the glory of the Church is the glory 
of the bishop.' In proportion as we grieve over 
those whom a hostile persecution has cast down, 
in the same proportion we rejoice over you 
whom the devil has not been able to over- 
come. 

2. Yet I exhort you l)y our common faith, by 
the true and simple love of my heart towards 
you, that, having overcome the adversary in this 
first encounter, you should hold fast your glory 
with a brave and persevering virtue. We are 
still in the world ; we are still placed in the bat- 
tle-field ; we fight daily for our lives. Care 
must be taken, that after such beginnings as 
these there should also come an increase, and 
that what you have begun to be with such a 
blessed commencement should be consummated 
in you. It is a slight thing to have been able 
to attain anything ; it is more to be able to keep 
what you have attained ; even as faith itself and 
saving birth makes alive, not by being received, 
but by being preserved. Nor is it actually the 
attainment, but the perfecting, that keeps a man 
for God. The Lord taught this in His instruc- 
tion when He said, " Behold, thou art made 
whole ; sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto 
thee."^ Conceive of Him as saying this also to 
His confessor, " Lo thou art made a confessor ; 
sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee." 
Solomon also, and Saul, and many others, so 
long as they walked in the Lord's ways, were 
able to keep the grace given to them. When 
the discipline of the Lord was forsaken by them, 
grace also forsook them. 

3. We must persevere in the straight and nar- 
row road of praise and glory ; and since peace- 
fulness and humility and the tranquillity of a 
good life is fitting for all Christians, according to 
the word of the Lord, who looks to none other 
man than " to him that is poor and of a contrite 
spirit, and that trembleth at " ^ His word, it the 
more behoves you confessors, who have been 
made an example to the rest of the brethren, to 
observe and fulfil this, as being those whose 
characters should provoke to imitation the life 

' [A beautifu 
^ John V, 14. 
3 Isa. Uvi. 3. 

tiful aphorism. See below, note 3, this page.] 

and conduct of all. For as the Jews were alien- 
ated from God, as those on whose account " the 
name of God is blasphemed among the Gen- 
tiles," •♦ so on the other hand those are dear to 
God through whose conformity to discipline the 
name of God is declared with a testimony of 
praise, as it is written, the Lord Himself fore- 
warning and saying, " Let your light so shine 
before men that they may see your good works 
and glorify your Father which is in heaven. "s 
And Paul the apostle says, " Shine as lights in 
the world." ^ And similarly Peter exhorts : "As 
strangers," says he, " and i)ilgrinis, abstain from 
fleshly lusts, which war against the soul, having 
your conversation honest among the Gentiles ; 
that whereas they speak against you as evil-doers, 
they may by your good works, which they shall 
behold, glorify the Lord." ^ This, indeed, the 
greatest part of you, I rejoice to say, are careful 
for ; and, made better by the honour of your 
confession itself, guard and preser\'e its glory by 
tranquil and virtuous lives. 

4. But I hear that some infect your number, 
and destroy the praise of a distinguished name 
by their corrupt conversation ; whom you your- 
selves, even as being lovers and guardians of 
your own praise, should rebuke and check and 
correct. For what a disgrace is suffered by your 
name, when one spends his days in intoxication 
and debauchery,^ another returns to that country 
whence he was banished, to perish when arrested, 
not now as being a Christian, but as being a 
criminal ! "^ I hear that some are puffed up and 
are arrogant, although it is written, " Be not high- 
minded, but fear : for if God spared not the 
natural branches, take heed lest He also spare 
not thee." '° Our Lord " was led as a sheep to 
the slaughter ; and as a lamb before her shearers 
is dumb, so He opened not His mouth." " "I 
am not rebellious," says He, " neither do I gain- 
say. I gave my back to the smiters, and my 
cheeks to the palms of their hands. I hid not 
my face from the filthiness of spitting." '^ And 
dares any one now, who lives by and in this very 
One, lift up himself and be haughty, forgetful, 
as well of the deeds which He did, as of the 
commands which He left to us either by Himself 
or by His apostles ? But if " the servant is not 
greater than his Lord." '= let those who follow 

* Rom. ii. 24. 
5 Matt. V. 16. 

* Phil. il. 15. 

" I Pet. ii. II, 12. 

8 [The s/iniiie of the Church is the shame of the bishop See 
above, note i ; also i Tim. v. 22.] 

9 Kither as criminals having returned from banishment without 
authority, or as having committed some crime for which they became 
amenable to punishment. See i Pet. iv. 15: "But let none of you 
suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil-doer." 

'° Rom. xi. 20, 21. [How significant this warning to Rome!] 
" Isa. liii. 7. 
" Isa. 1. 5, 6. 
'^ John xiii. 16. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

28=; 

r 

the Lord humbly and peacefully and silently 
tread in His steps, since the lower one is, the 
more exalted he may become ; as says the Lord, 
" He that is least among you, the same shall be 
great." ' 

5. What, then, is that — how execrable should 
it appear to you — which I have learnt with ex- 
treme anguish and grief of mind, to wit, that 
there are not wanting those who defile the tem- 
ples of God, and the members sanctified after 
confession and made glorious,^ with a disgraceful 
and infamous concubinage, associating their beds 
promiscuously with women's ! In which, even 
if there be no pollution of their conscience, 
there is a great guilt in this very thing, that by 
their offence originate examples for the ruin of 
others. 3 There ought also to be no contentions 
and emulations among you, since the Lord left 
to us His peace, and it is written, " Thou shalt 
love thy neighbour as thyself." * " But if ye 
bite and find fault with one another, take heed 
that ye be not consumed one of another." s 
From abuse and revilings also I entreat you to 
abstain, for " revilers do not attain the kingdom 
of God ; " ^ and the tongue which has confessed 
Christ should be preserved sound and pure with 
its honour. For he who, according to Christ's 
precept, speaks things peaceable and good and 
just, daily confesses Christ. We had renounced 
the world when we were baptized ; but we have 
now indeed renounced the world when tried and 
approved by God, we leave all that we have, 
and have followed the Lord, and stand and live 
in His faith and fear. 

6. Let us confirm one another by mutual ex- 
hortations, and let us more and more go forward 
in the Lord ; so that when of His mercy He 
shall have made that peace which He promises 
to give, we may return to the Church new and 
almost changed men, and may be received, 
whether by our brethren or by the heathen, 
in all things corrected and renewed for the 
better ; and those who formerly admired our 
glory in our courage may now admire the dis- 
ciphne in our lives. ^ I bid you, beloved breth-, 
ren, ever heartily farewell ; and be mindful of 
me. 

' Luke ix. 48. 

2 " lllustrata." The Oxford translation has " bathed in light." 

3 [That is, if they have not actually committed the great sin them- 
selves, yet, etc. See vol. ii. p. 57.] 

* Lev. xix. iS. 

-'' Matt. xxii. 39. ,» 

'' Gal. V. 15. [See note 9, infra.'\ 

7 The following is found only in one MS. Its genuineness is there- 
fore doubted by some: " And although I have most fully written to 
our clergy, both lately when you were still kept in prison, and now 
also again, to supply whatever was needful, either for your clothing 
or for your food, yet I myself have also sent you from the small means 
of my own which I had with me, 250 pieces; and another 250 1 had 
also sent before. Victor also, who from a reader has become a dea- 
con, and is with me, sent you 175. But I rejoice when I know that 
very many of our brethren of their love are striving with each other, 
and are aiding your necessities with their contributions." 

EPISTLE VII.^ 

TO THE CLERGY, CONCERNING PRAYER TO 

GOD. 

ARGUMENT. — THE ARGUMENT OF THE PRESENT 
EPISTLE IS NEARLY THE SAME AS THAT OF THE 
TWO PRECEDING, EXCEPT THAT HE EXHORTS IN 
THIS TO DILIGENT PRAYER. 

1. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his 
brethren, greeting. Although I know, brethren 
beloved, that from the fear which we all of us 
owe to God, you also are instantly urgent in 
continual petitions and earnest prayers to Him, 
still I myself remind your religious anxiety, that 
in order to appease and entreat the Lord, we 
must lament not only in words, but also with 
fastings and with tears, and with every kind of 
urgency. For we must perceive and confess 
that the so disordered ruin arising from that 
affliction, which has in^a great measure laid 
waste, and is even still laying waste, our flock, 
has visited us according to our sins, in that we 
do not keep the way of jJie Lord, nor observe 
the heavenly commandments given to us for out 
salvation. Our Lord did the will of His Father, 
and we do not do the will of our Lord ; eager 
about our patrimony and our gain, seeking to 
satisfy our pride, yielding ourselves wholly to 
emulation and to strife, careless of simplicity and 
faith, renouncing the world in words only, and 
not in deeds, every one of us pleasing himself, 
and displeasing all others,^ — therefore we are 
smitten as we deserve, since it is written : " And 
that servant, which knoweth his master's will, 
and has not obeyed his will, shall be beaten with 
many stripes." '° But what stripes, what blows, 
do we not deserve, when even confessors, who 
ought to be an example of virtuous life to others, 
do not maintain discipline ? Therefore, while an 
inflated and immodest boastfulness about their 
own confessidn excessively elates some, tortures 
come upon them, and tortures without any cessa- 
tion of the tormentor, without any end of con- 
demnation, without any comfort of death, — 
tortures which do not easily let them pass to the 
crown, but wrench them on the rack until they 
cause them to abandon their faith, unless some 
one taken away by the divine compassion should 
depart in the very midst of the torments, gaining 
glory, not by the cessation of his torture, but by 
the quickness of his death. 

2. These things we suffer by our own fault and 
our own deserving, even as the divine judgment 
has forewarned us, saying, " If they forsake my 

8 Oxford ed. : Ep. xi. a.d. 230. 

9 [Compare, in former letters, similar complaints, to which brief 
notes are subjoined. And mark the honest simplicity of these confes- 
sions. 2 Peter ii. 13, 14, 15.] 

'° Luke xii. 47. 

286 

THE EPISTLP:S of CYPRIAN. 

law and walk not in my judgments, if they pro- 
fane my statutes and keep not my command- 
ments, then will I visit their transgressions with ' 
the rod, and their iniquities with stripes." ■ It 
is for this reason that we feel the rods and the 
stripes, because we neither please God with good 
deeds nor atone ^ for our sins. Let us of our 
inmost heart and of our entire mind ask for ^ 
(lod's mercy, because He Himself also adds, 
saying, " Nevertheless my loving-kindness will I 
not scatter away from them." ^ Let us ask, and j 
we shall receive ; and if there be delay and tardi- 
ness in our receiving, since we have grievously 
offended, let us knock, because " to him that 
knocketh also it shall be opened," •» if only our 
prayers, our groanings, and our tears, knock at 
the door ; and with these we must be urgent 
and persevering, even although prayer be offered 
with one mind. 5 

3. For, — which the more induced and con- 
strained me to write this letter to you, — you 
ought to know (since the Lord has condescended 
to show and to reveal it) that it w^as said in a 
vision, " Ask, and ye shall obtain." Then, after- 
wards, that the attending people were bidden to 
pray for certain persons pointed out to them, 
but that in their petitions there were dissonant 
voices, and wills disagreeing, and that this ex- 
cessively displeased Him who had said, "Ask, 
and ye shall obtain," because the disagreement 
of the people was out of harmony, and there 
was not a consent of the brethren one and sim- 
ple, and a united concord ; since it is written, 
" God who maketh men to be of one mind in a 
house ; " '' and we read in the Acts of the Apos- 
tles, " And the multitude of them that believed 
were of one heart and of one soul." ^ And the 
Lord has bidden us with His own voice, saying, 
"This is my command, that ye love one an- 
other." ^ And again, " I say unto you, that if 
two of you shall agree on earth as touching any- 
thing that you shall ask, it shall be done for you 
of my Father which is in heaven." ^ But if two 
of one mind can do so much, what might be 
effected if the unanimity prevailed among all? 
But if, according to the peace which our Lord 
gave us, there were agreement among all brethren, 
we should before this have obtained from the 
divine mercy what we seek ; nor should we be 
wavering so long in this peril of our salvation 
and our faith. Yes, truly, and these evils would 
not have come upon the brethren, if the brother- 
hood had been animated with one spirit. 

' Ps. Ixxxix. 30-32. 
^ Satisfacimus. 
3 Ps. Ixxxix. 33. 

* 1-uke xi. 10. 

5 (A comment on Lul<e xviii. 3, compared with Matt, xviii. 19. 
Importunity necessary, even in the latter case.] 

<> Ps. Ixviii. 6. [Vulgate and Anglican Psalter version.] 
" .Acts iv. 32. 

* John XV. 12. 

9 Matt, xviii. 19. 

4. For there also was shown that there sate 
the father of a family, a young man also being 
seated at his right hand, who, anxious and some- 
what sad with a kind of indignation, holding his 
chin in his right hand, occupied his place with 
a sorrowful look. But another standing on the 
left hand, bore a net, which he threatened to 
throw, in order to catch the people standing 
round."' And when he who saw marvelled what 
this could be, it was told him that the youth 
who was thus sitting on the right hand was sad- 
dened and grieved because his commandments 
were not observed ; but that he on the left was 
exultant because an opportunity was afforded 
him of receiving from the father of the family 
the power of destroying. This was shown long 
before the tempest of this devastation arose. 
And we have seen that which had been shown 
fulfilled ; that while we despise the command- 
ments of the Lord, while we do not keej) the 
salutary ordinances of the law that He has given, 
the enemy was receiving a power of doing mis- 
chief, and was overwhelming, by the cast of his 
net, those who were imperfectly armed and too 
careless to resist. 

5. Let us urgently pray and groan with con- 
tinual petitions. For know, beloved brethren, 
that I was not long ago reproached with this also 
in a vision, that we were sleepy in our prayers, 
and did not pray with watchfulness ; and un- 
doubtedly God, who " rebukes whom He loves," " 
when He rebukes, rebukes that He may amend, 
amends that He may preserve. Let us therefore 
strike off and break away from the bonds of sleep, 
and pray with urgency and watchfulness, as the 
Apostle Paul bids us, saying, "Continue in prayer, 
and watch in the same." '^ For the apostles also 
ceased not to pray day and night ; and the Lord 
also Himself, the teacher of our discipline, and 
the way of our example, frequently and watch- 
fully i)rayed, as we read in the Gospel : " He 
went out into a mountain to pray, and continued 
all night in prayer to God." '^ And assuredly 
what He prayed for. He prayed for on our be- 
half, since He was not a siliner, but bore the 
sins of others. But He so prayed for us, that in 
another place we read, " And the Lord said to 
Peter, Behold, Satan has desired to sift you as 
wheat : but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith 
fail not." '^ But if for us and for our sins He 
both laboured and watched and prayed, how 
mucli more ought we to be instant in prayers ; 
and, first of all, to pray and to entreat the Lord 
Himself, and then through Him, to make satis- 
faction to God the Father ! We have an advo- 
cate and an intercessor for our sins, Jesus Christ 

•° [.After the manner of Hermas. Vol. ii. p. 24, note 2.] 

" Heb. xii. 6. 

'- Col. iv. 2. 

■^ l.uke vi. 12. 

'■» Luke xxii. 31, 32. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

287 

the Lord and our God, if only we repent of our 
sins past, and confess and acknowledge our sins, 
whereby we now offend the Lord, and for the 
time to come engage to walk in His ways, and 
to fear His commandments. The Father corrects 
and protects us, if we still stand fast in the faith 
both in afflictions and perplexities, that is to say, 
cling closely to His Christ ; as it is written, "Who 
shall separate us from the love of Christ ? Shall 
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, 
or nakedness, or peril, or sword?"' None of 
these things can separate believers, nothing can 
tear away those who are clinging to His body and 
blood. Persecution of that kind is an examina- 
tion and searching out of the heart. God wills 
us to be sifted and proved, as He has always 
proved His people ; and yet in His trials help 
has never at any time been wanting to believers. 

6. Finally,. to the very least of His servants, 
although placed among very many sins, and 
unworthy of His condescension, yet He has con- 
descended of His goodness towards us to com- 
mand : ^ " Tell him," said He, " to be safe, 
because peace is coming ; but that, in the mean- 
time, there is a little delay, that some who still 
remain may be proved." But we are admonished 
by these divine condescensions both concerning a 
spare diet and a temperate use of drink ; to wit, 
lest worldly enticement should enervate the 
breast now elevated with celestial vigour, or lest 
the mind, weighed down by too abundant feast- 
ing, should be less watchful unto prayers and 
suppHcation. 

7. It was my duty not to conceal these special 
matters, nor to hide them alone in my own con- 
sciousness, — matters by which each one of us 
may be both instructed and guided. And do 
not you for your part keep this letter concealed 
among yourselves, but let the brethren have it to 
read. For it is the part of one who desires that 
his brother should not be warned and instructed, 
to intercept those words with which the Lord 
condescends to admonish and instruct us. Let 
them know that we are proved by our Lord, and 
let them never fail of that faith whereby we have 
once believed in Him, under the conflict of this 
present affliction. Let each one, acknowledging 
his own sins, even now put off the conversation 
of the old man. " For no man who looks back 
as he putteth his hand to the plough is fit for 
the kingdom of God." ^ And, finally, Lot's wife, 
who, when she was delivered, looked back in 
defiance of the commandment, lost the benefit 
of her escape.-* Let us look not to things which 

' Rom. viii 35. 

2 [A vision granted to the pastor in l)ehalf of his flock. See Vul- 
gate version of Ps. Lxxxix. 19, which Cyprian's, doubtless, antici- 
pated.) This prediction of settled times was pubUshed in ntiscttled 
ones; and it was fulfilled by the sudden and unexpected death of 
JJecius, in his e.\:pedition against the Goths. 

^ L.uke ix. 62. 

'' Gen. xix. 26. 

are behind, whither the devil calls us back, but to 
things which are before, whither Christ calls us. 
Let us lift up our eyes to heaven, lest the earth 
with its delights and enticements deceive us. 
Let each one of us pray God not for himself 
only, but for all the brethren, even as the Lord 
has taught us to pray, when He bids to each one,, 
not private prayer, but enjoined them, when they 
prayed, to pray for all in common prayer and 
concordant supplication. 5 If the Lord shall be- 
hold us humble and peaceable ; if He shall see 
us joined one with another ; if He shall see us 
fearful concerning His anger ; if corrected and 
amended by the present tribulation. He will 
maintain us safe from the disturbances of the 
enemy. Discipline hath preceded ; pardon also 
shall follow. 

8. Let us only, without ceasing to ask, and 
with full faith that we shall receive, in simplicity 
and unanimity beseech the Lord, entreating not 
only with groaning but with tears, as it behoves 
those to entreat who are situated between the 
ruins of those who wail, and the remnants of 
those who fear ; between the manifold slaughter 
of the yielding, and the little firmness of those 
who still stand. Let us ask that peace may be 
soon restored ; that we may be quickly helped 
in our concealments and our dangers ; that those 
things may be fulfilled which the Lord deigns to 
show to his servants, — the, restoration of the 
Church, the security of our salvation ; after the 
rains, serenity ; after the darkness, light ; after 
the storms and whirlwinds, a peaceful calm ; the 
affectionate aids of paternal love, the accus- 
tomed grandeurs of the divine majesty whereby 
both the blasphemy of persecutors may be re- 
strained, the repentance of the lapsed renewed, 
and the stedfast faith of the persevering may 
glory. I bid you, beloved brethren, ever heartily 
farewell ; and have me in remembrance. Salute 
the brotherhood in my name ; and remind them 
to remember me. Farewell. 

EPISTLE VIII.6 

TO THE MARTYRS AND CONFESSORS. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN, COMMENDING THE AFRI- 
CAN MARTYRS MARVELLOUSLY FOR THEIR CON- 
STANCY, URGES THEM TO PERSEVERANCE BY THE 
EXAMPLE OF THEIR COLLEAGUE MAPPALICUS. 

' Cyprian to the martyrs anid^confessors-in Christ 
our Lord and in God the Father, everlasting 
salvation. I gladly rejoice and am thankful, 
most brave and blessed brethren, at hearing of 
your faith and virtue, wherein the Church, our 
Mother, glories. Lately, indeed, she gloried, 
when, in consequence of an enduring confession, 

5 [Saying, '" our Father " not " my Father." Vol. i. p. 62. j 
^ Oxford eJ.: Ep. X. A.D. 2^0. 

288 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

that punishment was undergone which drove the 
confessors of Christ into exile ; yet the present 
\ confession is so much the more ilhistrious and 
greater in honour as it is braver in suffering. 
The coml)at has increased, and the glory of the 
combatants lias increased also. Nor were you 
kept back from the struggle by fear of tortures, 
but by the very tortures themselves you were 
more and more stimulated to the conflict ; 
bravely and firmly you have returned with ready 
devotion, to contend in the extremest contest. 
Of you I find that some are already crowned, 
while some are even now within reach of the 
cro^^T^ of victory ; but all whom the danger has 
shut up in a glorious company are animated to 
carry on the struggle with an etjual and common 
warmth of virtue, as it behoves the soldiers of 
Christ in the divine camp : that no allurements 
may deceive the incorruptible stedfastness of your 
faith, no threats terrify you, no sufferings or tor- 
tures overcome you, because " greater is He that 
is in us, than he that is in the world ; " ' nor is 
the earthly punishment able to do more towards 
casting down, than is the divine protection 
towards lifting up. This truth is proved by the 
glorious struggle of the brethren, who, having 
become leaders to the rest in overcoming their 
tortures, afforded an example of virtue and faith, 
contending in the strife, until the strife yielded, 
being overcome. With what praises can I com- 
mend you, most courageous brethren? With 
what vocal proclamation can I extol the strength 
of your heart and the perseverance of your 
faith? You have borne the sharpest examina- 
tion by torture, even unto the glorious consum- 
mation, and have not yielded to sufferings, but 
rather the sufferings have given way to you. The 
end of torments, which the tortures themselves 
did not give, the crown has given. The exami- 
nation l)y torture waxing severer, continued for 
a long time to this result, not to overthrow the 
stedfast faith, but to send the men of God more 
(|uickly to the Lord. The multitude of those 
who were present saw with admiration the heav- 
enly contest, — the contest of God, the spiritual 
contest, the battle of Christ, — saw that His ser- 
vants stood with free voice, with unyielding mind, 
with tlivine virtue — bare, indeed, of weapons of 
this world, but believing and armed with the 
weai^ons of faith. The tortured stood more 
brave than the torturers ; and the limbs, beaten 
and torn as they were, overcame the hooks that 
bent and tore them. The scourge, often re- 
peated with all its rage, could not roncpier 
invincible faith, even although the membrane 
which enclosed the entrails were broken, and it 
was no longer the limbs but the wounds of the 
servants of God that were tortured. Hlood was 

* John iv. 4. 

flowing which might quench the blaze of perse- 
cution, which might subdue the flames of Ge- 
henna with its glorious gore.' Oh, what a spec- 
tacle was that to the Lord, — how sublime, how 
great, how acceptable to the eyes of God in the 
allegiance and devotion of His soldiers ! As it 
is written in the Psalms, when the Holy Spirit at 
once speaks to us and warns us : " Precious in 
the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints." ^ 
Precious is the death which has bought immor- 
tality at the cost of its blood, which has received 
the crown from the consummation of its virtues. 
How did Christ rejoice therein ! How willingly 
did He both fight and conquer in such servants 
of His, as the protector of their faith, and giving 
to believers as much as he who taketh believes 
that he receives ! He was present at His own 
contest ; He lifted up, strengthened, animated 
the champions and assertors of His name. And 
He who once conquered death on our behalf, 
always conquers it in us. " When they," says 
He, " deliver you up, take no thought what ye 
shall speak : for it shall be given you in that 
hour what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that 
speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speak- 
eth in you." * The present struggle has afforded 
a proof of this saying. A voice filled with the 
Holy Spirit broke forth from the martyr's mouth 
when the most blessed Mappalicus said to the 
proconsul in the midst of his torments, " You 
shall see a contest to-morrow." And that which 
he said with the testimony of virtue and faith, 
the Lord fulfilled. A heavenly contest was ex- 
hibited, and the servant of God was crowned in 
the struggle of the promised fight. This is the 
contest which the prophet Isaiah of old pre- 
dicted, saying, " It shall be no light contest for 
you with men, since God appoints the struggle." 5 
And in order to show what this struggle would 
be, he added the words, " Behold, a virgin shall 
conceive and bear a son, and ye shall call His 
name Emmanuel." ^ This is the struggle of our 
faith in which we engage, in which we conquer, 
in which we are crowned. This is the struggle 
which the blessed Apostle Paul has shown to us, 
in which it behoves us to run and to attain the 
crown of glory. " Do ye not know," says he, 
" that they which run in a race, run all indeed, 
but one receiveth the prize? So run that ye 
may obtain." " Now they do it that they may 
receive a corruptible crown, but we an incor- 
ruptible." ^ Moreover, setting forth his own 
struggle, and declarin 

g that he himself should 

" [There is in the church of S. Stefano Rotondo at Rome a. series 
of delineations of the sufferings of the early martyrs, poorly executed, 
and too horrible to contemplate; but it all answers to these words of 
our author. See Ep. xxxiv. I'li/fa.] 

3 Ps. cxvi. 15. 

* Matt. X. 19, 20. 

J Isa. vii. 13; vic/c Lam. iii. 26. 

* Isa. vii. 14. 

' 1 Cor. IX. 24, 25. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

289 

soon be a sacrifice for the Lord's sake, he says, 
" I am now ready to be offered, and the time 
of my assumption is at hand. I have fought a 
good fight, I have finished my course, I have 
kept the faith : henceforth there is laid up for 
me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, 
the righteous judge, shall give me at that day ; 
and not to me only, but unto all them also that 
love His appearing." ' This fight, therefore, 
predicted of old by the prophets, begun by the 
Lord, waged by the apostles, Mappalicus prom- 
ised again to the proconsul in his own name 
and that of his colleagues. Nor did the faithful 
voice deceive in his promise ; he exhibited the 
fight to which he had pledged himself, and he 
received the reward which he deserved. I not 
only beseech but exhort the rest of you, that you 
all should follow that martyr now most blessed, 
and the other partners of that engagement, — 
soldiers and comrades, stedfast in faith, patient 
in suffering, victors in tortures, — that those 
who are united at once by the bond of confes- 
sion, and the entertainment of a dungeon, may 
also be united in the consummation of their vir- 
tue and a celestial crown ; that you by your joy 
may dry the tears of our Mother, the Church, 
who mourns over the wreck and death of very 
many ; and that you may confirm, by the prov- 
ocation of your example, the stedfastness of 
others who stand also. If the battle shall call 
you out, if the day of your contest shall come, 
engage bravely, fight with constancy, as knowing 
that you are fighting under the eyes of a present 
Lord, that you are attaining by the confession 
of His name to His own glory ; who is not such 
a one as that He only looks on His servants, but 
He Himself also wrestles in us. Himself is en- 
gaged,— Himself also in the struggles of our 
conflict not only crowns, but is crowned. But 
if before the day of your contest, of the mercy 
of God, peace shall supervene, let there still 
remain to you the sound will and the glorious 
conscience.^ Nor let any one of you be sad- 
dened as if he were inferior to those who before 
you have suffered tortures, have overcome the 
world and trodden it under foot, and so have 
come to the Lord by a glorious road. For the 
Lord is the " searcher out of the reins and the 
hearts." ^ He looks through secret things, and 
beholds that which is concealed. In order to 
merit the crown from Him, His own testimony 
aJone is sufficient, who will judge us. Therefore, 
beloved brethren, either case is equally lofty and 
illustrious, — the former more secure, to wit, to 
hasten to the Lord with the consummation of 
our victory, — the latter more joyous ; a leave 

' 2 Tim. iv. 6-8. 

2 [He contemplates the peace promised in Ep. viii. supra. But 
note the indomitable spirit with which, for successive ages, the Church 
supplied her martyrs. Heb. xi. 36, 37.] 

^ Rev. ii. 33. 

of absence, after glory, being received to flourish 
in the praises of the Church. O blessed Church 
of ours, which the honour of the divine conde- 
scension illuminates, which in our own times the 
glorious blood of martyrs renders illustrious I 
She was white before in the works of the breth- 
ren ; now she has become purple in the blood 
of the martyrs. Among her flowers are wanting 
neither roses nor lilies. Now let each one strive 
for the largest dignity of either honour. Let 
them receive crowns, either white, as of labours, 
or of purple, as of suffering. In the heavenly 
camp both peace and strife have their own flow- 
ers, with which the soldier of Christ may be 
crowned for glory. I bid you, most brave and 
beloved brethren, always heartily farewell in the 
Lord ; and have me in remembrance. Fare ye 
well. 

EPISTLE IX.4 

TO THE CLERGY, CONCERNING CERTAIN PRES- 
BYTERS WHO HAD RASHLY GRANTED PEACE 
TO THE LAPSED BEFORE THE PERSECUTION 
HAD BEEN APPEASED, AND WITHOUT THE 
PRIVITY OF THE BISHOPS. 

ARGUMENT. — THE ARGUMENT OF THIS EPISTLE 
IS CONTAINED IN THE FOLLOWING WORDS OF THE 

XIVTH EPISTLE : " TO THE PRESBYTERS AND 

DEACONS," HE S.WS, " WAS NOT WANTING THE 
VIGOUR OF THE PRIESTHOOD, SO THAT SOME, 
TOO LITTLE MINDFUL OF DISCIPLINE, AND HASTY 
WITH A RASH PRECIPITATION, WHO HAD ALREADY 
BEGUN TO COMMUNICATE WITH THE LAPSED, 
WERE CHECKED." 

1. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his 
brethren, greeting. I have long been patient, 
beloved brethren, hoping that my forbearing 
silence would avail to quietness. But since the 
unreasonable and reckless presumption of some 
is seeking by its boldness to disturb both the 
honour of the martyrs, and the modesty of the 
confessors, and the tranquillity of the whole 
people, it behoves me no longer to keep silence, 
lest too much reticence should issue in danger 
both to the people and to ourselves. For what 
danger ought we not to fear from the Lord's dis- 
pleasure, when some of the presbyters, remem- 
bering neither the Gospel nor their own place, 
and, moreover, considering neither the Lord's i 
future judgment nor the bishop now placed over\ 
them, claim to themselves entire authority, s — a 
thing which was never in any wise done under 
our predecessors, — with discredit and contempt 
of the bishop? 

2. And I wish, if it could be so without the 
sacrifice of our brethren's safety, that they could 
make good their claim to all things ; I could dis- 

■♦ Oxford ed. : Ep. xvi. a.d. 250. 

5 [In letter ii. we have noted a limited exercise o^ jurisdiction: 
the canons seem not to have allowed them the full powers these pres- 
byters had used.l 

290 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

semble and bear the discredit of my episcopal 
authority, as I always have dissembled and borne 
it. But it is not now the occasion for dissimu- 
lating when our brotherhood is deceived by 
some of you, who, while without the means of 
restoring salvation they desire to please, become 
a still greater stumbling-block to the lapsed. 
For that it is a very great crime which persecu- 
tion has compelled to be committed, they them- 
selves know who have committed it ; since our 
Lord and Judge has said, " Whosoever shall con- 
fess me before men, him will I also confess 
before my Father which is in heaven ; but who- 
soever shall deny me, him will I also deny." ' 
And again He has said, " All sins shall be for- 
given unto the sons of men, and blasphemies ; 
but he that shall blaspheme against the Holy 
Ghost shall not have forgiveness, but is guilty of 
eternal sin." ^ Also the blessed apostle has 
said, " Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord and 
the cup of devils ; ye cannot be partakers of the 
Lord's table and of the table of devils."^ He 
who withholds these words from our brethren 
deceives them, wretched that they are ; so that 
they who truly repenting might satisfy God, both 
as the Father and as merciful, with their prayers 
and works, are seduced more deeply to perish ; 
and they who might raise themselves up fall the 
more deeply. For although in smaller sins sin- 
ners may do penance for a set time, and accord- 
ing to the rules of discipline come to public 
confession,* and by imposition of the hand of 
the l)ishop and clergy receive the right of com- 
munion : now with their time still unfulfilled, 
while persecution is still raging, while the peace 
of the Church itself is not yet restored, they are 
admitted to communion, and their name is pre- 
sented ; and while the penitence is not yet per- 
formed, confession is not yet made, the hands 
of the bishop and clergy are not yet laid upon 
them, the eucharist is given to them ; although 
it is written, " Whosoever shall eat the bread and 
drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be 
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord." 5 

3. But now they are not guilty who so little 
observe the law of Scripture ; but they will be 
guilty who are in office and do not suggest these 
things to brethren, so that, being instructed by 
those placed above them, they may do all things 
with the fear of God, and with the observance 
given and prescribed by Him. 'I'hen, moreover, 
they lay the blessed martyrs open to ill-will, and 
involve the glorious servants of God with the 
priest of God ; so that although they, mindful 
of my place, have directed letters to me, and 
have asked that their wishes should then be ex- 

' M.itt. X. 32, 33. 

* Mark iii. 28, 29. 
3 I Cor. X. 21. 

* " Exomologesis." 
5 I Cor. xi. 37. 

amined, and peace granted them, — when our 
Mother, the Church herself, should first have 
received peace for the Lord's mercy, and the 
divine protection have brought me back to His 
Church, — yet these, disregarding the honour 
which the blessed mart)Ts with the confessors 
maintain for me, despising the Lord's law and 
that obsen-ance, which the same martyrs and 
confessors bid to be maintained, before the fear 
of persecution is quenched, before my return, 
almost even before the departure of the martyrs, 
communicate with the lapsed, and offer and give 
them the eucharist : when even if the martyrs, 
in the heat of their glory, were to consider less 
carefully the Scriptures, and to desire anything 
more, they should be admonished by the pres- 
byters' and deacons' suggestions, as was always 
done in time past.^ 

4. For this reason the divine rebuke does not 
cease to chastise us night nor daj'. For besides 
the visions of the night, by day also, the inno- 
cent age of boys is among us filled with the 
Holy Spirit, seeing in an ecstasy with their eyes, 
and hearing and speaking those things whereby 
the Lord condescends to warn and instruct us.^ 
And- you shall hear all things when the Lord, 
who bade me withdraw, shall bring me back 
again to you. In the meanwhile, let those cer- 
tain ones among you who are rash and incau- 
tious and boastful, and who do not regard man, 
at least fear God, knowing that, if they shall 
persevere still in the same course, I shall use 
that power of admonition which the Lord bids 
me use ; so that they may meanwhile be with- 
held from offering,^ and have to plead their 
cause both before me and before the confessors 
themselves and before the whole people, when, 
with God's permission, we begin to be gathered 
together once more into the bosom of the Church, 
our Mother. Concerning this matter, I have 
written to the martyrs and confessors, and to the 
people, letters ; both of which I have bidden to 
be read to you. I wish you, dearly beloved 
brethren and earnestly longed-for, ever heartily 
forewell in the Lord ; and have me in remem- 
brance. Fare ye well. 

EPISTLE X.9 

TO THE MARTYRS AND CONFESSORS WHO 
SOUGHT THAT PEACE SHOULD 13E GRANTED 
TO THE LAPSED. 

ARGUMENT. — THE (OCCASION OF THIS LETTER IS 

GIVEN BELOW IN EPISTLE XIV. AS FOLLOWS : 

" WHEN I FOUND THAT THOSE WHO HAD POL^ 

<" I Compare Tertullian, Ad Martyras, vol. iii. p. 693.] 

7 [Note this persuasion of Cyprian, and compare St. Matt. xxi. 
15, 16; Luke .\i.\. 40.] 

" [Celebrating the Tx>rd's .Supper: Rom. xv. 16 (Greek) com- 
pared with Mai. i. 11, texts which seem greatly to have influenced 
the language of the early Church. | 

9 Oxford ed. : Ep. xv. a.u. 250. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN, 

291 

LUTED THEIR HANDS AND MOUTHS WITH SACRI- 
LEGIOUS CONTACT, OR HAD NO LESS INFECTED 
THEIR CONSCIENCE WITH WICKED CERTIFICATES," 
ETC' 

1. Cyprian to the martyrs and confessors, his 
"beloved brethren, greeting. The anxiety of my 
situation and the fear of the Lord constrain me, 
my brave and beloved brethren, to admonish 
you in my letters, that those who so devotedly 
and bravely maintain the faith of the Lord should 
also maintain the law and discipline of the Lord. 
For while it behoves all Christ's soldiers to keep 
the precepts of their commander ; to you it is 
more especially fitting that you should obey His 
precepts, inasmuch as you have been made an 
example to others, both of valour and of the 
fear of God. And I had indeed believed that 
the presbyters and deacons who are there present 
with you would admonish and instruct you more 
fully concerning the lavv^ of the Gospel, as was 
the case always in time past under my prede- 
cessors ; so that the deacons passing in and out 
of the prison controlled the wishes of the martyrs 
ty their counsels, and by the Scripture precepts. 
But now, with great sorrow of mind, I gather 
that not only the divine precepts are not sug- 
gested to you by them, but that they are even 
rather restrained, so that those things which are 
done by you yourselves, both in respect of God 
with caution, and in respect of God's priest^ 
with honour, are relaxed by certain presbyters, 
who consider neither the fear of God nor the 
honour of the bishop. Although you sent letters 
to me in which you ask that your wishes should 
be examined, and that peace should be granted 
to certain of the lapsed as soon as with the end 
of the persecution we should have begun to meet 
with our clergy, and to be gathered together once 
more ; those presbyters, contrary to the Gospel 
law, contrary also to your respectful petition, 
before penitence was fulfilled, before confession 
even of the gravest and most heinous sin was 
made, before hands were placed upon the re- 
pentant by the bishops and clergy, dare to offer 
on their behalf, and to give them the eucharist, 
that is, to profane the sacred body of the Lord, 
although it is written, " Whosoever shall eat the 
bread and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, 
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the 
Lord." 3 

2. And to the lasped indeed pardon may be 
granted in respect of this thing. For what dead 
person would not hasten to be made alive? 

' That these were everywhere soliciting the martyrs, and were 
also corrupting the confessors with importunate and excessive entreaty, 
so that, without any distmction or examination of the individuals, 
thousands of certificates were given, against the Gospel law, I wrote 
letters in which I recalled by my advice as much as possible the 
martyrs and confessors to the Lord's commands. 

- [Another instance of this word as applied to the bishop, kot' 
^'^Xl '• •'^<^ '" St- Chrysostom, De Sacerdotio = episcopatu.] 

■i I Cor, xi. 27. 

Who would not be eager to attain to his own 
salvation? But it is the duty of those placed 
over them to keep the ordinance, and to instruct 
those that are either hurrying or ignorant, that 
those who ought to be shepherds of the sheep 
may not become their butchers. For to con- 
cede those things which tend to destruction is to 
deceive. Nor is the lapsed raised in this man- 
ner, but, by offending God, he is more urged on 
to ruin. Let them learn, therefore, even from 
you, what they ought to have taught ; let them 
reserve your petitions and wishes for the bishops, ■♦ 
and let them wait for ripe and peaceable times 
to give peace at your requests. The first thing 
is, that the Mother should first receive peace 
from the Lord, and then, in accordance with 
your wishes, that the peace of her children 
should be considered. 

3. And since I hear, most brave and beloved 
brethren, that you are pressed by the shameless- 
ness of some, and that your modesty suffers vio- 
lence ; I beg you with what entreaties I may, 
that, as mindful of the Gospel, and considering 
what and what sort of things in past time your 
predecessors the martyrs conceded, how careful 
they were in all respects, you also should anx- 
iously and cautiously weigh the wishes of those 
who petition you, since, as friends of the Lord, 
and hereafter to exercise judgment with Him, 
you must inspect both the conduct and the do- 
ings and the deserts of each one. You must 
consider also the kinds and qualities of their 
sins, lest, in the event of anything being abruptly 
and unworthily either promised by you or done 
by me, our Church 5 should begin to blush, even 
before the very Gentiles. For we are visited 
and chastened frequently, and we are admon- 
ished, that the commandments of the Lord may 
be kept without corruption or violation, which I 
find does not cease to be the case there among 
you so as to prevent the divine judgment from 
instructing very many of you also in the disci- 
pline of the Church. Now this can all be done, 
if you will regulate those things that are asked 
of you with a careful consideration of religion, 
perceiving and restraining those who, by accept- 
ing persons, either make favours in distributing 
your benefits, or seek to make a profit of an un- 
lawful trade. y 

4. Concerning this I have written both to the 
clergy and to the people, both of which letters I 
have directed to be read to you. But you ought 
also to bring back and amend that matter ac- 
cording to your diligence, in such a way as to 
designate those by name to whom you desire 
that peace should be granted. For I hear that 
certificates are so given to some as that it is said, 

■< [He refers to his comprovincials, not arrogating all authority to 
himself. See Hippolytus, p. 125, note 2, supra.\ 
i (The African Church. 1 

292 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAIS. 

" Let such a one be received to communion 
along with his friends," which was never in any 
case done by the martyrs so that a vague and 
blind petition should by and by heap reproach 
upon us. For it opens a wide door to say, " Such 
a one with his friends ; " and twenty or thirty or 
more, may be presented to us, who may be as- 
serted to be neighbours and connections, and 
freedmen and servants, of the man who receives 
the certificate. And for this reason I beg you 
that you will designate by name in the certificate 
those whom you yourselves see, whom you have 
known, whose penitence you see to be very near 
to full satisfaction, and so direct to us letters in 
conformity with faith and discipline. I bid you, 
very brave and beloved brethren, ever heartily 
in the Lord farewell ; and have me in remem- 
brance. Fare ye well. 

EPISTLE XL' 

TO THE PEOPLE. 

ARGUMENT. — THE SUBSTANCE OF THIS LETTER IS 
ALSO SUGGESTED IN EPISTLE XIV. " AMONG THE 
PEOPLE ALSO," HE SAYS, " I HAVE DONE WHAT 
I COULD TO QUIET THEIR MINDS, AND HAVE IN- 
STRUCTED THEM TO BE RETAINED IN ECCLESI- 
ASTICAL DISCIPLINE." 

I . Cyprian to his brethren among the people 
who stand fast,^ greeting. That you bewail and 
grieve over the downfall of our brethren I know 
from myself, beloved brethren, who also bewail 
with you and grieve for each one, and suffer and 
feel what the blessed apostle said : " AVho is 
weak," said he, "and I am not wx'ak? who is 
offended, and I burn not?"^ And again he has 
laid it down in his epistle, saying, "Whether one 
member suffer, all the members suffer with it ; 
or one member rejoice, all the members rejoice 
with it." ■♦ I sympathize with you in your suffer- 
ing and grief, therefore, for our brethren, who, 
having lapsed and fallen y)rostrate under the se- 
verity of the persecution, have inflicted a like pain 
on us by their wounds, inasmuch as they tear 
away part of our bowels with them, — to these 
the divine mercy is able to bring healing. Yet 
I do not think that there must be any haste, nor 
that anything must be done incautiously and 
immaturely, lest, while peace is grasped at, the 
divine indignation be more seriously incurred. 
The blessed martyrs have written to me about 
certain persons, requesting that their wishes may 
be examined into. When, as soon as peace is 
given to us all by the Lord, we shall begin to 

' Oxford ed.: Ep. xvii. a.d. 250. 

2 [The faiihfiil laity. A technical expression, in the original.] 

■' 2 Cor. xi. 29. 

* I Cor. xii. 26. 

return to the Church, then the wishes of each 
one shall be looked into in your presence, and 
with your judgment. 5 

2. Yet I hear that certain of the presbyters, 
neither mindful of the Gospel nor considering 
what the martyrs have written to me, nor re- 
serving to the bishop the honour of his priest- 
hood and of his dignity, have already begun to 
communicate with the lapsed, and to offer on 
their behalf, and to give them the eucharist, 
when it was fitting that they should attain to 
these things in due course. For, as in smaller 
sins which are not committed against God, peni- 
tence may be fulfilled in a set time, and confes- 
sion may be made with investigation of the life 
of him who fulfils the penitence, and no one 
can come to communion unless the hands of the 
bishop and clergy be first imposed upon him ; 
how much more ought all such matters as these 
to be observed with caution and moderation, ac- 
cording to the discipline of the Lord, in these 
gravest and extremest sins ! This warning, in- 
deed, our presbyters and deacons ought to have 
given you, that they might cherish the sheep 
committed to their care, and by the divine au- 
thority might instruct them in the way of obtain- 
ing salvation by prayer. I am aware of the 
peacefulness as well as the fear of our people, 
who would be watchful in the satisfaction and 
the deprecation of God's anger, unless some of 
the presbyters, by way of gratifying them, had 
deceived them. 

3. Even you, therefore, yourselves, guide them 
each one, and control the minds of the lapsed 
by counsel and by your own moderation, accord- 
ing to the divine precepts. Let no one pluck 
the unripe fruit at a time as yet premature. Let 
no one commit his ship, shattered and broken 
with the waves, anew to the deep, before he has 
carefully repaired it. Let none be in haste to 
accept and to put on a rent tunic, unless he has 
seen it mended by a skilful workman, and has 
received it arranged by the fuller. Let them 
bear with patience my advice, I beg. Let them 
look for my return, that when by God's mercy I 
come to you, L ^vith many of my co-bishops, 
being called together according to the Lord's 
discipline,^ and in the presence of the confessors, 
and with your opinion also, may be able to ex- 
amine the letters and the wishes of the blessed 
martyrs. Concerning this matter I have written 
both to the clergy and to the martyrs and con- 
fessors, both of which letters I have directed to 
be read to you. I bid you, brethren beloved 
and most longed-for, ever heartily farewell in the 
Lord ; and have me in remembrance. Fare ye 
well. 

S [Here is a recognition of the laity as contributing to the dc 
cisive action, i Cor. v. 4.] 

•> [Ehicidation HI.; also Ignatius, vol. i. p. 69.] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

293 

EPISTLE XII.' 

TO THE CLERGY, CONCERNING THE LAPSED 
AND CATECHUMENS, THAT THEY SHOULD 
NOT BE LEFT WITHOUT SUPERINTENDENCE. 

ARGUMENT. — THE BURDEN OF THIS LETTER, AS 
OF THE SUCCEEDING ONE, IS FOUND BELOW 
IN THE XIVTH EPISTLE. " BUT AFTERWARDS," 
HE SAYS, " WHEN SOME OF THE LAPSED, 
■WHETHER OF THEIR OWN ACCORD, OR BY THE 
SUGGESTION OF ANY OTHER, BROKE FORTH 
WITH A DARING DEMAND, AS THOUGH THEY 
WOULD ENDEAVOUR, BY A VIOLENT EFFORT, 
TO EXTORT THE PEACE THAT HAD BEEN PROM- 
ISED TO THEM BY THE MARTYRS AND CON- 
FESSORS," ETC.^ 

1. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his 
brethren, greeting. I marvel, beloved brethren, 
that you have answered nothing to me in reply 
to my many letters which I have frequently writ- 
ten to you, although as well the advantage as 
the need of our brotherhood would certainly be 
best provided for if, receiving information from 
you, I could accurately investigate and advise 
upon the management of affairs. Since, how- 
ever, I see that there is not yet any opportunity 
of coming to you, and that the summer has 
already begun — a season that is disturbed with 
continual and heavy sicknesses, — I think that 
our brethren must be dealt with ; — that they 
who have received certificates from the martyrs, 
and may be assisted by their privilege with God, 
if they should be seized with any misfortune and 
peril of sickness, should, without waiting for my 
presence, before any presbyter who might be 
present, or if a presbyter should not be found 
and death begins to be imminent, before even 
a deacon, be able to make confession of their 
sin, that, with the imposition of hands upon them 
for repentance, they should come to the Lord 
with the peace which the martyrs have desired, 
by their letters to us, to be granted to them.^ 

2. Cherish also by your presence the rest of 
the people who are lapsed, and cheer them by 
your consolation, that they may not fail of the 
faith and of God's mercy. For those shall not, 
be forsaken by the aid and assistance of the LDrd, 
who meekly, humbly, and with true penitence 
have persevered in good works ; but the divine 
remedy will be granted to them also. To the 
hearers '* also, if there are any overtaken by 
danger, and placed near to death, let your vigi- 
lance not be wanting ; let not the mercy of the 

' Oxford ed.: Ep. xviii. a.d. 250. 

2 " Concerning this also I wrote twice to the clergy, anU com- 
manded it to be read to them, that for the mitigation of their violence 
jn any manner for the meantime, if any who had received a certificate 
from the martyrs were departing from this life, having made confes- 
sion and received the hands imposed upon them for repentance, they 
should be remitted to the Lord with the peace promised them by the 
martyrs," etc. 

3 [2 Cor. ii. 10.] 

* " Audientibus," scii. catechumens. 

Lord be denied to those that are imploring the 
divine favour.5 I bid you, beloved brethren, 
ever heartily farewell ; and remember me. Greet 
the whole brotherhood in my name, and remind 
them and ask them to be mindful of me. Fare 
ye well. 

EPISTLE XI 11.^ 

TO THE CLERGY, CONCERNING THOSE WHO 
ARE IN HASTE TO RECEIVE PEACE, a.d. 250. 

ARGUMENT. — PEACE MUST BE ATTAINED THROUGH 
PENITENCE, AND PENITENCE IS REALIZED BY 
KEEPING THE COMMANDMENTS. THEY WHO 
ARE OPPRESSED WITH SICKNESS, IF THEY ARE 
RELIEVED BY THE SUFFRAGES OF THE MARTYRS, 
MAY BE ADMITTED TO PEACE ; BUT OTHERS 
ARE TO BE KEPT BACK UNTIL THE PEACE OF 
THE CHURCH IS SECURED. 

1. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, 
his brethren, greeting. I have read your letter, 
beloved brethren, wherein you wrote that your 
wholesome counsel was not wanting to our breth- 
ren, that, laying aside all rash haste, they should 
manifest a religious patience to God, so that 
when by His mercy we come together, we may 
debate upon all kinds of things, according to 
the discipline of the Church, especially since it 
is written, " Remember from whence thou hast 
fallen, and repent." ^ Now he repents, who, 
remembering the divine precept, with meekness 
and patience, and obeying the priests of God, 
deserves well of the Lord by his obedience and 
his righteous works. 

2. Since, however, you intimate that some are 
petulant, and eagerly urge their being received 
to communion, and have desired in this matter 
that some rule should be given by me to you, I 
think I have sufficiently written on this subject 
in the last letter that was sent to you, that they 
who have received a certificate from the martyrs, 
and can be assisted by their help with the Lord 
in respect of their sins, if they begin to be op- 
pressed with any sickness or risk ; when they 
have made confession, and have received the 
imposition of hands on them by you in acknowl- 
edgment of their penitence, should be remitted 
to the Lord with the peace promised to them by 
the martyrs. But others who, without having 
received any certificate from the martyrs, are 
envious ^ (since this is the cause not of a few, 
nor of one church, nor of one province, but of 
the whole world), must wait, in dependence on 
the protection of the Lord, for the public peace 

5 [See Hennas, vol. ii. p. 15, note 6.] 

6 Oxford ed. : Ep. xix. [See letter xxvii. i>i/ra.\ 

7 Rev. ii. 5. 

8 Faciunt invidiam: " are producing ill-will to us. Those who 
were eager to be received into the Church without certificates would 
produce ill-will to those who refused to receive them, as if they were 
too strict. Thus Rigaltius explains the passage. " These," Cyprian 
says, " should wait until the Church in its usual way gives them peace 
publicly." 

294 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

of the Church itself. For this is suitable to the 
modesty and the discipline, and even the life of 
all of us, that the chief officers meeting together 
with the clergy in the presence also of the peo- 
ple who stand fast, to whom themselves, more- 
over, honour is to be shown for their faith and 
fear, we may be able to order all things with the 
religiousness of a common consultation.' But 
how irreligious is it, and mischievous, even to 
those themselves who are eager, that while such 
as are exiles, and driven from their country, and 
spoiled of all their property, have not yet re- 
turned to the Church, some of the lapsed should 
be hasty to anticipate even confessors themselves, 
and to enter into the Church before them ! If 
they are so over-anxious, they have what they 
require in their own power, the times themselves 
offering them freely more than they ask. The 
struggle is still going forward, and the strife is 
daily celebrated. If they truly and with con- 
stancy repent of what they have done, and the 
fervour of their faith prevails, he who cannot be 
delayed may be crowned.- I bid you, beloved 
brethren, ever heartily farewell ; and have me 
in remembrance. Greet all the brotherhood in 
my name, and tell them to be mindful of me. 
Fare ye well. 

EPISTLE XIV.3 

TO THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS ASSEM- 
BLED AT ROME. 

ARGUMENT. — HE GIVES AN ACCOUNT OF HIS 
WITHDRAWAL AND OF THE THINGS WHICH HE 
DID THEREIN, HAVING SENT TO ROiME FOR HIS 
JUSTIFICATION, COPIES OF THE LETTERS WHICH 
HE HAD WRITTEN TO HIS PEOPLE ; NAY, HE 
MAKES USE OF THE SAME WORDS WHICH HE HAD 
EMPLOYED IN THEM.'* 

I. Cyprian to his brethren the presbyters and 
deacons assembled at Rome, greeting. Having 
ascertained, beloved brethren, that what I have 
done and am doing has been told to you in a 
somewhat garbled and untruthful manner, I have 
thought it necessary to write this letter to you, 
wherein I might give an account to you of my 
doings, my discipline, and my diligence ; for, as 
the Lord's commands teach, immediately the 
first burst of the disturl>ance arose, and the peo- 
ple with violent clamour repeatedly demanded 
me, I, taking into consideration not so nvich my 
own safety as the ])ublic ])eace of the brethren, 
withdrew for a while, lest, by my over-bold pres- 
ence, the tumult which had begun might be still 
further provoked. Nevertheless, altliough absent 
in body, I was not wanting cither in spirit, or in 
act, or in my advice, so ^s to fail in any benefit 

' [Elucidation IV.] 

* [i.e., they can become martyrs, if they will.] 
3 Oxford ed.: Kp. xx. a.u. 250. 

* Comp. Ep. xxii. to the Roman clergy. 

that I could afford my brethren by my counsel, 
according to the Lord's precepts, in anything 
that my poor abilities enabled me. 

2. And what I did, these thirteen letters sent 
forth at various times declare to you, which \ 
have transmitted to you ; in which neither coun- 
sel to the clergy, nor exhortation to the con- 
fessors, nor rebuke, when it was necessary, to 
the exiles, nor my appeals and persuasions to the 
whole brotherhood, that they should entreat 
the mercy of God, were wanting to the full ex- 
tent that, according to the law of faith and the 
fear of God, with the Lord's help, my poor abil- 
ities could endeavour. But afterwards, when 
tortures came, my words reached both to our 
tortured brethren and to those who as yet were 
only imprisoned with a view to torture, to 
strengthen and console them. Moreover, when 
I found that those who had polluted their hands 
and mouths with sacrilegious contact, or had ra) 
less infected their consciences with wicked ( eiV 
tificates, were everpvhere soliciting the martyrs,, 
and were also corrupting the confessors with im- 
portunate and excessive entreaties, so that, with- 
out any discrimination or examination of the 
individuals themselves, thousands of certificates 
were daily given, contrary to the law of the 
Gospel, I wrote letters in which I recalled by my 
advice, as much as possible, the martyrs and 
confessors to the Lord's commands. To the 
presbyters and deacons also was not wanting the 
vigour of the priesthood ; 5 so that some, too 
little mindful of (liscij)line, and hasty, with a rasl\ 
precipitation, who had already begun to com- 
municate with the lapsed, were restrained by my 
interposition. Among the people, moreover. I 
have done what I could to quiet their minds, 
and have instructed them to maintain ecclesias- 
tical disci])line. 

3. But afterwards, when some of the lapsed, 
whether of their own accord, or by the sugges- 
tion of any other, broke forth with a daring de- 
mand, as though they would endeavour by a 
violent effort to extort the peace that had been 
promised to them by the martyrs and confessors ; 
concerning this also I wrote twice to the clergy, 
and commanded it to be read to them ; that 
for the mitigation of their violence in any man- 
ner for the meantime, if any who had received 
a certificate from the martyrs were departing 
from this life, having made confession, and re- 
ceived the imposition of hands on them for re- 
pentance, they should be remitted to the Lord 
with the peace [jromised them by the martyrs. 
Nor in this did I give them a law, or rashly con- 
stitute mvself the author of the direction : but 
as it seemed lit both that honour should be paid 
to the martyrs, and that the vehemence of those 

5 [Another instance of this usage ((car' i^oxf\v), of which see pi. 
291, SHpra.\ 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

295 

who were anxious to disturb everything should 
be restrained ; and when, besides, I had read 
vour letter which you lately wrote hither to my 
clergy by Crementius the sub-deacon, to the 
effect that assistance should be given to those 
who might, after their lapse, be seized with sick- 
ness, and might penitently desire communion ; 
I judged it well to stand by your judgment, lest 
our proceedings, which ought to be united and 
to agree in all things, should in any respect be 
different.' The cases of the rest, even although 
they might have received certificates from the 
martyrs, I ordered altogether to be put off, and 
to be reserved till I should be present, that so, 
when the Lord has given to us peace, and sev- 
eral bishops shall have begun to assemble into 
one place, we may be able to arrange and re- 
form everything, having the advantage also of 
your counsel. I bid you, beloved brethren, ever 
heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XV .= 

TO MOYSES AND MAXIMUS, AND THE REST 
OF THE CONFESSORS. 

ARGUMENT. — THE BURDEN OF THIS LEITER IS 
GIVEN IN EPISTLE XXXI. BELOW, WHERE THE 
ROMAN CLERGY SAY: " ON WHICH SUBJECT WE 
OWE YOU, AND GIVE YOU OUR DEEPEST AND 
ABUNDANT THANKS, THAT YOU THREW LIGHT 
INTO THE GLOOM OF THEIR PRISON BY YOUR 
LETTERS." 3 

I. Cyprian to Moyses and Maximus, the pres- 
byters and the other confessors, his brethren, 
greeting. Celerinus, a companion both of your 
faith and virtue, and God's soldier in glorious 
engagements, has come to me, beloved brethren, 
^nd represented all of you, as well as each in- 
dividual, forcibly to my affection. I beheld in 
him, when he came, the whole of you ; and 
when he spoke sweetly and often of your love to 
me, in his words I heard you. I rejoice very 
greatly when such things are brought to me from 
you by such men as he. In a certain manner I 
am also there with you in prison. I think that 
I who am thus bound to your hearts, enjoy with 
you the delights of the divine approval. Your 
individual love associates me with your honour ; 
the Spirit does not allow our love to be separated. 
Confession ■* shuts you up in prison ; affection 

■ [Note the moderation of our author, i Pet. v. 5.] 

- Oxford ed. : Ep. xx.wii. In the autumn of a.d. 250. 

3 " Further, that you came to them in such way as you could 
enter: that you refreshed their minds, robust in their own faith and 
confession, by your appeals and your letters: that, accompanying 
their happiness with deserved praises, you inflamed them to a much 
more ardent desire for heavenly glory: that you urged them onward 
in the course; that you animated, as we believe and hope, future vic- 
tors by the power of your address, so that, although all this may seem 
to come from the faith of the confessors and the divine indulgence, yet 
in their martyrdom they may seem in some manner to have become 
debtors to you." 

■» [i.e., confessorship. As to the time, see Treatise ii. infra.\ 

shuts me up there. And I indeed, remembering 
you day and night, both when in the sacrifices I 
offer prayer with many, and when in retirement 
I pray with private petition, beseech of the Lord 
a full acknowledgment to your crowns and your 
praises. But my poor ability is too weak to rec- 
ompense you ; you give more when you remem- 
ber me in prayer, since, already breathing only 
celestial things, and meditating only divine 
things, you ascend to loftier heights, even by the 
delay of your suffering ; and by the long lapse 
of time, are not wasting, but increasing your 
glory. A first and single confession makes 
blessed ; you confess as often as, when asked to 
retire from prison, you prefer the prison witli 
faith and virtue ; your praises are as numerous, 
as the days ; as the months roll onward, ever 
your merits increase. He conquers once who ' 
suffers at once ; but he who continues always, 
battling with punishments, and is not overcome 
with suffering, is daily crowned. 

2. Now, therefore, let magistrates and consuls 
or proconsuls go by ; let them glory in the en- 
signs of their yearly dignity, and in their twelve 
fasces. Behold, the heavenly dignity in you is 
sealed by the brightness of a year's honour, and 
already, in the continuance of its victorious 
glory, has passed over the rolling circle of the 
returning year. The rising sun and the waning 
moon enlightened the world ; but to you. He 
who made the sun and moon was a greater light 
in your dungeon, and the brightness of Christ 
glowing in your hearts and minds, irradiated with 
that eternal and brilliant light the gloom of the 
place of punishment, which to others was so 
horrible and deadly. The winter has passed 
through the vicissitudes of the months ; but you,, 
shut up in prison, were undergoing, instead of 
the inclemencies of winter, the winter of perse- 
cution. To the winter succeeded the mildness 
of spring, rejoicing with roses and crowned with 
flowers ; but to you were present roses and 
flowers from the delights of paradise, and celes- 
tial garlands wreathed your brows. Behold, the 
I summer is fruitful with the fertility of the harvest,, 
and the threshing-floor is filled with grain ; but 
you who have sown glory, reap the fruit of glory ,^ 
and, placed in the Lord's threshing-floor, behold 
the chaff" burnt up with unquenchable fire ; you 
yourselves as grains of wheat, winnowed and 
precious corn, now purged and garnered, regard 
the dwelling-place of a prison as your granary. 
Nor is there wanting to the autumn spiritual 
grace for discharging the duties of the season. 
The vintage is pressed out of doors, and the 
grape which shall hereafter flow into the cups is 
trodden in the presses. You, rich bunches out 
of the Lord's vineyard, and branches with fruit 
already ripe, trodden by the tribulation of 
worldly pressure, fill your wine-press in the tor- 

296 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

turing prison, and shed your blood instead of 
wine ; brave to bear suffering, you willingly drink 
the cup of martyrdom. Thus the year rolls on 
with the Lord's servants, — thus is celebrated the 
vicissitude of the seasons with spiritual deserts, 
and with celestial rewards. 

3. 'Abundantly blessed are they who, from 
your number, passing through these footprints 
of glory, have already dejjarted from the world ; 
and, having finished their journey of virtue and 
faith, have attained to the embrace and the kiss 
of the Lord, to the joy of the Lord Himself 
But yet your glory is not less, who are still en- 
gaged in contest, and, about to follow the glories 
of your comrades, are long waging the battle, 
and with an unmoved and unshaken faith stand- 
ing fast, are daily exhibiting in your virtues a 
spectacle in the sight of God. The longer is 
your strife, the loftier will be your crown. The 
struggle is one, but it is crowded with a mani- 
fold multitude of contests ; you conquer hunger, 
and despise thirst, and tread under foot the 
squalor of the dungeon, and the horror of the 
very abode of punishment, by the vigour of your 
courage. Punishment is there subdued ; torture 
is worn out ; death is not feared but desired, 
being overcome by the reward of immortality, 
so that he who has conquered is crowned with 
eternity of life. What now must be the mind in 
you, how elevated, how large the heart, when 
such and so great things are resolved, when 
nothing but the precepts of God and the re- 
wards of Christ are considered ! The will is 
then only God's will ; and although you are still 
placed in the flesh, it is the life not of the 
present world, but of the future, that you now 
live. 

4. It now remains, beloved brethren, that you 
should be mindful of me ; that, among your 
great and divine considerations, you should also 
think of me in your mind and spirit ; and that 
I should be in your prayers and supplications, 
when that voice, which is illustrious by the puri- 
fication of confession, and praiseworthy for the 
continual tenor of its honour, penetrates to God's 
ears, and heaven being open to it, passes from 
these regions of the world subdued, to the realms 
above, and obtains from the Lord's goodness 
even what it asks. For what do you ask from 
the Lord's mercy which you do not deserve to 
obtain? — you who have thus observed the 
Lord's commands, who have maintained the 
Gospel discipline with tlie sim])le vigour of your 
faith, who, with the glory of your virtue uncor- 
rupted, have stood bravely by the Lord's com- 
mands, and by His apostles, and have confirmed 
the wavering faith of many by the tnith of your 
martyrdom ? Truly, Gospel witnesses, and truly, 
Christ's martyrs, resting upon His roots, founded 
with strong foundation upon the Rock, you have 

joined discipline with virtue, you have brought 
others to the fear of God, you have made your 
martyrdoms, examples. I bid you, brethren, 
very brave and beloved, ever heartily farewell ; 
and remember me. 

EPISTLE XVI.' 

THE CONFESSORS TO CYPRIAN. 

ARGUMENT. — A CERTIFICATE WRITTEN IN THE 
NAME OF THE MARTYRS BY LUCI.\NUS. 

All the confessors to father^ Cyprian, greet- 
ing. Know that, to all, concerning whom the 
account of what they have done since the com- 
mission of their sin has been, in your estimation, 
satisfactory, we have granted peace ; and we have 
desired that this rescript should be made known 
by you to the other bishops also. We bid you 
to have peace with the holy martyrs. Lucianus 
wrote this, there being present of the clergy, 
both an exorcist and a reader. 

EPISTLE XVII.3 

TO THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS ABOUT 
THE FOREGOING AND THE FOLLOWING LET- 
TERS. 

ARGUMENT. — NO ACCOUNT IS TO BE MADE OK 
CERTIFICATES FROM THE MARTYRS BEFORE THE 
PEACE OF THE CHURCH IS RESTORED. 

Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his 
brethren, greeting. The Lord speaketh and 
saith, " Upon whom shall I look, ^it upon him 
that is humble and quiet, and that trembleth at 
my words ? " •♦ Although we ought all to be this, 
yet especially those ought to be so who must 
labour, that, after their grave lapse, they may, by 
true penitence and absolute humility, deserve 
well of the Lord. Now I have read the letter 
of the whole body of confessors, which they wish 
to be made known by me to all my colleagues, 
and in which they requested that the peace given 
by themselves should be assured to those con- 
cerning whom the account of what they have 
done since their crime has been, in our estima- 
tion, satisfactory ; which matter, as it waits for 
the counsel and judgment of all of us, 5 I do not 
dare to prejudge, and so to assume a common 
cause for my own decision. And therefore, in 
the meantime, let us abide by the letters which 
I lately wrote to you, of which I have now sent 
a copy to many of my colleagues,^ who wrote in 

' Oxford ed.: Ep. xxili. a.d. 250. 

^ "Cypriano Papa;," to "Pope" Cyprian. [An instance illus- 
trative of what is to be found on p. 54, supra. See also Elucidation 
III. p. 154, su/>ra.'\ 

■5 Oxford ed.: Ep. xxvi. a.d. 250. 

* Isa. Ixvi. 2. 

5 [Elucidation V.] 

* [The affectionate and general usage of primitive bishops to seek 
the consensus /ratrum, is noteworthy!] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

297 

reply, that they were pleased with what I had 
decided, and that there must be no departure 
therefrom, until, peace being granted to us by 
the Lord, we shall be able to assemble together 
into one place, and to examine into the cases of 
individuals. But that you may know both what 
my colleague Caldonius wrote to me, and what 
I replied to him, I have enclosed with my letter 
a copy of each letter, the whole of which I beg 
you to read to our brethren, that they may be 
more and more settled down to patience, and 
not add another fault to what had hitherto been 
their former fault, not being willing to obey 
either me or the Gospel, nor allowing their cases 
to be examined in accordance with the letters 
of all the confessors. I bid you, beloved breth- 
ren, ever he^-rtily farewell ; and have m© in re- 
membrance. Salute all the brotherhood. Fare 
ye well ! 

EPISTLE XVIII.' 

CALDONIUS TO CYPRIAN. 

ARGUMENT. — WHEN, IN THE URGENCV OF A NEW 
PERSECUTION, CERTAIN OF THE LAPSED HAD 
CONFESSED CHRIST, AND SO, BEFORE THEV WENT 
AWAY INTO EXILE, SOUGHT FOR PEACE, CALDO- 
NIUS CONSULTS CYPRIAN AS TO WHETHER PEACE 
SHOULD BE GRANTED THEM. 

Caldonius to Cyprian and his fellow-presby- 
ters ^ abiding at Carthage, greeting. The neces- 
sity of the times induces us not hastily to grant 
peace. But it was well to write to you, that 
they 3 who, after having sacrificed,'* were again 
tried, became exiles. And thus they seem to 
me to have atoned for their former crime, in 
that they now let go their possessions and homes, 
and, repenting, follow Christ. Thus Felix, who 
assisted in the office of presbyter 5 under Deci- 
mus, and was very near to me in bonds (I knew 
that same Felix very thoroughly), Victoria, his 
wife, and Lucius, being faithful, were banished, 
and have left their possessions, which the treasury 
now has in keeping. Moreover, a woman. Bona 
by name, who was dragged by her husband to 
sacrifice, and (with no conscience guilty of the 
crime, but because those who held her hands, 
sacrificed) began to cry against them, " I did not 
do it ; you it was who did it ! " — was also ban- 
ished.^ Since, therefore, all these were asking 
for peace, saying, " We have recovered the faith 
which we had lost, we have repented, and have 

' Oxford ed. : Ep. xxiv. a.d. 250. 

^ [The community of this lerm, presbyters, has been noted. See 
p 156, supra.^ 

■5 " Some "would seem to be correct (Goldhorn) ; but it has no 
authority. 

* [i.e., to idols, or the imperial image.] 

5 " Presbyterium subministrabat; " assisted, probably as vicar or 
curate. 

*" "^ ^ very touching incident, dramatically narrated.] 

publicly confessed Christ" — although it seems 
to me that they ought to receive peace, — yet 
I have referred them to your judgment, that I 
might not appear to presume anything rashly. 
If, therefore, you should wish me to do anything 
by the common decision, write to me. Greet 
our brethren ; our brethren greet you. I bid 
you, beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XIX.7 

CYPRIAN REPLIES TO CALDONIUS. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN TREATS OF NOTHING PECU- 
LIAR IN THIS EPISTLE, BEYOND ACQUIESCING IN 
THE OPINION OF CALDONIUS, TO WIT, THAT PEACE 
SHOULD NOT BE REFUSED TO SUCH LAPSED AS, 
BY A TRUE REPENTANCE AND CONFESSION OF 
THE NAME OF CHRIST, HAVE DESERVED IT, AND 
HAVE THEREFORE RETURNED TO HIM. 

Cyprian to Caldonius, his brother, greeting. 
We have received your letter, beloved brother, 
which is abundantly sensible, and full of honesty 
and faith. Nor do we wonder that, skilled and 
exercised as you are in the Scriptures of the 
Lord, you do everything discreetly and wisely. 
You have judged quite correctly about granting 
peace to our brethren, which they, by true peni- 
tence and by the glory of a confession of the 
Lord, have restored to themselves, being justified 
by their words, by which before they had con- 
demned themselves. Since, then, they have 
washed away all their sin, and their former stain, 
by the help of the Lord, has been done away by 
a more powerful virtue, they ought not to lie any 
longer under the power of the devil, as it were, 
prostrate ; when, being banished and deprived 
of all their property, they have lifted themselves 
up and have begun to stand with Christ. And I 
wish that the others also would repent after their 
fall, and be transferred into their former condi- 
tion ; and that you may know how we have dealt 
with these, in their urgent and eager rashness and 
importunity to extort peace, I have sent a book ** 
to you, with letters to the number of five, that 
I wrote to the clergy and to the people, and to 
the martyrs also and confessors, which letters 
have already been sent to many of our colleagues, 
and have satisfied them ; and they replied that 
they also agree with me in the same opinion 
according to the Catholic faith ; which very thing 
do you also communicate to as many of our col- 
leagues as you can, that among all these, may 
be observed one mode of action and one agree- 
ment, according to the Lord's precepts.'' I bid 
you, beloved brother, ever heartily farewell. 

" Oxford ed.: Ep. xxv. a.d. 250. 

8 Probably the treatise, 0>i the Lapsed. 

9 [A beautiful specimen of obedience to the precept, i Pet. v. 5.] 

298 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

EPISTLE XX.' 

CELERINUS TO LUCIAN. 

ARGUMENT. — CELERINUS, ON BEHALF OF HIS 
IJVPSED SISTERS AT ROME, BESEECHES PEACE 
FROM THE CARTHAGINIAN CONFESSORS. 

1. Celerinus to Lucian, greeting. In writing 
this letter to you, my lord and brother, I have 
been rejoicing and sorrowful, — rejoicing in that 
I had heard that you had been tried on behalf 
of the name of our Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour, 
and had confessed His name in the presence of 
the magistrates of the world ; but sorrowful, in 
that from the time when I was in your company 
I have never been able to receive your letters. 
And now lately a twofold sorrow has fallen upon 
me ; that although you knew that Montanus, our 
common brother, was coming to me from you 
out of the dungeon, you did not intimate any- 
thing to me concerning your wellbeing, nor about 
anything that is done in connection with you. 
This, however, continually happens to the ser- 
vants of God, especially to those who are ap- 
pointed for the confession of Christ. For I know 
that every one looks not now to the things that 
are of the world, but that he is hoping for a heav- 
enly crown. Moreover, I said that perhaps you 
had forgotten to write to me. For if from the 
lowest place I may be called by you yours, or 
brotlier, if I should be worthy to hear myself 
named Celerinus ; yet, when I also was in such 
a purple ^ confession, I remembered my oldest 
brethren, and I took notice of them in my letters, 
that their former love was still around me and 
mine. Yet I beseech, beloved of the Lord, that 
if, first of all, you are washed in that sacred blood, 
and have suffered for the name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ before my letters find you in this world, 
or should they now reach you, that you would 
answer them to me. So may He crown you 
whose name you have confessed. For I believe, 
that although in this world we do not see each 
other, yet in the future we shall embrace one 
another in the presence of Christ. Entreat that 
I may be worthy, even I, to be crowned along 
with your company. 

2. Know, nevertheless, that I am placed in 
the midst of a great tribulation ; and, as if you 
were present with me, I remember your former 
love day and night, God only knows. And 
therefore I ask that you will grant my desire, 
and that you will grieve with me at the (spirit- 
ual) death of my sister, who in this time of dev- 
astation has fallen from Christ ; for she has 
sacrificed and provoked our Lord, as seems 
manifest to us. And for her deeds I in this day 

' Oxford ed.: Ep. xxi. a.d. 250. 

- " Florida," scil. " purpurea," purpled, that is, with blood. See 
concluding section of Ep. viii. The Oxford translator has " cm- 
purpled." 

of paschal rejoicing,^ weeping day and night,. 
have spent the days in tears, in sackcloth, and 
ashes, and I am still spending them so to this 
day, until ■♦ the aid of our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
affection manifested through you, or through 
those my lords who have been crowned, from 
whom you are about to ask it, shall come to 
the help of so terrible a shipwreck. For I re- 
member your former love, that you will grieve 
with all the rest for our sisters whom you also 
knew well — that is, Numeria and Candida, — 
for whose sin, because they have us as brethren, 
we ought to keep watch. For I believe that 
Christ, according to their repentance and the 
works which they have done towards our ban- 
ished colleagues who came from you — by whom 
themselves you will hear of their good works, — 
that Christ, I say, will have mercy upon them, 
when you, His martyrs, beseech Him. 

3. For I have heard that you have received 
the ministry of the purpled ones. Oh, happy 
are you, even sleeping on the ground, to obtain 
your wishes which you have always desired \ 
You have desired to be sent into prison for His 
name's sake, which now has come to pass ; as it 
is written, "The Lord grant thee according to 
thine own heart ;" 5 and now made a priest of 
God over them, and the same their minister has 
acknowledged it.^ I ask, therefore my lord, and 
I entreat by our Lord Jesus Christ, that you will 
refer the case to the rest of your colleagues, 
your brethren, my lords, and ask from them, 
that whichever of you is first crowned, should 
remit such a great sin to those our sisters, Nu- 
meria and Candida. For this latter I have 
always called Etecusa ^ — God is my witness, — 
because she gave gifts for herself that she might 
not sacrifice ; but she appears only to have 
ascended to the Tria Fata,** and thence to have 
descended. I know, therefore, that she has not 
sacrificed. Their cause having been lately heard, 
the chief rulers 9 commanded them in the mean- 
time to remain as they are, until a bishop should 
be appointed.'" But, as far as possible, by your 
holy prayers and petitions, in which we trust, 
since you are friends as well as witnesses of 

3 [Written at Easter, like the first Epistle to the Corinthians, as 
implied in cap. v. 7. See Conybeare and Hovvson.] 

■* The Oxford edition has a variation here, as follows: " Until our 
Lord Jesus Christ afford help, and pity be manifested through you, 
or through those my lords who may have been crowned, from whom 
you will entreat that these dreadful shipwrecks may be pardoned." 

5 Ps. XX. 4. 

* This seems altogether unintelligible: the original is probably 
corrupt. [It seems to relate to the sort of priathood which was 
conceded to all martyrs, in view of (Rev. i. 6 and v. 10) the message 
sent by the angel " to His servants," and by their servant or min- 
ister, John.] 

■' Dodwell conjectures this name to be from !nv\o\)<ja. (unhappy) 
or atKovack (unwilling), and applies it to Candida. 

^ A spot in the Roman Forum which must of necessity be passed 
by in the ascent to the Capitol. It would appear that Candida there- 
fore repented of her purpose of sacrificing, when she was .ictually oa 
her way to effect it. 

9 [i.e., the clergy administering jurisdiction.] 

'° I.e., in the room of Fabian. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

299 

Christ, (we pray) that you would be indulgent 
in all these matters. 

4. I entreat, therefore, beloved lord Lucian, 
be mindful of me, and acquiesce in my petition ; 
so may Christ grant you that sacred crown which 
he has given you not only in confession but also 
in holiness, in which you have always walked 
and have always been an example to the saints, 
as well as a witness, that you will relate to all my 
lords, your brethren the confessors, all about this 
matter, that they may receive help from you. 
For this, my lord and brother, you ought to know, 
that it is not I alone who ask this on their be- 
half, but also Statins and Severianus, and all the 
confessors who have come thence hither from 
you ; to whom these very sisters went down to 
the harbour ' and took them up into the city, 
and they have ministered to sixty-five, and even 
to this day have tended them in all things. For 
all are with them. But I ought not to burden 
that sacred heart of yours any more, since I 
know that you will labour with a ready will. 
Macharius, with his sisters Cornelia and Emerita, 
salute you, rejoicing in your sanguinary confes- 
sion, as well as in that of all the brethren, and 
Saturninus, who himself also wrestled with the 
devil, who also bravely confessed the name of 
Christ, who moreover, under the torture of the 
grappling claws, bravely confessed, and who also 
strongly begs and entreats this. Your brethren 
Calphurnius and Maria, and all the holy breth- 
ren, salute you. For you ought to know this too, 
that I have written also to my lords your breth- 
ren letters, which I request that you will deign 
to read to them. 

EPISTLE XXI.^ 

LUCIAN REPLIES TO CELERINUS. 

ARGUMENT. — LUCIAN ASSENTS TO THE PETITION 
OF CELERINUS. 

I. Lucian to Celerinus, his lord, and (if I shall 
be worthy to be called so) colleague in Christ, 
greeting. I have received your letter, most 
dearly beloved lord and brother, in which you 
have so laden me with expressions of kindness, 
that by reason of your so burdening me I was 
almost overcome with such excessive joy ; so 
that I exulted in reading, by the benefit of your 
so great humility, the letter, which I also earnesdy 
desired after so long' a time to read, in which 
you deigned to call me to remembrance, saying 
to me in your writing, " if I may be worthy to 
be called your brother," of a man such as I am 
who confessed the name of God with trembling 
before the inferior magistrates. For you, by 
God's will, when you confessed, not only fright- 

' [i e., to Ostia or Tortus]. 

2 Oxford ed. : Ep. xxii. a.d. 250. 

ened back the great serpent himself, the pioneer 
of Antichrist,^ (but) have conquered him, by 
that voice and those divine words, whereby I 
know how you love the faith, and how zealous 
you are for Christ's discipline, in which I know 
and rejoice that you are actively occupied.'* 
Now beloved, already to be esteemed among the 
martyrs, you have wished to overload me with 
your letter, in which you told us concerning our 
sisters, on whose behalf I wish that we could by 
possibility mention them without remembering 
also so great a crime committed. Assuredly we 
should not then think of them with so many 
tears as we do now. 

2. You ought to know what has been done 
concerning us. When the blessed martyr Paulus 
was still in the body, he called me and said to 
me : " Lucian, in the presence of Christ I say 
to you. If any one, after my being called away, 
shall ask for peace from you, grant it in my 
name." Moreover, all of us whom the Lord 
has condescended in such tribulation to call 
away, by our letters, by mutual agreement, have 
given peace to all. You see, then, brother, how 
(I have done this) in part of what Paulus bade 
me, as what we in all cases decreed when we 
were in this tribulation, wherein by the command 
of the emperor we were ordered to be put to 
death by hunger and thirst, and were shut up in 
two cells, that so they might weaken us by hun- 
ger and thirst. Moreover, the fire from the 
effect of our torture was so intolerable 5 that no- 
body could bear it. But now we have attained 
the brightness itself. And therefore, beloved 
brother, greet Numeria and Candida, who (shall 
have peace ^) according to the precept of Pau- 
lus, and the rest of the martyrs whose names I 
subjoin : viz., Bassus in the dungeon of the per- 
jured,7 Mappalicus at the torture, Fortunio in 
prison, Paulus after torture, Fortunata, Victori- 
nus, Victor, Herennius, Julia, Martial, and Aristo, 
who by God's will were put to death in the prison 
by hunger, of whom in a few days you will hear 
of me as a companion. For now there are eight 
days, from the day in which I was shut up again, 
to the day in which I wrote my letter to you. 
For before these eight days, for five intervening 
days, I received a morsel of bread and water by 
measure. And therefore, brother, as here, since 
the Lord has begun to give peace to the Church 
itself, according to the precept of Paulus, and 
our tractate, the case being set forth before the 
bishop, and confession being made, I ask that 

3 The emperor Decius. 
^ The passage is hopelessly confused. 

- " And. moreover, by the smoke of fire, and our suffering was so 
intolerable," etc.: v. I. 

6 These parenthical words are necessary to the sense, but are 
omitted in the original. 

7 " Pejerario." There are many conjectures as to the meaning of 
this. Perhaps the most plausible is the emendation, " Petrario " — • 
" in the mines." 

300 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

not only these may have peace, but also (all) 
those whom you know to be very near to our 
heart. 

3. All my colleagues greet you. Do you greet 
the confessors of the Lord who are there with you, 
whose names you have intimated, among whom 
also are Saturninus, with his companions, but who 
also is my colleague, and Maris, Collecta, and 
Emerita, Calphurnius and Maria, Sabina, Spesina, 
and the sisters, Januaria, Dativa, Donata. We 
greet Saturus with his family, Bassianus and all 
the clergy, Uranius, Alexius, Quintianus, Colon- 
ica, and all whose names I have not written, 
because I am already weary. Therefore they 
must pardon me. I bid you heartily farewell, 
and Alexius, and Getulicus, and the money- 
changers, and the sisters. My sisters Januaria 
and Sophia, whom I commend to you, greet 
you.' 

EPISTLE XXIL= 

TO THE CLERGY ABIDING AT ROME, CONCERN- 
ING MANY OF THE CONFESSORS, AND CON- 
CERNING THE FORWARDNESS OF LUCIAN 
AND THE MODESTY OF CELERINUS THE CON- 
FESSOR. 

ARGUMENT. — IN THIS LETTER CYPRIAN INFORMS 
THE ROMAN CLERGY OF THE SEDITIOUS DE- 
MAND OF THE LAPSED TO BE RESTORED TO 
PEACE, AND OF THE FORWARDNESS OF LUCIAN. 
IN ORDER THAT THEY MAY BETTER UNDER- 
STAND THESE MATTERS, CYPRIAN TAKES CARE 
THAT NOT ONLY HIS OWN LETTERS, BUT ALSO 
THOSE OF CELERINUS AND LUCLVN, SHOULD BE 
SENT TO THEM. 

I. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons 
abiding at Rome, his brethren, greeting. After 
the letters that I wrote to you, beloved brethren, 
in which what I had done was explained, and 
some slight account was given of my discipline 
and diligence, there came another matter which, 
any more than the others, ought not to be con- 
cealed from you. For our brother Lucian, who 
himself also is one of the confessors, earnest in- 
deed in faith, and robust in virtue, but little es- 
tablished in the reading of the Lord's word, has 
attempted certain things, constituting himself 
for a time an authority for unskilled people, so 
that certificates written by his hand were given 
indiscriminately to many persons in the name of 
Paulus ; whereas Mappalicus the martyr, cautious 
and modest, mindful of the law and discipline, 
wrote no letters contrary to the Gospel, but only. 

' This epistle, as well as the preceding, seems to be very imper- 
fect, having probably been " written," says the Oxford translator, 
" by persons little versed in writing, — confessors, probably, of the 
less instructed sort." The meaning in many places is very unsatis- 
factory. 

^ Oxford ed. : Ep. xxvii. a.d. 250. 

moved with domestic affection for his mother,' 
who had fallen, commanded peace to be given 
to her. Saturninus, moreover, alter his torture, 
still remaining in prison, sent out no letters of 
this kind. But Lucian, not only while Paulus 
was still in prison, gave everpvhere in his name 
certificates written with his own hand, but even 
after his decease persisted in doing the same 
things under his name, saying that this had been 
commanded him by Paulus, ignorant that he 
must obey the Lord rather than his fellow-ser- 
vant. In the name also of Aurelius, a young 
man who had undergone the torture, many cer- 
tificates were given, written by the hand of the 
same Lucian, because Aurelius did not know 
how to write himself. 

2. In order, in some measure, to put a stop to 
this practice, I wrote letters to them, which I 
have sent to you under the enclosure of the 
former letter, in which I did not fail to ask and 
persuade them that consideration might be had 
for the law of the Lord and the Gospel. But 
after I sent my letters to them, that, as it were, 
something might be done more moderately and 
temperately ; the same Lucian wrote a letter in 
the name of all the confessors, in which well nigh 
every bond of faith, and fear of God, and the 
Lord's command, and the sacredness and sin- 
cerity of the Gospel were dissolved. For he 
wrote in the name of all, that they had given 
peace to all, and that he wished that this decree 
should be communicated through me to the 
other bishops, of which letter I transmitted a 
copy to you. It was added indeed, '' of whom 
the account of what they have done since their 
crime has been satisfactory;" — a thing this 
which excites a greater odium against me, be- 
cause I, when I have begun to hear the cases of 
each one and to examine into them, seem to 
deny to many what they now are all boasting 
that they have received from the martyrs and 
confessors. 

3. Finally, this seditious practice has already 
begun to appear ; for in our province, through 
some of its cities, an attack has been made by 
the multitude upon their rulers, and they have 
compelled that peace to be given to them im- 
mediately which they all cried out had been once 
given to them by tlie martyrs and confessors. 
Their rulers, being frightened and subdued, were 
of litde avail to resist them, either by vigour of 
mind or by strength of taith. \Vith us, moreover, 
some turbulent spirits, who in time past were 
with difficulty governed by me, and were delayed 
till my coming, were inflamed by this letter as if 
by a firebrand, and began to be more \iolent, and 
to extort the peace granted to them. I have 
sent a copy to you of the letters that I wrote to 

J Some read, " his mother and sisters, who had fallen.' 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

301 

my' clergy about these matters, and, moreover, 
what Caldonius, my colleague, of his integrity 
and faithfulness wrote, and what I replied to him. 
I have sent both to you to read. Copies also of 
the letter of Celerinus, the good and stout con- 
fessor, which he wrote to Lucian the same con- 
fessor — also what Lucian replied to him, — I 
have sent to you ; that you may know both my 
labour in respect of everything, and my diligence, 
and might learn the truth itself, how moderate 
and cautious is Celerinus the confessor, and how 
reverent both in his humility and fear for our 
faith ; while Lucian, as I have said, is less skil- 
ful concerning the understanding of the Lord's 
word, and by his facility, is mischievous on ac- 
count of the dislike that he causes for my rever- 
ential dealing. For while the Lord has said that 
the nations are to be baptized in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, 
and their past sins are to be done away in bap- 
tism ; this man, ignorant of the precept and of 
the law, commands peace to be granted and sins 
to be done away in the name of Paulus ; and he 
says that this was commanded him by Paulus, as 
you will observe in the letter sent by the same 
Lucian to Celerinus, in which he very little con- 
sidered that it is not martyrs that make the Gos- 
pel, but that martyrs are made by the Gospel ; ' 
since Paul also, the apostle whom the Lord called 
a chosen vessel unto Him, laid down in his epis- 
tle : " I marvel that ye are so soon removed from 
Him that called you into the grace of Christ, 
unto another gospel : which is not another ; but 
there be some that trouble you, and would per- 
vert the Gospel of Christ. But though we, or an 
angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto 
you than that which we have preached unto you, 
let him be accursed. As we said before, so say I 
now again. If any man preach any other gospel 
unto you than that ye have received, let him be 
accursed."^ 

4. But your letter, which I received, written 
to my clergy, came opportunely ; as also did 
those which the blessed confessors, Moyses and 
Maximus, Nicostratus, and the rest, sent to Sat- 
urninus and Aurelius, and the others, in which are 
contained the full vigour of the Gospel and the 
robust discipline of the law of the Lord. Your 
words much assisted me as I laboured here, and 
withstood with the whole strength of faith the 
onset of ill-will, so that my work was shortened 
from above, and that before the letters which I 
last sent you reached you, you declared to me, 
that according to the Gospel law, your judgment 
also strongly and unanimously concurred with 
mine. I bid you, brethren, beloved and longed- 
for, ever heartily farewell, 

' [A Cyprianic aphorism applicable to the " The Fathers."] 
* Gal. i. 6-9. [Applicable to ihe new Marian dogma.] 

EPISTLE XXIII.3 

TO THE CLERGY, ON THE LETTERS SENT TO 
ROME, AND ABOUT THE APPOINTMENT OF 
SATURUS AS READER, AND OPTATUS AS 
SUB-DEACON, a.d. 250. 

ARGUMENT. THE CLERCY ARE INFORMED BY 

THIS LEITER OF THE ORDINATION OF SATURUS 
AND OPTATUS, AND WHAT CYPRIAN HAD WRITTEN 
TO ROME. 

Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his 
brethren, greeting. That nothing may be un- 
known to your consciousness, beloved brethren, 
of what was written to me and what I replied, I 
have sent you a copy of each letter, and I believe 
that my rejoinder will not displease you. But 
I ought to acquaint you in my letter concerning 
this, that for a very urgent reason I have sent a 
letter to the clergy who abide in the city. And 
since it behoved me to write by clergy, while I 
know that very many of ours are absent, and the 
few that are there are hardly sufficient for the 
ministry of the daily duty, it was necessary to 
appoint some new ones, who might be sent. 
Know, then, that I have made Saturus a reader, 
and Optatus, the confessor, a sub-deacon ; whom 
already, by the general advice, we had made 
next to the clergy, in having entrusted to Saturus 
on Easter-day, once and again, the reading; 
and when with the teacher-presbyters * we were 
carefully trying readers — in appointing Optatus 
from among the readers to be a teacher of the 
hearers ; — examining, first of all, whether all 
things were found fitting in them, which ought 
to be found in such as were in preparation for 
the clerical office. Nothing new, therefore, has 
been done by me in your absence ; but what, 
on the general advice of all of us had been 
begun, has, upon urgent necessity, been accom- 
plished. I bid you, beloved brethren, ever 
heartily farewell ; and remember me. Fare ye 
well. 

EPISTLE XXIV.5 

TO MOYSES AND MAXIMUS AND THE REST 
OF THE CONFESSORS. 

ARGUMENT. — THIS LETTER IS ONE OF CON- 
GRATULATION TO THE ROMAN CONFESSORS. 

I. Cyprian to Moyses and Maximus, the pres- 
byters, and to the other confessors, his very 

3 Oxford ed. : Ep. xxix. The numbering of the epistles has hith- 
erto been in accordance with Migne's edition of the text; but as he 
here follows a typographical error in numbering the epistle " xxiv.," 
and all the subsequent ones accordingly, it has been thought better to 
continue the correct order in this translation. In each case, therefore, 
after this, the number of the epistle in the translation will be one 
earlier than in Migne. 

■* Not " teachers and presbyters," as in the Oxford translation, 
but " teaching presbyters." For these were a distinct class of pres- 
byters— all not being teachers, — and these were to be judges of the 
fitness of such as were to be teachers of the hearers. [According 
to Cyprian's theory, all presbyters shared in the government and 
celebrated the Lord's Supper, but only the more learned and gifted 
were preachers, i Tim. iv. 17.] 

5 Oxford ed.: Ep. xxviii. [The .See of Rome was now vacant bv 
the death of Fabian, a.d. 250. See letter xxiv. in/ra.\ 

102 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

beloved brethren, greeting. I had already known 
from rumour, most brave and blessed brethren, 
the glory of your faith and virtue, rejoicing 
greatly and abundantly congratulating you, that 
the highest condescension of our Lord Jesus 
Christ should have prepared you for the crown 
by confession of His name. For you, who have 
become chiefs and leaders in the battle of our 
day, have set forward the standard of the celes- 
tial warfare ; you have made a beginning of the 
spiritual contest which God has purposed to be 
now waged by your valour ; you, with unshaken 
strength and unyielding firmness, have broken 
the first onset of the rising war. Thence have 
arisen happy openings of the fight ; thence have 
begun good auspices of victory. It happened 
that here martyrdoms were consummated by 
tortures. But he who, preceding in the struggle, 
has been made an example of virtue to the 
brethren, is on common ground with the martyrs 
in honour. Hence you have delivered to us 
garlands woven by your hand, and have pledged 
your brethren from the cup of salvation. 

2. To these glorious beginnings of confession 
and the omens of a victorious warfare, has been 
added the maintenance of discipline, which I 
observed from the vigour of your letter that you 
lately sent to your colleagues joined with you to 
the Lord in confession, with anxious admonition, 
that the sacred precepts of the Gospel and the 
commandments of life once delivered to us 
should be kept with firm and rigid observance. 
Behold another lofty degree of your glory ; be- 
hold, with confession, a double title to deserv- 
ing well of God, — to stand with a firm step, 
and to drive away in this struggle, by the strength 
of your faith, those who endeavour to make a 
breach in the Gospel, and bring impious hands 
to the work of undermining the Lord's precepts : 
— to have before afforded the indications of 
courage, and now to afford lessons of life. The 
I^ord, when, after His resurrection, He sent 
forth His apostles, charges them, saying, " All 
power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. 
Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptiz- 
ing them in the name of the Father, and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost : teaching them to 
observe all things whatsoever I have connnanded 
you." ' And the Apostle John, remembering 
this charge, subsequently lays it down in his 
epistle : " Hereby," says he, "we do know that 
we know Him, if we keep His commandments. 
He that saith he knoweth Him, and keepeth 
not His commandments, is a liar, and the truth 
is not in him." ^ You prompt the keeping of 
these precepts ; you observe the divine and 
heavenly commands. This is to be a confessor 

' Matt, xxviii. i8-ao. 
^ I John ii. 3, 4. 

of the Lord ; this is to be a martyr of Christ, — • i 
to k-eep the firmness of one's profession invio-( 
late among all evils, and secure. ^ Yot to wish 
to become a martyr for the Lord, and to try to 
overthrow the Lord's precepts ; to use against 
Him the condescension that He has granted 
you ; — to become, as it were, a rebel with arms 
that you have received from Him ; — this is to 
wish to confess Christ, and to deny Christ's Gos- 
pel. I rejoice, therefore, on your behalf, most 
brave and faithful brethren ; and as much as I 
congratulate the martyrs there honoured for the 
glory of their strength, so much do I also equally 
congratulate you for the crown of the Lord's 
discipline. The Lord has shed forth His con- 
descension in manifold kinds of liberality. He 
has distributed the praises of good soldiers and 
their spiritual glories in plentiful variety. We 
also are sharers in your honour ; we count your 
glory our glory, whose times have been brightened 
by such a felicity, that it should be the fortune 
of our day to see the proved servants of God 
and Christ's soldiers crowned. I bid you, most 
brave and blessed brethren, ever heartily fare- 
well ; and remember me. 

EPISTLE XXV.* 

MOYSES, MAXIMUS, NICOSTRATUS, AND THE 
OTHER CONFESSORS ANSWER THE FOREGO- 
ING LETTER. A.D. 250. 

ARGUMENT. THEY GR.\TEFULLY ACKNOWLEDGE 

THE CONSOLATION WHICH THE ROMAN CON- 
FESSORS HAD RECEIVED FROM CYPRIAN 'S LET- 
TER. MART\"RDOM IS NOT A PUNISHMENT, 
BUT A HAPPINESS. THE WORDS OF THE GOSPEL 
ARE BR.'VNDS TO INFLAME FAITH. IN THE CASE 
OF THE LAPSED, THE JUDGMENT OF CYPRIAN 
IS ACQUIESCED IN. 

I. To Caecilius Cyprian, bishop of the church 
of the Carthaginians, Moyses and Maximus, 
presbyters, and Nicostratus and Rufinus, dea- 
cons, and the other confessors persevering in 
the faith of the truth, in God the Father, and 
in His Son Jesus Christ our Lord, and in the 
Holy Spirit, greeting. Placed, brother, as we 
are among various and manifold sorrows, on ac- 
count of the present desolations of many breth- 
ren throughout almost the whole world,' this 
chief 'consolation has reached us, that we have 
been lifted up by the receipt of your letter, and 
have gathered some alleviation for the griefs of 
our saddened spirit. From which we can al- 

3 " And not to become a martyr for the Lord's sake " (or, " by 
the Lord's help"), " and to endeavour to overthrow the Lord's pre- 
cepts." Baiuz. reads ''prater," but in notes, "propter," while 
most MSS. read "per Dominum." 

* Oxford ed.: Ep. xxxi. [This epistle shows that Cyprian's 
gentle reproof of their former implied regret at his retreat (see p. 280, 
supra) had been effective.] 

5 [Note this testimony to the universality of the persecution. VoL 
ir. p. 125, this series.] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

303 

ready perceive that the grace of divine provi- 
dence wished to keep us so long shut up in the 
prison chains, perhaps for no other reason than 
that, instructed and more vigorously animated 
by your letter, we might with a more earnest 
will attain to the destined crown. For your let- ; 
ter has shone upon us as a calm in the midst of 
a tempest, and as the longed-for tranquillity in 
the midst of a troubled sea, and as repose in 
labours, as health in dangers and pains, as in the 
■densest darkness, the bright and glowing light. 
Thus we drank it up with a thirsty spirit, and 
received it with a hungry desire ; so that we 
rejoice to find ourselves by it sufficiently fed and 
strengthened for encounter with the foe. The 
Lord will reward you for that love of yours, and 
will restore you the fruit due to this so good 
work ; for he who exhorts is not less worthy of 
the reward of the crown than he who suffers ; 
not less worthy of praise is he who has taught, 
than he who has acted also ; he is not less to be 
honoured who has warned, than he who has 
fought ; except that sometimes the weight of 
glory more redounds to him who trains, than to 
him who has shown himself a teachable learner ; 
for the latter, perchance, would not have had what 
he has practised, unless the former had taught him. 

2. Therefore, again, we say, brother Cyprian, 
we have received great joy, great comfort, great 
refreshment, especially in that you ha^^e described, 
with glorious and deserved praises, the glorious, 
I will not say, deaths, but immortalities of mar- 
tyrs. For such departures should have been 
proclaimed with such words, that the things 
which were related might be told in such manner 

\ as they were done. Thus, from your letter, we 
•^saw those glorious triumphs of the martyrs ; and 
with our eyes in some sort have followed them 
as they went to heaven, and have contemplated 
them seated among angels, and the powers and 
dominions of heaven. Moreover, we have in 
some manner perceived with our ears the Lord 
giving them the promised testimony in the pres- 
ence of the Father. It is this, then, which also 
raises our spirit day by day, and inflames us to 
the following of the track of such dignity. 

3. For what more glorious, or what more 
blessed, can happen to any man from the divine 
■condescension, than to confess the Lord God, 
in death itself, before his very executioners? 
Than among the raging and varied and exquisite 
tortures of worldly power, even when the body 
is racked and torn and cut to pieces, to confess 
Christ the Son of God with a spirit still free, 
although departing? Than to have mounted to 
heaven with the world left behind ? Than, having 
forsaken men, to stand among the angels ? Than, 
all worldly impediments being broken through, 
already to stand free in the sight of God ? Than 
to enjoy the heavenly kingdom without any delay ? 

Than to have become an associate of Christ's 
passion in Christ's name ? Than to have become 
by the divine condescension the judge of one's 
own judge ? Than to have brought off an un- 
stained conscience from the confession of His 
name? Than to have refused to obey human 
and sacrilegious laws against the faith? Than 
to have borne witness to the truth with a public 
testimony? Than, by dying, to have subdued 
death itself, which is dreaded by all ? Than, by 
death itself, to have attained immortality ? Than,, 
when torn to pieces, and tortured by all the in- 
struments of cruelty, to have overcome the tor- 
ture by the tortures themselves? Than by 
strength of mind to have wrestled with all the 
agonies of a mangled body? Than not to have 
shuddered at the flow of one's own blood? 
Than to have begun to love one's punishments, 
after having faith to bear them ? ' Than to think 
it an injury to one's life not to have left it? 

4. For to this battle our Lord, as with ,the 
trumpet of His Gospel, stimulates us when He 
says, " He that loveth father or mother more 
than me is not worthy of me : and he that loveth 
his own soul more than me is not worthy of me. 
And he that taketh not his cross, and foUovveth 
after me, is not worthy of me." - And again, 
" Blessed are they which are persecuted for 
righteousness' sake : for theirs is the kingdom 
of heaven. Blessed shall ye be, when men shall 
persecute you, and hate you. Rejoice, and be 
exceeding glad : for so did their fathers perse- 
cute the prophets which were before you." ^ 
And again, " Because ye shall stand before kings 
and powers, and the brother shall deliver up the 
brother to death, and the father the son, and he 
that endureth to the end shall be saved ; " ■♦ 
and " To him that overcometh will I give to sit 
on my throne, even as I also overcame and am 
set down on the throne of my Father." 5 More- 
over the apostle : " Who shall separate us from 
the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, 
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, 
or sword? (As it is written. For thy sake are 
we killed all the day long ; we are accounted as 
sheep for the slaughter.) Nay, in all these 
things we are more than conquerors for Him 
who hath loved us." ^ 

5. When we read these things, 7 and things of 
the like kind, brought together in the Gospel, 
and feel, as it were, torches placed under us, 
with the Lord's words to inflame our faith, we 
not only do not dread, but we even provoke ^ the 

' Supplicia sua post fidem amare ccepisse. 

2 Matt. X. 37, 38. 

3 Matt. V. 10-12. 

■* Matt. X. 18, xxi. 22. 
S Rev. iii. 21. 
^ Rom. viii. 35. 

7 [Note the power of Holy Scripture in creating and supporting 
the martyr-spirit.] 

" [See valuable note, Oxford translation, p. 71.] 

304 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

enemies of the truth ; and we have already con- 
quered the opponents of God, by the very fact 
of our not yielding to them, and have subdued 
their nefarious laws against the truth. And al- 
though we have not yet shed our blood, we are 
prepared to shed it. Let no one think that this 
delay of our departure ' is any clemency ; for it 
obstructs us, it makes a hindrance to our glory, 
it puts off heaven, it withholds the glorious sight 
of God. For in a contest of this kind, and in 
the kind of contest when faith is struggling in the 
encounter, it is not true clemency to put off 
martyrs by delay. Entreat therefore, beloved 
Cyprian, that of His mercy the Lord will every 
day more and more arm and adorn every one 
of us with greater abundance and readiness, and 
will confirm and strengthen us by the strength 
of His power; and, as a good captain, will at 
length bring forth His soldiers, whom He has 
hitherto trained and proved in the camp of our 
prison, to the field of the battle set before them. 
May He hold forth to us the divine arms, those 
weapons that know not how to be conquered, — 
the breastplate of righteousness, which is never 
accustomed to be broken, — the shield of faith, 
which cannot be pierced through, — the helmet 
of salvation, which cannot be shattered, — and 
the sword of the Spirit, which has never been 
wont to be injured. For to whom should we 
rather commit these things for him to ask for 
us, than to our so reverend bishop,- as destined 
victims asking help of the priest ? 

6. Behold another joy of ours, that, in the 
duty of your episcopate, although in the mean- 
time you have been, owing to the condition of 
the times, divided from your brethren, you have 
frequently confirmed the confessors by your 
letters ; that you have ever afforded necessary 
supplies from your own just acquisitions ; that 
in all things you have always shown yourself in 
some sense present ; that in no part of your 
duty have you hung behind as a deserter.^ But 
what more strongly stimulated us to a greater 
joy we cannot be silent upon, but must describe 
with all the testimony of our voice. For we 
observe that you have both rebuked with fitting 
censure, and worthily, those who, unmindful of 
their sins, had, with hasty and eager desire, ex- 
torted ])eace from the presbyters in your absence, 
and those who, without respect for the Gospel, 
had with profane facility granted the holiness '^ 
of the Lord unto dogs, and pearls to swine ; al- 
though a great crime, and one whicli has extended 
with incredible destructiveness almost over the 
whole earth, ought only, as you yourself write, 
to be treated cautiously antl with moderation. 

' of our postponement." 

" Lit. 

3 [An important testimony to Cyprian's judicious retirement, in 
Ihe spirit of St. Paul, Phil. i. 24.] 

■♦ " Sanctum." [Note what follows: a rule for our times.] 

fl have amended the translation here from the O.xford trans.] 
An impo 

with the advice of all the bishops, presbyters, 
deacons, confessors, and even the laymen who 
abide fast,5 as in your letters you yourself also 
testify ; so that, while wishing unseasonably to 
bring repairs to the ruins, we may not appear to 
be bringing about other and greater destruction, 
for where is the divine word left, if pardon be 
so easily granted to sinners? Certainly their 
spirits are to be cheered and to be nourished up 
to the season of their maturity, and they are to 
be instructed from the Holy Scriptures how 
great and surpassing a sin they have committed. 
Nor let them be animated by the fact that they 
are many, but rather let them be checked by the 
fact that they are not few.^ An unblushing 
number has never been accustomed to have 
weight in extenuation of a crime ; but shame, 
modesty, patience, discij^line, humility, and sub- 
jection, waiting for the judgment of others upon 
itself, and bearing the sentence of others upon 
its own judgment, — this it is which proves peni- 
tence ; this it is which skins over a deep wound ;. 
this it is which raises up the ruins of the fallen 
spirit and restores them, which quells and re- 
strains the burning vapour of their raging sins. 
For the physician will not give to the sick the 
food of healthy bodies, lest the unseasonable 
nourishment, instead of repressing, should stimu- 
late the power of the raging disease, — that is tO' 
say, lest what might have been sooner diminished 
by abstinence, should, through impatience, be 
prolonged by growing indigestion. 

7. Hands, therefore, polluted with impious 
sacrifices ^ must be purified with good works, 
and wretched mouths defiled with accursed food^ 
must be purged with words of true penitence, 
and the spirit must be renewed and consecrated 
in the recesses of the faithful heart. Let the 
frequent groanings of the penitents be heard ; 
let faithful tears be shed from the eyes not once 
only, but again and again, so that those very 
eyes which wickedly looked upon idols may 
wash away, with tears that satisfy God, the un- 
lawful things that they had done. Nothing is 
necessary for diseases but patience : they who 
are weary and weak wrestle with their pain ; 
and so at length hope for health, if, by toler- 
ating it, they can overcome their suffering ; for 
unfaithful is the scar which the physician has 
too (luickly produced ; and the healing is un- 
done by any little casualty, if the remedies be 
not used faithfiilly from their very slowness. The 
flame is (juickly recalled again to a conflagra- 
tion, unless the material of the whole fire be ex- 
tinguished even to the extremest spark ; so that 

S [An important testimony to the Cyprianic theory from members 
of the Roman presbytery.] 

* [The extent of the lapses which Cyprian strove to check by 
due austerity must be noted] 

" [The casting of a grain of incense upon the coals before au 
image, to escape death.] 

" [Meats offered to idols.] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

305 

men of this kind should justly know that even 
they themselves are more advantaged by the 
very delay, and that more trusty remedies are 
applied by the necessary postponement. Be- 
sides, where shall it be said that they who con- 
fess Christ are shut up in the keeping of a squalid 
prison, if they who have denied Him are in no 
peril of their faith ? Where, that they are bound 
in the cincture of chains in God's name, if they 
who have not" kept the confession of God are 
not deprived of communion ? Where, that the 
imprisoned martyrs lay down their glorious lives, 
if those who have forsaken the faith do not feel 
the magnitude of their dangers and their sins? 
But if they betray too much impatience, and de- 
mand communion with intolerable eagerness, 
they vainly utter with petulant and unbridled 
tongues those querulous and invidious reproaches 
which avail nothing against the truth, since they 
might have retained by their own right what 
now by a necessity, which they of their own free 
will have sought, they are compelled to sue for.' 
For the faith which could confess Christ, could 
also have been kept by Christ in communion. 
We bid you, blessed and most glorious father, 
ever heartily farewell in the Lord ; and have us 
in remembrance. 

EPISTLE XXVI.^ 

CYPRIAN TO THE LAPSED. 
ARGUMENT. — THE ARGUMENT OF THIS LETTER IS 

FOUND BELOW IN LEITER XXVII. 

'THEY WROTE 

TO ME, SAYS HE, "NOT ASKING THAT PEACE 
SHOULD BE GRANTED THEM, BUT CLAIMING IT 
FOR THEMSELVES AS ALREADY GRANTED, BE- 
CAUSE THEY SAY THAT PAULUS HAS GIVEN PEACE 
TO ALL ; AS YOU WILL READ IN THEIR LETTER 
OF WHICH I HAVE SENT YOU A COPY, TOGETHER 
WITH WHAT I BRIEFLY REPLIED TO THEM." BUT 
THE LETTER OF THE LAPSED TO WHICH HE RE- 
PLIES IS WANTING. 

I. Our Lord, whose precepts and admonitions 
we ought to observe, describing the honour of a 
bishop 3 and the order of His Church, speaks in 
the Gospel, and says to Peter : " I say unto thee. 
That thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I 
build my Church ; and the gates of hell shall not 
prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the 
keys of the kingdom of heaven : and whatso- 
ever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound 
in heaven : and whatsoever thou shall loose on 
earth shall be loosed in heaven." ^ Thence, 
through the changes of times and successions, 
the ordering of bishops and the plan of the 

' [Note the profound convictions in these very lapsers of the truth 
of the Gospel and of the value of full communion with Christ ] 

- Oxford ed : Ep. xxxiii. a.d. 250. 

3 I This is the Cyprianic idea. The idea that this was peculiar to 
any one bishop had never entered his mind. See vol. iv. p. 99.] 

■♦ Malt. xvi. 18, 19. 

Church flow onwards ; so that the Church is 
founded upon the bishops, and every act of 
the Church is controlled by these same rulers. 5 
Since this, then, is founded on the divine law,. 
I marvel that some, with daring temerity, have 
chosen to write to me as if they wrote in the 
name of the Church ; when the Church is es- ^ 
tablished in the bishop and the clergy, and all 
who stand fast in the faith. For far be it from 
the mercy of God and His uncontrolled might 
to suffer the number of the lapsed to be called 
the Church ; since it is written, " God is not the 
God of the dead, but of the living." ^ For we 
indeed desire that all may be made alive ; and 
we pray that, by our supplications and groans^ 
they may be restored to their original state. But 
if certain lapsed ones claim to be the Church, 
and if the Church be among them and in them,, 
what is left but for us to ask of these very per- 
sons that they would deign to admit us into- 
the Church ? Therefore it behoves them to be ,/ 
submissive and quiet and modest, as those who- 
ought to appease God, in remembrance of their 
sin, and not to write letters in the name of the 
Church, when they should rather be aware that 
they are writing to the Church. 

2. But some who are of the lapsed have lately 
written to me, and are humble and meek and 
trembling and fearing God, and who have always- 
laboured in the Church gloriously and liberally, 
and who have never made a boast of their labour 
to the Lord, knowing that He has said, " When, 
ye shall have done all these things, say. We are 
unprofitable servants : we have done that which, 
was our duty to do." 7 Thinking of which things, 
and although they had received certificates from 
the martyrs, nevertheless, that their satisfaction 
might be admitted by the Lord, these persons, 
beseeching have written to me that they ac- 
knowledge their sin, and are truly repentant, 
and do not hurry rashly or importunately to- ^ 
secure peace ; but that they are waiting for my 
presence, saying that even peace itself, if they 
should receive it when I was present, would be 
sweeter to them. How greatly I congratulate 
these, the Lord is my witness, who hath conde- 
scended to tell what such, and such sort of ser- 
vants deserve of His kindness. Which letters,, 
as I lately received, and now read that you have 
written very differently, I beg that you will dis- 
criminate between your wishes ; and whoever you 
are who have sent this letter, add your names to 
the certificate, and transmit the certificate to me 
with your several names. For I must first know 
to whom I have to reply ; then I will respond to 
each of the matters that you have written, having 
regard to the mediocrity of my place and con- 

5 [Elucidated and worked out in the Treatise on Unity, iHfra.\ 

6 Matt. xxii. 32. 
^ Luke xvii. 10. 

lo6 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

duct. I bid you, beloved brediren, ever heartily 
farewell, and live quietly and tranquilly according 
to the Lord's discipline. Fare ye well. 

EPISTLE XXVII.= 

TO THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS. 

ARGUMENT. — THE ARGUMENT OF THIS LETTER 
IS SUFFICIENTLY IN AGREEMENT WITH THE PRE- 
CEDING, AND IT APPEARS THAT IT IS THE ONE 
OF WHICH HE SPEAKS IN THE FOLLOWING LET- 
TER ; FOR HE PRAISES HIS CLERGY FOR HAVING 
REJECFED FROM COMMUNION GAIUS OF DIDDA, 
A PRESBYTER, AND HIS DEACON, WHO RASHLY 
COMMUNICATED WITH THE LAPSED ; AND EX- 
HORTS THEM TO DO THE SAME WITH CERTAIN 
OTHERS. 

1. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his 
brethren, greeting. Vou have done uprightly 
and with discipline, beloved brethren, that, by 
the advice of my colleagues who were present, 
you have decided not to communicate with Gaius 
the presbyter of Didda, and his deacon ; who, 
by communicating with the lapsed, and offering 
their oblations,- have been frequently taken in 
their wicked errors ; and who once and again, 
as you wrote to me, when warned by my col- 
leagues not to do this, have persisted obstinately 
in their presumption and audacity, deceiving 
certain brethren also from among our people, 
whose benefit we desire with all humility to con- 
sult, and whose salvation we take care for, not 
with affected adulation, but with sincere faith, 
that they may supplicate the Lord with true 
penitence and groaning and sorrow, since it is 
written, " Remember from whence thou art 
fallen, and repent." ^ And again, the divine 
Scripture says, "Thus saith the Lord, When 
thou shalt be converted and lament, then thou 
shalt be saved, and shalt know where thou hast 
been."-* 

2. Yet how can those mourn and repent, 
whose groanings and tears some of the j^resby- 
ters obstruct when they rashly think that they 
may be communicated with, not knowing that 
it is written, " They who call you ha])py ^ cause 
you to err, and destroy the i)ath oi your feet? " ^ 
Naturally, our wholesome and true counsels have 
no success, whilst the salutary truth is hindered 
by mischievous blandishments and flatteries, and 
the wounded and unhealthy mind of the lapsed 
suffers what those also who are bodily diseased 
and sick often suffer ; that while they refuse 
wholesome food and beneficial drink as bitter 

' Oxford ed.: Ep. xxxiv. a.d. 250. 

- I At the Eucharist the alms and oblations were regarded in the 
light of Matt. V. 23, 24.] 
^ Rev. ii. 5. 
* Isn. XXX. 15, LXX. 
5 " They which lead thee." — E. V. 
<> Isa. lii. la, LXX. 

and distasteful, and crave those things which 
seem to please them and to be sweet for the 
present, they are inviting to themselves mischief 
and death by their recklessness and intemper- 
ance. Nor does the true remedy of the skilful 
physician avail to their safety, whilst the sweet 
enticement is deceiving with its charms. 

3. Do you, therefore, according to my letters, 
take counsel about this faithfully and whole- 
somely, and do not recede from better counsels ; 
and be careful to read these same letters to mv 
colleagues also, if there are any present, or if 
any should come to you ; that, with unanimity 
and concord, we may maintain a healthful plan for 
soothing and healing the wounds of the lapsed, 
intending to deal very fully with all when, by the 
Lord's mercy, we shall begin to assemble together. 
In the meantime, if any unrestrained and im- 
petuous person, whether of our presbyters or 
deacons or of strangers, should dare, before our^ 
decree, to communicate with the lapsed, let him 
be expelled from our communion, and plead the 
cause of his rashness before all of us when, by/ ^ 
the Lord's permission, we shall assemble together/ 
again. 7 Moreover, you wished me to reply what 
I thought concerning Philumenus and Fortuna- 
tus, sub-deacons, and Favorinus, an acolyte, who 
retired in the midst of the time of trial, and 
have now returned. Of which thing I cannot 
make myself sole judge, since many of the clergy 
are still absent, and have not considered, even 
thus late, that they should return to their place ; 
and this case of each one must be considered 
separately and fully investigated, not only with 
my colleagues, but also with the whole of the 
people themselves. 7 For a matter which here- 
after may constitute an example as regards the 
ministers of the Church must be weighed and 
adjudged with careful deliberation. In the mean- 
while, let them only abstain from the monthly ^ 
division,** not so as to seem to be deprived of 
the ministry of the Church, but that all matters 
being in a sound state, they may be reserved till 
my coming. I bid you, beloved brethren, ever 
heartily farewell. Greet all the brotherhood, 
and fare ye well. 

EPISTLE XXVIII.9 

TO THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS ABIDING 
AT ROME. 

ARGUMENT. — THE ROMAN CLERGY ARE INFORMED 
OF THE TEMERITY OF THE LAPSED WHO WERE 
DEMANDING PEACE. 

Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons abid- 
ing at Rome, his brethren, greeting. Both our 

7 [Thus Cyprian keeps in view " the whole Church," and adheres 
to his principle in letter xiii. p. 294, note i, supra.^ 
* Some read this, " dictione," preaching. 
9 Oxford ed. : Ep. xxxv. A.u. 250. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

307 

■common love and the reason of the thing de- 
mand, beloved brethren, that I should keep back 
from your knowledge nothing of those matters 
which are transacted among us, that so we may 
have a common plan for the advantage of the 
administration of the Church. For after I wrote 
to you the letter which I sent by Saturus the 
reader, and (3ptatus the sub-deacon, the com- 
bined temerity of certain of the lapsed, who 
refuse to repent and to make satisfaction to God, 
-wrote to me, not asking that peace might be 
given to them, but claiming it as already given ; 
because they say that Paulus has given peace to 
all, as you will read in their letter of which I 
have sent you a copy, as well as what I briefly 
replied to them in the meantime. But that you 
may also know what sort of a letter I afterwards 
wrote to the clergy, I have, moreover, sent you 
a copy of this. But if, after all, their temerity 
should not be repressed either by my letters or 
by yours, and should not yield to wholesome 
counsels, I shall take such proceedings as the 
Lord, according to His Gospel, has enjoined to 
be taken. I bid you, beloved brethren, ever 
heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XXIX.' 

THE PRESBYTERS AND DEACONS ABIDING AT 
ROME, TO CYPRIAN. 

ARGUMENT. — THE ROMAN CHURCH DECLARES ITS 
JUDGMENT CONCERNING THE LAPSED TO BE IN 
AGREEMENT WITH THE CARTHAGINIAN DECREES. 
ANY INDULGENCE SHOWN TO THE LAPSED IS RE- 
QUIRED TO HE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAW 
OF THE GOSPEL. THAT THE PEACE GRANTED 
BY THE CONFESSORS DEPENDS ONLY UPON 
GRA.CE AND GOOD-WILL, IS MANIFEST FROM THE 
FACT THAT THE LAPSED ARE REFERRED TO 
THE BISHOPS. THE SEDITIOUS DEMAND FOR 
PEACE MADE BY FELICISSIMUS IS TO BE ATTRIB- 
UTED TO FACTION. 

I. The presbyters and deacons abiding at 
Rome, to Father^ Cyprian, greeting. When, be- 
loved brother, we carefully read your letter which 
you had sent by Fortunatus the sub-deacon, we 
■were smitten with a double sorrow, and dis- 
ordered with a twofold grief, that there was not 
any rest given to you in such necessities of the 
persecution, and that the unreasonable petulance 
of the lapsed brethren was declared to be car- 
ried even to a dangerous boldness of expression. 
But although those things which we have spoken 
of severely afflicted us and our spirit, yet your 
vigour and the severity that you have used, ac- 
cording to the proper discipline, moderates the 
so heavy load of our grief, in that you rightly 

' Oxford ed. : Ep. xxxvi. a.d. 250. 

- " Papa " =: /*o/i'. [It may thus be noted what this word meant at 
iRome: nothing more than the fatherly address of all bishops.] 

restrain the wickedness of some, and, by your 
exhortation to repentance, show the legitimate 
way of salvation. That they should have wished 
to hurry to such an extreme as this, we are in- 
deed considerably surprised ; as that with such 
urgency, and at so unseasonable and bitter a 
time, being in so great and excessive a sin, they 
should not so much ask for, as claim, peace for 
themselves ; nay, should say that they already 
have it in heaven. If they have it, why do they 
ask for what they possess ? But if, by the very 
fact that they are asking for it, it is proved that 
they have it not, wherefore do they not accept 
the judgment of those from whom they have 
thought fit to ask for the peace, which they cer- 
tainly have not got ? But if they think that they 
have from any other source the prerogative of 
communion, let them try to compare it with the 
Gospel, that so at length it may abundantly avail 
them, if it is not out of harmony with the Gospel 
law. But on what principle can that give Gos- 
pel communion which seems to be established 
I contrary to Gospel truth ? For since every pre- 
rogative contemplates the privilege of associa- 
tion, precisely on the assumption of its not being 
out of harmony with the will of Him with whom 
it seeks to be associated ; then, because this is 
alien from His will with whom it seeks to be 
associated, it must of necessity lose the indul- 
gence and privilege of the association. 

2. Let them, then, see what it is they are try- 
ing to do in this matter. For if they say that 
the Gospel has established one decree, but the 
martyrs have established another; then they,, 
setting the martyrs at variance with the Gospel, 
will be in danger on both sides. For, on the 
one hand, the majesty of the Gospel will already 
appear shattered and cast down, if it can be 
overcome by the novelty of another decree ; 
and, on the other, the glorious crown of confes- 
sion will be taken from the heads of the martyrs, 
if they be not found to have attained it by the 
observation of that Gospel whence they become 
martyrs ; so that, reasonably, no one should be 
more careful to determine nothing contrary to 
the Gospel, than he who strives to receive the 
name of martyr from the Gospel. We should 
like, besides, to be informed of this : if martyrs 
become martyrs for no other reason than that 
by not sacrificing they may keep the peace of 
the Church even to the shedding of their own 
blood, lest, overcome by the suffering of the 
torture, by losing peace, they might lose salva- 
tion ; on what principle do they think that the sal- 
vation, which if they had sacrificed they thought 
that they should not have, was to be given to 
those who are said to have sacrificed ; although 
they ought to maintain that law in others which 
they themselves appear to have held before their 
own eyes? In which thing we observe that they 

3o8 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

have put forward against their own cause the 
very thing which they thought made for them. 
For if the martyrs thought that peace was to be 
granted to them, why (Hd not they themselves 
grant it? \\'hy did they think that, as they 
themselves say, they were to be referred to the 
bishops? For he who orders a thing to be 
done, can assuredly do that which he orders to 
be done. But, as we understand, nay, as the 
case itself speaks and proclaims, the most holy 
martyrs thought that a proper measure of mod- 
esty and of truth must be observed on both sides. 
For as they were urged by many, in remitting 
them to the bishop they conceived that they 
would consult their own modesty so as to be no 
further disquieted ; and in themselves not hold- 
ing communion with them, they judged that the 
purity of the Gospel law ought to be maintained 
unimpaired. 

3. But of your charity, brother, never desist 
from soothing the spirits of the lapsed and 
affording to the erring the medicine of truth, 
although the temper of the sick is wont to reject 
the kind offices of those who would heal them. 
This wound of the lapsed is as yet fresh, and 
the sore is still rising into a tumour ; and there- 
fore we are certain, that when, in the course of 
more protracted time, that urgency of theirs 
shall have worn out, they will love that very 
delay which refers them to a faithful medicine ; 
if onlv there be not those who arm them for 
their own danger, and, instructing them per- 
versely, demand on their behalf, instead of the 
salutary remedies of delay, the fatal poisons of 
a premature communion. For we do not be- 
lieve, that without the instigation of certain 
persons they would all have dared so petulantly 
to claim peace for themselves. We know the 
faith of the Carthaginian church,' we know her 
training, we know her humility ; whence also we 
have marvelled that we should observe certain 
things somewhat rudely suggested against you 
by letter, although we have often become aware 
of your mutual love and charity, in many illus- 
trations of reciprocal affection of one another. 
It is time, therefore, that they should re])ent of 
their fault, that they should prove their grief for 
their lapse, that they should show modesty, that 
they should manifest humility, that they should 
exhibit some shame, that, by their submission, 
they should appeal to (lod's clemency for them- 
selves, and by due honour for- God's priest 
should draw forth upon themselves the divine 
mercy. How v.astly better would have been the 
letters of these men themselves, if the ])rayers 
of those who stood fast had been aided by their 

' [The church M Rome recognises nation.il churches as sisters. 
The' Roman Catholic " theory was not known, even under the Pa- 
pacy, till the Trent Council, which destroyed " sister churches."] 

' Or, we may read in. 

own himiility ! since that which is asked for is 
more easily obtained, when he for whom it is 
asked is worthy, that what is asked should be 
obtained. 

4. In respect, however, of Privatus of Lam- 
besa, you have acted as you usually do, in de- 
siring to inform us of the matter, as being an 
object of anxiety ; for it becomes us all to watch 
for the body of the whole Church, whose mem- 
bers are scattered through every various prov- 
ince.^ But the deceitfulness of that crafty man 
could not be hid from us even before we had 
your letters ; for previously, when from the com- 
pany of that very wickedness a certain Futurus 
came, a standard-bearer of Privatus, and was 
desirous of fraudulently obtaining letters t'rom 
us, we were neither ignorant who he was, nor 
did he get the letters which he wanted. We 
bid you heartily farewell in the Lord. 

EPISTLE XXX.* 

THE ROMAN CLERGY TO CYPRIAN. 

ARGUMENT. — THE ROMAN CLERGY ENTER I\T(3 
THE MATTERS WHICH THEY HAD SPOKEN OF IN 
THE FOREGOING LETTER, MORE FULLY AND SUB- 
STANTIALLY IN THE PRE^NT ONE ; REPLYING, 
MOREOVER, TO ANOTHER LETTER OF CYPRIAN, 
WHICH IS THOUGHT NOT TO BE EXTANT, AND 
FROM WHICH THEY QUOTE A FEW WORDS. THEY 
THANK CYPRIAN FOR HIS LETIERS SENT TO IHE 
ROMAN CONFESSORS AND MARTYRS.5 

I. To Father^ Cyprian, the presbyters and 
deacons abiding at Rome, greeting. Although 
a mind conscious to itself of uprightness, and 
relying on the vigour of evangelical discipline, 
and made a true witness to itself in the heavenly 
decrees, is accustomed to be satisfied with God 
for its only judge, and neither to seek the praises 
nor to dread the charges of any other, yet those 
are worthy of double praise, who, knowing that 
they owe their conscience to God alone as the 
judge, yet desire that their doings should be ap- 
proved also by their brethren themselves. It is 
no wonder, brother Cyprian, that you should do 
this, who, with your usual modesty and inborn, 
industry, have wished that we should be found 
not so much judges of, as sharers in, your coun- 
sels, so that we might find praise with you in 
your doings while we approve them ; and might 
be able to be fellow-heirs with you in your good 
counsels, because we entirely accord with them. 
In the same way we are all thought to ha\-e 
laboured in that in which we are all regarded as 

3 [On the principles we shall find laid down in Cyprian's Treatise 
on Unity. Also see vol. iv. p. 113.] 

* Oxford ed.: Ep. .\xx. .\.'o. 250. 

5 This letter was written, as were also the others of the Roman 
clergy, during the vacancy of the See, after the death of Fabian. 

* " Pope Cyprian." 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

;09 

allied in the same agreement of censure and dis- 
cipline. 

2. For what is there either in peace so suit- 
able, or in a war of persecution so necessary, as 
to maintain the due severity of the divme vigour? 
Which he who resists, will of necessity wander 
in the unsteady course of affairs, and will be 
tossed hither and thither by the various and un- 
certain storms of things ; and the helm of coun- 
sel being, as it were, wrenched from his hands, 
he will drive the ship of the Church's safety 
among the rocks ; so that it would appear that 
the Church's safety can be no otherwise secured, 
than by repelling any who set themselves against 
it as adverse waves, and by maintaining the ever- 
guarded rule of discipline itself as if it were the 
rudder of safety in the tempest. Nor is it now 
but lately that this counsel has been considered 
by us, nor have these sudden appliances against 
the wicked but recently occurred to us ; but this 
is read of among us as the ancient severity, the 
ancient faith, the ancient discipline,' since the 
apostle would not have published such praise 
concerning us, when he said " that your faith is 
spoken of throughout the whole world," ^ unless 
already from thence that vigour had borrowed 
the roots of faith from those times ; from which 
praise and glory it is a very great crime to have 
become degenerate.^ For it is less disgrace 
never to have attained to the heraldry of praise, 
than to have fallen from the height of praise ; it 
is a smaller crime not to have been honoured 
with a good testimony, than to have lost the 
honour of good testimonies ; it is less discredit 
to have lain without the announcement of vir- 
tues, ignoble without praise, than, disinherited 
of the faith, + to have lost our proper praises. 
For those things which are proclaimed to the 
glory of any one, unless they are maintained by 
anxious and careful pains, swell up into the 
odium of the greatest crime. 5 

3. That we are not saying this dishonestly, 
our former letters have proved, wherein we have 
declared our opinion to you with a very plain 
statement, both against those who had betrayed 
themselves as unfaithful by the unlawful presen- 
tation of wicked certificates, as if they thought 
that they would escape those ensnaring nets of 
the devil ; whereas, not less than if they had 
approached to the wicked altars,^ they were held 
fast by the very fact that they had testified to 
him ; and against those who had used those cer- 
tificates when made, although they had not been 
present when they were made, since they had 
certainly asserted their presence by ordering that 

' [Note Ta apxaia eOrj, as in St. Paul, i Cor. xi. i6.] 
= Rom. i. 8. 

3 [God grant this spirit to the modern Christians in Rome] 
■* [No conception of Roman infaUibihty here.] 
5 [A concession which illustrates the present awful degeneracy 
of this See.] 

f" [i Cor. X. 21, where tables and altars are used as synonymes.] 

they should be so written. For he is not guiltless 
of wickedness who has bidden it to be done ; 
nor is he unconcerned in the crime with whose 
consent it is publicly spoken of, although it was 
not committed by him. And since the whole 
mystery 7 of faith is understood to be contained 
in the confession of the name of Christ, he who 
seeks for deceitful tricks to excuse himself, has 
denied Christ ; and he who wants to appear to 
have satisfied either edicts or laws put forth 
against the Gospel, has obeyed those edicts by 
the very fact by which he wished to appear to 
have obeyed them. Moreover, also, we have de- 
clared our faith and consent against those, too, 
who had polluted their hands and their mouths 
with unlawful sacrifices, whose own minds were 
before polluted ; whence also their very hands 
and mouths were polluted also.^ Far be it from 
the Roman Church to slacken her vigour with so 
profane a facility, and to loosen the nerves of 
her severity by overthrowing the majesty of faith ; 
so that, when the wrecks of your ruined brethren 
are still not only lying, but are falling around, 
remedies of a too hasty kind, and certainly not 
likely to avail, should be afforded for communion ; 
and by a false mercy, new wounds should be im- 
pressed on the old wounds of their transgression ; 
so that even repentance should be snatched from 
these wretched beings, to their greater overthrow. 
For where can the medicine of indulgence profit, 
if even the physician himself, by intercepting 
repentance, makes easy way for new dangers, if 
he only hides the wound, and does not suffer 
the necessary remedy of time to close the scar? 
This is not to cure, but, if we wish to speak the 
truth, to slay.9 

4. Nevertheless, you have letters agreeing with 
our letters from the confessors, whom the dignity 
of their confession has still shut up here in prison, 
and whom, for the Gospel contest, their faith has 
once already crowned in a glorious confession ; 
letters wherein they have maintained the severity 
of the Gospel discipline, and have revoked the 
unlawful petitions, so that they might not be a 
disgrace to the Church. Unless they had done 
this, the ruins of Gospel discipline '° would not 
easily be restored, especially since it was to none 
so fitting to maintain the tenor of evangelical 
vigour unimpaired, and its dignity, as to those 
who had given themselves up to be tortured and 
cut to pieces by raging men on behalf of the 
Gospel, that they might not deservedly forfeit the 
honour of martyrdom, if, on the occasion of mar- 
tyrdom, they had wished to be betrayers of the 
Gospel. For he who does not guard what he 

^ Sacramentum. 

8 [See p. 304, note 8, supra.\ 

9 [The whole system of Roman casuistry, as it now exists in the 
autliorized penitential forms of Liguori, is here condemned.] 

'° [See Alphonsits de Liguori and the Papal Authorization, 
vol. i. p. Axii., ed. Paris, 1852.] 

3IO 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

has, in that condition whereon he possesses it, 
by violating the condition whereon he possesses 
it, loses what he possessed. 

5. In which matter we ought to give you also, 
and we do give you, abundant thanks, that you 
have brightened the darkness of their prison by 
your letters ; that you came to them in whatever 
way you could enter ; that you refreshed their 
minds, robust in their own faith and confession, 
by your addresses and letters : that, following up 
their felicities with worthy praises, you have in- 
flamed them to a much more ardent desire of 
heavenly glory ; that you urged them forward ; 
that you animated, by the power of your dis- 
course, those who, as we believe and hope, will 
be victors by and by ; so that although all may 
seem to come from the faith of those who con- 
fess, and from the divine mercy, yet they seem 
in their martyrdom to have become in some sort 
debtors to you. But once more, to return to 
the point whence our discourse appears to have 
digressed, you shall find subjoined the sort of 
letters that we also sent to Sicily ; although upon 
us is incumbent a greater necessity of delaying 
this affair ; having, since the departure of Fabian 
of most noble memory, had no bishop appointed 
as yet, on account of the difficulties of affairs 
and times, who can arrange all things of this 
kind, and who can take account of those who 
are lapsed, with authority and wisdom. How- 
ever, what you also have yourself declared in so 
important a matter, is satisfactory to us, that the 
peace of the Church must first be maintained ; 
then, that an assembly for counsel being gathered 
together, with bishops, presbyters, deacons, and 
confessors, as well as with the laity who stand 
fast,' we should deal with the case of the lapsed. 
For it seems extremely invidious and burdensome 
to examine into what seems to have been com- 
mitted by many, except by the advice of many ; 
or that one should give a sentence when so great 
a crime is known to have gone forth, and to be 
diffused among so many ; since that cannot be a 
firm decree which shall not ai)pear to have had 
the consent of very many.- Look upon almost 
the whole world devastated, and observe that the 
remains and the ruins of the fallen are lying about 
on every side, and consider that therefore an ex- 
tent of counsel is asked for, large in proportion 
as the crime appears to be widely propagated. 
Let not the medicine be less than the wound, let 
not the remedies be fewer than the deaths, that 
in the same manner as those who fell, fell for 
this reason that they were too incautious with 
a blind rashness, so those who strive to set in 
order this mischief should use every moderation 
in counsels, lest anything done as it ought not 

■ I All-important is this testimony of the Roman clergy to the 
Cyprianic idea of the Church synods. See this vol. suf>fa, p. 283.] 
^ [Note this principle, as a test of synodical decrees.] 

to be, should, as it were, be judged by all of no 
effect. 

6. Thus, with one and the same counsel, with 
the same prayers and tears, let us, who up to the 
present time seem to have escaped the destruc- 
tion of these times of ours, as well as those who 
appear to have fallen into those calamities of the 
time, entreat the divine majesty, and ask peace 
for the Church's name. With mutual prayers, 
let us by turns cherish, guard, arm one another ; 
let us pray for the lapsed, ^ that they may be 
raised up ; let us pray for those who stand, that 
they may not be tempted to such a degree as to 
be destroyed ; let us pray that those who are 
said to have fallen may acknowledge the great- 
ness of their sin, and may perceive that it needs 
no momentary nor over-hasty cure ; let us pray 
that penitence may follow also the effects of the 
pardon of the lapsed ; that so, when they have 
understood their own crime, they may be willing 
to have patience with us for a while, and no 
longer disturb the fluctuating condition of the 
Church, lest they may seem themselves to have 
inflamed an internal persecution for us, and the 
fact of their unquietness be added to the heap 
of their sins. For modesty is very greatly fit- 
ting for them in whose sins it is an immodest 
mind that is condemned. Let them indeed 
knock at the doors, but assuredly let them not 
break them down ; let them present themselves 
at the threshold of the church, but certainly let 
them not leap over it ; let them watch at the 
gates of. the heavenly camp, but let them be 
armed with modesty, by which they perceive 
that they have been deserters ; let them resume 
the trumpet of their prayers, but let them not 
therewith sound a point of war ; let them arm 
themselves indeed with the weapons of modesty, 
and let them resume the shield of faith, which 
they had put oft" by their denial through the fear 
of death, but let those that are even now armed 
believe that they are armed against their foe, the 
devil, not against the Church, which grieves over 
their fall. A modest petition will much avail 
them ; a bashful entreaty, a necessary humility, 
a patience which is not careless. Let them send 
tears as their ambassadors for their sufferings ; 
let groanings, brought forth from their deepest 
heart, discharge the office of advocate, and prove 
their grief and shame for the crime they have 
committed. 

7. Nay, if they shudder at the magnitude of 
the guilt incurred ; if with a truly medicinal 
hand they deal with the deadly wound of their 
heart and conscience and the deep recesses of 
the subtle mischief, let them blush even to ask ; 
except, again, that it is a matter of greater risk 

3 [Probably a quotation from a " bidding prayer ' 
in those times. Elucidation VI.] 

in use at Rome 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

311 

and shame not to have besought the aid of peace. 
But let all this be in the sacrament ; ■ in the law 
of their very entreaty let consideration be had 
for the time ; let it be with downcast entreaty, 
with subdued petition, since he also who is be- 
sought ought to be bent, not provoked ; and as 
the divine clemency ought to be looked to, so 
also ought the divine censure ; and as it is writ- 
ten, " I forgave thee all that debt, because thou 
desiredst me," ^ so it is written, " Whosoever 
shall deny me before men, him will I also deny 
before mv Father and before His angels." ^ For 
God, as He is merciful, so He exacts obedience 
to His precepts, and indeed carefully exacts it ; 
and as He invites to the banquet, so the man 
that hath not a wedding garment He binds hands 
and feet, and casts him out beyond the assembly 
of the saints. He has prepared heaven, but He 
has also prepared hell.-* He has prepared places 
of refreshment, but He has also prepared eter- 
nal punishment. He has prepared the light that 
none can approach unto, but He has also pre- 
pared the vast and eternal gloom of perpetual 
night. 

8. Desiring to maintain the moderation of this 
middle course in these matters, we for a long 
time, and indeed many of us, and, moreover, 
with some of the bishops who are near to us and 
within reach, and some whom, placed afar off, 
the heat of the persecution had driven out from 
other provinces, 5 have thought that nothing new 
was to be done before the appointment of a 
bishop ; but we believe that the care of the 
lapsed must be moderately dealt with, so that, 
in the meantime, whilst the grant of a bishop is 
withheld from us ^ by God, the cause of such as 
are able to bear the delays of postponement 
should be kept in suspense ; but of such as im- 
pending death does not suffer to bear the delay, 
having repented and professed a detestation of 
their deeds with frequency ; if with tears, if with 
groans, if with weeping they have betrayed the 
signs of a grieving and truly penitent spirit, when 
there remains, as far as man can tell, no hope of 
living ; to them, finally, such cautious and care- 
ful help should be ministered, God Himself 
knowing what He will do with such, and in what 
way He will examine the balance of His judg- 
ment ; while we, however, take anxious care that 
neither ungodly men should praise our smooth 
facility, nor truly penitent men accuse our se- 
verity as cruel. We bid you, most blessed and 

' In " Sacramento," sci'L "fidei; " perhaps in a way in har- 
mony with their religious engagement and with ecclesiastical dis- 
ciplme. 

2 Matt, ifviii. 32. 

3 Matt. X. 33; Luke xii. 9. 

* [Note this faithful statement of scriptural doctrine, and no hint 
oi purgatory. ] 

5 [All this illustrates the Treatise on Unity {itt/ra), and proves 
the utter absence of anything peculiar in the See of Rome.] 

<> [How different the language of the cardinal vicar, now, when he 
writes, sede vacante.} 

glorious father, ever heartily farewell in the 
Lord ; and have us in memory.? 

EPISTLE XXXI.8 

TO THE CARTHAGINIAN CLERGY, ABOUT THE 
LETTERS SENT TO ROME, AND RECEIVED 
THENCE. 

ARGUMENT. — THE CARTH.IGINIAN CLERGY ARE 
REQUESTED TO TAKE CARE THAT THE LETTERS 
OF THE ROMAN CLERGY AND CYPRIAN'S ANSWER 
ARE COMMUNICATED. 

Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his 
brethren, greeting. That you, my beloved breth- 
ren, might know what letters I have sent to the 
clergy acting 9 at Rome, and what they have 
replied to me, and, moreover, what Moyses and 
Maximus, the presbyters, and Rufinus and Ni- 
costratus, the deacons, and the rest of the con- 
fessors that with them are kept in prison, replied 
likewise to my letters, I have sent you copies to 
read. Do you take care, with as much dili- 
gence as you can, that what I have written, and 
what they have replied, be made known to our 
brethren. And, moreover, if any bishops from 
foreign places, '° my colleagues, or presbyters, or 
deacons, should be present, or should arrive 
among you, let them hear all these matters from 
you ; and if they wish to transcribe copies of the 
letters and to take them to their own people, let 
them have the opportunity of transcribing them ; 
although I have, moreover, bidden Saturus the 
reader, our brother, to give liberty of copying 
them to any individuals who wish it ; so that, in 
ordering, for the present, the condition of the 
Church in any manner, an agreement, one and 
faithful, may be observed by all. But about the 
other matters which were to be dealt with, as I 
have also written to several of my colleagues, we 
will more fully consider them in a common 
council, when, by the Lord's permission, we 
shall begin to assemble into one place. I bid 
you, brethren, beloved and longed-for, ever 
heartily farewell. Salute the brotherhood. Fare 
ye well. 

EPISTLE XXXII." 

TO THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE, ABOUT THE 
ORDINATION OF AURELIUS AS A READER. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN TELLS THE CLERGY AND 
PEOPLE THAT AURELIUS THE CONFESSOR HAS BEEN 
ORDAINED A READER BY HIM, AND COMMENDS, 
BY THE WAY, THE CONST.A.NCY OF HIS VIRTUE 
AND HIS MIND, WHEREBY HE WAS EVEN DESERV- 
ING OF A HIGHER DEGREE IN THE CHURCH. 

I. Cyprian to the elders and deacons, and to 
the whole people, greeting. In ordinations of 

' [This eloquent and evangelical letter proves that much dross 
had been burned away by the fires of persecution since the episcopate 
of Callistus. It is referred to, p. 309, note 4.] 
* Oxford ed.: Ep. xxxii. a.d. 250. 
9 r Administering jurisdiction sede vacaiUe.\ 
'° [ Illustrating the Treatise on Unity. ^ 
" Oxford ed.: Ep. xxxviti. a.d. 250. 

312 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

the clergy, beloved brethren, we usually consult 
you beforehand, and weigh the character and 
deserts of individuals, with the general advice.' 
But human testimonies must not be waited for 
when the divine approval precedes. Aurelius, 
our brother, an illustrious youth, already ap- 
proved by the Lord, and dear to God, in years 
still very young, but, in the praise of virtue and 
of faith, advanced ; inferior in the natural abili- 
ties of his age, but superior in the honour he has 
merited, — has contended here in a double con- 
flict, having twice confessed and twice been 
glorious in the victory of his confession, both 
when he conquered in the course and was ban- 
ished, and when at length he fought in a severer 
conflict, he was triumphant and victorious in the 
battle of suffering. As often as the adversary 
wished to call forth the servants of God, so often 
this prompt and brave soldier both fought and 
•conquered. It had been a slight matter, pre- 
viously to have engaged under the eyes of a few, 
when he was banished ; he deserved also in the 
forum to engage with a more illustrious virtue ; 
so that, after overcoming the magistrates, he 
might also triumph over the proconsul, and, 
after exile, might vanquish tortures also. Nor 
can I discover what I ought to speak most of in 
him, — the glory of his wounds or the modesty 
■of his character ; that he is distinguished by the 
honour of his virtue, or praiseworthy for the ad- 
mirableness of his modesty. He is both so ex- 
cellent in dignity and so lowly in humility, that 
it seems that he is divinely reserved as one who 
should be an example to the rest for ecclesiasti- 
cal discipline, of the way in which the servants 
of God should in confession conquer by their 
courage, and, after confession, be conspicuous 
f(jr their character. 

2. Such a one, to be estimated not by his 
years but by his deserts, merited higher degrees 
of clerical ordination and larger increase. But, 
in the meantime, I judged it well, that he should 
begin with the office of reading; because noth- 
ing is more suitable for the voice which has con- 
fessed the Lord in a glorious utterance, than to 
sound Him forth in the solemn repetition of the 
divine lessons ; than, after the sublime words 
which spoke out the witness of Christ, to read 
the Gospel of Christ whence martyrs are made ; 
to come to the desk after the scaffold ; there to 
have been conspicuous to the multitude of the 
(Tcntiles, here to be beheld by the brethren ; 
there to have been heard with the wonder of 
the surrounding people, here to be heard with the 
joy of the brotherhood. Know, then, most be- 
loved brethren, that this man has been ordained 
by me and by my colleagues who were then pres- 
ent. 1 know that you will both gladly welcome 

' [Note n^.-xin this principle of the Cyprianic freedom and evan- 
gelical discipline. Acts xv. 22; Matt, xviii. 17.] 

these tidings, and that you desire that as many 
such as possible may be ordained in our church. 
And since joy is always hasty, and gladness can 
bear no delay, he reads on the Lord's day, in 
the meantime, for me ; that is, he has made a 
beginning of peace, by solemnly entering on his 
office of a reader.^ Do you frequently be urgent 
in supplications, and assist my prayers by yours, 
that the Lord's mercy favouring us may soon re- 
store both the priest-^ safe to his people, and the 
martyr for a reader with the priest. I bid you, 
beloved brethren in God the Father, and in 
Jesus Christ, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XXXII I.'* 

TO THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE, ABOUT THE 
ORDINATION OF CELERINUS AS READER. 

ARGUMENT. — THIS LETTER IS ABOUT THE SAME 
IN PURPORT WITH THE PRECEDING, EXCEPT THAT 
HE LARGELY COMMENDS THE CONSTANCY OF 
CELERINUS IN HIS CONFESSION OF THE FAITH. 
MOREOVER, THAT BOTH OF THESE LETTERS 
WERE WRITTEN DURING HIS RETRE.^T, IS SUF- 
FICIENTLY INDICATED BY THE CIRCUMSTANCES 
OF THE CONTEXT. 

1. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, and 
to the whole people, his brethren in the Lord, 
greeting. The divine benefits, beloved brethren, 
should be acknowledged and embraced, where- 
with the Lord has condescended to embellish 
and illustrate His Church in our times by grant- 
ing a respite to His good confessors and His 
glorious martyrs, that they who had grandly con- 
fessed Christ should afterwards adorn Christ's 
clergy in ecclesiastical ministries. Exult, there- 
fore, and rejoice with me on receiving my letter, 
wherein I and my colleagues who were then 
present mention to you Celerinus, our brother, 
glorious alike for his courage and his character, 
as added to our clergy, not by human recom- 
mendation, but by divine condescension ; who, 
when he hesitated to yield to the Church, was 
constrained by her own admonition and exhor- 
tation, in a vision by night, not to refuse our 
persuasions ; and she had more power, and con- 
strained him, because it was not right, nor was 
it becoming, that he should be without ecclesi- 
astical honour, whom the Lord honoured with 
the dignity of heavenly glory.5 

2. This man was the first in the struggle of 
our days ; he was the leader among Christ's 
soldiers ; he, in the midst of the burning begin- 
nings of the persecution, engaged with the very 
chief and author of the disturbance, in conquer- 

2 Aurelius not being able to discharge the functions of his office in 
public, because of the persecution, in the meantime read for Cyprian; 
which is said to be an augury or beginning of future peace. 

J [That is himself. Compare Phil. i. 26.] 

■♦ O.\ford ed.: Ep. xxxix. ad. 250. 

5 [See testimony of Cornelius, in Euseb., H. E., vi. 43.] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

313 

ing with invincible firmness the adversary of his 
own conflict.' He made a way for others to 
conquer ; a victor with no small amount of 
wounds, but triumphant by a miracle, with the 
long-abiding and permanent penalties of a te- 
dious conflict. For nineteen days, shut up in 
the close guard of a dungeon, he was racked 
and in irons ; but although his body was laid in 
chains, his spirit remained free and at liberty. 
His flesh wasted away by the long endurance of 
hunger and thirst ; but God fed his soul, that 
lived in faith and virtue, wath spiritual nourish- 
ments. He lay in punishments, the stronger for 
his punishments ; imprisoned, greater than those 
that imprisoned him ; lying prostrate, but loftier 
than those who stood ; as bound, and firmer 
than the links which bound him ; judged, and 
more sublime than those who judged him ; and 
although his feet were bound on the rack, yet 
the serpent was trodden on and ground down 
and vanquished. In his glorious body shine the 
bright evidences of his wounds ; their mani- 
fest traces show forth, and appear on the man's 
sinews and limbs, worn out with tedious wast- 
ing away.2 Great things are they — marvellous 
things are they — which the brotherhood may 
hear of his virtues and of his praises. And should 
any one appear like Thomas, who has little faith 
in what he hears, the faith of the eyes is not 
"wanting, so that what one hears he may also see. 
In the servant of God, the glory of the wounds 
made the victory ; the memory of the scars pre- 
serves that glory. 

3. Nor is that kind of title to glories in the 
■case of Celerinus, our beloved, an unfamiliar and 
novel thing. He is advancing in the footsteps 
of his kindred ; he rivals his parents and rela- 
tions in equal honours of divine condescension. 
His grandmother, Celerina, was some time since 
crowned with martyrdom. Moreover, his pater- 
nal and maternal uncles, Laurentius and Egna- 
tius, who themselves also were once warring in 
the camps of the world, but were true and spirit- 
ual soldiers of God, casting down the devil by 
the confession of Christ, merited palms and 
crowns from the Lord by their illustrious passion. 
We always offer sacrifices for them,^ as you re- 
member, as often as we celebrate the passions 
and days of the martyrs in the annual commem- 
oration. Nor could he, therefore, be degenerate 
and inferior whom this family dignity and a gen- 
erous nobility provoked, by domestic examples 
of virtue and faith. But if in a worldly family 
it is a matter of heraldry and of praise to be a 
patrician, of how much greater praise and honour 

' [He produced some momentary impression on Decius himself.] 
^ [Gal. vi 17. St. Paul esteemed such .r//^;«aifrt a better ground 

of glorying in the flesh than his circumcision.] 

^ [Memorial thanksgivings. Ussher argues hereby the absence 

of all purgatorial ideas, because martyrs were allowed by all to go at 

unce to bliss. Compare TertulL, vol. iv. p. 67.] 

is it to become of noble rank in the celestial 
heraldry ! I cannot tell whom I should call 
more blessed, — whether those ancestors, for a 
posterity so illustrious, or him, for an origin so 
glorious. So equally between them does the 
divine condescension flow, and pass to and fro, 
that, just as the dignity of their offspring brightens 
their crown, so the sublimity of his ancestry 
illuminates his glory. 

4. When this man, beloved brethren, came to 
us with such condescension of the Lord, illus- 
trious by the testimony and wonder of the very 
man who had persecuted him, what else behoved 
to be done except that he should be placed on 
the pulpit,-* that is, on the tribunal of the Church ; 
that, resting on the loftiness of a higher station, 
and conspicuous to the whole peoj)le for the 
brightness of his honour, he should read the 
precepts and Gospel of the Lord, which he so 
bravely and faithfully follows? Let the voice 
that has confessed the Lord daily be heard in 
those things which the Lord spoke. Let it be 
seen whether there is any further degree to which 
he can be advanced in the Church. There is 
nothing in which a confessor can do more good 
to the brethren than that, while the reading of 
the Gospel is heard from his hps, every one who 
hears should imitate the faith of the reader. He 
should have been associated with Aurelius in 
reading ; with whom, moreover, he was associ- 
ated in the alliance of divine honour; with 
whom, in all the insignia of virtue and praise, 
he had been united. Equal both, and each like 
to the other, in proportion as they were sublime 
in glory, in that proportion they were humble in 
modesty. As they were lifted up by divine con- 
descension, so they were lowly in their own 
peacefulness and tranquillity, and equally afford- 
ing examples to every one of virtues and char- 
acter, and fitted both for conflict and for peace , 
praiseworthy in the former for strength, in the 
latter for modesty. 

5. In such servants the Lord rejoices ; in con- 
fessors of this kind He glories, — whose way and 
conversation is so advantageous to the announce- 
ment of their glory, that it affords to others a 
teaching of discipline. For this purpose Christ 
has willed them to remain long here in the 
Church ; for this purpose He has kept them safe, 
snatched from the midst of death, — a kind of 
resurrection, so to speak, being wrought on their 
behalf; so that, while nothing is seen by the 
brethren loftier in honour, nothing more lowly 
in humility, the way of life of the brotherhood 5 
may accompany these same persons. Know, 
then, that these for the present are appointed 
readers, because it was fitting that the candle 

* [He was called to preach and expound the .Scriptures.] 

s " The brotherhood may follow and imitate these same persons; " 

3^4 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

should be placed in a candlestick, whence it 
may give light to all, and that their glorious 
countenance should be established in a higher 
place, where, beheld by all the surrountling 
jjrotherhood, they may give an incitement of 
glory to the beholders. But know that I have 
already purposed the honour of the presbytery 
for them, that so they may be honoured with the 
same presents as the presbyters, and may share 
the monthly divisions ' in equalled quantities, to 
sit with us hereafter in their advanced and 
strengthened years ; although in nothing can he 
seem to be inferior in the qualities of age who 
has consummated his age by the dignity of his 
glory. I bid you, brethren, beloved and ear- 
nestly longed-for, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XXXIV.^ 

TO THE SAME, ABOUT THE ORDINATION OF 
NUMIDICUS AS PRESBYTER. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN TELIJ? THE CLERGY AND 
PEOPLE THAT NUMIDICUS HAS BEEN ORDAINED 
BY HIM PRESBYTER ; AND BRIEFLY COMMENDS 
HIS WORTH. 

Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, and 
to the whole people, his brethren, very dear and 
longed-for, greeting. That which belongs, dear- 
est brethren, both to the common joy and to the 
greatest glory of our Church ought to be told to 
you ; for you must know that I have been ad- 
monished and instructed by divine condescen- 
sion, that Numidicus the presbyter should be 
appointed in the number of Carthaginian pres- 
l)yters, and should sit with us among the clergy, 
— a man illustrious by the brightest light of con- 
fession, exalted in the honour both of virtue and 
of faith ; who by his exhortation sent before him- 
self an aljundant nvmiber of martyrs, slain by 
stones and by the flames, and who beheld with 
joy his wife abiding by his side, burned (I should 
rather say, preserved) together with the rest. 
He himself, half consumed, overwhelmed with 
stones, and left for dead, — when afterwards his 
daughter, with the anxious consideration of affec- 
tion, sought for the corpse of her father, — was 
found half dead, was drawn out and revived, and 
remained unwillingly ^ from among the comjinn- 
ions whom he himself had sent before, lint the 
reason of his remaining behind, as we see, was 
this : that the Lord might add him to our clergy, 
and might atlorn with glorious jjriests the num- 
ber of our i)resbyters that had been desolated by 
the Ia])se of some.-* .And when God permits, 
he shall be advanced to a larger ofifice in his region, 

' [Sec Bingham, Book v. cap. 6, sec. 3.] 

2 Oxford ed.: Ep. xl. a.d. 250. 

^ Otherwise, " iinconqiiered." 

* [Let lis put ourselves in Cypri.in's place, and share his anxiety 
to fill up the vacant places in h-s list of presbyters at this terrible 
period.] 

when, by the Lord's protection, we have come 
into your presence once more. In the mean- 
time, let what is revealed be done, that we receive 
this gift of God with thanksgiving, hoping from 
the Lord's mercy more ornaments of the same 
kind, that so the strength of His Church being 
renewed. He may make men so meek and lowly 
to flourish in the honour of our assembly. I bid 
you, brethren, very dear and longed-for, ever 
heartily farewell. 

epistle' XXXV. s 

TO THE CLERGY, CONCERNING THE CARE OF 
THE POOR AND STRANGERS. 

ARGUMENT. — HE CAUTIONS THEM AGAINST NEG- 
LECTING THE WIDOWS, THE SICK, OR THE POOR, 
OR STRANGERS. 

Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his 
beloved brethren, greeting. In safety, by God's 
grace, I greet you, beloved brethren, desiring 
soon to come to you, and to satisfy the wish as 
well of myself and you, as of all the brethren. 
It behoves me also, however, to have regard to 
the common peace, and, in the meantime, al- 
though with weariness of spirit, to be absent 
from you, lest my presence should provoke the 
jealousy and violence of the heathens, and I 
should be the cause of breaking the peace,^ who 
ought rather to be careful for the quiet of all. 
When, therefore, you wTite that matters are ar- 
ranged, and that I ought to come, or if the Lord 
should condescend to intimate it to me before, 
then I will come to you. For where could I be 
better or more joyful than there where the Lord 
willed me both to believe and to grow up? I 
request that you will diligently take care of the 
widows, and of the sick, and of all the poor. 
Moreover, you may supply the expenses for 
strangers, if any should be indigent, from my 
own portion, which I have left with Rogatianus, 
our fellow-presbyter ; '' which portion, lest it 
should be all appropriated, I have supplemented 
by sending to the same by Naricus the acolyte 
another share, so that the sufferers may be more 
largely and promptly dealt with. I bid you, 
beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell ; and 
have me in remembrance. Greet your brother- 
hood in my name, and tell them to be mindful 
of me. 

EPISTLE XXXVI.7 

TO THE CLERGY, BIDDING THEM SHOW EVERY 
KINDNESS TO THE CONFESSORS IN PRISON. 

ARGUMENT. HE EXHORTS HIS CLERGY THAT 

EVERY KINDNESS AND CARE SHOULD BE EXER- 
CISED TOWARDS THE CONFESSORS, AS WELL TO- 

-■^ Oxford ed.: Ep. vii. a.d. circa 251. 

*• [Here, as elsewhere, spoken of in this way, in imitation of i Pet. 
V. 1.] 

' Oxford ed.: Ep. xii. a.o. ctrca 2^1. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

315 

WARDS THOSE WHO WERE ALIVE, AS THOSE WHO 
DIED, IN PRISON ; THAT THE DAYS OF THEIR 
DEATH SHOULD BE CAREFULLY NOTED, FOR THE 
PURPOSE OF CELEBRATING THEIR MEMORY ANNUr 
ALLY ; AND, FINALLY, THAT THEY 
FORGET THE POOR ALSO. 

SHOULD NOT 

1. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his 
brethren, greeting. Although I know, dearest 
brethren, that you have frequently been admon- 
ished in my letters to manifest all care for those 
who with a glorious voice have confessed the 
Lord, and are confined in prison ; yet, again and 
again, I urge it upon you, that no consideration 
be wanting to them to whose glory there is noth- 
ing wanting. And I wish that the circumstances 
of the place and of my station would permit 
me to present myself at this time with them ; 
promptly and gladly would I fulfil all the duties 
of love towards our most courageous brethren 
in my appointed ministry. But I beseech you, 
let your diligence be the representative of my 
duty, and do all those things which behove to be 
done in respect of those whom the divine con- 
descension has rendered illustrious in such merits 
of their faith and virtue. Let there be also a 
more zealous watchfulness and care bestowed 
upon the bodies of all those who, although they 
were not tortured in prison, yet depart thence 
by the glorious exit of death. For neither is 
their virtue nor their honour too little for them 
also to be allied with the blessed martyrs. As 
far as they could, they bore whatever they were 
prepared and equipped to bear. He who under 
the eyes of God has offered himself to tortures 
and to death, has suffered whatever he was 
willing to suffer ; for it was not he that was 
wanting to the tortures, but the tortures that were 
wanting to him. " Whosoever shall confess me 
before men, him will I also confess before my 
Father which is in heaven," ' saith the Lord. 
They have confessed Him. " He that endureth 
to the end, the same shall be saved," - saith the 
Lord. They have endured and have carried the 
uncorrupted and unstained merits of their vir- 
tues through, even unto the end. And, again, it 
IS written, " Be thou faithful unto death, and I 
will give thee a crown of life." ^ They have per- 
severed in their faithfulness, and stedfastness, 
and invincibleness, even unto death. When to 
the willingness and the confession of the name 
in prison and in chains is added also the conclu- 
sion of dying, the glory of the martyr is con- 
summated. 

2. Finally, also, take note of their days on 
which they depart, that we may celebrate their 

the memorials of the 

commemoration 

among 

' Malt. x. 32. 
^ Matt. X. 22. 
3 Rev. li. 10. 

martyrs,-* although Tertullus, our most faithful 
and devoted brother, who, in addition to the 
other solicitude and care which he shows to the 
brethren in all service of labour, is not wanting 
besides in that respect in any care of their 
bodies, has written, and does write and intimate 
to me the days, in which our blessed brethren 
in prison pass by the gate of a glorious death to 
their immortality ; and there are celebrated here 
by us oblations and sacrifices for their commemo- 
rations, which things, with the Lord's protection, 
we shall soon celebrate with you. Let your care 
also (as I have already often written) and your 
diligence not be wanting to the poor, — to such, 
I mean, as stand fast in the faith and bravely 
fight with us, and have not left the camp of 
Christ ; to whom, indeed, we should now show 
a greater love and care, in that they are neither 
constrained by poverty nor prostrated by the 
tempest of persecution, but faithfully serve with 
the Lord, and have given an example of faith to 
the other poor. I bid you, brethren beloved, 
and greatly longed-for, ever heartily farewell ; 
and remember me. Greet the brotherhood in 
my name. Fare ye well. 

EPISTLE XXXV II.5 

TO CALDONIUS, HERCULANUS, AND OTHERS, 
ABOUT THE EXCOMMUNICATION OF FELI- 

CISSIMUS. 

ARGUMENT. — FELICISSIMUS, TOGETHER WITH HIS 
COMPANIONS IN SEDITION, IS TO BE RESTRAINED 
FROM THE COMMUNION OF ALL. 

I. Cyprian to Caldonius and Herculanus, his 
colleagues, also to Rogatianus and Numidicus, 
his fellow-presbyters, greeting. I have been 
greatly grieved, dearest brethren, at the receipt 
of your letter, that although I have always pro- 
posed to myself and wished to keep all our 
brotherhood safe, and to preserve the flock un- 
harmed, as charity requires, you tell me now that 
Felicissimus has been attempting many things 
with wickedness and craft ; so that, besides his 
old frauds and plundering, of which I had for- 
merly known a good deal, he has now, moreover, 
tried to divide with the bishop a portion of the 
people ; that is, to separate the sheep from the 
shepherd, and sons from their parents, and to 
scatter the members of Christ. And although I 
sent you as my substitutes to discharge the ne- 
cessities of our brethren, with funds, and if any, 
moreover, wished to exercise their crafts, to 
assist their wishes with such an addition as 
might be sufficient, and at the same time also 
to take note of their ages and conditions and 
deserts, — that I also, upon whom falls the 

■* [The tract of Archbishop Ussher shows what these commemo- 
rations were. See vol. iii. p. 701, and Ehicidation, p. 706; also voL 
i. p. 484.1 

5 Oxford ed. : Ep. xli. a.d. 250. 

3i6 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

charge of knowing all of them thoroughly, might 
promote any that were worthy and humble and 
meek to the offices of the ecclesiastical admin- 
istration ; — he has interfered, and directed that 
no one should be relieved, and that those things 
which I had desired should not be ascertained 
by careful examination ; he has also threatened 
our brethren, who had first approached to be 
relieved, with a wicked exercise of power, and 
with a violent dread that those who desired to 
obey me should not communicate with him in 
death.' 

2. And since, after all these things, neither 
moved by the honour of my station, nor shaken 
by your authority and presence, but of his own 
impulse, disturbing the peace of the brethren, 
he hath rushed forth with many more, and 
asserted himself as a leader of a faction and 
chief of a sedition with a hasty madness — in 
which respect, indeed, I congratulate several of 
the brethren that they have withdrawn from this 
boldness, and have rather chosen to consent 
with you, so that they may remain with the 
Church, their mother, and receive their stipends 
from the bishop who disi)enses them, which, 
indeed, I know for certain, that others also will I 
peaceably do, and will tjuickly withdraw from I 
their rash error, — in the meantime, since Feli- 
cissimus has threatened that they should not 
communicate with him in death- who had 
obeyed us, that is, who communicated with us, 
let him receive the sentence which he first of 
all declared, that he may know that he is ex- 
communicated by us ; inasmuch as he adds to 
his frauds and rapines, which we have known by 
the clearest truth, the crime also of adultery, 
which our brethren, grave men, have declared 
that they have discovered, and have asseverated 
that they will prove ; all which things we shall 
then judicially examine, when, with the Lord's 
l)ermission, we shall asseml)le in one place with 
many of our colleagues. Hut Augendus also, 
who, considering neither his bishop nor his 
Church, has etjually associated himself with him 
in this conspiracy and faction, if he should 
further persevere with him, let him bear the sen- 
tence which that factious and impetuous man has 
])n)voked on himself Moreover, whoever shall 
ally himself with his conspiracy and faction, let 
him know that he shall not communicate in the 
Church with us, since of his own accord he has 
preferred to be separated from the Church. 
Read this letter of mine to our brethren, and also 
transmit it to Carthage to the clergy, the names 
being added of those who have joined them- 
selves with F'elicissimus. I bid you, beloved 

' [So the Oxford ed., p. 91.] Or, " in the mount," " in monte; " 
vide Neandcr, A'. G., i. 252; prob.ibly in some church or congre- 
gation assembled by Felicissimus, on an eminence near or in Car- 
thage. 

-■ Or, " on the mount." 

brethren, ever heartily farewell ; and remember 
me. Fare ye well. 

EPISTLE XXXVIII.J 

THE LETTER OF CALDONIUS, HERCULANUS, 
AND OTHERS, ON THE EXCOMMUNICATION 
OF FELICISSIMUS WITH HIS PEOPLE. 

ARGUMENT. — CALDONIUS, HERCUL.A.NUS, AND 
OTHERS CARRY INTO EFFECT WHAT THE PRE- 
CEDING LETTER HAD BIDDEN THEM. 

Caldonius, with Herculanus and Victor, his 
colleagues, also with Rogatianus and Numidicus, 
presbyters. ■♦ We have rejected Felicissimus and 
Augendus from communion ; also Repostus from 
among the exiles, and Irene of the Blood-stained 
ones ; 5 and Paula the sempstress ; which you 
ought to know from my subscription ; also we 
have rejected Sophronius and Soliassus (budina- 
rius) ^ — himself also one of the exiles. 

EPISTLE XXXIX.7 

TO THE PEOPLE, CONCERNING FIVE SCHIS- 
MATIC PRESBVTERS OF THE FACTION OF 
FELICISSIMUS. 

ARGUMENT. — IN LIKE' MANNER, AS IN THE EPIS- 
TLE BUT ONE BEFORE THIS, CYPRIAN TOLD THE 
CLERGY, SO NOW HE TELLS THE PEOPLE, THAT 
FELICISSIMUS IS TO BE AVOIDED, TOGETHER 
WITH FIVE PRESBYTERS OF HIS FACTION, WHO 
NOT ONLY GRANTED PEACE TO THE LAPSED 
WITHOUT ANY DISCRIMINATION, BUT STIRRED UP 
SEDITION AND SCHISM AGAINST HIMSELF. 

I. Cyprian to the whole people, greeting. 
Althougii, dearest brethren, Virtius,^ a most 
faithful and upright presbyter, and also Rogatia- 
nus and Numidicus, presbyters, confessors, and 
illustrious by the glory of the divine condescen- 
sion, and also the deacons, good men and de- 
voted to the ecclesiastical administration in all 
its duties, with the other ministers, afford you 
the full attention of their presence, and do not 
cease to confirm individuals by their assiduous 
exhortations, and, moreover, to govern, and 
reform the minds of the lapsed by their whole- 
some counsels, yet, as much as I can, I admon- 
ish, and as I can, I visit you with my letters. 
By my letters I say, dearest brethren ; for the 

3 Oxford ed.: Ep. xlii. a.u. 2ji. 

* /'. /. " to Cyprian, greeting." 

5 " Rutih." sell, confessors who had spiU their blood. 

*> " Budinarius." The exact meaning of this word is unknown. 
Some read it as another name: ".Soliassus and Budinarius" The 
<.)xford editor changes it into Burdonarius, meaning .a " carrier on 
muies." Salmasius, in a long note on a passage in the life of Aurelian 
{Hist. Aug., p. 408), proposes biitiiiarius, which he derives from 
fii'Tifi), a cruet for containing vinegar, etc., and which he identities 
with ^oilTTi?, the original of our /'Ottti: Hutinarius would then 
me.an a maker of vessels suitable for containing vinegar, etc. See 
Sophocles' Glossary of Byzantine Greek, s. v. ftoOrxn. [Probablj 
low Latin for a maker of force-meats. Spanish, budin.] 

' Oxford ed.: Ep xliii. a.d. 251. 

8 Some read " Britius" or " Briccius." 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

Z^7 

malignity and treachery of certain of the pres- ' 
byters has accompHshed this, that I should not 
1 )e allowed to come to you before E^aster-day ; i 
since mindful of their conspiracy, and retaining 
that ancient venom against my episcopate, that ! 
is, against your suffrage and (jod's judgment, 
they renew their old attack upon me, and once 
more begin their sacrilegious machinations with 
their accustomed craft. And, indeed, of God's 
])rovidence, neither by our wish nor desire, nay, 
although we were forgiving and silent, they have 
suffered the punishment which they had de- 
served ; so that, not cast out by us, they of their 
own accord have cast themselves out. They 
themselves, before their own conscience, have 
passed sentence on themselves in accordance 
with your suffrages and the divine. These con- 
spirators and evil men of their own accord have 
driven themselves from the Church. 

2. Now it has appeared whence came the fac- 
tion of Felicissimus ; on what root and by what 
strength it stood. These men supplied in former 
times encouragements and exhortations to cer- 
tain confessors, not j to agree with their bishop, 
not to maintain the ecclesiastical discipline with 
faith and quietness according to the Lord's pre- 
cepts, not to keep the glory of their confession 
with an uncorrupt and unspotted conversation. 
And lest it should be too little to have corrupted 
the minds of certain confessors, and to have 
wished to arm a portion of our broken fraternity 
against God's priesthood, they have now turned 
their attention with their envenomed deceitful- 
ness to the ruin of the lapsed, to turn away from 
the healing of their wound the sick and the 
wounded, and those who, by the misfortune of 
their fall, are less fit and less sturdy to take 
stronger counsel ; and invite them, by the false- 
hood of a fallacious peace, to a fatal rashness, 
leaving off prayers and supplications, whereby, 
with long and continual satisfaction, the Lord is 
to be appeased. 

3. But I pray you, brethren, watch against the 
snares of the devil, and, taking care for your 
own salvation, be diligently on your guard against 
this death-bearing fallacy. This is another per- 
secution and another temptation. Those five 
presbyters are none other than the five leaders 
who were lately associated with the magistrates 
in an edict, that they might overthrow our faith, 
that they might turn away the feeble hearts of 
the brethren to their deadly nets by the prevari- 
cation of the truth. Now the same scheme, the 
same overturning, is again brought about by the 
five presbyters, linked with Felicissimus, to the de- 
struction of salvation, that God should not be 
besought, and that he who has denied Christ 
should not appeal for mercy to the same Christ 
whom he had denied ; that after the fault of the 
crime, repentance also should be taken away ; 

and that the Lord should not be appeased 
through bishops and priests, but that the Lord's 
priests being forsaken, a new tradftion of a sacri- 
legious appointment should arise, contrary to the 
evangelical discipline. And although it was once 
arranged as well by us as by the confessors and 
the city ' clergy, and moreover by all the bishops 
appointed either in our province or beyond the 
sea,^ that no novelty should be introduced in 
respect of the case of the lapsed unless we all 
assembled into one place, and our counsels be- 
ing compared, should decide upon a moderate 
sentence, tempered alike with discipline and with 
mercy ; — against this our counsel they have 
rebelled, and all priestly authority and power is 
destroyed by factious conspiracies. 

4. What sufferings do I now endure, dearest 
brethren, that I myself am not able to come to 
you at the present juncture, that I myself cannot 
approach you each one, that I myself cannot 
exhort you according to the teaching of the Lord 
and of His Gospel ! An exile of, now, two years ^ 
was not sufficient, and a mournful separation 
from you, from your countenance, and from your 
sight, — continual grief and lamentation, which, 
in my loneliness without you, breaks me to 
pieces with my constant mourning, nor my tears 
flowing day and night, that there is not even an. 
opportunity for the priest, whom you made with 
so much love and eagerness, to greet you, nor 
to be enfolded in your embraces. This greater 
grief is added to my worn spirit, that in the 
midst of so much solicitude and necessity I am 
not able myself to hasten to you, since, by the 
threats and by the snares of perfidious men, we 
are anxious that on our coming a greater tumult 
may not arise there ; and so, although the bishop 
ought to be careful for peace and tranquillity 
in all things, he himself should seem to have 
afforded material for sedition, and to have em- 
bittered persecution anew. Hence, however, 
beloved brethren, I not only admonish but coun- 
sel you, not rashly to trust to mischievous words, 
nor to yield an easy consent to deceitful say- 
ings, nor to take darkness for light, night for 
day, hunger for food, thirst for drink, poison for 
medicine, death for safety. Let not the age nor 
the authority deceive you of those who, answer- 
ing to the ancient wickedness of the two elders ; * 
as they attempted to corrupt and violate the 
chaste Susannah, s are thus also attempting, with 
their adulterous doctrines, to corrupt the chastity 

' " Clericis urbicis," scil. the " Roman city clergy." [A very 
important example of the concurrent action of the clergy of the me- 
tropolis with those of sister churches.] 

^ " Romae," sczl. " across the sea, at Rome." [The African 
canons forbade appeals to any bishop beyond seas.] 

3 [Concerning this e.\ile, .see p. 270, s!i/>ra.^ 

* ["The elders," i.e., presbyters Our author plays upon the 
word, and compares the corrupt presbyters to their like in the He- 
brew Church, from which this name is borrowed. Exod. iii. 16 and 
passi7».] 

5 Hist, of Susannah. 

i8 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

of the Church and violate the truth of the 
Gospel. 

5. The Lorcl cries aloud, saying. " Hearken 
not unto the words of the false prophets, for the 
visions of their own hearts deceive them. They 
si)eak, but not out of the mouth of the Lord. 
They say to them that despise the word of the 
Lord, Ye shall have peace." ' They are now 
offering peace who have not peace themselves. 
They are promising to bring back and recall the 
lapsed into the Church, who themselves have 
departed from the Church. There is one God, 
and Christ is one, and there is one Church, and 
one chair founded upon the rock by the word 
of the Lord.^ Another altar cannot be consti- 
tuted nor a new priesthood be maoe, except the 
one altar and the one priesthood. Whosoever 
gathereth elsewhere, scattereth. Whatsoever is 
appointed by human madness, so that the divine 
disposition is violated, is adulterous, is impious, 
is sacrilegious. Depart far from the contagion 
of men of this kind, and flee from their words, 
avoiding them as a cancer and a plague, as the 
Lord warns you and says, " They are blind 
leaders of the blind. But if the blind lead the 
blind, they shall both fall into the ditch." ^ They 
intercept your prayers, which you pour forth with 
us to God day and night, to appease Him with a 
righteous satisfaction. They intercept your tears 
with which you wash away the guilt of the sin 
you have committed ; they intercept the peace 
which you truly and faithfully ask from the mercy 
of the Lord ; and they do not know that it is 
written, " And that prophet, or that dreamer of 
dreams, that hath spoken to turn you away from 
the Lord your God, shall be put to death." * 
Let no one, beloved brethren, make you to err 
from tlie wa)'s of the Lord ; let no one snatch 
you, Christians, from the Gospel of Christ ; let 
no one take sons of the Church away from the 
Church ; let them perish alone for themselves 
who have wished to perish ; let them remain 
outside the Church alone who have departed 
from the Church ; let them alone be without 
bishops who have rebelled against bishops ; let 
them alone undergo the penalties of their con- 
spiracies who formerly, according to your votes, 
and now according to God's judgment, have de- 
served to undergo the sentence of their own 
conspiracy and malignity. 

6. The Lord warns us in His Gospel, saying, 
"Ye reject the commandment of God, that ye 
may establish your own tradition." 5 Let them 
who reject the commandment of God and en- 

' ler. xxiii. i6, 17. 

- I See I'rfatise oil IJniiy. Cyprian considers the universal 
episcopate as one cathedra, like " Moses' seat " in the Church of 
tfie Hebrews. This one chair he calls " Peter's chair."j 

J Matt. XV. 14. 

^ I 'cut. xui. 5. 

s Mark vu. 9. 

deavour to keep their own tradition be bravely 
and firmly rejected by you ; let one downfall be 
sufficient for the lapsed ; let no one by his fraud 
hurl down those who wish to rise ; let no one 
cast down more deeply and depress those who 
are down, on whose behalf we pray that they 
may be raised up by God's hand and arm ; let no 
one turn away from all hope of safety those who 
are half alive and entreating that they may re- 
ceive their former health ; let no one extinguish 
every light of the way of salvation to those that 
are wavering in the darkness of their lapse. The 
apostle instructs us, saying, " If any man teach 
otherwise, and consent not to the wholesome 
words of our Lord Jesus Christ and His doctrine, 
he is lifted up with foolishness : from such with- 
draw thyself." ^ i\nd again he says, " Let no 
man deceive you with vain words ; for because 
of these things cometh the wrath of God upon 
the children of disobedience. Be not ye there- 
fore partakers with them." ^ There is no reason 
that you should be deceived with vain words, 
and begin to be partakers of their depravity. 
Depart from such, I entreat you, and acquiesce 
in our counsels, who daily pour out for you con- 
tinual prayers to the Lord, who desire that you 
should be recalled to the Church by the clemency 
of the Lord, who pray for the fullest peace from 
God, first for the mother, and then for her chil- 
dren. Join also your petitions and prayers with 
our prayers and petitions ; mingle your tears with 
our wailings. Avoid the wolves who separate 
the sheep from the shepherd ; avoid the enven- 
omed tongue of the devil, who from the begin- 
ning of the world, always deceitful and lying, lies 
that he may deceive, cajoles that he may injure, 
promises good that he may give evil, promises 
life that he may put to death. Now also his 
words are evident, and his poisons are plain. 
He promises peace, in order that peace may not 
possibly be attained ; he promises salvation, that 
he who has sinned may not come to salvation ; he 
promises a Church, when he so contrives that he 
who believes him may utterly perish apart from 
the Church. 

7. It is now the occasion, dearly beloved 
bretliren, both for you who stand fast to perse- 
vere bravely, and to maintain your glorious 
stability, which you kept in persecution with a 
continual firmness ; and if any of you by the cir- 
cumvention of the adversary have fallen, that in 
this second temptation you should faithfully take 
counsel for your hope and your peace ; and in 
order that the Lord may pardon you, that you 
shoilld not depart from the priests of the Lord, 
since it is written. " And the man that will do 
presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the 

* I Tim. vi. 3-5. 
" Eph. V. 6, 7. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN, 

3ic> 

priest or unto the judge that shall be in those 
days, even that man shall die." ' Of this perse- 
cution this is the latest and final temptation, 
which itself also, by the Lord's protection, shall 
c[uickly pass away ; so that I shall be again pre- 
sented to you after Easter-day with my col- 
leagues, who, being present, we shall be able as 
well to arrange as to complete the matters which 
require to be done according to your judgment 
and to the general advice of all of us as it has 
been decided before.^ But if anybody, refusing 
to repent and to make satisfaction to God, shall 
yield to the party of Felicissimus and his satel- 
Utes, and shall join himself to the heretical fac- 
tion, let him know that he cannot afterwards 
return to the Church and communicate with the 
bishops and the people of Christ. I bid you, 
dearest brethren, ever heartily farewell, and that 
you plead with me in continual prayer that the 
mercy of God may be entreated. 

EPISTLE XL.3 

TO CORNELIUS, ON HIS REFUSAL TO RECEIVE 
NOVATIAN'S ORDINATION." 

ARGUMENT. — THE MESSENGERS SENT BY NO- 
VATIAN TO INTIMATE HIS ORDINATION TO THE 
CHURCH OF CARTHAGE ARE REJECTED BY CYPRIAN. 

I. Cyprian to Cornelius, his brother, greeting. 
There have come to us, beloved brother, sent 
by Novatian, Maximus the presbyter, and Augen- 
dus the deacon, and a certain Machaeus and 
Longinus. But, as we discovered, as well from 
the letters which they brought with them, as from 
their discourse and declaration, that Novatian 
had been made bishop ; disturbed by the wick- 
edness of an unlawful ordination made in oppo- 
sition to the Catholic Church, we considered at 
once that they must be restrained from commun- 
ion with us ; and having, in the meanwhile, 
refuted and repelled the things which they per- 
tinaciously and obstinately endeavoured to assert, 
I and several of my colleagues, who had come 
together to me, were awaiting the arrival of our 
colleagues Caldonius and Fortunatus, whom we 
had lately sent to you as ambassadors, and to 
our fellow-bishops, who were present at your 
ordination, 5 in order that, when they came and 
reported the truth of the matter, the wickedness 
of the adverse party might be quelled through 
them, by greater authority and manifest proof. 
But there came, in addition, Pompeius and 
Stephanus, our colleagues, who themselves also, 

' Peut. xvii. 12. 

2 [riie high official tone with which Cyprian upholds his own au- 
thority is always balanced byeqtial zeal for the presbyters and the 
laity. On which Compare Hooker, Polity, book viii. cap. vi. 8.] 

- Oxford ed.: Ep. .\liv. a.d 251. 

■t 1 Cornelius has succeeded to the cathedra in Rome Here 
■opens a new chapter in the history of Cyprian and of the Roman See. ] 

5 [Ori/Zwij/Zo;; to the episcopate was the term used. Cotisecra- 
tio)i IS the inferior term now usual in Western Christendom. Eluci- 
■datijn VIII.l 

by way of instructing us thereon, put forward 
manifest proofs and testimonies in conformity 
with their gravity and faithfulness, so that it was 
not even necessary that those who had come, as 
sent by Novatian, should be heard any further. 
And when in our solemn assembly^ they burst 
in with invidious abuse and turbulent clamour, 
demanding that the accusations, which they said 
that they brought and would prove, should be 
publicly investigated by us and by the people, 
we said that it was not consistent with our grav- 
ity to suffer the honour of our colleague, who 
had already been chosen and ordained and ap- 
proved by the laudable sentence of many, to be 
called into question any further by the abusive 
voice of rivals. And because it would be a long 
business to collect into a letter the matters in 
which they have been refuted and repressed, 
and in which they have been manifested as hav- 
ing caused heresy by their unlawful attempts, 
you shall hear everything most fully from Primi- 
tivus our co-presbyter,7 when he shall come to 
you. 

2. And lest their raging boldness should ever 
cease, they are striving here also to distract the 
members of Christ into schismatical parties, and 
to cut and tear the one body of the Catholic 
Church, so that, running about from door to door, 
through the houses of many, or from city to city, 
through certain districts, they seek for compan- 
ions in their obstinacy and error to join to them- 
selves in their schism. To whom we have once 
given this reply, nor shall we cease to command 
them to lay aside their pernicious dissensions and 
disputes, and to be aware that it is an impiety 
to forsake their Mother ; and to acknowledge, 
and understand that when a bishop ^ is once made 
and approved by the testimony and judgment of 
his colleagues and the people, another can by no 
means be appointed.*^ Thus, if they consult 
their own interest peaceably and faithfully, if 
they confess themselves to be maintainers of the 
Gospel of Christ, they must return to the Church. 
I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XLI.'° 

TO CORNELIUS, ABOUT CYPRIAN'S APPROVAL 
OF HIS ORDINATION, AND CONCERNING FELI- 
CISSIMUS. 

ARGUMENT. — CWVdk^ EXCUSES HIMSELF FOR NOT 
HAVING WITHOUT HESITATION BELIEVED IN THE 
ORDINATION OF CORNELIUS, UNTIL HE RECEIVED 
THE LETTERS OF HIS COLLEAGUES CALDONIUS 

*> " In statione," " stationary assembly;" these being the Wednes- 
days and Fridays in each week (Marshall). [See vol, i. p. 33.] 

' [Note the free use of this phra.se by Cyprian This also to the 
Bishop of Rome.] 

>> [Nothing of a "universal bishop" is intimated or heard of. 
The election is that of a bishop like any other bishop.] 

■3 [ Here note, that the episcopate of Rome is in no otherwise regU' 
lated or regarded than that of any other See.] 
'° Oxford ed. : Ep. xlv. a.d. 251. 

320 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

AND FORTUNATUS, WHICH FULLY TESTIFIED TO 
ITS LEGITIMACY ; AND INCIDENTALLY REPEATS, 
IN RESPECT OF THE CONTRARY FACFION OF 
THE NOVATIAN PARTY, THAT HE DID NOT IN 
THE VERY FIRST INSTANCE GIVE HIS ADHESION 
TO THAT, RUT R.ATHER TO CORNELIUS, EVEN TO 
THE EXTENT OF REFUSING TO RECEIVE ACCU- 
SATIONS AGAINST HIM. 

I. Cyprian to Cornelius his brother, greeting. 
As was fitting for God's servants, and especially 
for upright and peaceable priests, dearest brother, 
we recently sent our colleagues Caldonius and 
Fortunatus, that they might, not only by the per- 
suasion of our letters, but by their presence and 
the advice of all of you, strive and labour with all 
their power to bring the members of the divided 
body into the unity of the Catholic Church, and 
associate them into the bond of Christian charity. 
But since the obstinate and inflexible pertinacity 
of the adverse party has not only rejected the 
bosom and the embrace of its root and Mother, 
but even, with a discord spreading and reviving 
itseif worse and worse, has appointed a bishop 
for itself, and, contrary to the sacrament once 
delivered of the divine appointment and of Cath- 
olic Unity, has made an adulterous and opposed 
head outside the Church ; having received your 
letters as well as those of our colleagues, at the 
coming also of our colleagues Pompeius and 
Stephanus, good men and very dear to us, by 
whom all these things were undoubtedly alleged 
and proved to us with general gladness,' in con- 
formity with the requirements alike of the sanc- 
tity and the truth of the divine tradition and 
ecclesiastical institution, we have directed our 
letters to you. Moreover, bringing these same 
things under the notice of our several colleagues 
throughout the province, we have bidden also 
that our brethren, with letters from them, be 
directed to you. 

2. This has been done, although our mind and 
intention had been already plainly declared to the 
brethren, and to the whole of the people in this 
place, when, having received letters lately from 
l)oth jjartic;-, we read your letters, and intimated 
your ordination to the episcopate, in the ears of 
every one. Moreover, remembering the com- 
mon honour, and having respect for the sacerdo- 
tal gravity and sanctity, we repudiated those 
things which from the other party had been 
heaped together with bitter virulence into a 
document transmitted to us ; alike considering 
and weighing, that in so great and so religious 
an assembly of brethren, in which God's priests 
were sitting together, and His altar was set, they 
ought neither to be read nor to be heard. For 
those things should not easily be put forward, nor 

carelessly and rudely published, which may move 
a scandal by means of a quarrelsome pen in the 
minds of the hearers, and confuse brethren, who 
are placed far apart and dwelling across the sea, 
with uncertain opinions. Let those beware, who, 
obeying either their own rage or lust, and unmind- 
ful of the divine law and holiness, rejoice to throw 
abroad in the meantime things w-hich they can- 
not prove ; and although they may not be suc- 
cessful in destroying and ruining innocence, are 
satisfied with scattering stains upon it with lying 
reports and false rumours. Assuredly, we should 
exert ourselves, as it is fitting for prelates and 
priests to do, that such things, when they are 
written by any, should be repudiated as far as 
we are concerned. For otherwise, what will 
become of that which we learn and which we 
declare to be laid down in Scripture : " Keep 
thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speak- 
ing guile?" ^ .\nd elsewhere: "Thy mouth 
abounded in malice, and thy tongue embraced 
deceit. Thou satest and spakest against thy 
brother, and slanderedst thine own mother's 
son." 3 Also what the apostle says : " Let no 
corrupt communication proceed from thy mouth, 
but that which is good to the edifying of faith, 
that it may minister grace unto the hearers." + 
Further, we show what the right course of con- 
duct to pursue is,5 if, when such things are writ- 
ten by the calumnious temerity of some, we do 
not allow them to be read among us ; and there- 
fore, dearest brother, when such letters came to 
me against you, even though they were the let- 
ters of your co-presbyter sitting with you,^ as 
they breathed a tone of religious simplicity, and 
did not echo with any barkings of curses and re- 
vilings, I ordered them to be read to the clergy 
and the people. 

3. But in desiring letters from our colleagues,7 
who were present at your ordination at that i)lace,. 
we did not forget the ancient usage, nor did we 
seek for any novelty. For it was sufficient for 
you to announce yourself by letters ^^ to have been 
made bishop, unless there had been a dissenting 
faction on the other side, who by their slander- 
ous and calumnious fabrications disturbed the 
minds and perplexed the hearts of our colleagues, 
as well as of several of the brethren. To set this 
matter at rest, we judged it necessary to obtain 
thence the strong and decided authority of our 
colleagues who wrote to us ; and they, declaring 

» The Oxiorcl edition follows some authorities in reading this 
" sadness " rather than " gladness." 

^ Ps. xxxiv. 13. 

3 Ps. 1. 19, 20. 

* Eph. iv. 29. _^ 

5 Lit. : " that these things ought to be done.' 

*> The co-presbyter here spoken of is Novatian. The Oxford text 
reads, " When such writings came to me concerning yoii and your 
co-presbyters sitting with you, as had the true ring of rehgious sim- 
pHcity in them." There is a variety of readings. \'Bm think of a 
modern " Pope " thus addressed about a " co-presbyter."] 

7 [Cyprian, however, respectfully demands the canonical evi- 
dences from his brother Cornelius.] 

8 ) Every bishop thus announced his ordination.] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

321 

the testimony of their letters to be fully deserved 
by your character, and life, and teaching, have 
deprived even your rivals, and those who delight 
either in novelty or evil, of every scruple of doubt 
or of difference ; and, according to our advice 
v/eighed in wholesome reason, the minds of the 
brethren tossing about in this sea have sincerely 
and decidedly approved your priesthood. For 
this, my brother, we especially both labour after, 
and ought to labour after, to be careful to main- 
tain as much as we can the unity delivered by 
the Lord, and through His apostles to us their 
successors, and, as far as in us lies, to gather into 
the Church the dispersed and wandering sheep 
which the wilful faction and heretical temptation 
of some is separating from their Mother ; those 
only being left outside, who by their obstinacy 
and madness have persisted, and have been un- 
vv'illing to return to us ; who themselves will have 
to give an account to the Lord of the dissension 
and separation made by them, and of the Church 
that they have forsaken. 

4. But, so far as pertains to the cause of cer- 
tain presbyters here, and of Felicissimus, that you 
may know what has been done here, our col- 
leagues have sent you letters subscribed by their 
own hand, that you may learn, when you have 
heard the parties, from their letters what they 
have thought and what they have pronounced. 
But you will do better,' brother, if you will also 
bid copies of the letters which I had sent lately 
by our colleagues Caldonius and Fortunatus to 
you, to be read for the common satisfaction, 
which I had written concerning the same Felicis- 
simus and his presbytery to the clergy there, and 
also to the people, to be read to the brethren 
there ; declaring your ordination, and the course 
of the whole transaction, that so as well there as 
here the brotherhood may be informed of all 
things by us. Moreover, I have here transmitted 
also copies of the same by Mettius the sub-dea- 
con, sent by me, and by Nicephorus the acolyte, 
I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XLII.^ 

TO THE SAME, ON HIS HAVING SENT LETTERS 
TO THE CONFESSORS WHOM NOVATIAN HAD 
SEDUCED. 

ARGUMENT. — THE ARGUMENT OF THIS LETTER 
SUFFICIENTLY APPEARS FROM THE TITLE? IT IS 
MANIFEST THAT THIS LETTER AND THE FOL- 
LOWING WERE SENT BY ONE MESSENGER. 

Cyprian to Cornelius his brother, greeting. I 
have thought it both obligatory on me, and 
necessary for you, dearest brother, to write a 

' [Had such instructions proceeded from the Roman See to Cyp- 
rian, what inferences would have been manufactured out of them by 
the mediaeval writers.] 

- Oxford ed. : Ep. xlvii. a.d. 251. 

short letter to the confessors who are there with 
you, and, seduced by the obstinacy and de- 
pravity of Novatian and Novatus,^ have departed 
from the Church ; in which letter I might induce 
them, for the sake of our mutual affection, to 
return to their Mother, that is, to the Catholic 
Church. This letter I have first of all entrusted 
to you by Mettius the sub-deacon for your perusal, 
lest any one should pretend that I had written 
other\vise than according to the contents of my 
letter. I have, moreover, charged the same 
Mettius sent by me to you, that he should be 
guided by your decision ; and if you should 
think that this letter should be given to the 
confessors, then that he should deliver it. I bid 
you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XLIIL-^ 

TO THE ROMAN CONFESSORS, THAT THEY 
SHOULD RETURN TO UNITY. 

ARGUMENT. — HE EXHORTS THE ROMAN CON- 
FESSORS WHO HAD BEEN SEDUCED BY THE FACTION 
OF NOVATIAN AND NOVATUS, TO RETURN TO UNITY, 

Cyprian to Maximus and Nicostratus, and the 
other confessors, greeting. As you have fre- 
quently gathered from my letters, beloved, what 
honour I have ever observed in my mode of 
speaking for your confession, and what love for 
the associated brotherhood ; believe, I entreat 
you, and acquiesce in these my letters, wherein 
I both write and with simplicity and fidelity 
consult for you, and for your doings, and for 
your praise. For it weighs me down and sad- 
dens me, and the intolerable grief of a smitten, 
almost prostrate, spirit seizes me, when I find 
that you there, contrary to ecclesiastical order, 
contrary to evangelical law, contrary to the unity 
of the Catholic institution, had consented that 
another bishop should be made.5 That is what 
is neither right nor allowable to be done ; that 
another church should be set up ; that Christ's 
members should be torn asunder \ that the one 
mind and body of the Lord's flock should be 
lacerated by a divided emulation. I entreat that 
in you, at all events, that unlawful rending of our 
brotherhood may not continue ; but remembering 
both your confession and the divine tradition, you 
may return to the Mother whence you have gone 
forth ; whence you came to the glory of confession 
with the rejoicing of the same Mother. And 
think not that you are thus maintaining the Gos- 
pel of Christ when you separate yourselves from 
the flock of Christ, and from His peace and 

3 [On the frequent confusion of these names see Wordsworth, 

Hippol., p. 109.] 

•• Oxford ed.: Ep. xlvi. a.d. 251. 

5 [" Another bishop should be made." What would have been the 
outcry of the whole Church, and what the language of Cyprian, had 
any idea entered their minds that the case was that of the Divine 
Oracle of Christendom, the Vicar of Christ, the Centre of Unity, the 
Infallible, etc.] 

322 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

concord ; since it is more fitting for glorious 
and good soldiers to sit down within their own 
camp, and so placed, within to manage and pro- 
vide for those things which are to be dealt with 
in common. For as our unanimity and concord 
ought by no means to be divided, and because 
we cannot forsake the Church and go outside 
her to come to you, we beg and entreat you 
with what exhortations we can, rather to return 
to the Church your Mother, and to our brother- 
hood. I bid you, dearest brethren, ever heartily 
farewell. 

EPISTLE XLIV.' 

TO CORNELIUS, CONCERNING POLYCARP THE 
ADRUMETINE. 

ARGUMENT. — HE EXCUSES HIMSELF IN THIS LET- 
TER FOR WHAT HAD OCCURRED, IN THAT, DURING 
THE TLME THAT HE WAS AT ADRUMETUM, LET- 
TERS HAD BEEN SENT THENCE BV THE CLERGY 
OF POLYCARP, NOT TO CORNELIUS, BUT TO THE 
• ROMAN CLERGY, NOIAVITHSTANDING THAT PRE- 
VIOUSLY POLYCARP HIMSELF HAD WRITTEN 
RATHER TO CORNELIUS. IT APPEARS TOL"ERABLY 
PL.AIN FROM THE CONTEXT ITSELF THAT THIS 
WAS WRITTEN AFTER THE PRECEDING ONES. 

1. Cyprian to Cornelius his brother, greeting. 
I have read your letters, dearest brother, which 
you sent by Primitivus our co-presbyter, in which 
I perceived that you were annoyed that, whereas 
letters from the Adrumetine colony in the name 
of Polycarp were directed to you, yet after Lib- 
eralis and I came to that place, letters began to 
be directed thence to the presbyters and to the 
deacons. 

2. In respect of which I wish you to know, 
and certainly to believe, that it was done from 
no levity or contempt. But when several of our 
colleagues who had assembled into one place 
had determined that, while our co-bishops Cal- 
donius and Fortunatus were sent as ambassadors 
to you, all things should be in the meantime sus- 
pended as they were, until the same colleagues 
of ours, having reduced matters there to peace, 
or, having discovered their truth, should return 
to us ; the presbyters and deacons abiding in the 
Adrumetine colony ; in the absence of our co- 
bishop Polycarp, were ignorant of what had been 
decided in common by us. Hut when we came 
before them, and our purpose was understood, 
they themselves also began to Observe what the 
others did, so that the agreement of the churches 
abiding there was in no respect broken. 

3. Some persons, however, sometimes disturb 
men's minds and spirits by their words, in that 
they relate things other\vise than is the truth. 
For we, who furnish every person who sails hence 
with a plan that they may sail without any of- 
fence, know that we have exhorted them to 

' O.\forjcd.: Ep. .\lviii. a.d. 251. 

acknowledge and hold the root and matrix of 
the Catholic Church.^ But since our province is 
wide-spread, and has Numidia and Mauritania 
attached to it ; lest a schism made in the city 
should confuse the minds of the absent with un- 
certain opinions, we decided — having obtained 
by means of the bishops the truth of the matter, 
and having got a greater authority for the proof 
of your ordination, and so at length every scru- 
ple being got rid of from the breast of every 
one — that letters should be sent you by all who 
were placed anywhere in the province ; as in 
fact is done, that so the whole of our colleagues 
might decidedly approve of and maintain both 
you and your communion, that is as well to the 
unity of the Catholic Church as to its charity. 
That all which has by God's direction come to 
pass, and that our design has under Providence 
been forwarded, we rejoice. 

4. For thus as well the truth as the dignity of 
your episcopate has been established in the most 
open light, and with the most manifest and sub- 
stantial approval ; so that from the replies of our 
colleagues, who have thence written to us, and 
from the account and from the testimonies of 
our co-bishops Pompeius, and Stephanus, and 
Caldonius, and Fortunatus, both the needful 
cause and the right order, and moreover the 
glorious innocence, of your ordination might be 
known by all. That we, with the rest of our col- 
leagues, may steadily and firmly administer this 
office, and keep it in the concordant unanimity of 
the Catholic Church, the divine condescension 
will accomplish ; so that the Lord who conde- 
scends to elect and appoint for Himself priests 
in His Church, may protect them also when 
elected and appointed by His good-will and 
help, inspiring them to govern, and supplying 
both vigour for restraining the contumacy of the 
wicked, and gentleness for cherishing the peni- 
tence of the lapsed. I bid you, dearest brother, 
ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XLV.3 

CORNELIUS TO CYPRIAN, ON THE RETURN OF 
THE CONFESSORS TO UNITY. 

ARGUMENT. — CORNELIUS INFORMS CYPRIAN OF 
THE SOLEMN RETURN OF THE CONFESSORS TO 
THE CHURCH, AND DESCRIBES IT. 

I. Cornelius to Cyprian his brother, greeting. 
In proportion to the solicitude and anxiety that 
we sustained in respect of those confessors who 
had been circumvented and almost deceived 
and alienated from the Church by the craft and 
malice of that wily and subtle man,-» was the joy 

= [This reftrs to the episcopate. They had taken letters only to 
" presbyters and deacons." Or to Christ the root, and the Church the 
womb or matrix. See infra. Letter xlviii. p. 325. 

J Oxford ed.: Ep. xlix a.d. 251. 

< Novatian. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

323 

with which we were affected, and the thanks 
which we gave to Almighty God and to our Lord 
Christ, when they, acknowledging their error, 
and perceiving the poisoned cunning of the ma- 
lignant man, as if of a serpent, came back, as 
they with one heart profess, with singleness of 
will to the Church from which they had gone 
forth. And first, indeed, our brethren of ap- 
proved faith, loving peace and desiring unity, 
announced that the swelling pride of these men 
was already soothed ; ' yet there was no fitting 
assurance to induce us easily to believe that they 
were thoroughly changed. But afterwards, Ur- 
banus and Sidonius the confessors came to our 
presbyters, affirming that Maximus the confessor 
and presbyter, equally with themselves, desired 
to return into the Church ; but since many things 
had preceded this which they, had contrived, of 
which you also have been made aware from our 
co-bishops and from my letters, so that faith 
could not hastily be reposed in them, we deter- 
mined to hear from their own mouth and con- 
fession those things which they had sent by the 
messengers. And when they came, and were 
required by the presbyters to give an account of 
what they had done, and were charged with hav- 
ing very lately repeatedly sent letters full of 
calumnies and reproaches, in their name, through 
all the churches, and had disturbed nearly all 
the churches ; they affirmed that they had been 
deceived, and that they had not known what was 
in those letters ; that only through being misled 
they had also committed schismitical acts, and 
been the authors of heresy, so that they suffered 
hands to be imposed on him as if upon a 
bishop.' And when these and other matters 
had been charged upon them, they entreated 
that they might be done away and altogether 
discharged from memory. 

2. The whole of this transaction therefore 
being brought before me, I decided that the 
presbytery 3 should be brought together; (for 
there were present five bishops, who were also 
present to-day ;) so that by well-grounded coun- 
sel it might be determined with the consent of 
all what ought to be observed in respect of their 
persons. And that you may know the feeling 
of all, and the advice of each one, I decided 
also to bring to your knowledge our various 
opinions, which you will read subjoined. When 
these things were done, Maximus, Urbanus, Sido- 
nius, and several brethren who had joined them- 
selves to them, came to the presbytery, desiring 
■with earnest prayers that what had been done 
before might fall into oblivion, and no mention 
might be made of it ; and promising that hence- 

' Baluz. : " Announced the swelling pride of some, the softened 
temper of others." 

* [i e., for episcopal ordination and consecration.] 
•3 [See Ep. xvii. p. 296, iupra.\ 

forth, as though nothing had been either done 
or said, all things on both sides being forgiven, 
they would now exhibit to God a heart clean 
and pure, following the evangelical word which 
says, " Blessed are the pure in heart, for they 
shall see God." * What remained was, that the 
people should be informed of all this proceeding, 
that they might see those very men established 
in the Church whom they had long seen and 
mourned as wanderers and scattered. Their 
will being known, a great concourse of the broth- 
erhood was assembled. There was one voice 
from all, giving thanks to God ; all were express- 
ing the joy of their heart by tears, embracing 
them as if they had this day been set free from 
the penalty of the dungeon. And to quote their 
very own words, — " We," they say, " know that 
Cornelius is bishop of the most holy Catholic 
Church elected by Almighty God, and by Christ 
our Lord. We confess our error ; we have suf- 
fered imposture ; we were deceived by captious 
perfidy and loquacity. For although we seemed, 
as it were, to have held a kind of communion 
with a man who was a schismatic and a heretic, 
yet our mind was always sincere in the Church. 
For we are not ignorant that there is one God ; 
that there is one Christ the Lord whom we have 
confessed, and one Holy Spirit ; and that in the 
Catholic Church there ought to be one bishop." 5 
Were we not rightly induced by that confession 
of theirs,^ to allow that what they had confessed 
before the power of the world they might approve 
when established in the Church? Wherefore we 
bade Maximus the presbyter to take his own 
place ; the rest we received with great approba- 
tion of the people. But we remitted all things 
to Almighty God, in whose power all things are 
reserved. 

3. These things therefore, brother, written to 
you in the same hour, at the same moment, we 
have transmitted ; and I have sent away at once 
Nicephorus the aoolyte, hastening to descend to 
embarkation, that so, no delay being made, you 
might, as if you had been present among that 
clergy and in that assembly of people, give thanks 
to Almighty God and to Christ our Lord. But 
we believe — nay, we confide in it for certain — 
that the others also who have been ranged in 
this error will shortly return into the Church when 
they see their leaders acting with us. I think, 
brother, that you ought to send these letters also 
to the other churches, that all may know that 
the craft and prevarication of this schismatic and 
heretic are from day to day being reduced to 
nothing. Farewell, dearest brother. 

■♦ Matt..*r. 8. 

s [Episcopatus unus est. One bishop, i e., one episcopate. See 
the note, Oxford translation of this letter, p. io8, and Cyprian's 
theory of the same in his Treatise on l/nt'ty.] 

*> Baluzius reads, without authority : " Who would not be moved 
by that profession of theirs," etc. 

324 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

EPISTLE XLVL' 

CYPRIAN'S ANSWER TO CORNELIUS, CONGRAT- 
ULATING HIM ON THE RETURN OF THE CON- 
FESSORS FROM SCHISM. 

ARGUMENT. — HE CONGRATULATES HIM ON THE 
RETURN OF THE CONFESSORS TO THE CHURCH, 
AND REMINDS HIM HOW MUCH THAT RETURN 
BENEFITS THE CATHOLIC CHURCH. 

I. Cyprian to Cornelius his brother, greeting. 
I profess that I both ha\'e rendered and do ren- 
der the greatest thanks without ceasing, dearest 
brother, to God the Father Almighty, and to 
His Christ the Lord and our God and Saviour, 
that the Church is thus divinely protected, and 
its unity and holiness is not constantly nor 
altogether corrupted by the obstinacy of perfidy 
and heretical wickedness. For we have read 
your letter, and have exultingly received the 
greatest joy from the fulfilment of our common 
desire ; to wit, that Maximus the presbyter, and 
Urbanus, the confessors, with Sidonius and Ma- 
carius, have re-entered into the Catholic Church, 
that is, that they have laid aside their error, and 
given up their schismadcal, nay, their heretical 
madness, and have sought again in the sound- 
ness of faith the home of unity and tnith ; that 
whence they had gone forth to glory, thither they 
might gloriously return ; and that they who had 
confessed Christ should not afterwards desert 
the camp of Christ, and that they might not 
tempt the faith of their charity and unity,' who 
had not been overcome in strength and courage. 
Behold the safe and unspotted integrity of their 
praise ; behold the uncorrupted and substantial 
dignity of these confessors, that they have de- 
parted from the deserters and fugitives, that they 
have left the betrayers of the faith, and the im- 
pugners of the Catholic Church. With reason 
(lid both the people and the brotherhood receive 
them when they returned, as you write, with the 
greatest joy ; since in the glory of confessors 
who had maintained their glory, and returned to 
unity, there is none who does not reckon himself 
a partner and a sharer. 

2. We can estimate the joy of that day ^ from 
our own feelings. For if, in this place, the whole 
number of the brethren rejoiced at your letter 
which you sent concerning their confession, and 
received this tidings of common rejoicing with 
the greatest alacrity, what must have been the 
joy there when the matter itself, and the general 
gladness, was carried on under the eyes of all ? 
For since the Lord in His Gospel says that there 
is the highest "joy in heaven over one sinner 

' Oxford ed.: Ep. li. a.d. 251. 

2 Some read, " might not be tried by the faith of their charity and 
unity." 

3 Some old editions read, " of that thing." 

that repenteth," ■• how much greater is the joy k\ 
earth, no less than in heaven, over confessors 
who return with their glory and with praise to 
the Church of God, and make a way of return- 
ing for others by the faith and approval of their 
example ? For this error had led away certain 
of our brethren, so that they thought they were 
following the communion of confessors. When 
this error was removed, light was infused into 
the breasts of all, and the Catholic Church ha& , 
been shown to be one, and to be able neither-/ 
to be cut nor divided. Nor can any one now 
be easily deceived by the talkative words of a 
raging schismatic, since it has been proved that 
good and glorious soldiers of Christ could not 
long be detained without the Church by the de- 
ceitfulness and perfidy of others. I bid you, 
dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XLVII.5 

CORNELIUS TO CYPRIAN, CONCERNING THE 
FACTION OF NOVATIAN WITH HIS PARTY'. 

ARGUMENT. — CORNELIUS GIVES CYPRIAN AN AC- 
COUNT OF THE FACTION OF NOVATIAN.^ 

Cornelius to Cyprian his brother, greeting. 
That nothing might be wanting to the future 
punishment of this wretched man, when cast 
down by the powers of God, (on the expulsion by 
you of Maximus, and Longinus, and Machgeus ;) 
he has risen again ; and, as I intimated in my 
former letter which I sent to you by Augendus 
the confessor, I think that Nicostratus, and No- 
vatus, and Evaristus, and Primus, and Diony- 
sius, have already come thither. Therefore let 
care be taken that it be made known to all 
our co-bishops and brethren, that Nicostratus is 
accused of many crimes, and that not only has 
he committed frauds and plunders on his secu- 
lar patroness, whose affairs he managed ; but, 
moreover (which is reserved to him for a per- 
petual punishment), he has abstracted no small 
deposits of the Church ; that Evaristus has been 
the author of a schism ; and that Zetus has been 
appointed bishop in his room, and his successor 
to the people over whom he had previously pre- 
sided. But he contrived greater and worse things 
by his malice and insatiable wickedness than 
those which he was then always practising among 
his own people ; so that you may know what 
kind of leaders and protectors that schismatic 
and heretic constantly had joined to his side. 
I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily fare- 
well. 

■♦ Luke XV. 7. 

5 Oxford ed.: Ep. 1. a.d. 251. 

<> [Oxford trans., p. in. Ehicidation VHI. and p. 319, supra.\ 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

325 

EPISTLE XLVIIL' 

CYPRIAN'S ANSWER TO CORNELIUS, CONCERN- 
ING THE CRIMES OF NOVATUS. 

ARGUMENT. — HE PRAISES CORNELIUS, THAT HE 
HAD GIVEN HIM TIMELY WARNING, SEEING THAT 
THE DAY AFTER THE GUILTY FACTION HAD 
COME TO HIM HE HAD RECEIVED CORNELIUS' 
LETIER. THEN HE DESCRIBES AT LENGTH 
MOVATUS' CRIMES, AND THE SCHISM THAT HAD 
BEFORE BEEN STIRRED UP BY HIM IN AFRICA. 

I. Cyprian to Cornelius his brother, greeting. 
You have acted, dearest brother, both with dili- 
gence and love, in sending us in haste Nicephorus 
the acolyte, who both told us the glorious glad- 
ness concerning the return of the confessors, and 
most fully instructed us against the new and 
mischievous devices of Novatian and Novatus 
for attacking the Church of Christ. For whereas 
on the day before, that mischievous faction of 
heretical wickedness had arrived here, itself al- 
ready lost and ready to ruin others who should 
join it, on the day after, Nicephorus arrived with 
your letter. From which we both learnt our- 
selves, and have begun to teach and to instruct 
others, that Evaristus from being a bishop has 
now not remained even a layman ; but, banished 
from the see and from the people, and an exile 
from the Church of Christ, he roves about far 
and wide through other provinces, and, himself 
having made shipwreck of truth and faith, is pre- 
paring for some who are like him, as fearful 
shipwrecks. Moreover, that Nicostratus, having 
lost the diaconate of sacred administrations, be- 
cause he had abstracted the Church's money by 
a sacrilegious fraud, and disowned the deposits 
of the widows and orphans, did not wish so much 
to come into Africa as to escape thither from the 
•city, from the consciousness of his rapines and 
his frightful crimes. And now a deserter and a 
fugitive from the Church, as if to have changed 
the clime were to change the man, he goes on 
to boast and announce himself a confessor, al- 
though he can no longer either be or be called a 
confessor of Christ who has denied Christ's 
Church. For when the Apostle Paul says, " For 
this cause shall a man leave his father and 
mother, and shall cleave unto his wife ; and they 
two shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery ; 
but I speak concerning Christ and the Church ; "^ 
— when, I say, the blessed apostle says this, and 
with his sacred voice testifies to the unity of 
Christ with the Church, cleaving to one another 
with indivisible links, how can he be with Christ 
who is not with the spouse of Christ, and in His 
Church ? ^ Or how does he assume to himself 
the charge of ruling or governing the Church, 

who has spoiled and wronged the Church of 
Christ? 

2. For about Novatus there need have been 
nothing told by you to us, since Novatus ought 
rather to have been shown by us to you, as always 
greedy of novelty, raging with the rapacity of 
an insatiable avarice, inflated with the arrogance 
and stupidity of swelling pride ; always known 
with bad repute to the bishops there ; always 
condemned by the voice of all the priests as a 
heretic and a perfidious man ; always inquisitive, 
that he may betray : he flatters for the purpose 
of deceiving, never faithful that he may love ; a 
torch and fire to blow up the flames of sedition ; 
a whirlwind and tempest to make shipwrecks of 
the faith ; the foe of quiet, the adversary of tran- 
quillity, the enemy of peace. Finally, when 
Novatus withdrew thence from among you, that 
is, when the storm and the whirlwind departed, 
calm arose there in part, and the glorious and 
good confessors who by his instigation had de- 
parted from the Church, after he retired from 
the city, returned to the Church. This is the 
same Novatus who first sowed among us the 
flames of discord and schism ; who separated 
some of the brethren here from the bishop ; 
who, in the persecution itself, was to our peo- 
ple, as it were, another persecution, to overthrow 
the minds of the brethren. He it is who, with- 
out my leave or knowledge, of his own fac- 
tiousness and ambition appointed his attendant 
Felicissimus a deacon, and with his own tempest 
sailing also to Rome to overthrow the Church, 
endeavoured to do similar and equal things there, 
forcibly separating a part of the people from the 
clergy, and dividing the concord of the fraternity 
that was firmly knit together and mutually loving 
one another. Since Rome from her greatness 
plainly ought to take precedence of Carthage, 
he there committed still greater and graver 
crimes.^ He who in the one place had made a 
deacon contrary to the Church, in the other 
made a bishop. Nor let any one be surprised 
at this in such men. The wicked are always 
madly carried away by their own furious pas- 
sions ; and after they have committed crimes, 
they are agitated by the very consciousness of a 
depraved mind. Neither can those remain in 
God's Church, who have not maintained its 
divine and ecclesiastical discipline, either in the 
conversation of their life or the peace of their 
character. Orphans despoiled by him, widows 
defrauded, moneys moreover of the Church with- 
held, exact from him those penalties which we 
behold inflicted in his madness. His father also 
died of hunger in the street, and afterwards even 

A.D. 251. 

' Oxford ed.: Ep. lii. 

- Eph. V. 31, 32. 

5 ^See letter xliv. p. 322, siipra.\ 

•» [" From her greatness: " he does not even mention her dignity 
as the one and only apostolic see of Western Christendom And this 
is the case in subsequent action of the Great Councils. Rome, 
though not t/i^o<A, was yet a " root and iitatrix."] 

z^^ 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

in death was not buried by him. The womb of 
his wife was smitten by a blow of his heel ; and 
in the miscarriage that soon followed, the off- 
spring was brought forth, the fruit of a father's 
murder. And now does he dare to condemn 
the hands of those who sacrifice, when he him- 
self is more guilty in his feet, by which the son, 
who was about to be born, was slain ? 

3. He long ago feared this consciousness of 
crime. On account of this he regarded it as 
certain that he would not only be turned out of 
the presbytery, but restrained from communion ; 
and by the urgency of the brethren, the day of 
investigation was coming on, on which his cause 
was to be dealt with before us, if the persecution 
had not prevented. He, welcoming this, with a 
sort of desire of escaping and evading condem- 
nation, committed all these crimes, and wrought 
all this stir ; so that he who was to be ejected 
?nd excluded from the Church, anticipated the 
judgment of the JDriests by a voluntary departure, 
as if to have anticipated the sentence were to 
have escaped the punishment. 

4. But in respect to the other brethren, over 
whom we grieve that they were circumvented 
by him, we labour that they may avoid the mis- 
chievous neighbourhood of the crafty impostor, 
that they may escape the deadly nets of his 
solicitations, that they may once more seek the 
Church from which he deserved by divine author- 
ity to be expelled. Such indeed, with the Lord's 
help, we trust may return by His mercy, for one 
cannot perish unless it is plain that he must 
perish, since the Lord in His Gospel says, " Every 
planting which my heavenly Father hath not 
planted shall be rooted up." ' He alone who 
has not been planted in the precepts and warn- 
ings of God the Father, can depart from the 
Church : he alone can forsake the bishops ^ and 
abide in his madness with schismatics and here- 
tics. But the mercy of God the Father, and the 
indulgence of Christ our Lord, and our own 
patience, will unite the rest with us. I bid you, 
dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE XLIX.3 

MA.XIMUS AND. THE OTHER CONFESSORS TO 
CVPRIAN, ABOUT THEIR RETURN FROM 
SCHISM. 

ARGUMENT. — THEY INFORM CVPRIAN THAT THEY 
HAD RETURNED TO THE CHURCH. 

Maximus, Urbanus, Sidonius, and Macharius, 
to Cyi)rian their brother, greeting. We are 
certain, dearest brother, that you also rejoice 
together with us with equal earnestness, that we 
ha.ving taken advice, and especially, considering 

* Matt. XV. ^^■^. 

* 1 Cyprian's Idea of unity as expounded in his treatise, in/ra.'\ 

* Oxfurd cU. : £p. liii. A.u. 251. 

the interests and the peace of the Church, having 
passed by all other matters, and reserved them 
to God's judgment, have made peace with Cor- 
nelius our bishop, as well as with the whole 
clergy.^ You ought most certainly to know from 
these our letters that this was done with the joy 
of the whole Church, and even with the forward 
affection of the brethren. We pray, dearest 
brother, that for many years you may fare well. 

EPISTLE L.5 

FROM CYPRIAN TO THE CONFESSORS, CON- 
GRATULATING THEM ON THEIR RETURN 
FROM SCHISM. 

ARGUMENT. — CVPRIAN CONGRATULATES THE RO- 
MAN CONFESSORS ON THEIR RETURN INTO THE 
CHURCH, AND REPLIES TO THEIR LETTERS. 

1. Cyprian to Maximus the presbyter, also to 
Urbanus, and Sidonius, and Macharius, his breth- 
ren, greeting. When I read your letters, dearest 
brethren, that you wrote to me about your re- 
turn, and about the peace of the Church, and 
the brotherly restoration, I confess that I was as 
greatly overjoyed as I had before been overjoyed 
when I learnt the glory of your confession, and 
thankfully received tidings of the heavenly and 
spiritual renown of your warfare. For this, more- 
over, is another confession of your faith and 
praise ; to confess that the Church is one, and 
not to become a sharer in other men's error, or 
rather wickedness ; to seek anew the same camp 
whence you went forth, whence with tiie most 
vigorous strength you leapt forth to wage the 
battle and to subdue the adversary. For the 
trophies from the battle-field ought to be brought 
back thither whence the arms for the field had 
been received, lest the Church of Christ should 
not retain those same glorious warriors whom 
Christ had furnished for glory. Now, however, 
you have kept in the peace of the Lord the fit- 
ting tenor of your faith and the law of undivided 
charity and concord, and have given by your 
walk an example of love and peace to others ; 
so that the truth of the Church, and the unity of 
the Gospel mystery which is held by us, are also 
linked together by your consent and bond ; and 
confessors of Christ do not become the leaders 
of error, after having stood forth as praiseworthy 
originators of virtue and honour. 

2. Let others consider how much they may 
congratulate you, or how much each one may 
glory for himself : I confess that I congratulate 
you more, and I more boast of you to others, in 
respect of this your peaceful return and charity. 
For you ought in simplicity to hear what was 

* [The language of this letter clearly demonstrates the primitive 
condition of the Roman clergy and their bishop, and their entire un- 
consciousness of any exceptional position in their estate or relations 
to other churches. " Our bishop " — not Urbis et Orbis papa.\ 

i Oxford ed.: Ep. liv. a.u. 252- 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

327 

i'n my heart. I .grieved vehemently, and I was 
greatly afflicted, that I could not hold commun- 
ion with those whom once I had begun to love. 
After the schismatical and heretical error laid 
hold of you, on your going forth from prison, 
it seemed as if your glory had been left in the 
dungeon. For there the dignity of your name 
seemed to have stayed behind when the soldiers 
of Christ did not return from the prison to the 
Church, although they had gone into the prison 
with the praise and congratulations of the Church. 

3. For although there seem to be tares in 
the Church, yet neither our faith nor our charity 
ought to be hindered, so that because we s;se 
that there are tares in the Church we ourselves 
should withdraw from the Church : we ought 
only to labour that we may be wheat, that when 
the wheat shall begin to be gathered into the 
Lord's barns, we may receive fruit for our labour 
and work. The apostle in his epistle says, " In 
a great house there are not only vessels of gold 
and silver, but also of wood and of earth, and 
some to honour and some to dishonour." ' Let 
us strive, dearest brethren, and labour as much 
as we possibly can, that we may be vessels of 
gold or silver. But to the Lord alone it is granted 
to break the vessels of earth, to whom also is 
given the rod of iron. The servant cannot be 
greater than his lord, nor may any one claim to 
himself what the Father has given to the Son 
alone, so as to think that he can take the fan for 
winnowing and purging the threshing-floor, or 
can separate by human judgment all the tares 
from the wheat. That is a proud obstinacy and 
a sacrilegious presumption which a depraved 
madness assumes to itself. And while some are 
always assuming to themselves more dominion 
than meek justice demands, they perish from the 
Church ; and while they insolendy extol them- 
selves, blinded by their own swelling, they lose 
the light of truth. For which reason we also, 
keeping moderation, and considering the Lord's 
balances, and thinking of the love and mercy of 
God the Father, have long and carefully pondered 
with ourselves, and have weighed what was to be 
done with due moderation. 

4. All which matters you can look into thor- 
oughly, if you will read the tracts ^ which I have 
lately read here, and have, for the sake of our 
mutual love, transmitted to you also for you to 
read ; wherein there is neither wanting for the 
lapsed, censure which may rebuke, nor medicine 
which may heal. Moreover, my feeble ability 
has expressed as well as it could the unity of the 
Catholic Church.5 Which treatise I now more 

' 2 Tim. ii. 20. 

'^ [\.e.. Oil Unity zx\i Oil the Lapsers.'\ 

3 " Of the Unity of the Church." [And note, Cyprian innocently 
leaches these Roman clergy the principles of Catholic tmity, without 
an idea tliat they were in a position to know much more on the subject 
than ihey could be taught by a bishop in Africa.] 

and more trust will be pleasing to you, since you 
now read it in such a way as both to approve 
and love it ; inasmuch as what we have written 
in words you fulfil in deeds, when you return to 
the Church in the unity of charity and peace. 
I bid you, dearest brethren, and greatly longed- 
for, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LI.-* 

TO ANTONIANUS ABOUT CORNELIUS AND 

NOVATIAN. 

ARGUMENT. — WHEN ANTONIANUS, HAVING RE- 
CEIVED LETTERS FROM NOVATIAN, HAD BEGUN TO 
BE DISPOSED IN HIS MIND TOWARDS HIS PARTY, 
CYPRIAN CONFIRMS HIM IN HIS FORMER OPINION, 
NAMELY, THAT OF CONTINUING TO HOLD COM- 
MUNION WITH HIS BISHOP AND SO WITH THE 
CATHOLIC CHURCH. HE EXCUSES HIMSELF FOR 
HIS OWN CHANGE OF OPINION IN RESPECT OF" 
THE LAPSED, AND AT THE END HE EXPLAINS 
WHEREIN CONSISTS THE NOVATIAN HERESY. 5 

1. Cyprian to Antonianus his brother, greet- 
ing. I received your first letters, dearest broth- 
er, firmly maintaining the concord of the priestly 
college, and adhering to the Catholic Church, in 
which you intimated that you did not hold com- 
munion with Novatian, but followed my advice, 
and held one common agreement with Cornelius 
our co-bishop.^ You wrote, moreover, for me 
to transmit a copy of those same letters to Cor- 
nelius our colleague, so that he might lay aside 
all anxiety, and know at once that you held com- 
munion with him, that is, with the Catholic 
Church. 7 

2. But subsequently there arrived other letters 
of yours sent by Quintus our co-presbyter, in 
which I observed that your mind, influenced by 
the letters of Novatian, had begun to waver. 
For although previously you had settled your 
opinion and consent firmly, you desired in these 
letters that I should write to you once more what 
heresy Novatian had introduced, or on what 
grounds Cornelius holds communion with Trophi- 
mus and the sacrificers. In which matters, in- 
deed, if you are anxiously careful, from solicitude 
for the faith, and are diligently seeking out the 
truth of a doubtful matter, the hesitating anxiety 
of a mind undecided in the fear of God, is not 
to be blamed. 

3. Yet, as I see that after the first opinion 
expressed in your letter, you have been disturbed 

* Oxford ed.: Ep.lv. ad. 252. . ,- 

5 That he may induce him to this, he narrates the history of the 
whole disturbance between Cornelius and Novatian, and explains that 
Cornelias was an excellent man, and legitimately elected ; while Nova- 
tian was guilty of many crimes, and had obtained an unlawful elec- 
tion. , . 

* [" Our co-bishop," — language which reflects our author s idea 
of Catholic communion. See his Treatise on Unity ; also p 329.} 

' [ His idea is, that to be in communion with the whole Church, one 
must be in fellowship with his own lawfur.bishop.] 

128 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

-subsequently by letters of Novatian, I assert this 
first of all, dearest brother, that grave men, and 
men who are once established upon the strong 
rock with solid firmness, are not moved, I say 
not with a light air, but even with a wind or a 
tempest, lest their mind, changeable and uncer- 
tain, be frecjuently agitated hither and thither by 
various opinions, as by gusts of wind rushing on 
them, and so be turned from its purpose with 
some reproach of levity. That the letters of 
Novatian may not do this with you, nor with any 
one, I will set before you, as you have desired, 
my brother, an account of the matter in few 
words. And first of all indeed, as you also seem 
troubled about what I too have done, I must 
clear my own person and cause in your eyes, lest 
any should think that I have lightly withdrawn 
from my purpose, and while at first and at the 
•commencement I maintained evangelical vigour, 
yet subsequently I seem to have turned my mind 
from discipline and from its former severity of 
judgment, so as to think that those who have 
stained their conscience with certificates, or have 
offered abominable sacrifices, are to have peace 
made easy to them. Both of which things have 
been done by me, not without long-balanced and 
pondered reasons. 

4. For when the battle was still going on, and 
the struggle of a glorious contest was raging in 
the persecution, the courage of the soldiers had 
to be excited with every exhortation, and with 
full urgency, and especially the minds of the 
lapsed had to be roused with the trumpet call, 
as it were, of my voice, that they might pursue 
the way of repentance, not only with prayers and 
lamentations ; but, since an opportunity was 
given of repeating the struggle and of regaining 
salvation, that they might be reproved by my 
voice, and stimulated rather to the ardour of 
confession and the glory of martyrdom. Finally, 
when the presbyters and tleacons had written to 
me about some persons, that they were without 
moderation and were eagerly pressing forward 
to receive communion ; replying to them in my 
letter which is still in existence,' then I added 
also this : " If these are so excessively eager, they 
have what they re(iuire in their own power, the 
time itself providing for them more than they 
ask : the battle is still being carried on, and the 
struggle is daily celebrated : if they truly and 
substantially repent of what they have done, and 
the ardour of their faith prevails, he wiio cannot 
be delayed may be crowned." But I put off 
deciding what was to be arranged about the case 
of the lapsed, so that when quiet and tranquillity 
should be granted, and the divine indulgence 
should allow the bishops to assemble into one 
place, then the advice gathered from the com- 

' Ep. xiii. 2. 

parison of all opinions being communicated and 
weighed, we might determine what was necessary 
to be done. But if any one, before our coun- 
cil,^ and before the opinion decided upon by the 
advice of all, should rashly wish to communicate 
with the lapsed, he himself should be withheld 
from communion. 

5. And this also I wrote very fully to Rome, 
to the clergy who were then still acting without 
a bishop, and to the confessors, Maximus the 
presbyter, and the rest who were then shut up 
in i^rison, but are now in the Church, joined with 
Cornelius. You may know that I wrote this 
from their reply, for in their letter they wrote 
thus : " However, what you have yourself also 
declared in so important a matter is satisfactory 
to us, that the peace of the Church must first 
be maintained ; then, that an assembly for coun- 
sel being gathered together, with bishop, pres- 
byters, deacons, and confessors, as well as with 
the laity who stand fast, we should deal with the 
case of the lapsed." ^ it was added also — 
Novatian then writing, and reciting with his own 
voice what he had written, and the presbyter 
Moyses, then still a confessor, but now a martyT, 
subscribing — that peace ought to be granted to 
the lapsed who were sick and at the point of 
departure. Which letter was sent throughout 
the whole world, and was brought to the knowl- 
edge of all the churches and all the brethren. ■♦ 

6. According, however, to what had been 
before decided, when the persecution was qui- 
eted, and opportunity of meeting was afforded ; 
a large number of bishoi)s, whom their faith and 
the divine protection had preserved in sound- 
ness and safety, we met together ; and the 
divine Scriptures being brought forward 5 on both 
sides, we balanced the decision witli wholesome 
moderation, so that neither should hope of com- 
munion and peace be wholly denied to the 
lapsed, lest they should fail still more through 
desperation, and, because the Church was closed 
to them, should, like the world, live as heathens ; 
nor yet, on the other hand, should the censure 
of the Gospel be relaxed, so that they might 
rashly rush to communion, but that repentance 
should be long protracted, and the ]:)aternal 
clemency be sorrowfully besought, and the cases, 
and the wishes, and the necessities of individu- 
als be examined into, according to what is con- 
tained in a little book, which I trust has come 
to you, in which the several heads of our decis- 
ions are collected. And lest perchance the 
number of bishops in Africa should seem un- 
satisfactory, we also wrote to Rome, to Cornelius 
our colleague, concerning this thing, who himself 

' [The provincial council, clearly.] 
' Ep. XXX. p. 310. 

* [On principles of Catholic unity expounded in his Treatise.] 
S [Note this appeal to Scripture always, as enthroned infalli- 
bility, insuring the presence of the Spirit of counsel.] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

329 

also holding a council with very many bishops, 
concurred in the same opinion as we had held, 
with equal gravity and wholesome moderation.' 

7. Concerning which it has now become 
necessary to write to you, that you may know 
that I have done nothing lightly, but, according 
to what I had before comprised in my letters, 
had put off everything to the common determi- 
nation of our council, and indeed communicated 
with no one of the lapsed as yet, so long as 
there still was an opening by which the lapsed 
might receive not only pardon, but also a crown. 
Yet afterwards, as the agreement of our college, 
and the advantage of gathering the fraternity 
together and of healing their wound required, I 
submitted to the necessity of the times, and 
thought that the safety of the many must be pro- 
vided for ; and I do not now recede from these 
things which have once been determined in our 
council by common agreement, although many 
things are ventilated by the voices of many, 
and lies against God's priests uttered from the 
devil's mouth, and tossed about everywhere, to 
the rupture of the concord of Catholic unity. 
But it behoves you, as a good brother and a 
fellow-priest like-minded, not easily to receive 
what malignants and apostates may say, but care- 
fully to weigh what your colleagues, modest and 
grave men, may do, from an investigation of 
our life and teaching. 
/^ 8. I come now, dearest brother, to the char- 
acter of Cornelius our colleague, that with us 
you may more justly know Cornelius, not from 
the lies of malignants and detractors, but from 
the judgment of the Lord God, who made him 
a bishop, and from the testimony of his fellow- 
bishops, the whole number of whom has agreed 
with an absolute unanimity throughout the whole 
world. For, — a thing which with laudable an- 
nouncement commends our dearest Cornelius to 
God and Christ, and to His Church, and also 
to all his fellow-priests, — he was not one who on 
a sudden attained to the episcopate ; but, pro- 
moted through all the ecclesiastical offices, and 
having often deserved well of the Lord in divine 
administrations, he ascended by all the grades 
of religious service to the lofty summit of the 
Priesthood. Then, moreover, he did not either 
ask for the episcopate itself, nor did he wish it ; 
nor, as others do when the swelling of their 
arrogance and pride inflates them, did he seize 
upon it ; ^ but quiet otherwise, and meek, and 
such as those are accustomed to be who are 
chosen of God to this office, having regard to 
the modesty of his virgin continency, and the 
humility of his inborn and guarded veneration, 
he did not, as some do, use force to be made a 

' [A most important reference to the true position of the Roman 
See. Elucidation IX.] 

- iNovatian and his hke.] 

bishop, but he himself suffered compulsion, so 
as to be forced to receive the episcopal office. 
And he was made bishop by very many of our 
colleagues who were then present in the city of 
Rome, who sent to us letters concerning his or- 
dination, honourable and laudatory, and remark- 
able for their testimony in announcement of him. 
Moreover, Cornelius was made bishop by the\ 
judgment of God and of His Christ, by the tes- ^ 
timony of almost all the clergy, by the suffrage 
of the people who were then present, and by the / 
assembly of ancient priests and good men, when ' 
no one had been made so before him, when the 
place of Fabian, that is, when the place of Peter ^ \\ 
and the degree of the sacerdotal throne was' 
vacant ; which being occupied by the will of 
God, and established by the consent of all of 
us, whosoever now wishes to become a bishop, 
must needs be made from without ; and he can- 
not have the ordination of the Church who does 
not hold the unity of the Church. Whoever he 
may be, although greatly boasting about himself, 
and claiming very much for himself, he is pro- 
fane, he is an alien, he is without. And as after 
the first there cannot be a second, whosoever is 
made after one who ought to be alone, is not 
second to him, but is in fact none at all. 

9, Then afterwards, when he had undertaken 
the episcopate, not obtained by solicitation nor 
by extortion, but by the will of God who makes 
priests ; what a virtue there was in the very 
undertaking of his episcopate, what strength 
of mind, what firmness of faith, — a thing that 
we ought with simple heart both thoroughly to 
look into and to praise, — that he intrepidly sate 
at Rome in the sacerdotal chair at that time 
when a tyrant, odious to God's priests, was 
threatening things that can, and cannot be spoken, 
inasmuch as he would much more patiently and 
tolerantly hear that a rival prince was raised up 
against himself, than that a priest of God was 
established at Rome, Is not this man, dearest 
brother, to be commended with the highest 
testimony of virtue and faith ? Is not he to be 
esteemed among the glorious confessors and 
martyrs, who for so long a time sate awaiting the 
manglers of his body and the avengers of a fero- 
cious tyrant, who, when Cornelius resisted their 
deadly edicts, and trampled on their threats 
and sufferings and tortures by the vigour of his 
faith, would either rush upon him with the sword, 
or crucify him, or scorch him with fire, or rend 
his bowels and his limbs with some unheard-of 
kind of punishment? Even though the majesty 
and goodness of the protecting Lord guarded, 
when made, the priest whom He willed to be 
made ; yet Cornelius, in what pertains to his 
devotion and fear, suffered^ whatever he could 

3 [On the death of Fabian, see Ep. iii. p. 281 ; sufferings of 
Cornelius (inference), p. 303; Decius, p. 299. J 

330 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

suffer, and conquered the t>Tant first of all by 
his priestly office, who was afterwards conquered 
in arms and in war. 

10. But in respect to certain discreditable 
and malignant things that are bandied about 
ciDnceming him, I would not have you wonder, 
when you know that this is always the work of 
the devil, to wound God's servants with lies, and 
"to defame a glorious name by false opinions, so 
that they who are bright in the light of their 
own conscience may be tarnished by the reports 
of others Moreover, you are to know that our 
colleagues have investigated, and have certainly 
discovered that he has been blemished with no 
stain of a certificate, as some intimate ; neither 
has he mingled in sacrilegious communion with 
the bishops who have sacrificed, but has merely 
associated with us those whose cause had been 
heard, and wliose innocence was approved. 

11. For with respect to Trophimus also, of 
whom you wished titlings to be written to you, 
the case is not as the report and the falsehood 
of malignant people had conveyed it to you. 
For, as our predecessors often did, our dearest 
brother, in bringing together the brethren, yielded 
to necessity : and since a very large part of the 
people had withdrawn with Trophimus, now 
when Trophimus returned to the Church, and 
atoned for, and with the penitence of prayer 
confessed, his former error, and with perfect 
humility and satisfaction recalled the brother- 
hood whom he had lately taken away, his prayers 
were heard ; and not only Trophimus, but a 
very great number of brethren who had been 
with Trophimus, were admitted into the Church 
of the Loid, who would not all have returned to 
the Church unless they had come in Trophimus' 
company. Therefore the matter being consid- 
ered there with several colleagues,' Trophimus 
was received, for whom the return of the breth- 
ren and salvation restored to many made atone- 
ment Yet Trophimus was admitt-ed in such a 
manner as only to communicate as a layman, 
not, according to the information given to you 
by the letters of the malignants, in such a way 
as to assume the place of a priest. 

12. But, moreover, in respect of what has 
been told you, that Cornelius communicates 
everywhere with those who have sacrificed, this 
intelligence has also arisen from the false reports 
of the apostates. For neither can they praise 
us who depart from us, nor ought we to expect 
to please them, who, while they displease us, 
and revolt against the Church, violently persist 
in soliciting brethren away from the Church. 
Wherefore, dearest brethren, do not with facility 
either hear or believe whatever is currently ru- 
moured against Cornelius and about me. 

' INot by a mere decision, but by consent o( " coIIeagues."J 

13. For if any are seized with sicknesses, help 
is given to them in danger, as it has been de- 
cided. Yet after they have been assisted, and 
peace has been granted to them in their danger, 
they cannot be suffocated by us, or destroyed,^ 
or by our force or hands urged on to the result 
of death ; as if, because peace is granted to the 
dying, it were necessary that those who have 
received peace should die ; although the token 
of divine love and paternal lenity appears more 
in this way, that they, who in peace given to- 
them receive the pledge of life, are naoreover 
here bound to life by the peace they have re- 
ceived. And therefore, if with peace received, 
a reprieve is given by God, no one ought to 
complain of the priests for this, when once it 
has been decided that brethren are to be aided 
in peril. Neither must you tliink, dearest 
brother, as some do, that those who receive cer- 
tificates are to be put on a par with those who 
have sacrificed ; since even among those who 
have sacrificed, the condition and the case are 
frequently different. For we must not place 
on a level one who has at once leapt forward, 
with good-will to the abominable sacrifice, and 
one who, after long struggle and resistance, has 
reached that fatal result under compulsion ; one 
who has betrayed both himself and all his con- 
nections, and one who, himself approaching the 
trial in behalf of all, has protected his wife and 
his children, and his whole family, by himself 
undergoing the danger ; one who has compelled 
his inmates or friends to the crime, and one who 
has spared inmates and servants, and has even 
received many brethren who were departing to 
banishment and flight, into his house and hospi- 
tality ; showing and offering to the Lord many 
souls living and safe to entreat for a single 
wounded one. 

14. Since, then, there is much difference 3. be- 
tween those who have sacrificed, what a want of 
mercy it is, and how bitter is the hardship, to 
associate those who have received certificates, 
with those who have sacrificed, when he by whom 
the certificate has been received may say, " I 
had previously read, and had been made aware 
by the discourse of the bishop,'' that we must 
not sacrifice to idols, that the servant of God 
ought not to worship images; and therefore, in 
order that I might not do this which was not 
lawful, when the opportunity of receiving a cer- 
tificate was offered, which itself also I should 
not have received, unless the opportunity had 
been put before me, I either went or charged 
some other person going to the magistrate, to 
say that I am a Christian, that I am not allowed 

* Oppriml. 

3 Mode 22.] 

* {Episropo tractanit. See Oxford trans., a valuable note, p 
124; also Vincent, Conitnoti., cap. 28.] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN 

331 

to sacrifice, that I cannot come to the devil's 
altars, and that I pay a price for this purpose, 
that I rnay not do what is not lawful for me to 
do." Now, however, even he who is stained 
with having received a certificate, — after he has 
learnt from our admonitions that he ought not 
even to have done this, and that although his 
hand is pure, and no contact of deadly food has 
polluted his lips, yet his conscience is neverthe- 
less polluted, weeps when he hears us, and la- 
ments, and is now admonished of the thing 
wherein he has sinned, and having been deceived, 
not so much by guilt as by error, bears witness 
that for another time he is instructed and pre- 
pared. 

15. If we reject the repentance of those who 
have some confidence in a conscience that may 
be tolerated ; at once with their wife, with their 
children, whom they had kept safe, they ase 
hurried by the devil's invitation into heresy or 
schism ; and it will b« attributed to us in the 
day of judgment, that we have not cared for the 
wounded sheep,' and that on account of a single 
wounded one we have lost many sound ones. 
And whereas the Lord left the ninety and nine 
that were whole, and sought after the one wan- 
tiering and weary, and Himself carried it, when 
found, upon His shoulders, we not only do not 
seek the lapsed, but even drive them away when 
they come to us ; and while false prophets are 
not ceasing to lay waste and tear Christ's flock, 
we give an opportunity to dogs and wolves, so 
that those whom a hateful persecution has not 
destroyed, we ruin by our hardness and inhu- 
manity. And what will become, dearest brother, 
of wliat the apostle says : " I please all men in 
all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the 
profit of many, that they may be saved. Be ye 
followers of me, as I also am of Christ." ^ And 
again : " To the weak I became as weak, that 
I might gain the weak."^ And again : "Whether 
one member suffer, all the members suffer with 
it ; or one member rejoice, all the members re- 
joice with it." ^ 

./-1 6. The principle of the philosophers and 
stoics is different, dearest brother, who say that 
all sins are equal, and that a grave man ought 
not easily to be moved. But there is a wide 
difference between Christians and philosophers. 
And when the apostle says, " Beware, lest any 
man spoil you through philosophy and vain de- 
ceit," 5 we are to avoid those things which do 
not come from God's clemency, but are begot- 
ten of the presumption of a too rigid philosophy. 
Concerning Moses, moreover, we find it said in 
the Scriptures, " Now the man Moses was very 

■ JEzek. xxxiv. 4.] 
^ I Cor. X. 33, xi. 1. 
' 1 Cor. ix. 22. 
* I Cor. xii. 26. 
5 Col. ij. 8. 

C 

meek ; "^ and the Lord in His Gospel says, "Be 
ye merciful, as your Father also had mercy upon 
you ; " 7 and again, " They that be whole need 
not a physician, but they that are sick." '^ What 
medical skill can he exercise who says, " I cure 
the sound only, who have no need of a physi- 
cian?" We ought to give our assistance, our 
healing art, to those who are wounded ; neither 
let us think them dead, but rather let us regard 
them as lying half alive, whom we see to have 
been wounded in the fatal persecution, and who, 
if they had been altogether dead, would never 
from the same men become afterwards both con- 
fessors and martyrs.9 

17. But since in them there is that, which, by 
subsequent repentance, maybe strengthened into 
faith ; and by repentance strength is armed to 
virtue, which could not be armed if one should 
fall away through despair ; if, hardly and cruelly 
separated from the Church, he should turn him- 
self to Gentile ways and to worldly works, or, if 
rejected by the Church, he should pass over to 
heretics and schismatics ; where, although he 
should afterwards be put to death on account of 
the name, still, being placed outside the Church, 
and divided from unity and from charity, he 
could not in his death be crowned. And there- 
fore it was decided, dearest brother, the case of 
each individual having been examined into, that 
the receivers of certificates should in the mean- 
time be admitted, that those who had sacrificed 
should be assisted at death, because there is 
no confession in the place of the departed,'" nor 
can any one be constrained by us to repentance, 
if the fruit of repentance be taken away. If the 
battle should come first, strengthened by us, he 
will be found ready armed for the battle ; but if 
sickness should press hard upon him before the 
battle, he departs with the consolation of peace 
and communion. 

18. Moreover, we do not prejudge when the 
Lord is to be the judge ; save that if He shall 
find the repentance of the sinners full and sound, 
He will then ratify what shall have been here 
determined by us. If, however, any one should 
delude us with the pretence of repentance, God, 
who is not mocked, and who looks into man's 
heart, will judge of those things which we have 
imperfectly looked into, and the Lord will amend 
the sentence of His servants ; while yet, dearest 
brother, we ought to remember that it is written, 
" A brother that helpeth a brother shall be ex- 
alted ; " " and that the apostle also has said, " Let 
all of you severally have regard to yourselves, 
lest ye also be tempted. Bear ye one another's 

* Num. xii. 3. 

^ Luke vi. 36. 

^ Matt. ix. 12. 

9 ( Compare Cypriah, in .ill this, with his less reasonable " master" 
Tertullian.] 

'° Apud inferos. See Ps, vi. 5. 
" Prov. xviii. 19 (old version). 

00 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ ; " ' also 
that, rebuking the haughty, and breaking down 
their arrogance, he says in his epistle, " Let him 
that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he 
fall ; " ^ and in another place he says, " Who art 
thou that judgest another man's servant? To 
his own master he standeth or falleth ; yea, he 
shall stand, for God is able to make him stand." ^ 
John also proves that Jesus Christ the Lord is 
our Advocate and Intercessor for our sins, saying, 
" My little children, these things write I unto 
you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we 
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ 
the Supporter : and He is the propitiation for 
our sins."'' And Paul also, the apostle, in his 
epistle, has written, " If, while we were yet sin- 
ners, Christ died for us ; much more, being now 
justified by His blood, we shall be saved from 
wrath through Him." 5 

19. Considering His love and mercy, we ought 
not to be so bitter, nor cruel, nor inhuman in 
cherishing the brethren, but to mourn with those 
that mourn, and to weep with them that weep, 
and to raise them up as much as we can by the 
help and comfort of our love ; neither being too 
ungentle and pertinacious in repelling their re- 
pentance ; nor, again, being too lax and easy in j 
rashly yielding communion. Lo ! a wounded 
brother lies stricken by the enemy in the field 
of battle. There the devil is striving to slay him 
whom he has wounded ; here Christ is exhort- 
ing that he whom He has redeemed may not 
wholly perish. Whether of the two do we assist ? 
On whose side do we stand? Whether do we 
favour the devil, that he may destroy, and pass 
by our prostrate lifeless brother, as in the Gospel 
did the priest and Levite ; or rather, as priests of 
God and Christ, do we imitate what Christ both 
taught and did, and snatch the wounded man 
from the jaws of the enemy, that we may pre- 
serve him cured for God the judge ?'^' 

20. And do not think, dearest brother, that 
cither the courage of the brethren will be les- 
sened, or that martyrdoms will fail for this cause, 
that repentance is relaxed to tiie lapsed, and that 
the hope of peace is offered to the penitent. 
The strength of the truly believing remains un- 
shaken ; and with those who fear and love God 
with their whole heart, their integrity continues 
steady and strong. For to adulterers even a 
time of repentance is granted by us, and peace 
is given. Yet virginity is not therefore deficient 
ill the Church, nor does the glorious design of 
continence languish through the sins of others. 
The Church, crowned with so many virgins, 

■ Gal. vi. I, 2. 

2 I Cor. X. 12. 

3 Rom. xiv. 4. 
'* I John ii. I, 2. 
5 Rom. V. 8, 9. 

* [1 bespeak admiration for this loving spirit of one often up- 
braided for his strong expressions and firm convictions.] 

flourishes ; and chastity and modesty preserve 
the tenor of their glor}'. Nor is the vigour of 
continence broken down because repentance and 
pardon are facilitated to the adulterer. It is one 
thing to stand for pardon, another thing to attain 
to glory : it is one thing, when cast into prison, 
not to go out thence until one has paid the 
uttermost farthing ; another thing at once to re- 
ceive the wages of faith and courage. It is one 
thing, tortured by long suffering for sins, to be 
cleansed and long purged by fire ; ^ another to 
have purged all sins by suffering. It is one 
thing, in fine, to be in suspense till the sentence 
of God at the day of judgment ; another to be. 
at once crowTied by the Lord.- 

21. And, indeed, among our predecessors, 
some of the bishops here in our province thought 
that peace was not to be granted to adulterers, 
and wholly closed the gate of repentance against 
adultery. Still they did not withdraw from the 
assembly of their co-bishops, nor break the unity 
of the Catholic Church ^ by the persistency of 
their severity or censure ; so that, because by 
some peace was granted to adulterers, he who did 
not grant it should be separated from the Church. 
While the bond of concord remains, and the un- 
divided sacrament of the Catholic Church en- 
dures, every bishop disposes and directs his own 
acts, and will have to give an account of his pur- 
poses to the Lord.'5 

22. But I wonder that some are so obstinate 
as to think that repentance is not to be granted 
to the lapsed, or to suppose that pardon is to be 
denied to the penitent, when it is written, " Re- 
member whence thou art fallen, and repent, and 
do the first works," '° which certainly is said to 
him who evidently has fallen, and whom the Lord 
exhorts to rise up again by his works, because it 
is written, " Alms do deliver from death," " and 
not, assuredly, from that death which once the 
blood of Christ extinguished, and from which 
the saving grace of baptism and of our Re- 
deemer has delivered us, but from that which 
subsequently creeps in through sins. Moreover, 
in another place time is granted for repentance ; 
and the Lord threatens him that does not repent : 
" I have," saith He, " many things against thee, 
because thou sufferest thy wife Jezebel, which call- 
eth herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce 
my servants to commit fornication, and to eat 
things sacrificed to idols ; and I gave her a space 
to repent, and she will not repent of her forni- 

7 These words are variously read, "to be purged _ divinely," or 
" to be purged for a long while, ' sci7. " purgari divine," or " purgari 
diutinc." [Candid Romish writers concede that this does not refer to 
their purgatory; but, the idea once accepted, we can rcaii it into 
this place as into i Cor. iii. 13. See Oxford trans., p. 128.] 

8 [The unity of the Catholic Church, in his view, consists iri this 
imity of co-bishops in one episcoijate, with which every Christian 
should be in conununion through his own bishop.] 

9 [The independence of bishops, and their intercommunion as one 
episcopate, is his theory of the undivided sacrament of Catholicity.] 

"^ Apoc. ii. 5. 
" Tob. iv. 10. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

333 

cation. Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and 
them that commit adultery with her into great 
tribulation, except they repent of their deeds ;" ' 
whom certainly the Lord would not exhort to 
repentance, if it were not that He promises mercy 
to them that repent. And in the Gospel He says, 
" I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in 
heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than 
over ninety and nine just persons that need no 
repentance."^ For since it is written, "God did 
not make death, neither hath He pleasure in the 
destruction of the living," ^ assuredly He who 
wills that none should perish, desires that sinners 
should repent, and by repentance should return 
again to life. Thus also He cries by Joel the 
prophet, and says, " And now, thus saith the 
Lord your God, Turn ye even to me with all 
your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, 
and with mourning ; and rend your heart, and 
not your garments, and return unto the Lord 
your God ; for He is gracious and merciful, slow 
to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth 
Him of the evil appointed." ■♦ In the Psalms, 
also, we read as well the rebuke as the clemency 
of God, threatening at the same time as He 
spares, punishing that He may correct ; and 
when He has corrected, preserving. " I will 
visit," He says, " their transgressions with the 
rod, and their iniquity with stripes. Neverthe- 
less, my loving-kindness will I not utterly take 
from them." s 

23. The Lord also in His Gospel, setting forth 
the love of God the Father, says, " What man is 
there of you, whom, if his son ask bread, will he 
give him a stone ? or if he ask a fish, will he give 
hi™ a serpent? If ye then, being evil, know how 
to give good gifts unto your children, how much 
more shall your heavenly Father give good things 
to them that ask Him?"^ The Lord is here 
comparing the father after the flesh, and the 
eternal and liberal love of God the P'ather. But 
if that evil father upon earth, deeply offended by 
a sinful and evil son, yet if he should see the 
same son afterwards reformed, and, the sins of 
his former life being put away, restored to so- 
briety and morality and to the discipline of in- 
nocence by the sorrow of his repentance, both 
rejoices and gives thanks, and with the eagerness 
of a father's exultation, embraces the restored 
one, whom before he had cast out ; how much 
more does that one and true Father, good, mer- 
ciful, and loving — yea. Himself Goodness and 
Mercy and Love — refoice in the repentance of 
His own sons ! nor threatens punishment to those 
who are now repenting, or mourning and lament- 

' Apoc. ii. 20-22. 
- Luke XV. 7 
3 Wisd. i. 13. 
* Joel ii. 12, 13. 

5 Ps. l.xxxix. 32, 33. 

6 Matt. vii. 9-1 1. 

ing, but rather promises pardon and clemency. 
Whence the Lord in the Gospel calls those that 
mourn, blessed ; because he who mourns calls 
forth mercy.7 He who is stubborn and haughty 
heaps up wrath against himself, and the punish- 
ment of the coming judgment. And therefore, 
dearest brother, we have decided that those who 
do not repent, nor give evidence of sorrow for 
their sins with their whole heart, and with mani- 
fest profession of their lamentation, are to be 
absolutely restrained from the hope of commun- 
ion and peace if they begin to beg for them in 
the midst of sickness and peril ; because it is not 
repentance for sin, but the warning of urgent 
death, that drives them to ask ; and he is not 
worthy to receive consolation in death who has 
not reflected that he was about to die. 

24. In reference, however, to the character of 
Novatian, dearest brother, of whom you desired 
that intelligence should be written you what 
heresy he had introduced ; know that, in the 
first place, we ought not even to be inquisitive 
as to what he teaches, so long as he teaches out 
of the pale of unity. Whoever he may be, and 
whatever he may be, he who is not in the Church / 
of Christ is not a Christian. Although he may 
boast himself, and announce his philosophy or 
eloquence with lofty words, yet he who has not 
maintained brotherly love or ecclesiastical unity 
has lost even what he previously had been. Un- 
less he seems to you to be a bishop, who — when 
a bishop has been made in the Church by six- 
teen** co-bishops — strives by bribery to be made 
an adulterous and extraneous bishop by the 
hands of deserters ; and although there is onei 
Church, divided by Christ throughout the whole 
world into many members, and also one episco-l 
pate diffused through a harmonious multitude of 
many bishops ; 9 in spite of God's tradition, in 
spite of the combined and everywhere com- 
pacted unity of the Catholic Church, is endeav- 
ouring to make a human church, and is sending 
his new apostles through very many cities, that 
he may establish some new foundations of his 
own appointment. And although there have 
already been ordained in each city, and through 
all the provinces, bishops old in years, sound in 
faith, proved in trial, proscribed in persecution, 
(this one) dares to create over these other and 
false bishops : as if he could either wander over ■ 
the whole world with the persistence of his new 
endeavour, or break asunder the structure of the 
ecclesiastical body, by the propagation of his 
own discord, not knowing that schismatics are 
always fervid at the beginning, but that they 

^ [Matt. V. 4. A striking exposition. " The quality of mercy is 
not strained," etc.] 

^ [The primitive canons require the consent of a majority of com- 
provincials, and //irci" at least to ordain.] 

9 [One of the many aphoristic condensations of the Cyprianic 
theory. Elucidation X.J 

334 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

cannot increase nor add to what they have un- 
lawfully begun, but that they immediately fail 
together with their evil emulation. But he 
could not hold the episcopate, even if he had 
before been made bishop, since he has cut him- 
self off from the body of his fellow-bishops, and 
from the unity of the Church ; since the apostle 
admonishes that we should mutually sustain one 
another, and not withdraw from the unity which 
God has appointed, and says, " Bearing with one 
another in love, endeavouring to keep the" unity 
of the Spirit in the bond of peace." ' He then 
who neither maintains the unity of the Spirit nor 
the bond of peace, and separates himself from 
the band of the Church, and from the assembly 
of priests, can neither have the power nor the 
honour of a bishop, since he has refused to 
maintain either the unity or the peace of the 
episcopate.^ 

25. Then, moreover, what a swelling of arro- 
gance it is, what oblivion of humility and gentle- 
ness, what a boasting of his own arrogance, that 
any one should either dare, or think that he is 
able, to do what the Lord did not even grant to 
the apostles ; that he should think that he can 
discern the tares from the wheat, or, as if it were 
granted to him to bear the fan and to purge the 
threshing-floor, should endeavour to separate the 
chaff from the wheat ; and since the apostle 
says, " But in a great house there are not only 
vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood 
and of earth," ^ should think to choose the ves- 
sels of gold and of silver, to despise, to cast 
away, and to condemn the vessels of wood and 
of clay ; while the vessels of wood are not burnt 
up except in the day of the Lord by the flame 
of the divine burning, and the vessels of clay are 
only broken by Him to whom is given the rod 
of iron. 

26. Or if he appoints himself a searcher and 
judge of the heart and reins, let him in all cases 
judge equally. And as he knows that it is writ- 
ten, " Behold, thou art made whole ; sin no 
more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee," ^ 
let him separate the fraudulent and adulterers 
from his side and from his company, since the 
case of an adulterer is by far both graver and 
worse than that of one who has taken a certifi- 
cate, because the latter has sinned by necessity, 
the former by free will : the latter, thinking that 
it is sufficient for him that he has not sacrificed, 
has been deceived by an error; the former, a 
violator of the matrimonial tie of another, or 
entering a brothel, into the sink and filthy gulf 
of the common people, has befouled by detesta- 
ble impurity a sanctified body and God's temple. 

^ Eph. iv. 2, 3. 

2 [" The body of his fellow-bishops," as above.l 
^ 2 Tim. ii. 2o. 
* lohn V. 14. 

as says the apostle : " Every sin that a man 
doeth is without the body, but he that commit- 
teth fornication sinneth against his own body." s 
And yet to these persons themselves repentance 
is granted, and the hope of lamenting and aton- 
ing is left, according to the saying of the samr 
apostle : " I fear lest, when I come to you, I 
shall bewail many of those who have sinned 
already, and have not repented of the unclean- 
ness, and fornication, and lasciviousness which 
they have committed."^ 

27. Neither let the new heretics flatter them- 
selves in this, that they say that they do not 
communicate with idolaters ; although among 
them there are both adulterers and fraudulent 
persons, who are held guilty of the crime of 
idolatry, according to the saying of the apostle : 
" For know this with understanding, that no 
whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous 
man, whose guilt is that of idolatry, hath any 
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of 
God." 7 And again : " Mortify therefore your 
members which are upon the earth ; putting off 
fornication, uncleanness, and evil concupiscence, 
and covetousness, which are the service of idols : 
for which things' sake cometh the wrath of 
God." ** For as our bodies are members of 
Christ, and we are each a temple of God, who- 
soever violates the temple of God by adultery, 
violates God ; and he who, in committing sins, 
does the will of the devil, serves demons and 
idols. For evil deeds do not come from the 
Holy Spirit, but from the prompting of the 
adversary, and lusts born of the unclean spirit 
constrain men to act against God and to obey 
the devil. Thus it happens that if they say that 
one is polluted by another's sin, and if they con- 
tend, by their own asseveration, that the idolatry 
of the delinquent passes over to one who is not 
guilty according to their own word ; they can- 
not be excused from the crime of idolatry, since 
from the apostolic proof it is evident that the 
adulterers and defrauders with whom they com- 
municate are idolaters. But with us, according 
to our faith and the given rule of divine preach- 
ing, agrees the principle of truth, that every one 
is himself held fast in his own sin ; nor can one 
become guilty for another, since the Lord fore- 
warns us, saying, "The righteousness of the 
righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness 
of the wicked shall be upon him."*^ And again : 
"The fathers shall not die for the children, and 
the children shall not die for the fathers. Every 
one shall die in his own sin." "^ Reading and 
observing this, we certainly think that no one is 

5 t Cor. vi. 18. 
*> 2 Cor. xii. 21. 
' Eph. V. 5. 
* Col. ill. 5, 6. 
9 Ezck. xviii. 20. 
«« Dcut. xxiv. 36, 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

335 

to be restrained from the fruit of satisfaction, 
and the hope of peace, since we know, accord- 
ing to the faith of the divine Scriptures, God 
Himself being their author, and exhorting in 
them, both that sinners are brought back to 
repentance, and that pardon and mercy are not 
denied to penitents.' 

28. .And oh, mockery of a deceived fraternity ! 
Oh, vain deception of miserable and senseless 
mourners ! Oh, ineffectual and profnless tradi- 
tion of heretical institution ! to exhort to the 
repentance of atonement, and to take away the 
healing from the atonement ; to say to our 
brethren, " Mourn and shed tears, and groan 
day and night, and labour largely and frequently 
for the washing away and cleansing of your sin ; 
but, after all these things, you shall die without 
the pale of the Church. Whatsoever things are 
necessary to peace, you shall do, but none of 
that peace which you seek shall you receive ! " 
Who would not perish at once ? Who would not 
fall away, from very desperation? Who would 
DOt turn away his mind from all design of lamen- 
tation? Do you think that the husbandman 
could labour if you should say, "Till the field 
Avith all the skill of husbandry, diligently perse- 
vere in its cultivation ; but you shall reap no 
harvest, you shall press no vintage, you shall 
receive no fruits of your olive-yard, you shall 
gather no apples from the trees ; " or if, urging 
upon any one the possession and use of ships, 
you were to say, '• Purchase, my brother, material 
from excellent woods ; inweave your keel with 
the strongest and chosen oak ; labour on the 
rudder, the ropes, the sails, that the ship may be 
constructed and fitted ; but when you have done 
this, you shall never behold the result from its 
doings and its voyages? " 

29. This is to shut up and to cut off the way 
•of grief and of repentance ; so that while in all 
Scripture the Lord God sooths those who re- 
turn to Him and rei>ent, repentance itself is 
taken away by our hardness and cruelty,, which 
intercepts the fruits of repentance. But if we 
find that none ought to be restrained from re- 
penting, and that peace may be granted by His 
priests to those who entreat and beseech the 
Lord's mercv, inasmuch as He is merciful and 
loving, the groaning of those who mourn is to be 
admitted, and the fruit of repentance is not to 
be denied to those who grieve. .And because in 
the place of the departed there is no confession, 
neither can confession be made there,^ they who 
have repented from their whole heart, and have 

' [" Fools make a mock at sin." But what serious reflections 
are inspired by the solemn discipline of primitive Christianity ! Mercy 
is magnified, mdeed, but pardon and peace are made worth striving 
after Repentance is made a reality, and we hear nothing of mechani- 
cal penances and absolutions ] 

- [ He has never heard of indulgences and masses foi ihe dead, nor 
cf a purgatorial remission. See p. 332. note 7.] 

asked for it, ought to be received within the 
Church, and to be kept in it for the Lord, who 
will of a surety judge, when He comes to His 
Church, those whom He shall find within it. 
J3ut apostates and deserters, or adversaries and 
enemies, and those who lay waste the Church of 
Christ, cannot, even if outside the Church they 
have been slain for His name, according to the 
apostle, be admitted to the peace of the Church, 
since they have neither kept the unity of the 
spirit nor of the Church. 

30. These few things for the present, out of 
many, dearest brother, I have run over as briefly 
as I could, that I might thereby both satisfy your 
desire, and might link you more and more 
closely to the society of our college and body.J 
But if there should arise to you an opportunity 
and power of coming to us, we shall be able to 
confer more fully together, and to consider more 
fruitfully and more at large the things which 
make for a salutary agreement. I bid you, 
dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LII.'' 

TO FORTUNATUS AND HIS OTHER COLLEAGUES, 
CON'CERNING THOSE WHO HAD BEEN OVER. 
COME BY TORTUES. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN BEING CONSULTED BY HIS 
COLLEAGUES, WHETHER CERT.'MN LAPSED PER- 
SONS WHO HAD BEEN OVERPOWERED BY TOR- 
TURE SHOULD BE ADMITTED TO COMMUNION, 
REPLIES, THAT INASMUCH AS THEY HAD ALREADY 
REPENTED FOR THE SPACE OF THREE YE.^RS, 
HE THOUGHT THEY SHOULD BE RECEIVED ; BUT 
AS AFTER THE FESTIVAL OF EASTER THERE 
WOULD BE A COUNCIL OF BISHOPS WITH HIM, 
HE WOULD THEN CONSIDER THE MATTER WITH 
THE.M. 

I. Cyprian to Fortunatus, Ahymnus, Optatus, 
Privatianus, Donatulus, and Felix, his brethren, 
greeting, You have written to me, dearest 
brethren, that when you were in the city of 
Capsa for the purpose of ordaining a bishop, 
Superius, our brother and colleague brought be- 
fore you, that Ninus, Clementianus, and Florus, 
our brethren, who had been previously laid hold 
of in the persecution, and confessing the name 
of the Lord, had overcome the violence of the 
magistracy, and the attack of a raging populace, 
afterwards, when they were tortured before the 
proconsul with severe sufferings, were van- 
quished by the acuteness of the torments, and 
fell, through their lengthened agonies, from the 
degree of glory to which in the full virtue of 

3 [To the unity of our common episcopate. Note this; for, if 
he had imagined Cornelius to have beeii a " Pope," he must have 
said, " to unity with the true pontiff, against whom Novatian has re- 
belled, and made himself an anti-pope. "J 

* Oxford ed. : Ep. Ivi. a.d. 252. 

33^ 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

faith they were tending, and after this grave 
lapse, incurred not wilHngly but of necessity, 
had not yet ceased their repentance for the space 
of three years : of whom you thought it right to 
consult whether it was well to receive them now 
to communion. 

2. And indeed, in respect of my own opinion, 
I think that the Lord's mercy will not be want- 
ing to those who are known to have stood in the 
ranks of battle, to have confessed the name,' to 
have overcome the violence of the magistrates 
and the rush of the raging populace with the 
persistency of unshaken faith, to have suffered 
imprisonment, to have long resisted, amidst the 
threats of the proconsul and the warring of the 
surrounding people, torments that wrenched and 
tore them with protracted repetition ; so that in 
the last moment to have been vamjuished by the 
infirmity of the flesh, may be extenuated by the 
plea of preceding deserts. And it may be suffi- 
cient for such to have lost their glory, but that 
we ought not, moreover, to close the place of 
j)ardon to them, and deprive them of their 
Father's love and of our communion ; to whom 
we think it may be sufficient for entreating the 
mercy of the Lord, that for three years continu- 
ally and sorrowfully, as you write, they have 
lamented with excessive penitential mourning. 
Assuredly I do not think that peace is incau- 
tiously and over-hastily granted to those, who by 
the bravery of their warfare, have not, we see, 
been previously wanting to the battle ; and who, 
if the struggle should come on anew, might be 
able to regain their glory. For when it was de- 
cided in the council that penitents in peril of 
sickness should be assisted, and have peace 
granted to them, surely those ought to precede 
in receiving peace whom we see not to have 
fallen by weakness of mind, but who, having 
engaged in the conflict, and being wounded, have 
not been able to sustain the crown of their con- 
fession through weakness of the flesh ; especially 
since, in their desire to die, they were not per- 
mitted to be slain, but the tortures wrenched 
their wearied frames long enough, not to con- 
([uer their faith, which is unconquerable, but to 
exhaust the flesh, which is weak. 

3. Since, however, you have written for me to 
give full consideration to this matter with many 
of my colleagues ; and so great a subject claims 
greater and more careful counsel from the con- 
ference of many ; and as now almost all, during 
:ne first celebrations of Easter, are dwelling at 
home with their brethren : when they shall have 
completed the solemnity to be celebrated among 
their own people, and have begun to come to 
me, I will consider it more at large with each 
one, so that a decided opinion, weighed in the 

' According to some readings, " the name of the Lord." 

council of many priests, on the subject on which 
you have consulted me, may be established 
among us, and may be written to you. I bid 
you, dearest brethren, ever heartily farewell.^ 

EPISTLE LIII.3 

TO CORNELIUS, CON'CERNING GRANTING PEACE 
TO THE LAPSED. 

ARGUMENT. CYPRIAN ANNOUNCES THIS DECREE 

OF THE BISHOPS IN THE NAME OF THE WHOLE 
SYNOD TO FATHER CORNELIUS ; AND THEREFORE 
THIS LEITER IS NOT SO MUCH THE LETTER OF 
CYPRIAN HIMSELF, AS THAT OF THE ENTIRE 
AFRICAN SYNOD.'* 

Cyprian, Liberalis, Caldonius, Nicomedes, 
Caecilius, Junius, Marrutius, Felix, Successus, 
Faustinus, Fortunatus, Victor, Saturninus, another 
Saturninus, Rogatianus, TertuUus, Lucianus, 
Eutyches, Amplus, Sattius, Secundinus, another 
Saturninus, Aurelius, Priscus, Herculanus, Victo- 
ricus, Quintus, Honoratus, Montanus, Horten- 
sianus, Verianus, Iambus, Donatus, Pompeius, 
Polycarpus, Demetrius, another Donatus, Priva- 
tianus, another Fortunatus, Rogatus and Monu- 
lus, to Cornelius their brother,^ greeting.^ 

I. We had indeed decided some time ago, 
dearest brother, having mutually taken counsel 
one with another, that they who, in the fierce- 
ness of persecution, had been overthrown by the 
adversary, and had lapsed, and had polluted 
themselves with unlawful sacrifices, should un- 
dergo a long and full repentance ; and if the risk 
of sickness should be urgent, should receive 
peace on the very point of death. For it was 
not right, neither did the love of the Father nor 
divine mercy allow, that the Church should be 
closed to those that knock, or the help of the 
hope of salvation be denied to those who mourn 
and entreat, so that when they pass from this 
world, they should be dismissed to their Lord 
without communion and peace ; since He Him- 
self who gave the law, that things which were 
bound on earth should also be bound in heaven, 
allowed, moreover, that things might be loosed 

2 [The sweetness, moderation, and prudence of this letter are alike 
commend.able. Hut let us reflect what it meant to confess Christ m 
those days.] 
' 3 Oxford cd. : F.p. Ivii. 

* As the African bishops had previously decifled in a certain coun- 
cil, that the lapsed, except after long penitence, should not he received 
to peace, unless perchance peril of sickness was urgent: now on the 
appearance of a new persecution they decided that peace was to be 
granted to all those who had repented, so that they might be the more 
courageous for the contest of suffering. 

5 ["To Cornelius their brother." Now compare this with the 
.nbject conduct of Latin bishops at the late council of the Vatican. 
See Diillinger (O;/ ;'«//>', etc.), 7rt«Ki, and (7»/r/«7/.y. 

*> The superscription in other texts is as follows: " Cyprian, Li- 
beralis, Caldonius, Nicomedes, Cajcilius, Junius, Marrutius, Felix, 
Successus, Faustinus. Fortunatus, Victor, Saturninus, another Sa- 
turninus, Kogatian, Tertullus, Lucianus, Sattius, Secundinus, another 
Saturninus, Eutyches, .Amplus, another Saturninus, Aurelius, Pris- 
cus, Hcrculaneus, Victoricus. Quintus, Honoratus. Manthaneus, 
Hortensianus, Verianus, Iambus, Donatus, Pompoiiius, Polycarp, 
Demetrius, another Donatus, Privatianus, another Fortunatus, Roga- 
tus and Munnnlus, to Cornelius their brother, greeting." 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

337 

there which were here first loosed in the Church. 
But now, when we see that the day of another 
trouble is again beginning to draw near, and are 
admonished by frequent and repeated intiina- 
tions that we should be prepared and armed for 
the struggle 'which the enemy announces to us, 
that we should also prepare the people com- 
mitted to us by divine condescension, by our 
exhortations, and gather together from all parts 
all the soldiers of Christ who desire arms, and 
are anxious for the battle within the Lord's 
camp under the compulsion of this necessity, 
we have decided that peace is to be given to 
those who have not withdrawn from the Church 
of the Lord, but have not ceased from the first 
day of their lapse to repent, and to lament, and 
to beseech the Lord ; and we have decided that 
they ought to be armed and equipped for the 
battle which is at hand. 

2. For we must comply with fitting intima- 
tions and admonitions, that the sheep may not 
be deserted in danger by the shepherds, but that 
the whole flock may be gathered together into 
one place, and the Lord's army may be armed 
for the contest of the heavenly warfare. For the 
repentance of the mourners was reasonably pro- 
longed for a more protracted time, help only 
being afforded to the sick in their departure, so 
long as peace and tranquillity prevailed, which 
permitted the long postponement of the tears 
of the mourners, and late assistance in sickness 
to the dying. But now indeed peace is neces- 
sary, not for the sick, but for the strong ; nor is 
communion to be granted by us to the dying, 
but to the living, that we may not leave those 
whom we stir up and exhort to the battle un- 
armed and naked, but may fortify them with the 
protection of Christ's body and blood. And, as 
the Eucharist is appointed for this very purpose 
that it may be a safeguard to the receivers, ;'/ is 
needful that we may arm those whom we wish 
to be safe against the adversary with the pro- 
tection of the Lord's abundance. For how do 
we teach or provoke them to shed their blood 
in confession of His name, if we deny to those 
who are about to enter on the warfare the blood 
of Christ? Or how do we make them fit for the 
cup of martyrdom, if we do not first admit 
them to drink, in the Church, the cup of the 
Lord ' by the right of communion ? 

3. We should make a difference, dearest 
brother, between those who either have apos- 
tatized, and, having returned to the world which 
they have renounced, are living heathenish lives, 
or, having become deserters to the heretics, are 
daily taking up parricidal arms against the 
Church ; and those who do not depart from the 
Church's threshold, and, constantly and sorrow- 

—mm~ 

^ [Compare Luke xzii. 15, 42, and Ps. cxvL 13.} 

fully imploring divine and paternal consolation, 
profess that they are now prepared for the bat- 
tle, and ready to stand and fight bravely for the 
name of their Lord and for their own salvation. 
In these times we grant peace, not to those who 
sleep, but to those who watch. We grant peace,, 
not amid indulgences, but amid arms. We 
grant peace, not for rest, but for the field of 
battle. If, according to what we hear, and 
desire, and believe of them, they shall stand 
bravely, and shall overthrow the adversary with, 
us in the encounter, we shall not repent of hav- 
ing granted peace to men so brave. Yea, it is 
the great honour and glory of our episcopate to 
have granted peace to martyrs, so that we, as 
priests, who daily celebrate the sacrifices of 
God, may prepare offerings and victims for God. 
But if — which may the Lord avert from our 
brethren — any one of the lapsed should de- 
ceive, seeking peace by guile, and at the time 
of the impending struggle receiving peace with- 
out any purpose of doing battle, he betrays and 
deceives himself, hiding one thing in his heart 
and pronouncing another with his voice. We, 
so far as it is allowed to us to see and to judge, 
look upon the face of each one ; we are not 
able to scrutinize the heart and to inspect the 
mind. Concerning these the Discerner and 
Searcher of hidden things judges, and He will 
quickly come and judge of the secrets and 
hidden things of the heart. But the evil ought 
not to stand in the way of the good, but rather 
the evil ought to be assisted by the good. 
Neither is peace, therefore, to be denied to 
those who are about to endure martyrdom, be- 
cause there are some who will refuse it, since 
for this purpose peace should be granted to all 
who are about to enter upon the warfare, that 
through our ignorance he may not be the first 
one to be passed over, who in the struggle is to 
be crowned. 

4. Nor let any one say, " that he who accepts 
martyrdom is baptized in his own blood, and 
peace is not necessary to him from the bishop, 
since he is about to have the peace of his own 
glory, and about to receive a greater reward 
from the condescension of the Lord." First of 
all, he cannot be fitted for martyrdom who is 
not armed for the contest by the Church ; and 
his spirit is deficient which the Eucharist received / 
does not raise and stimulate. For the Lord 
says in His Gospel : " But when they deliver 
you up, take no thought what ye shall speak ; 
for it shall be given you in that hour what ye 
shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the 
Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you." ^ 
Now, since He says that the Spirit of the Father 
speaks in those who are delivered up and set 

2 Matt. X. 19, 20. 

138 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

in the confession of His name, how can he be 
found prepared or fit for that confession who 
has not first, in the reception of peace, received 
the Spirit of the Father, who, giving strength to 
His servants. Himself speaks and confesses in 
us ? Then, besides — if, having forsaken every- 
thing that he has, a man shall flee, and dwelling 
in hiding-places and in solitude, shall fall by 
chance among thieves, or shall die in fever and 
in weakness, will it not be charged upon us that 
so good a soldier, who has forsaken all that he 
hath, and contemning his house, and his parents, 
and his children, has preferred to follow his 
Lord, dies without peace and without commun- 
ion? Will not either inactive negligence or cruel 
hardness be ascribed to us in the day of judg- 
ment, that, pastors though we are, we have 
neither been willing to take care of the sheep 
trusted and committed to us in peace, nor to 
arm them in battle ? Would not the charge be 
brought against us by the Lord, which by His 
prophet He utters and says ? " Behold, ye con- 
sume the milk, and ye clothe you with the wool, 
and ye kill them that are fed ; but ye feed not 
my flock. The weak have ye not strengthened, 
neither have ye healed that which was sick, 
neither have ye comforted that which was bro- 
ken, neither have ye brought again that which 
strayefl, neither have ye sought that which was 
lost, and that which was strong ye wore out with 
labour. And my sheep were scattered, because 
there were no shepherds : and they became 
meat to all the beasts of the field ; and there 
Avas none who sought after them, nor brouglit 
them back. Therefore thus saith the Lord, 
Behold, I am against the shejihords ; and I will 
require my sheep of their hand, and cause them 
to cease from feeding my sheep ; neither shall 
they feed them any more : and I will deliver 
my sheej) from their mouth, and I will feed them 
with judgment." ' 

5. Lest, then, the sheep committed to us by 
the Lord be demanded back from our mouth, 
wherewith we deny peace, wherewith we oppose 
to them rather the severity of human cruelty than 
the benigiiifv of divine and paternal love ; we 
have determined - by the suggestion of the Holy 
Spirit and the admonition of the Lord, conveyed 
by many and manifest visions, because the enemy 
is foretold and shown to be at hand, to gather 
within the camp the soldiers of Christ, to examine 
the cases of each one, and to grant peace to the 
lapsed, yea, rather to furnish arms to those who 
are about to fight. And this, we trust, will ])lease 
you in contemplation of the paternal mercy. 
I5ut if there be any {o>u') of our colleagues 

' Ezek. xxxiv. 3-6, 10-16. 

- [" We have determined." No reference to any revising power 
in ihe Bishop of Rome, who is counselled from first to last as a brother, 
and told what he should do.] 

who, now that the contest is urgent, thinks that 
peace should not be granted to our brethren and 
sisters, he shall give an account to the Lord in 
the day of judgment, either of his grievous rigour 
or of his inhuman hardness. We, as befitted our 
faith and charity and solicitude, have laid before 
you what was in our own mind, namely, that the 
day of contest has approached, that a violent 
enemy will soon rise up against us, that a struggle 
is coming on, not such as it has been, but much 
more serious and fierce. This is frequently shown 
to us from above ; concerning this we are often 
admonished by the providence and mercy of the 
Lord, of whose help and love we who trust in 
Him may be secure, because He who in peace 
foretells to His soldiers that the battle will come, 
will give to them when they are warring victory 
in the encounter. We bid you, dearest brother, 
ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LIV.3 

TO CORNELIUS, CONCERNING FORTUNATUS 
AND FELICISSIMUS, OR AGAINST THE HERE- 
TICS. 

ARGUMENT. — C\PR\Mi CHIEFLY WARNS CORNELIUS 
IN THIS LETTER NOT TO HEAR THE CALUMNIES 
OF FELICISSIMUS AND FORTUNATUS AGAINST HIM, 
AND NOT TO BE FRIGHTENED BY THEIR THREATS, 
BUT TO BE OF A BR.AVE SPIRIT, AS BECOMES 
god's priests IN OPPOSITION TO HERETICS : 
NAMELY, THOSE WHO, AFTER THE CUSTOM PRE- 
VAILING AMONG HERETICS, BEGAN THEIR HERESV 
AND SCHISMS WITH THE CONTEMFl' OF ONE 
BISHOP IN THE CHURCH.* 

I. I have read your letter, dearest brother, 
which you sent by Saturus our brother the aco- 
lyte, abundantly full of fraternal love and eccle- 
siastical discipline and priestly reproof ; in which 
you signified that Felicissimus,^ no new enemy 
of Christ, but long ago excommunicated for hisv 
very many and grave crimes, and condemned 
not only by my judgment, but also by that of 
very many of my fellow-bishops, has been re- 
jected by you there, and that when he came 
attended by a band and faction of desperadoes, 
he was driven from the Church with the full 
vigour with which it behoves a bishop to act. 
From which Church long ago he was driven, with 
others like himself, by the majesty of God and 
the severity of Christ our Lord and Judge ; that 
the author of schism and disagreement, the 
fraudulent user of money entrusted to him, the 
violator of virgins, the destroyer and corrupter 
of many marriages, should not, by the dishonour 

•J Oxford ed.: Ep. Hx. A.u 252. 

* Indicating also by the way whence heresy and schisms are wot.t 
to take their rise, so that the letter is with good reason inscribed by 
Morell " Contra Ha;reticos." 

5 [He was a purse-proud layman. But see Elucidation XIII. 
infra . J 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

jj9 

of his presence and his immodest and incestuous 
contact, violate further the spouse of Christ, 
hitherto uncorrupt, holy, modest. 

2. But yet, when I read your other letter, 
brother, which you subjoined to your first one, I 
was considerably surprised at observing that you 
were in some degree disturbed by the threats 
and terrors of those who had come, when, ac- 
cording to what you wrote, they had attacked 
and threatened you with the greatest despera- 
tion, that if you would not receive the letters 
which they had brought, they would read them \ 
publicly, and would utter many base and dis- | 
graceful things, and such as were worthy of their 
mouth. But if the matter is thus, dearest broth- 
er, that the audacity of the most wicked men ^ 
is to be dreaded, and that what evil men cannot 
do rightly and equitably, they may accomplish 
by daring and desperation, there is an end of 
the vigour of the episcopacy, and of the sub- 
lime and divine power of governing the Church ; 
nor can we continue any longer, or in fact now \ 
be Christians, if it is come to this, that we are 
to be afraid of the threats or the snares of out- 
casts. For both Gentiles and Jews threaten, j 
and heretics and all those, of whose hearts and | 
minds the devil has taken possession, daily attest 
their venomous madness with furious voice. We 
are not, therefore, to yield because they threaten ; 
nor is the adversary and enemy on that account 
greater than Christ, because he claims for him- 
self and assumes so much in the world. There 
ought to abide with us, dearest brother, an im- 
moveable strength of faith ; and against all the 
irruptions and onsets of the waves that roar 
against us, a steady and unshaken courage should 
plant itself as with the fortitude and mass of a 
resisting rock. Nor does it matter whence comes 
the terror or the danger to a bishop, who lives 
subject to terrors and dangers, and is neverthe- 
less made glorious by those very terrors and 
dangers. For we ought not to consider and re- 
gard the mere threats of the Gentiles or of the 
Jews, when we see that the Lord Himself was 
deserted by^is brethren, and was betrayed by 
him whom He Himself had chosen among His 
apostles ; that also in the beginning of the world 
it was none other than a brother who slew right- 
eous Abel, and an angry brother pursued the 
fleeing Jacob, and the youthful Joseph was sold 
by the act of his brethren. In the Gospel also 
we read that it was foretold that our foes should 
rather be of our own household, and that they who 
have first been associated in the sacrament of 
unity ' shall be they who shall betray one another. 
It makes no difference who delivers up or who 
rages, since God permits those to be delivered 
up whom He appoints to be crowned. For it is 

I [" The sacramental host of God's elect."— T/ie Task, Cowper.] 

no ignominy to us to suffer from our brethren 
what Christ suffered, nor is it glory to them to 
do what Judas did. But what insolence it is in 
them, what swelling and inflated and vain boast- 
ing on the part of these threateners, f/iere to 
threaten me in my absence, when here they have 
me present in their power ! I do not fear their 
reproaches with which they daily wound them- 
selves and their own life ; I do not trt»mble at 
their clubs and stones and swords, which they 
brandish with parricidal words : as far as lies in 
their power such men are homicides before God. 
Yet they are not able to slay unless the Lord 
have allowed them to slay ; and although I must 
die but once, yet they daily slay me by their 
hatred, their words, and their villanies. 

3. But, dearest brother, ecclesiastical disci- 
pline is not on that account to be forsaken, nor 
priestly censure to be relaxed, because we are 
disturbed with reproaches or are shaken with 
terrors ; since Holy Scripture meets and warns 
us, saying, " But he who presumes and is haughty, 
the man who boasts of himself, vvho hath enlarged 
his soul as hell, shall accomplish nothing."^ 
And again : " And fear not the words of a sinful 
man, for his glory shall be dung and worms. 
To-day he is lifted up, and to-morrow he shall 
not be found, because he is turned into his earth, 
and his thought shall perish." ^ And again : "■ I 
have seen the wicked exalted, and raised above 
the cedars of Libanus : I went by, and, lo, he 
was not ; yea, I sought him, and his place was 
not found." -* Exaltation, and puffing up, and 
arrogant and haughty boastfulness, spring not 
from the teaching of Christ who teaches humilit)-, 
but from the spirit of Antichrist, whom the Lord 
rebukes by His prophet, saying, " For thou hast 
said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I 
will place my throne above the stars of God : 
I will sit on a lofty mountain, above the lofty 
mountains to the north : I will ascend above the 
clouds ; I will be like the Most High." 5 And 
he added, saying, " Yet thou shalt descend into 
hell, to the foundations of the earth ; and they 
that see thee shall wonder at thee."'' Whence 
also divine Scripture threatens a like punishment 
to such in another place, and says, " For the day 
of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one 
that is injurious and proud, and upon every one 
that is lifted up, and lofty." ? By his mouth, 
therefore, and by his words, is every one at once 
betrayed; and whether he has Christ in his 
heart, or Antichrist, is discerned in his speaking, 
according to what the Lord says in His Gospel, 
" O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, 

2 Hab. ii. 5. 

3 I Mac. ii. 62, 63. 

* Ps. xxxviii. 35, 36, 
S Isa. xiv. 13, 14. 
^ Isa. XIV. 15, 16. 
7 Isa. ii. 12. 

340 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

speak ;,'ood tliin.£,'s? for out of the 

abundance 

of ihc heart the mouth speaketh. A good man 
out of the good treasure bringcth forth good 
things ; and an evil man out of the evil treasure 
bringeth forth evil things." ' Whence also that 
rich sinner who implores help from Lazarus, then 
laid in Abraham's bosom, and established in a 
place of comfort, while he, writhing in torments, 
IS consumed by the heats of burning flame, 
suffers most punishment of all parts of his body 
in his mouth and his tongue, because doubtless in 
his mouth and his tongue he had most sinned.- 

4. For since it is written, " Neither shall re- 
vilers inherit the kingdom of God,"^ and again 
the Lord says in His Gospel, " Wliosoever shall 
say to his brother. Thou fool ; and whosoever 
shall say, Raca, shall be in danger of the Gehenna 
of fire," •* how can they evade the rebuke of the 
Lord the avenger, who heap up such expressions, 
not only on their brethren, but also on the priests, 
to whom is granted such honour of the conde- 
scension of God, that whosoever should not obey 
his priest, and him that judgeth here for the time, 
was immediately to be slain? In Deuteronomy 
the Lord God speaks, saying, "And the man that 
will do presumptuously, and will not hearken 
unto the priest or to the judge, whosoever he 
shall be in those days, that man shall die ; and all 
the people, when they hear, shall fear, and shall 
do no more* wickedly." 5 Moreover, to Samuel, 
when he was despised by the Jews, God says, 
" They have not despised thee, but they have 
despised me."^ And the Lord also in the Gos- 
pel says, " He that heareth you, heareth me, and 
Him that sent me ; and he that rejecteth you, 
rejecteth me ; and he that rejecteth me, rejecteth 
Him that sent me." ^ And when he had cleansed 
the leprous man, he said, " Go, show thyself to 
the priest." ^ And when afterwards, in the time 
of His passion, He had received a buffet from a 
servant of the priest, and the servant said to Him, 
"Answerest thou the high priest so?"^ the Lord 
said nothing reproachfully against the high priest, 
nor detracted anything from the priest's honour; 
but rather asserting His own innocence, and 
showing it. He says, "If I have spokeii evil, 
bear witness of the evil ; but if well, why smitest 
thou me ? " '° Also subsequently, in the Acts of 
the Apostles, the blessed Apostle Paul, when it 
was said to him, "Revilest thou God's priest?"" 
— although they had begun to be sacrilegious, 

' Matt. xii. ;i4, 35. 

^ ['I'his ide.T became embedded in the minds of Western Christians. 
Sec Soiithcy, Roderick, xxv. note 72. The Fabulous Chronicie 
■which Souihcy gives at length is a curious study of this subject.,] 

^ I Cor. VI. 10. 

* Matt. V. 22. 

5 Dcut. xvii 

** I Sam 

... "• 

viii. 7. 

13- 

7 Luke X. 16. 

* Matt. viii. 4. 

9 John xviii. 22. 
'° John xviii. 23. 
" Acts xxiii. 4. 

and impious, and bloody, the Lord having already 
been crucified, and had no longer retained any- 
thing of the priestly honour and authority — yet 
Paul, considering the name itself, however empty, 
and the shadow, as it were, of the priest, said, "I 
wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest : 
for it is written, Thou shalt not speak evil of the 
ruler of thy people." '- 

5. \\hen, then, such and so great examples,, 
and many others, are precedents whereby the 
priestly authority and power by the divine con- 
descension is established, what kind of people, 
think you, are they who, being enemies of the 
priests, and rebels against tlie Catholic Church,, 
are frightened neither by the threatening of a fore- 
warning Lord, nor by the vengeance of comuig^ 
judgment ? For neither have heresies arisen, nori 
have schisms originated, from any other source] 
than from this, that God's priest is not obeyed ; 1 
nor do they consider that there is one person ' 
for the time priest in the Church, and for the 
time judge in the stead of Christ ; '^ whom, if,, 
according to divine teaching, the whole frater- 
nity should obey, no one would stir up anything 
against the college of priests ; no one, after the 
divine judgment, after the suffrage of tiie people,. 
after the consent of the co-bishops, would make 
himself a judge, not now of the bishop, but of 
God. No one would rend the Church by a di\is- 
ion of the unity of Christ.'^ No one, plca>ing^ 
himself, and swelling with arrogance, would found 
a new heresy, separate and without, unless any 
one be of such sacrilegious daring and abandoned 
mind, as to think that a priest is made without 
God's judgment, when the Lord says in His Gos- 
pel, "Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? 
and one of them does not fall to the ground with- 
out the will of your Father." '5 When He says 
that not even the least things are done without 
God's will, does any one think that the highest 
and greatest things are done in God's Church 
either without" God's knowledge or permission, 
and that priests — that is. His stewards — are 
not ordained by His decree? This is not to 
have faith, whereby we live ; this is not to give 
honour to God, by whose direction and decision 
we know and believe that all things are ruled and 
governed. Undoubtedly there are bishops made, 
not by the will of God, but they are such as are 
made outside of the Church — such as are made 
contrary to the ordinance and tradition of the 
Gospel, as the Lord Himself in the twelve proph- 
ets asserts, saying, "They have set up a king 
for themselves, and not by me." '^ And again : 

'2 Acts xxiii. 5. 

'3 [i e., in each Church the one episcopate — "the college of 
priests " — is represented by the one bishop. See note, Oxford 
trans., p. 155.] 

'< [An illustration again of the Cyprianic theory. Sec the 7V^a//jt 
on Unity. These notes will aid vk'hen we reach that Treatise.] 

'5 Matt. X 29. 

*^ Hos. viii. 4. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

341 

*' Their sacrifices are as the bread of mourning ; 
all that eat thereof shall be polluted." ' And 
the Holy Spirit also cries by Isaiah, and says, 
*'Woe unto you, children that are deserters. 
Thus saith the Lord, Ye have taken counsel, but 
not of me ; and ye have made a covenant, but 
not of my Spirit, that ye may add sin to sin." ^ 

6. But — I speak to you as being provoked ; 
I speak as grieving ; I speak as constramed — 
when a bishop is appointed into the place of 
one deceased, when he is chosen in time of 
peace by the suffrage of an entire people, when 
he IS protected by the help of God in persecu- 
tion, faithfully linked with all his colleagues, 
approved to his people by now four years' ex- 
perience in his episcopate ; observant of disci- 
pline in time of peace ; in time of disturbance, 
proscribed with the name of his episcopate ap- 
plied and attached to him ; so often asked for 
an the circus " for the lions ; " in the amphi- 
theatre, honoured with the testimony of the 
divine condescension ; even in these very days 
on which I have written this letter to you, on 
account of the sacrifices which, by proclaimed 
edict, the people were commanded to celebrate, 
demanded anew in the circus " for the lions " 
by the clamour of the populace ; — when such a 
one, dearest brother, is seen to be assailed by 
^ome desperate and reckless men, and by those 
■who have their place outside the Church, it is 
manifest who assails him : not assuredly Christ, 
who either appoints or protects his priests ; but 
he who, as the adversary of Christ and the foe 
to His Church, for this purpose persecutes with 
his malice the ruler of the Church, that when 
the pilot is removed, he may rage more atro- 
ciously and more violently with a view to the 
Church's dispersion. 

7. Nor ought it, my dearest brother, to dis- 
turb any one who is faithful and mindful of the 
Gospel, and retains the commands of the apostle 
who forewarns us ; if in the last days certain 
persons, proud, contumacious, and enemies of 
God's priests, either depart from the Church or 
act against the Church, since both the Lord and 
His apostles have previously foretold that there 
should be such. Nor let any one wonder that 
the sen^ant placed over them should be for- 
saken by some, when His own disciples forsook 
the Lord Himself, who performed such great 
and wonderful works, and illustrated the attri- 
butes of God the Father by the testimony of 
His doings. And yet He did not rebuke them 
when they went away, nor even severely threaten 
them , but rather, turning to His apostles. He 
said, "Will ye also go away? "3 manifestly ob- 
serving the law whereby a man left to his own 

> Hos. IX. 4. 
2 Isa. XXX. I. 
■3 John vi. 1^. 

liberty, and established in his own choice, him- 
self desires for himself either death or salvation. 
Nevertheless, Peter,* upon whom by the same 
Lord the Church had been built, speaking one 
for all, and answering with the voice of the 
Church, says, "Lord, to whom shall we go? 
Thou hast the words of eternal life ; and we be- 
lieve, and are sure that Thou art the Christ, the 
Son of the living God : " s signifying, doubtless, 
and showing that those who departed from Christ 
perished by their own fault, yet that the Church 
which believes on Christ, and holds that which 
it has once learned, never departs from Him at 
all, and that those are the Church who remain in 
the house of God ; but that, on the other hand, 
they are not the plantation planted by God the 
Father, whom we see not to be established with 
the stability of wheat, but blown about like chaff 
by the breath of the enemy scattering them, of 
whom John also in his epistle says, " They went 
out from us, but they were not of us ; for if they 
had been of us, no doubt they would have con- 
tinued with us." ^ Paul also warns us, when evil 
men perish out of the Church, not to be dis- 
turbed, nor to let our faith be lessened by the 
departure of the faithless. " For what," he says, 
"if some of them have departed from the faith? 
Hath their unbehef made the faith of God of 
none effect ? God forbid ! For God is true, 
but every man a liar." ^ 

8. For our own part, it befits our conscience, 
dearest brother, to strive that none should per- 
ish going out of the Church by our fault ; but if 
any one, of his own accord and by his own sin, 
should perish, and should be unwilling to repent 
and to return to the Church, that we who are 
anxious for their well-being should be 'blameless 
in the day of judgment, and that they alone 
should remain in punishment who refused to be 
healed by the wholesomeness of our advice. 
Nor ought the reproaches of the lost to move 
us in any degree to depart from the right path 
and from the sure rule, since also the apostle 
instructs us, saying, " If I should please men, I 
should not be the servant of Christ."** There 
is a great difference whether one desires to -de- 
serve well of men or of God. If we seek to 
please men, the Lord is offended. But if we 
strive and labour that we may please God, 
we ought to contemn human reproaches and 
abuse. 

9. But that I did not immediately write to 
you, dearest brother, about Fortunatus, that 
pseudo-bishop, constituted by a few, and those, 

< [Cyprian could not have written this letter to Cornelius had he 
recognised in him, as a successor of Peter, any other than the gifts 
which he supposed common to all bishops.] 

5 Matt. XV. v3. 

* I John ii. 19. 
' Rom. iii. 3, 4. 

* Gal. i. lo. 

i42 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

inveterate heretics, the matter was not such as i 
ought at once and hastily to be brought under ; 
your notice, as if it were great or to be feared ; i 
especially since you already know well enough 
the name of Fortunatus, who is one of the five 
presbyters who some time back deserted from 
the Church, and were lately excommunicated by 
the judgment of our fellow-bishops,' men both 
numerous and entitled to the greatest respect, 
who on this matter wrote to you last year. Also 
you would recognise Felicissimus, the standard- 
bearer of sedition, who himself also is comprised 
in those same letters long ago written to you by 
our co-bishops,' and who not only was excom- 
municated by them here, but moreover was lately 
driven from the Church by you there. Since I 
was confident that these things were in your 
knowledge, and knew for certain that they abode 
in your memor)' and discipline, I did not think 
it necessary that the follies of heretics should be 
told you quickly and urgently. For indeed it 
ought not to pertain to the majesty or the dignity 
of the Catholic Church, to concern itself with 
what the audacity of heretics and schismatics 
may attempt among themselves. For Novatian's 
party is also said to have now made Maximus 
the presbyter — who was lately sent to us as an 
ambassador for Novatian, and rejected from 
communion with us — their false bishop in that 
place ; and yet I had not written to you about 
this, since all these things are slighted by us ; 
and I had sent to you lately the names of the 
bishops appointed there, who with wholesome 
and sound discijjline govern the brethren in the 
Catholic Church.- And this certainly, therefore, 
it was decided by the advice of all of us to 
write to you, that there might be found a short 
method of destroying error and of finding out 
truth, that you and our colleagues might know 
to whom to write, and reciprocally, from whom 
it behoved you to receive letters ; but if any 
one, except those whom we have comprised in 
our letter, should dare to write to you, you would 
know either that he was polluted by sacrifice, or 
by receiving a certificate, or that he was one of 
the heretics, and therefore perverted and profane. 
Nevertheless, having gained an oj^portunity, by 
means of a very great friend and a clerk, I have 
written to you by Felicianus the acolyte, whom 
you had sent with Perseus our colleague, among 
other matters which were to l)e brought under 
your notice from their party, about that Fortu- 
natus also. P)Ut while our brother Felicianus is 
• either retarded there by the wind, or is detained 
by receiving other letters from us, he has been 
forestalled by Felicissimus hastening to you. 

' [" Our fellow-bishops." This council was held on the return 
of Cyprian, a d. 251, soon after Easter.] 

^ [They were not appointed there by any " favour of the Apos- 
tolic See," and Cyprian knows much more of their existence as bishops 
than Cornelius does.] 

For thus wickedness always hastens, as if by its 
speed it could prevail against innocence. 

10. But I intimated to you, my brother, by 
Felicianus, that there had come to Carthage, 
Privatus, an old heretic in the colony of Lam- 
besa, many years ago condemned for many and 
grave crimes by the judgment of ninety bishops, 
and severely remarked upon in the letters of 
Fabian and Donatus, also our predecessors, as is 
not hidden from your knowledge ; ^ who, when 
he said that he wished to plead his cause before 
us in the council which we held on the Ides of 
May then past, and was not permitted, made for 
himself that Fortunatus a pretended bishop, 
worthy of his college. And there had also come 
with him a certain Felix, whom he himself 
had formerly appointed a pseudo-bishop outside 
the Church, in heresy. But Jovinus also, and 
Maximus, were present as companions with the 
proved heretic,"* condemned for wicked sacrifices 
and crimes proved against them by the judg- 
ment of nine bishops, our colleagues, and again 
excommunicated also by many of us last year in 
a council. And with these four was also joined 
Repostus of Suturnica, who not only fell himself 
in the persecution, but cast down by sacrile- 
gious persuasion the greatest part of his people. 
These five, with a few who either had sacrificed, 
or had evil consciences, concurred in desiring 
Fortunatus as a false bishop for themselves, that 
so, their crimes agreeing, the ruler should be 
such as those who are ruled. 

11. Hence also, dearest brother, you may now 
know the other falsehoods which desperate and 
abandoned men have there spread about, that 
although, of the sacrificers, or of the heretics, 
there were not more than five false bishops who 
came to Carthage, and appointed Fortunatus as 
the associate of their madness ; yet they, as chil- 
dren of the devil, and full of lies, dared, as you 
write, to boast that there were present twenty- 
five bishops ; which falsehood they boasted here 
also before among our brethren, saying that twen- 
ty-five bishops would come from Numidia to 
make a bishop for them. After they were de- 
tected and confounded in this their lie (only 
five who had made shipwreck coming together, 
and these being excommunicated by us), they 
sailed to Rome with the reward of their lies, as 
if the truth could not sail after them, and con- 
vict their lying tongues by proof of the certainty. 
And this, my brother, is real madness, not to 
think nor to know that lies do not long deceive, 
that the night only lasts so long as until the day 
brightens ; but that when the day is clear and 
the sun has arisen, the darkness and gloom give 
place to light, and the robberies which were go- 

3 [Elucidation XI.] 

< Or, " with Privatus, the proved heretic; " or, according to the 
Oxford translation, " a proud heretic." [See p. 308.J 

I 
THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

343 

ing on through the night cease. In fine, if you 
were to seek the names from them, they would 
have none which they could even falsely give. 
For such among them is the penury even of 
wicked men, that neither of sacrificers nor of 
heretics can there be collected twenty-five for 
them ; and yet, for the sake of deceiving the ears 
of the simple and the absent, the number is 
exaggerated by a lie, as if, even if this number 
were true, either the Church would be overcome 
by heretics, or righteousness by the unrighteous. 

12. Nor does it behove me, dearest brother, 
to do like things to them, and to go through in 
my discourse those things which they have com- 
mitted, and still commit, since we have to con- 
sider what it becomes God's priests to utter and 
to write. Nor ought grief to speak among us so 
much as shame, and I ought not to seem oro- 
voked rather to heap together reproaches than 
crimes and sins. Therefore I am silent upon the 
deceits practised in the Church. I pass over the 
conspiracies and adulteries, and the various kinds 
of crimes. That circumstance alone, however, 
of their wickedness, in which the cause is not 
mine, nor man's, but God's, I do not think must 
be withheld ; that from the very first day of the 
persecution, while the recent crimes of the guilty 
were still hot, and not only the devil's altars, but 
the very hands and the mouths of the lapsed, 
were still smoking with the abominable sacrifices, 
they did not cease to communicate with the 
lapsed, and to interfere with their repentance, 
(iod cries, " He that sacrificeth unto any gods, 
save unto the Lord only, shall be rooted out."' 
And in the Gospel the Lord says, " Whosoever 
shall deny me, him will I deny." ^ And in an- 
other place the divine indignation and anger are 
not silent, saying, " To them hast thou poured 
out a drink-offering, and to them hast thou offered 
a meat-offering. Shall I not be angry with these 
things? saith the Lord."^ And they interfere 
that God may not be entreated, who Himself de- 
clares that He is angry ; they interpose that 
Christ may not be besought with prayers and 
satisfactions, who professes that him who denies 
Him He will deny. 

13. In the very time of persecution we wrote 
letters on this matter, but we were not attended 
to. A full council being held, we decreed, not 
only with our consent, but also with our threat- 
ening, that the brethren should repent,'' and that 
none should rashly grant peace to those who did 
not repent. And those sacrilegious persons rush 
with impious madness against God's priests, de- 
parting from the Church ; and raising their par- 
ricidal arms against the Church, in order that 

' F.x. xxil. 20. 
- Matl. X. 33. 
3 Isa. Ivii 6. 

* Strictly, the phrase here as elsewhere is, " should do penance," 
' poeiiitentiam agerent." 

the malice of the devil may consummate their 
work, 5 take pains that the divine clemency may 
not heal the wounded in His Church. They 
corrupt the repentance of the wretched men by 
the deceitfulness of their lies, that it may not 
satisfy an offended God — that he who has either 
blushed or feared to be a Christian before, may 
not afterwards seek Christ his Lord, nor he re- 
turn to the Church who had departed from the 
Church. Efforts are used that the sins may not 
be atoned for with just satisfactions and lamenta- 
tions, that the wounds may not be washed away 
with tears. True peace is done away by the 
falsehood of a false peace ; the healthful bosom 
of a mother is closed by the interference of the 
stepmother, that weeping and groaning may not 
be heard from the breast and from the lips of 
the lapsed. And beyond this, the lapsed are 
compelled with their tongues and lips, in the 
Capitol ^ wherein before they had sinned, to re- 
proach the priests — to assail with contumelies 
and with abusive words the confessors and vir- 
gins, and those righteous men who are most 
eminent for the praise of the faith, and most 
glorious in the Church. By which things, indeed, 
it is not so much the modesty and the humility 
and the shame of our people that are smitten, 
as their own hope and life that are lacerated. 
For neither is it he who hears, but he who utters 
the reproach, that is wretched ; nor is it he who 
is smitten by his brother, but he who smites a 
brother, that is a sinner under the law ; and when 
the guilty do a wrong to the innocent, they 
suffer the injury who think that they are doing it. 
Finally, their mind is smitten by these things, 
and their spirit is dull, and their sense of right 
is estranged : it is God's wrath that they do not 
perceive their sins, lest repentance should follow, 
as it is written, " And God gave them the spirit 
of torpor," 7 that is, that they may not return and 
be healed, and be made whole after their sins by 
just prayers and satisfactions. Paul the apostle in 
his epistle lays it down, and says, "They received 
not the love of the truth, that they might be 
saved. And for this cause God shall send them 
strong delusion, that they should believe a lie : 
that they all might be judged who believed not 
the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteous- 
ness." ^ The highest degree of happiness is, not 
to sin ; the second, to acknowledge our sins. In 
the former, innocence flows pure and unstained 
to preserve us ; in the latter, there comes a 
medicine to heal us. Both of these they have 
lost by offending God, both because the grace is 
lost which is received from the sanctification of 

5 " That by the malice of the devil they may consummate their 
work: " 7'. /. 

<> Sci7. Capitol of Carthage, for the provinces imitated Rome in 
this respect. Du Cange gives many instances. 

7 Isa. xxix. 10: ong. " iratispunctionis." 

^ 2 Thess. ii. 10-12. 

344 

THE EPISTLES Op-CYPRIAN. 

baptism, and repentance comes not to their help, 
whereby the sin is healed. Think you, brother, 
that their wickednesses against God are trifling, 
their sins small and moderate — since by their 
means the majesty of an angry God is not be- 
sought, since the anger and the fire and the day 
of the Lord is not feared — since, when Anti- 
christ is at hand, the faith of the militant people 
is disarmed by the taking away of the power of 
Christ and His fear? Let the laity see to it how 
they may amend this.' A heavier labour is in- 
cumbent on the priests in asserting and main- 
taining the majesty of God, that we seem not to 
neglect anything in this respect, when God ad- 
monishes us, and says, " And now, O ye priests, 
this commandment is for you. If ye will not 
hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give 
glory unto my name, saith the Lord, I will even 
send a curse upon you, and I will curse your 
blessing." - Is honour, then, given to God when 
the majesty and decree of God are so con- 
temned, that when He declares that He is in- 
dignant and angry with those who sacrifice, and 
when He threatens eternal penalties and per- 
petual punishments, it is proposed by the sacri- 
legious, and said. Let not the wrath of God be 
considered, let not the judgment of the Lord 
be feared, let not any knock at the Church of 
Christ ; but repentance being done away with, 
and no confession of sin being made, the bishops 
being despised and trodden under foot, let peace 
be proclaimed by the presbyters in deceitful 
words ; and lest the lapsed should rise up, or 
those placed without should return to the 
Church, let communion be offered to those who 
are not in communion? 

14. To these also it was not sufficient that 
they had withdrawn from the Gospel, that they 
had taken away from the lapsed the hope of sat- 
isfaction, and repentance, that they had taken 
away those involved in frauds or stained with 
adulteries, or polluted with the deadly contagion 
of sacrifices, lest they should entreat God, or 
make confession of their crimes in the Church, 
from all feeling and fruit of repentance ; that 
they had set up J outside for themselves — out- 
side the Church, and opposed to the Church, a 
conventicle of their abandoned faction, when 
there had flowed together a band of creatures 
with evil consciences, and unwilling to entreat 
and to satisfy God. After such things as these, 
moreover, they still dare — a false bishop having 
been appointed for them by heretics — to set 
sail and to bear letters from schismatic and pro- 
fane persons to the throne of Peter, and to the 
chief church whence priestly unity takes its 

> [The nrsnni^ation of the hiiy into their freedom and franchises 
is part of the C'ypriaiiic system, and ;;ave birih 10 the whole fabric 
of fice consiitiitioiis, in England and eUewlicre.J 

- Mai. li I, 2. 

* " Unless ilicy had set up, '" v i. 

source ; ■♦ and not to consider that these were 
the Romans whose faith was praised in the 
preaching of the apostle, to whom faithlessness 
could ha\'e no access.5 But what was the rea- 
son of their coming and announcing the making 
of the pseudo-bishop in opposition to the bish- 
ops ? For either they are pleased with what they 
have done, and persist in their wickedness ; or, 
if they are displeased and retreat, thfey know 
whither they may return. For, as it has been 
decreed by all of us ^ — and is equally fair and 
just — that the case of every one should be 
heard there where the crime has been com- 
mitted ; and a portion of the flock has been 
assigned to each individual pastor, which he is 
to rule and govern, having to give account of his 
doing to the Lord ; it certainly behoves those 
over whom we are placed not to run about nor 
to break up the harmonious agreement of the 
bishops with their crafty and deceitful rashness, 
but there to plead their cause, where they may 
be able to have both accusers and \vitnesses of 
their crime ; unless perchance the authority of 
the bishops constituted in Africa seems to a few 
desperate and abandoned men to be too little, ^ 
who have already judged concerning them, and 
have lately condemned, by the gravity of their 
judgment, their conscience bound in many bonds 
of sins. Already their case has been examined, 
already sentence concerning them has been pro- 
nounced ; nor is it fitting for the dignity of priests 
to be blamed for the levity of a changeable and 
inconstant mind, when the Lord teaches and 
says, " Let your communication be. Yea, yea ; 
Nay, nay." ** 

15. If the number of those who judged con 
cerning them last year be reckoned with the 
presbyters and deacons, then there were more 
present to the judgment and hearing than are 
those very same persons who now seem to be 
associated with Fortunatus. For you ought to 
know, dearest brother, that after he was made a 
pseudo-bishop by the heretics, he was at once 
deserted by almost all. For those to whom in 
past time delusions were offered, and deceitful 
words were given, to the effect that they were to 
return to the Church together ; after they saw 
that a false bishop was made there, learned that 
they had been fooled and deceived, and are 
daily returning and knocking at the door of the 

* [The Apostolic See of the West was necessarily all this in the 
eyes of an unambitious faithful Western co-bishop; but the letter it- 
self proves that it was not the See of one who had any authority over 
or apart from his co-bishops. Let us not read into his expressions 
ideas which are an after-thought, and which conflict with the life and 
all the testimony of Cyprian.] 

5 I To be interpreted by Epistle xxx. p. 308, supra. Elucidation 
XII. J 

*> [Note this decree, " by all of us," and what follows. J 

7 Only "desperate and .abandoned men" could make light of 
other bishops, by carrying their case from their own province to Korne 
This was forbidden by canons. Cyprian's respect for the mother Se«» 
was like that felt by Anelo-Americans for Canterbury, involving no 
subjection in the least degree. t>ee Elucidation Xlli.j 

"* Matt V. 37- 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

345 

Church ; while we, meanwhile, by whom account 
is to be given to the Lord, are anxiously weigh- 
ing and. carefully examining who ought to be re- 
ceived and admitted into the Church. For some 
are either hindered by their crimes to such a 
degree, or they are so obstinately and firmly op- 
posed by their brethren, that they cannot be re- 
ceived at all except with offence and risk to a 
great many. For neither must some putridities 
be so collected and brought together, that the 
parts which are sound and whole should be in- 
jured ; nor is that pastor serviceable or wise who 
so mingles the diseased and affected sheep with 
his flock as. to contaminate the whole flock with 
the infection of the clinging evil. (Do iiot pay 
attention to their number.' For one who fears 
God is better than a thousand impious sons, as 
the Lord spoke by the prophet, saying, " O son, 
do not delight in ungodly sons, though they 
•multiply to thee^ except the fear of the Lord be 
with them." *) Oh, if you could, dearest broth- 
er, be with us here when those evil and perverse 
men return from schism, you would see what 
labour is mine to persuade patience to our breth- 
ren, that they should calm their grief of mind, 
and consent to receive and heal the wicked. For 
as they rejoice and are glad when those who are 
endurable and less guilty return, so, on the other 
hand, they murmur and are dissatisfied as often 
as the incorrigible and violent, and those who 
are contaminated either by adulteries or by sac- 
rifices, and who, in addition to this, are proud 
besides, so return to the Church, as to corrupt 
the good dispositions within it. Scarcely, do I 
persuade the people ; nay, I extort it from them, 
that they should suffer such to be admitted. And 
the grief of the fraternity is made the more just, 
from the fact that one and another who, notwith- 
standing the opposition and contradiction of the 
people, have been received by my facility, have 
proved worse than they had been before, and 
have not been able to keep the faith of their 
repentance, because they had not come with true 
repentance. 

." i6* But what am I to say of those who have 
now sailed to you with Felicissimus, guilty of 
every crime, as ambassadors sent by Fortunatus 
the pseudo-bishop, bringing to you letters as 
false as he himself is false, whose letters they 
bring, as his conscience is full of sins, as his life 
is execrable, as it is disgraceful ; so that, even if 
they were in the Church, such people ought to 
be expelled from the Church. In addition, since 
they have known their own conscience, they do 
not dare to come to us or to approach to the 

■ [Exod. xxiii. 2. The best comment on Cyprian's system is to 
•be found in the Cotnmonitory of Vincent of L«nns (a.d. 450), who 
lays down the rule, that if the whole Church revolts from the faith 
save only a few, those few are the Catholics.] 

- Ecclus. xvi. I, 2. The' words in parenthesis are not found in 
soauy editions. 

threshold of the Church, but wander about, with- 
out her, through the province, for the sake of 
circumventing and defrauding the brethren ; and 
now, being sufficiently known to all, and every- 
where excluded for their crimes, they sail thither 
also to youi For they cannot have the face to 
approach to us, or to stand before us, since the 
crimes which are charged upon them by- the 
brethren are most grievous and grave. If they 
wish to undergo our judgment, let them come. 
Finally, if they can find any excuse or defence, 
let us see what thought they have of making 
satisfaction, what fruit of repentance they bring 
forward. The Church is neither closed here 
to any one, ilor is the bishQp denied to any. 
Our patience, and facility, and humanity are 
ready for those who come. I entreat all to re- 
turn into the Church. I beg all our fellow-sol- 
diers to be included within the camp of Christ, 
and the dwelling-place of God the Father. I 
remit everything. I shut my eyes to many things, 
with the desire and the wish to gather together 
the brotherhood. Even those things which are 
committed against God I do not investigate with 
the full judgment of religion. I almost sin my- 
self, in remitting sins^ more than I ought. I 
embrace with prompt and full love those who 
return with repentance, confessing their sin with 
lowly and unaffected atonement."* 

1 7. But if there are some who think that they 
can return to the Church not with prayers but 
with threats, or suppose that they can make a 
way for themselves, not with lamentation and 
atonements, but with terrors, let them take it 
for certain that against such the Church of the 
Lord stands closed ; nor does the camp of Christ, 
unconquered and firm with the Lord's protec- 
tion, yield to threats. The priest of God. hold- 
ing fast the Gospel and keeping Christ's precepts 
may be slain ; he cannot be conquered. Zach- 
arias, God's priest, suggests and furnishes to us 
examples of courage and faith, who, when he 
could not be terrified with threats and stoning, 
was slain in the temple of God, at the same time 
crying out and saying, what we also cry out and 
say against the heretics, " Thus saith the Lord, 
Ye have forsaken the ways of the Lord, and the 
Lord will forsake you."s For because a few 
rash and wicked men forsake the heavenly and 
wholesome ways of the Lord, and not doing holy 
things are deserted by the Holy Spirit, we also 
ought not therefore to be unmindful of the divine 
tradition, so as to think that the crimes of mad- 
men are greater than the judgments of priests ; 
or conceive that human endeavours can do 

3 [Sec vol. ii. pp. 15, 22. And for this ecclesiastical " remis- 
sion," 2 Cor. it. 10, whicn Cyprian imitates.] 

* ^What a contrast to the hierarchical spirit of the Middle Ages, 
this pnmitive compassion for penitents! Tftink of Canossa.] 

s 2 Chron. xxiv. so. 

)46 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

more to attack, than divine protection avails to 
defend. 

1 8. Is the dignity of the CathoHc Church, 
dearest brother, to be laid aside, is the faithful 
and uncorrupted majesty of the people placed 
within it,' and the priestly authority and power 
also, all to be laid aside for this, that those who 
are set without the Church may say that they 
wish to judge concerning a prelate in the Church ? 
heretics concerning a Christian? wounded men 
about a whole man ? maimed concerning a sound 
man? lapsed concerning one who stands fast? 
guilty concerning their judge? sacrilegious men 
concerning a priest? What is left but that the 
Church should yield to the Capitol, and that, 
while the priests depart and remove the Lord's 
altar, the images and idols should pass over with 
their altars into the sacred and venerable assem- 
bly of our clergy, and a larger and fuller material 
fur declaiming against us and abusing us be af- 
forded to Novatian ; if they who have sacrificed 
and have publicly denied Christ should begin 
not only to be entreated and admitted without 
jienance done, but, moreover, in addition, to 
domineer by the power of their terror? 

19. If they desire peace, let them lay aside 
their arms. If they make atonement, why do 
they threaten? or if they threaten, let them 
know that they are not feared by God's priests. 
For even Antichrist, when he shall begin to come, 
shall not enter into the Church because he threat- 
ens ; neither shall we yield to his arms and vio- 
lence, ()ecause he declares that he will destroy 
us if we resist. Heretics arm us when they think 
that we are terrified by their threatenings ; nor 
<1() thev cast us down on our face, but rather 
they lift us up and inflame us, when they make 
peace itself worse to the brethren than persecu- 
tion. And we desire, indeed, that they may not 
fill uj) with crime what they speak in madness, 
that they who sin with ];crfidious and cruel words 
may not also sin in deeds. Wc pray and be- 
seech Cod, whom they do not cease to provoke 
and exasperate, that He will soften their hearts, 
that they may lay aside their madness, and re- 
turn to soundness of mind ; that their breasts, 
covered over with the darkness of sins, may 
acknowledge the light of repentance, and that 
they may rather seek that the prayers and sup- 
plications of the priest may be poured out on 
their behalf, than themselves j^our out the blood 
of the priest. But if they continue in their mad- 
ness, and cruelly persevere in these their parrici- 
dal deceits and threats, no priest of Cod is so 
weak, so prostrate, and so abject, so inefficient 
by the weakness of human infirmity, as not to 
be aroused against the enemies and impugners 

' [Cyprian's love for the people is always thus conspicuous. 
Here the majesty and dignity of the Catholic Church is identified with 
all estates of men lliereiii.J 

of God by strength from above ; as not to find 
his humility and weakness animated by the vig- 
our and strength of the Lord who protects him. 
It matters nothing to us by whom, or when we 
are slain, since we shall receive from the Lord 
the reward of our death and of our blood. Their 
concision ^ is to be mourned and lamented, whom 
the devil so blinds, that, without considering the 
eternal punishments of Gehenna, they endeavour 
to imitate the coming of Antichrist, who is now 
approaching. 

20. And although I know, dearest brother, 
from the mutual love which w-e owe and mani- 
fest one towards another, that you always read 
my letters to the very distinguished clerg}' w'ho 
preside with you there,^ and to your very holy 
and large congregation,-* yet now I both warn 
and ask you to do by my request what at other 
times you do of your own accord and courtesy ; 
that so, by the reading of this my letter, if any 
contagion of envenomed speech and of pestilent 
propagation has crept in there, it may be all 
purged out of the ears and of the hearts of the 
brethren, and the sound and sincere afiection of 
the good may be cleansed anew from all the 
filth of heretical disparagement. 

21. But for the rest, let our most beloved 
brethren firmly decline, and avoid the words and 
conversations of those whose word creeps on- 
wards like a cancer ; as the apostle says, " Evil 
communications corrupt good manners." 5 And 
again : " A man that is an heretic, after one 
admonition, reject : knowing that he that is such 
is subverted, and sinneth, being condemned of 
himself." ^ And the Holy Spirit speaks by Sol- 
omon, saying, " A perverse man carrieth perdition 
in his mouth ; and in his lips he hideth a fire." ^ 
Also again, he warneth us, and says, " Hedge in 
thy ears with thorns, and hearken not to a 
wicked tongue." ** And again : " A wicked doer 
giveth heed to the tongue of the unjust ; but a 
righteous man does not listen to lying lips."' 
And although I know that our brotherhood 
there, '° assuredly fortified by your foresight, and 
besides sufficiently cautious by their own vigi- 
lance, cannot be taken nor deceived by the 
poisons of heretics, and that the teachings and 
precepts of God prevail with them only in pro- 
portion as the fear of God is in them ; )et, even 
although needlessly, either my solicitude or my 

2 [Phil. iii. 2. The apostle calls the Judaizcrs a concision, the 
particle (';/;' (>/7' and thrown aw.iy in the rite of circumcision: a re- 
jected schism. See Joel iii. 14, Kng., margin. Elucidation XII. ] 

^ [Note this significant language. Our author has no conception 
of a pontifical system excluding the presbytery from its part and place 
in the councils and regimen of the Church.] 

■• [Klucidation XV.; also Elucidation XIII.] 

I Cor. XV. 33. 

Tit. iii. 10, II. 

Prov. xvi. 27. 

Ecclus. xxviii. 24 (Viilg. 28). 

Prov. xvii. 4 . . ^ 

( It must be seen what all this implies as to the position of Cor- 
nelius and (" our brotherhood there") his comprovincial bishops, 
i.e., in their relations to Cyprian. j 

6 
7 
S 

9 

10 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

347 

love persuaded me to write these things to you, 
that no commerce should be entered into with 
such ; that no banquets nor conferences be en- 
tertained with the wicked ; but that we should 
be as much separated from them, as they are 
deserters from the Church ; because it is written, 
" If he shall neglect to hear the Church, let him 
be unto thee as a heathen man and a publican.'" 
And the blessed apostle not only warns, but also 
commands us to withdraw from such. " We 
command you," he says, " in the name of Jesus 
Christ our Lord, that ye withdraw yourselves 
from every brother that walketh disorderly, and 
not after the tradition which he received of us." ^ 
There can be no fellowship between faith and 
faithlessness. He who is not with Christ, who 
is an adversary of Christ, who is hostile to His 
unity and peace, cannot be associated with us. 
If they come with prayers and atonements, let 
them be heard ; if they heap together curses 
and threats, let them be rejected. I bid you, 
dearest brother, ever heartily farewell.^ 

EPISTLE LV.4 

TO THE PEOPLE OF THIBARIS, EXHORTING 
TO MARTYRDOM. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN FIRST OF ALL EXCUSES 
HIMSELF TO THE THIBARITANS THAT HE HAD NOT 
BEEN TO VISIT THEM, AND GIVES THEM WARN- 
ING OF THE PERSECUTION AT HAND ; HE THEN 
FURNISHES INDUCEMENTS READILY TO UNDERGO 
MARTYRDOM. 5 

I. Cyprian to the people abiding at Thibaris, 
greeting. I had indeed thought, beloved breth- 
ren, and prayerfully desired — if the state of 
things and the condition of the times permitted, 
in conformity with what you frequently desired 
— myself to come to you ; and being present 
with you, then to strengthen the brotherhood 
with such moderate powers of exhortation as I 
possess. But since I am detained by such urgent 
affairs, that I have not the power to travel far 
from this place, and to be long absent from the 
people over whom by divine mercy I am placed, 
I have written in the meantime this letter, to be 
to you in my stead. For as, by the condescen- 
sion of the Lord instructing me, I am very often 
instigated and warned, I ought to bring unto 
your conscience also the anxiety of my warning. 

' Matt xviii. 17. 

^ 2 Thess. iii. 6. [Cyprian virtually commands Cornelius, through 
the Apostle, what course to take. Elucidation XIII.) 

3 [Had such a letter been sent by Cornelius to Cyprian, — so full 
of warning, advice, and even direction, — what would not have been I 
made of it as a " Decretal " ? a.-d. 252.] ! 

* Oxford ed : Ep. Iviii. 

5 Hence are suggested illustrations of good men from the begin- 
ning of the world who have suf.ered marr\'rdom, especially that which 
? uruasses all examples, the passion of our Lord. What incitement is 
.afforded t.i the endurance of martyrdom by the brave and ready endur- 
ing of t!ie contests of the stadium and the theatre. Finally, let the 
reward be considered, which now, moreover, aniiuales and influences , 
us to sustain everythn.g. I 

For you ought to know and to believe, and hold 
it for certain, that the day of affliction has begun 
to hang over our heads, and the end^ of the 
world and the time of Antichrist to draw near, 
so that we must all stand prepared for the battle ; 
nor consider anything but the glory of life eter- 
nal, and the crown of the confession of the Lord ; 
and not regard those things which are coming 
as being such as were those which have passed 
away. A severer and a fiercer fight is now threat- 
ening, for which the soldiers of Christ ought to 
prepare themselves with uncorrupted faith and 
robust courage, considering that they drink the 
cup of Christ's blood daily,7 for the reason that 
they themselves also may be able to shed their 
blood for Christ. For this is to wish to be found 
with Christ, to imitate that which Christ both 
taught and did, according to the Apostle John, 
who said, " He that saith he abideth in Christ, 
ought himself also so to walk even as He 
walked."^ Moreover, the blessed Apostle Paul 
exhorts and teaches, saying, "We are God's 
children ; but if children, then heirs of God, and 
joint-heirs with Christ ; if so be that we suffer 
with Him, that we may also be glorified to- 
gether."? 

2. Which things must all now be considered 
by us, that no one may desire anything from 
the world that is now dying, but may follow 
Christ, who both lives for ever, and quickens 
His servants, who are established in the faith of 
His name. For there comes the time, beloved 
brethren, which our Lord long ago foretold and 
taught us was approaching, saying, "The time 
cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think 
that he doeth God service. And these things 
they will do unto you, because they have not 
known the Father nor me. But these things 
have I told you, that when the time shall come, 
ye may remember that I told you of them." '° 
Nor let any one wonder that we are harassed 
with constant persecutions, and continually tried 
with increasing afflictions, when the Lord before 
predicted that these things would happen in tlie 
last times, and has instructed us for the warfare 
by the teaching and exhortation of His words. 
Peter also, His apostle, has taught that persecu- 
tions occur for the sake of our being proved, and 
that we also should, by the example of righteous 
men who have gone before us, be joined to the 
love of God by death and sufferings. For he 
wrote in his epistle, and said, " Beloved, think 
it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is 
to try you, nor do ye fall away, as if some new 

*> Occasum. 

^ [It has been a question whether this daily reception of the coni- 
munion was confined to times of persecution, or was more generally 
the custom. It seems to me exceptional. Freeman, vol. i. p. 383.] 

" 1 John ii. 6. 

9 Rom. viii. 16, 17. 
'"^ John xvi. 2-4. 

145 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

thing happened unto you ; but as often as ye 
partake in Christ's sufferings, rejoice in all things, 
that when His glory shall be revealed, ye may be 
glad also with exceeding joy. If ye be re- 
proached in the name of Christ, happy are ye ; 
for the name of the majesty and power of the 
Lord restethon you, which indeed on their part 
is blasphemed, but on our part is glorified." ' 
Now the apostles taught us those things which 
they themselves also learnt from the Lord's pre- 
cepts and the heavenly commands, the Lord 
Himself thus strengthening us, and saying, 
"There is no man that hath left house, or land, 
or parents, or brethren, or sisters, or wife, or 
children, for the kingdom of God's sake, who 
shall not receive sevenfold more in this present 
time, and- in the world to come life everlasting."^ 
And again He says, " Blessed are ye when men 
shall hate you, and shall separate you from their 
company, and shall cast you out, and shall re- 
proach your name as evil for the Son of man's 
sake. Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy ; 
for, behold, -your reward is great in heaven." ^ 

3. The Lord desired that we should rejoice 
and leap for joy in persecutions, because, when 
persecutions occur, then are given the crowns 
of faith, then the soldiers of God are proved, 
then the heavens are opened to martyrs. For 
we have not in such a way given our name to 
warfare that we ought only to think about peace, 
and draw back from and refuse war, when in this 
very warfare the Lord walked first — the Teach- 
er of humility, and endurance, and suffering — so 
that wliat He taught to be done, He first of all 
did, and what He exhorts to suffer, He Himself 
first suffered for us. Let it be before your eyes, 
beloved brethren, that He who alone received all 
judgment from the Father, and who will come 
to judge, has already declared the decree of His 
judgment and of His fiiture recognition, foretell- 
ing and testifying that He will confess those 
before His Father who confess Him, and will 
deny those who deny Him. If we could escape 
death, we might reasonably fear to die. But 
since, on the other hand, it is necessary that a 
mortal man should die, we should embrace the 
occasion that comes by divine promise and con- 
descension, and accomplish the ending provided 
by death with the reward of immortality ; nor 
fear to be slain, since we are sure when we are 
slain to be crowned. 

4. Nor let any one, beloved brethren, when 
he beholds our people driven away and scat- 
tered by the fear of persecution, be disturbed at 
not seeing the brotherhood gathered together, 
nor hearing the bishops discoursing.'' All are 

' I Pet. Iv. 12-14. 
^ L«ke xviii. sg, 30. 
3 Luke vi. •-•2, 23. 

* [I'rencliiiv^ the eminent duty of true bishops. 
330, r.o:e 4, iu/)ra.\ 

See letter li 

not able to be there together, who may not kill, 
but who must be killed. Wherever, in those 
days, each one of the brethren shall be sepa- 
rated from the flock for a time, by the necessity 
of the season, in body, not in spirit, let him not 
be moved at the terror of that flight ; nor, if he 
withdraw and be concealed, let him be alarmed 
at the solitude of the desert place. He is not 
alone, whose companion in flight Christ is ; he 
is not alone who, keeping God's temple where- 
soever he is, is not without God. And if a 
robber should fall upon you, a fugitive in the 
solitude or in the mountains ; if a wild beast 
should attack you ; if hunger, or thirst, or cold 
should distress you, or the tempest and the 
storm should overwhelm you hastening in a 
rapid voyage over the seas, Christ everywhere 
looks upon His soldier fighting; and for the 
sake of persecution, for the honour of His name, 
gives a reward to him when he dies, as He has 
promised that He will give in the resurrection. 
Nor is the glory of martyrdom less that he has 
not perished publicly and before many, since 
the cause of perishing is to perish for Christ. 
That Witness who proves martyrs, and crowns 
them, suffices for a testimony of his martyrdom. 
5. Let us, beloved brethren,, imitate righteous 
Abel, who initiated martyrdoms, he first being 
slain for righteousness' sake. Let us imitate 
Abraham, the friend of God, who did not delay 
to offer his son as a victim with his own hands, 
obeying God with a faith of devotion. Let us 
imitate the three children Ananias, Azarias, and 
Misael, who, neither frightened by their youth- 
ful age nor broken down by captivity, Judea 
being conquered and Jerusalem taken, over- 
came the king by the power of faith in his 
own kingdom ; who, when bidden to worship 
the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had 
made, stood forth stronger both than the king's 
threats and the flames, calling out and attest- 
ing their faith by these words : " O king Nebu- 
chadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee 
in this matter. For the God whom we serve 
is able to deliver us from the burning fiery 
furnace ; and He will deliver us out of thine 
hands, O king. But if not, be it known unto 
tlice, that we do not serve thy gods, nor wor- 
ship the golden image which thou hast set up." 5 
They believed that they might escape according 
to their faith, but they added, "and if not," 
that the king might know that they could also 
die for the God they worshipped. For this is 
the strength of courage and of faith, to believe 
and to know that God can deliver from present 
death, and yet not to fear death nor to give way, 
that faith may be the more mightily proved. 
The uncorrupted and unconquered might of 

S Dan. iii. i6-i3. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

349 

the Holy Spirit broke forth by their mouth, so 
that the words which the Lord in His Gospel 
spoke are seen to be true : " But when they 
shall seize you, take no thought what ye shall 
speak ; for it shall be given you in that hour 
what ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, 
but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in 
you." • He said that what we are able to speak 
aad to answer is given to us in that hour from 
heaven, and supplied ; and that it is not then 
we who speak, but the Spirit of God our Father, 
who, as He does not depart nor is separated 
from those who confess Him, Himself both 
speaks and is crowned in us. So. Daniel, too, 
when' he was required to worship the idol Bel, 
, which the people and the king then worshipped, 
in asserting the honour of his God, broke forth 
with full faith and freedom, saying, " I worship 
nothing but the Lord my God, who created the 
heaven and the earth." ^ 

6. What shall we say of the cruel tortures of 
the blessed martyrs in the Maccabees,^ and the 
multiform sufferings of the seven brethren, and 
the mother comforting her children in their 
agonies, and herself dying also with her chil- 
dren? Do not they witness the proofs of great 
courage and faith, and exhort us by their suffer- 
ings to the triumphs of martyrdom? What of 
the prophets whom the Holy Spirt quickened 
to the foreknowledge of future events? What 
of the apostles whom the Lord chose? Since 
these righteous men were slain for righteousness' 
sake, have they not taught us also to die? The 
nativity of Christ witnessed at once the martyr- 
,dom of infants, so that they who were two years 
old and under were slain for His name's sake. 
'An age not yet fitted for the battle appeared fit 
for the crown. That it might be manifest that 
, they who are slain for Christ's sake are inno- 
cent, innocent infancy was put to death for His 
name's sake. It is shown that none is free from 
I the peril of persecution, when even these ac- 
complished martyrdoms. But how grave is the 
'case of a Christian man, if he, a servant, is un- 
willing to suffer, when his Master first suffered ; 
and that we should be unwilling to suffer for 
our own sins, when He who had no sin of His 
own suffered for us ! The Son of God suffered 
that He might make us sons of God, and the 
son of man will not suffer that he may continue 
to be a son of God ! If we suffer from the 
world's hatred, Christ first endured the world's 
hatred. If we suffer reproaches in this world, 
if exile, if tortures, the Maker and Lord of the 
world experienced harder things than these, and 
He also warns us, saying, "If the world hate 

' Matt. X. ig, 20. 

- Bel and ihc iJracon, 5. 
I ■" [Kefcned to by St. Pnul, Ueb. xi. 35. T say St. Paul advis- 
icdly. See, to the contrary, Farrar, Si. Paul, p. 6.j 

you, remember that it hated me before you. If 
ye were of the world, the world would love its 
own : but because ye are not of the world, but 
I have chosen you out of the world, therefore 
the world hateth you. Remember the word 
that I said unto you. The servant is not greater 
than his lord. If they have persecuted me, 
they will also persecute you." ■* Whatever our 
Lord and God taught. He also did, that the dis- 
ciple might not be excused if he learns and 
does not. 

7. Nor let any one of you, beloved brethren, 
be so terrified by the fear of future persecution, 
or the coming of the threatening Antichrist, as 
not to be found armed for all things by the 
evangelical exhortations and precepts, and by 

hhe heavenly warnings. Antichrist is coming, 
but above him comes Christ also. 5 The enemy 
goeth about and rageth, but immediately the 
Lord follows to avenge our sufferings and our 
wounds. The adversary is enraged and 'threat- 
ens, but there is One who can deliver us from 
his hands. He is to be feared whose anger no 
one can escape, as He Himself forewarns, and 
says : " Fear not them which kill the body, but 
are not able to kill the soul ; but rather fear 
Him which is able to destroy both body and 
soul in hell."^ And again: "He that loveth 
his life, shall lose it ; and he that hateth his life 
in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal." 7 
And in the Apocalypse He instructs and fore- 
warns, saying, " If any man worship the beast 
and his image, and receive his mark in his fore- 
head or in his hand, the same also shall drink 
of the wine of the wrath of God, mixed in the 
cup of His indignation, and he shall be tor- 
mented with fire and brimstone in the presence 
of the holy angels, and in the presence of the 
Lamb ; and the smoke of their torments shall 
ascend up for ever and ever ; and they shall 
have no rest day nor night, who worship the 
beast and his image." '^ 

8. For the secular contest men are trained 
and prepared, and reckon it a great glory of 
their honour if it should happen to them to be 
crowned in the sight of the people, and in the 
presence of the emperor. Behold a lofty and 
great contest, glorious also with the reward of a 
heavenly crown, inasmuch as God looks upon us 
as we struggle, and, extending His view over 
those whom He has condescended to make His 
sons. He enjoys the spectacle of our contest. 
God looks upon us in the warfare, and fighting 
in the encounter of faith ; His angels look on 
us, and Christ looks on us. How great is the 
dignity, and how great the happiness of the 

* lohn XV 18-20. 

S [Valuable note, Oxford trans,, Ep. Iviii. p. 142, note k.] 

*> Matt. X. 28. 

' John xii. 25. 

^ Apoc. xiv. 9-11. * 

350 

THE EPISTLES OP CYPRIAN. 

glory, to engage in the presence of God, and to 
l)e crowned, with Christ for a judge ! Let us be 
armed, beloved brethren, with our whole strength, 
and let us be prepared for the struggle with an 
uncorrupted mind, with a sound faith, with a 
devoted courage. Let the camp of God go forth 
to the battle-field which is appointed to us. Let 
the sound ones be armed, lest he that is sound 
should lose the advantage of having lately stood ; 
let the lapsed also be armed, that even the 
lapsed may regain what he has lost : let honour 
Ijrovoke the whole ; let sorrow provoke the 
lapsed to the battle. The Apostle Paul teaches 
us to be armed and prepared, saying, " We 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against 
powers, and the princes of this world and of this 
darkness, against spirits of wickedness in high 
places. Wherefore put on the whole armour, 
tliat ye may be able to withstand in the most 
evil day, that when ye have done all ye may 
stand ; having your loins girt about with truth, 
and having put on the breastplate of righteous- 
ness ; and your feet shod with the preparation 
of the Gospel of peace ; taking the shield of 
faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all 
the fiery darts of the wicked one ; and the helmet 
of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which 
is the word of God." ' 

9, Let us take these arms, let us fortify our- 
selves with these spiritual and heavenly safe- 
guards, that in the most evil day we may be able 
to withstand, and to resist the threats of the 
devil : let us i)ut on the breastplate of righteous- 
ness, that our breast may be fortified and safe 
against the darts of the enemy : let our feet be 
shod with evangelical teaching, and armed, so 
that when the serpent shall begin to be trodden 
and crushed by us, he may not be able to bite 
and trip us up : let us bravely bear the shield of 
faith, by the protection of whicli, whatever the 
enemy darts at us may be extinguished : let us 
take also for protection of our head the helmet 
of salvation, that our ears may be guarded from 
hearing the tleadly edicts ; that our eyes may be 
fortified, that they may not see the odious images ; 
that our brow may be fortified, so as to keep safe 
the sign of God ; - that our moutli may be forti- 
fietl, that the concjuering tongue may confess 
Christ its Lord : let us also arm the right hand 
with the sword of the Spirit, that it may bravely 
reject the deadly sacrifices ; that, mindful of the 
Lucharist, the hand which has received the Lord's 
body 3 may embrace the Lord Himself, hereafter 
to receive from the Lord the reward of heavenly 
crowns. 

• Eph. vi. 12-17. 

- Sci7. : the .si2;n of the cross in bnptisni. 

■' It is observed here that the Kiichnrist was at this time received 
by the hand of the commimicant, and not placed in his mouth by the 
minister, as some have pretended was the original mode of adminis- 
tration. [See Cyril of Jerusalem, Mysta^og., v. p. 1126, migne.] 

10. Oh, what and how great will that day be 
at its coming, beloved brethren, when the Lord 
shall begin to count up His people, and to recog- 
nise the deservings of each one by the inspec- 
tion of His divine knowledge, to send the guilty 
to Gehenna, and to set on fire our persecutors 
with the perpetual burning of a penal fire, but to 
I)ay to us the reward of our faith and devotion ! 
\\'hat will be the glory and how great the joy to 
be admitted to see God, to be honoured to re- 
ceive with Christ, thy Lord God, the joy of eter- 
nal salvation and light — to greet Abraham, and 
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the patriarchs, and 
prophets, and apostles, and martyrs — to rejoice 
with the righteous and the friends of God in the 
kingdom of heaven, with the pleasure of immor- 
tality given to us — to receive there what neither 
eye hath seen, nor ear heard, neither hath en- 
tered into the heart of man ! For the apostle 
announces that we shall receive greater things 
than anything that we here either do or suffer, 
saying, " The sufferings of this present time are 
not worthy to be compared with the glory to 
come hereafter which shall be revealed in us." * 
When that revelation shall come, when that glory 
of God shall shine upon us, we shall be as happy 
and joyful, honoured with the condescension of 
God, as they will remain guilty and wretched, 
who, either as deserters from God or rebels 
against Him, have done the will of the devil, so 
that it is necessary for them to be tormented 
with the devil himself in unquenchable fire. 

11. Let these things, beloved brethren, take 
hold of our hearts ; let this be the preparation 
of our arms, this our daily and nightly medita- 
tion, to have before our eyes and ever to revolve 
in our thoughts and feelings the punishments of 
the wicked and the rewards and the deservings 
of the righteous : what the Lord threatens by way 
of punishment against those that deny Him ; 
what, on the other hand. He promises by way 
of glory to those that confess Him. If, while 
we think and meditate on these things, there 
should come to us a day of persecution, the 
soldier of Christ instructed in His precepts and 
warnings is not fearful for the battle, but is pre- 
pared for the crown. I bid you, dearest breth- 
ren, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LVI.5 

TO CORNELIUS IN EXILE, CONCERNING HIS 
CONFESSION. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN PRAISES IN CORNELIUS AND 
HIS PEOPLE THEIR CONFESSION OF THE NAME 
OF CHRIST EVEN TO llANISHMENT ; AND EX- 
HORTS THEM TO CONSTANCY AND TO MUTUAL 

^ Rom. viil. i3. 

5 Oxford ed.: Ep. Ix. a.d. 252. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

351 

PRAYER FOR ONE ANOTHER, AS WELL IN RE- 
SPECT OF THE APPROACHING DAY OF STRUGGLE 
IN THK LIFE, AS AFTER DEATH." 

I. Cyprian to Cornelius his brother, greeting. 
We have been made acquainted, dearest brother, 
with the glorious testimonies of your faith and 
courage, and have received with such exultation 
the honour of your confession, that we count 
ourselves also sharers and companions in your 
merits and praises. For as we have one Church, 
a mind united, and a concord undivided, what 
priest does not congratulate himself on the 
praises of his fellow-priest' as if on his own; or 
what brotherhood would not rejoice in the joy 
of its brethren? It cannot be sufficiently de- 
clared how great was the exultation and how 
great the joy here, when we had heard of your 
success and bravery, that you had stood forth as 
a leader of confession to the brethren there ; 
and, moreover, that the confession of the leader 
had increased by the consent of the brethren ; so 
that, while you precede them to glory, you have 
made many your companions in glory, and have 
persuaded the people to become a confessor by 
being first prepared to confess on behalf of all ; 
so that we are at a loss what we ought first of 
all to commend in you, whether your prompt 
and decided faith, or the inseparable love of the 
brethren. Among you the courage of the bishop 
going before has been publicly proved, and the 
tmitedness of the brotherhood following has been 
shown. As with you there is one mind and one 
voice, the whole Roman Church has confessed.^ 

2. The faith, dearest brethren, which the 
blessed apostle commended in you has shone 
brightly. He even then in the spirit foresaw 
this praise of courage and firmness of strength ; 
and, attesting your merits by the commendation 
of your futur doings, in praising the parents he 
provokes the children. While you are thus 
luianimous, while you are thus brave, you have 
given great examples both of unanimity and of 
bravery to the rest of the brethren. You have 
taught them deeply to fear God, firmly to cling 
to Christ ; that the people should be associated 
with the priests in peril ; that the brethren should 
not be separated from brethren in persecution ; 
that a concord, once established, can by no 
means be overcome ; that whatsoever is at the 
same time sought for by all, the God of peace 
will grant to the peaceful. The adversary had 
leapt forth to disturb the camp of Christ with 
violent terror; but, with the same impetuosity 
with which he had come, he was beaten back 

' Damasus mentions this epistle in the life of CorneHus, as being 
that on account of which a cahimny arose, whence the tyrant took an 
excuse for his death 

- [Note the entire equality of these bishops. Carthage and 
Rome are of equal sacerdocy.] 

-' [Cornehns the voice of his diocese only because they concur 
•with him. Comoare Leio. I 'a/. Council, p. 223 and/aiivw.) 

and conquered ; and as much fear and terror as 
he had brought, so much bravery and strength 
he also found. He had thought that he could 
again overthrow the servants of God, and agitate 
I them in his accustomed manner, as if they were 
novices and inexperienced — as if little prepared 
and little cautious. He attacked one first, as a 
wolf had tried to separate the sheep from the 
flock, as a hawk to separate the dove from the 
flying troop; for he who has not sufficient 
strength against all, seeks to gain advantage from 
the solitude of individuals. But when beaten 
back as well by the faith as by the vigour of the 
combined army, he perceived that the soldiers 
of Christ are now watching, and stand sober and 
armed for the battle ; that they cannot be con- 
quered, but that they can die ; and that by this 
very fact they are invincible, that they do not 
fear death ; that they do not in turn assail their 
assailants, since it is not lawful for the innocent 
even to kill the guilty ; but that they readily de- 
liver up both their lives and their blood ; that 
since such malice and cruelty rages in the world, 
they may the more quickly withdraw from the 
evil and cruel. What a glorious spectacle was 
that under the eyes of God ! what a joy of His 
Church in the sight of Christ, that not singk 
soldiers, but the whole camp, at once went forth 
to the battle which the enemy had tried to be- 
gin ! For it is plain that all would have come 
if they could have heard, since whoever heard 
ran hastily and came. How many lapsed were 
there restored by a glorious confession ! They 
bravely stood, and by the very suffering of re- 
pentance were made braver for the battle, that 
it might appear that lately they had been taken 
at unawares, and had trembled at the fear of a 
new and unaccustomed thing, but that they had 
afterwards returned to themselves ; that true 
faith and their strength, gathered from the fear 
of God, had constantly and firmly strengthened 
them to all endurance ; and that now they do 
not stand for pardon of their crime, but for the 
crown of their suffering. 

3. What does Novatian say to these things, 
dearest brother? Does he yet lay aside his 
error? Or, indeed, as is the custom of foolish 
men, is he more driven to fury by our very 
benefits and prosperity ; and in proportion as 
the glory of love and faith grows here more and 
more, does the madness of dissension and envy 
break out anew there ? Does the wretched man 
not cure his own wound, but wound both him- 
self and his friends still more severely, clamour- 
ing with his tongue to the ruin of the brethren, 
and hurling darts of poisonous eloquence, more 
severe in accordance with the wickedness of a 
secular philosophy than peaceable with the gen- 
tleness of the Lord's wisdom, — a deserter of the 
Church, a foe to mercy, a destroyer of repent- 

352 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

ance, a teacher of arrogance, a corrupter of 
truth, a murderer of love? Does he now ac- 
knowledge who is the priest of God ; which is 
the Church and the house of Christ ; who are 
God's servants, whom the devil molests ; who 
the Christians, whom Antichrist attacks? For 
neither does he seek those whom he has already 
subdued, nor does he take the trouble to over- 
throw those whom he has already made his own. 
The foe and enemy of the Church despises and 
passes by those whom he has alienated from the 
Church, and led without as captives and con- 
quered ; he goes on to harass those in whom he 
sees Christ dwell. 

4. Even although any one of such should 
have been seized, there is no reason for his flat- 
tering himself, as if in the confession of the 
name ; since it is manifest that, if people of this 
sort should be put to death outside the Church, 
it is no crown of faith, but is rather a punish- 
ment of treachery. Nor will those dwell in the 
house of God among those that are of one 
mind, whom we see to have withdrawn by the 
madness of discord from the peaceful and divine 
household. 

5. We earnestly exhort as much as we can, 
dearest brother, for the sake of the mutual love 
by which we are joined one to another, that 
since we are instructed by the providence of the 
Lord, who warns us, and are admonished by 
the wholesome counsels of divine mercy, that 
the day of our contest and struggle is already 
approaching, we should not cease to be instant 
with all the people in fastings, in watchings, in 
prayers. Let us be urgent, with constant groan- 
ings and frequent prayers. For these are our 
heavenly arms, which make us to stand fast and 
bravely to persevere. These are the spiritual 
defences and divine weapons which defend us. 
Let us remember one another in concord and 
unanimity. Let us on both sides always pray 
for one another. Let us relieve burdens and 
afflictions by mutual love, that if any one of us, 
by the swiftness of divine condescension, shall 
go hence the first, our love may continue in the 
presence of the Lord, and our prayers for our 
brethren and sisters not cease in the presence 
of the Father's mercy. I bid you, dearest 
brother, ever heartly farewell. 

EPISTLE LVIL' 

TO LUCIUS* THE BISHOP OF ROME, RETURNED 
FROM BANISHMENT. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN, WITH HIS COLLEAGUES, 
CONGRATULATES LUCIUS ON HIS RETURN FROM 
EXILE, REMINDING HIM THAT MARTYRDOM DE- 

' Oxford ed.: Ep Ixi. a.d. 252. 

- [Hi-, episcopate lasted not six months. See Eusebius, //. £. , 
vii 2. He seems to have suffered martyrdom by the sword. J 

FERRED DOCS NOT MAKE 'IIIE GLORY LESS. 
THEN, POINTING OUT THAT THE MARTYRDO.M OF 
CORNELIUS AND THE BANISHMENT OF LUCIUS 
HAD HAPPENED BY DIVINE DIRECTION, FOR THE 
CONFUSION OF THE NOVATL\NS, HE FORETELLS 
TO HIM HIS OWN IMPENDING MARTYRDOM, GOD 
SO ORDAINING IT THAT IT SHOULD BE CON- 
SJMMATED NOT AWAY FROM HOME, BUT A.MONG 
HIS OW.N PEOPLE. 

1. Cyprian, with his colleagues, to Lucius his 
brother, greeting. We had lately also congratu- 
lated you indeed, dearest brotlier, when the 
divine condescension, by a double honour, ap- 
pointed you in the administration of God's 
Church, as well a confessor as a priest. But 
now also we no less congratulate you and your 
companions, and the whole fraternity, that the 
benignant and liberal protection of tiie Lord has 
broughL>you back again to His own with the 
same glory, and with praises to you ; that so the 
shepherd might be restored to feed his flock, and 
the pilot to manage the ship, and the ruler to 
govern the people ; and that it might appear 
that your banishment was so divinely arranged, 
not that the bishop banished and driven away 
should be wanting to the Church, but that he 
should return to the Church greater than he had 
left it. 

2. For the dignity of martyrdom was not the 
less in the case of the three youths, because, their 
death being frustrated, they came forth safe from 
the fiery furnace; nor did Daniel stand forth 
uncoippleted in the praise he deserved, because, 
when he had been sent to the lions for a prey, he 
was protected by the Lord, and lived to glory. 
Among confessors of Christ, martyrdoms deferred 
do not diminish the merits of confession, but 
show forth the greatness of divine protection. 
We see represented in you what the brave and 
illustrious youths announced before the king, 
that they indeed were prepared to be burnt in 
the flames, that they might not ser\e his gods, 
nor worship the image which he had made \ but 
that the God whom they worshipped, and whom 
we also worship, was able even to rescue them 
from the fiery furnace, and to deliver them from 
the hands of the king, and from imminent suffer- 
ings. This we now find carried out in the faith 
of your confession, and in the Lord's protection 
over you ; so that while you were prepared and 
ready to undergo all punishment, yet the Lord 
withdrew you from punishment, and preserved 
you for the Church. In your return the dignity 
of his confession has not been abridged in the 
bishop, but the priestly authority has rather in- 
creased ; so that a priest is assisting at the altar 
of God, who exhorts the people to take up the 
arms of confession, and to submit to martyrdom, 
not by his words, but by his deeds ; and, now 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

353 

that Antichrist is near, prepares the soldiers for 
the battle, not only by the urgency of his speech 
and his words, but by the example of his faith 
and courage. 

3. We understand, dearest brother, and we 
perceive with the whole light of our heart, the 
salutary and holy plans of the divine majesty, 
whence the sudden persecution lately arose there 

— whence the secular power suddenly broke 
forth against the Church of Christ and the bishop 
Cornelius, the blessed martyr, and all of you ; so 
that, for the confusion and beating dov/n of here- 
tics, the Lord might show ' which was the Church 

— which is its one bishop chosen by divine ap- 
pointment — which presbyters are associated 
with the bishop in priestly honour — which is 
the united and true people of Christ, linked to- 
gether in the love of the Lord's flock — who 
they were whom the enemy would harass ; whom, 
on the other hand, the devil would spare as being 
his own. For Christ's adversary does not perse- 
cute and attack any except Christ's camp and 
soldiers ; heretics, once prostrated and made his 
own, he despises and passes by. He seeks to 
cast down those whom he sees to stand. 

4. And I wish, dearest brother, that the power 
were now given us to be with you there on 
your return, that we ourselves, who love you with 
mutual love, might, being present with the rest, 
also receive the very joyous fruit of your coming. 
What exultation among all the brethren there ; 
what running together and embracing of each 
one as they arrive ! Scarcely can you be satisfied 
with the kisses of those who cling to you ; scarce- 
ly can the ver)' faces and eyes of the people be 
satiated with seeing. At the joy of your coming 
the brotherhood there has begun to- recognise 
what and how great a joy will follow when Christ 
shall come. For because His advent will quickly 
approach, a kind of representation has now gone 
before in you ; that just as John, His forerunner 
and preparer of His way, came and preached 
that Christ had come, so, now that a bishop re- 
turns as a confessor of the Lord, and His priest, 
it appears that the Lord also is now returning. 
But I and my colleagues, and all the brother- 
hood, send this letter to you in the stead of us, 
dearest brother ; and setting forth to you by our 
letter our joy, we express the faithful inclination 
of our love here also in oar sacrifices and our 
prayers, not ceasing to give thanks to God the 
Father, and to Christ His Son our Lord ; and as 
well to pray as to entreat, that He who is perfect, 
and makes perfect, will keep and perfect in you 
the glorious crown of your confession, who per- 
chance has called you back for this purpose, that 
your glory should not be hidden, if the martyrdom 
of your confession should be consummated away 

' [Not Novatian. The organization at Rome is here glanced at, 
as answering to the Cyprianic tjieory in all respects.] 

from home. For the victim which affords an 
example to the brotherhood both of courage and 
of faith, ought to be offered up when the breth- 
ren are present. We bid you, dearest brother, 
ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LVIII.^ 

TO FIDUS, ON THE BAPTISM OF INFANTS. 
ARGUMENT. — IN THIS LETTER CYPRIAN IS NOT 
ESTABLISHING ANY NEW DECREE; BUT KEEPING 
MOST FIRMLY THE FAITH OF THE CHURCH, FOR 
THE CORRECTION OF THOSE WHO THOUGHT THAT 
AN INFANT MUST NOT BE BAPTIZED BEFORE THE 
EIGHTH DAY AFTER ITS BIRTH, HE DECREED 
WITH SOME OF HIS FELLOW-BISHOPS THAT A3 
SOON AS IT WAS BORN IT MIGHT PROPERLY BE 
BAPTIZED. HE TAKES OCCASION, HOWEVER, TO 
REFUSE TO RECALL THE PE.'^CE THAT HAD BEEN 
GRANTED TO ONE VICTOR, ALTHOUGH IT HAD 
BEEN GRANTED AGAINST THE DECREES OF SYNODS 
CONCERNING THE LAPSED ; BUT FORBIDS THERA- 
PIUS THE BISHOP TO DO IT IN OTHER CASES.^ 

1. Cyprian, and others his colleagues who were 
present in council, in number sixty-six, to Fidus 
their brother, greeting. We have read your let- 
ter, dearest brother, in which you intimated con- 
cerning Victor, formerly a presbyter, that our 
colleague Therapius, rashly at a too early season, 
and with over-eager haste, granted peace to him 
before he had fully repented, and had satisfied 
the Lord God, against whom he had sinned ; 
which thing rather disturbed us, that it was a 
departure from the authority of our decree,-' that 
peace should be granted to him before the legiti- 
mate and full time of satisfaction, and without 
the request and consciousness of the people — 
no sickness rendering it urgent, and no necessity 
compelling it. But the judgment being long 
weighed among us, it was considered sufficient 
to rebuke Therapius our colleague for having 
done this rashly, and to have instructed him that 
he should not do the like with any other. Yet 
we did not think that the peace once granted in 
any wise by a priest s of God was to be taken 
away, and for this reason have allowed Victor to 
avail himself of the communion granted to him. 

2. But in respect of the case of the infants, 
which you say ought not to be baptized within 
the second or third day after their birth, and 
that the law of ancient circumcision should be 
regarded, so that you think that one who is just 
bom should not be baptized and sanctified with- 

^ Oxford ed.: Ep. Ixiv. [It would be unbecoming in me to add 
comments of my own on this letter. Such are the views of Cyprian; 
and one may see the opposite views, set forth with extreme candor, by 
Jeremy Taylor in his Liberty of Frofihesying.\ 

^ This letter was evidently written after both synods concernmg 
the lapsed, of which mention was made above in Epistle liii ; hut 
whether a long time or a short time after is uncertain, although the 
context indicates that it was written during a time of peace. 

■♦ [i.e., the decree of the synod, or council.] 
S [See letter liv. p. 340, supra.\ 

354 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

in the eighth day, we all thought very differently ' 
in our council. For in this course which you 
thought was to be taken, no one agreed ; but we | 
all rather judge that the mercy and grace of God 
is not to be refused to any one born of man. For j 
as the Lord says in His Gospel, "The Son of! 
man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to { 
save them," ' as far as we can, we must strive 
that, if possible, no soul be lost. For what is 
wanting to him who has once been formed in 
the womb by the hand of God ? To us, indeed, 
and to our eyes, according to the worldly course 
of days, they who are bom appear to receive an 
increase. But whatever things are made by God, 
are completed by the majesty and work of God 
their Maker. 

3. Moreover, belief in divine Scripture de- 
clares to us, that among all, whether infants or 
those who are older, there is the same equality 
of the divine gift. Elisha, beseeching God, so 
laid himself upon the infant son of the widow, 
who was lying dead, that his head was applied 
to his head, and his face to his face, and the 
limbs of Elisha were spread over and joined to 
<;ach of the limbs of the child, and his feet to 
his feet. If this thing be considered with re- 
spect to the inequality of our birth and our body, 
an infant could not be made equal with a person 
grown up and mature, nor could its little limbs 
fit and be eijual to the larger limbs of a man. 
But in that is expressed the divine and spiritual 
equality, that all men are like and equal, since 
they have once been made by God ; and our 
age may have a difference in the increase of our 
bodies, according to the world, but not accord- 
ing to God ; unless that very grace also which is 
given to the baptized is given either less or more, 
according to the age of the receivers, whereas 
the Holy Spirit is not given with measure, but 
by the love and mercy of the Father alike to 
all. - For God, as He does not accept the per- 
son, so does not accept the age ; since He shows 
Himself a Father to all with well-weighed equality 
for the attainment of heavenly grace. , 

4. For, with respect to what you say, that the 
aspect of an infant in the first days after its birth 
is not pure, so that any one of us would still 
shudder at kissing it,^ we do not think that this 
ought to be alleged as any impediment to heaven- 
ly grace. For it is written, " To the pure all 
things are pure." ^ Nor ought any of us to 
shudder at that which God hath condescended 
to make. For although the infant is still fresh 
from its birth, yet it is not such that any one 
should shudder at kissing it in giving grace and 
in making peace ; since in the kiss of an infant 

' Luke ix. 56. 

- [A marvellous relic of pagan ideas. A new-born babe, after its 
bath, makes no such impression upon civilized minds.] 
■^ Tit. i. IS. 

every one of us ought, for his very religion's 
sake, to consider the still recent hands of God 
themselves, which in some sort we are kissing, in 
the man lately formed and freshly born, when we 
are embracing that which God has made. For 
in respect of the observance of the eighth day in 
the Jewish circumcision of the flesh, a sacrament 
was given l)eforehand in shadow and in usage ; 
but when Christ came, it was fulfilled in truth. 
For because the eighth day, that is, the first day 
after the Sabbath, was to be that on which the 
Lord should rise again, and should quicken us, 
and give us circumcision of the spirit, the eighth 
day, that is, the first day after the Sabbath, and 
the Lord's day, went before in the figure ; which 
figure ceased when by and by the truth came, 
and spiritual circumcision was given to us. 

5. For which reason we think that no one is 
to be hindered from obtaining grace by that law 
which was already ordained, and that spiritual 
circumcision ought not to be hindered by carnal 
circumcision, but that absolutely every man is to 
be admitted to the grace of Christ, since Peter 
also in the Acts of the Apostles speaks, and says, 
" The Lord hath said to me that I should call no 
man common or unclean." ■» But if anything 
could hinder men from obtaining grace, their 
more heinous sins might rather hinder those who 
are mature and grown up and older. But again, 
if even to the greatest sinners, and to those who 
had sinned much against God, when they sub- 
sequently believed, remission of sins is granted 
— and nobody is hindered from baptism and 
from grace — how much rather ought we to 
shrink from hindering an infant, who, being 
lately born, has not sinned, except in that, being 
born after the flesh according to Adam, 5 he has 
contracted the contagion of the ancient death 
at its earliest birth, who approaches the more 
easily on this very account to the reception of 
the forgiveness of sins — that to him are re- 
mitted, not his own sins, but the sins of another. 

6. And therefore, dearest brother, this was our 
opinion in council, that by us no one ought to 
be hindered from baptism and from the grace of 
God, who is merciful and kind and loving to all. 
Which, since it is to be observed and maintained 
in respect of all, we think is to be even more 
observe^ in respect of infants and newly-born 
l^ersons, who on this very account deserve more 
from our help and from the divine mercy, that 
immediately, on the very beginning of their birth, 
lamenting and weeping, they do nothing else but 
entreat. We bid you, dearest brother, ever 
heartily farewell. 

* Acts X. 28. 

5 [I cannot refrain from quoting a layman's beautiful lines on the 
death of his son: — 

" Pure from all stain save that of human clay, 
Which Christ's atoning blood had washed away." 

Oeorue Canning, a.d. 1770-1827.] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

;55 

EPISTLE LIX.' 

TO THE NUMIDIAN BISHOPS, ON THE REDEMP- 
TION OF THEIR BRETHREN FROM CAPTIVITY 
AMONG THE BARBARIANS. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN BEGINS BY DEPLORING 
THE CAPTIVITY OF THE BRETHREN, OF WHICH HE 
HAD HEARD FROM THE NUMIDIAN BISHOPS, AND 
:SAYS THAT HE IS SENDING THEM A HUNDRED 
THOUSAND SESTERCES, CONTRIBUTED BY BRETH- 
REN AND SISTERS AND COLLEAGUES.^ 

1. Cyprian to Januarius, Maximus, Proculus, 
Victor, Modianus, Nemesianus, Nampulus, and 
Honoratus, his brethren, greeting. With exces- 
sive grief of mind, and not without tears, dearest 
brethren, I have read your letter which you wrote 
to me from the soHcitude of your love, concern- 
ing the captivity of our brethren and sisters. 
For who would not grieve at misfortunes of that 
kind, or who would not consider his brother's 
grief his own, since the Apostle Paul speaks, 
saying, " Whether one member suffer, all the 
members suffer with it ; or one member rejoice, 
all the members rejoice with it ; " ^ and in an- 
■other place he says, ''• Who is weak, and I am not 
weak?""* Wherefore now also the captivity of | 
-our brethren must be reckoned as our captivity, I 
and the grief of those who are endangered is to ! 
be esteemed as our grief, since indeed there is 
one body of our union ; and not love only, but 
also religion, ought to instigate and strengthen 
us to redeem the members of the brethren. 

2. For inasmuch as the Apostle Paul says 

again, " Know ye not that ye are the temple of 

God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in 

you? "5 — even although love urged us less to 

bring help to the brethren, yet in this place we 

must have considered that it was the temples of 

God which were taken captive, and that we 

ought not by long inactivity and neglect of their 

suffering to allow the temples of God to be long 

captive, but to strive with what powers we can, 

and to act quickly by our obedience, to deserve 

well of Christ our Judge and Lord and God. 

For as the Apostle Paul says, " As many of you 

as have been baptized into Christ have put on 

Christ,"^ Christ is to be contemplated in our 

captive brethren, and He is to be redeemed 

from the peril of captivity who redeemed us 

from the peril of death ; so that He who took 

us out of the jaws of the devil, who abides and 

dwells in us, may now Himself be rescued and 

redeemed from the hands of barbarians by a 

sum of money — who redeemed us by His cross 

and blood — who suffers these things to happen 

' Oxford ed.: Ep. Ixii. a.d. 253. 

2 It is probable that this captivity was the work of those barba- 
rians against whon\ Decius went to war and was killed. 

3 I Cor. xii. 26. 
■♦ 2 Cor. xi. 29. 
5 I Cor. iii. 16. 
^ Gal. iii. 37. 

for this reason, that our faith may be tried, 
whether each one of us will do for another what 
he would wish to be done for himself, if he him- 
self were held captive among barbarians. ■ For 
who that is mindful of humanity, and reminded 
of mutual love, if he be a father, will not now 
consider that his sons are there ; if he be a 
husband, will not think that his wife is there k^pt 
captive, with as much grief as shame for the 
marriage tie? But how great is the general 
grief among all of us, and suffering concerning 
the peril of virgins who are kept there, on whose 
behalf we must bewail not only the loss of liberty, 
but of modesty ; and must lament the bonds of 
barbarians less than the violence of seducers and 
abominable places, lest the members dedicated 
to Christ, and devoted for ever in honour of 
continence by modest virtue, should be suUied 
by the lust and contagion of the insulter. 

3. Our brotherhood, considering all these 
things according to your letter, and sorrowfully 
examining, have all promptly and willingly and 
liberally gathered together supplies of money for 
the brethren, being always indeed, according to 
the strength of their faith, prone to the work of 
God, but now even more stimulated to salutary 
works by the consideration of so great a suffer- 
ing. For since the Lord in His Gospel says, " I 
was sick, and ye visited me," ^ with how much 
greater reward for our work will He say now, 
" I was captive, and ye redeemed me ! " And 
since again He says, " I was in prison, and ye 
came unto me," how much more will it be when 
He begins to say, " I was in the dungeon of cap- 
tivity, and I lay shut up and bound among bar- 
barians, and from that prison of slavery you 
delivered me," being about to receive a reward 
from the Lord when the day of judgment shall 
come ! Finally, we give you the warmest thanks 
that you have wished us to be sharers in your 
anxiety,^ and in so great and necessary a work 
— that you have offered us fruitful fields in which 
we might cast the seeds of our hope, with the 
expectation of a harvest of the most abundant 
fruits which will proceed from this heavenly and 
saving operation. We have then sent you a sum 
of one hundred thousand sesterces,9 which have 
been collected here in the Church over which 
by the Lord's mercy we preside, by the con- 
tributions of the clergy and people established 
with us, which you will there dispense with what 
diligence you may. ♦ 

4. And we wish, indeed, that nothing of such 
a kind may happen again, and that our brethren, 
protected by the majesty of the Lord, may be 

^ Matt. XXV. 36. . . ,. ■, 

8 [Primitive Christians were grateful for opportunities to distribute 
gifts. Rom. xii. 13. ] 

9 [An immense contribution, for the times. In our money reck- 
oned (for temp. Decii) at $3,757- For the Augustan age it would 
be $4,294. The text {^sestertia) dubious. Ed. Paris. 

356 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

preserved safe from perils of this kind. If, how- 
ever, for the searching out of the love of our 
mind, and for the testing of the faith of our heart, 
any such thing should happen, do not delay to 
tell us of it in your letters, counting it for certain 
that our church and the whole fraternity here 
beseech by their prayers that these things may 
not happen again ; but if they happen, that they 
will willingly and liberally render help. But that 
you may have in mind in your prayers our breth- 
ren and sisters who have laboured so promptly 
and liberally for this needful work, that they may 
always labour ; and that in return for their good 
work you may present them in your sacrifices and 
prayers, I have subjoined the names of each one ; 
and moreover also I have added the names of 
my colleagues and fellow-priests, who themselves 
also, as they were present, contributed some little 
according to their power, in their own names 
and the name of their people. And besides our 
own amount, I have intimated and sent their 
small sums, all of whom, in conformity with the 
claims of faith and charity, you ought to re- 
member in your supplications and prayers.' We 
bid you, dearest brethren, ever heartily farewell, 
and remember us. 

EPISTLE LX.2 

TO EUCHRATIUS, ABOUT AN ACTOR. 

ARGUMENT. — HE FORBIDS AN ACTOR, IF HE CON- 
TINUE IN HIS DISGRACEFUL CALLING, FROM COM- 
MUNICATING IN THE CHURCH. NEITHER DOES 
HE ALLOW IT TO BE AN EXCUSE FOR HIM, THAT 
HE HIMSELF DOES NOT PRACTICE THE HISTRI- 
ONIC ART, SO LONG AS HE TEACHES IT TO 
OTHERS ; NEFTHER DOES HE EXCUSE FT BECAUSE 
OF THE WANT OF MEANS, SINCE NECESSARIES 
MAY BE SUPPLIED TO HIM FROM THE RE- 
SOURCES OF THE CHURCH ; AND THEREFORE, IF 
THE MEANS OF THE CHURCH THERE ARE NOT 
SUFFICIENT, HE RECOMMENDS HIM TO COME TO 
CARTHAGE. 

I. Cyprian to Euchratius his brother, greeting. 
From our mutual love and your reverence for me 
you have thought that I should be consulted, 
dearest brother, as to my opinion concerning a 
certain actor, who, being settled among you, still 
persists in the discredit of the same art of his ; 
and as a master and teacher, not for the instruc- 
tion, but for the destruction o/ boys, that which 
he has unfortunately learnt he also imparts to 
others : you ask whether such a one ought to 
communicate with us. This, I think, ntither 
befits the divine majesty nor the discipline of the 
Gospel, that the modesty and credit of the Church 

' [The (///^/yc/jj are here referred to; that is, lists (read at the 
Eucharist) in which benefactors, living or dead, were gratefully re- 
jnembcrcd. ^«^//<-<', " beadroll."] 

* Oxford ed. : Ep. ii. Circa a.d. 249. 

should be polluted by so disgraceful and infa- 
mous a contagion. For since, in the law, men 
are forbidden to put on a woman's garment, and 
those that offend in this manner are judged ac- 
cursed, how much greater is the crime, not only 
to take women's garments, but also to express 
base and effeminate and luxurious gestures, by 
the teaching of an immodest art. 

2. Nor let any one excuse himself that he 
himself has given up the theatre, while he is still 
teaching the art to others. For he cannot ap- 
pear to have given it up who substitutes others 
in his place, and who, instead of himself alone, 
supplies many in his stead ; against God's ap- 
pointment, instructing and teaching in \rhat way 
a man may be broken down into a woman, and 
his sex changed by art,' and how the devil who 
pollutes the divine image may be gratffied by the 
sins of a corrupted and enervated body. But if 
such a one alleges poverty and the necessity of 
small means, his necessity also can be assisted 
among the rest who are maintained by the sup- 
port of the Church ; if he be content, that is, 
with very frugal but innocent food. And let 
him not think that he is redeemed by an allow- 
ance to cease from sinning, since this is an ad- 
vantage not to us, but to himself. What more 
he may wish he must seek thence, from such, 
gain as takes men away from the banquet of 
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and leads them 
down, sadly and perniciously fattened in this 
world, to the eternal torments of hunger and 
thirst ; and therefore, as far as you can, recall 
him from this depravity and disgrace to the way 
of innocence, and to the hope of eternal life, 
that he may be content with the maintenance of 
the Church, sparing indeed, but wholesome. But 
if the Church with you is not sufficient for this, 
to afford support for those in need, he may trans- 
fer himself to us, and here receive what may be 
necessary to him for food and clothing, and not 
teach deadly things to others without the Church, 
but himself learn wholesome things in the Church. 
I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LXI.4 

TO POMPONIUS, CONCERNING SOME VIRGINS. 

ARGUMENT. — CVPRL\N, WFFH SOME OF HIS COL- 
LEAGUES, REPLIES TO HIS COLLEAGUE POMPO- 
NIUS, THAT VIRGINS WHO HAD DETERMINED TO 
MAINTAIN THEIR STATE WITH CONTINENCV AND 
FIRMNESS, BUT WHO HAD VET SUBSEQUENTLY 
BEEN FOUND IN THE SAME BED WITH MEN, IF 
THEY WERE STILL FOUND TO BE VIRGINS, SHOULD 

i [In the Sistine Chapel of the Vatican, to the disgrace of t!ie pon- 
tifical court, the fine music is obtained by recourse to this expedient, 
inflicted upon children. J 

* 0.\ford cd.: Ep. iv. He suggests the kind of discipline by 
which virgins may be kept in their duty, and some matters concern 
ing the power of excommunication in the Church. Circa a.u. 249. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

357 

BE RECEIVED INTO ■ COMMUNION AND ADMITTED 
TO THE CHURCH. BUT IF OTHERWISE, SINCE 
THEY ARE ADULTEROUS TOWARDS CHRIST, THEY 
SHOULD BE COMPELLED TO FULL REPENTANCE, 
AND THOSE WHO SHOULD OBSTINATELY PERSE- 
VERE SHOULD BE EJECTED FROM THE CHURCH. 

1. Cyprian, Caecilius, Victor, Sedatus, Tertul- 
lus, with the presbyters who were present with 
them, to Pomponius their brother, greeting. 
We have read, dearest brother, your letter which 
you sent by Paconius our brother, asking and 
desiring us to write again to you, and say what 
we thought of those virgins who, after having 
once determined to continue in their condition, 
and firmly to maintain their continency, have 
afterwards been found to have remained yi the 
same bed side by side with men ; of whom you 
say that one is a deacon ; and yet that the same 
virgins who have confessed thatithey have slept 
with men declare that they are chaste.' Con- 
cerning which matters, since you have desired 
our advice, know that we do* not depart from 
the traditions of the Gospel and of the apostles, 
but with constancy and firmness take counsel 
for our brethren and sisters, and maintain the 
discipline- of the Church by all the ways of use- 
fulness and safety, since the Lord speaks, say- 
ing, " And I will give you pastors according to 
mine heart, and they shall feed you with disci- 
pline." * And again it is written, " Whoso de- 
spiseth discipline is miserable ; " ^ and in the 
Psalms also the Holy Spirit admonishes and in- 
structs us, saying, " Keep discipline, lest hapjy the 
Lord be angry, and ye perish from the right way, 
when His anger shall quickly burn against you." ■♦ 

2. In the first place, therefore, dearest brother, 
■both by overseers and people nothing is to be 
more eagerly sought after, than that we who fear 
God should keep the divine precepts with every 
observation of discipline, and should not suffer 
our brethren to stray, and to live according to 
their own fancy and lust ; s but that we should 
faithfully consult for the life of each one, and 
not suffer virgins to dwell with men, — I do not 
say to sleep together, but to live together,^ — 
since both their weak sex and their age, still 
critical, ought to be bridled in all things and 
Tuled by us, lest an occasion should be given to 
the devil who ensnares us, and desires to rage 
over us, to hurt , them, since the apostle also 
says, " Do not give place to the devil." ? The 
ship is watchfully to be delivered from perilous 

' [See vol. ii. p. 57, Elucidation II.] 

- Jer. iii. 15. 

3 Wisd. iii. 11. 

* Ps. ii. 12 (LXX.). 

s Some editors read here "fructu" for "ructu;" but Goldhom 
observes that a similar collocation of eructation with error is found 
■in Horace, £p. ad Pis., 457. 

«> [How coarse and brutal the pagan manners, which even the 
(Gospel could not immediately refine 1 "] 

' Eph. iv. 27. 

places, that it may not be broken among the 
rocks and cliffs ; the baggage must swiftly be 
taken out of the fire, before it is burnt up by 
the flames reaching it. No one who is near to 
danger is long safe, nor will the servant of God 
be able to escape the devil if he has entangled 
himself in the devil's nets. We must interfere 
at once with such as these, that they may be 
separated while yet they can be separated in 
innocence j because by and by they will not be 
able to be separated by our interference, after 
they have become joined together by a very 
guilty conscience. Moreover, what a number 
of serious mischiefs we see to have arisen hence ; 
and what a multitude of virgins we behold cor- 
rupted by unlawful and dangerous conjunctions 
of this kind, to our great grief of mind ! But 
if they have faithfully dedicated themselves to 
Christ, let them persevere in modesty and chas- 
tity, without incurring any evil report, and so in 
courage and steadiness await the reward of vir- 
ginity. But if they are unwilling or unable to 
persevere, it is better that they should marry, 
than that by their crimes they should fall into 
the fire. Certainly let them not cause a scandal 
to the brethren or sisters, since it is written, " If 
meat cause my brother to offend, I will eat no- 
flesh while the world sfandeth, lest I make my 
brother to offend." ^ 

3. Nor let any one think that she can be 
defended by this excuse, that she may be ex- 
amined and proved whether she be a virgin ; 
since both the hands and the eyes of the mid- 
wives are often deceived ; and if she be found 
to be a virgin in that particular in which a 
woman may be so, yet she may have sinned in 
some other part of her body, which may be cor- 
rupted and yet cannot be examined. Assuredly' 
the mere lying together, the mere embracing, 
the very talking together, and the act of kissing, 
and the disgraceful and foul slumber of two per- 
sons lying together, how much of dishonour and 
crime does it confess ! If a husband come 
upon his wife, and see her lying with another 
man, is he not angry and raging, and by the 
passion of his rage does he not perhaps take 
his sword into his hand? And what shall 
Christ and our Lord and Judge think, when He 
sees His virgin, dedicated to Him, and destined 
for His holiness, lying with another? How in- 
dignant and angry is He, and what penalties 
does He threaten against such unchaste con- 
nections ! whose spiritual sword and the coming 
day of judgment, that every one of the brethren 
may be able to escape, we ought with all our 
counsel to provide and to strive. And since it 
behoves all by all means to keep discipline,'' 

8 I Cor. viii. 13. 

9 [This abomination may have lingered in Africa much longer than 
elsewhere among the Punic converw from Canaanite manners. Ezek. 
viii. i3i '4- J 

158 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

much more is it right that overseers and deacons 
should be careful for this, that they may afford 
an example and instruction to others concerning 
their conversation and character. For how can 
they direct the integrity and continence of others, 
if the corruptions and teachings of sin begin to 
proceed from themselves? 

4. And therefore you have acted advisedly 
and with vigour, dearest brother, in excommuni- 
cating the deacon who has often abode with a 
virgin ; and, moreover, the others who had been 
used to sleep with virgins. But if they have 
re])ented of this their unlawful lying together, 
and have mutually withdrawn from one another, 
let the virgins meantime be carefully inspected 
by midwives ; and if they should be found vir- 
gins, let them be received to communion, and 
admitted to the Church ; yet with this threaten- 
ing, that if subsequently they should return to 
the same men, or if they should dwell together 
with the same men in one house or under the 
same roof, they should be ejected with a severer 
censure, nor should such be afterwards easily 
received into the Church. But if any one of 
them be found to be corrupted, let her abun- 
dantly repent, because she who has been guilty 
of this crime is an adulteress, not (indeed) 
against a husband, but against Christ ; and there- 
fore, a due time being appointed, let her after- 
wards, when confession has been made, return 
to the Church. But if they obstinately perse- 
vere, and do not mutually separate themselves, 
let them know that, with this their immodest 
obstinacy, they can never be admitted by us 
into the Church, lest they should begin to set an 
example to others to go to ruin by their crimes. 
Nor let them think that the way of life or of 
salvation is still open to them, if they have re- 
fused to obey the bishops and priests, since in 
Deuteronomy the Lord C}od says, "And the 
man that will do presumptuously, and will not 
hearken unto the priest or judge, whosoever he 
shall be in those days, that man shall die, and 
all the people shall hear and fear, and do 
no more presumptuously." ' (}od commanded 
those who did not obey His priests to be slain, 
and those who did not hearken to His judges 
who were appointed for the time. And then 
indeed they were slain with the sword, when the 
circumcision of the flesh was yet in force ; but 
now that circumcision has begun to be of the 
spirit among God's faithful sen'ants, the proud 
and contumacious are slain with the sword of 
the Spirit, in that they are cast out of the 
Church. For they cannot live out of it, since 
the house of God is one, and there can be no 
salvation to any except in the Church. But the 
divine Scripture testifies that the undisciplined 

' Deut. xvii. 12, 13. 

perish, because they do not listen to, nor obey 
wholesome precepts; for it says, " An undisci- 
plined man loveth not him that correcteth him. 
But they who hate reproof shall be consumed 
with disgrace." ^ 

5. Therefore, dearest brother, endeavour that 
the undisciplined should not be consumed and 
perish, that as much as you can, by your salu- 
tary counsels, you should rule the brotherhood, 
and take counsel of each one with a view to his 
salvation. Strait and narrow is the way through 
which we enter into life, but excellent and great 
is the reward when we enter into glory. Let 
those who have once made themselves eunuchs 
for the kingdom of heaven ^ please God in all 
things, and not offend God's priests nor the 
Lord's Church by the scandal of their wicked- 
ness. And if, for the present, certain of our 
brethren seem to be made sorry by us, let us- 
nevertheless remain in our wholesome persua- 
sion, knowing that an apostle also has said, " Am 
I therefore become your enemy because I tell 
you the truth? " •* But if they shall obey us, we 
have gained our brethren, and have formed 
them as well to salvation as to dignity by our 
address. But if some of the perverse persons 
refuse to obey, let us follow the same apostle, 
who says, " If I please men, I should not be the 
servant of Christ." 5 If we cannot please some,, 
so as to make them please Christ, let us assur- 
edly, as far as we can, please Christ our Lord 
and God, by observing His precepts. I bid you, 
brother beloved and much longed-for. heartily 
farewell in the Lord.^ 

( 

EPISTLE LXII 

) 

TO C/ECILIUS, ON THE SACRAMENT OF THE 
CUP OF THE LORD. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN TEACHES, IN OPPOSITION 
TO THOSE WHO USED WATER IN THE LORD'S 
SUPPER, THAT NOT WATER ALONE, BUT WINE 
MIXED WITH WATER, WAS TO BE OFFERED ; 
THAT BY WATER WAS DESIGNATED IN SCRIPTURE, 
BAPTISM, BUT CERTAINLY NOT THE EUCHARIST. 
BY TYPES DR.'^WN FROM THE OLD TEST.^.MENT, 
THE USE OF WINE IN THE SACRAMENT OF THE 
lord's BODY IS ILLUSTRATED ; AND IT IS DE- 
CLARED TH.\T BY THE SYMBOL OF WATER IS 
UNDERSTOOD THE CHRISTIAN CONGREGATION. 

I. Cyprian to Csecilius his brother, greeting. 
Although I know, dearest brother, that very many 

2 Prov. XV. 12, lo. 

3 [The frightful condition of heathen society inspired the effort 
to maintain celibacy, but all this suggests the divine wisdom and 
clemency in restricting it to the few. Matt. xix. ii.] 

* Gal. iv. i6. 

5 Gal. i. ID. 

ti [The horrible subject of this letter is treated in a valuable note 
(k) in the Oxford trans., p 7. It began earlier (see Hernias) 
than that learned annotator supposes, but the silence of Minucius. 
Felix, and the pagan objectorof his story, as to this specific reproach, 
suggests that it was of rare occurrence. Vol. ii. p. 235. J 

^ Oxford ed.: Ep. Ixiii. A.u. 253. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

359' 

of the bishops who are set over the churches of 
the Lord by divine condescension, throughout 
the whole world, maintain the plan of evangelical 
truth, and of the tradition of the Lord, and do 
not by human and novel institution depart from 
that which Christ our Master both prescribed and 
did ; yet since some, either by ignorance or sim- 
plicity ' in sanctifying the cup of the Lord, and 
in ministering to the people, do not do that which 
Jesus Christ, our Lord and God, the founder and 
teacher of this sacrifice, did and taught, I have 
thought it as well a religious as a necessary thing 
to write to you this letter, that, if any one is 
still kept in this error, he may behold the light 
of truth, and return 'to the root and origin of 
the tradition of the Lord.- Nor must you think, 
dearest brother, that I am writing my own thoughts 
or man's ; or that I am boldly assuming this to 
myself of my own voluntary- will, since I always 
hold my mediocrity with lowly and modest mod- 
eration. But when anything is prescribed by the 
inspiration and command of God, it is necessary 
that a faithful servant should obey the Lord, ac- 
quitted by all of assuming anything arrogantly 
to himself, seeing that he is constrained to fear 
offending the Lord unless he does what he is 
commanded. 

2. Know then that I have been admonished 
that, in offering the cup, the tradition of the 
Lord - must be observed, and that nothing must 
be done by us but what the Lord first did on our 
behalf, as that the cup which is offered in remem- 
brance of Him should be offered mingled with 
wine. For when Christ says, " I am the true 
vine," 3 the blood of Christ is assuredly not water, 
but wine ; neither can His blood by which we 
are redeemed and quickened appear to be in the 
cup, when in the cup there is no wme whereby 
the blood of Christ is shown forth, which is de- 
clared by the sacrament and testimony of aJl the 
Scriptures. 

3. For we find in Genesis also, in respect o* 
the sacrament in Noe, this same thing was to 
them a precursor and figure of the Lord's pas- 
sion ; that he drank wine • that he was drunken ; 
that he was made naked in his household ; that 
he was lying down with his thighs naked and 
exposed ; that the nakedness of the father was 
observed by his second son, and was told abroad, 
but was covered by two, the eldest and the young- 
est ; and other matters which it is not necessary 
to follow out, since this is enough for us to em- 
brace alone, that Noe, setting forth a type of the 
future truth, did not drink water, but wine, and 
thus expressed the figure of the passion of the 
Lord. 

■ [A kindly rebuke of those Encratites who were called Hydro- 
parastatx. Epiphan., iii. p. 9, ed. Oehler.] 

^ [i Cor. xi. 2. Our author evidently has this in mind. He is 
admonished\>y such Scriptures to maintain apostolic traditions.] 

3 John XV. I. 

4. Also in the priest Melchizedek we see pre- 
figured the sacrament of the sacrifice of the Lord, 
according to what divine Scripture testifies, and 
says, " And Melchizedek, king of Salem, brought 
forth bread and wine." * Now he was a priest 
of the most high God, and blessed Abraham. 
And that Melchizedek bore a type of Christ, the 
Holy Spirit declares in the Psalms, saying from 
the person of the Father to the Son : " Before the 
morning star I begat Thee ; Thou art a priest for 
ever, after the order of Melchizedek ; " s which 
order is assuredly this coming from that sacrifice 
and thence descending ; that Melchizedek was 
a priest of the most high God ; that he offered 
wine and bread ; that he blessed Abraham. For 
who is more a priest of the most high God than 
our Lord Jesus Christ, who offered a sacrifice to 
God the Father, and offered that very same thing 
which Melchizedek had offered, that is, bread 
and wine, to wit. His body and blood? And 
with respect to Abraham, that blessing going be- 
fore belonged to our people. For if Abraham 
believed in God, and it was accounted unto him 
for righteousness, assuredly whosoever believes 
in God and lives in faith is found righteous, and 
already is blessed in faithful Abraham, and is set 
forth as justified ; as the blessed Apostle Paul 
proves, when he says, " Abraham believed God, 
and it was accounted to him for righteousness. 
Ye know, then, that they which are of faith, these 
are the children of Abraham. But the Scripture, 
foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles 
through faith, pronounced before to Abraham 
that all nations should be blessed in him ; there- 
fore they who are of faith are blessed with faithful 
Abraham."^ Whence in the Gospel we find that 
" children of Abraham are raised from stones, 
that is, are gathered from the Gentiles." ^ And 
when the Lord praised Zacchseus, He answered 
and said, " This day is salvation come to this 
house, forasmuch as he also is a son of Abra- 
ham." ^ In Genesis, therefore, that the benedic- 
tion, in respect of Abraham by Melchizedek the 
priest, might be duly celebrated, the figure of 
Christ's sacrifice precedes, namely, as ordained 
in bread and wine ; which thing the Lord, com- 
pleting and fulfilling, offered bread and the cup 
mixed with wine, and so He who is the fulness of 
truth fulfilled the truth «f the image prefigured. 

5. Moreover the H0I3' Spirit by Solomon shows 
before the type of the Lord's sacrifice, making 
mention of the immolated victim; and of the 
bread and wine, and, moreover, of the altar and 
of the apostles, and says, " Wisdom hath builded 
her house, she hath underlaid her seven pillars ; 
she hath killed her victims ; she hath mingled 

* Gen. xiv. i8. 

5 Ps. ex. 4. 

6 Gal. iii. 6-9. 

7 Matt. iii. 9. 

* Luke xix. 9. 

36o 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

her wine in the chalice ; she hath also furnished 
her table : and she hath sent forth her servants, 
calling together with a lofty announcement to 
her cup, saying, Whoso is simple, let him turn 
to me ; and to those that want understanding 
she hath said. Come, eat of my bread, and drink 
of the wine which I have mingled for you." ' 
He declares the wine mingled, that is, he fore- 
tells with prophetic voice the cup of the Lord 
mingled with water and wine, that it may appear 
that that was done in our Lord's passion which 
had been before predicted. 

6. In the blessing of Judah also this same 
thing is signified, where there also is expressed 
a figure of Christ, that He should have praise 
and worship from his brethren ; that He should 
press down the back of His enemies yielding 
and fleeing, with the hands with which He bore 
the cross and conquered death ; and that He 
Himself is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, and 
should couch sleeping in His passion, and should 
rise up, and should Himself be the hope of the 
Gentiles. To which things divine Scripture adds, 
and says, " He shall wash His garment in wine, 
and His clothing in the blood of the grape." ^ 
But when the blood of the grape is mentioned, 
what else is set forth than the wine of the cup 
■of the blood of the Lord ? 

7. In Isaiah also the Holy Spirit testifies this 
same thing concerning the Lord's passion, say- 
ing, " Wherefore are Thy garments red, and Thy 
apparel as from the treading of the wine-press 
full and well trodden? "^ Can water make gar- 
ments red ? or is it water in the wine-press which 
is trodden by the feet, or pressed out by the 
press? Assuredly, therefore, mention is made of 
wine, that the Lord's blood may be understood, 
and that which was afterwards manifested in 
the cup of the Lord might be foretold by the 
prophets who announced it. The treading also, 
and pressure of the wine-press, is repeatedly 
dwelt on ; because just as the drinking of wine 
cannot be attained to unless the bunch of grapes 
be first trodden and pressed, so neither could 
we drink the blood of Christ unless Christ had 
first been trampled upon and pressed, and had 
first drunk the cup of which He should also give 
believers to drink. 

8. But as often as water is named alone in 
the Holy Scriptures, baptism is referred to, as 
we see intimated in Isaiah : " Remember not," 
says he, " the former things, and consider not 
the things of old. Behold, I will do a new thing, 
which shall now spring forth ; and ye shall know 
it. I will even make a way in the wilderness, 
and rivers in the dry place, to give drink to my 
elected people, my people whom I have pur- 

■ Prov. ix. 1-5. 
2 Gen. xlix. 11. 
^ Isa. Ixiii. 2. 

chased, that they might show forth my praise." * 
There God foretold by the prophet, that among 
the nations, in places which previously had been 
dry, rivers should afterwards flow plenteously, 
and should provide water for the elected people 
of God, that is, for those who were made sons 
of God by the generation of baptism. s More- 
over, it is again predicted and foretold before, 
that the Jews, if they should thirst and seek after 
Christ, should drink with us, that is, should attain 
the grace of baptism. " If they shall thirst," he 
says, " He shall lead them through the deserts, 
shall bring forth water for them out of the rock ; 
the rock shall be cloven, and the water shall 
flow, and my people shall drink ;"^ which ix 
fulfilled in the Gospel, when Christ, who is the 
Rock, is cloven by a stroke of the spear in His 
passion ; who also, admonishing what was before 
announced by the prophet, cries and says, " If 
any man thirst, let him come and drink. He 
that believeth on me, as the Scripture saith, out 
of his belly shall flow rivers of living water." 
And that it might be more evident that the Lord 
is speaking there, not of the cup, but of baptism, 
the Scripture adds, saying, " But this spake He 
of the Spirit, which they that believe on Him 
should receive," ^ For by baptism the Holy 
Spirit is received ; and thus by those who are 
baptized, and have attained to the Holy Spirit, 
is attained the drinking of the Lord's cup. And 
let it disturb no one, that when the divine Scrip- 
ture speaks of baptism, it says that we thirst and 
drink, since the Lord ,also in the Gospel says, 
" Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst 
after righteousness ; " ^ because what is received 
with a greedy and thirsting desire is drunk more 
fully and plentifully. As also, in another place, 
the Lord speaks to the Samaritan woman, saying, 
" Whosoever drinketli of this water shall thirst 
again ; but whosoever drinketh of the water that 
I shall give him, shall not thirst for ever.'"? By 
which is also signified the very baptism of saving 
water, which indeed is once received, and is not 
again repeated. But the cup of the Lord is al- 
ways both thirsted for and drunk in the Church. 
;^. Nor is there need of very many arguments, 
dearest brother, to prove that baptism is always 
indicated by the appellation of water, and that 
thus we ought to understand it, since the Lord, 
when He came, manifested the truth of baptism 
and the cup in commanding that that faithful 
water, the water of life eternal, should be given 
to believers in baptism, but, teaching by the 
example of His own authority, that the cup 
should be mingled with a union of wine and 

* Isa. xliii. 18-21. 

s [For a full view of all theories of election, see Faber, Oft the 
Primitive Doctrine 0/ Election, New York, ed. 1840,] 
*> Is.i. xlviii. 2J. 
f John vii. 37-39. 

8 Matt. V. 6. 

9 Jolin iv. I}, 14. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

361 

water.' For, taking the cup on the eve of His 
passion, He blessed it, and gave it to His dis- 
ciples, saying, " Drink ye all of this ; for this is 
my blood of the New Testament, which shall be 
shed for many, for the remission of sins. I say 
unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this 
fruit of the vine, until that day in which I shall 
drink new wine with you in the kingdom of 
my Father." ^ In which portion we find that 
the cup which the Lord offered was mixed, and 
that that was wine which He called His blood. 
Whence it appears that the blood of Christ is 
not offered if there be no wine in the cup, nor 
the Lord's sacrifice celebrated with a legitimate 
consecration unless our oblation and sacrifice 
respond to His passion. But how shall we drink 
the new wine of the fruit of the vine with Christ 
in the kingdom of His Father, if in the sacrifice 
of God the Father and of Christ we do not 
offer wine, nor mix the cup of the Lord by the 
Lord's own tradition? 

10. Moreover, the blessed Apostle Paul, 
chosen and sent by the Lord, and appointed a 
preacher of the Gospel truth, lays down these 
very things in his epistle, saying, " The Lord 
Jesus, the same night in which He was betrayed, 
took bread ; and when He had given thanks. 
He brake it, and said. This is my body, which 
shall be given for you : do this in remembrance 
of me. After the same manner also He took 
the cup, when he had supped, saying. This cup 
is the new testament in my blood : this do, as 
oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. For 
as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, 
ye shall show forth the Lord's death until He 
come." J But if it is both enjoined by the Lord, 
and the same thing is confirmed and delivered 
by His apostle, that as often as we drink, we do 
an remembrance of the Lord the same thing 
which the Lord also did, we find that what was 
commanded is not observed by us, unless we 
also do what the Lord did ; and that mixing 
the Lord's cup in like manner we do not depart 
from the divine teaching ; but that we must not 
at all depart from the evangelical precepts, and 
that disciples ought also to observe and to do 
thfe same things which the Master both taught 
and did. //The blessed apostle in another place 
more earnestly and strongly teaches, saying, " I 
wonder that ye are so soon removed from Him 
that called you mto grace, unto another gospel, 
which is not another ; but there are some that 
trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of 
Christ. But though we, or an angel from heav- 
en, preach any otherwise than that which we 
have preached to you, let him be anathema. 
As we said before, so say I now again. If any 

' [See Justin, vol. i. p. 185, this series.] 
- ^latt. xxvi. 28, 29. 
J I Cor. xi. 23-26. 

man preach any other gospel unto you than that 
ye have received, let him be anathema." •♦ 

11. Since, then, neither the apostle himself 
nor an angel from heaven can preach or teach 
any otherwise than Christ has once taught and 
His apostles have announced, I wonder very 
much whence has originated this practice, that, 
contrary to evangelical and apostolical discipline, 
water is offered in some places in the Lord's cup, 
which water by itself cannot express the blood 
of Christ. The Holy Spirit also is not silent inl 
the Psalms on the sacrament of this thing, when 
He makes mention of the Lord's cup, and says,' 
" Thy inebriating cup, how excellent it is ! " sj 
Now the cup which inebriates is assuredly 
mingled with wine, for water cannot inebriate 
anybody. And the cup of the Lord in such wise 
inebriates, as Noe also was intoxicated drinking 
wine, in Genesis. But because the intoxication 
of the Lord's cup and blood is not such as is the 
intoxication of the world's wine, since the Holy 
Spirit said in the Psalm, " Thy inebriating cup," 
He added, " how excellent it is," because doubt- 
less the Lord's cup so inebriates them that drink, 
that it makes them sober ; that it restores their 
minds to spiritual wisdom ; that each one recov- 
ers from that flavour of the world to the under- 
standing of God ; and in the same way, that by 
that common wine the mind is dissolved, and the 
soul relaxed, and all sadness is laid aside, so, when 
the blood of the Lord and the cup of salvation 
have been drunk, the memory of the old man is 
laid aside, and there arises an oblivion of the 
former worldly conversation, and the sorrowful 
and sad breast which before was oppressed by 
tormenting sins is eased by the joy of the divine 
mercy ; because that only is able to rejoice him 
who drinks in the Church, which, when it is drunk, 
retains the Lord's truth. "^ 

12. But how perverse and how contrary it is, 
that although the Lord at the marriage made 
wine of water, we should make water of wine, 
when even the sacrament of that thing ought to 
admonish and instruct us rather to offer wine in 
the sacrifices of the Lord. For because among 
the Jews there was a want of spiritual grace, wine 
also was wanting. For the vineyard of the Lord 
of hosts was the house of Israel ; but Christ, when 
teaching and showing that the people of the Gen- 
tiles should succeed them, and that by the merit 
of faith we should subsequently attain to the place 
which the Jews had lost, of water made wine ; 
that is. He showed that at the marriage of Christ 
and the Church, as the Jews failed, the people 
of the nations should rather flow together and as- 
semble : for the divine Scripture in the Apocalypse 

< Gal. i. 6-9. 

S Ps. xxiii. 5. [I'tt/^ttte, " caVix inehrians." Ps. xxii. 5.] 
t" [ A happy conception of the inebriation of the Spirit, " where 
drinking largely sobers us again."] 

362 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

declares that the waters signify the people, say- 
ing, " The waters which thou sawest, upon which 
the whore sitteth, are peoples and multitudes, 
and nations of the Gentiles, and tongues," ' which 
we evidently see to be contained also in the sac- 
rament of the cup. 

13. For because Christ bore us all, in that He 
also bore our sins, we see that in the water is 
understood the people, but in the wine is showed 
the blood of Christ. But when the water is 
mingled in the cup with wine, the people is made 
one with Christ, and the assembly of believers is 
associated and conjoined with Him on whom it 
believes ; which association and conjunction of 
water and wine is so mingled in the Lord's cup, 
that that mixture cannot any more be separated. 
Whence, moreover, nothing can separate the 
Church — that is, the people established in the 
Church, faithfully and firmly persevering in that 
which they have believed — from Christ, in such 
a way as to prevent their undivided love from 
always abiding and adhering. Thus, therefore, 
in consecrating the cup of the Lord, water alone 
cannot be offered, even as wine alone cannot be 
offered. For if any one offer wine only, the 
blood of Christ is dissociated from us ; but if the 
water be alone, the people are dissociated from 
Christ ; but when both are mingled, and are 
joined with one another by a close union, there 
is completed a spiritual and heavenly sacrament. 
Thus the cup of the Lord is not indeed water 
alone, nor wine alon,e, unless each be mingled 
with the other ; just as, on the other hand, the 
body of the Lord cannot be flour alone or 
water alone, unless both should be united and 
joined together and compacted in the mass of 
one bread ; in which very sacrament our people 
are shown to be made one, so that in like man- 
ner as many grains, collected, and ground, and 
mixed together into one mass, make one bread ; 
so in Christ, who is the heavenly bread, we may 
know that there is one body, with which our 
number is joined and united.^ 

14. There is then no reason, dearest brother, 
for any one to think that the custom of certain 
persons is to be followed, who have thought in 
time past that water alone should be offered in 
the cup of the Lord. For we must inquire 
whom they themselves have followed. For if in 
the sacrifice which Christ offered none is to be 
followed but Christ, assuredly it behoves us to 
obey and do that which Christ did, and what He 
commanded to be done, since He Himself says 
in the Ciospel, "If ye do whatsoever I command 
you, henceforth I call you not servants, but 
friends." 2 And that Christ alone ought to be 

■ Apoc. xvii. 15. 

* (This figure, copied by St. Augustine (vol. v. p. 1247, ed. 
Mipne), is retained in the liturgy of the Reformed Dutch communion.] 
3 John XV. 14, 15. 

heard, the Father also testifies from heaven, say- 
ing, " This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I 
am well pleased ; hear ye Him." •* Wherefore, 
if Christ alone must be heard, we ought not to 
give heed to what another before us may have 
thought was to be done, but what Christ, who is 
before all, first did. Neither is it becoming to 
follow the practice of man, but the truth of 
God ; since God speaks by Isaiah the prophet, 
and says, " In vain do they worship me, teach- 
ing the commandments and doctrines of men." 5 
And again the Lord in the Gospel repeats this 
same saying, and says, " Ye reject the com- 
mandment of God, that ye may keep your own 
tradition."^ Moreover, in another place He 
establishes it, saying, " Whosoever shall break 
one of these least commandments, and shall 
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the 
kingdom of heaven." ^ But if we may not break 
even the least of the Lord's commandments, how 
much rather is it forbidden to infringe such im- 
portant ones, so great, so pertaining to the very 
sacrament of our Lord's passion and our own 
redemption, or to change it by human tradition 
into anything else than what was divinely ap- 
pointed ! For if Jesus Christ, our Lord and 
God, is Himself the chief priest of God the 
Father, and has first offered Himself a sacrifice 
to the Father, and has commanded this to be 
done in commemoration of Himself, certainly 
that priest truly discharges the oftice of Christ, 
who imitates that which Christ did ; and he then 
offers a true and full sacrifice in the Church to 
God the Father, when he proceeds to offer it 
according to what he sees Christ Himself to 
have offered. 

15. But the discipline of all religion and truth 
is overturned, unless what is spiritually prescribed 
be faithfully observed ; unless indeed any one 
should fear in the morning sacrifices,^ lest by the 
taste of wine he should be redolent of the blood 
of Christ. Therefore thus the brotherhood is 
beginning even to be kept back from the passion 
oi Christ in persecutions, by learning in the 
offerings to be disturbed concerning His blood 
and His blood-shedding. Moreover, however, 
the Lord says in the Gospel, " Whosoever shall 
be ashamed of me, of him shall the Son of man 
be ashamed." ^ And the apostle also speaks, 
saying, " If I pleased men, I should not be the 
servant of Christ." '° But how can we shed our 

* Matt. xvii. 5. 
5 Isa. xxix. 13. 

* Mark vii. 13. 
1 Matt V. 19. 

8 According to some texts is re.id here, "to offer wine, lest in the 
morning hours, through the flavour of the wine, its smell should be 
recognised by its fragrant odour by the perception of unbelievers, and 
he should be known to be a Christian, since we commemorate the 
blood of Christ in the oblation of wine." [The heathen detected 
Christians by this token when searching victims for tlie persecutor.] 

9 Mark viii. 38. [Bingham, book xv. cap. ii. sec. 7.] 
'0 Gal. i. 10. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

363 

blood for Christ, who blush to drink the blood 
of Christ? 

16. Does any one perchance flatter himself 
with this notion, that although in the morning, 
water alone is seen to be offered, yet when we 
come to supper we offer the mingled cup ? But 
when we sup, we cannot call the people together 
to our banquet, so as to celebrate the truth of 
the sacrament in the presence of all the brother- 
hood.' But still it was not in the morning, but 
after supper, that the Lord offered the mingled 
cup. Ought we then to celebrate the Lord's cup 
after supper, that so by continual repetition of 
the Lord's supper^ we may offer the mingled 
cup ? L behoved Christ to offer about the even- 
ing of the day, that the very hour of sacrifice 
might show the setting and the evening of the 
world ; as it is written in Exodus, " And all the 
people of the synagogue of the children of Israel 
shall kill it in the evening." ^ And again in the 
Psalms, " Let the lifting up of my hands be an 
evening sacrifice." •* But we celebrate the resur- 
rection of the Lord in the morning. 

17. And because we make mention of His 
passion in all sacrifices (for the Lord's passion 
is the sacrifice which we offer), we ought to do 
nothing else than what He did. For Scripture 
says, " For as often as ye eat this bread and 
drink this cup, ye do show forth the Lord's death 
till He come." s As often, therefore, as we offer 
the cup in commemoration of the Lord and of 
His passion, let us do what it is known the Lord 
did. And let this conclusion be reached, dear- 
est brother : if from among our predecessors any 
have either by ignorance or simplicity not observed 
and kept this which the Lord by His example 
and teaching has instructed us to do, he may, by 
the mercy of the Lord, have pardon granted to 
his simplicity. But we cannot be pardoned who 
are now admonished and instructed by the Lord 
to offer the cup of the Lord mingled with wine 
according to what the Lord offered, and to direct 
letters to our colleagues also about this, so that 
the evangelical law and the Lord's tradition may 
be everywhere kept, and there be no departure 
from what Christ both taught and did. 

18. To neglect these things any further, and 
to persevere in the former error, what is it else 
than to fall under the Lord's rebuke, who in the 
psalm reproveth, and says, " What hast thou to 
do to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest 
take my covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou 
hatest instruction and castest my words behind 
thee ? When thou sawest a thief, thou consent- 
edst with him, and hast been partaker with 

' [Much light is thrown on this by the Hebrew usages. See Free- 
man, Oil the Principles of Diviiie Serz'ice, vol. ii. p. 293.] 

2 " Frequentandis dominicis." 

3 Ex. xii. 6. 
■« Ps. cxii. 2. 

i I Cor. xi. aft. 

adulterers." ^ For to declare the righteousness 
and the covenant of the Lord, and not to do 
the same that the Lord did, what else is it than 
to cast away His words and to despise the Lord's 
instruction, to commit not earthly, but spiritual 
thefts and adulteries ? While any one is steal- 
ing from evangelical truth the words and doings 
of our Lord, he is corrupting and adulterating 
the divine precepts, as it is written in Jeremiah. 
He says, "What is the chaff to the wheat? 
Therefore, behold, I am against the prophets, 
saith the Lord, who steal my words every one 
from his neighbour, and cause my people to err 
by their lies and by their lightness." ^ Also in 
the same prophet, in another place. He says, 
" She committed adultery with stocks and stones, 
and yet for all this she turned not unto me." ^ 
That this theft and adultery may not fall unto us 
also, we ought to be anxiously careful, and fear- 
fully and religiously to watch. For if we are 
priests of God and of Christ, I do not know any 
one whom we ought rather to follow than God 
and Christ, since He Himself emphatically says 
in the Gospel, " I am the light of the world ; he 
that foUoweth me shall not walk in darkness, but 
shall have the light of life."^ Lest therefore we 
should walk in darkness, we ought to follow 
Christ, and to observe his precepts, because He 
Himself told His apostles in another place, as He 
sent them forth, " All power is given unto me in 
heaven and earth. Go, therefore, and teach all 
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Fa- 
ther, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost : | 
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I ' 
have commanded you." '° Wherefore, if we wish 
to walk in the light of Christ, let us not depart 
from His precepts and monitions, giving thanks 
that, while He instructs for the future what we 
ought to do, He pardons for the past wherein 
we in our simplicity have erred. And because 
already His second coming draws near to us. 
His benign and liberal condescension is more 
and more illuminating our hearts with the light 
of truth." 

19. Therefore it befits our religion, and our 
fear, and the place itself, and the office of our 
priesthood, dearest brother, in mixing and offer- 
ing the cup of the Lord, to keep the truth of 
the Lord's tradition, and, on the warning of the 
Lord, to correct that which seems with some to 
have been erroneous ; so that when He shall 
begin to come in His brightness and heavenly 
majesty. He may find that we keep what He ad- 
monished us ; that we observe what He taught ; 

b Ps. 1. 16^18. 

7 Jer. xxiii. 28, 30, 32. 

^ Jer. iii. 9, 10. 

9 John viii. 12. 
'° Matt, xxviii. 18-20. 

■I [A very important monition that clearer light upon certain Scrip" 
tures may break in as time unfolds their purpose. Phil. iii. 15.] 

364 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

that we do what He did.' I bid you, dearest 
brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LXIII.^' 

TO EPICTETUS AND TO THE CONGREGATION 
OF ASSURyE, CONCERNING FORTUNATIANUS, 
FORMERLY THEIR BISHOP. 

ARGUMENT. — HE WARNS EPICTETUS AND THE 
CONGREGATION OF THE ASSURITANS NOT TO 
ALLOW FORTUNATIANUS, A LAPSER, BUT THEIR 
FORMER BISHOP, TO RETURN TO HIS EPISCOPATE, 
AS WELL FOR OTHER REASONS AS BECAUSE IT 
HAD BEEN DECREED THAT LAPSED BISHOPS 
SHOULD NOT BE ADMITTED TO THEIR FORMER 
RANK. 

I. Cyprian to Epictetus his brother, and to 
the people established at Assurae, greeting. I 
was gravely and grievously disturbed, dearest 
brethren, at learning that Fortunatianus, formerly 
bishop among you, after the sad lapse of his fall, 
was now wishing to act as if he were sound, and 
beginning to claim for himself the episcopate. 
Which thing distressed me ; in the first place, 
on his own account, who, wretched man that he 
is, being either wholly blinded in the darkness 
of the devil, or deceived by the sacrilegious per- 
suasion of certain persons ; when he ought to be 
making atonement, and to give himself to the 
work of entreating the Lord night and day, by 
tears, and supplications, and prayers, dares still 
to claim to himself the priesthood which he has 
betrayed, as if it were right, from the altars of 
the devil, to apy^roach to the altar of God. Or 
as if he would not provoke a greater wrath 
and indignation of the Lord against himself in 
the day of judgment, who, not being able to be 
a guide to the brethren in faith and virtue, stands 
forth as a teacher in perfidy, in boldness, and in 
temerity ; and he who has not taught the breth- 
ren to stand bravely in the battle, teaches those 
who are conciuered and prostrate not even to 
ask for pardon ; although the Lord says, " To 
them have ye poured a drink-offering, and to 
them have ye offered a meat-offering. Shall I 
not be angry for these things? saith the Lord." ^ 
And in another place, " He that sacrificeth to 
any god, save unto the Lord only, shall be de- 
stroyed." ■♦ Moreover, the Lord again speaks, 
and says, " They have worshipped those whom 
their own fingers have made ; antl the mean man 
boweth down, and the great man humbleth him- 
self: and I will not forgive them." 5 In the 
Apocalypse also, we read the anger of the Lord 

' [Even these minute maxims show that the spirit of the third 
century was to adhere to the example of Christ and His Apostles. This 
gives us contidence that no intentional innovations were admitted.] 

-■ Oxford ed.: Ep. Ixv. a.d. 253. 

J Isa. Ivii. 6. 

< Ex. xxii. 20. 

S Isa. ii. 8, 9. 

threatening, and saying, " If any man worship 
the beast and his image, and receive his mark in 
his forehead or in his hand, the same shall drink 
of the wine of the wrath of God mixed in the 
cup of His anger ; and he shall be tormented 
with fire and brimstone in the presence of the 
holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb : 
and the smoke of their torments shall ascend up 
for ever and ever ; neither shall they have rest 
day nor night, who worship the beast and his 
image." ^ 

2. Since, therefore, the Lord threatens these 
torments, these punishments in the day of judg- 
ment, to those who obey the devil and sacrifice 
to idols, how does he think that he can act as a 
priest of God who has obeyed and served the 
priests of the devil ; or how does he think that 
his hand can be transferred to the sacrifice of 
God and the prayer of the Lord which has been 
captive to sacrilege and to crime, when in the 
sacred Scriptures God forbids the priests to ap- 
proach to sacrifice even if they have been in 
lighter guilt ; and says in Leviticus : " The man 
in whom there shall be any blemish or stain shall 
not approach to ofter gifts to God? " 7 Also in 
Exodus : " And let the priests which come near 
to the Lord God sanctify themselves, lest per- 
chance the Lord forsake them."'' And again: 
"And when they come near to minister at the 
altar of the Holy One, they shall not bring sin 
upon them, lest they die." "^ Those, therefore, 
who have brought grievous sins upon themselves, 
that is, who, by sacrificing to idols, have offered 
sacrilegious sacrifices, cannot claim to themselves 
the priesthood of God, nor make any i)rayer for 
their brethren in His sight ; since it is written in 
the Gospel, " God heareth not a sinner ; but if 
any man be a worshipper of God, and doeth His 
will, him He heareth." '° Nevertheless the pro- 
found gloom of the falling darkness has so 
blinded the hearts of some, that they receive no 
light from the wholesome precepts, but, once 
turned away from the direct path of the true 
way, they are hurried headlong and suddenly by 
the night and error of their sins." 

3. Nor is it wonderful if now those reject our 
counsels, or the Lord's precei)ts, who have de- 
nied the Lord. They desire gifts, and offerings, 
and gain, for which formerly they watched in- 
satiably. They still long also for suppers and 
banquets, whose debauch they belched forth in 
the indigestion lately left to the day, most mani- 
festly proving now that they did not before serve 
religion, but rather their belly and gain, with 
profane cupidity. Whence also we perceive and 

*" -Apoc. xiv. 9-1 1. 

" Lev. xxi. 17. 

' Ex. xix. 22. 

9 Kx. xxviii. 43. 
'° John ix 31. 
" [2 Thess. ii. ii. 
known truth.] 

Judicial blindness the result of revolt froM 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

365 

believe that this rebuke has come from God's 
searching out, that they might not continue to 
stand at the aUar ; and any further, as unchaste 
persons, to have to do with modesty ; as per- 
fidious, to have to do with faith ; as profane, 
with religion ; as earthly, with things divine ; as 
sacrilegious, with things sacred. That such per- 
sons may not return again to the profanation of 
the altar, and to the contagion of the brethren, 
we must keep watch with all our powers, and 
strive with all our strength, that, as far as in us 
lies, we may keep them back from this audacity 
of their wickedness, that they attempt not any 
longer to act in the character of priest ; who, 
cast down to the lowest pit of death, have gone 
headlong with the weight of a greater destruc- 
tion beyond the lapses of the laity. 

4. But if, among these insane persons, their 
incurable madness shall continue, and, with 
the withdrawal of the Holy Spirit, the blindness 
which has begun shall remain in its deep night, 
our counsel will be to separate individual breth- 
ren from their deceitfulness ; and, lest any one 
should run into the toils of their error, to sep- 
arate them from their contagion. Since neither 
can the oblation be consecrated where the Holy 
Spirit is not ; nor can the Lord avail to any one 
by the prayers and supplications of one who 
himself has done despite to the Lord. But if 
Fortunatianus, either by the blindness induced 
by the devil forgetful of his crime, or become a 
minister and servant of the devil for deceiving 
the brotherhood, shall persevere in this his mad- 
ness, do you, as far as in you lies, strive, and in 
this darkness of the rage of the devil, recall the 
minds of the brethren from error, that they may 
not easily consent to the madness of another ; 
that they may not make themselves partakers in 
the crimes of abandoned men ; but being sound, 
let them maintain the constant tenor of their 
salvation, and of the integrity preserved and 
guarded by them.' 

5. Let the lapsed, however, who acknowledge 
the greatness of their sin, not depart from en- 
treating the Lord, nor forsake the Catholic 
Church, which has been appointed one and 
alone by the Lord ; but, continuing in their 
atonements and entreating the Lord's mercy, let 
them knock at the doo)' of the Church, that they 
may be received there where once they were, 
and may return to Christ from whom they have 
departed, and not listen to those who deceive 
them with a fallacious and deadly seduction ; 
since it is written, " Let no man deceive you 
with vain words, for because of these things 
cometh the wrath of God upon the children of 
disobedience ; be not ye therefore partakers 

I Otherwise, " the enduring vigour of that soundnsss which they 
have preserved and guarded." 

with them." ^ Therefore let no one associate 
himself with the contumacious, and those who 
do not fear God, and those who entirely with- 
draw from the Church. But if any one should 
be impatient of entreating the Lord who is 
offended, and should be unwilling to obey us, 
but should follow desperate and abandoned 
men, he must take the blame to himself when 
the day of judgment shall come. For how shall 
he be able in that day to entreat the Lord, who 
has both before this denied Christ, and now also 
the Church of Christ, and not obeying bishops 
sound and wholesome and living, has made him- 
self an associate and a partaker with the dying? 
I bid you, dearest brethren and longed-for, ever 
heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LXIV.3 

TO ROGATIANUS, CONCERNING THE DEACON 
WHO CONTENDED AGAINST THE BISHOP. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN WARNS THE BISHOP ROGA- 
TIANUS TO RESTRAIN THE PRIDE OF THE DEACON 
WHO HAD PROVOKED HIM WITH HIS INSULTS, AND 
TO COMPEL HIM TO REPENT OF HIS BOLDNESS ; 
TAKING OCCASION TO REPEAT ONCE MORE WHAT- 
EVER HE HAS SAID IN THE PREVIOUS LETTER, 
ABOUT THE SACERDOTAL OR EPISCOPAL POWER.'^ 

I . Cyprian to his brother Rogatianus, greeting. 
I and my colleagues who were present with me 
were deeply and grievously distressed, dearest 
brother, on reading your letter in which you 
complained of your deacon, that, forgetful of 
your priestly station, and unmindful of his own 
office and ministry, he had provoked you by his 
insults and injuries. And you indeed have acted 
worthily, and with your accustomed humility 
towards us, in rather complaining of him to us ; 
although you have power, according to the vig- 
our of the episcopate and the authority of your 
See, whereby you might be justified on him at 
once, assured that all we your colleagues would 
regard it as a matter of satisfaction, whatever you 
should do by your priestly power in respect of 
an insolent deacon, as you have in respect of 
men of this kind divine commands. Inasmuch 
as the Lord God says in Deuteronomy, " And 
the man that will do presumptuously, and will 
not hearken unto the priest or the judge, who- 
ever he shall be in those days, that man shall 
die ; and all the people, when they hear, shall 
fear, and shall no more do impiously." 5 And 
that we may know that this voice of God came 
forth with His true and highest majesty to hon- 
our and avenge His priests ; when three of the 

- Eph. V. 6, 7. 

3 Oxford ed.: Ep. ili. 

■* At what time this letter was written is uncertain, unless we may 
gather from the similar commencement in both letters, that it was 
written at the same synod with the following one. Perhaps a.d. 249. 
1 5 Deut. xvii. 12, 13. 

366 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

ministers ■ — Korah, Dathan, and Abiram — 
dared to deal proudly, and to exalt their neck 
against Aaron the priest, and to equal themselves 
with the priest set over them ; they were swal- 
lowed up and devoured by the opening of the 
earth, and so immediately suffered the penalty 
of their sacrilegious audacity. Nor they alone, 
but also two hundred and fifty others, who were 
their companions in boldness, were consumed 
by a fire breaking forth from the Lord, that it 
might be proved that God's priests are avenged 
by Him who makes priests. In the book of 
Kings also, when Samuel the priest was despised 
by the Jewish people on account of his age, as 
you are now, the Lord in wrath exclaimed, and 
said, " They have not rejected thee, but they 
have rejected me."^ And that He might avenge 
this, He set over them Saul as a king, who af- 
flicted them with grievous injuries, and trod on 
the people, and pressed down their pride with all 
insults and penalties, that the despised priest 
might be avenged by divine vengeance on a 
proud people. 

2. Moreover also Solomon, established in the 
Holy Spirit, testifies and teaches what is the 
priestly authority and power, saying, " Fear the 
Lord with all thy soul, and reverence His priests;" ^ 
and again, " Honour God with all thy soul, and 
honour His priests." •♦ Mindful of which pre- 
cepts, the blessed Apostle Paul, according to 
what we read in the Acts of the Apostles, when 
it was said to him, " Reviiest thou thus God's 
high priest?" answered and said, "I wist not, 
brethren, that he was the high priest ; for it is 
written, Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of 
thy people." 5 Moreover, our Lord Jesus Christ 
Himself, our King, and Judge, and God, even to 
the very day of His passion observed the hon- 
our to priests and high priests, although they 
observed neither the fear of Ciod nor the acknowl- 
edgment of Christ. For when He had cleansed 
the lei)er, He said to him, " Go, show thyself to 
the priest, and offer the gift." ^ With that humil- 
ity which taught us also to be huml)le, He still 
called him a priest whom He knew to be sacrile- 
gious ; also under the very sting of His passion, 
when He had received a blow, and it was said 
to Him, " Answerest thou the high priest so?" 
He said nothing reproachfiilly against the person 
of the high priest, but rather maintained His own 
innocence, saying, " If I have spoken evil, bear 
witness of the evil ; but if well, why smitest thou 
me?"'' All which things were therefore done 

* [i.e., Levites = deacons. But Korah and the Invites (Num. 
xvi. 9, lo) must be regarded apart from the Reubenites (laics) 
who sinned with them. Jude ii.] 

^ Sam. viii. 7. 
3 Ecclus. vii. 29. 

* Ecclus. vii. 31. 
S Acts xxiii. 4, 5. 

* Matt, viii 4. 

7 John xviii. 23. 

by Him humbly and patiently, that we might 
have an example of humility and patience ; for 
He taught that true priests were lawfully and 
fully to be honoured, in showing Himself such 
as He was in respect of false priests. 

3. But deacons ought to remember that the 
Lord chose apostles, that is, bishops and over- 
seers ; while apostles appointed for themselves 
deacons^ after the ascent of the Lord into heaven, 
as ministers of their episcopacy and of the Church. 
But if we may dare anything against God who 
makes bishops, deacons may also dare against 
us by whom they are made ; and therefore it 
behoves the deacon of whom you write to re- 
pent of his audacity, and to acknowledge the 
honour of the priest, and to satisfy the bishop 
set over him with full humility. For these things 
are the beginnings of heretics, and the origins 
and endeavours of evil-minded schismatics ; — 
to please themselves, and with swelling haughti- 
ness to despise him who is set over them. Thus 
they depart from the Church — thus a profane 
altar is set up outside — thus they rebel against 
the peace of Christ, and the appointment and 
the unity of God. But if, further, he shall har- 
ass and provoke you with his insults, you must 
exercise against him the power of your dignity, 
by either deposing him or excommunicating him. 
For if the Apostle Paul, writing to Timothy, said, 
" Let no man despise thy youth," '^ how much 
rather must it be said by your colleagues to you, 
"Let no man despise thy age? And since you 
have written, that one has associated himself with 
that same deacon of }ours, and is a partaker of 
his pride and boldness, you may either restrain 
I or excommunicate him also, and any others that 
may appear of a like disposition, and act against 
God's priest. Unless, as we exhort and advise, 
they should rather perceive that they have sinned 
and -make satisfaction, and suffer us to keep our 
own purpose ; for we rather ask and desire to 
overcome the reproaches and injuries of individ- 
uals by clemency and patience, than to punish 
them by our priestly power.'° I bid you, dearest 
brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LXV." 

TO THE CLERGY .\ND PEOPLE .ABIDING AT 
FUKNI, ABOUT VICTOR, WHO HAD MADE THE 
PRESBYTER FAUSTINUS A GUARDIAN. 

ARGUMENT. — SINCE, AGAINST THE DECI.SION OF' 
A COUNCIL OF BISHOPS, GEMINIUS VICTOR HAD 
NAMED IN HIS WILL GEMINIUS FAUSTINUS THE 
PRESBYTER AS HIS GU.ARDIAN OR CURATOR, HE 
FORBIDS TH.\T OFFERING SHOULD BE MADE FOR 

8 [This is the Cyprianic theory.] 

9 I Tim. iv. 12. 

'° [See letter liv. sec. 16, p. 345, supra.^ 
»' Oxford ed. : Ep. i. a.u. 249. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

;6; 

HIM, OR THAT THE SACRIFICE SHOULD BE CELE- 
BRATED FOR HIS REPOSE, INFERRING BY THE 
WAY, FROM THE EXAMPLE OF THE LEVITICAL 
TRIBE, THAT CLERICS OUGHT NOT TO MIX THEM- 
SELVES UP IN SECULAR CARES. 

I. Cyprian to the presb>ters, and deacons, 
and people abiding at Furni, greeting. I and 
my colleagues who were present with me were 
greatly disturbed, dearest brethren, as were also 
our fellow-presbyters who sate with us, when we 
were made aware that Geminius Victor, our 
brother, when departing this life, had named 
-Geminius Faustinus the presbyter executor to 
his will, akhough long since it was decreed, in 
a council of the bishops, that no one should 
appoint any of the clergy and the ministers of 
God executor or guardian ' by his will, since 
every one honoured by the divine priesthood, 
and ordained in the clerical service, ought to 
serve only the altar and sacrifices, and to have 
leisure for prayers and supplications. For it is 
written : " No man that warreth for God en- 
tangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that 
he may please Him to whom he has pledged 
himself." ^ As this is said of all men, how much 
rather ought those not to be bound by worldly 
anxieties and involvements, who, being busied 
with divine and spiritual things, are not able to 
-withdraw from the Church, and to have leisure 
for earthly and secular doings ! The form of 
which ordination and engagement the Levites 
formerly observed under the law, so that when 
the eleven tribes divided the land and shared 
the possessions, the Levitical tribe, which was 
left free for the temple and the altar, and for 
the divine ministries, received nothing from that 
portion of the division ; but while others culti- 
vated the soil, that portion only cultivated the 
tavour of God, and received the tithes from 
the eleven tribes, for their food and mainte- 
nance, from the fruits which grew. All which 

was done by divine authority and arrangement, 
so that they who waited on divine services might 
in no respect be called away, nor be compelled 
to consider or to transact secular business. 
Which plan and rule is now maintained in 
respect of the clergy, that they who are pro- 
moted by clerical ordination in the Church of 
the Lord may be called off in no respect from 
the divine administration, nor be tied down by 
worldly anxieties and irvatters ; but in the hon- 
our of the brethren who contribute, receiving 
as it were tenths of the fruits, they may not 
withdraw from the altars and sacrifices, but may 
serve day and night in heavenly and spiritual 
things. 

2. The bishops our predecessors religiously 
considering this, and wholesomely providing for 
it, decided that no brother departing should 
name a cleric for executor or guardian ; and if 
any one should do this, no offering should be 
made for him, nor any sacrifice be celebrated 
for his repose. s For he does not deserve to be 
named at the altar of God in the prayer of the 
priests, who has wished to call away the priests 
and ministers from the altar. And therefore, 
since Victor, contrary to the rule lately made in 
council by the priests, has dared to appoint 
Geminius Faustinus, a presbyter, his executor, 
it is not allowed that any offering be made by 
you for his repose, nor any prayer be made in 
the church in his name, that so the decree of 
the priests, religiously and needfully made, may 
be kept by us ; and, at the same time, an ex- 
ample be given to the rest of the brethren, that 
no one should call away to secular anxieties the 
priests and ministers of God who are occupied 
with the service of His altar and Church. For 
care will probably be taken in time to come 
that this happen not with respect to the person 
of clerics any more, if what has now been done 
has been punished. I bid you, dearest brethren, 
ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LXVI.-* 

TO FATHER STEPHANUS, CONCERNING MAR- 
CIANUS OF ARLES, WHO HAD JOINED HIM- 
SELF TO NOVATIAN. 

ARGUMENT. — AS MARCIANUS, BISHOP OF ARLES, 
WHEN HE FOLLOWED THE SECT OF NOVATIAN, 
HAD SEDUCED MANY, AND BY HIS SCHISM HAD 
SEPARATED HIMSELF FROM THE COMMUNION OF 
THE REST OF THE BISHOPS, CYPRIAN WARNS 
STEPHANUS, THAT HE SHOULD BY ANNOUNCING 
THE EXCOMMUNICATION OF THE OFFENDER, 
ALIKE BY ROME AND CARTHAGE, ENABLE THE 
CHURCH AT ARLES, TO ELECT .ANOTHER IN HIS 
PLACE ; AND THAT SO PEACE MIGHT BE GRANTED, 
AS WELL TO THE LAPSED AS TO THOSE SEDUCED 
BY HIM, UPON THEIR REPENTANCE, AND A RE- 
TURN TO THE CHURCH CONCEDED TO THEM. 

I. Cyprian to his brother Stephen, greeting. 
Faustinus our colleague, abiding at Lyons, has 
once and again written to me, dearest brother, 
informing me of those things which also I cer- 
tainly know to have been told to you, as well by 
him as by others our fellow-bishops established 

> The Oxford translator notes here that the Roman law did not 
permit this office to be declined. . . . j • 

2 2 Tim. ii. 4. [Are not these primitive ideas a needed admoni- 
tion to our times?] 

3 " Pro dormitione ejus." Goldhorn observes here, rather need- 
lessly, that it was unlucky among the ancient Christians to speak of 
death. [They counted death as a falling asleep, and the grave as a 
ciemeterinm: and this prayer for the n-pose o{ the righteous was 
strictly such, that they might " rest from their labours, till, in the 
resurrection, and not before, they should receive their consummation 
and reward.] 

4 Oxford ed. : Ep. Ixviii. This epistle does not appear in many 
MSS and its genuineness has been therefore doubted. But the styl« 
points to Cyprian as its author, and the documents where it is found 
are among the oldest, one the most ancient of all. a.d. 254. 

:68 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

in the same province, that Marcianus, who abides 
at Aries, has associated himself with Novatian, 
and has departed from the unity of the Catholic 
Church, and from the agreement of our body and 
priesthood, holding that most extreme depravity 
of heretical presumption, that the comforts and 
aids of divine love and paternal tenderness are 
closed to the servants of God who repent, and 
mourn, and knock at the gate of the Church 
with tears, and groans, and grief; and that those 
who are wounded are not admitted for the sooth- 
ing of their wounds, but that, forsaken without 
hope of peace and communion, they must be 
thrown to become the prey of wolves and the 
booty of the devil ; which matter, dearest broth- 
er, it is our business to advise for and to aid in, 
since we who consider the divine clemency, and 
hold the balance in governing the Church, do 
thus exhibit the rebuke of vigour to sinners in 
such a way as that, nevertheless, we do not re- 
fuse the medicine of divine goodness and mercy 
in raising the lapsed and healing the wounded. 

2. Wherefore it behoves you ' to write a very 
copious letter to our fellow-bishops appointed in 
Gaul, not to suffer any longer that Marcian, fro- 
ward and haughty, and hostile to the divine 
mercy and to the salvation of the brotherhood, 
should insult our assembly, because he does not 
yet seem to be excommunicated by us ;^ in that 
he now for a long time boasts and announces 
that, adhering to Novatian, and following his 
frowardness, he has separated himself from our 
communion ; although Novatian himself, whom 
he follows, has formerly been excommunicated, 
and judged an enemy to the Church ; and when 
he sent ambassadors to us into Africa, asking to 
be received into our communion, he received 
back word from a council of several priests who 
were here present, that he himself had excluded 
himself, and could not by any of us be received 
into communion, as he had attempted to erect a 
profane altar, and to set up an adulterous throne, 
and to offer sacrilegious sacrifices opposed to the 
true priest ; while the Bishop Cornelius was or- 
dained in the Catholic Church by the judgment 
of God, and by the suffrages of the clergy and 
people. Therefore, if he were willing to return 
to a right mind, and to come to himself, he 
should repent and return to the Church as a 
suppliant. How vain it is, dearest brother, when 
Novatian has lately been repulsed and rejected, 
and excommunicated by God's priests through- 
out the whole world, for uS still to suffer his flat- 
terers now to jest with us, and to judge of the 
majesty and dignity of the Church ! 

' [With all Cyprian's humility and reverence forihe mother See, 
to which the Church of North Africa owed its origin, he yet, as an 
older bishop, reminds Stephen of what he ought to do to succour the 
Church of lrena;us.] 

- J" By us," viz., Rome and Carthage, provinces in communion 
with r'austinus.J 

3. Let letters be directed by you into the 
province and to the people abiding at Aries, by 
which, Marcian being excommunicated, another 
may be substituted in his place, and Christ's 
flock, which even to this day is contemned as 
scattered and wounded by him, may be gathered 
together. Let it suffice that many of our breth- 
ren have departed in these late years in those 
parts without peace ; and certainly let the rest 
who remain be helped, who groan both day and 
night, and beseeching the divine and fatherly 
mercy, entreat the comfort of our succour. For, 
for that reason, dearest brother, the body of 
priests is abundantly large, joined together by 
the bond of mutual concord, and the link of 
unity ; so that if any one of our college should 
try to originate heresy, and to lacerate and lay 
waste Christ's flock, others may help, and as it 
were, as useful and merciful shepherds, gather 
together the Lord's sheep into the flock. For 
what if any harbour in the sea shall begin to be 
mischievous and dangerous to ships, by the 
breach of its defences ; do not the navigators 
direct their ships to other neighbouring ports 
where there is a safe ' and practicable entrance, 
and a secure station? Or if, on the road, any 
inn should begin to be beset and occupied by 
robbers, so that whoever should enter would be 
caught by the attack of those who lie in wait 
there ; do not the travellers, as soon as this its 
character is discovered, seek other houses of 
entertainment on the road, which shall be safer, 
where the lodging is trustworthy, and the inns 
safe for the travellers ? And this ought now to 
be the case with us, dearest brother,-* that we 
should receive to us with ready and kindly 
humanity our brethren, who, tossed on the rocks 
of Marcian, 5 are seeking the secure harbours of 
the Church ; and that we afford such a place of 
entertainment for the travellers as is that in the 
Gospel, in which those who are wounded and 
maimed by robbers may be received and cher- 
ished, and protected by the host. 

4. P\)r what is a greater or a more worthy 
care of overseers, than to provide by diligent 
solicitude and wholesome medicine for cherish- 
ing and preserving the sheep? since the Lord 
speaks, and says, " The diseased have ye not 
strengthened, neither have ye healed that which 
was sick, neither have ye bound up that which 
was broken, neither have ye brought again that 
which was driven away, neither have ye sought 
that which was lost. And my sheep were scat- 
tered because there is no shepherd ; and they 
became meat to all the beasts of the field, and 
none did search or seek after them. Therefore 

3 Suppl. " access," according to Baluzius. 

* [Note the language, " with us, dearest brother; " not a thought 
save that of equal and joint authority.] 

5 Some old editions read, " who, having avoided the rocks of 
Marcian." 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

369 

thus saith the Lord, Behold, I am against the 
shepherds, and I will require my flock at their 
hands, and cause them to cease from feeding 
the flock ; neither shall they feed them any more : 
for I will deliver them from their mouth, and I 
will feed them with judgment." ' Since there- 
fore the Lord thus threatens such shepherds by 
whom the Lord's sheep are neglected and perish, 
what else ought we to do, dearest brother, than 
to exhibit full diligence in gathering together 
and restoring the sheep of Christ, and to apply 
the medicine of paternal affection to cure the 
wounds of the lapsed, since the Lord also in 
the Gospel warns, and says, " They that be whole 
need not a physician, but they that are sick?"^ 
For although we are many shepherds, yet we 
feed one flock,^ and ought to collect and cherish 
all the sheep which Christ by His blood and 
passion sought for ; nor ought we to suffer our 
suppliant and mourning brethren to be cruelly 
despised and trodden down by the haughty pre- 
sumption of some, since it is written, " But the 
man that is proud and boastful shall bring noth- 
ing at all to perfection, who has enlarged his 
soul as hell." •♦ And the Lord, in His Gospel, 
blames and condemns men of that kind, saying, 
" Ye are they which justify yourselves before 
men, but God knoweth your hearts : for that 
which is highly esteemed among men is abomina- 
tion in the sight of God." 5 He says that those 
are execrable and detestable who please them- 
selves, who, swelling and inflated, arrogantly 
assume anything to themselves. Since then 
Marcian has begun to be of these, and, allying 
himself with Novatian, has stood forth as the 
opponent of mercy and love, let him not pro- 
nounce sentence, but receive it ; and let him 
not so act as if he himself were to judge of the 
college of priests, since he himself is judged by 
all the priests. 

5. For the glorious honour of our predeces- 
sors, the blessed martyrs Cornelius and Lucius, 
must be maintained, whose memory as we hold 
in honour, much more ought you, dearest brother, 
to honour and cherish with your weight and 
authority, since you have become their vicar and 
successor.^ For they, full of the Spirit of God, 
and established in a glorious martyrdom, judged 
that peace should be granted to the lapsed, and 
*hat when penitence was undergone, the reward 
of peace and communion was not to be 'denied ; 
and this they attested by their letters, and 
we all everywhere and entirely have judged the 

' Ezek. xxxiv. 4-6, 10, 16. 

2 Matt. ix. 12. 

3 ["We, many shepherds (one episcopate), over one flock." 
Cyprian's theory i^ never departed from, practically.] 

* Heb. ii. 5. 

5 Luke xvi. 15. 

'' [" You ought," etc. Does any modern bishop of the Roman 
obedience presume to speak thus to the " infallible " oracle of the 
Vatican?! 

same thing. For there could not be among us 
a diverse feeling yi whom there was one spirit ; 
and therefore it is manifest that he does nof 
hold the truth of the Holy Spirit with the rest 
whom we observe to think differently. Intimate 
plainly to us who has been substituted at Aries 
in the place of Marcian, that we may know to 
whom to direct our brethren, and to whom we 
ought to write. I bid you, dearest brother, ever 
heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LXVII.7 

TO THE CLERGY ATD PEOPLE ABIDING IN 
SPAIN, CONCERNING BASILIDES AND MAR- 
TIAL. 

AI?GUA/ENT.—BAS1UDES AND MARTIAL, BISHOPS, 
HAVING LAPSED AND BECOME CONTAMINATED BY 
THE CERTIFICATES OF IDOLATRY, CYPRIAN WITH 
HIS FELLOW-BISHOPS PRAISES THE CLERGY AND 
PEOPLE OF SPAIN THAT THEY HAD SUBSTITUTED 
IN THEIR PLACE BY A LEGITIMATE ELECTION 
SABINUS AND FELIX ; ESPECIALLY AS, ACCORD- 
ING TO THE DECISION OF CORNELIUS AND HIS 
COLLEAGUES, LAPSED BISHOPS MIGHT INDEED BE 
RECEIVED TO REPENTANCE, BUT WERE PROHIB- 
ITED FROM THE PRIESTLY HONOUR. MOREOVER, 
HE ALLUDES BY THE WAY TO CERTAIN MATTERS 
ABOUT THE ANCIENT RITE OF EPISCOPAL ELEC- 
TION, THE CONTEXT INDICATES THAT THIS WAS 
WRITTEN DURING THE EPISCOPATE OF STEPHEN. 

I. Cyprian, Csecilius, Primus, Polycarp, Nico- 
medes, Lucilianus, Successus, Sedatus, Fortuna- 
tus, Januarius, Secundinus, Pomponius, Honora- 
tus, Victor, Aurelius, Sattius, Petrus, another 
Januarius, Saturninus, another Aurelius, Venan- 
tius. Quietus, Rogatianus,Tenax, Felix, Faustinus^ 
Quintus, another Saturninus, Lucius, Vincentius, 
Libosus, Geminius, Marcellus, Iambus, Adelphius, 
Victoricus, and Paulus, to Felix the presbyter, and 
to the peoples abiding at Legio ^ and Asturica,^ 
also to LjeHus the deacon, and the people abid- 
ing at Emerita,'° brethren in the Lord, greeting. 
When we had come together, dearly beloved 
brethren, we read your letters, which according 
to the integrity of your faith and your fear of 
God you wrote to us by Felix and Sabinus our 
fellow-bishops, signifying that Basilides and Mar- 
tial, being stained with the certificates of idola- 
try, and bound with the consciousness of wicked 
crimes, ought not to hold the episcopate and 
administer the priesthood of God ; and you de- 
sired an answer to be written to you again con- 
cerning these things, and your solicitude, no less 
just than needful, to be relieved either by the 
comfort or by the help of our judgment. Never- 

7 Oxford ed. : Ep. Ixvii. 

8 Leon. 

9 Astorga. 
'° Merida. 

A.D. 25f . 

370 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

theless to this your desire not so much our coun- 
sels as the divine precepts rei^y, in which it is 
long since bidden by the voice of Heaven and 
prescribed by the law of God, who and what 
sort of persons ought to serve the altar and to 
celebrate the divine sacrifices. For in Exodus 
God speaks to Moses, and warns him, saying, 
" Let the priests which come near to the Lord 
God sanctify themselves, lest the Lord forsake 
them." ' And again : " And when they come 
near to the altar of the Holy One to minister, 
they shall not bring sin upon them, lest they 
die." ^ Also in Leviticus the Lord commands, 
and says, " Whosoever hath any spot or blemish 
upon him, shall not approach to offer gifts to 
God." 3 

2. Since these things are announced and are 
made plain to us, it is necessary that our obedi- 
ence should wait upon the divine precepts ; nor 
in matters of this kind can human indulgence 
accept any man's person, or yield anything to 
any one, when the divine prescription has inter- 
fered, and establishes a law. For we ought not 
to be forgetful what the Lord spoke to the Jews 
by Isaiah the prophet, rebuking, and indignant 
that they had despised the divine precepts and 
followed human doctrines. " This people," he 
says, honoureth me wish their lips, but their heart 
is widely removed from me ; but in vain do they 
worship me, teaching the doctrines and com- 
mandments of men." ■♦ This also the Lord re- 
peats in the Gospel, and says, " Ye reject the 
•commandment of God, that ye may establish 
your own tradition." 5 Having which things 
before our eyes, and solicitously and religiously 
■considering them, we ought in the ordinations 
of priests to choose none but unstained and up- 
right ministers,^' who, holily and worthily offering 
sacrifices to God, may be heard in the prayers 
■which they make for the safety of the Lord's 
people, since it is written, " God heareth not a 
sinner ; but if any man be a worshii)per of God, 
and doeth His will, him He heareth." 7 On which 
account it is fitting, that with fiill diligence and 
sincere investigation those should be chosen for 
God's priesthood whom it is manifest God will 
hear. 

3. Nor let the people flatter themselves that 
they can be free from the contagion of sin, while 
communicating with a priest who is a sinner, and 
yieUling their consent to the unjust and unlawful 
episcopacy of their overseer, when the divine 
reproof by Hosea the prophet threatens, and 
says, "Their sacrifices shall be as the bread of 
mourning; all that eat thereof shall be pol- 

* Ex. xix. 22. 

^ Ex. xxviii. 43. 
3 Lev. xxi. 17. 

* Isa. xxix. 13. 
S Mark vii. 13. 
<> " Antistites." 
7 John ix. 31. 

luted ; " * teaching manifestly and showing tnat 
all are absolutely bound to the sin who ha\e 
been contaminated by the sacrifice of a profane 
and unrighteous priest. Which, moreover, we 
; find to be manifested also in Numbers, when 
Korah, and Dathan, and Abiram claimed for 
themselves the power of sacrificing in opposition 
to Aaron the priest. There also the Lord com- 
manded by Moses that the people should be 
separated from them, lest, being associated with 
the wicked, themselves also should be bound 
closely in the same wickedness. " Separate 
yourselves," said He, " from the tents of these 
wicked and hardened men, and touch not those 
things which belong to them, lest ye perish to- 
gether in their sins." '' On which account a peo- 
i pie obedient to the Lord's precepts, and fearing 
God, ought to separate themselves from a sinful 
prelate, and not to associate themselves with the 
sacrifices of a sacrilegious priest, especially since 
they themselves have the power either of choos- 
ing worthy priests, or of rejecting unworthy 
ones. 

4. Which very thing, too, we observe to come 
from divine authority, that the priest should be 
chosen in the presence of the people under the 
eyes of all, and should be approved worthy and 
suitable by public judgment and testimony ; as 
in the book of Numbers the Lord commanded 
Moses, saying, "Take Aaron thy brother, and 
Eleazar his son, and place them in the mount, 
in the presence of all the assembly, and strij) 
' Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Klea- 
: zar his son ; and let Aaron die there, and be 
added to his people." '° God commands a priest 
to be appointed in the presence of all the as- 
sembly ; that is. He instructs and shows that the 
I ordination of priests ought not to be solemnized 
: except with the knowledge of the people stand- 
ing near, that in the presence of the people 
either the crimes of the wicked, may be dis- 
closed, or the merits of the good may be de- 
clared, and the ordination, which shall have 
been examined by ihe suftVage and judgment of 
all, may be just and legitimate." .And this is 
subse(]uently observed, according to divine in- 
struction, in the Acts of the .Apostles, when 
Peter speaks to the people of ordaining an apos- 
tle in the place of Judas. " Peter," it says, 
" stood up in the midst of the disciples, and the 
multitude were in one place." '^ Neither do we 
observe that this was regarded by the apostles 
only in the ordinations of bishops and priests, 
but also in those of deacons, of which matter it- 
self also it is written in their Acts : " And they 

8 Hos. ix. 4. 

9 Num. xvi. 26. 

'° Num. XX. 25, 26. 

" [See sec. 5, />yV(i.l 

■- Acts i. 15. From some authorities, Baluzius here interpolates, 
" the number of men .was about a hundred and twenty." But this, 
»ays a modern editor, smacks of" emendation." 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

?>7^ 

twelve called together," it says, "the whole con- 
gregation of the disciples, and said to them ; " ' 
which was done so diligently and carefully, with 
the calling together of the whole of the people, 
surely for this reason, that no unworthy person 
might creep into the ministry of the altar, or to 
the office of a priest. For that unworthy per- 
sons are sometimes ordained, not according to 
the will of God, but according to human pre- 
sumption, and that those things which do not 
come of a legitimate and righteous ordination 
are displeasing to God, God Himself manifests 
by Hosea the prophet, saying, " They have set 
up for themselves a king, but not by me." ^ 

5. For which reason you must diligently ob- 
serve and keep the practice delivered from di- 
vine tradition and apostolic obser\'ance, which is 
also maintained among us, and almost through- 
out all the provinces ; ^ that for the proper cele- 
bration of ordinations all the neighbouring bishops 
of the same province should assemble with that 
people for which a prelate is ordained. And the 
bishop should be chosen in the presence of the 
people, who have most fully known the life of 
each one, and have looked into the doings of 
each one as respects his habitual conduct. And 
this also, we see, was done by you in the ordina- 
tion of our colleague Sabinus ; so that, by the 
suffrage of the whole brotherhood,* and by the 
sentence of the bishops who had assembled in 
their presence, and who had written letters to 
you concerning him, the episcopate was con- 
ferred upon him, and hands were imposed on 
him in the place of Basilides. Neither can it 
rescind an ordination rightly perfected, that Ba- 
silides, after the detection of his crimes, and the 
baring of his conscience even by his own confes- 
sion, went to Rome and deceived Stephen our 
colleague, placed at a distance, and ignorant of 
what had been done, and of the truth, to canvass 
that he might be replaced unjustly in the episco- 
pate from which he had been righteously de- 
posed.5 The result of this is, that the sins of 
Basilides are not so much abolished as enhanced, 
inasmuch as to his former sins he has also added 
the crime of deceit and circumvention. For he 
is not so much to be blamed who has been 
through heedlessness surprised by fraud, as he 
is to be execrated who has fraudulently taken 
him by surprise. But if Basilides could deceive 
men, he cannot deceive God, since it is written, 
" God is not mocked." ^ But neither can deceit 
advantage Martialis, in such a way as that he 

' Acts iv. 2. I 

2 Hos. viii. 4. 

3 [See Ep. xl. p. 319, supra."] 
* [Elucidation XIV.]^ 

5 ["Our colleague Stephen," placed at a distance, ignorant of 
facts and truth, and, in short, incompetent to meddle with the African 
province in its own business: such was Cyprian's idea of the limits to 
which even this apostolic See was restricted.] 

•= Gal. VI. 7. 

who also is involved in great crimes should hold 
his bishopric, since the apostle also warns, and 
says, " A bishop must be blameless, as the stew- 
ard of God."? 

6. Wherefore, since as ye have written, dearly 
beloved brethren, and as Felix and Sabinus our 
colleagues affirm, and as another Felix of C^sar 
Augusta,^ a maintainer of the faith and a de- 
fender of the truth, signifies in his letter, Basili- 
des and Martialis have been contaminated by the 
abominable certificate of idolatry ; and Basilides, 
moreover, besides the stain of the certificate, 
when he was prostrate in sickness, blasphemed 
against God, and confessed that he blasphemed ; 
and because of the wound to his own conscience, 
voluntarily laying down his episcopate, turned 
himself to repentance, entreating God, and con- 
sidering himself sufficiently happy if it might be 
permitted him to communicate even as a layman : 
Martialis also, besides the long frequenting of the 
disgraceful and filthy banquets of the Gentiles in 
their college, and placing his sons in the same 
college, after the manner of foreign nations, 
among profane sepulchres, and burying them 
together with strangers, has also affirmed, by 
acts which are publicly taken before a ducena- 
rian procurator,'^ that he had yielded himself to 
idolatry, and had denied Christ ; and as there 
are many other and grave crimes in which Ba- 
silides and Martialis are held to be implicated ; 
such persons attempt to claim for themselves 
the episcopate in vain ; since it is evident that 
men of that kind may neither rule over the 
Church of Christ, nor ought to offer sacrifices to 
God, especially since Cornelius also, our col- 
league, a peaceable and righteous priest, and 
moreover honoured by the condescension of the 
Lord with martyrdom, has long ago decreed 
with us,'° and with all tife bishops appointed 
throughout the whole world, that men of this 
sort might indeed be admitted to repentance, 
but were prohibited from the ordination of the 
clergy, and from the priestly honour. 

7. Nor let it disturb you, dearest brethren, if 
with some, in these last times, either an uncer- 
tain faith is wavering, or a fear of God without 
religion is vacillating, or a peaceable concord 
does not continue. These things have been 
foretold as about to happen in the end of the 
world ; and it was predicted by the voice of the 
Lord, and by the testimony of the apostles, that 
now that the world is failing, and the Antichrist 
is drawing near, everything good shall fail, but 
evil and adverse things shall prosper." 

8. Yet although, in these last times, evangelic 
vigour has not so failed in the Church of God, nor 

\ 

7 Tit. i. 7. 

^ Saragos5.i. 

9 A collector of taxes, so called from the amount of his salarjv 

'^ [Elucidation XV.] 

" I Surely a significant warning to our own times.] 

ll-^ 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

the strength of Christian virtue or faith so lan- 
guished, that there is not left a portion of the 
priests which in no respect gives way under 
these ruins of things and wrecks of faith ; but, 
bold and stedfast, they maintain the honour of 
the divine majesty and the priestly dignity, with 
full observance of fear. We remember and keep 
in view that, although others succumbed and 
yielded, Mattathias boldly vindicated God's law ; 
that Elias, when the Jews gave way and departed 
from the divine religion, stood and nobly con- 
tended ; that Daniel, deterred neither by the 
loneliness of a foreign country nor by the har- 
assment of continual persecution, frequently and 
gloriously suffered martyrdoms ; also that the 
three youths, subdued neither by their tender 
years ' nor by threats, stood up faithfully against 
the Babylonian fires, and conquered the victor 
king even in their very captivity itself. Let the 
number either of prevaricators or of traitors see 
to it, who have now begun to rise in the Church 
against the Church, and to corrupt as well the 
faith as the truth. Among very many there still 
remains a sincere mind and a substantial religion, 
and a spirit devoted to nothing but the Lord and 
its God.^ Nor does the perfidy of others press 
down the Christian faith into ruin, but rather 
stimulates and exalts it to glory, according to 
what the blessed Apostle Paul exhorts, and says : 
" For what if some of these have fallen from 
their faith : hath their unbelief made the faith of 
God of none effect? God forbid. For God is 
true, but every man a liar." ^ But if every man 
is a liar, and God only true, what else ought we, 
the servants, and especially the priests, of God, to 
tlo, than forsake human errors and lies, and con- 
tinue in the truth of God, keeping the Lord's 
precepts ? 

9. Wherefore, although there have been found 
some among our colleagues, dearest brethren, 
who think that the godly discipline may be neg- 
lected, and who rashly hold communion with 
Basilides and Martialis, such a thing as this ought 
not to trouble our faith, since the Holy Spirit 
threatens such in the Psalms, saying, " But thou 
hatest instruction, and castedst my words behind 
thee : when thou sawest a thief, thou consent- 
edst unto him, and hast been partaker with adul- 
terers." •♦ He shows that they become sharers 
and partakers of other men's sins who are asso- 
ciated with the delinquents. And besides, Paul 
the apostle writes, and says the same thing : 
"Whisperers, backbiters, haters of (iod, injurious, 
proud, boasters of themselves, inventors of evil 
things, who, although they knew the judgment of 
God, did not understand that they which com- 

* Some read, " by the furnaces: " some " by arms." 
^ [A noteworthy testimony to the Decian period, when tobeaChris- 
tian, indeed, was to be a confessor or martyr. Soc, H . .^..bk. iv. c. 28.] 
^ Rom. iii. 3, 4. 
■• I's. 1. 17, 18. 

mit such things are worthy of death, not only 
they which commit those things, but they also 
which consent unto those who do these things." - 
Since 'they, says he, who do such things are 
worthy of death, he makes manifest and proves 
that not only they are worthy of death, and come 
into punishment who do evil things, but also 
those who consent unto those who do such things 
— who, while they are mingled in unlawful com- 
munion with the evil and sinners, and the unre- 
penting, are polluted by the contact of the guilty, 
and, being joined in the fault, are thus not sepa- 
rated in its penalty. For which reason we not 
only approve, but applaud, dearly beloved breth- 
ren, the religious solicitude of your integrity and 
faith, and exhort you as much as we can by our 
letters, not to mingle in sacrilegious communion 
with profane and polluted priests, but maintain 
the sound and sincere constancy of your faith 
with religious fear. I bid you, dearest brethren, 
ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LXVni.^ 

TO FLORENTIUS PUPIANUS, ON CALUMNIATORS. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN CLEARS HIMSELF IN THE 
EVES OF FLORENTIUS PUPIANUS FROM VARIOUS 
CRIMES OF WHICH HE IS ACCUSED BY HIM ; 
AND ARGUES THE LIGHTNESS OF HIS MIND, IN 
TH.-^T HE HAS SO HASTILY TRUSTED CALUMNI- 
ATORS. 

I. Cyprian, who is also called Thascius," to 
Florentius, who is also Pupianus, his brother, 
greeting. I had believed, brother, that you were 
now at length turned to repentance for having 
either rashly heard or believed in tune past 
things so wicked, so disgraceful, so execrable 
even among CJentiles, concerning me. But even 
now in your letter I perceive that you are still 
the same as you were before — that you ljelie\'e 
the same things concerning me, and thai )ou 
persist in what you did believe, and, lest by 
chance the dignity of your eminence and your 
martyrdom should be stained by communion 
with me, that you are incjuiring carefully into 
my character; and after God the Judge who 
makes priests, that you wish to judge — I will 
not say of me, for what am I ? — but of the judg- 
ment of God and of Christ. This is not to be- 
lieve in God — this is to stand forth as a rebel 
against Christ and His Gospel ; so that although 
He says, " Are not two sparrows sold for a far- 
thing ? and neither of them falls to the ground 

5 Rom. i. 30-32. 

* Oxford ed. : Ep. l.wi. From his saying, that he h-^s now dis- 
charged his episcopal office for si,\ years (sec. 5), it is plainly evident 
that he is writing this letter in the tnne of Stephen, a.d. 254. 

7 It is suggested with some probability, that this form of super- 
scription was intended to rebuke the rudeness of Florentius, who, in 
addressing Cyprian, had used his heathen name of Thascius instead 
of his baptismal name of Ca:cilius, which he had adopted from the 
presbyter who had been the means of his conversion. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

'> "T '» 

without the will of my Father," ' and His majesty 
and truth prove that even things of little conse- 
quence are not done without the consciousness 
and permission of God, you think that God's 
priests are ordained in the Church without His 
knowledge. For to believe that they who are 
ordained are unworthy and unchaste, what else 
is it than to believe that his priests are not 
appointed in the Church by God, nor through 
God ? 

2. Think you that my testimony of myself is 
better than that of God ? when the Lord Him- 
self teaches, and says that testimony is not true, 
if any one himself appears as a witness concern- 
ing himself, for the reason that every one would 
assuredly favour himself. Nor would any one 
put forward mischievous and adverse things 
against himself, but there may be a simple con- 
fidence of truth if, in what was announced of us, 
another is the announcer and witness. " If," 
He says, " I bear witness of myself, my testimony 
is not true ; but there is another who beareth 
witness of me." ^ But if the Lord Himself, who 
will by and by judge all things, was unwilling to 
be believed on His own testimony, but preferred 
to be approved by the judgment and testimony 
of God the Father, how much more does it be- 
hove His servants to observe this, who are not 
only approved by, but even glory in the judg- 
ment and testimony of God ! But with you the 
fabrication of hostile and malignant men has 
prevailed against the divine decree, and against 
our conscience resting upon the strength of its 
faith, as if among lapsed and profane persons 
placed outside the Church, from whose breasts 
the Holy Spirit has departed, there could be 
anything else than a depraved mind and a deceit- 
ful tongue, and venomous hatred, and sacrilegious 
lies, which whosoever believes, must of necessity 
be found with them when the day of judgment 
shall come. 

3. But with respect to what you have said, 
that priests should be lowly, because both the 
Lord and His apostles were lowly ; both all the 
brethren and Gentiles also well know and love 
my humility ; and you also knew and loved it 
while you were still in the Church, and were in 
communion with me. But which of us is far 
from humility : I, who daily serve the brethren, 
and kindly receive with good-will and gladness 
every one that comes to the Church ; or you, 
who appoint yourself bishop of a bishop, and 
judge of a judge, ^ given for the time by God? 
Although the Lord God says in Deuteronomy, 
" And the man that will do presumptuously, and 
will not hearken unto the priests or unto the judge 

' Matt. X. 29. 
^ John V. 31, 32.' 

3 [ A mild remonstrance against the officious conduct of Stephen, 
also.] 

who shall be in those days, even that man shall 
die ; and all the people, when they hear, shall 
fear, and do no more presumptuously." •* And 
again He speaks to Samuel, and says, " They 
have not despised thee, but they have despised 
me." 5 And moreover the Lord, in the Gospel, 
when it was said to Him, " Answerest thou the 
high priest so?" guarding the priestly dignity, 
and teaching that it ought to be maintained, 
would say nothing against the high priest, but 
only clearing His own innocence, answered, say- 
ing, " If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the 
evil ; but if well, why smitest thou me?"^ The 
blessed apostle also, when it was said to him, 
" Revilest thou God's high priest? " spoke noth- 
ing reproachfully against the priest, when he 
might have lifted up himself boldly against those 
who had crucified the Lord, and who had already 
sacrificed God and Christ, and the temple and 
the priesthood ; but even although in false and 
degraded priests, considering still the mere empty 
shadow of the priestly name, he said, " I wist 
not, brethren, that he was the high priest ; for 
it is written. Thou shalt not speak evil of the 
ruler of thy people." ? 

4. Unless perchance I was a priest to you be- 
fore the persecution, when you held communion 
with me, and ceased to be a priest after the per- 
secution ! For the persecution, when it came, 
lifted you to the highest sublimity of martyrdom. 
But it depressed me with the burden of proscrip- 
tion, since it was publicly declared, " If any one 
holds or possesses any of the property of Caeci- 
lius Cyprian, bishop of the Christians ; " so that 
even they who did not believe in God appoint- 
ing a bishop, could still believe in the devil pro- 
scribing a bishop. Nor do I boast of these 
things, but with grief I bring them forward, since 
you constitute yourself a judge ^ of God and of 
Christ, who says to the apostles, and thereby to 
all chief rulers, who by vicarious ordination suc- 
ceed to the apostles : " He that heareth you, 
heareth me ; and he that heareth me, heareth 
Him that sent me ; and he that despiseth you, 
despiseth me, and Him that sent me.'"^ 

5. For from this have arisen, and still arise, 
schisms and heresies, in that the bishop who is | 
one 9 and rules over the Church is contemned 
by the haughty presumption of some persons ; 
and the man who is honoured by God's conde- 
scension, is judged unworthy by men. For what 
swelling of pride is this, what arrogance of soul, 
what inflation of mind, to call prelates and priests 
to one's own recognition, and unless I may be 

■* Deut. xvii. 12, 13. 
5 I Sam. viii. 7. 
^ John xviii. 23. 

7 Acts xxiii. 4, 5. 

8 Luke X. 16. _ . 

9 [His aphorism, Ecclesta in Episcopo, is here used in anothe* 
form. " The bishop " here = the episcopate.] 

374 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

declared clear in your sight and absolved by 
your judgment, behold now for six years the 
brotherhood has neither had a bishop, nor the 
people a prelate," nor the flock a pastor, nor 
the Church a governor, nor Christ a representa- 
tive,^ nor God a priest ! Pupianus must come 
to the rescue, and give judgment, and declare 
the decision of God and Christ accepted, that 
so great a number of the faithful who have been 
summoned away, under my rule, may not appear 
to have departed without hope of salvation and 
of peace ; that the new crowd of believers may 
not be considered to have failed of attaining any 
grace of baptism and the Holy Spirit by my 
ministry ; ^ that the peace conferred upon so 
many lapsed and penitent persons, and the com- 
munion vouchsafed by my examination, may not 
be abrogated by the authority of your judgment. 
Condescend for once, and deign to pronounce 
concerning us, and to establish our episcopate by 
the authority of your recognition, that God and 
His Christ may thank you, in that by your means 
a representative and ruler has been restored as 
well to their altar as to their people. 

6. Bees have a king, and cattle a leader, and 
they keep faith to him. Robbers obey their 
chief with an obedience full of humility. How 
much more simple and better than you are the 
brute cattle and dumb animals, and robbers, 
although bloody, and raging among swords and 
weapons I The chief among them is acknowl- 
edged and feared, whom no divine judgment has 
appointed, but on whom an abandoned faction 
and a guilty band have agreed. 

7. You say, indeed, that the scruple into which 
you have fallen ought to be taken from your 
mind. You have fallen into it, but it was by 
your irreligious credulity. You have fallen into 
it, but it was by your own sacrilegious (lisi:»osition 
and will in easily hearkening to unchaste, to im- 
pious, to unspeakal)le things against your brother, 
against a priest, and in willingly believing them ; 
in defending other men's falsehoods, as if they 
were your own and your i)rivate pro]:)erty ; and 
in not remembering that it is written, " Hedge 
thine ears with thorns, and hearken not to a 
wicked tongue ; " •♦ and again : " A wicked doer 
giveth heed to the tongue of the unjust ; but a 
righteous man regards not lying lips." 5 Where- 
fore have not the martyrs fallen into this scruple, 
full of the Holy Ghost, and already by their pas- 
sion near to the presence of God and of His 
Christ \ martyrs who, from their dungeon, di- 
rected letters to Cyprian the bishop, acknowl- 
edging the priest of God, and bearing witness to 

' {Prcepositum is the word thus translated.] 
^ Antistitem. [This word occurs in Tertulhan, De Fuga.'] 
3 [In all this his theory comes out; viz., that unity is maintained 
by communion with one's lawful bishop, not with any foreign See.] 
■• Ecclus. xxviii. 24 (Vulg. 28). 
5 Prov. xvii. 4, LXX. 

him ? Wherefore have not so many bishops, my 
colleagues, fallen into this scruple, who either, 
when they departed from the midst of us, were 
proscribed, or being taken were cast into prison 
and were in chains ; or who, sent away into ex- 
ile, have gone by an illustrious road to the Lord ; 
or who in some places, condemned to death, 
have received heavenly crowns from the glorifi- 
cation of the Lord? Wherefore have not they 
fallen into this scruple, from among that people 
of ours which is with us, and is by God's con- 
descension committed to us — so many confess- 
ors who have Ijeen put to the question and 
tortured, and glorious by the memory of illustri- 
ous wounds and scars ; so many chaste virgins, 
so many praiseworthy widows ; finally, all the 
churches throughout the whole world who are 
associated with us in the bond of unity ? Unless 
all these, who are in communion with me, as 
you have written, are polluted with the pollution 
of my lips, and have lost the hope of eternal life 
by the contagion of my communion.^ Pupianus 
alone, sound, inviolate, holy, modest, vvho would 
not associate himself with us, shall dwell alone 
in paradise and in the kingdom of heaven. 

8. You have written also, that on my account 
the Church has now a portion of herself in a 
state of dispersion, although the whole people 
of the Church are collected, and united, and 
joined to itself in an undivided concord : they 
alone have remained without, who even, if they 
had been within, would have had to be cast out. 
Nor does the Lord, the protector of His people, 
and their guardian, suffer the wheat to be snatched 
from His floor ; but the chaff alone can be sep- 
I arated from the Church, since also the apostle 
says, " For what if some of them have departed 
from the iliith ? shall their unbelief make the 
fiiith of God of none effect? God forbid; for 
God is true, but every man a liar." 7 And the 
Lord also in the Gospel, when disciples forsook 
Him as He s})oke, turning to the twelve, said, 
"Will ye also go away?" then Peter answered 
Him, " Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast 
the word of eternal life ; and we believe, and are 
sure, that Thou art the Son of the living God." ^ 
Peter speaks there, on whom the Church was to 
be built,'^ teaching and showing in the name of 
the Church, that although a rebellious and arro- 
gant multitude of those who will not hear and 
obey may depart, yet the Church does not depart 
from Christ ; and they are the Church who are 
a people united to the priest, and the flock which 
adheres to its pastor.^ Whence you ought to 
know that the bishop is in the Church, and the 

6 [See sec. 6, note 3, siipra.^ 

' Rom. iii. 3, 4. 

* John vi. 67-69. 

9 [Not any of his successors, but Peter personally, is thus hon- 
oured on the strength of Eph. ii. 20. All the apostles were in this foun- 
dation also. Rev. xxi. 14; but the figure excludes successors, who 
arc of the superstructure, necessarily.] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

375 

Church in the bishop ; ' and if any one be not 
with the bishop, that he is not in the Church, 
and that those flatter themselves in vain who 
creep in, not having peace with God's priests, 
and think that they communicate secretly with 
some ; while the Church, which is Catholic and 
one, is not cut nor divided, but is indeed con- 
nected and bound together by the cement of 
priests who cohere with one another. 

9. Wherefore, brother, if you consider God's 
.majesty who ordains priests, if you will for once 

have respect to Christ, who by His decree and 
word, and by His presence, both rules prelates 
themselves, and rules the Church by prelates ; 
if you will trust, in respect of the innocence of 
bishops, not human hatred, but the divine judg- 
ment ; if you will begin even a late repentance 
for your temerity, and pride, and insolence ; if 
you will most abundantly make satisfaction to 
God and His Christ whom I serve, and to whom 
with pure and unstained lips I ceaselessly offer 
sacrifices, not only in peace, but in persecution ; 
we may have some ground for communion with 
you, even although there still remain among us 
respect and fear for the divine censure ; so that 
first I should consult my Lord whether He 
would permit peace to be granted to you, and 
you to be received to the communion of His 
Church by His own showing and admonition. 

10. For I remember what has already been 
manifested to me, nay, what has been prescribed 
by the authority of our Lord and God to an 
obedient and fearing servant ; and among other 
things which He condescended to show and to 
reveal, He also added this : " Whoso therefore 
does not believe Christ, who maketh the priest, 
shall hereafter begin to believe Him who avengeth 
the priest." Although I know that to some men 
dreams seem ridiculous and visions foolish, yet 
assuredly it is to such as would rather believe in 
opposition to the priest, than believe the priest. 
But it is no wonder, since his brethren said of 
Joseph, " Behold, this dreamer cometh ; come 
now therefore, let us slay him." ^ And after- 
wards the dreamer attained to what he had 
dreamed ; and his slayers and sellers were put 
to confusion, so that they, who at first did not 
believe the words, afterwards believed the deeds. 
But of those things that you have done, either 
in persecution or in peace, it is foolish for me to 
pretend to judge you, since you rather appoint 
yourself a judge over us. These things, of the 
pure conscience of my mind, and of my confi- 
dence in my Lord and my God, I have written 
at length. You have my letter, and I yours. In 

• [See sec. 5. supra. This is the famous formula of Cyprian's 
theory. The whole theory is condensed in what follows.] 

2 Gen. xxxvii 19, zo. [It seems a beautiful coincidence that 
another Joseph was a "dreamer" (Matt. ii. 20, 23); and in those 
days, when prophets and prophesyings were hardly yet extinct, we 
jnust not too readily call this credulity. Ps. Ixxxix. 19, Vulgate.] 

the day of judgment, before the tribunal of 
Christ, both will be read. 

^EPISTLE LXIX.i 

TO JANUARIUS AND OTHER NUMIDIAN BISH- 
OPS, ON BAPTIZING HERETICS. 

ARGUMENT. — THE ARGUMENT OF THIS LETTER 
AND THE NEXT IS FOUND IN A SUBSEQUENT EPIS- 
TLE TO STEPHEN : ■* " THAT WHAT HERETICS USE 
IS NOT BAPTIS:\I ; AND THAT NONE AMONG THEM 
CAN RECEIVE BENEFIT BY THE GRACE OF CHRIST, 
WHO OPPOSE CHRIST ; HAS BEEN LATELY CARE- 
FULLY EXPRESSED IN A LE'ITER WHICH WAS 
WRITTEN ON THAT SUBJECT TO QUINTUS, OUR 
COLLEAGUE, ESTABLISHED IN MAURITANIA ; AS 
ALSO IN A LETTER WHICH OUR COLLEAGUES 
PREVIOUSLY WROTE TO THE BISHOPS PRESIDING 
IN NUMIDIA ; OF BOTH OF WHICH LETTERS I 
HAVE SUBJOINED COPIES." 5 

I. Cyprian, Liberalis, Caldonius, Junius, Pri- 
mus, Caecilius, Polycarp, Nicomedes, Felix, Mar- 
rutius, Successus, Lucianus, Honoratus, Fortu- 
natus, Victor, Donatus, Lucius, Herculanus, 
Pomponius, Demetrius, Quintus, Saturninus, 
Januarius, Marcus, another Saturninus, another 
Donatus, Rogatianus, Sedatus, Tertullus, Hor- 
tensianus, still another Saturninus, Sattius, to 
their brethren Januarius, Saturninus, Maximus, 
Victor, another Victor, CaSsius, Proculus, Modi- 
anus, Cittinus, Gargilius, Eutycianus, another 
Gargilius, another Saturninus, Nemesianus, 
Nampulus, Antonianus, Rogatianus, Honoratus, 
greeting'. When we were together in council, 
dearest brethren, we read your letter which you 
wrote to us concerning those who seem to be 
baptized by heretics and schismatics, (asking); 
whether, when they come to the Catholic Church, 
which is one,'' they ought to be baptized. On 
which matter, although you yourselves hold 
thereupon the truth and certainty of the Catholic 
rule, yet since you have thought that of our 
mutual love we ought to be consulted, we put 
forward our opinion, not as a new one,7 but we 
join with you in equal agreement, in an opinion 
long since decreed by our predecessors, and ob- 
served by us, — judging, namely, and holding it 
for certain that no one can be baptized abroad/ 
outside the Church, since there is one baptism 
appointed in the holy Church. And it is written 
in the words of the Lord, " They have forsaken 
me, the fountain of living waters, and hewed 
them out broken cisterns, which can hold no 

3 Oxford ed. : Ep. Ixx. a.d. 255. 

< Ep. Ixxi. 

5 Mention is made of both letters in the Epistle to Jubaianus, and 
in the one that follows this. 

'■ " And true." 

^ [This is very much to be observed, at this outset of an important 
historical controversy. Cyprian was not conscious of any innova- 
tio.i. See Oxford TertuU., vol. i. p. 280, note.] 

Zl^ 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

water." ' And again, sacred Scripture warns, 
and says, " Keep thee from the strange water, 
.and drink not from a fountain of strange water." ^ 
It is required, then, that the water should first 
be cleansed and sanctified by the priest, ^ that it 
may wash away by its baptism the sins of the 
man who is baptized ; because the Lord says by 
Ezekiel the prophet : " Then will I sprinkle clean 
water upon you, and ye shall be cleansed from 
all your filthiness ; and from all your idols will I 
cleanse you : a new heart also will I give you, 
and a new spirit will I put within you." •♦ But 
how can he cleanse and sanctify the water who 
is himself unclean, and in whom the Holy Spirit 
is not? since the Lord says in the book of 
Numbers, " .-Knd whatsoever the unclean person 
toucheth shall be unclean." 5 Or how can he 
•who baptizes give to another remission of sins, 
who himself, being outside the Church, cannot 
put away his own sins? 

2. But, moreover, the very interrogation which 
is put in baptism is a witness of the truth. For 
■when we ^ay, " Dost thou believe in eternal life 
and remission of sins through the holy Church ? " 
\j we mean that remission of sins is not granted 
except in the Church, and that among heretics, 
where there is no Church, sins cannot be put 
away. Therefore they who assert that heretics 
can baptize, must either change the interroga- 
tion or maintain the truth ; unless indeed they 
attribute a church also to those who, they con- 
tend, have baptism. It is also necessary that 
\\i should be anointed who is baptized ; so that, 
Iliaving received the chrism,'' tha*- is, the anoint- 
ing, he may be anointed of God, and have in 
him the grate of Christ. Further, it is the 
?>ucharist whence the baptized are anointecrwith 
the oil sanctified on the altar.^ But he cannot 
sanctify the creature of oil,** who has neither an 
altar nor a church ; whence also there can be no 
spiritual anointing among heretics, since it is 
manifest that the oil cannot be sanctified nor 
the Eucharist celebrated at all among them. 
But we ought to know and remember that it is 
written, " Let not the oil of a sinner anoint my 
head," ^ which the Holy Spirit before forewarned 
in tiie Psalms, lest any one going out of the way 
.and wandering from the path of truth should be 
anointed by heretics and adversaries of Christ. 
Besides, what prayer can a priest who is impious 

' ler. ii. 13. 

2 Prov ix. 19 (LXX.). 

' I When :> deacon baptized, he was regarded as iisinR, not his 
own ' key, " but the keys of the priesthood, and .as simply supplying 
a lawful hand to the .absent priest. See p. 366, note 8, supra.\ 

* Kzek. xx.wi. 25, 26. 
5 Num. xix. 2. 

* [i.e., confirmation, called chrism, or uuction, from i John ii. 27 
and other Scriptures.] 

' \n authorized reading here is, " But further, the Eucharist and 
the oil, whence the baptized are anointed, are sanctified on the altar." 

' [Material oil was not originally used in baptism or confirmation, 
but w.as admitted ceremonially, in divers rites, at an early period. 
Alark vi. 13; Jas. v. 14. Bunsen, Hippol., vol. ii. p. 322, note i.] 

9 Ps. cxli. 5 (L.\X.;. 

and a sinner offer for a baptized person? since 
it is written, " God heareth not a sinner ; but if 
any man be a worshipper of God, and doeth His 
will, him He heareth." '° Who, moreover, can 
give what he himself has not? or how can he 
discharge s]>iritual functions who himself has lost 
the Holy Spirit? And therefore he must be 
baptized and renewed who comes untrained to 
the Church, that he may be sanctified within by 
those who are holy, since it is written, " Be ye 
holy, for I am holy, saith the Lord." " So that 
he who has been seduced into error, and bap- 
tized ■' outside irf the Chinrh, should lay aside 
even this very thing in the true and ecclesiastical 
baptism, viz., that he a man coming to God, while 
he seeks for a priest, fell by the deceit of error 
upon a profane one. 

3. But it is to approve the baptism of heretics 
and schismatics, to admit that they have tn//y 
baptized. For therein a part cannot be void, 
and part be valid. If one could baptize, he 
could also give the Holy Spirit. But if he can-i 
not give the Holy Spirit, because he that is ap-\ 
pointed without is not endowed with the Holy^ 
Spirit, he cannot baptize those who come ; since 
both baptism is one and the Holy Spirit is one, 
and the Church founded by Christ the Lord 
upon Peter, by a source and principle of unity,'' 
is one also. Hence it results, that since with 
them all things are futile and false, nothing of 
that which they have done ought to be approved 
by us. For what can be ratified and established 
by God which is done by them whom the Lord 
calls His enemies and adversaries? setting forth 
in His Gospel, " He that is not with me is against 
me ; and he that gathercth not with me, scattcr- 
''^eth/' '■♦ And the blessed .Apostle John also, keep- 
i ingthe commandments and precepts of the Lord, 
I has laid it (U^wn in his epistle, and said, "Ye 
have heard that antichrist shall come : even now 
I there are many Antichrists ; whereby we know 
that it is the last time. They went out from us, 
but they were not of us ; for if they had been 
of us. no doubt they would have continued with 
us." '5 Whence we also ought to gather and con- 
sider whether they who are the Lord's adver- 
saries, and are called antichrists, can give the 
grace of Christ. Wherefore we who are with tne 
Lord, and maintain the unity of the Lord, and 
according to His condescension administer His 
priesthood in the Church, ought to repudiate and 
reject and regard as profane whatever His ad- 
versaries and the antichrists do ; and to those 
who, coming out of error and wickedness, ac- 
knowledge the true faith of the one Church, we 

■° John ix. 31. 

" Lev. xix. 2. 

'- Tinctus. 

■J [Sec Cave, Prim. Christianity, p. 365.] 

'♦ I-uke xi. 23. 

■5 I John ii. 18, xg. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

zn 

should give the truth both of unity and faith, by 
means of all the sacraments of divine grace.' 
We bid you, dearest brethren, ever heartily fare- 
well. 

EPISTLE LXX.^ 

TO QUINTUS, CONCERNING THfe BAPTISM OF 
HERETICS, 

ARGUMENT. — AN ANSWER IS GIVEN TO QUINTUS, 
A BISHOP IN MAURITANIA, WHO HAS ASKED AD- 
VICE CONCERNING THE BAPTISM OF HERETICS. 

I. Cyprian to Quintus his brother, greeting. 
Lucian, our co-presbyter, has reported to me, 
dearest brother, that you have wished me to de- 
clare to you what I think concerning those who 
seem to have been baptized by heretics and schis- 
matics ; of which matter, that you may know what 
several of us fellow-bishops, with the brother 
presbyters who were present, lately determined 
in council, I have sent you a copy of the same 
epistle. For I know not by what presumption 
some of our colleagues^ are led to think that they 
who have been dipped by heretics ought not to 
be baptized when they come to us, for the rea- 
son that they say that there is one baptism ; 
which indeed is therefore one, because the 
Church is one, and there cannot be any baptism 
out of the Church.-t For since there cannot be 
two baptisms, if heretics truly baptize, they them- 
selves have this baptism. And he who of his 
own authority grants this advantage to them, 
yields and consents to them, that the enemy and 
adversary of Christ should seem to have the 
power of washing, and purifying, and sanctifying 
a man. But we say that those who come thence 
are not re- baptized among us, but are baptized. 
For indeed they do not receive anything there^ 
where there is nothing ; but they come to us, 
that here they may receive where there is both 
grace and all truth, because both grace and truth 
are one. But again some of our colleagues ^ 
would rather give honour to heretics than agree 
with us ; and while by the assertion of one bap- 
tism they are unwilling to baptize those that 
come, they thus either themselves make two 
baptisms in saying that there is a baptism among 
heretics ; or certainly, which is a matter of more 
importance, they strive to set before and prefer 
the sordid and profane washing of heretics to 
the true and only and legitimate baptism of the 
Catholic Church, not considering that it is writ- 
ten, " He who is baptized by one dead, what 

' [The ifigour of Cyprian's logic must be conceded. The discus- 
sion will show, as it proceeds, on what grounds it failed to enlist uni- 
versal support. It resembled the Easter question, vol. i. p. 569.] 

2 Oxford ed.: Ep. Ixxi. a.d. 255. 
• 3 [Note this, at the outset: it \=, presumption in his colleague 
Stephen to act otherwise than as a general consent of the provinces 
seems to rule.] 

■» (Otherwise, "which doubtless is one in the Catholic Church; 
and if this Church be one, baptism cannot exist outside the Church." 
His theory of unity underlies all our author's conduct.] 

availeth his washing?" 5 Now it is manifest that 
they who are not in the Church of Christ are 
reckoned among the dead ; and another cannot 
be made alive by him who himself is not alive, 
since there is one Church which, having attained 
the grace of eternal life, both lives for ever and 
quickens the people of God. 

2. And they say that in this matter they follow 
ancient custom ; ^ although among the ancients 
these were as yet the first beginnings of heresy 
and schisms, so that those were involved in them 
who departed from the Church, having first been 
baptized therein ; and these, therefore, when 
they returned to the Church and repented, it 
was not necessary to baptize. Which also we 
observe in the present day, that it is sufficient to, 
lay hands for repentance upon those who are 
known to have been baptized in the Church, and 
have gone over from us to the heretics, if, sub- 
sequendy acknowledging their sin and putting 
away their error, they return to the truth and to 
their parent ; so that, because it had been a 
sheep, the Shepherd may receive into His fold 
the estranged and vagrant sheep. But if he 
who comes from the heretics has not previously 
been baptized in the Church, but comes as a 
stranger and entirely profane, he must be bap- 
tized, that he may become a sheep, because in 
the holy Church is the one water which makes ' 
sheep. And therefore, because there can be 
nothing common to falsehood and truth, to dark- 
ness and light, to death and immortality, to Anti- 
christ and Christ, we ought by all means *to| 
maintain the unity of the Catholic Church, and 
not to give way to the enemies of faith and truth 
in any respect. 

3. Neither must we prescribe this from cus- 
tom, but overcome opposite custom by reason. 
For neither did Peter, whom first the Lord chose, 
and upon whom He built His Church, when 
Paul disputed with him afterwards about circum- 
cision, claim anything to himself insolently, nor 
arrogantly assume anything ; so as to say that 
he held the primacy,'' and that he ought rather 
to be obeyed by novices and those lately come.** 
Nor did he despise Paul because he had pre- 
viously been a persecutor of the Church, but ad- 
mitted the counsel of truth, and easily yielded to 
the lawful reason which Paul asserted, furni-shing 
thus an illustration to us both of concord and of 
patience, that we should not obstinately love our 
own opinions, but should rather adopt as our 
own those which at any time are usefully and 

S Ecclus. xxxiv. 25. 

* [The local custom of the Roman Province seems to have justi- 
fied Stephen's local practice. It is a case similar to that of Polycarp 
and Anicetus disturbed by Victor, vol. i. 310, and 312. J 

7 [But a primacy involves no supremacy. All the Galileans, 
with Bossuet, insist on this point. Cyprian now adopts, as his rule, 
St, Paul's example, Gal. ii. 5.] 

^ [Here, then, is the whole ot Cyprian's idea as to Peter, in a 
nutshell.] 

3/ 

78 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

wholesomely suggested by our brethren and col- ; 
leagues, if they be true and lawful. Paul, more- 
over, looking forward to this, and consulting 
faithfully for concord and peace, has laid down 
in his epistle this rule : " Moreover, let the proph- 
ets speak two or three, and let the rest judge. ' 
But if anything be revealed to another that sit- 
teth by, let the first hold his peace." ' In which 
place he has taught and shown that many things 
are revealed to individuals for the better, and 
that each one ought not obstinately to contend 
for that which he had once imbibed and held ; 
but if anything has appeared better and more 
useful, he should gladly embrace it. For we are 
not overcome when better things are presented 
to us, but we are instructed, especially in those 
matters which pertain to the unity of the Church 
and the truth of our hope and faith ; so that we, 
priests of God and prelates of His Church, by 
His condescension, should know that remission 
of sins cannot be given save in the Church, nor 
can the adversaries of Christ claim to themselves 
'anything belonging to His grace. 
' 4. Which thing, indeed, Agrippinus also, a 
man of worthy memory, with his other fellow- 
bishops, who at that time governed the Lord's 
Church in the province of Africa and Numidia, 
decreed, and by the well-weighed examination 
of the common council established : whose opin- 
ion, as being both religious and lawful and salu- 
tary, and in harmony with the Catholic f;iith and 
Church, we also have followed.^ And that you 
may know what kind of letters we have written 
on this subject, I have transmitted for our mutual 
love a copy of them, as well for your own infor- 
mation as for that of our fellow-bishops who are 
in those parts. I bid you, dearest brother, ever 
heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LXXI.3 

TO STEPHEN, CONCERNING A COUNCIL. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN WITH HIS COLLEAGUES IN 
A CERTAIN COUNCIL TELLS STEPHEN, THE ROMAN 
BISHOP, THAT IT HAD BEEN DECREED BY THEM, 
BOTH THAT THOSE WHO RETURNED FROM HERESY 
INTO THE CHURCH SHOULD BE BAPTIZED, AND 
THAT BISHOPS OR PRIESTS COMING FROM THE 
HERETICS SHOULD BE RECEIVED ON NO OTHER 
CONDITION, THAN THAT THEY SHOULD COMMU- 
NIC.VIE AS LAY PEOPLE. A.D. 255. 

I. Cyprian and others, to Stephen their 
brother, greeting. We have thought it neces- 
sary for the arranging of certain matters, dearest 

' I Cor. xiv. 29, 30. [P. 379, note 4, iiifra.\ 

- [With Cyprian it was an adjudged case. Stephen not only had 
noautnority in the case, but, save by courtesy, even \ii\^ primacy was 
confined to his own province.] 

■ ^ Oxford ed : Ep. Ixxii. [Concerning the council (seventh of 
Carthage), sec the Acts, infra. Elucidation XVI.] 

brother, and for their investigation by the ex- 
amination of a common council, to gather to- 
gether and to hold a council, at which many 
I)riests were assembled at once ; at which, more- 
over, many things were brought forward and 
transacted. But the subject in regard to which 
we had chiefly to write to you, and to confer with 
your gravity and wisdom, is one that more espe- 
cially pertains both to the priestly authority and 
to the unity, as well as the dignity, of the 
Catholic Church, arising as these do from the 
ordination of the divine appointment ; to wit, 
that those who have been dipped abroad outside 
the Church, and have been stained among here- 
tics and schismatics with the taint of profane 
water, when they come to us and to the Church 
which is one, ouglit to be baptized, for the rea- 
son that it is a small matter ■» to " lay hands on 
them that they may receive the Holy Ghost," 
unless they receive also the baptism of the 
Church. For then finally can they be fiilly 
sanctified, and be the sons of God, if they be 
born of each sacrament ; 5 since it is written, 
'• Except a man be born again of water, and of 
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of 
God."*^ For we find also, in the Acts of the 
Apostles, that this is maintained by the apostles, 
and kept in the truth of the saving faith, so that 
when, in the house of Cornelius the centurion, 
the Holy Ghost had descended upon the Gen- 
tiles who were there, fervent in the warmth of 
their faith, and believing in the Lord with their 
whole heart ; and when, filled with the Sjjirit, 
they blessed God in divers tongues, still none 
the less the blessed Apostle Peter, mindful of 
the divine precept and the (iospel, commanded 
that those same men should be baptized who 
had already been filled with the Holy Spirit, 
that nothing might seem to be neglected to the 
observance by the apostolic instruction in all 
things of the law of the divine precept and Gos- 
pel.7 But that that is not bajjtism which the 
heretics use ; and that none of those who op- 
pose Christ can profit by the grace of Christ ; 
has lately been set forth with care in the letter 
which was written on that subject to Quintus, 
our colleague, established in Mauritania ; as also 
in a letter which our colleagues previously wrote 
to our fellow-bishc)i)s presiding in Numidia, of 
both which letters 1 have subjoined copies. 

■* FHe quotes Acts viii. 17] 

5 The sense of this passage has been doubted, but seems to b« 
this: " The rite of confirniatiod, or the giving of the Holy (Jliost, is- 
of no avail unless baptism have first been conferred. I'ov only by 
being born of rack sacrametit. scil. confirmation and baptism, can. 
they be fully sanctified and be born again: since it is written, ' Ex- 
cept a man be bnrn of jca/rr and of the S/>irit,' etc ; which quota- 
tion is jilainly meant to convey, that the birth of water is by baptism,. 

that of tlie Spirit by co>ifiri:iatioii. 
*> John iii. 5. [Bingham, book 
"> [This case (Acts .\. 47) was governed by the example of Christ, 

rit by cottfiriitatiov . 

5. [Bingham, book xii. cap. i. sec. 4.] 

Matt. "iii. 15. The baptism of the Spirit h.-id preceded: yet as an act 
of obedience to Christ, and in honour of His example, St Peter " lul- 
fils all righteousncsii," even to tlie l«-ncr.J 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

379 

2. We add, however, and connect with what 
we have said, dearest brother, with common 
consent and authority, that if, again, any pres- 
byters or deacons, who either have been before 
ordained in the Catholic Church, and have sub- 
sequently stood forth as traitors and rebels 
against the Church, or who have been promoted 
among the heretics by a profane ordination by 
the hands of false bishops and antichrists con- 
trary to the appointment of Christ, and have 
attempted to offer, in opposition to the one and 
divine altar, false and sacrilegious sacrifices 
without, that these also be received when they 
return, on this condition, that they communicate 
as laymen, and hold it to be enough that they 
should be received to peace, after having stood 
forth as enemies of peace ; and that they ought 
not, on returning, to retain those arms of ordina- 
tion and honour with which they rebelled against 
us. For it behoves priests and ministers, who 
wait upon the altar and sacrifices, to be sound 
and stainless ; since the Lord God speaks in 
Leviticus, and says, " No man that hath a stain 
or a blemish shall come nigh to offer gifts to the 
Lord." ' Moreover, in Exodus, He prescribes 
this same thing, and says, " And let the priests 
which come near to the Lord God sanctify them- 
selves, lest the Lord forsake them." ^ And 
again : " And when they come near to minister 
at the altar of the holy place, they shall not 
bear iniquity upon them, lest they die." ^ But 
what can be greater. iniquity, or what stain can 
be more odious, than to have stood in opposi- 
tion to Christ ; than to have scattered His 
Church, which He purchased and founded with 
His blood ; than, unmindful of evangelical peace 
and love, to have fought with the madness of 
hostile discord against the unanimous and ac- 
cordant people of God ? Such as these, although 
they themselves return to the Church, still can- 
not restore and recall with them those who, 
seduced by them, and forestalled by death with- 
out, have perished outside the Church without 
communion and peace ; whose souls in the day of 
judgment shall be required at the hands of those 
who have stood forth as the authors and leaders 
of their ruin. And therefore to such, when they 
return, it is sufficient that pardon should be 
granted ; since perfidy ought certainly not to 
receive promotion in the household of faith. 
For what do we reserve for the good and inno- 
cent, and those who do not depart from the 
Church, if we honour those who have departed 
from us, and stood in opposition to the Church ? 

3. We have brought these things, dearest 
brother, to your knowledge, for the sake of our 
mutual honour and sincere affection ; believing 

' Lev. xxi. 21. 
* Ex. xix. 22. 
3 Ex. xxviii. 43. 

that, according to the truth of your religion and 
faith, those things which are no less religious 
than true will be approved by you. But we know 
that some will not lay aside what they have once 
imbibed, and do not easily change their purpose ; 
but, keeping fast the bond of peace and concord 
among their colleagues, retain certain things pe- 
culiar to themselves, which have once been 
adopted among them. In which behalf we 
neither do violence to, nor impose a law upon, 
any one, since each prelate has in the adminis- 
tration of the Church the exercise of his will 
free, as he shall give an account of his conduct 
to the Lord.'* We bid you, dearest brother, 
ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LXXII.s 

TO JUBAIANUS, CONCERNING THE BAPTISM 
OF HERETICS. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN REFUTES A LETTER EN- 
CLOSED TO HIM BY JUBAIANUS, AND WITH THE 
GREATEST CARE COLLECTS WHATEVER HE THINKS 
WILL AVAIL FOR THE DEFENCE OF HIS CAUSE. 
MOREOVER, HE SENDS JUBAIANUS A COPY OF THE 
LETTER TO THE NUMIDIANS AND TO QUINTUS, AND 
PROBABLY THE DECREES OF THE LAST SYNOD.^ 

I. Cyprian to Jubaianus his brother, greeting. 
You have written to me, dearest brother, wishing 
that the impression of my mind should be signi- 
fied to you, as to what I think concerning the 
baptism of heretics ; who, placed without, and 
established outside the Church, arrogate to 
themselves a matter neither within their right 
nor their power. This baptism we cannot con- 
sider as valid or legitimate, since it is manifestly 
unlawful among them ; and since we have already 
expressed in our letters what we thought on this 
matter, I have, as a compendious method, sent 
you a copy of the same letters, what we decided 
in council when very many of us were present, 
and what, moreover, 1 subsequently wrote back 
to Quintus, our colleague, when he asked about 
the same thing. And now also, when we had 
met together, bishops as well of the province of 
Africa as of Numidia, to the number of seventy- 
one, we established this same matter once more? 
by our judgment, deciding that there is one 
baptism which is appointed in the Catholic 
Church ; and that by this those are not re- 
baptized, but baptized by us, who at any time 
come from the adulterous and unhallowed water 

< [Obviously, the law of liberty here laid down might introduce 
the greatest confusion if not limited by common consent. Vet the 
tolerant spirit of our author merits praise. P. 37S, notes i, 2.] 

5 Oxford ed.: Ep. Ixxiii. a.d. 256. 

* In the year of Christ 256, a little after the seventh council of 
Carthage, Cyprian wrote a long letter to the Bishop Jubaianus. He 
had consulted Cyprian about baptism, and at the same time had sent 
a letter not written by himself, but by some other person opposed to 
the opinion of Cyprian. 

? [Letter Lxx. sec. 4, p. 378, .yw/ra. Jubaian. was of Mauritania.J 

38o 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

to be washed and sanctified by the truth of the 
saving water. 

2. Nor does what you have described in your 
letters disturb us, dearest brother, that the No- 
vatians re-baptize those whom they entice from 
us, since it does not in any wise matter to us 
what the enemies of the Church do, so long as 
we ourselves hold a regard for our power, and 
the stedfastness of reason and truth. For No- 
vatian, after the manner of apes — which, al- 
though they are not men, yet imitate human 
doings — wishes to claim to himself the authority 
and truth of the Catholic Church, while he him- 
self is not in the Church ; nay, moreover, has 
stood forth hitherto as a rebel and enemy against 
tlie Church. For, knowing that there is one 
baptism, he arrogates to himself this one, so that 
he may say that the Church is with him, and 
make us heretics. But we who hold the head 
and root ' of the one Church know, and trust for 
certain, that nothing is lawful there outside the 
( "hurch, and that the baptism which is one ^ is 
among us, where he himself also was formerly 
baptized, when he maintained both the wisdom 
and truth of the divine unity. But if Novatian 
thinks that those who have been baptized in the 
C'hurch are to be re-baptized outside — without 
the Church — he ought to begin by himself, that 
he might first be re-baptized with an extraneous 
and heretical baptism, since he thinks that after 
the Church, yea, and contrary to the Church, 
people are to be baptized without. But what 
sort of a thing is this, that, because Novatian 
dares to do this thing, we are to think that we 
must not do it ! What then ? Because Novatian 
also usurps the honour of the priestly throne, 
ought we therefore to renounce our throne ? Or 
because Novatian endeavours wrongfully to set 
up an altar and to offer sacrifices, does it behove 
us to cease from our altar and sacrifices, lest we 
should appear to be celebrating the same or like 
things with him ? Utterly vain and foolish is it, 
that because Novatian arrogates to himself out- 
side the Church the image of the truth, we should 
forsake the truth of the Church. 

3. But among us it is no new or sudden thing 
for us to judge that those are to be baptized who 
come to the Church from among the heretics, 
since it is now many years and a long time ago, 
that, under Agrippinus — a man of worthy 
memory — very many bishops assembling to- 
gether have decided this ; ^ and thenceforward 
imtil the present day, so many thousands of here- 
tics in our j)rovinces have been converted to the 
Church, and have neither despised nor delayed, 
nay, they have both reasonably and gladly em- 

' [T'l's helps us to understand the expression , p. 322, note 2,SM/ira.] 

^ Or, " the source of baptism which is one." 

3 [Note, that Cyprian beUeves himself to be sustaining a ri's ad- 
judicata, and has no idea that the councils of the African Church 
need to be revised beyond seas. Letter Ixx. p. y^'i, note 2, supra.\ 

braced, the opportunity to attain the grace of 
the life-giving laver and of saving baptism. P'or 
it is not difficult for a teacher to insinuate true 
and lawful things into his mind, who, having 
condemned heretical pravity, and discovered the 
truth of the Church, comes for this purpose, that 
he may learn, and learns for the purpose that he 
may li\e. We ought not to increase the stolidity 
of heretics by the patronage of our consent, when 
they gladly and readily obey the truth. 

4. Certainly, since I found in the letter the 
copy of which you transmitted to me, that it was 
written, " That it should not be asked who bap- 
tized, since he who is baptized might receive re- 
mission of sins according to what he believed," 
I thought that this topic was not to be passed 
by, especially since I observed in the same epis- 
tle that mention was also made of Marcion, say- 
ing that " even those that came from him did 
not need to be baptized, because they seemed to 
have been already baptized in the name of Jesus 
Christ." Therefore we ought to consider their 
faith who believe without, whether in respect of 
the same faith they can obtain any grace. For 
if we and heretics have one faith, we may also 
have one grace. If the Patripassians, Anthro- 
pians, Valentinians, Apelletians, Ophites, Mar- 
cionites, and other pests, and swords, and poisons 
of heretics for subverting the truth,'* confess the 
same Father, the same Son, the same Holy Ghost, 
the same Church with us, they may also have 
one baptism if they have also one faith. 

5. And lest it should be wearisome to go 
through all the heresies, and to enumerate cither 
the follies or the madness of each of them, be- 
cause it is no pleasure to speak of that which 
one either dreads or is ashamed to know, let us 
examine in the meantime about Marcion alone, 
the mention of whom has been made in the let- 
ter transmitted by you to us, whether the ground 
of his l)aptism can be made good. For the 
Lord after His resurrection, sending His disci- 
l)les, instructed and taught them in what manner 
they ought to baptize, saying, " All power is 
given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye, 
therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them 
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and 
of the Holy Ghost." ' He suggests the Trinity, 
in whose sacrament the nations were to be bap- 
tized. Does Marcion then maintain the Trinity? 
Does he then assert the same Father, the Crea- 
tor, as we do? Does he know the same Son, 
Christ born of the Virgin Mary, who as the Word 
was made flesh, who bare our sins, who con- 
(piered death by dying, who by Himself first of 
all originated the- resurrection of the flesh, and 
showed to His disciples that He had risen in the 

♦ Or otherwise", " and other plagues of heretics subverting the 
truth with their swords and poisons." 

5 Matt, xxviii. 18, 19. [Elucidation XVII.] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

;8i 

same flesh ? Widely different is the faith with 
Marcion, and, moreover, with the other heretics ; 
nay, with them there is nothing but perfidy, and 
blasphemy, and contention, which is hostile to 
holiness and truth. How then can one who is 
baptized among them seem to have obtained re- 
mission of sins, and the grace of the divine 
mercy, by his faith, when he has not the truth 
of the faith itself? For if, as some suppose, one 
could receive anything abroad out of the Church 
according to his faith, certainly he has received 
what he believed ; but if he believes what is 
false, he could not receive what is true ; but 
rather he has received things adulterous and pro- 
fane, according to what he believed. 

6. This matter of profane and adulterous bap- 
tism Jeremiah the prophet plainly rebukes, say- 
mg, " Why do they who afflict me prevail? My 
wound is hard ; whence shall I be healed ? while 
it has indeed become unto me as deceitful water 
which has no faithfulness." ' The Holy Spirit 
makes mention by the prophet of deceitful water 
which has no faithfulness. What is this deceit- 
ful and faithless water? Certainly that which 
falsely assumes the resemblance of baptism, and 
frustrates the grace of faith by a shadowy pre- 
tence. But if, according to a perverted faith, 
one could be baptized without, and obtain remis- 
sion of sins, according to the same faith he could 
also attain the Holy Spirit ; and there is no need 
that hands should be laid on him when he comes, 
that he might obtain the Holy Ghost, and be 
sealed. Either he could obtain both privileges 
^vithout by his faith, or he who has been without 
has received neither. 

7. But it is manifest where and by whom re- 
mission of sins can be given ; to wit, that which 
is given in baptism. For first of all the Lord 
gave that power to Peter, upon whom He built 
the Church, and whence He appointed and 
showed the source of unity — the power, namely, 
that whatsoever he loosed on earth should be 
loosed in heaven. And after the resurrection, 
also, He speaks to the apostles, saying, " As the 
Father hath sent me, even so I send you. And 
when He had said this, He breathed on them, 
and saith unto them. Receive ye the Holy Ghost : 
whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted 
unto them ; and whosesoever sins ye retain, they 
are retained." ^ Whence we perceive that only 
they who are set over the Church and established 
in the Gospel law, and in the ordinance of the 
Lord, are allowed to baptize and to give remis- 
sion of sins ; but that without, nothing can either 
be bound or loosed, v/here there is none who 
can either bind or loose anything. 

8. Nor do we propose this, dearest brother, 
without the authority of divine Scripture, when 

' Jer XV. 18 (LXX.). 

' John XX. 21-23. LSee notes of Oxf. edition on this letter.] 

we say that all things are arranged by divine 
direction by a certain law and by special ordi- 
nance, and that none can usurp to himself, in 
opposition to the bishops and priests, anything 
which is not of his own right and power. For 
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram endeavoured tc 
usurp, in opposition to Moses and Aaron the 
priest, the power of sacrificing ; and they did 
not do without punishment what they unlawfully 
dared. The sons of Aaron also, who placed 
strange fire upon the altar, were at once con- 
sumed in the sight of an angry Lord ; which 
punishment remains to those who introduce 
strange water by a false baptism, that the divine 
vengeance may avenge and chastise wheii here- 
tics do that in opposition to the Church, which 
the Church alone is allowed to do. 

9. But in respect of the assertion of some con- 
cerning those who had been baptized in Sama- 
ria, that when the Apostles Peter and John came, 
only hands were imposed on them, that they 
might receive the Holy Ghost, yet that they 
were not re-baptized ; we see that that place 
does not, dearest brother, touch the present case. 
For they who had believed in Samaria had be- 
lieved with a true faith ; and within, in the Church 
which is one, and to which alone it is granted to 
bestow the grace of baptism and to remit sins, 
had been baptized by Philip the deacon, whom 
the same apostles had sent. And therefore, be- 
cause they had obtained a legitimate and eccle- 
siastical baptism, there was no need that they 
should be baptized any more, but only that which 
was needed was performed by Peter and John ; 
viz., that prayer being made for them, and hands 
being imposed, the Holy Spirit should be invoked 
and poured out upon them, which now too is 
done among us, so that they who are baptized 
in the Church are brought to the prelates of the 
Church, and by our prayers and by the imposi- 
tion of hands obtain the Holy Spirit, and are per- 
fected with the Lord's seal. 

10. There is no ground, therefore, dearest 
brother, for thinking that we should give way to 
heretics so far as to contemplate the betrayal 
to them of that baptism, which is only granted 
to the one and only Church. It is a good sol- 
dier's duty to defend the camp of his general 
against rebels and enemies. It is the duty of 
an illustrious leader to keep the standards en- 
trusted to him. 3 It is written, " I'he Lord thy 
God is a jealous God." ^ We who have received 
the Spirit of God ought to have a jealousy for 
the divine faith ; with such a jealousy as that 
wherewith Phineas both pleased God and justly 
allayed His wrath when He was angry, and the 
people were perishing. Why do we receive as 

3 [This sounds like Ignatius himself, whose style abounds 14 
aphonsms. See vol. i. p. 45.] 
■♦ Deut. iv. 24. 

382 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRLW. 

allowed an adulterous and alien church, a foe to 
the divine unity, when we know only one Christ 
and His one Church ? The Church, setting forth 
the likeness of paradise, includes within her 
walls fruit-bearing trees, whereof that which 
does not bring forth good fruit is cut off and is 
cast into the fire. These trees she waters with 
four rivers, that is, with the four Gospels, where- 
with, by a celestial inundation, she bestows the 
grace of saving baptism. Can any one water 
from the Church's fountains who is not within 
the Church? Can one impart those wholesome 
and saving draughts of paradise to any one if he 
is perverted, and of himself condemned, and 
banished outside the fountains of paradise, and 
has dried up and failed with the dryness of an 
eternal thirst? 

1 1 . The Lord cries aloud, that " whosoever 
thirsts should come and drink of the rivers of 
living water that flowed out of His bosom." ' 
Whither is he to come who thirsts? Shall he 
come to the heretics, where there is no fountain 
and river of living water at all ; or to the Church 
which is one, and is founded upon one who has 
received the keys of it by the Lord's voice ? It 
is she who holds and possesses alone all the 
power of her spouse and Lord. In her we 
preside ; for her honour and unity we fight ; 
her grace, as well as her glory, we defend with 
faithful devotedness.^ We by the divine per- 
mission water the thirsting people of God ; we 
guard the boundaries of the living fountains. 
If, therefore, we hold the right of our posses- 
sion, if we acknowledge the sacrament of unity, 
wherefore are we esteemed prevaricators against 
truth? Wherefore are we judged betrayers of 
unity? The faithful, and saving, and holy water 
of the Church cannot be corrupted and adulter- 
ated, as the Church herself also is uncorrupted, 
and chaste, and modest. If heretics are devoted 
to the Church and established in the Church, 
they may use l)0th her baptism and her other 
saving benefits. But if they are not in the 
Church, nay more, if they act against the Church, 
how can they baptize with the Church's baptism ? 

12. For it is no small and insignificant matter 
which is conceded to heretics, when their bap- 
tism is recognised by us ; since thence springs 
the whole origin of faith and the saving access 
to the hope of life eternal, and the divine con- 
descension for purifying and quickening the 
servants of God. For if any one could be 
baptized among heretics, certainly he could 
also obtain remission of sins. If he attained 
remission of sins, he was also sanctified. If he 
was sanctified, he also was made the temple of 

' John vi. j7, 38. 
^ith the 

[This quotation is amended by me, in strict 
accordance with tlTe (ex rij? itoiAta?) Greek, which refers to the 
noHer canity, not the inferior, of the human body.] 
2 Or, " with the courage of faith." 

God. I ask, of what God? If of the Creator ; 
he could not be, because he has not believed in 
Him. If of Christ; he could not become His 
temple, since he denies that Christ is God. If 
of the Holy Spirit ; since the three are one, 

' how can the Holy Spirit be at peace with him 
who is the enemy either of the Son or of the 
Father ?_> 

j 13. Hence it is in vain that some who are 
overcome by reason oppose to us custom, as if 

! custom were greater than truth ; ^ or as if that 
were not to be sought after in spiritual matters 
which has been revealed as the better by the 
Holy Spirit. For one who errs by simplicity 
may be pardoned, as the blessed Apostle Paul 
says of himself, " I who at first was a blasphemer, 
and a persecutor, and injurious ; yet obtained 
mercy, because I did it ignorantly." ■» But after 
inspiration and revelation made to him, he who 
intelligently and knowingly perseveres in that 
course in which he had erred, sins without par- 
don for his ignorance. For he resists with a 
certain presumption and obstinacy, when he is 
overcome by reason. Nor let any one say, " We 
follow that which we have received from the 
apostles," when the apostles only delivered one 
Church, and one baptism, which is not ordained 
except in the same Church. And we cannot find 
that any one, when he had been baptized by 
heretics, was received by the apostles in the same 
baptism, and communicated in such a way as 
that the apostles should appear to have approved 
the baptism of heretics. 

14. For as to what some say, as if it tendecf 
to favour heretics, that the Apostle Paul declared, 
" Only every way, whether in pretence or in truth, 
let Christ be preached," 5 we find that this also 
can avail nothing to their benefit who support 
and applaud heretics. For Paul, in his epistle, 
was not speaking of heretics, nor of their bap- 
tism, so that anything can be shown to have been 
alleged which pertained to this matter. He was 
speaking of brethren, whether as walking dis- 
orderly and against the discipline of the Church, 
or as keeping the truth of the Gospel with the 
fear of God. And he said that certain of them 
spoke the word of God with constancy and cour- 
age, but some acted in envy and dissension ; that 
some maintained towards him a benevolent lo\-e, 
but that some indulged a malevolent spirit of 
dissension ; but yet that he bore all patiently, so 
long only as, whether in truth or in pretence, the 
name of Christ which Paul preached might come 
to the knowledge of many ; and the sowing of 
the word, which as yet hail been new and irregu- 
lar, might increase through the preaching of the 

^ [It would seem, then, that " custom " could be pleaded on both 
sides. This appeal is recognised in Scripture, i Cor. xi. i6; and 
see sec. 23, in/ra. As to preceding sentence, Elucidation XVII.] 

•• I Tim. i. 13. 

5 Phil. i. 18. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

383 

speakers. Besides, it is one thing for those who 
are within the Church to speak concerning the 
name of Christ ; it is another for those who are 
without, and act in opposition to the Church, to 
baptize in the name of Christ, ^\^herefore, let 
not those who favour heretics put forward what 
Paul spoke concerning brethren, but let them 
show if he thought anything was to be conceded 
to the heretic, or if he approved of their faith 
or baptism, or if he appointed that perfidious 
and blasphemous men could receive remission 
of their sins outside the Church. 

15. But if we consider what the apostles 
thought about heretics, we shall find that they, 
in all their epistles, execrated and detested the 
sacrilegious wickedness of heretics. For when 
they say that " their word creeps as a canker," ' 
how is such a word as that able to give remission 
of sins, which creeps like a canker to the ears of 
the hearers ? And when they say that there can 
be no fellowship between righteousness and un- 
righteousness, no communion between light and 
darkness,^ how can either darkness illuminate, or 
unrighteousness justify ? And when they say that 
" they are not of God, but are of the spirit of 
Antichrist," ^ how can they transact spiritual and 
divine matters, who are the enemies of God, and 
whose hearts the spirit of Antichrist has pos- 
sessed? Wherefore, if, laying aside the errors 
of human dispute, we return with a sincere and 
religious faith to the evangelical authority and to 
the apostolical. tradition, we shall perceive that 
they may do nothing towards conferring the 
ecclesiastical and saving grace, who, scattering 
and attacking the Church of Christ, are called 
adversaries by Christ Himself, but by His apos- 
tles, Antichrists. 

16. Again, there is no ground for any one, for 
the circumvention of Christian truth, opposing 
to us the name of Christ, and saying, " All who 
are baptized everywhere, and in any manner, in 
the name of Jesus Christ, have obtained the grace 
of baptism," — when Christ Himself speaks, and 
says, " Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, 
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven." * 
And again. He forewarns and instructs, that no 
one should be easily deceived by false prophets 
and false Christs in His name. " Many," He 
says, " shall come in my name, saying, I am 
Christ, and shall deceive many." And afterwards 
He added : " But take ye heed ; behold, I have 
foretold you all things." 5 Whence it appears 
that all things are not at once to be received 
and assumed which are boasted of in the name 
of Christ, but only those things which are done 
in the truth of Christ. 

' 2 Tim. ii. 17. 

2 2 Cor. vi. 14. 

3 I John iv. 3. 
* Matt. vii. 21. 

5 Matt. xxiv. 5, 25. 

17. For whereas in the Gospels, and in the 
epistles of the apostles, the name of Christ is 
alleged for the remission of sins ; it is not in 
such a way as that the Son alone, without the 
Father, or against the Father, can be of advan- 
tage to anybody ; but that it might be shown to 
the Jews, who boasted as to their having the 
Father, that the Father would profit them noth- 
ing, unless they believed on the Son whom He 
had sent. For they who know God the Father 
the Creator, ought also to know Christ the Son, 
lest they should flatter and applaud themselves 
about the Father alone, without the acknowl- 
edgment of His Son, who also said, " No man 
Cometh to the Father but by me."^ But He, the 
same, sets forth, that it is the knowledge of the 
two which saves, when He says, " And this is life 
eternal, that they might know Thee, the only 
true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast 
sent." 7 Since, therefore, from the preaching 
and testimony of Christ Himself, the Father who 
sent must be first known, then afterwards Christ, 
who was sent, and there cannot be a hope of 
salvation except by knowing the two together ; 
how, when God the Father is not known, nay, is 
even blasphemed, can they who among the here- 
tics are said to be baptized in the name of Christ, 
be judged to have obtained the remission of sins ? 
For the case of the Jews under the apostles was 
one, but the condition of the Gentiles is another. 
The former, because they had already gained 
the most ancient baptism of the law and Moses, 
were to be baptized also in the name of Jesus 
Christ, in conformity with what Peter tells them 
in the Acts of the Apostles, saying, " Repent, 
and be baptized every one of you in the name 
of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the remission of 
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy 
'Ghost. For this promise is unto you, and to 
your children, and to all that are afar off, even 
as many as the Lord our God shall call."^ Peter 
makes mention of Jesus Christ, not as though 
the Father should be omitted, but that the Son 
also might be joined to the Father. 

18. Finally, when, after the resurrection, the 
apostles are sent by the Lord to the heathens, 
they are bidden to baptize the Gentiles " in the 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost." How, then, do some say, that a 
Gentile baptized without, outside the Church, 
yea, and in opposition to the Church, so that it 
be only in the name of Jesus Christ, everywhere, 
and in whatever manner, can obtain remission 
of sin, when Christ Himself commands the hea- 
then to be baptized in the full and united Trinity? 
Unless while one who denies Christ is denied by 
Christ, he who denies His Father whom Christ 

^ John xiv. 6. 
'' John xvii. 3. 
8 Acts ii. 38, 39. 

384 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRLA.N. 

Himself confessed is not denied ; and he who 
blasphemes against Him whom Christ called His 
Lord and His God, is rewarded by Christ, and 
obtains remission of sins, and the sanctification 
of baptism ! But by what power can he who 
denies God the Creator, the Father of Christ, 
obtain, in baptism, the remission of sins, since 
Christ received that very power by which we are 
baptized and sanctified, from the same Father, 
whom He called " greater " than Himself, by 
whom He desired to be glorified, whose will He 
fulfilled even unto the obedience of drinking 
the cup, and of undergoing death? What else 
is it then, than to become a partaker with blas- 
pheming heretics, to wish to maintain and assert, 
that one who blasphemes and gravely sins against 
the Father and the Lord and God of Christ, can 
receive remission of sins in the name of Christ ? 
What, moreover, is that, and of what kind is it, 
that he who denies the Son of God has not the 
Father, and he who denies the Father should be 
thought to have the Son, although the Son Him- 
self testifies, and says, " No man can come unto 
me except it were given unto him of my Father?" ' 
So that it is evident, that no remission of sins 
can be received in baptism from the Son, which 
It is not plain that t' : Father has granted. Espe- 
cially, since He furtner repeats, and says, " Every 
plant which my heavenly Father hath not planted 
shall be rooted up." ^ 

19. But if Christ's disciples are unwilling to 
learn from Christ what veneration and honour 
is due to the name of the Father, still let them 
learn from earthly and secular examples, and 
know that Christ has declared, not without the 
strongest rebuke, "The children of this world are 
wiser in their generation than the children of 
light." 3 In this world of ours, if any one havp 
offered an insult to the father of any ; if in in- 
jury and frowardness he have wounded his repu- 
tation and his honour by a malevolent tongue, 
the son is indignant, and wrathful, and with what 
means he can, strives to avenge his injured 
father's wrong. Think you that Christ grants 
impunity to the impious and profane, and the 
blasphemers of His Father, and that He puts 
away their sins in baptism, who it is evident, 
when baptized, still heap up evil words on the 
person of the Father, and sin with the unceas- 
ing wickedness of a blaspheming tongue ? Can 
a Christian, can a servant of (iod, either con- 
ceive this in his mind, or believe it in faith, or 
put it forward in discourse? And what will be- 
come of the precepts of the divine law, which 
say, " Honour thy father and thy mother? " •• If 
the name of father, which in man is commanded 

' John vi. 65. 

* Matt. XV. 13. 
3 Luke xvi. 8. 

* Ex. XX. la. 

to be honoured, is violated with impunity in 
God, what will become of what Christ Himself 
lays down in the Gospel, and says, " He that 
curseth father or mother, let him die the death ; " s 
if He who bids that those who curse their parents 
after the flesh should be punished and slain. 
Himself quickens those who revile their heav- 
enly and spiritual Father, and are hostile to the 
Church, their Mother? An execrable and de- 
testable thing is actually asserted by some, that 
He who threatens the man who blasphemes 
against the Holy Spirit, that he shall be guilty of 
eternal sin, Himself condescends to sanctify those 
who blaspheme against God the Father with 
saving baptism. And now, those who think that 
they must communicate with such as come to 
the Church without baptism, do not consider 
that they are becoming partakers with other 
men's, yea, with eternal sins, when they admit 
without baptism those who cannot, except in 
baptism, put ofT the sins of their blasphemies. 

20. Besides, how vain and perverse a thing it 
is, that when the heretics themselves, having 
repudiated and forsaken either the error or the 
wickedness in which they had previously been, 
acknowledge the truth of the Church, we should 
mutilate the rights and sacrament of that same 
truth, and say to those who come to us and 
repent, that they had obtained remission of sins 
when they confess that they have sinned, and 
are for that reason come to seek the pardon of 
the Church ! Wherefore, dearest brother, we 
ought both firmly to maintain the faith and truth 
of the Catholic Church, and to teach, and by all 
the evangelical and apostolical precepts to set 
forth, the plan of the divine dispensation and 
unity. 

21. Can the power of baptism be greater or 
of more avail than confession, than suffering, 
when one confesses Christ before men and is 
baptized in his own blood? And yet even this 
baptism does not benefit a heretic, although he 
has confessed Christ, and been put to death out- 
side the Church, unless the patrons and advo- 
cates of heretics declare that the heretics who 
are slain in a false confession of Christ are mar- 
tyrs, and assign to them the glory and the 
crown of martyrdom contrary to the testimony 
of the apostle, who says that it will profit them 
nothing although they were burnt and slain. ^ 
But if not even the baptism of a public confes- 
sion and blood can profit a heretic to salvation, 
because there is no salvation out of the Church, ^ 
how much less shall it be of advantage to him. 
if in a hiding-place and a cave of robbers, stained 
with the contagion of adulterous water, he has 

5 Matt. XV. 4. 
^ 1 Cor xiii. 3. 

7 [One of the Catholic maxims which has been terribly misimcJcr- 
Stood and cruelly abused. See below, p. 385, notes 2 and 3.J 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

385 

not only not put off his old sins, but rather 
heaped up still newer and greater ones ! Where- 
fore baptism cannot be common to us and to 
heretics, to whom neither God the Father, nor 
Christ the Son, nor the Holy Ghost, nor the 
faith, nor the Church itself, is common. And 
therefore it behoves those to be baptized who 
come from heresy to the Church, that so they 
who are prepared, in the lawful, and true, and 
only baptism of the holy Church, by divine re- 
generation, for the kingdom of God, may be 
born of both sacraments, because it is written, 
" Except a man be born of water and of the 
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of 
God." ' 

22. On which place some, as if by human 
reasoning they were able to make void the 
truth of the Gospel declaration, object to us 
the case of catechumens ; asking if any one 
of these, before he is baptized in the Church, 
should be apprehended and slain on confession 
of the name, whether he would lose the hope of 
salvation and the reward of confession, because 
he had not previously been born again of water ? 
Let men of this kind, who are aiders and favour- 
ers of heretics, know therefore, first, that those 
catechumens hold the sound faith and truth of 
the Church, and advance from the divine camp 
to do battle with the devil, with a full and sin- 
cere acknowledgment of God the Father, and of 
Christ, and of the Holy Ghost ; then, that they 
certainly are not deprived of the sacrament of 
baptism who are baptized with the most glorious 
and greatest baptism of blood, concerning which 
the Lord also said, that He had " another bap- 
tism to be baptized with." ^ But the same Lord 
declares in the Gospel, that those who are bap- 
tized in the'' own blood, and sanctified by suf- 
fering, are perfected, and obtain the grace of 
the divine promise, whei) He speaks to the thief 
believing and confessing in His very passion, 
and promises that he should be with Himself in 
paradise. Wherefore we who are set over the 
faith and truth ought not to deceive and mislead 
those who come to the faith and truth, and re- 
pent, and beg that their sins should be remitted 
to them ; but to instruct them when corrected 
by us, and reformed for the kingdom of heaven 
by celestial discipline. 

23. But some one says, "What, 'then, shall 
become of those who in past times, coming 
from heresy to the Church, were received with- 
out baptism ? " The Lord is able by His mercy 
to give indulgence, 3 and not to separate from 
the gifts of His Church those who by simplicity 

' John iii. 5. [His exposition of this passage explains his hyper- 
bole, nulla salus extra ecclesiatn. Of which sec. 23, iit/ra.'\ 

2 Luke xii. 50. [See p. 386, first line.] 

3 [Here is the qualifying maxim to that other dictum. Potens est 
Dominus misericordia sua, indulgentiam dare. Matt. ix. 13, xii. 7. 
How emphatic this repeated maxim of Christ! And sec Jas. ii. 13.] 

were admitted into the Church, and in the 
Church have fallen asleep. Nevertheless it does 
not follow that, because there was error at one 
time, there must always be error ; since it is more 
fitting for wise and God-fearing men, gladly and 
without delay to obey the truth when laid open 
and perceived, than pertinaciously and obstinate- 
ly to struggle against brethren and fellow-priests 
on behalf of heretics. 

24. Nor let any one think that, because bap- 
tism is proposed to them, heretics will be kept 
back from coming to the Church, as if offended 
at the name of a second baptism ; nay, but on 
this very account they are rather driven to the 
necessity of coming by the testimony of truth 
shown and proved to them. For if they shall 
see that it is determined and decreed by our 
judgment and sentence, that the baptism where- 
with they are there baptized is considered just 
and legitimate, they will think that they are 
justly and legitimately in possession of the 
Church also, and the other gifts of the Church ; 
nor will there be any reason for their coming to 
us, when, as they have baptism, they seem also 
to have the rest. But further, when they know 
that there is no baptism without, and that no re- 
mission of sins can be given outside the Church, 
they more eagerly and readily hasten to us, and 
implore the gifts and benefits of the Church our 
Mother, assured that they can in no wise attain 
to the true promise of divine grace unless they 
first come to the truth of the Church. Nor will 
heretics refuse to be baptized among us with the 
lawful and true baptism of the Church, when 
they shall have learnt from us that they also 
were baptized by Paul, who already had been 
baptized with the baptism of John,-* as we read 
in the Acts of the Apostles. 

25. And now by certain of us the baptism of 
heretics is asserted to occupy the (like) ground, 
and, as if by a certain dislike of re-baptizing, it 
is counted unlawful to baptize after God's ene- 
mies. And this, although we find that they were 
baptized whom John had baptized : John, es- 
teemed the greatest among the prophets ; John, 
filled with divine grace even in his mother's 
womb ; who was sustained with the spirit and 
power of Elias ; who was not an adversary of 
the Lord, but His precursor and announcer ; 
who not only foretold our Lord in words, but 
even showed Him to the eyes ; who baptized 
Christ Himself by whom others are baptized. 
But if on that account a heretic could obtain the 
right of baptism, because he first baptized, then 
baptism will not belong to the person that has it, 
but to the person that seizes it. And since bap- 
tism and the Church can by no means be sepa- 
rated from one another, and divided, he who has 

■< [John's baptism was under the Law, and was distinguished from 
Christ's baptism; which accoimts for the plural in Heb. vi. 2.j 

o 

86 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

first been able to lay hold on baptism has equally 
also laid hold on the Church ; and you begin to 
appear to him as a heretic, when you being an- 
ticipated, have begun to be last, and by yielding 
and giving way have relinquished the right which 
you had received. But how dangerous it is in 
divine matters, that any one should depart from 
his right and power. Holy Scripture deplares 
-when, in Genesis, Esau thence lost his birthright, 
nor was able afterwards to regain that which he 
Jiad once given up. 

26. These things, dearest brother, I have 
briefly written to you, according to my abilities, 
l)rescribing to none, and prejudging none, so as 
to prevent any one of the bishops doing what he 
thinks well, and having the free exercise of his 
judgment." We, as far as in us lies, do not con- 
tend on behalf of heretics with our colleagues 
and fellow-bishops, with whom we maintain a 
divine concord and the peace of the Lord ; ■ 
especially since the apostle says, " If any man, 
however, is thought to be contentious, we have 
no such custom, neither the Church of God." ^ 
Charity of spirit, the honour of our college, the 
bond of faith, and priestly concord, are main- 
tained by us with patience and gentleness. For 
this reason, moreover, we have with the best of 
our poor abilities, with the permission and in- 
spiration of the Lord, written a treatise ^ on the 
■" Benefit of Patience," which for the sake of our 
mutual love we have transmitted to you. I bid 
•you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LXXIII.'t 

TO POMPEV, AGAINST THE EPISTLE OF STE- 
PHEN ABOUT THE BAPTISM OF HERETICS. 

ARGUMENT. — THE PURPORT OF THIS EPISTLE IS 
GIVEN IN ST. AUGUSTINE'S " CONTRA DONATIS- 
TAS," LIB. V. CAP. 23. HE SAYS THERE : 
"CYPRIAN, MOREOVER, WRITES TO POMPEY ON 
THE SAME SUBJECr, WHEN HE PLAINLY SIGNI- 
FIES THAT STEPHEN, WHO, AS WE LEARN, WAS 
THEN A BISHOP OF THE ROMAN CHURCH, NOT 
ONLY DID NOT AGREE WITH HIM ON THOSE 
POINTS, BUT EVEN HAD WRITTEN AND CHARGED 
IN OPPOSITION TO HIM." 5 

I. Cyprian to his brother Pompeius, greeting. 
Although I have fully comi)rised what is to be 

' [See Ep. Ixxi. sec. 3, p. 379, supra. Here is the spirit, not of 
Tertulliaii, Ixit of Irenaeus (vol. i. p. 310), which seems to have pre- 
vailed in the practical settlement, between East and West, of one 
vexed question. As a (luestion of canonical consent and of irresisti- 
ble logic, assHiiiiiig; the premiss, Cyprian appears to me justified.] 

^ I Cor xi 16. 

3 [See this volume, in^ra.\ A.D. 256. 

■♦ Oxford ed. : Ep. Ixxiv. 

5 On which subject, again, in chap. 25: "I will not now recon- 
sider what he anyrdy uttered against Stephen, because there is no 
necessity for it. The ver>' same things are indeed said which have 
already been sufficiently discussed, and it is better to pass by what 
suggested the risk of a mischievous dissension. Stephen, for his part, 
.had thought that they who endeavoured to annul the old custom about 
;Tec«ivin£ heretics were to be excommunicated; but th» other, moved 

said concerning the baptism of heretics in the 
letters of which I sent you copies, dearest 
brother, yet, since you have desired that what 
Stephen our brother replied to my letters should 
be brought to your Knowledge, I have sent you 
a copy of his reply ; on the reading of which, 
you will more and more observe his error in 
endeavouring to maintain the cause of heretics 
against Christians, and against the Church of 
God.^ For among other matters, which were 
either haughtily assumed, or were not pertaining 
to the matter, or contradictory to his own view, 
which he unskilfully and without foresight wrote, 
he moreover added this saying : " If any one, 
therefore, come to you from any heresy whatever, 
let nothing be innovated (or done) which has 
not been handed down, to wit, that hands be 
imposed on him for repentance ; 7 since the here- 
tics themselves, in their own proper character, 
do not baptize such as come to them from one 
another, but only admit them to communion." 

2. He forbade one coming from any heresy 
to be baptized in the Church ; that is, he judged 
the baptism of all heretics to be just and lawful. 
And although special heresies have special bap- 
tisms and different sins, he, holding communion 
with the baptism of all, gathered up the sins of 
all, heaped together into his own bosom. And 
he charged that nothing should be innovated 
except what had been handed down ; as if he 
were an innovator, who, holding the unity, claims 
for the one Church one baptism ; and not mani- 
festly he who, forgetful of unity, adopts the lies 
and the contagions of a profane washing. Let 
nothing be innovated, says he, nothing viain- 
taiiici/, except what has been handed down. 
Whence is that tradition? Whether does it 
descend from the authority of the Lord and of 
the Gospel, or does it come from the commands 
arid the epistles of the apostles ? For that those 
things which are written must be done, God wit- 
nesses and admonishes, saying to Joshua the son 
of Nun : " The book of this law shall not depart 
out of thy mouth ; but tiiou slialt meditate in it 
day and night, that thou mayest observe to do 
according to all that is written therein." ^ Also 
the Lord, sending His apostles, commands that 
the nations should be baptized, and taught to 

with the difficylty of that very question, and very largely endowed 
with a sacred charity, thought that unity might be maintained with 
them who thought difrerently. Thus, although there was a great deal 
of keenness, yet it was always in a spirit of brotherhood: and at 
length the peace of Christ conquered in their hearts, so that in such a 
dispute none of the mischief of schism arose between them" (Migne). 
[Ed. Migne adds, assuming the media;val system to have been known 
to Cyprian, as follows] : " Thus far Augustnie, whom we have quoted 
at length, because, the passage is opposed to those who strive from 
this to assert his schism from the Roman pontift"." 

6 [It will be seen, more and more, that this entire conviction of 
Cyprian as to Stephen's absolute equality with himself, results from the 
Ante-Niccne system, and accords with his theory of the divine organi- 
zation of the Church. So Augustine, as quoted in the " Argument."] 

" Meaning, prob.ably, heretics with regard to the djctrine of the 
Trinity, Stephen not regarding the Novatians as" properly" heretics. 
[Sec Oxford translator, note m, p. a6i.] 

8 Josh. i. 3. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

;87 

observe all things which He commanded. If, 
therefore, it is either prescribed in the Gospel, 
or contained in the epistles or Acts of the Apos- 
tles, that those who come from any heresy should 
not be baptized, but only hands laid upon them 
to repentance, let this divine and holy tradition 
be observed. But if everywhere heretics are 
called nothing else than adversaries and anti- 
christs, if they are pronounced to be people to 
be avoided, and to be perverted and condemned 
of their own selves, wherefore is it that they 
should not be thought worthy of being con- 
demned by us, since it is evident from the 
apostolic testimony ' that they are of their own 
selves condemned? So that no one ought to 
defame the apostles as if they had approved of 
the baptisms of heretics, or had communicated 
with them without the Church's baptism, when 
they, the apostles, wrote such things of the 
heretics. And this, too, while as yet the more 
terrible plagues of heresy had not broken forth ; 
while Marcion of Pontus had not yet emerged 
from Pontus, whose master Cerdon came to 
Rome, — while Hyginus was still bishop, who 
was the ninth bishop in that city, — whom Mar- 
cion followed, and with greater impudence add- 
ing other enhancements to his crime, and more 
daringly set himself to blaspheme against God 
the Father, the Creator, and armed with sacri- 
legious arms the heretical madness that rebelled 
against the Church with greater wickedness and 
determination. 

3. But if it is evident that subsequently here- 
sies became more numerous and worse ; and 
if, in time past, it was never at all prescribed 
nor written that only hands should be laid upon 
a heretic for repentance, and that so he might 
be communicated with ; and if there is only one 
baptism, which is with us, and is within, and 
is granted of the divine condescension to the 
Church alone, what obstinacy is that, or what 
presumption, to prefer human tradition to divine 
ordinance, and not to observe that God is in- 
dignant and angry as often as human tradition 
relaxes and passes by the divine precepts, as He 
cries out, and says by Isaiah the prophet, " This 
people honoureth me with their lips, but their 
heart is far from me. But in vain do they wor- 
ship me, teaching the doctrines and command- 
ments of men." ^ Also the Lord in the Gospel, 
similarly rebuking and reproving, utters and says, 
" Ye reject the commandment of God, that ye 
may keep your own tradition." ^ Mindful of 
which precept, the blessed Apostle Paul himself 
also warns and instructs, saying, " If any man 
teach otherwise, and consent not to the whole- 
some words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to 

1 [Tit. iii. II.] 

2 Isa. xxix. 13. 

3 Mark vii. 13. 

Plis doctrine, he is proud, knowing nothing : 
from such withdraw thyself." •♦ 

4. Certainly an excellent and lawful tradition 
is set before us by the teaching of our brother 
Stephen, which may afford us a suitable authori- 
ty ! For in the same place of his epistle he has 
added and continued : " Since those who are 
specially heretics do not baptize those who come 
to them from one another, but only receive them 
to communion." To this point of evil has the 
Church of God and spouse of Christ been de- 
veloped, that she follows the examples of here- 
tics ; that for the purpose of celebrating the 
celestial sacraments, light should borrow her dis- 
cipline from darkness, and Christians should do 
that which antichrists do. But what is that 
blindness of soul, what is that degradation of 
faith, to refuse to recognise the unity 5 which 
comes from God the Father, and from the tradi- 
tion of Jesus Christ the Lord and our God ! 
For if the Church is not with heretics, therefore, 
because it is one, and cannot be divided ; and 
if thus the Holy Spirit is not there, because He 
is one, and cannot be among profane persons, 
and those who are without ; certainly also bap- 
tism, which consists in the same unity, cannot 
be among heretics, because it can neither be 
separated from the Church nor from the Holy 
Spirit. 

5. Or if they attribute the effect of baptism 
to the majesty of the name, so that they who are 
baptized anywhere and anyhow, in the name of 
Jesus Christ, are judged to be renewed and 
sanctified ; wherefore, in the name of the same 
Christ, are not hands laid upon the baptized 
persons among them, for the reception of the 
Holy Spirit? Why does not the same majesty 
of the same name avail in the imposition of 
hands, which, they contend, availed in the sanc- 
tification of baptism? For if any one born out 
of the Church can become God's temple, why 
cannot the Holy Spirit also be poured out upon 
the temple? For he who has been sanctified, 
his sins being put away in baptism, and has been 
spiritually re-formed into a new man, has become 
fitted for receiving the Holy Spirit ; since the 
apostle says, " As many of you as have been 
baptized into Christ have put on Christ." '' He 
who, having been baptized among the heretics, 
is able to put on Christ, may much more receive 
the Holy Spirit whom Christ sent. Otherwise 
He who is sent will be greater than Him who 
sends ; so that one baptized without may begin 
indeed to put on Christ, but not to be able to 
receive the Holy Spirit, as if Christ could either 
be put on without the Spirit, or the Spirit be 

* I Tim. vi. 3-5. 

5 [This "unity" consisted not at all in agreeing with Stephen, 
according to our author. See good note (1) Oxford edition, p. aoo.J 

* Gal. iii. 27. 

;88 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

separated from Christ. Moreover, it is silly to 
say, that although the second birth is spiritual, 
by which we are born in Christ through the laver 
of regeneration, one may be born spiritually 
among the heretics, where they say that the 
Spirit is not. For water alone is not able to 
cleanse away sins, and to sanctify a man, unless 
he have also the Holy Spirit.' Wherefore it is 
necessary that they should grant the Holy Spirit 
to be there, where they say that baptism is ; or 
else there is no baptism where the Holy Spirit 
is not, because there cannot be baptism without 
the Spirit. 

6. But what a thing it is, to assert and contend 
that they who are not born in the Church can 
be the sons of God ! For the blessed apostle 
sets forth and proves that baptism is that wherein 
the old man dies and the new man is born, say- 
ing, " He saved us by the washing of regenera- 
tion." 2 But if regeneration is in the washing, 
that is, in baptism, how can heresy, which is not 
the spouse of Christ, generate sons to God by 
Christ ? For it is the Church alone which, con- 
joined and united with Christ, spiritually bears 
sons ; as the same apostle again says, " Christ 
loved the Church, and gave Himself for it, that 
He might sanctify it, cleansing it with the wash- 
ing of water." 3 if^ then, she is the beloved and 
spouse who alone is sanctified by Christ, and 
alone is cleansed by His washing, it is manifest 
that heresy, which is not the spouse of Christ, 
nor can be cleansed nor sanctified by His wash- 
ing, cannot bear sons to God.-* 

7. But further, one is not born by the imposi- 
tion of hands when he receives the Holy Ghost, 
but in baptism, that so, being already born, he 
may receive the Holy Spirit, even as it happened 
in the first man Adam. For first God formed 
him, and then breathed into his nostrils the 
breath of life. For the Spirit cannot be received, 
unless he who receives first have an existence. 
But as the birth of Christians is in baptism, while 
the generation and sanctification of baptism are 
with the spouse of Christ alone, who is able spirit- 
ually to conceive and to bear sons to God, where 
and of whom and to whom is he born, who is 
not a son of the Church, so as that he should 
have God as his Father, before he has had the 
Church for his Mother ? But as no heresy at all, 
and equally no schism, being without, can have 
the sanctification of saving baptism, why has the 
bitter obstinacy of our brother Stephen broken 
forth to such an extent, as to contend that sons 

' [Cyprian does not believe in the mere opus oprratum of the 
waicr. And one fears that Stephen's position in this mailer bore its 
fruit long after in that pernicious dogma of the schoolmen.] 

- Tit iii. 5. 

3 Eph. V. 25, 26. 

* [Allowing the premisses admitted alike by Stephen and Cyprian 
(of which it is not my place to speak), the logic of our author appears 
to me irresistible. Practically, how wise the inspired maxim, Rom. 
jiiv. I.] 

are born to God from the baptism of Marcion ; 
moreover, of Valentinus and Apelles, and of others 
who blaspheme against God the Father ; and to 
say that remission of sins is granted in the name 
of Jesus Christ where blasphemy is uttered against 
the Father and against Christ the Lord God ? 

8. In which place, dearest brother, we must 
consider, for the sake of the faith and the reli- 
gion of the sacerdotal office which we discharge, 
whether the account can be satisfactory in the 
day of judgment for a priest of God, who main- 
tains, and approves, and accjuiesces in the bap- 
tism of blasphemers, when the Lord threatens, 
and says, " And now, O ye priests, this com- 
mandment is for you : if ye will not hear, and if 
ye will not lay it to heart to give glory unto my 
name, saith the Lord Almighty, I will even send 
a curse upon you, and I will curse your bless- 
ings." 5 Does he give glory to God, who com- 
municates with the baptism of Marcion ? Does 
he give glory to God, who judges that remission 
of sins is granted among those who blaspheme 
against God ? Does he give glory to God, who 
affirms that sons are born to God without, of an 
adulterer and a harlot ? Does he give glory to 
God, who does not hold the unity and truth that 
arise from the divine law, but maintains heresies 
against the Church ? Does he give glory to God, 
who, a friend of heretics and an enemy to Chris- 
tians, thinks that the priests of Ciod, who support 
the truth of Christ and the unity of the Church, 
are to be excommunicated?"^ If glory is thus 
given to God, if the fear and the discipline of 
God is thus preserved by His worshii)pers and 
His priests, let us cast away our arms ; let us 
give ourselves up to captivity ; let us deliver to 
the devil the ordination of the Gospel, the a]> 
pointment of Christ, the majesty of God ; let the 
sacraments of the divine warfare be loosed ; let 
the standards of the heavenly camp be betrayed ; 
and let the Church succumb and yield to here- 
tics, light to darkness, fi\ith to perfidy, hope to 
despair, reason to error, immortality to death, 
love to hatred, truth to falsehood, Christ to Anti- 
christ ! Deservedly thus do heresies and schisms 
arise day by day, more frecjuently and more 
fruitfully grow up, and with serpents' locks shoot 
forth and cast out against the Clnirch of God 
with greater force the poison of their venom j 
whilst, by the advocacy of some, both authority 
and support are afforded them ; whilst their bap- 
tism is defended, whilst faith, whilst truth, is be- 
trayed ;7 whilst that which is done without against 
the Church is defended within in the very Church 
itself. 

5 Mai. ii. 1, 2. [Compare Tcrtullian, vol. iv. p. 122.] 
^ I A terrible indictment, indeed, of his brother Stephen: pro- 
voked, however, by conduct less warranted. .See Ep. Ixxiv. !7iffa.^ 
^ [^Stephen's presumption in this step is the dark spot in )iia 
record. It was a ii^'rt^KW y^/wrw, however, even in his own prov« 
ince. See Augustine's testimony, 0.\f. ed. (note 1) p. 258.] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

389 

9. But if there be among us, most beloved 
brother, the fear of God, if the maintenance of 
the faith prevail, if we keep the precepts of Christ, 
if we guard the incorrupt and inviolate sanctity 
of His spouse, if the words of the Lord abide in 
our thoughts and hearts, when he says, " Think- 
est thou, when the Son of man cometh, shall He 
find faith on the earth?" ' then, because we are 
God's faithful soldiers, who war for the faith and 
sincere religion of God, let us keep the camp 
entrusted to us by God with faithful valour. Nor 
ought custom, which had crept in among some, 
to prevent the truth from prevailing and conquer- 
ing ; for custom without truth is the antiquity of 
error.2 On which account, let us forsake the 
error and follow the truth, knowing that in Es- 
dras also the truth conquers, as it is written : 
" Truth endureth and grows strong to eternity, 
and lives and prevails for ever and ever. With 
her there is no accepting of persons or distinc- 
tions ; but what is just she does : nor in her 
judgments is there unrighteousness, but the 
strength, and the kingdom, and the majesty, and 
the power of all ages. Blessed be the Lord God 
of truth ! " ^ This truth Christ showed to us in 
His Gospel, and said, " I am the truth." ■♦ Where- 
fore, if we are in Christ, and have Christ in us, 
if we abide in the truth, and the truth abides in 
us, let us keep fast those things which are true. 

10. But it happens, by a love of presumption 
and of obstinacy, that one would rather maintain 
his own evil and false position, than agree in 
the right and true which belongs to another. 
Looking forward to which, the blessed Apostle 
Paul writes to Timothy, and warns him that a 
bishop must not be " litigious, nor contentious, 
but gentle and teachable." 5 Now he is teach- 
able who is meek and gentle to the patience of 
learning. For it behoves a bishop not only to 
teach, but also to learn ; because he also teaches 
better who daily increases and advances by learn- 
ing better ; which very thing, moreover, the same 
Apostle Paul teaches, when he admonishes, " that 
if anything better be revealed to one sitting by, 
the first should hold his peace."'' But there is 
a brief way for religious and simple minds, both 
to put away error, and to find and to elicit truth. 
For if we return to the head and source of divine 
tradition, human error ceases ; and having seen 
the reason of the heavenly sacraments, whatever 
lay hid in obscurity under the gloom and cloud 
of darkness, is opened into the light of the truth. 
If a channel supplying water, which formerly 
flowed plentifully and freely, suddenly fail, do 
we not go to the fountain, that there the reason 

■ Luke xviii. 8. 

2 [Another of Cyprian's striking aphorisms: " Consuetudo sine 
veritate vetustas erroris est."] 
^ Esdras iv. 38-40. 
* John xiv. 6. 

5 Original, " docibilis." 2 Tim. ii. 24. 
^ I Cor. xiv. 30. 

of the failure may be ascertained, whether from 
the drying up of the springs the water has failed 
at the fountainhead, or whether, flowing thence 
free and full, it has failed in the midst of its 
course ; that so, if it has been caused by the 
fault of an interrupted or leaky channel, that the 
constant stream does not flow uninterruptedly 
and continuously, then the channel being re- 
paired and strengthened, the water collected 
may be supplied for the use and drink of the 
city, with the same fertility and plenty with which 
it issues from the spring? And this it behoves 
the priests of God to do now, if they would keep 
the divine precepts, that if in any respect the 
truth have wavered and vacillated, we should 
return to our original and Lord, and to the evan- 
gelical and apostolical tradition ; and thence may 
arise the ground of our action, whence has taken 
rise both our order and our origin. ^ 

11. For it has been delivered to us, that there 
is one God, and one Christ, and one hope, and 
one faith, and one Church, and one baptism 
ordained only in the one Church, from which 
unity whosoever will depart must needs be found 
with heretics ; and while he upholds them against 
the Church, he impugns the sacrament of the 
divine tradition. The sacrament of which unity 
we see expressed also in the Canticles, in the 
person of Christ, who says, " A garden enclosed 
is my sister, my spouse, a fountain sealed, a 
well of living water, a garden with the fruit of 
apples."^ But if His Church is a garden en- 
closed, and a fountain sealed, how can he who 
is not in the Church enter into the same garden, 
or drink from its fountain? Moreover, Peter 
himself, showing and vindicating the unity, has 
commanded and warned us that we cannot be 
saved, except by the one only baptism of one 
Church. " In the ark," says he, " of Noah, {^w, 
that is, eight souls, were saved by water, as also 
baptism shall in like manner save you." 9 In 
how short and spiritual a summary has he set 
forth the sacrament of unity ! For as, in that 
baptism of the world in which its ancient in- 
iquity was purged away, he who was not in the 
ark of Noah could not be saved by water, so 
neither can he appear to be saved by baptism 
who has not been baptized in the Church which 
is established in the unity '° of the Lord according 
to the sacrament of the one ark. 

12. Therefore, dearest brother, having ex- 
plored and seen the truth ; it is observed and 
held by us, that all who are converted from any 
heresy whatever to the Church must be baptized 
by the only and lawful baptism of the Church, 

^ [Elucidation XVIII. See pp. 380 (note i) and 322 (note 2).] 

8 Cant. iv. 12, 13. 

9 I Pet. iii. 20, 21. 

'° [It is obvious that the Cyprianic theory of unity has not the 
least connection with a theory depending on communion with a par- 
ticular See. But this elucidates the maxim, p. 384, note 7.] 

190 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

with the exception of those who had previously 
been baptized in the Church, and so had passed 
over to the heretics.' For it behoves these, 
when they return, having repented, to be re- 
ceived by the imposition of hands only, and to 
be restored by the shepherd to the sheep-fold 
whence they had strayed. I bid you, dearest 
brother, ever heartily farewell. 

EPISTLE LXXIV.^ 

FIRMILIAN, BISHOP OF CiESAREA IN CAPPA- 
DOCIA, TO CYPRIAN, AGAINST THE LETTER 
OF STEPHEN. A.D. 256. 

ARGUMENT. — THE ARGUMENT OF THIS LETTER 
IS EXACTLY THE SAME AS THAT OF THE PREVI- 
OUS ONE, BUT WRITTEN WITH A LITTLE MORE 
VEHEMENCE AND ACERBITY THAN BECOMES A 
BISHOP,^ CHIEFLY FOR THE REASON, AS MAY BE 
SUSPECTED, THAT STEPHEN HAD ALSO WRITTEN 
ANOTHER LETTER TO FIRMILIANUS, HELENUS, 
AND OTHER BISHOPS OF THOSE PARTS.'* 

1. Firmilianus to Cyprian, his brother in the 
Lord, greeting. We have received by Rogatian, 
our beloved deacon, the letter sent by you which 
you wrote to us, well-beloved brother ; and we 
gave the greatest thanks to the Lord, because 
it has happened that we who are separated from 
one another in body are thus united in spirit, 
as if we were not only occupying one country, 
but inhabiting together one and the self-same 
house. Which also it is becoming for us to say, 
because, indeed, the spiritual house of God is 
one. " For it shall come to pass in the last 
days," saith the prophet, " that the mountain of 
the Lord shall be manifest, and the house of God 
above the tops of the mountains." 5 Those that 
come together into this house are united with 
gladness, according to what is asked from the 
Lord in the psalm, to dwell in the house of the 
Lord all the days of one's life. Whence in 
another place also it is made manifest, that 
among the saints there is great and desirous love 
for assembling together. " Behold," he says, 
" how good and how pleasant a thing it is for 
brethren to dwell together in unity ! " ^ 

2. For unity and peace and concord afford 
ihe greatest pleasure not only to men who be- 
lieve and know the truth, but also to heavenly 
angels themselves, to whom the divine word says 
it is a joy when one sinner repents and returns 

' [See letter Ixxi. p. 378, SHf>ra.'\ 

~ Oxford cd. : Ep Ixxv. [This is one of the most important illus- 
trations of ante-Nicene unity and its laws. Elucidation XIX.) 

3 I But observe, in contrast, the language of Stephen, which he 
rebukes (sec. 26, /«/>-«), and his schismatical conduct towards the 
whole .■\frican Church.] 

■* To the effect that he would not hold communion with them so 
long as they should persist in their opinion concerning the baptism 
of heretics, as Eusebius tells us from a letter of Dionysius of Alexan- 
dria to Xistus, the successor of Stephen, Hiit. Eccles.,'hoo^ vii. c. 4. 

5 Isa. ii. 2. 

*" Ps. cxxxiii. I. 

to the bond of unity. But assuredly this would 
not be said of the angels, who have their con- 
versation in heaven, unless they themselves also 
were united to us, who rejoice at our unity ; even 
as, on the other hand, they are assuredly sad- 
; dened when they see the diverse minds and the 
divided wills of some, as if not only they do 
not together invoke one and the same God, but 
as if, separated and divided from one another, 
they can neither have a common conversation 
nor discourse. 7 Except that we may in this 
matter give thanks to Stephen, that it has now 
happened through his unkindness that we receive 
the proof of your faith and wisdom. But although 
we have received the favour of this benefit on 
account of Stephen, certainly Stephen has not 
done anything deserving of kindness and thanks. 
For neither can Judas be thought worthy by his- 
perfidy and treachery wherewith he wickedly 
dealt concerning the Saviour, as though he had 
been the cause of such great advantages, that 
through him the world and the people of the 
Gentiles were delivered by the Lord's passion. 

3. But let these things which were done by 
Stephen be passed by for the present, lest, while 
we remember his audacity and pride, we bring 
a more lasting sadness on ourselves from the 
things that he has wickedly done.^ And know- 
ing, concerning you, that you have settled this 
matter, concerning which there is now a (jues- 
tion, according to the rule of truth and the 
wisdom of Christ ; we have exulted with great 
joy, and have given God thanks that we ha\e 
found in brethren placed at such a distance such 
a unanimity of faith and truth with us. For the 
grace of God is mighty to associate and join 
together in the bond of charity and unity even 
those things which seem to be divided liy a 
considerable s])ace of earth, according to the 
way in which of old also the divine power asso- 
ciated in the bond of unanimity Ezekiel and 
Daniel, though later in their age, and separated 
from them by a long space of time, to Job and 
Noah, who were among the first ; so that although 
they were separated by long periods, yet by 
divine inspiration they felt the same truths. And 
this also we now observe in you, that you who 
are separated from us by the most extensive 
regions, approve yourselves to be, nevertheless, 
joined with us in mind and spirit. All which 
arises from the divine unity. For even as the 
Lord who dwells in us is one and the same. He 
everywhere joins and couples His own ])eople in 
the bond of unity, whence their sound has gone 
out into the whole earth, who are sent by the 
Lord swiftly running in the spirit of unity ; as. 

7 [This is a sentence to be admired, apart from anything in the 
gener.-il subject.] 

" [Note the ignorance of these Oriental bishops of any superiot 
authority in the Bishop of Rome. Athanas., <>//., p. 470, Paris.] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

39r 

on the other hand, it is of no advantage that 
some are very near and joined together bodily, 
if in spirit and mind they differ, since souls can- 
not at all be united which divide themselves 
from God's unity. " For, lo," it says, " they that 
are far from Thee shall perish." ' But such shall 
undergo the judgment of God according to their 
desert, as depart from His words who prays to 
the Father for unity, and says, " Father, grant 
that, as Thou and I are one, so they also may 
be one in us." ^ 

4. But we receive those things which you 
have written as if they were our own ; nor do 
we read them cursorily, but by frequent repeti- 
tion have committed them to memory. Nor 
does it hinder saving usefulness, either to repeat 
the same things for the confirmation of the 
truth, or, moreover, to add some things for 
the sake of accumulating proof. But if any- 
thing has been added by us, it is not added 
as if there had been too little said by you ; 
but since the divine discourse surpasses human 
nature, and the soul cannot conceive or grasp 
the whole and perfect word, therefore also the 
number of prophets is so great, that the divine 
wisdom in its multiplicity may be distributed 
through many. Whence also he who first speaks 
in prophecy is bidden to be silent if a revela- 
tion be made to a second. For which reason it 
happens of necessity among us, that year by 
year we, the elders and prelates, assemble to- 
gether to arrange those matters which are com- 
mitted to our care, so that if any things are 
more serioHS they may be directed by the com- 
mon counsel. Moreover, tve do this that some 
remedy may be sought for by repentance for 
lapsed brethren, and for those wounded by the 
devil after the saving laver, not as though they 
obtained remission of sins from us, but that by 
our means they may be converted to the under- 
standing of their sins, and may be compelled to 
give fuller satisfaction to the Lord. 

5. But since that messenger sent by you was 
in haste to return to you, and the winter season 
was pressing, we replied what we could to your 
letter. And indeed, as respects what Stephen 
has said, as though the apostles forbade those 
who come from heresy to be baptized, and de- 
livered this also to be observed by their succes- 
sors, you have replied most abundantly, that no 
one is so foolish as to believe that the apostles 
delivered this, when it is even well known that 
these heresies themselves, execrable and detest- 
able as they are, arose subsequently ; when even 
Marcion the disciple of Cerdo is found to have 
introduced his sacrilegious tradition against God 
long after the apostles, and after long lapse of 
time from them. Apelles, also consenting to 

' Ps. Ixxiii. 27. 
^ John xvii. 21. 

his blasphemy, added many other new and more 
important matters hostile to faith and truth. 
But also the time of Valentinus and Basilides is 
manifest, that they too, after the apostles, and 
after a long period, rebelled against the Church 
of God with their wicked lies. It is plain that 
the other heretics, also, afterwards introduced 
their evil sects and perverse inventions, even as 
every one was led by error ; all of whom, it is 
evident, were self-condemned, and have declared 
against themselves an inevitable sentence before 
the day of judgment ; and he who confirms the 
baptism of these, what else does he do but 
adjudge himself with them, and condemn him- 
self, making himself a partaker with such ? 

6. But that they who are at Rome do not ob- 
serve those things in all cases which are handed 
down from the beginning, and vainly pretend the 
authority of the apostles ; ^ any one may know 
also from the fact, that concerning the celebra- 
tion of Easter, and concerning many other sacra- 
ments of divine matters, he may see that there are 
some diversities among them, and that all things 
are not observed among them alike, which are 
observed at Jerusalem, just as in very many other 
provinces also many things are varied because 
of the difference of the places and names."* And 
yet on this account there is no departure at all 
from the peace and unity of the Catholic Church, 
such as Stephen has now dared to make ; 5 
breaking the peace against you, which his pred- 
ecessors have always kept with you in mutual 
love and honour, even herein defaming Peter 
and Paul the blessed apostles,^ as if the very 
men delivered this who in their epistles execrated 
heretics, and warned us to avoid them. Whence' 
it appears that this tradition is of men which 
maintains heretics, and asserts that they have 
baptism, which belongs to the Church alone. 

7. But, moreover, you have well answered that 
part where Stephen said in his letter that here- 
tics themselves also are of one mind in respect 
of baptism ; and that they do not baptize such 
as come to them from one another, but only 
communicate with them ; as if we also ought to 
do this. \w which place, although you have al- 
ready proved that it is sufficiently ridiculous for 
any one to follow those that are in error, yet we 
add this moreover, over and above, that it is not 
wonderful for heretics to act thus, who, although 
in some lesser matters they differ, yet in that 
which is greatest they hold one and the same 
agreement to blaspheme the Creator, figuring 
for themselves certain dreams and phantasms of 

3 [Apart from the argument, observe the clear inference as to the 
equal position of Stephen and his " primacy," in the great Western 
See. For the West, compare Hilar., Aif Liberium, Frag.] 

•* Probably " of men," " nominum " in the original havmg been 
read for " hominum." 

5 [Peter and Paul could not be quoted, then, as speaking by the 
mouth of anyone bishop; certainly not by any prerogative of his 
See. See Guettee, The Papacy, p. 119. New York, 1866.] 

!92 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

an unknown God. Assuredly it is but natural 
that these should agree in having a baptism which 
is unreal,' in the same way as they agree in re- 
pudiating the truth of the divinity. Of whom, 
since it is tedious to reply to their several state- 
ments, either wicked or foolish, it is sufficient 
shortly to say in sum, that they who do not hold 
the true Lord the Father cannot hold the truth 
either of the Son or of the Holy Spirit ; accord- 
ing to which also they who are called Cataphry- 
gians, and endeavour to claim to themselves new 
prophecies, can have neither the Father, nor the 
Son, nor the Holy Spirit,- of whom, if we ask 
what Christ they announce, they will reply that 
they preach Him who sent the Spirit that speaks 
l)y Montanus and Prisca. And in these, when 
we observe that there has been not the spirit of 
truth, but of error, we know that they who main- 
tain their false prophesying against the faith of 
Christ cannot have Christ. Moreover, all other 
heretics, if they have separated themselves from 
the Church of God, can have nothing of power 
or of grace, since all power and grace are estab- 
lished in the Church where the elders ^ preside, 
who possess the power both of baptizing, and of 
imposition of hands, and of ordaining. For as a 
heretic may not lawfully ordain nor lay on hands, 
so neither may he baptize, nor do any thing holily 
or spiritually, since he is an alien from spiritual 
and deifying sanctity. All which we some time 
back confirmed in Iconium, which is a place in 
Phrygia, when we were assembled together with 
those who had gathered from Galatia and Cilicia, 
and other neighbouring countries, as to be held 
and firmly vindicated against heretics, when there 
was sonie doubt in certain minds concerning that 
matter.^ 

8. And as Stephen and those who agree with 
him contend that putting away of sins and sec- 
ond birth may result from the baptism of here- 
tics, among whom they themselves confess that 
the Holy Spirit is not ; let them consider and 
understand that spiritual birth cannot be without 
the Spirit ; in conformity with which also the 
blessed Apostle Paul baptized anew with a spirit- 
ual baptism those who had already been bap- 
tized by John before the Holy Spirit had been 
sent by the Lord, and so laid hands on them that 
they might receive the Holy Ghost. But what 
kind of a thing is it, that when we see that Paul, 
after John's baptism, baptized his disciples again, 
we are hesitating to baptize those who come to 
the Church from heresy after their unhallowed 
and profane dipping. Unless, perchance, Paul 
was inferior to the bishops of these times, so that 
these indeed can by imposition of hands alone 

' Literally, " in the vanity (or unreality) of a baptism." 
2 These words in italics are conjecturally interpolated, but have 
BO authority. 

J [Another use of this word as generic for all but deacons.] 

4 [A provincial council of the Elast; and note, in Asia, not Europe.] 

give the Holy Spirit to those heretics who come 
(to the Church), while Paul was not fitted to give 
the Holy Spirit by imposition of hands to those 
who had been baptized by John, unless he had 
first baptized them also with the baptism of the 
Church. 

9. That, moreover, is absurd, that they do not 
think it is to be inquired who was the person 
that baptized, for the reason that he who has 
been baptized may have obtained grace by the 
invocation of the Trinity, of the names of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 
Then this will be the wisdom which Paul writes 
is in those who are perfected. But who in the 
Church is perfect and wise who can either de- 
fend or believe this, that this bare invocation of 
names is sufficient to the remission of sins and 
the sanctification of baptism ; since these things 
are only then of advantage, when both he who 
baptizes has the Holy Spirit, and the baptism 
itself also is not ordained without the Spirit? 
But, say they, he who in any manner whatever 
is baptized without, may obtain the grace of 
baptism by his disposition and faith, which 
doubtless is ridiculous in itself, as if either a 
wicked disposition could attract to itself from 
heaven the sanctification of the righteous, or a 
false faith the truth of believers. But that not 
all who call on the name of Christ are heard, 
and that their invocation cannot obtain any grace, 
the Lord Himself manifests, saying, " Many shall 
come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall 
deceive many."' Because there is no difference 
between a false prophet and a heretic. For as 
the former deceives in the name of God or 
Christ, so the latter deceives in the sacrament of 
baptism. Both strive by falsehood to deceive 
men's wills. 

10. But I wish to relate to you some facts 
concerning a circumstance which occurred among 
us, pertaining to this very matter. About two- 
and-twenty years ago, in the times after the 
Emperor Alexander, there happened in these 
parts many struggles and difficulties, either in 
general to all men, or privately to Christians. 
Moreover, there were many and frequent earth- 
quakes, so that many places were overthrown 
throughout Cappadocia and Pontus ; even cer- 
tain cities, dragged into the abyss, were swal- 
lowed up by the oi)ening of the gaping earth. 
So that from this also a severe persecution arose 
against us of the Christian name ; and this after 
the long peace of the {)revious age arose sud- 
denly, and with its unusual evils was made more 
terrible for the disturbance of our people. Se- 
renianus was then governor in our province, a 
bitter and terrible persecutor. But the faithfiil 
being set in this state of disturbance, and fleeing 

S Mark xiii. 6. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

393 

hither and thither for fear of the persecution, 
and leaving their country and passing over into 
other regions — for there was an opportunity of 
passing over, for the reason that that persecution 
was not over the whole world, but was local — 
there arose among us on a sudden a certain 
woman, who in a state of ecstasy announced her- 
self as a prophetess, and acted as if filled with 
the Holy Ghost. And she was so moved by the 
impetus of the principal demons, that for a long 
time she made anxious and deceived the broth- 
erhood, accomplishing certain wonderful and 
portentous things, and promised that she would 
cause the earth to be shaken. Not that the 
power of the demon was so great that he could 
prevail to shake the earth, or to disturb the 
elements ; but that sometimes a wicked spirit, 
prescient, and perceiving that there will be an 
earthquake, pretends that he will do what he 
sees will happen. By these lies and boastings 
he had so subdued the minds of individuals, that 
they obeyed him and followed whithersoever he 
commanded and led. He would also make that 
woman walk in the keen winter with bare feet 
over frozen snow, and not to be troubled or hurt 
in any degree by that walking. Moreover, she 
would say that she was hurrying to Judea and 
to Jerusalem, feigning as if she had come thence. 
Here also she deceived one of the presbyters, a 
countryman, and another, a deacon, so that they 
had intercourse with that same woman, which 
was shortly afterwards detected. For on a sud- 
den there appeared unto her one of the exorcists, 
a man approved and always of good conversa- 
tion in respect of religious discipline ; who, 
stimulated by the exhortation also of very many 
brethren who were themselves strong and praise- 
worthy in the faith, raised himself up against 
that wicked spirit to overcome it ; which more- 
over, by its subtile fallacy, had predicted this a 
little while before, that a certain adverse and 
unbelieving tempter would come. Yet that ex- 
orcist, inspired by God's grace, bravely resisted, 
and showed that that which was before thought 
holy, was indeed a most wicked spirit. But that 
woman, who previously by wiles and deceitful- 
ness of the demon was attempting many things 
for the deceiving of the faithful, among other 
things by which she had deceived many, also 
had frequently dared this ; to pretend that with 
an invocation not to be contemned she sanctified 
bread and celebrated ' the Eucharist, and to 
offer sacrifice to the Lord, not without the sacra- 
ment of the accustomed utterance ; and also to 
baptize many, making use of the usual and law- 
ful words of interrogation, that nothing might 
seem to be different from the ecclesiastical 
rule. 

* Facere. [Demoniacs. See Apost. lessons, so called, Ixxix.] 

11. What, then, shall we say about the bap- 
tism of this woman, by which a most wicked 
demon baptized through means of a woman? 
Do Stephen and they who agree with him ap- 
prove of this also, especially when neither the 
symbol of the Trinity nor the legitimate and 
ecclesiastical interrogatory were wanting to her? 
Can it be believed that either remission of sins 
was given, or the regeneration of the saving laver 
duly completed, when all things, although after 
the image of truth, yet were done by a demon ? 
Unless, perchance, they who defend the baptism 
of heretics contend that the demon also con- 
ferred the grace of baptism in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. 
Among them, no doubt, there is the same error 
— it is the very deceitfulness of devils, since 
among them the Holy Spirit is not at all. 

12. Moreover, what is the meaning of that 
which Stephen would assert, that the presence 
and. holiness of Christ is with those who are bap- 
tized among heretics? For if the apostle does 
not speak falsely when he says, "As many of you 
as are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ,"^ 
certainly he who has been baptized among them 
into Christ, has put on Christ. But if he has 
put on Christ, he might also receive the Holy 
Ghost, who was sent by Christ, and hands are 
vainly laid upon him who comes to us for the 
reception of the Spirit ; unless, perhaps, he has 
not put on the Spirit from Christ, so that Christ 
indeed may be with heretics, but the Holy Spirit 
not be with them. 

13. But let us briefly run through the other 
matters also, which were spoken of by you abun- 
dantly and most fully, especially as Rogatianus, 
our well-beloved deacon, is hurrying to you. 
For it follows that they must be asked by us, 
when they defend heretics, whether their baptism 
is carnal or spiritual. For if it is carnal, they 
differ in no respect from the baptism of the Jews, 
which they use in such a manner that in it, as if 
in a common and vulgar laver, only external filth 
is washed away. But if it is spiritual, how can 
baptism be spiritual among those among whom 
there is no Holy Spirit? And thus the water 
wherewith they are washed is to them only a 
carnal washing, not a sacrament of baptism. 

14. But if the baptism of heretics can have 
the regeneration of the second birth, those who 
are baptized among them must be counted not 
heretics, but children of God. For the second 
birth, which occurs in baptism, begets sons of 
God. But if the spouse of Christ is one, which 
is the Catholic Church, it is she herself who alone 
bears sons of God. For there are not many 
spouses of Christ, since the apostle says, "I have 
espoused you, that I may present you as a chaste 

2 Gal. iii. 27. 

394 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

virgin to Christ ; " ' and, " Hearken, O daughter, 
and consider, and incline thine ear ; forget also 
thine own people, for the King hath greatly de- 
sired thy beauty ; " ^ and, " Come with me, my 
spouse, from Lebanon ; thou shalt come, and 
shalt pass over from the source of thy faith ; " ^ 
and, " I am come into my garden, my sister, my 
spouse." ^ We see that one person is every- 
where set forward, because also the spouse is 
one. But the synagogue of heretics is not one 
with us, because the spouse is not an adulteress 
and a harlot. Whence also she cannot bear 
children of God ; unless, as appears to Stephen, 
heresy indeed brings them forth and exposes 
them, while the Church takes them up when ex- 
posed, and nourishes those for her own whom 
she has not born, although she cannot be the 
mother of strange children. And therefore Christ 
our Lord, setting forth that His spouse is one, 
and declaring the sacrament of His unity, says, 
" He that is not with me is against me, and he 
that gathereth not with me scattereth." 5 For if 
Christ is with us, but the heretics are not with us, 
certainly the heretics are in opposition to Christ ; 
and if we gather with Christ, but the heretics do 
not gather with us, doubtless they scatter. 

15. But neither must we pass over what has 
been necessarily remarked by you, that the 
Church, according to the Song of Songs, is a 
garden enclosed, and a fountain sealed, a para- 
dise with the fruit of apples.^ They who have 
never entered into this garden, and have not 
seen the paradise planted by God the Creator, 
how shall they be able to afford to another the 
living water of the saving lava from the foun- 
tain which is enclosed within, and sealed with a 
divine seal ? And as the ark of Noah was noth- 
ing else than the sacrament of the Church of 
Christ, which then, when all without were perish- 
ing, kept those only safe who were within the 
ark, we are manifestly instructed to look to the 
unity of the Church. Even as also the Apostle 
Peter laid down, saying, " Thus also shall bap- 
tism in like manner make you safe ; " ^ showing 
that as they who were not in the ark with Noah 
not only were not purged and saved by water, 
but at once perished in that deluge ; so now also, 
whoever are not in the Church with Christ will 
perish outside, unless they are converted by peni- 
tence to the only and saving lava of the Church. 

1 6. But what is the greatness of his error, 
and what the depth of his blindness, who says 
that remission of sins can be granted in the 
synagogues of heretics, and does not abide on 

• 2 Cor. xi. 2. 

2 Ps. xlv. 11. 

3 Cant. iv. 8. 

* Cant. V. I. 

s Luke xi. 23. 
' Cant. iv. 12, 
7 1 Pet. iiL 21. 

la- 

the foundation of the one Church which was 
once based by Christ upon the rock, may be 
perceived from this, that Christ said to Peter 
alone, " Whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth 
shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou 
shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven."** 
And again, in the Gospel, when Christ breathed 
on the apostles alone, saying, " Receive ye the 
Holy Ghost : whose soever sins ye remit they 
are remitted unto them, and whose soever sins 
ye retain they are retained." 9 Therefore the 
power of remitting sins was given to the apostles,, 
and to the churches which they, sent by Christ, 
established, and to the bishops who succeeded 
to them by vicarious ordination.'" But the ene- 
mies of the one Catholic Church in which we 
are, and the adversaries of us who have suc- 
ceeded the apostles, asserting for themselves, in 
opposition to us, unlawful priesthoods, and set- 
ting up profane altars, what else are they than 
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, profane with a like 
wickedness, and about to suffer the same punish- 
ments which they did, as well as those who agree 
with them, just as their partners and abettors 
perished with a like death to theirs? 

17. And in this respect I am justly indignant 
at this so open and manifest folly of Stephen, 
that he who so boasts of the place of his epis- 
copate, and contends that he holds the succes- 
sion from Peter," on whom the foundations of 
the Church were laid, should introduce many 
other rocks and establish new buildings of many 
churches ; maintaining that there is baptism in 
them by his authority. For they who are bap- 
tized, doubtless, fill up the number of the Church. 
But he who approves their baptism maintains, 
of those baptized, that the Church is also with 
them. Nor does he understand that the truth 
of the Christian Rock is overshadowed, and in 
some measure abolished, by him when he thus 
betrays and deserts unity.'- The apostle ac- 
knowledges that the Jews, although blinded by 
ignorance, and bound by the grossest wicked- 
ness, have yet a zeal for God. Stephen, who 
announces that he holds by succession the throne 
of Peter, is stirred with no zeal against heretics, 
when he concedes to them, not a moderate, but 
the very greatest power of grace : so far as to 
say and assert that, by the sacrament of bap- 
tism, the filth of the old man is washed away 
by them, that they pardon the former mortal 

8 Matt. xvi. 19. 

9 John XX. 22, 23. [The two texts here quoted lie at the base of 
Cyprian's own theory: (i) to Peter aione this gift to signify its siii- 
glou'ss, (2) then the same to all the apostles alone to signify their 
common .ind u>idh<ided partucrship in the use of this gift. Note 
the two nlones and one therefore. And see Treatise I. i>!/rii.\ 

'° [Cyprian's theory is thus professed by the Orient.] 

" [This place and succession are conceded in the argument: but 

Stephen himself does not appear to have claimed to be the Rock or 

to exercise the authority of Peter. Vol. iii. p. 266 ] 

'- [.Stephen .ibolishes the Rock, and " deserts unity: " here, then, 

i( evidence that he was not the one, nor the criterion of the other.] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

195 

sins, that they make sons of God by heavenly 
regeneration, and renew to eternal life by the 
sanctification of the divine laver. He who con- 
cedes and gives up to heretics in this way the 
great and heavenly gifts of the Church, what 
else does he do but communicate with them for 
whom he maintains and claims so much grace ? 
And now he hesitates in vain to consent to 
them, and to be a partaker with them in other 
matters also, to meet together with them, and 
equally with them to mingle their prayers, and 
appoint a common altar and sacrifice. 

1 8. But, says he, "the name of Christ is of 
great advantage to faith and the sanctification 
of baptism ; so that whosoever is anywhere so- 
ever baptized in the name of Christ, immediately 
obtains the grace of Christ : " although this posi- 
tion may be briefly met and answered, that if 
baptism without in the name of Christ availed 
for the cleansing of man ; in the name of the 
same Christ, the imposition of hands might 
avail also for the reception of the Holy Spirit ; 
and the other things also which are done among 
heretics will begin to seem just and lawful when 
they are done in the name of Christ ; as you 
have maintained in your letter that the name of 
Christ could be of no avail except in the Church 
alone, to which alone Christ has conceded the 
power of heavenly grace. 

19. But with respect to the refutation of cus- 
tom which they seem to oppose to the truth, 
who is so foolish as to prefer custom to truth, 
or when he sees the light, not to forsake the 
darkness? — unless most ancient custom in any 
respect avail the Jews, upon the advent of Christ, 
that is, the Truth, in remaining in their old usage, 
and forsaking the new way of truth. And this 
indeed you Africans are able to say against 
Stephen, that when you knew the truth you for- 
sook the error of custom. But we join custom 
to truth, and to the Romans' custom we oppose 
custom, but the custom of truth ; holding from 
the beginning that which was delivered by 
Christ and the apostles.' Nor do we remember 
that this at any time began among us, since it 
has always been observed here, that we knew 
none but one Church of God, and accounted 
no baptism holy except that of the holy Church. 
Certainly, since some doubted about the bap- 
tism of those who, although they receive the 
new prophets,^ yet appear to recognise the same 
Father and Son with us ; very many of us meet- 
ing together in Iconium very carefully examined 
the matter, and we decided that every baptism 
was .altogether to be rejected which is arranged 
for without the Church,^ 

' [The Roman custom seems to have been a heal tradition, 
which more getieral custom is opposed. See p. 375, sttpra.] 
^ [i.e., Montanists.] Or, " as we do the prophets." 
3 [See sec. 7, ja/ra.] 

to 

20. But to what they allege and say on 
behalf of the heretics, that the apostle said, 
" Whether in pretence or in truth, Christ is 
preached," •♦ it is idle for us to reply ; when it 
is manifest that the apostle, in his epistle where- 
in he said this, made mention neither of heretics 
nor of baptism of heretics, but spoke of brethren 
only, whether as perfidiously speaking in agree- 
ment with himself, or as persevering in sincere 
faith ; nor is it needful to discuss this in a long 
argument, but it is sufficient to read the epistle 
itself, and to gather from the apostle himself 
what the apostle said. 

2 1 . What then, say they, will become of those 
who, coming from the heretics, have been re- 
ceived without the baptism of the Church ? If 
they have departed this life, they are reckoned 
in the number of those who have been catechu- 
mens indeed among us, but have died before 
they were baptized, — no trifling s advantage of 
truth and faith, to which they had attained by 
forsaking error, although, being prevented by 
death, they had not gained the consummation 
of grace.^ But they who still abide in life should 
be baptized with the baptism of the Church, that 
they may obtain remission of sins, lest by the 
presumption of others they remain in their old 
error, and die without the completion of grace. 
But what a crime is theirs on the one hand who 
receive, or on the other, theirs who are received, 
that their foulness not being washed away by the 
laver of the Church, nor their sins put away, 
communion being rashly seized, they touch the 
body and blood of the Lord, although it is 
written, " Whosoever shall eat the bread or drink 
the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty 
of the body and blood of the Lord ! " ^ 

22. We have judged, that those also whom 
they, who had formerly been bishops in the 
Catholic Church, and afterwards had assumed to 
themselves the power of clerical ordination, had 
baptized, are to be regarded as not baptized. 
And this is observed among us, that whosoever 
dipped by them come to us are baptized among 
us as strangers and having obtained nothing, with 
the only and true baptism of the Catholic Church, 
and obtain the regeneration of the laver of life. 
And yet there is a great difference between him 
who unwillingly and constrained by the necessity 
of persecution has given way, and him who with 
a profane will boldly rebels against the Church, 
or with impious voice blasphemes against the 
Father and God of Christ and the Creator of the 
whole world. And Stephen is not ashamed to 
assert and to say that remission of sins can be 

< Phil. i. 18. 

s Or, " they not only speak of, (but have)," is a proposed read- 
ing of this obscure passage, " fie/i /nodo dicitnt." 

6 [These, as the schoolmen teach, do virtually receive the sacra* 
ment, though in veto ianium.] 

' I Cor. xi. 27. 

196 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

granted by those who are themseh'es set fast in 
all kinds of sins, as if in the house of death there 
could be the laver of salvation. 

23. What, then, is to be made of what is writ- 
ten, "Abstain from strange water, and drink not ' 
from a strange fountain," ' if, leaving the sealed | 
fountain of the Church, you take up strange 
water for your own, and pollute the Church with 
unhallowed fountains ? For when you commu- 
nicate with the baptism of heretics, what else do 
you do than drink from their slough and mud ; 
and while you yourself are purged with the 
Church's sanctification, you become befouled 
with the contact of the filth of others ? And do 
you not fear the judgment of God when you are 
giving testimony to heretics in opposition to the 
Church, although it is written, " A false witness 
shall not be unpunished?"^ But indeed you 
are worse than all heretics. For when many, as 
soon as their error is known, come over to you 
from them that they may receive the true light 
of the Church, you assist the errors of those who 
come, and, obscuring the light of ecclesiastical 
truth, you heap up the darkness of the heretical 
night ; and although they confess that they are 
in sins, and have no grace, and therefore come 
to the Church, you take away from them remis- 
sion of sins, which is given in baptism, by saying 
that they are already baptized and have obtained 
the grace of the Church outside the Church, and 
you do not perceive that their souls will be re- 
quired at your hands when the day of judgment 
shall come, for having denied to the thirstuig the 
drink of the Church, and having been the oc- 
casion of death to those that were desirious of 
living. And, after all this, you are indignant ! 

24. Consider with what want of judgment you 
dare to blame those who strive for the truth 
against falsehood. For who ought more justly 
to be indignant against the other? — whether he 
who supports God's enemies, or he who, in op- 
])osiUon to him who supports God's enemies, 
unites with us on behalf of the truth of the 
('hurch? — except that it is plain that the igno- 
rant are also excited and angry, because by the 
want of counsel and discourse they are easily 
turned to wrath ; so that of none more than of 
you does divine Scripture say, " A wrathful man 
stirreth up strifes, and a furious man heapeth up 
sins." 5 For what strifes and dissensions have 
you stirred up throughout tiie churches of the 
whole world ! Moreover, how great sin have 
you heaped up for yourself, when you cut your- 
self off from so many flocks ! For it is yourself 
tnat you have cut off. Do not deceive yourself, 
since he is really the schismatic who has made 
himself an apostate from the communion of ec- 

> Prov. ix. 19 (LXX.). 

2 Prov. xix. 5. [Note the charge of schism that follows.] 

3 Prov. xxix. 22. 

clesiastical unity.'* For while you think that ali 
may be excommunicated by you, you have ex- 
communicated yourself alone from all ; and not 
even the precepts of an apostle have been able 
to mould you to the rule of truth and peace, al- 
though he warned, and said, " I therefore, the 
prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk 
worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, 
with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffer- 
ing, forbearing one another in love ; endeavour- 
ing to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond 
of peace. There is one body and one Spirit, 
even as ye are called in one hope of your calling ; 
one Lord, one faith, one baptism ; one God and 
Father of all, who is above all, and through all, 
and in us all." 5 

25. How carefully has Stephen fulfilled these 
salutary commands and warnings of the apostle, 
keeping in the first place lowliness of mind and 
meekness ! For what is more lowly or meek 
than to have disagreed with so many bishops 
throughout the whole world, breaking peace with 
each one of them in various kinds of discord : '' 
at one time with the eastern churches, as we are 
sure you know ; at another time with you who 
are in the south, from whom he received bishops 
as messengers sufficiently patiently and meekly 
not to receive them even to the speech of an 
ordinary conference ; and even more, so mindful 
of love and charity as to command the entire 
fraternity, that no one should receive them into 
his house, so that not only peace and commun- 
ion, but also a shelter and entertainment, were 
denied to them when they came ! This is to 
have kept the unity of the Spirit in the bond of 
peace, to cut himself off from the unity of love,^ 
and to make himself a stranger in all respects 
from his brethren, and to rebel against the sacra- 
ment and the faith with the madness of contuma- 
cious discord ! With such a man can there be 
one Spirit and one body, in whom perchance 
there is not even one mind, so slippery, and 
shifting, and uncertain is it? 

26. But as far as he is concerned, let us leave 
him ; ^ let us rather deal with that concerning 
which there is the greatest question. They who 
contend that persons baptized among the heretics 
ought to be received as if they had obtained the 
grace of lawful baptism, say that baptism is one 
and the same to them and to us, and differs in 
no respect. But what says the Apostle Paul? 
" One Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God." ^ 
If the baptism of heretics be one and the same 

■» [This, by the structure of the argument, is supposed to be taid to 
Stephen.] 

5 Eph. iv. I, 6. 

6 [By Canon XIX. of Nicxa the Paulianists were compelled to 
observe the Carthaginian discipline, which was a Catholic decision, 
so far, in Cyprian's favour. His position was not condemned ] 

^ (These passages arc noted here, because they all must be bom» 
in mind when we come to the Treatise ati UnityT^ 
' Eph. iv. 5, 6. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

39: 

with ours, without doubt their faith also is one ; 
but if our faith is one, assuredly also we have 
one Lord : if there is one Lord, it follows that 
we say that He is one.' But if this unity which 
cannot be separated and divided at all, is itself 
also among heretics, why do we contend any 
more ? Why do we call them heretics and not 
Christians? Moreover, since we and heretics 
have not one God, nor one Lord, nor one 
Church, nor one faith, nor even one Spirit, nor 
one body, it is manifest that neither can baptism 
l)e common to us with, heretics, since between us 
there is nothing at all in common. And yet Ste- 
phen is not ashamed to afford patronage to such 
in opposition to the Church, and for the sake of 
maintaining heretics to divide the brotherhood ; 
and in addition, to call Cyprian " a false Christ, 
and a false apostle, and a deceitful worker."^ 
And he, conscious that all these characters are 
in himself, has been in advance of you, by falsely 
objecting to another those things which he him- 
self ought deservedly to hear. We all bid you, 
for all our sakes, with all the bishops who are in 
Africa, and all the clergy, and all the brother- 
hood, farewell ; that, constantly of one mind, 
and thinking the same thing, we may find you 
united with us even though afar off.^ 

EPISTLE LXXV.4 

TO MAGNUS, ON BAPTIZING THE NOVATIANS, 
AND THOSE WHO OBTAIN GRACE ON A 
SICK-BED. 

ARGUMENT. — THE FORMER PART OF THIS LET- 
TER IS OF THE SAME TENOR WITH THOSE THAT 
PRECEDE, EXCEPT THAT HE INCULCATES CON- 
CERNING THE NOVATIANS WHAT HE HAD IN 
SUBSTANCE SAID CONCERNING ALL HERETICS ; 
MOREOVER, INSINUATING BY THE WAV THAT THE 
LEGITIMATE SUCCESSION OF CORNELIUS AT ROME 
IS KNOWN, AS THE CHURCH MAY BE KNOWN. 
IN THE SECOND PART (WHICH HITHERTO, AS 
THE TITLE SUFFICIENTLY INDICATES, HAS BEEN 
WRONGLY PUBLISHED AS A SEPARATE LETTER) 
HE TEACHES THAT THAT IS A TRUE BAPTISxM 
WHEREIN ONE IS BAPTIZED BY SPRINKLING ON 
A SICK-BED, AS WELL AS BY IMMERSION IN THE 
CHURCH. 

I . Cyprian to Magnus his son, greeting. With 
your usual religious diligence, you have consulted 
my poor intelligence, dearest son, as to whether, 
among other heretics, they also who come from 
Novatian ought, after his profane washing, to be 
baptized, and sanctified in the Catholic Church, 
with the lawful, and true, and only baptism of 

' Otherwise " unity." .Some commentators omit this clause. 

- [" Pseudo-Christum, pseudo-apostolum, et dolosum operarium." 
Compare Cyprian's meekness (p. 3S6) with this.] 

3 [This letter may be too much like Stephen's, in a spirit not so 
meek as is becoming; but it is not less conclusive as a testimony.] 

*• Oxford ed. : Ep. Ixix. a.d. 255. 

the Church. Respecting which matter, as much 
as the capacity of my faith and the sanctity and 
truth of the divine Scriptures suggest, I answer, 
that no heretics and schismatics at all have any 
power or right. For which reason Novatian 
neither ought to be nor can be expected, inas- 
much as he also is without the Church and act- 
ing in opposition to the peace and love of Christ, 
from being counted among adversaries and anti- 
christs. For our Lord Jesus Christ, when He 
testified in His Gospel that those who were not 
with Him were His adversaries, did not point 
out any species of heresy, but showed that all 
whatsoever who were not with Him, and who, 
not gathering with Him, were scattering His 
flock, were His adversaries ; saying, " He that 
is not with me is against me, and he that gather- 
eth not with me scattereth." 5 Moreover, the 
blessed Apostle John himself distinguished no 
heresy or schism, neither did he set down any 
as specially separated ; but he called all who 
had gone out from the Church, and who acted 
in opposition to the Church, antichrists, saying, 
" Ye have heard that Antichrist cometh, and 
even now are come many antichrists ; wherefore 
we know that this is the last time. They went 
out from us, but they were not of us ; for if they 
had been of us, they would have continued with 
us." ^ Whence it appears, that all are adversa-! 
ries of the Lord and antichrists, who are known i 
to have departed from charity and from the unity 
of the Catholic Church. In addition, moreover, 
the Lord establishes it in His Gospel, and says, 
" But if he neglect to hear the Church, let him 
be unto thee as a heathen man and a publican." 7 
Now if they who despise the Church are counted 
heathens and publicans, much more certainly is 
it necessary that rebels and enemies, who forge 
false altars, and lawless priesthoods, and sacrile- 
gious sacrifices, and corrupted names, should be 
counted among heathens and publicans ; since 
they who sin less, and are only despisers of the 
Church, are by the Lord's sentence judged to 
be heathens and publicans. 

2. But that the Church is one, the Holy Spirit 
declares in the Song of Songs, saying, in the 
person of Christ, " My dove, my undefiled, is 
one ; she is the only one of her mother, she is 
the choice one of her that bare her." ■'^ Con- 
cerning which also He says again, " A garden 
enclosed is ray sister, my spouse ; a spring sealed 
up, a well of living water." 9 But if the spouse 
of Christ, which is the Church, is a garden en- 
closed ; a thing that is closed up cannot lie open 
to strangers and profane persons. And if it is 

5 Luke xi. 23. [Bacon wished to see this reconciled with that 
other text Luke ix. 50.] 
^ I John ii. 18, 19. 
7 Matt, xviii. 17. 
^ Cant. vi. 9. 
9 Cant. iv. 12. 

198 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

a fountain sealed, he who, being placed without, 
has no access to the spring, can neither drink 
thence nor be sealed. And the well also of 
living water, if it is one and the same within, he 
who is placed without cannot be quickened and 
sanctified from that water of which it is only 
granted to those who are within to make any 
use, or to drink. Peter also, showing this, set 
forth that the Church is one, and that only they 
who are in the Church can be baptized ; and 
said, " In the ark of Noah, few, that is, eight 
souls, were saved by water ; the like figure where- 
unto even baptism shall save you ; " ' proving 
and attesting that the one ark of Noah was a 
type of the one Church. If, then, in that bap- 
tism of the world thus expiated and purified, he 
who was not in the ark of Noah could be saved 
by water, he who is not in the Church to which 
alone baptism is granted, can also now be quick- 
ened by baptism. Moreover, too, the Apostle 
Paul, more openly and clearly still manifesting 
this same thing, writes to the Ephesians, and 
says, " Christ loved the Church, and gave Him- 
self for it, that He might sanctify and cleanse it 
with the washing of water." ^ But if the Church 
is one which is loved by Christ, and is alone 
cleansed by His washing, how can he who is 
not in the Church be either loved by Christ, or 
washed and cleansed by His washing? 

3. Wherefore, since the Church alone has the 
living water, and the power of baptizing and 
cleansing man, he who says that any one can be 
baptized and sanctified by Novatian must first 
show and teach that Novatian is in the Church, 
or presides over the Church. For the Church is 
one, and as she is one, cannot be both within 
and without. For if she is with Novatian, she 
was not with Cornelius.^ But if she was with 
Cornelius, who succeeded the bishop Fabian by 
lawful ordination, and whom, beside the honour 
of the priesthood, the Lord glorified also with 
martyrdom, Novatian is not in the Church ; nor 
can he be reckoned as a bishop, who, succeed- 
ing to no one, and despising the evangelical and 
apostolic tradition, sprang from himself For he 
who has not been ordained in the Church can 
neither have nor hold to the Church in any way. 

4. For the faith of the sacred Scripture sets 
forth that the Church is not without, nor can be 
separated nor divided against itself, but main- 
tains the unity of an inseparable and undi\ided 
house ; since it is written of the sacrament of 
the passover, and of the lamb, which Lamb des- 
ignated Christ : " In one house shall it be eaten : 
ye shall not carry forth the flesh abroad out of 
the house." ■♦ Which also we see expressed con- 

' I Pet. iii. 20, 21. 
''■ Eph. T. 25, 26. 

' [A dilemma which should be borne in mind in studying the sub- 
sequent history of the Roman See and its rival popes.] 
4 Ex. xii. 46. 

cerning Rahab, who herself also bore a tj-pe of 
the Church, who received the command which 
said, "Thou shalt bring thy father, and thy 
mother, and thy brethren, and all tfliy father's 
household unto thee into thine house ; and who- 
soever shall go out of the doors of thine house 
into the street, his blood shall be upon him." 5 
In which mystery is declared, that they who 
will live, and escape from the destruction of 
the world, must be gathered together into one 
house alone, that is, into the Church ; but who- 
soever of those thus collected together shall go 
out abroad, that is, if any one, although he may 
have obtained grace in the Church, shall depart 
and go out of the Church, that his blood shall 
be upon him ; that is, that he himself must 
charge it upon himself that he perishes ; which 
the Apostle Paul explains, teaching and enjoin- 
ing that a heretic must be avoided, as perverse, 
and a sinner, and as condemned of himself. 
For that man will be guilty of his own ruin, 
who, not being cast out by the bishop, but of 
his own accord deserting from the Church is by 
heretical presumption condemned of himself. 

5. And therefore the Lord, suggesting to us a 
unity that comes from divine authority, lays it 
down, saying, '' I and my Father are one."^ To 
which unity reducing His Church, He says again, 
" And there shall be one flock,'' and one shep- 
herd." ^ But if the flock is one, how can he be 
numbered among the flock who is not in the 
number of the flock? Or how can he be es- 
teemed a pastor, who, — while the true shep- 
herd remains and presides over the Church of 
God by successive ordination, — succeeding to 
no one, and beginning from himself, l)ecomes a 
stranger and a profane person, an enemy of the 
Lord's peace and of the divine unity, not dwell- 
ing in the house of God, that is, in the Church 
of God, in which none dwell except they are of 
one heart and one mind, since the Holy Spirit 
speaks in the Psalms, and says, " It is God who 
maketh men to dwell of one mind in a house." '' 

6. Besides even the Lord's sacrifices them- 
selves declare that Christian unanimity is linked 
together with itself by a firm and inseparable 
charity. For when the Lord calls bread, which 
is combined by the union of many grains. His 
body. He indicates our people whom He bore 
as being united ; and when He calls the wine, 
which is pressed from many grapes and clusters 
and collected together, His blood, He also sig- 
nifies our flock linked together by the mingling 
of a united multitude.'" If Novatian is united to 
this bread of the Lord, if he also is mingled 

5 Josh. ii. 18, 19. 
'' John .\. 30. 
" " Grex." 
' John X, 16. 

9 I's. Ixviii. 6. [Vulgate and Anglican Psalter.] 
'° [See p. 362, supra, and Augus., tom. v. p. 1246, ed. Migne.] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

399 

with this cup of Christ, he may also seem to be 
able to have the grace of the one baptism of the 
Church, if it be manifest that he holds the unity 
of the Church. In fine, how inseparable is the 
sacrament of unity, and how hopeless are they, 
and what excessive ruin they earn for themselves 
from the indignation of God, who make a schism, 
and, forsaking their bishop," appoint another false 
bishop for themselves without, — Holy Scripture 
declares in the books of Kings ; where ten tribes 
were divided from the tribe of Judah and Ben- 
jamin, and, forsaking their king, appointed for 
themselves another one without. It savs, " And 
the Lord was very angry with all the seed of 
Israel, and removed them away, and delivered 
them into the hand of spoilers, until He had 
cast them out of His sight ; for Israel was scat- 
tered from the house of David, and they made 
themselves a king, Jeroboam the son of Nebat." ^ 
It says that the Lord was very angry, and gave 
them up to perdition, because they were scat- 
tered from unity, and had made another king 
for themselves. And so great was the indigna- 
tion of the Lord against those who had made 
the schism, that even when the man of God 
was sent to Jeroboam, to charge upon him his 
sins, and predict the future vengeance, he was 
forbidden to eat bread or to drink water with 
them. And when he did not observe this, and 
took meat against the command cf God, he was 
immediately smitten by the majesty of the divine 
judgment, so that returning thence he was slain 
•on the way by the jaws of a lion which attacked 
him. And dares any one to say that the saving 
water of baptism and heavenly grace can be in 
common with schismatics, with whom neither 
earthly food nor worldly drink ought to be in 
common? Moreover, the Lord satisfies us in 
His Gospel, and shows forth a still greater light 
of intelligence, that the same persons who had 
then divided themselves from the tribe of Judah 
and Benjamin, and forsaking Jerusalem had se- 
ceded to Samaria, should be reckon among pro- 
fane persons and Gentiles. For when first He 
sent His disciples on the ministry of salvation, 
He bade them, saying, " Go not into the way 
of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samari- 
tans enter ye not." ^ Sending first to the Jews, 
He commands the Gentiles as yet to be passed 
over ; but by adding that even the city of the 
Samaritans was to be omitted, where there were 
schismatics. He shows that schismatics were to 
be put on the same level as Gentiles. 

7. But if any one objects, by way of saying 
that Novatian holds the same law which the 

' [This hinges unity for the individual, according to Cyprian; 
the individual must be in communion with his lawful bishop, and the 
bishop with the universal episcopate. It never enters his head that 
any one See is the test of unity. Vol. i. 415 and 460.] 

- 2 Kings xvii. 20, 31. 

3 Matt. X. 5. 

Catholic Church holds, baptizes with the same 
symbol with which we baptize, knows the same 
God and Father, the same Christ the Son, the 
same Holy Spirit, and that for this reason he 
may claim the power of baptizing, namely, that 
he seems not to differ from us in the baptismal 
interrogatory ; let any one that thinks that this 
may be objected, know first of all, that there is 
not one law of the Creed, nor the same interroga- 
tory conmion to us and to schismatics. For 
when they say, " Dost thou believe the remission 
of sins and life eternal through the holy Church ?" 
they lie in their interrogatory, since they have not 
the Church. Then, besides, with their own voice 
they themselves confess that remission of sins 
cannot be given except by the holy Church ; and 
not having this, they show that sins cannot be 
remitted among them. 

8. But that they are said to have the same 
God the Father as we, to know the same Christ 
the Son, the same Holy Spirit, can be of no avail 
to such as these. For even Korah, Dathan, and 
Abiram knew the same God as did the priest 
Aaron and Moses. Living under the same law 
and religion, they invoke the one and true God, 
who was to be invoked and worshipped ; yet, 
because they transgressed the ministry of their 
office in opposition to Aaron the priest, who had 
received the legitimate priesthood by the conde- 
scension of God and the ordination of the Lord, 
and claimed to themselves the power of sacrifi- 
cing, divinely stricken, they immediately suffered 
punishment for their unlawful endeavours ; and 
sacrifices offered irreligiously and lawlessly, con- 
trary to the right of divine appointment, could 
not be accepted, nor profit them. Even those 
very censers in which incense liad been lawlessly 
offered, lest they should any more be used by the 
priests, but that they might rather exhibit a me- 
morial of the divine vengeance and indignation 
for the correction of their successors, being by 
the command of the Lord melted and purged 
by fire, were beaten out into flexible plates, and 
fastened to the altars, according to what the 
Holy Scripture says, "to be," it says, '"a memo- 
rial to the children of Israel, that no stranger 
which is not of the seed of Aaron come near to 
offer incense before the Lord, that he be not as 
Korah.""* And yet those men had not made a 
schism, nor had gone out abroad, and in opposi 
tion to God's priests rebelled shamelessly and 
with hostility ; but this these men are now doing 
who divide the Church, and, as rebels against 
the peace and unity of Christ, attempt to estab- 
lish a throne for themselves, and to assume the 
primacy,5 and to claim the right of baptizing and 

* Num. xvii. 5 [and Jude 11.] 

5 [What would Cyprian have said to Honiface ITI., A u. 607, an 1 
to Nicholas, .-v. 13. 858? The former attempted n .^et up a universe 
throne: the latter founded the papacy on the forged Decretals.] 

400 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

of offering. How can they complete what they 
do, or obtain anything by lawless endeavours 
from God, seeing that they are endeavouring 
against God what is not lawful to them ? Where- 
fore they who patronize Novatian or other schis- 
matics of that kind, contend in vain that any one 
can be baptized and sanctified with a saving bap- 
tism among them, when it is plain that he who 
baptizes has not the power of baptizing. 

9. And, moreover, that it may be better un- 
derstood what is the divine judgment against 
audacity of the like kind, we find that in such 
wickedness, not only the leaders and originators, 
but also the partakers, are destined to punish- 
ment, unless they have separated themselves 
from the communion of the wicked .; as the Lord 
by Moses commands, and says, " Separate your- 
selves from the tents of these most hardened 
men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be con- 
sumed in their sins." ' And what the Lord had 
threatened by Moses He fulfilled, that whosoever 
had not separated himself from Korah, and Da- 
than, and Abiram, immediately suffered punish- 
ment for his impious communion. By which 
example is shown and proved, that all will be 
liable to guilt as well as its punishment, who with 
irreligious boldness mingle themselves with schis- 
matics in opposition to prelates and priests ; even 
as also by the prophet Osea the Holy Spirit wit- 
nesses, and says, " Their sacrifices shall be unto 
them as the bread of mourning ; all that eat 
thereof shall be polluted ; " - teaching, doubtless, 
and showing that all are absolutely joined with 
the leaders in i)unishment, who have been con- 
taminated by their crime. 

10. What, then, can be their deservings in the 
sight of God, on whom punishments are divinely 
denounced? or how can such persons justify and 
sanctify the baptized, who, being enemies of the 
priests, strive to usurp things foreign and lawless, 
and by no right conceded to them ? And yet we 
do not wonder that, in accordance with their 
wickedness, they do contend for them. For it 
is necessary that each one of them should main- 
tain what they do ; nor when vantjuishcd will 
they easily yield, although they know that what 
they do is not lawfiil. That is to be wondered 
at, yea, rather to be indignant and aggrieved at, 
that Christians should support antichrists ; and 
that ])revaricators of the faith, and betrayers of 
the Church, should stand within in the Church 
itself.^ ,\ik1 these, although otherwise obstinate 
and unteachable, yet still at least confess this — 
that all, whether heretics or schismatics, are with- 
out the Holy Ghost, and therefore can indeed 
l)a])tize, but cannot confer the Holy Spirit ; and 
at this very point they are held fast by us, inas- 

' Num. xvi. 26. 

^ Hos. ix. 4. 

3 " Within the very barriers of the Church; " v. l. 

much as we show that those who have not the 
Holy Ghost are not able to baptize at all. 

11. For since in baptism every one has his 
own sins remitted, the Lord proves and declares 
in His Gospel that sins can only be put away by 
those who have the Holy Spirit. For after His 
resurrection, sending forth His disciples. He 
speaks to them, and says, " As the Father hath 
sent me, even so send I you. And when He had 
said this. He breathed on them, and said to them. 
Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose soever sins, 
ye remit, they shall be remitted unto them ; and 
whose soever sins ye retain, they shall be re- 
tained." t In which place He shows, that he 
alone can baptize and give remission of sins who 
has the Holy Spirit. Moreover, John, who was to 
baptize Christ our Lord Himself, previously re- 
ceived the Holy Ghost while he was yet in his 
mother's womb, that it might be certain and 
manifest that none can baptize save those who 
have the Holy Spirit. Therefore those who 
patronize heretics or schismatics must answer us 
whether they have or have not the Holy Ghost. 
If they have, why are hands imposed on those 
who are baptized among them when they come 
to us, that they may receive the Holy Ghost, 
since He must surely have been received there, 
where if He was He could be given? But if 
heretics and schismatics baptized without have 
not the Holy Spirit, and therefore hands are im- 
posed on them among us, that he7-e may be re- 
ceived what there neither is nor can be given ; it 
is plain, also, that remission of sins cannot be 
given by those who, it is certain, have not the 
Holy Spirit. And therefore, in order that, ac- 
cording to the divine arrangement and the evan- 
gelical truth, they may be able to obtain remission 
of sins, and to be sanctified, and to become 
temples of God, they must all absolutely be baj)- 
tized with the baptism of the Church who come 
from adversaries and antichrists to the Church 
of Christ. 

12. You have asked also, dearest son, what I 
thought of those who obtain God's grace in 
sickness and weakness, whether they are to be 
accounted legitimate Christians, for that they are 
not to be washed, but sprinkled, with the saving 
water. In this point, my diffidence and modesty 
prejudges none, so as to ])revent any from feeling 
what he thinks right, and from doing what he 
feels to be right. ^ As far as my poor under- 
standing conceives it, I think that the divine 
benefits can in no res])ect be mutilated and 
weakened ; nor can anything less occur in that 
case, where, with hill antl entire faith both of 
the giver and receiver, is accepted what is drawn 

^ John XX. 21-23. 

5 [Here comes mto view the (juestion of chnic baptism and of 
the exceptional mode of sprinkling or affusion. On which let the ex» 
treme modesty of our author be a check to me. Elucidation XX. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

40. 

from the divine gifts. For in the sacrament of 
•■alvation the contagion of sins is not in such 
wise washed away, as the filth of the skin and of 
the body is washed away in the carnal and ordi- 
nary washing, as that there should be need of 
saltpetre and other appliances also, and a bath 
and a basin wherewith this vile body must be 
washed and purified. Otherwise is the breast 
of the believer washed ; otherwise is the mind 
of man purified by the merit of faith. In the 
sacraments of salvation, when necessity compels, 
and God bestows His mercy, the divine methods 
confer the whole benefit on believers ; nor ought 
it to trouble any one that sick people seem to 
be sprinkled or affused, when they obtain the 
Lord's grace, when Holy Scripture speaks by the 
mouth of the prophet Ezekiel, and says, " Then 
will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye 
shall be clean : from all your fiithiness and from 
all your idols will I cleanse you. And I will 
give you a new heart, and a new spirit will I put 
within you."' Also in Numbers: "And the 
man that shall be unclean until the evening shall 
be purified on the third day, and on the seventh 
day shall be clean : but if he shall not be puri- 
fied on the third day, on the seventh day he 
shall not be clean. And that soul shall be cut 
off from Israel : because the water of sprinkling 
hath not been sprinkled upon him." ^ And 
again : " And the Lord spake unto Moses, say- 
ing, Take the Levites from among the children 
of Israel, and cleanse them. And thus shalt 
thou do unto them, to cleanse them : thou shalt 
sprinkle them with the water of purification." ^ 
And again : " The water of sprinkling is a purifi- 
cation." ■* Whence it appears that the sprinkling 
also of water prevails equally with the washing 
of salvation ; and that when this is done in the 
Church, where the faith both of receiver and 
giver is sound, all things hold and may be con- 
summated and perfected by the majesty of the 
Lord and by the truth of faith. 

13. But, moreover, in respect of some calling 
those who have obtained the peace of Christ by 
the saving water and by legitimate faith, not 
Christians, but Clinics, I do not find whence 
they take up this name, unless perhaps, having 
read more, and of a more recondite kind, they 
have taken these Clinics from Hippocrates or 
Soranus.5 For I, who know of a Clinic in the 
Gospel, know that to that paralytic and infirm 
man, who lay on his bed during the long course 
of his life, his infirmity presented no obstacle to 

' Ezek. xxxvi. 25, 26. 

2 Num. xix. 8, 12, 13. 

3 Num. viii. 5-7. 
* Num. xix. 9. 

5 The Oxforc" translator has given this name as " Socrates " here, 
but, as it appears, by an oversight only; for the original text has 
" Soranus," who is described as " of Ephesus, under Trajan and 
Adrian, a well-instructed author in methodical medicine," just as the 
translator describes Socrates. [Elncidation XX.] 

his attainment in the fiillest degree of heavenly 
strength. Nor was he only raised from his bed 
by the divine indulgence, but he also took up 
his bed itself with his restored and increased 
strength. And therefore, as far as it is allowed 
me by faith to conceive and to think, this is my 
opinion, that any one should be esteemed a le- 
gitimate Christian, who by the law and right of 
faith shall have obtained the grace of God in 
the Church. Or if any one think that those 
have gained nothing by having only been sprin- 
kled with the saving water, but that they are still 
empty and void, let them not be deceived, so as 
if they escape the evil of their sickness, and get 
well, they should seek to be baptized.^ But if 
they cannot be baptized who have already been 
sanctified by ecclesiastical baptism, why are they 
offended in respect of their faith and the mercy 
of the Lord? Or have they obtained indeed 
the divine favour, but in a shorter and more 
limited measure of the divine gift and of the 
Holy Spirit, so as indeed to be esteemed Chris- 
tians, but yet not to be counted equal with 
others ? 

14. Nay, verily, the Holy Spirit is not given 
by measure, but is poured out altogether on the 
believer. For if the day rises alike to all, and 
if the sun is diffused with like and equal light 
over all, how much more does Christ, who is the 
true sun and the true day, bestow in His Church 
the light of eternal life with the like equality ! 
Of which equality we see the sacrament cele- 
brated in Exodus, when the manna flowed down 
from heaven, and, prefiguring the things to come, 
showed forth the nourishment of the heavenly 
bread and the food of the coming Christ. For 
there, without distinction either of sex or of age, 
an omer was collected equally by each one.'' 
Whence it appeared that the mercy of Christ, 
and the heavenly grace that would subsequently 
follow, was equally divided among all ; without 
difference of sex, without distinction of years, 
without accepting of persons, upon all the peo- 
ple of God the gift of spiritual grace was shed. 
Assuredly the same spiritual grace which is equally 
received in baptism by believers, is subsequently 
either increased or diminished in our conversation 
and conduct ; as in the Gospel the Lord's seed 
is equally sown, but, according to the variety of 
the soil, some is wasted, and some is increased 
into a large variety of plenty, with an exuberant 
fruit of either thirty or sixty or a hundred fold. 
But, once more, when each was called to receive 
a penny, wherefore should what is distributed 
equally by God be diminished by human inter- 
pretation ? 

6 The exact meaning of this sentence is very doubtful. 

7 [We may thmk this fanciful in argument; but this absorption 
of all Scripture, by primitive believers, into the analogy of faith, is nol 
to be despised. See St. Paul's example. Gal. iv. 31. 1 

A02 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

15. But if any one is moved by this, that 
some of those who are baptized in sickness are 
still tempted by unclean spirits, let him know 
that the obstinate wickedness of the devil pre- 
vails even up to the saving water, but that m 
baptism it loses all the poison of his wickedness. 
An instance of this we see in the king Pharaoh, 
who, having struggled long, and delayed in his 
perfidy, could resist and prevail until he came to 
the water ; but when he had come thither, he 
was both conquered and destroyed. And that 
that sea was a sacrament of baptism, the blessed 
Apostle Paul declares, Sitying, " Brethren, I would 
not have you ignorant how that all our fathers 
were under the cloud, and all passed through 
the sea, and were all baptized unto Moses in the 
cloud and in the sea ; " and he added, saying, 
*' Now all these things were our examples." ' 
And this also is done in the present day, in that 
the devil is scourged, and burned, and tortured 
by exorcists, by the human voice, and by divine 
power ; ^ and although he often says that he is 
going out, and will leave the men of God, yet 
in that which he says he deceives, and puts in 
practice what was before done by Pharaoh with 
tne same obstinate and fraudulent deceit. When, 
however, they come to the water of salvation 
and to the sanctification of baptism, we ought 
to know and to trust that there the devil is 
beaten down, and the man, dedicated to God, 
is set free by the divine mercy. For as scorpions 
and serpents, which prevail on the dry ground, 
when cast into water, cannot prevail nor retain 
their venom ; so also the wicked spirits, which 
are called scorpions and serpents, and yet are 
trodden under foot by us, by the power given by 
the Lord, cannot remain any longer in the body 
of a man in whom, baptized and sanctified, the 
Holy Spirit is beginning to dwell. 

16. This, finally, in very fact also we experi- 
ence, that those who are baptized by urgent 
necessity in sickness, and obtain grace, are free 
from the unclean spirit wherewith they were 
previously moved, and live in the Church in 
praise and honour, and day by day make more 
and more advance in the increase of heavenly 
grace by the growth of their faith. And, on the 
other hand, some of those who are baptized in 
health, if subsequently they begin to sin, are 
shaken by the return of the unclean spirit, so 
that it is manifest that the devil is driven out in 
baptism by the faith of the believer, and returns 
if the faith afterwards shall fail. Unless, indeed, 
it seems just to some, that they who, outside the 
Church among adversaries and antichrists, are 
polluted with profane water, should be judged 
to be baptized ; while they who are baptized in 

' ■: Cor. X. 1,2, 6. 

^ [Acts xvi. 16 and xix. 15. We must not overlook such Scrip- 
tures In judging the exorcisms of the primitive Church.] 

the Church are thought to have attained less of 
divine mercy and grace ; and so great considera- 
tion be had for heretics, that they who come 
from heresy are not interrogated whether they 
are washed or sprinkled, whether they be clinics 
or peripatetics ; but among us the sound truth 
of faith is disparaged, and in ecclesiastical bap- 
tism its majesty and sanctity suffer derogation.' 

17. I have replied, dearest son, to your letter, 
so far as my poor ability prevailed ; and I have 
shown, as far as I could, what I think ; pre- 
scribing to no one, so as to prevent any prelate 
from determining what he thinks right, as he 
shall give an account of his own doings to the 
Lord, according to what the blessed Apostle 
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans writes and 
says : " Every one of us shall give account for 
himself: let us not therefore judge one an- 
other." •♦ I bid you, dearest son, ever heartily 
farewell. 

EPISTLE LXXVI.5 

CYPRIAN TO NEMESIANUS AND OTHER MAR- 
TYRS IN THE MINES.'' 

ARGUMENT. HE EXTOLS WITH WONDERFUL COM- 
MENDATIONS THE MARTYRS IN THE MINES, 
OPPOSING, IN A BEAUTIFUL ANTITHESIS, TO THE 
TORTURES OF EACH, THE CONSOLATIONS OF EACH. 

I. Cyprian to Nemesianus, Felix, Lucius, an- 
other Felix, Litteus, Polianus, Victor, Jader. and 
Dativus, his fellow-bishops, also to his fellow- 
presbyters and deacons, and the rest of the 
brethren in the mines, martyrs of God the Father 
Almighty, and of Jesus Christ our Lord, and of 
God our preserver, everlasting greeting. Your 
glory, indeed, would demand, most blessed and 
beloved brethren, that I myself should come to 
see and to embrace you, if the limits of the place 
appointed me did not restrain me, banished as I 
am for th(* sake of the confession of the Name. 
But in what way I can, I bring myself into your 
presence ; and even though it is not permitted 
me to come to you in body and in movement, 
yet in love and in spirit I come expressing my 
mind in my letter, in which mind I joyfully exult 
in those virtues and praises of yours, counting 
myself a partaker with you, although not in 
bodily suffering, yet in community of love. Could 
I be silent and restrain my voice in stillness, 
when I am made aware of so many and such 
glorious things concerning my dearest friends, 
things with which the divine condescension has 
honoured you, so that part of you have already 

3 [Clinics, nevertheless, were treated by canonical law as less fit 
for Holy Orders. See Canon XII., Neo-Cassarea. Thomassin.] 

* Rom. xiv. 12, 13. 

5 Oxford ed.: Ep. Ixxvi. We gather that this was written in 
exile from these words, " If the limits of the place appointed me did 
not restrain me, banished as I am on account of the confession of the 
Name." a.d. 257. 

* [Compare vol. iii. p. 693.] 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

403 

gone before by the consummation of their mar- 
tyrdom to receive from their Lord the crown of 
their deserts ? Part still abide in the dungeons 
of the prison, or in the mines and in chains, ex- 
hibiting by the very delays of their punishments, 
greater examples for the strengthening and arm- 
ing of the brethren, advancing by the tedious- 
ness of their tortures to more ample titles of 
merit, to receive as many payments in heavenly 
rewards, as days are now counted in their pun- 
ishments. I do not marvel, most brave and 
blessed brethren, that these things have happened 
to you in consideration of the desert of your 
religion and your faith ; that the Lord should 
thus have lifted you to the lofty height of glory 
by the honour of His glorification, seeing that 
you have always flourished in His Church, guard- 
ing the tenor of the faith, keeping firmly the 
Lord's commands ; in simplicity, innocence ; in 
•charity, concord ; modesty in humility, diligence 
in administration, watchfulness in helping those 
that suffer, mercy in cherishing the poor, con- 
stancy in defending the truth, judgment in se- 
verity of discipline. And that nothing should 
be wanting to the example of good deeds in you, 
even now, in the confession of your voice and 
the suffering of your body, you provoke the 
minds of your brethren to divine martyrdom, by 
exhibiting yourselves as leaders of virtue, that 
while the flock follows its pastors, and imitates 
what it sees to be done by those set over it, it 
may be crowned with the like merits of obedi- 
ence by the Lord. 

2. But that, being first severely beaten with 
clubs, and ill-used, you have begun by sufferings 
of that kind, the glorious firstlings of your con- 
fession, is not a matter to be execrated by us. 
For a Christian body is not very greatly terrified 
at clubs, seeing all its hope is in the Wood.' 
The servant of Christ acknowledges the sacra- 
ment of his salvation : redeemed by wood to life 
eternal, he is advanced by wood to the crown. 
But what wonder if, as golden and silver vessels, 
you have been committed to the mine that is 
the home of gold and silver, except that now the 
nature of the mines is changed, and the places 
which previously had been accustomed to yield 
gold and silver have begun to receive them? 
Moreover, they have put fetters on your feet, 
and have bound your blessed limbs, and the 
temples of God with disgraceful chains, as if the 
spirit also could be bound with the body, or your 
gold could be stained by the contact of iron. 
To men who are dedicated to God, and attest- 
ing their faith with religious courage, such things 
are ornaments, not chains ; nor do they bind the 
feet of the Christians for infamy, but glorify them 
for a crown. Oh feet blessedly bound, which 

' Suzl. : " of the cross." [Fanciful in logic, but our author may 
be Indulged in his rhetoric. It was suited to the times.] 

are loosed, not by the smith but by the Lord ! 
Oh feet blessedly bound, which are guided to 
paradise in the way of salvation ! Oh feet bound 
for the present time in the world, that they may 
be always free with the Lord ! Oh feet, linger- 
ing for a while among the fetters and cross-bars,^ 
but to run quickly to Christ on a glorious road ! 
Let cruelty, either envious or malignant, hold 
you here in its bonds and chains as long as it 
will, from this earth and from these sufferings you 
shaU speedily come to the kingdom of heaven. 
The body is not cherished in the min^s with 
couch and cushions, but it is cherished with the 
refreshment and solace of Christ. The frame 
wearied with labours lies prostrate on the ground, 
but it is no penalty to lie down with Christ. 
Your limbs unbathed, are foul and disfigured 
with filth and dirt ; but within they are spirit- 
ually cleansed, although without the flesh is 
defiled. There the bread is scarce ; but man 
liveth not by bread alone, but by the word of 
God. Shivering, you want clothing ; but he 
who puts on Christ is both abundantly clothed 
and adorned. The hair of your half-shorn head ^ 
seems repulsive ; but since Christ is the head of 
the man, anything whatever must needs become 
that head which is illustrious on account of 
Christ's name. AU that deformity, detestable 
and foul to Gentiles, with what splendour shall 
it be recompensed ! This temporal and brief 
suffering, how shall it be exchanged for the re- 
ward of a bright and eternal honour, when, ac- 
cording to the word of the blessed apostle, " the 
Lord shall change the body of our humiliation, 
that it may be fashioned hke to the body of His 
brightness ! " "^ 

3. But there cannot be felt any loss of either 
religion or faith, most beloved brethren, in the 
fact that now there is given no opportunity there 
to God's priests for offering and celebrating the 
divine sacrifices ; yea, you celebrate and offer 
a sacrifice to God equally 5 precious and glorious, 
and that will greatly profit you for the retribution 
of heavenly rewards, since the sacred Scripture 
speaks, saying, " The sacrifice of God is a 
broken spirit ; a contrite and humbled heart 
God doth not despise." ^ You offer this sacri- 
fice to God ; you celebrate this sacrifice with- 
out intermission day and night, being made 
victims to God, and exhibiting yourselves as holy 
and unspotted offerings, as the apostle exhorts 
and says, " I beseech you therefore, brethren, 
by the mercies of God, that ye present your 
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto 
God. And be not conformed to this world ; but 

= [i.e., of the 

3 fAs of convi 
■♦ Phil. iii. 21. 

stocks.] 
ict criminals. An honourable tonsure.] 

5 [This is very strong language, and absolutely disproves traik 
substantiation and " the eucharistic God" of Dufresne, Med., iii.l 

6 Ps. li. iS. 

404 

THE EPISTLES OE CYPRIAN. 

be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, 
that ye may prove what is that good, and ac- 
ceptable, and perfect will of God." ' 

4. For this it is which especially pleases God ; 
it is this wherein our works with greater deserts 
are successful in earning God's good-will ; this 
it is which alone the obedience of our faith and 
devotion can render to the Lord for His great 
and saving benefits, as the Holy Spirit de- 
clares and witnesses in the Psalms : " What 
shall I render," says He, " to the Lord for all 
His benefits towards me? I will take the cup 
of salvation, and I will call upon the name of 
the Lord. Precious in the sight of the Lord is 
the death of His saints." ^ Who would not 
gladly and readily receive the cup of salvation ? 
Who would not with joy and gladness desire 
that in which he himself also may render some- 
what unto His Lord ? Who would not bravely 
and unfalteringly receive a death precious in the 
sight of the Lord, to please His eyes, who, look- 
ing down from above upon us who are placed in 
the conflict for His name, approves the willing, 
assists the struggling, crowns the conquering 
with the recompense of patience, goodness, and 
affection, rewarding in us whatever He Himself 
has bestowed, and honouring what He has ac- 
complished ? 

5. For that it is His doing that we conquer, 
and that we attain by the subduing of the ad- 
versary to the palm of the greatest contest, the 
Lord declares and teaches in His Gospel, saying, 
" But when they deliver you up, take no thought 
how or what ye shall speak ; for it shall be 
given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. 
For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of 
your Father which speaketh in you." ^ And 
again : " Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to 
meditate before what ye shall answer ; for I will 
give you a mouth and wisdom, which )our ad- 
versaries shall not be able to resist." •* In which, 
indeed, is both the great confidence of believers, 
and the gravest fault of the faithless, that they 
do not trust Him who promises to give His help 
to those who confess Him, and do not on the 
other hand fear Him who threatens eternal pun- 
ishment to those wlio deny Him. 

6. All which things, most brave and faithful 
soldiers of Christ, you have suggested to your 
brethren, fulfilling in deeds what ye have pre- 
viously taught in words, hereafter to be greatest 
in the kingdom of heaven, as the Lord promises 
and says, " Whosoever shall do and teach so, 
shall be called the greatest in the kingdom of 
heaven." 5 Moreover, a manifold portion of the 
people, following your example, have confessed 

' Rom. xii. i, 2. 
= Ps. cxvi. 12, 13, 15. 
3 Matt. X. 19, 20. 
* Luke xxi. 14, 15. 
s Malt V. 19. 

alike with you, and alike have been crowned, 
associated with you in the bond of the strongest 
charity, and separated from their prelates neither 
by the prison nor by the mines ; in the number 
of whom neither are there wanting virgins in 
whom the hundred-fold are added to the fruit 
of sixty-fold, and whom a double glory has ad- 
vanced to the heavenly crown. In boys also a 
courage greater than their age has surpassed 
their years in the praise of their confession, so 
that every sex and every age should adorn the 
blessed flock of your martyrdom.^' 

7. What now must be the vigour, beloved 
brethren, of your victorious consciousness, what 
the loftiness of your mind, what exultation in 
feeling, what triumph in your breast, that every 
one of you stands near to the promised reward 
of God, are secure from the judgment of God, 
walk in the mines with a body captive indeed, 
but with a heart reigning, that you know Christ 
is present with you, rejoicing in the endurance 
of His servants, who are ascending by His foot- 
steps and in His paths to the eternal kingdoms ! 
You daily expect with joy the saving day of your 
departure ; and already about to withdraw from 
the world, you are hastening to the rewards of 
martyrdom, and to the divine homes, to behold 
after this darkness of the world the purest light, 
and to receive a glory greater than all sufferings 
and conflicts, as the apostle witnesses, and says, 
"The sufiisrings of this present time are not 
worthy to be compared with the glory tliat shall 
be revealed in us." ^ And because now your 
word is more effectual in prayers, and supplica- 
tion is more quick to obtain what is sought for 
in afflictions, seek more eagerly, and ask that 
the divine condescension would consummate the 
confession of all of us ; that from this darkness 
and these snares of the world God would set us 
also free with you, sound and glorious ; that we 
who here are united in the bond of charity and 
peace, and have stood together against the 
wrongs of heretics and the oppressions of the 
heathens, may rejoice together in the heavenly 
kingdom. I bid you, most blessed and most 
beloved brethren, ever farewell in tlie Lord, and 
always and everywhere remember me.'^ 

EPISTLE LXXVIL9 

THE REPLY OF NEME.SI.\NUS, DATIVUS, FELIX,. 
AND VICTOR, TO CVPRL\N. 

ARGUMENT. — THIS F.PISTLE AND THE TWO FOL- 
LOWING CONTAIN NOTHING ELSE THAN REPLIES 
TO THE FOREGOING, INASMUCH AS THEY CON- 

<> [No one can read these obiter dicta of our author without 
assurance that the martyrs were a numerous army, beyond what is 
generally allowed. " A noble army, men and boys" (Heber).] 

7 Rom. viii. 18. 

8 [Sec next letter. I cannot Conceive of any Christian as not 
profoundly touched and edified by th-s eloquent .md scriptural letter 
of a martyr to martyrs in a period of fierj' trial. They truly believed 
what is written, " to die is gain." Phil. 1. 21.] 

9 Oxford cd : Ep. Ixxvii. A.u. 257. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

405 

TAIX THE THANKSGIVING AS WELL FOR THE 
COMFORT CONVEYED BY THE LE'ITER AS FOR 
THE ASSISTANCE SENT THEREWITH. BUT FROM 
THE FACT THAT THREE DISTINCT LEn'ERS ARE 
SENT IN REPLY TO THE" SINGLE ONE OF CYP- 
RLAN'S, WE ARE TO GATHER THAT THE BISHOPS 
WHO WROTE THEM WERE PLACED IN DIFFERENT 
DEPARTMENTS OF THE MINES.' 

1. Nemesianus, Dativus, Felix, and Victor, to 
their brother Cyprian, in the Lord eternal salva- 
tion. You speak, dearly beloved Cyprian, in 
your letters always with deep meaning, as suits 
the condition of the time, by the assiduous read- 
ing of which letters both the wicked are cor- 
rected and men of good faith are confirmed. 
For while you do not cease in your writings to 
lay bare the hidden mysteries, you thus make us 
to grow in faith, and men from the world to 
draw near to belief. For by whatever good 
things you have introduced in your many books, 
unconsciously you have described yourself to us. 
For you are greater than all men in discourse, 
in speech more eloquent, in counsel wiser, in 
patience more simple, in works more abundant, 
in abstinence more holy, in obedience more 
humble, and in good deeds more innocent. 
And you yourself know, beloved, that our eager 
wish was, that we might see you, our teacher 
and our lover, attain to the crown of a great 
confession. 

2. For, in the proceedings before the procon- 
sul, as a good and true teacher you first have 
pronounced that which we your disciples, follow- 
ing you, ought to say before the president. 
And, as a sounding trumpet, you have stirred up 
God's soldiers, furnished with heavenly arms, to 
the close encounter ; and fighting in the first 
rank, you have slain the devil with a spiritual 
sword : you have also ordered the troops of the 
brethren, on the one hand and on the other, with 
your words, so that snares were on all sides laid 
for the enemy, and the severed sinews of the 
very carcase of the public foe were trodden 
under foot.^ Believe us, dearest, that your inno- 
cent spirit is not far from the hundred-fold re- 
ward, seeing that it has feared neither the first 
onsets of the world, nor shrunk from going into 
exile, nor hesitated to leave the city, nor dreaded 
to dwell in a desert place ; and since it fur- 
nished many with an example of confession, 
itself first spoke the martyr-witness. For it 
provoked others to acts of martyrdom by its own 
example ; and not only began to be a compan- 
ion of the martyrs already departing from the 
world, but also linked a heavenly friendship with 
those who should be so. 

■ This is confirmed in Epistle Ixxix., where mention is made of 
one mine in particular. 

2 Otherwise, " the sinews of the common enemy cut in two, his 
carcase was trodden under foot." [Rom. xvi. 20.] 

3. Therefore they who were condemned with 
us give you before God the greatest thanks, 
beloved Cyprian, that in your letter you have 
refreshed their suffering breasts ; have healed 
their limbs wounded with clubs ; have loosened 
their feet bound with fetters ; have smoothed 
the hair of their half-shorn head ; have illumi- 
nated the darkness of the dungeon ; have brought 
down the mountains of the mine to a smooth 
surface ; have even placed fragrant flowers to 
their nostrils, and have shut out the foul odour 
of the smoke.J Moreover, your continued gifts, 
and those of our beloved Quirinus, which you 
sent to be distributed by Herennianus the sub- 
deacon, and Lucian, and Maximus, and Aman- 
tius the acolytes, provided a supply of whatever 
had been wanting for the necessities of their 
bodies. Let us, then, be in our prayers helpers 
of one another : and let us ask, as you have 
bidden us, that we may have God and Christ 
and the angels as supporters in all our actions. 
We bid you, lord and brother, ever heartily fare- 
well, and have us in mind. Greet all who are 
with you. All ours who are with us love you, 
and greet you, and desire to see you. 

EPISTLE LXXVIII.+ 

THE REPLY TO THE SAME OF LUCIUS AND 
THE REST OF THE MARTYRS. 

ARGUMENT. — THE ARGUMENT OF THE PRESENT 
LETTER is, IN SUBSTANCE, THE SAME AS THAT 
OF THE PRECEDING ; AND THEREFORE IT IS NOT 
A LETTER OF LUCIUS THE ROMAN BISHOP, BUT 
OF LUCIUS THE AFRICAN BISHOP AND MARTYR. 

I. To Cyprian our brother and colleague, 
Lucius, and all the brethren who are with me in 
the Lord, greeting. Your letter came to us, 
dearest brother, while we were exulting and re- 
joicing in God that He had armed us for the 
struggle, and had made us by His condescension 
conquerors in the battle ; the letter, namely, which 
you sent to us by Herennianus the sub-deacon, 
and Lucian, and Maximus, and Amantius the 
acolytes,5 which when we read we received a re- 
laxation in our bonds, a solace in our affliction, 
and a support in our necessity ; and we were 
aroused and more strenuously animated to bear 
whatever more of punishment might be awaiting 
us. For before our suffering we were called forth 
by you to glory, who first afforded us guidance 
to confession of the name of Christ. We indeed, 
who follow the footsteps of your confession, hope 
for an equal grace with you. For he who is first 
in the race is first also for the reward ; and you 
who first occupied the course thence have com- 

3 [A graphic idea of mine-tortures is here afforded.] 

* Oxford ed. : Ep. ixxviii. a.d. 257. 

5 [These acolytes were of Greek name, but of Western usage 
only. They were a sort of candidates for Orders; and our Moravian 
brethren retain this ministry and the name, to this day.] 

4o6 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

municated this to us from what you began, show- 
ing doubtless the undivided love wherewith you 
have always loved us, so that we who had one 
Spirit in the bond of peace might have the grace 
of your ' prayers, and one crown of confession. 

2. But in your case, dearest brother, to the 
crown of confession is added the reward of your 
labours — an abundant measure which you shall 
receive from the Lord in the day of retribution, 
who have by your letter presented yourself to us, 
as you manifested to us that candid and blessed 
breast of yours which we have ever known, and 
in accordance with its largeness have uttered 
praises to God with us, not as much as we de- 
serve to hear, but as much as you are able to 
utter. For with your words you have both 
adorned those things which had been less in- 
structed in us, and have strengthened us to the 
sustaining of those sufferings which we bear,- as 
being certain of the heavenly rewards, and of the 
crown of martyrdom, and of the kingdom of 
God, from the prophecy which, being filled with 
the Holy Spirit, you have pledged to us in your 
letter. All this will happen, beloved, if you will 
have us in mind in your prayers, which I trust 
you do even as we certainly do. 

3. And thus, O brother most longed-for, we 
have received what you sent to us from Quirinus 
and from yourself, a sacrifice from every clean 
thing. Even as Noah offered to God, and God 
was pleased with the sweet savour, and had re- 
spect unto his offering, so also may He have re- 
spect unto yours, and may He be pleased to 
return to you the reward of this so good work. 
But I beg that you will command the letter which 
we have written to Quirinus to be sent forward. 
I bid you, dearest brother and earnestly desired, 
ever heartily farewell, and remember us.^ Greet 
all who are with you. Farewell. 

EPISTLE LXXIX.4 

THE ANSWER OF FELIX, JADER, POLIANUS, AND 
THE REST OF THE MARTYRS, TO CYPRIAN. 

ARGUMENT. — THE MARTYRS ABOVE SPOKEN OF 
ACKNOWLEDGE WITH GRATITUDE THE ASSISTANCE 
SENT TO THEM BY CYPRIAN. 

To our dearest and best beloved Cyprian, 
Felix, Jader, Polianus, together with the presby- 
ters and all who are al)iding with us at the mine 
of Sigua, eternal health in the Lord. We reply 
to your salutation, dearest brother, by Heren- 
nianus the sub-deacon, Lucian and Maximus 
our brethren, strong and safe by the aid of your 
prayers, from whom we have received a sum 
under the name of an offering, together with 

» Or, " united." 
^ Or, " patiently bear." 

3 [This always means in prayers and at the Lord's Supper, in 
the common intercessions. Scudamore, Not. Euck., p. 327.] 
* Oxford ed. : Ep. Ixxix. a.d. 257. 

your letter which you wrote, and in which you 
have condescended to comfort us as if we were 
sons, out of the heavenly words. And we have 
given and do give thanks to God the Father 
Almighty through His Christ, that we have been 
thus comforted and strengthened by your ad- 
dress, asking from the candour of your mind 
that you would deign to have us in mind in your 
constant prayers, that the Lord would supply 
what is wanting in your confession and ours, which 
He has condescended to confer on us. Greet 
all who abide with you. We bid you, dearest 
brother, ever heartily farewell in God. I Felix 
wrote this ; I Jader subscribed it ; I Polianus 
read it. I greet my lord Eutychianus. 

EPISTLE LXXX.5 

CYPRIAN TO SERGIUS, ROGATIANUS, AND THE 
OTHER CONFESSORS IN PRISON. 

ARGUMENT. — HE CONSOLES ROGATIANUS AND 
HIS COLLEAGUES, THE CONFESSORS IN PRISON, 
AND GIVES THEM COURAGE BY THE EXAMPLE 
OF THE MARTYRS ROGATIANUS THE ELDER AND 
FELICISSIMUS. THE LETTER ITSELF INDICATE? 
THAT IT WAS WRITTEN IN EXILE. 

I. Cyprian to Sergius and Rogatianus, and 
the rest of the confessors in the Lord, everlast- 
ing health. I salute you, dearest and most 
blessed brethren, myself also desiring to enjoy 
the sight of you, if the state in which I am placed 
would permit me to come to you. For what 
could happen to me more desirable and more 
joyful than to be now close to you, that you 
might embrace me with those hands, which, 
pure and innocent, and maintaining the faith of 
the Lord, have rejected the profene obedience? 
What more pleasant and sublime than now to 
kiss your lips, which with a glorious voice have 
confessed the Lord, to be looked upon even in 
presence by your eyes, which, despising Hie 
world, have become worthy^ of looking upon 
God? But since opportunity is not afforded 
me to share in this joy, I send this letter in my 
stead to your ears and to your eyes, by which I 
congratulate and exhort you that you persevere 
strongly and steadily in the confession of the 
heavenly glory ; and having entered on the way 
of the Lord's condescension, that you go on in 
the strength of the Spirit, to receive the crown, 
having the Lord as your protector and guide, 
who said, " Lo, I am with you alway, even unto 
the end of the world." ^ O blessed prison, which 
your presence has enlightened ! O blessed prison, 
which sends the men of God to heaven ! O 
darkness, more bright than the sun itself, and 

5 Oxford ed.: Ep. vi. a.d. 257; possibly a.d. 250. 

6 [Luke XX. 35, xxi. 36; i Thess. li. 12. Such expressions in ouf 
author teach no worthiness apart from the merits of Christ.] 

7 Matt, xxviii. a*. 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

407 

clearer than the hght of this world, where now 
are placed temples of God, and your members 
are to be sanctified by divine confessions ! 

2 . Nor let anything now be revolved in your 
hearts and minds besides the divine precepts 
and heavenly commands, with which the Holy 
Spirit has ever animated you to the endurance 
of suffering. Let no one think of death, but of 
immortality ; nor of temporary punishment, but 
of eternal glory ; since it is written, " Precious 
in the sight of the Lord is the death of His 
saints ; " ■ and again, " A broken spirit is a sac- 
rifice to God : a contrite and humble heart God 
doth not despise." ^ And again, where the 
sacred Scripture speaks of the tortures which 
consecrate God's martyrs, and sanctify them in 
the very trial of suffering : " And if they have 
suffered torments in the sight of men, yet is their 
hope full of immortality ; and having been a 
little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded : 
for God proved them, and found them worthy 
of Himself. As gold in the furnace hath He 
tried them, and received them as a sacrifice of 
a burnt-offering, and in due time regard shall be 
had unto them. The righteous shall shine, and 
shall run to and fro like sparks among the stub- 
ble. They shall judge the nations, and have 
dominion over the people ; and their Lord shall 
reign for ever." ^ When, therefore, you reflect 
that you shall judge and reign with Christ the 
Lord, you must needs exult and tread under foot 
present sufferings, in the joy of what is to come ; 
knowing that from the beginning of the world it 
has been so appointed that righteousness should 
suffer there in the conflict of the world, since in 
the beginning, even at the first, the righteous 
Abel was slain, and thereafter all righteous men, 
and prophets, and apostles who were sent. To 
all of whom the Lord also in Himself has ap- 
pointed an example, teaching that none shall 
attain to His kingdom but those who have fol- 
lowed Him in His own way, saying, " He that 
loveth his life in this world shall lose it ; and he 
that hateth his life in this world shall keep it 
unto life eternal."'* And again : " Fear not them 
which kill the body, but are not able to kill the 
soul : but rather fear Him who is able to destroy 
both soul and body in hell." 5 Paul also exhorts 
us that we who desire to attain to the Lord's 
promises ought to imitate the Lord in all things. 
" We are," says he, " the sons of God : but if 
sons, then heirs ; heirs of God, and joint-heirs 
with Christ ; if so be that we suffer with Him, 
that we may also be glorified together." ^ More- 
over, he added the comparison of the present 

' Ps. cxvi. 15. 

2 Ps. li. 19. 

3 Wisd. iii. 4-8. 
* John xii. 25. 

5 Matt. X. 28. 

6 Rom. viii. 16, 17. 

time and of the future glory, saying, " The suf- 
ferings of this present time are not worthy to be 
compared with the coming glory which shall 
be revealed in us." ^ Of which brightness, when 
we consider the glory, it behoves us to bear all 
afflictions and persecutions ; because, although 
many are the afflictions of the righteous, yet 
those are delivered from them all who trust in 
God. 

3. Blessed women also, who are established 
with you in the same glory of confession, who, 
maintaining the Lord's faith, and braver than 
their sex, not only themselves are near to the 
crown of glory, but have afforded an example 
to other women by their constancy ! And lest 
anything should be wanting to the glory of your 
number, that each sex and every age also might 
be with you in honour, the divine condescension 
has also associated with you boys *^ in a glorious 
confession ; representing to us something of the 
same kind as once did Ananias, Azarias, and 
Misael, the illustrious youths to whom, when 
shut up in the furnace, the fires gave way, and 
the flames gave refreshment, the Lord being 
present with them, and proving that against His 
confessors and martyrs the heat of hell could 
have no power, but that they who trusted in God 
should always continue unhurt and safe in all 
dangers. And I beg you to consider more care- 
fully, in accordance with your religion, what 
must have been the faith in these youths which 
could deserve such full acknowledgment from 
the Lord. For, prepared for every fate, as we 
ought all to be, they say to the king, " O king 
Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer 
thee in this matter ; for our God whom we serve 
is able to deliver us from the burning fiery fur- 
nace ; and He will deliver us out of thine hand, 
O king ! But if not, be it known unto thee, O 
king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship 
the golden image which thou hast set up." 9 
Although they believed, and, in accordance with 
their faith, knew that they might even be de- 
livered from their present punishment, they still 
would not boast of this, nor claim it for them- 
selves, saying, " But if not." Lest the virtue of 
their confession should be less without the testi- 
mony of their suffering, they added that God 
could do all things ; but yet they would not 
trust in this, so as to wish to be delivered at the 
moment; but they thought on that glory of 
eternal liberty and security. 

4. And you also, retaining this faith, and medi- 
tating day and night, with your whole heart 
prepared for God, think of the future only, with 
contempt for the present, that you may be able 
to come to the fruit of the eternal kingdom, and 

7 Rom. viii. l8. 

8 [See p. 404, note 6, su/ra.] 

9 ban. iii. 16-18. 

4o8 

THE EPISTLES OF CYPRIAN. 

to the embrace and ki.-is, and the sight of the 
Lord, that you nsay follow in all things Rogatia- 
■nus the presbyter, the glorious old man who, to 
the glory of our time, makes a way for you by 
his religious courage and divine condescension, 
who, with Felicissimus our brother, ever quiet 
and temperate, receiving the attack of a fero- 
cious people, first prepared for you a dwelling 
in the prison, and, marking out the way ' for 
you in some measure, now also goes before you. 
That this may be consummated in you, we be- 
seech the Lord in constant prayers, that from 
beginnings going on to the highest results, He 
may cause those whom He has made to confess, 
also to be crowned. I bid you, dearest and 
most beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell in 
the Lord ; and may you attain to the crown of 
heavenly glory. Victor the deacon, and those 
•who are with me, greet you. 

EPISTLE LXXXL^ 

TO SUCCESSUS ON THE TIDINGS BROUGHT 
FROM ROME, TELLING OF THE PERSECUTION. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN TELLS THE BISHOP SUC- 
CESSUS, THAT IN A SEVERE PERSECUTION THAT 
HAD BEEN DECREED BY THE EMPEROR VALERI.^N ^ 
XISTUS THE BISHOP HAD SUFFERED AT ROME 
ON THE EIGHTH OF THE IDES OF AUGUST ; AND 
HE BEGS HIM TO INTIMATE THE SAME TO THE 
REST OF HIS COLLEAGUES, THAT EACH ONE 
MIGHT ANIMATE HIS OWN FLOCK TO MARTYRDOM. 

I. Cyprian to his brother Successus, greeting. 
The reason why I could not write to you imme- 
diately, dearest brother, was that all the clergy, 
Leing placed in the very heat of the contest, were 
unable in any way to depart hence, all of them 
Leing jirepared in accordance with the tlevotion 
of their mind for divine and heavenly glory. But 
know that those have come whom I had sent to 
the City* for this purpose, that they might find 
out and bring back to us the truth, in whatever 
manner it had been decreetl respecting us. For 
nianv various and uncertain things are current in 
men's opinions. But the truth concerning them 
is as follows, that Valerian had sent a rescript to 
the Senate, to the effect that bishops anil jjres- 
byters and deacons should immediately be pun- 
ished ; but that senators, and men of importance, 
and Roman knights,5 should lose their dignity, 
and moreover be deprived of their ])roperty ; and 
if, when their means were taken away, tiiey should 
persist in being Christians, then they should also 
lose their heads ; but that matrons should l)e de- 
prived of their property, and sent into banish- 

• " Mel.itor." 

2 Oxford ed.: Ep. Ixxx. As Cyprian suffered shortly after, in 
■the month of September, there is no doubt but that this letter was 
•written near the close of his life. A.D. 258. 

■* Doubtless with Gallienus. 

♦ [Of Rome.] 5 [Elucidation XX. 1 

ment. Moreover, people of Coesar's household, 
whoever of them had either confessed before, or 
should now confess, should have their property 
confiscated, and should be sent in chains by as- 
signment to Caesar's estates. The Emperor Vale- 
rian also added to this address a copy of the 
letters which he sent to the presidents of the 
provinces concerning us ; which letters we are 
daily hoping wull come, waiting according to the 
strength of our faith for the endurance of suffer- 
ing, and expecting from the help and mercy of 
the Lord the crown of eternal life. But know 
that Xistus was martyred in the cemetery on the 
eighth day of the Ides of August, and with him 
four deacons.' Moreover, the prefects in the 
City 7 are daily urging on this persecution; so 
that, if any are presented to them, they are mar- 
tyred, and their property claimed by the treas- 
ury. 

2. I beg that these things may be made known 
by your means to the rest of our colleagues, that 
everywhere, by their exhortation, the brother- 
hood may be strengthened and prepared for the 
spiritual conflict, that every one of us may think 
less of death than of immortality ; and, dedi- 
cated to the Lord, with full faith and entire cour- 
age, may rejoice rather than fear in this confession, 
wherein they know that the soldiers of God and 
Christ are not slain, but crowned. I bid you, 
dearest brother, ever heartily farewell in the 
Lord.* 

EPISTLE LXXXII.9 

TO THE CLERGY AND PEOPLE CONCERNING 
HIS RETIREMENT. A LITTLE BEFORE HIS 
MARTYRDOM. 

ARGUMENT. — WHEN, NEAR THE END OF HIS 
LIFE, CYPRIAN, ON RETURNING TO HIS GARDENS, 
WAS TOLD THAT MESSENGERS WERE SENT TO 
TAKE HIM FOR PUNISHMENT TO UTICA, HE WITH- 
DREW. AND LEST rr SHOULD BE THOUGHT THAT 
HE HAD DONE SO FROM FEAR OF DE.ATH, HE 
GIVES THE RE.\SON IN THIS LETTER, VIZ., THAT 
HE MIGHT UNDERGO HIS MARTYRDOM NOWHERE 
ELSE THAN AT CARTHAGE, IN THE SIGHT OF HIS 
OWN PEOPLE. A.D. 258. 

I. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, 
and all the people, greeting. When it had been 
told to us, dearest brethren, that the gaolers '° 
had been sent to bring me to Utica, and I had 

* Or, " and with him Quartus." 

^ [The modern name, htamboul (ei? tt^v ttoAii'), grows out of 
like usage in the East. And, as Constantinople was " New Rome," 
this illustrates Irenasus and his convenire , vol i. p. 460.] 

8 (The baptismal question went by default, and was practically 
given up by the African Church, amid greater issues. It has never 
been dogmatically settled by the Church Catholic: and Roman usage 
is evasive (in spite of its own atiatheiiias) ; for it baptizes again, sub 
cottditinnel. See useful note, Oxford ed. p. 244.] 

9 Oxford ed. : Ep. Ixxxi. [Cyprian's contest with Stephen is prac- 
tically valueless as to the point at issue between them (see supra, 
p. 396), but it throws a flood of light on the ijuestions raised by papal 
pretensions. It also illuminates the anti-Nicene doctrine of unity.] 

'"Or, "commissaries." 

ELUCIDATIONS. 

409 

been persuaded by the counsel of those dearest 
to me to withdraw for a time from my gardens, 
as a just reason was afforded I consented. For 
the reason that it is fit for a bishop, in that city 
in which he presides over the Church of the 
Lord, there to confess the Lord, and that the 
whole people should be glorified by the confes- 
sion of their prelate in their presence. For 
whatever, in that moment of confession, the con- 
fessor-bishop speaks, he speaks in the mouth of 
all, by inspiration of God.' But the honour of 
our Church, glorious as it is, will be mutilated 
if I, a bishop placed over another church, re- 
ceiving my sentence or my confession at Utica, 
should go thence as a martyr to the Lord, when 
indeed, both for my own sake and yours, I pray 
with continual supplications, and with all my 
desires entreat, that I may confess among you, 
and there suffer, and thence depart to the Lord 
even as I ought. Therefore here in a hidden 
retreat I await the arrival of the proconsul re- 
turning to Carthage, that I may hear from him 
what the emperors have commanded upon the 

' [Matt. X. 19. There is something sublime in the martyr's re- 
liance upon this word of Jesus See sec. 2, infra, and Elucidation 
XXII.] 

subject of Christian laymen and bishops, and 
may say what the Lord will wish to be said at 
that hour. 

2. But do you, dearest brethren, according to 
the discipline which you have ever received 
from me out of the Lord's commands, and ac- 
cording to what you have so very often learnt 
from my discourse, keep peace and tranquillity ; 
nor let any of you stir up any tumult for the 
brethren, or voluntarily offer himself to the Gen- 
tiles. For when apprehended and delivered up, 
he ought to speak, inasmuch as the Lord abiding 
in us speaks in that hour, who willed that we 
should rather confess than profess. But for the 
rest, what it is fitting that we should observe be- 
fore the proconsul passes sentence on me for the 
confession of the name of God, we will with the 
instruction of the Lord arrange in common.^ 
May our Lord make you, dearest brethren, to 
remain safe in His Church, and condescend to 
keep you. So be it through His mercy. 

- [Recur to the passion of this holy martyr as related by Pontius, 
his deacon, p. 390. Stephen had broken communion with him (see 
p. 390 note) and the African provinces, which had no effect upon his 
CaXhoWc status. (See letter of Firmillian, p. 391 note.) But, on tkf 
Roman theory, this glorious martyr died in schism. He is, neverthe- 
less, a canonized saint in the Roman Calendar. Elucidation XXII.] 

ELUCIDATIONS. 

(The presbyterate and the priesthood, p. 268.) 

Here is an instance of a usage just becoming common to the East and West, — to give the 
name oi priesthood to the chief ministry as distinguished from the presbyterate. So in Chrysostom 
passim, but notably in his treatise iripl tepwo-wT;?. The scriptural warrant for this usage is derived, 
dialectically, from the universal priesthood of Christians (i Pet. ii. 5), from the Old-Testament 
prophecies of the Christian ministry (Isa. Ixvi. 21), and from the culmination of the sacerdotitim 
in the chief ministry of St. Paul. Over and against the Mosaic priesthood he is supposed to 
assert his own priestly charisma, in the Epistle to the Romans,' where he says, " I have therefore 
my glorying in Christ Jesus " (i.e., the Great High Priest), " in things pertaining to God ; " that is 
(according to the Epistle to the Hebrews, v. i), " as a high priest taken from among men, in things 
pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins." He asserts himself, there- 
fore, as 2 better priest than those of the Law, " because of the grace that was given me of God, 
that I should be a minister of Christ Jesus unto the Gentiles, ministering in sacrifice ^ the Gospel 
of God." He then (according to this theory) adopts the language and the idea of Malachi, and 
adds, " that the oblation of the Gentiles might be acceptable," etc. ; i.e., the pure ninchah, ox 
oblation of bread and wine, commemorative of the one " and only propitiatory sacrifice of 
Calvary." 

These ideas run through all the primitive liturgies,^ which we are soon to reach in this series. 
It is no part of my plan to vindicate them, but only to state them. It will be felt by many that the.se 

* Cap. XT. 15, 16, compared with Mai. i. ii. 2 Revised Version, margin. 

3 For which, see vol. vii., this series. 

Rather, " ministering hierurgically." 

4IO ELUCIDATIONS. 

were at least exaggerated views of the apostle's ministry, — of the principle underlying his phrase, 
£1? TO €Lvcu fxf. XtLTovpyov . . . upovpyovvTa TO ivayyeXiov ; but let nobody read into these primitive 
expressions concerning a commemoration of the one only propitiatory sacrifice " once offered," 
the monstrous doctrine of the Council of Trent, which, reduced to its mildest form,' is as follows : 
" The sacrifice of the Mass is, and ought to be considered, one and the same sacrifice with that of 
the Cross . . . which being the case, // must be taught, without any hesitation, that (as the holy 
Council of Trent hath moreover explained) the sacred and holy sacrifice of the Mass is not only 
a sacrifice of praise and eucharist, or a mere commemoration of the sacrifice effected on the 
Cross, but also truly a propitiatory sacrifice, by which God is appeased, and rendered propitious to 
us." That such was not the doctrine of the Latin churches, even in the ninth century, sufficiently 
appears from the treatise of Ratramn ; but it is not less apparent from the ancient liturgies them- 
selves, and even from many primitive features which glitter like gold-dust amid the dross of the 
Roman missal itself. 

II. 

(To do nothing on my own private opinion, p. 283.) 

Note this golden principle which runs through all the epistles and treatises of our large-minded 
and free-spirited author, " A primordio episcopatus mei statuerim nihil, sine consilio vestro, et sine 
consensu p/ebis mece privata sententia gerere." When, in the midst of persecution, he could not 
convoke his council, he apologizes, as will appear hereafter,^ even for taking measures requisite to 
the emergency without such counsel. Such was his duty according to the primitive discipline, 
no doubt ; but our author knew well that a relaxing of discipline in exceptional circumstances is. 
the fruitful source of corruption. He is jealous against himself; — 

" 'Twill be recorded for a precedent ; 
And many an error, by the same example, 
Will rush into the CAurc/i." 

It is instructive to find the views of Baxter harmonizing with those of Cyprian. He speaks for 
himself and his brethren as not opposed to episcopacy, but only to "the engrossing (by prelates) 
of the sole power of ordination and jurisdiction . . . excluding wholly the pastors of particular 
churches /;'<7;« all share in it."" This is a sound Cyprianic remonstrance ; ^ but Cyprian always 
includes \\\t plebs as well as the "pastors." In short, if Ignatius, his Gamaliel, teaches primarily,. 
" Do nothing without the bishop," he not less reiterates his own maxim, " Let bishops do nothing 
without the presbytery and the people." 

Here it must be noted, however, that the primitive Fathers never speak of tlie episcopate as a 
development of the presbytcrate, as do the Middle-Age writers and the schoolmen. It was the 
policy of these to write down the bishops to mere presbyters, for the purpose of exalting the 
papacy, which they made the only episcopate and the universal apostolate. The Universal Bishop 
might, then, appoint presbyters to be his local vicars, and to bear a titular episcopate, as such, — the 
name of an office, and not an order. The episcopate was no longer, as with Ignatius and Cyprian, 
the apostolic office from which the presbyterate and diaconate were precipitated, but, rather, an 
ecclesiastical sublimate of the presbyterate. By this theory no bishop in the Latin communion 
can deal with the Bishop of Rome as Cyprian did, — on terms of equality, and as a co-bishop or 
colleague in a common episcopate. Such is the school doctrine : and the Council of Trent made 

' See the Trent Catechism, cap. iv. quaestt. 73, 75. 
^ Kpistle xxiii. and Elucidation III. 

3 Proposals, etc., by the Re7'ercnd Ministers 0/ the Presbyterian Persuasion, London, 1661. An extract may be found in 
Lcighlon's Works, p. 637, Edinburgh, 1840. 

ELUCIDATIONS. 411 

it dogma, abolishing the order of bishops as such, and defining that there are only three Holy 
Orders ; viz., presbyters, deacons, and sub-deacons.' The order of bishops is thus reduced to a 
merely ecclesiastical order in " the hierarchy," a vicariate of the papacy. 

III. 

(According to the Lord's discipline, p. 292.) 

Here he lays down, as a divine constitution for the Church, the principle exemplified in the 
Acts of the Apostles (cap. xv. 4-6, 22, 23). Compare Epistle xiv., where he speaks of some 
presbyters and deacons as " too little mindful of discipline," and of his instructions to the laity 
to maintain the same. Observe his language in the exceptional case referred to in the previous 
elucidation. " In ordinations of the clergy, beloved brethren " (he writes to " presbyters, 
deacons, and the whole people^^^, "we usually consult you beforehand, and weigh (the matter) 
-with, the general advice.''^ 

It is surprising that the learned and pious Dr. Pusey, always influenced by his essential Galli- 
canism, and too little devoted to the pritnitive discipline, hastily committed himself, in his work 
on The Councils of the Church, to an erroneous statement of the historic facts ^ as to the par- 
ticipation of the laity in synods. In reply, that American Cyprian, Whittingham of Maryland, 
called the Doctor's attention to an example he had evidently overlooked, in words worthy of note 
from so profound a patristic scholar. He says, " It occurred in the middle of the period to which 
Dr. Pusey's book is limited, and, as nearly as can be known, during the episcopate of Cyprian." 
He adds, " I doubt whether there is another equally particular relation of the circumstances of 
an episcopal election within the first four centuries." It is given in the life of Gregory Thau- 
maturgus, by his namesake Gregory of Nyssa.^ The whole of Bishop Whittingham's searching 
reviewal ■♦ of Dr. Pusey's positions is an honour to American scholarship, and ought to be con- 
sulted by the student of primitive antiquity. 

IV. 

(Common consultation, p. 294.) 

Again, we have our author's testimony to the free spirit of primitive councils, in which I exult 
as a Christian believer, and as a loyal supporter of constitutional liberty, i.e., freedom regulated 
by law. Concerning which, note the saying of Franklin, note 9, vol. i. p. 552, of this series. To 
primitive discipline and to these free councils of the Cyprianic age the world is indebted for all its 
free constitutions ; and when narrow-minded men presume to assert the contrary, because of 
mediaeval feudalism in the West, let them be reminded that not till the Church's constitutions 
were superseded by the forged Decretals, was the Western Church so deprived of its freedom as 
to be made the tool of despotism in violating the liberty of Christians. The last council of the 
whole West that retained anything of the primitive spirit was that of Frankfort, a.d. 794 : but its 
spirit survived, and not infrequently asserted itself in *' the Galilean maxims," so called ; while in 
England it was never smothered, but always survived in the parliaments until the usurpations of 
the papacy were abolished in the Church and realm. This was done by a practical re-assertion 
of Cyprianic principles. It is well to remind such reckless critics as Draper and Lecky that the 
Christian Church is responsible only for her own Catholic legislation ; not at all for what has been 
done under the fraudulent pretexts of the Decretals, in defiance of her whole system, which is 
embodied in the Ante-Nicene Fathers and the Nicene Constitutions. 

' Catechism of the Cotinci'lo/ Trent, cap. vii. quaest. 12. 3 Bishop Whittingham quotes the edition of Gerard Vossius, pp. 2S6-291. 
* See the said work, p. 41. * Church Revieiv, vol. xi. 1859, pp. 88-127. 

412 ELUCIDATIONS. 

V. 

(Counsel and judgment of all. ... a common cause, p. 296.) 

The language here is indicative of the whole spirit of Catholic canons, to which that of the 
Latin canonists affords such a contrast after the Isidorian forgeries had been made, by Nicholas, 
the system of the West. Note the words which our author addresses to his clergy, omni plebe 
adstanie : " Quae res cum omnium nostrum consilium et sententiam spectet, praejudicare ego, et 
soli mihi rem communem vindicare, non audeo." In other words, " What concerns all, ought by 
all to be considered and decided." ' 

The fifteenth chapter of Bishop Wordsworth's Histo7-y of the Church (vol. i.) deals with the 
ante-Nicene councils, and expounds their spirit and organization in a very able and concise manner. 

VI. 

(Let us pray for the lapsed, p. 310.) 

The passage that follows seems to be a quotation from the common prayers then in use. Out 
of these " bidding prayers " grew the ancient litanies ; the deacon dictating the suffrage, and the 
people responding with the petition, " Lord, have mercy upon them," or the like. 

By arranging the petitions thus, — 

Pro lapsis, ) f ut erigantur : 

.' \ OREMUS, i " 

Pro stantibus, ) (. ut non tententur, etc., 

we shall see how such prayers were formulated, and how the people, by responding Avien to each 
suffrage, gave their common supplications accordingly. These suffrages might be enlarged indefi- 
nitely, as divers subjects for prayer were presented ; and so there was a mingling of what has 
been called " free prayer " with the liturgical system, without confusion or lack of harmony. 

VII. 

(The honour of our colleague, p. 319.) 

Thus Cyprian speaks of the Bishop of Rome, whose due ordination and rightful jurisdiction 
Novatian was impugning. The absurdity of calling this heretic Novatian an anti-pope involves 
a great confusion of ideas, however. For, as Cornelius was no more a pope than Cyprian (to 
both of whom the title was freely conceded in its primitive sense ^), how can it be proper to give 
Novatian a name which imi:)lies a mediaeval sense, and leads the student to infer that his claim 
was not merely to the See of Rome,^ but to a universal bishopric over all Christians? It is 
needless to say, that, had the churches so understood the case, the whole Christian world would 
iiave been convulsed by a matter which, in j)oint of fact, was soon settled by Cyprian's enforce- 
ment of the canons. See subsequent letters. 

VIII. 

(Novatian, pp. 319, 324.) 

The similarity of the names of Novatus and Novatian, and their complicity in a common 
schism, led to great confusions among their contemporaries, which have not been wholly cleared 

■ Consult Epistles xxv. (sec. 6, p. 304) and xxx. (sec. 5, p. 310), supra. It is interesting to note how the primitive clergy of Rome 
recognise this free principle, with no suspicion that their own cathedra is not only their sufficient resource, but the oracle of God to all 
mankind. 

* See Elucidation III. p. 154, supra. 

3 Cyprian facetiously remarks (see Ep. xlviii. p. 325) that Novatus reserved his .gT-^a/^r crimes for the ^>-*a/^r city; "since Rome, 
from her magnitude, ought to take precedence of Carthage." 

ELUCIDATIONS. 413 

even to this day. See Lardner's elaborate argument against the latter name as a mere blunder. 
He calls Novatian also Novatus, and gives his forcible reasons. 

Observe that " ordination " is the term here used for conferring the order of bishops on a 
presbyter. So always anciently, though now it is customary to speak only of the *' consecration " 
of a bishop. This is the inferior term ; for the bishop is supposed to be " consecrated " to his 
specialty or diocese, while he is raised by " ordination " to the order in which all bishops 
are equal. Mirabeau says, " Words are things." I quote from a political source the following 
remarks of a shrewd observer of Mirabeau's principle. Speaking of American phraseology in 
constitutional affairs, he says, " It is true that this is a mere matter of words or phrases, but 
words and phrases misused have a very potent influence for confusing the minds of men as to 
real things. In politics, as in theology, it is best to stick to the text, and to avoid supposedly 
equivalent phrases. Such phrases often contain within them the seeds of heresy and schism." 
Now, it was the policy of the schoolmen to confuse terms, in order to break down the Cyprianic 
theory ; and they denied that bishops were ordained to a " Holy Order." Theirs was only a 
name of office; and their order was only an ecclesiastical order, as much so as "sacristans."' 
This to keep them from Cyprian's claim of equality with the Bishop of Rome. But this was 
debatable school doctrine only, till the Council of Trent. Since that, it has been dogma in the 
Roman communion. Contrast, therefore, the Greek and (modern) Roman dogmas : — 

1. Greek? "The three orders, by divine institution, are, (i) the episcopate, (2) the priest- 
hood, (3) the diaconate." 

2. Rotnan.^ "According to the unifortn tradition^ of the Catholic Church, the number of 
these orders is j-^Z'^fw / and they are called (i) porter, (2) reader, (3) exorcist, (4) acolyte, (5) 
sub-deacon, (6) deacon, (7) priest." The " bishop," then, is only 2. priest, who acts as vicar for 
the one " Universal Bishop " at Rome. For the Greek theory, note Cyprian /tzj-j-Zw. 

IX, 

(Cornelius, our colleague, p. 328.) 

Observe the state of the case. " Lest perchance the number of bishops in Africa should seem 
unsatisfactory," etc., he wrote to his colleague in Rome, who gathered a council also, " with very 
many bishops." Imagine such language, and such action in any case, between the French met- 
ropolitan and the present Bishop of Rome ! The contrast illustrates the absolute nonentity, in 
the Cyprianic age, of any conception of such relations as now exist between Rome and her vassal 
episcopate. " Prostrate at the feet of your Holiness," etc. : the noblest bishops and the boldest 
at the Vatican Council thus signed their feeble and abject remonstrances. Among their names 
are Schwarzenberg, Furstenberg, and even Strossmayer.s 

X. 

(One episcopate diffused, p. 333.) 
Here is the principle expounded in the Treatise on Unity. He states it tersely as follows : — ■ 

" Episcopatus unus, episcoporum multorum concordi numerositate diffusus." 

And he then states in few words his theory of the " compact unity of the Catholic Church," 
in which the existence of the " provinces " is recognised, and an " ecclesiastical structure ; " but 
not a hint of what must have been laid down as the test and primal law of truth and unity, had 

' Lombard., Sentences, p. 394, ed. Migne. Compare Aquinas. 3 Catechism of the Council of Trent, cap. vii. quxst. -«. 

2 Macarius, Thiohgie Orthodoxe, vol. iii. p. 244. * A monstrous statement. See Ignatius /ajjjwr. 

i L'UnioH Chretienne, p. 69, 1870. 

414 ELUCIDATIONS. 

any infallible supremacy been imagined to exist. In that case, no need of a treatise, no need of 
words: he would have said nothing of "co-bishops," but simply of communion with the Bishop 
of Rome. 

XI. 

(Fabian and Donatus, also our predecessors, p. 342.) 

Here the Paris editors of a.d. 1574 take pains to remind us that Cyprian means "Fabian, 
j'^//r predecessor, and Donatus, mine." Very well. But the implication is that "our predecessors" 
were persons of the same office and dignity. Let us suppose the present Bishop of Alger writing 
to Leo XIII. in the same manner, as follows : " Bishop Strossmayer was severely remarked upon 
by Pius and Martial, our predecessors, in their letters." Would this be tolerated? The editor of 
this series answered the invitation of Pius IX. to his council in 1869, after the manner of a con- 
temporary of Cyprian,' in order to make the contrast between the third century and the nine- 
teenth palpable to the venerable pontiff and his adviser Antonelli. It w^as resented with 
animosity by the Ultramontane journals, on the ground that nobody on earth should address the 
pontiff as bishop to bishop, or as man to man. 

XII. 

(To whom perfidy could have no access, p. 344.) 

When we put a man in mind of his self-respect, we imply that he is in peril of forgetting the 
quality we impute to him. " You are a gentleman, and, of course, cannot deceive me : " such 
language is not complimentary, but involves a gentle reproof. So here our author has to remind 
the Roman clergy of what is due to themselves if they would keep up the credit assigned to them 
by St. Paul, but from which, as the apostle himself warned them, they were in danger of falling. 
Cyprian goes orl to remind them of what they owe to Carthage and its synods, and warns them 
against " abandoned men " seeking to discredit the African bishops.^ The Roman clergy had 
already confessed their sense of what was due to Carthage,^ and in another epistle,* doubtless 
remembering Zephyrinus and Callistus, they confess their degeneracy, and the ignominy of their 
actual position as compared with that which the apostle had praised. The passage is often quoted 
as if it read, "to whom corrupt faith can have no access : " but the word is pctfidia, and has 
reference, not to faith, but morals ; and, to avoid ambiguity, I have put the w^ord " perfidy" into 
the translation, where the Edinburgh translator has " faithlessness." 

Here note (p. 346, note 2) the reference to St. Paul's term (Kararo/xr/), the concision, where 
the Oxford note (p. 170, Oxford trans.) is to the point. Only let it be more clearly stated, that 
St. Paul calls the Judaizing schismatics the KoxaroyJi] ; meaning that, instead of the circumcised 
body, they are but the particula pneputii cut off and cast away. Our author uses it here with 
great effect, therefore. In another place 5 St. Paul carries his scornful anathema farther, with a 
witty reference to a heathen example ; on which see Canon Farrar in his St. Paul, cap. xxii. 
(.'\gdistis) p. 235, ed. New York. The "sport with children," in the Canon's note (p. 227), 
seems to me illustrated by Ex. iv. 24-26. Tripling with children, i.e., their salvation. 

' A Letter to Pius the Ninth, Bishop of Rome, etc., published by Parker, London, 1870. It also ap[x;ared in most of the Iangu«^3 
of Europe, and was circulated by the Greeks in their own tongue. 

2 Same epistle and section, farther on. It seems needless to say that these Punic " Africans " were Asiatics, in fact. 

3 Ep. xxix. p. 308, supra. 
* Ep. XXX. p. 309, supra. 
S Gal. V. 12 in the Gre«k. 

ELUCIDATIONS. 415 

XIII. 

(I both warn and ask you, p. 346 at note 4.) 

The original is, " adtnoneo et peto ; " the language of an equal, but yet of an older brother in 
the episcopate. Here some other points are worthy to be noted in this important letter, and 
they shall be briefly taken in serie. 

1. We here encounter the tangled knot of the triple schisms, in which the unhappy Felicis- 
simus, with Novatus and Novatian, has long presented a scandal to criticism. Thus, our author 
speaks of Felicissimus as "schismatis et disidii atictor;" and difficulties have been raised about the 
meaning of the text, because Novatus would rather seem entitled to that " bad eminence." I 
think all difficulty disappears if we drop the idea that a particular schism is here referred to, and 
understand merely that this bad man was " the begimier of schism and dissension," out of which 
the three specific schisms had cropped. Go back to Epistles xxxvii. (p. 315) and xxxviii, (p. 
316) and xxxix. (p. 319) for his antecedents. The "faction of Felicissimus" (sec. 2), and of 
■*' five presbyters " with him (sec. 3), is here sufficiently evident to illustrate the point now under 
consideration. In Epistle xlviii. (p. 325) we find Novatus, it is true, accused as "the first sower 
of discord and sedition," but in another sense, because Felicissimus was a mere layman. Novatus 
took him up, and had him unlawfully ordained a deacon ; and now Felicissimus becomes a mere 
appendage, and Novatus becomes formidable. Sailing to Italy, and coming to Rome just in time 
to inspire the discontent of Novatian with a wicked ambition, he next proceeds to engineer his 
schismatical ordination to the bishopric of Rome by the hands of three bishops, acting uncanoni- 
cally and sinfully. So now Novatian becomes the chief character as rival to Cornelius, and pre- 
tender to his See ; while Novatus returns to Africa to foment new disturbances, but is jusdy 
•excommunicated, and disappears from history. 

2. In this epistle it would seem that Cornelius had vacillated weakly, and was in peril of 
acting uncanonically. Cyprian gently admonishes him (sec. 2) : "I was considerably surprised," 
«tc. ; also (sec. 6), "I speak to you as \)Q.\w% proiwked, dA grievi?ig, as constrained," etc. 

3. Here Fortunatus appears on the scene, to embroil the matter yet more seriously; of whom 
((sec. 9) enough appears in this letter. 

4. Fortunatus, with his wicked allies, sails to Rome (sec. 11) as the nearest apostolic See, 
ihence spoken of (sec. 14) as the chief church (i.e., of the West) and the matrix of unity (i.e., to 
the daughter churches of Africa). Let us read into the pages of Cyprian no Decretalist ideas 
when he modestly acknowledges the comparative inferiority of his place. Let us find his meaning 
in this very letter, and others, in which his words contradict all ideas of any official inferiority. 
Take also the ideas of the epoch for illustration. Recur to Cyprian's master expounding the 
relations of the primitive churches, one to another, in his Prescription. TertuUian points out a 
Toot-principle in all apostolic Sees ; ' and then, after elaborate discussion, he thus applies it 
practically : — 

" Run over the apostolic churches, in which the very thrones of the apostles," etc. " Achaia, 
e.g., is proximate to you ; then there is Corinth. If you are near Macedonia, there is Philippi. 
. . . Crossing to Asia, you get Ephesus. . . . Close to Italy you have Rome, /;■<?;« whicJi 
comes to us {in Africa) our authority,'' etc. I abridge, but do not alter the sense.^ Here, 
then, we find what Cyprian was writing about. The schismatics, on this principle, had rushed to 
the nearest apostolic See, viz., that of the Imperial City. Cyprian recognises his claims on its 
bishop ; Rome being the source of his own ordination, and the matrix of the Carthaginian 
church. This animates him with a loving humility. But what next? Having expressed all this, 
he proceeds, as an equal but an elder brother, to assert his rights, and to admonish Cornelius 
that he, too, must obey the ecclesiastical discipline. Nobody, even among the Greeks, would 

' Cap. XX. p. 352, note 7, etc. See vol. iii., this series. - Vol. iii. p. 260, cap. xxxvi. and note 13. 

4i6 ELUCIDATIONS. 

object to such a Roman primacy, even at this day ; but " to give place by subjection, even for ax. 
hour," is what St. Cyprian would not endure any more than St. Paul." " Supremacy " is another thing. 

5. The grounds of his conduct in this and other acts are unfolded in his Treatise on Unity. 
But here is the place to show what Cyprian had in his mind as the apxala W-q. A canon ^ of the 
African church, after providing for local appeals, reads as follows : " Let them not appeal to tri- 
bunals beyond the seas, but to the primates of their own provinces, or to a general council, as hath 
been often ordained with respect to bishops. But whoso shall persevere in appealing to tribunals 
beyond seas, let them be received to communion by no one in Africa." And here note that 
the plural is used, illustrating the above quotation from Tertullian. All the apostolic Sees are 
treated alike, as " tribunals beyond seas." Note, also, that if any one of these tribunals should 
receive and hear the appellant, its decisions were of no force in Africa. 

6. And, still further, let it be noted that the greatness of Rome, as the capital, was its only 
ground, even to a canotiical primacy afterwards conceded to it for the sake of order. The 
Council of Chalcedon (Fourth OEcumenical, a.d. 451) states the case, and sets the historical fact 
beyond dispute, as. follows : "The Fathers ng\i\\y grajited the seniority (ciTroSeSwKao-i to. Trpco-ySela), 
because that city was the capital, to the throne of the elder Rome, . . . and equal precedency 
{ra lo-a rrpco-ySeia) to the most holy throne of New Rome (Constantinople) ; justly judging that the 
city which is dignified with the sovereignty and the senate, and enjoys egual privileges with the 
elder imperial Rome, should hkewise be magnified with the other in ecclesiastical affairs, and 
rank second after that See." Second as to order, that is ; but equal a.?, to this presbeia. 

Cyprian's theory shows why they said nothing of its apostolic dignity ; viz., because in that 
respect all apostolic Sees were equal, and all older than Rome, and because all other churches in 
communion with these centres were practically apostolic, and each was a See of Peter. For, as 
Cyprian expounds it, there is but one episcopate ; and each bishop, locally, possesses the whole 
of it. It was given first to Peter to make this principle emphatic ; i.e., it is a gift held whole and 
entire by each holder. Then he gave the same to all the apostles, that each one of them might 
comprehend that what St. Peter had, he had : it was an undivided and indivisible authority. 
"Each particular church," says the Oxford translator, "being the miniature of the whole, each 
bishop the representative of Christ, the Chief Bishop ; so that, all bishops being, in their several 
stations, one and the same (as representing the Same), there was, as it were, but one bishop.''' 
Such was Cyprian's exposition of the a.p\axa Wrj : I am not so forgetful as to introduce anything 
of my own. But here it is to be noted that the theory of the Decretals was subversive of all this : 
there was but one, personally, the representative of Christ, His^ Vicar ; and his See, by divine war- 
rant, was supreme. Hence others, called bishops, were not such, as being equals with the Bishop 
of Rome in the episcopal order, for their "order" was only that of presbyters ; and they were called 
" bishops " only as vicars of the one Bishop at Rome, empowered to act for him in local stations, 
but having no real episcopate in themselves. Now, Calvin's memorable sentence was based on 
this difference between the primitive bishops and those of his day With his strong logic he 
argued : if, then, bishops are but shadows of a papacy which we have proved fabulous, bishops 
must be rejected as part of the papacy. But, he said, " Talem nobis hierarchiam si exhibeant, in 
qua sic emineant episcopi ut Chrisio subesse non recusent, et ab illo, tanquam unico capite, pen- 
deant et ad ipsum referantur ; in qua, sic inter se fraternatn societatem colant ut nofi alio nodo, 
quam ejus veritate sint colligati ; turn vero nullo non anathemate dignos fatear, si qui erunt, qui 
non eam reverenter, summaque obedientia, observent." 

It would seem, therefore, that Calvin drew a correct distinction between the Cyprianic theory 
and that of the Decretists. " A Christo, unico capite, pendeant," touches the point of the 
Western schism, which altered this princi])le into " A pontifice Romano, unico capite," prorsus 
pendeant omnes prsesules Catliolici. 

' Gal. ii. 5. 2 This canon of the Council of Milevis (a.d. 402), at a much later date, maintains the ancient principle. 

3 Calrin, De necessitate re/ormandce ecclesice. Works, vol. viii. p. 60. Amslelodami, 1667. 

ELUCIDATIONS. 417 

XIV. 

(The bishop should be chosen in the presence of the people, p. 371.) 

Concerning the election of bishops, and the part of the laity therein, enough has been already 
said to elucidate this important historical point.' But here is the place to elucidate Cyprian's 
relations to Ignatius, by pointing out his theory as to "bishops, presbyters, and deacons." The 
inquiry is, not whether his theory was right or wrong ; but the ante-Nicene Constitutions and 
Canons cannot be understood without a clear comprehension of it, and it is practically important 
in the coming collisions with the alien religion now lifting its head aggressively amongst us. To 
refute its pretensions, Cyprian and Hippolytus are sufificient if cleared from all ambiguities 
thrown back into their expressions from the mediaeval corruption of primitive words, idioms, 
and modes of thought. 

As to presbyters and deacons, then, we must refer to pp. 306, 366, 370; sub-deacons are 
mentioned pp. 301 and 306, with lectors under " teaching-presbyters," as preparing for the clerical 
office. On p. 306 an acolyte is mentioned. Now, these readers, sub-deacons, and acolytes 
{aK6X.ov6o<i) are all of a class, — persons preparing for Holy Orders, and after a time known as 
in " ecclesiastical " or minor orders.^ The lectors need not be explained. The sub-deacons are 
a class not heard of till this third century, even in the West. Cyprian and Cornelius are the first 
to mention them. In the East, sub-deacons and acolytes first appear in the fourth century ; they 
were sub-ministrants and attendants on the clergy, and doubtless had charge of the very trouble- 
some work of preparing the candidates for immersion, and the waters for that sacrament, besides 
cleansing the fonts, and superintending the changes of raiment made necessary. Their offices in 
time of divine service, attending upon the altar, taking the offerings, seating the congregation, 
watching the children, etc., may be supposed. Apart from the names, just such offices, like those 
of sextons, are required in all public worship. The Moravians have acolyths, to this day. 

XV. 

(Cornelius ... a peaceable and righteous priest, etc., p. 371.) 

Now observe his parting tribute in these words, " Cornelius, our colleague, a peaceable and 
righteous priest, and moreover honoured by the condescension of the Lord with martyrdom, has 
long ago decreed, with us and with all the bishops appointed throughout the whole world," etc. 
A colleague, sharing in the decrees of his co-bishops throughout the whole world, is the recognised 
position of this successor of St. Peter. And Cyprian, who firmly believes that St. Peter, as " a 
source and prmciple of unity," had the personal honour of being the first foundation-stone laid on 
the Corner-Stone Himself, sees nothing in that to make Cornehus the foundation ; nor did Cor- 
nelius himself. No, nor St. Peter either, who says (i Pet. ii. 5) all Christians may become Peters 
by being laid on the Living Stone, Christ Jesus. 

Thus we are prepared to read the Treatise on Unity. We may also concede to the bishops of 
Rome, even now, that as soon as they claim no more than Cornelius and St. Peter himself did, 
\S\t\x primacy will no longer be a stumbling-block and a schism to the Christian universe. 

In parting with Cornelius, it is useful to note that he represents his diocese in his day ^ as 
numbering " forty-six presbyters, seven deacons and the same number of sub-deacons, with forty- 
two acolytes and exorcists, readers and sacristans in all fifty-two." More than " fifteen hundred 
widows and sufferers " dependent on this comparatively small and poor church show the terrible 
ravages made by persecution. 

* Elucidation III. p. 411, supra. 2 Bingnam, Antiquities, book iii. capp. ii., iii. 

3 Eusebius, H. E., book vi. cap. xliii. 

4i8 ELUCIDATIONS. 

XVI. 

(Epistle Ixxi. ... To Stephen their brother, p. 378.) 

We now reach a very different character from that of his predecessor ; and in him we en- 
counter the germinant spirit which, in long after-ages, was able to overcome the disciphne of the 
Church." At this time, and during the great synodical period, these personal caprices were made 
light of: the canons and constitutions of the Church were strong enough to check them; and 
such was the predominance of the Eastern mind, for many generations, that the ship of the Church 
was not thrown out of trim. Let us carefully note this historical point, however, and the spirit in 
which our great author exposes the elements of error. 

XVII. 

(In the name of, etc. Since Thre« are One, pp. 380, 382.) 

Having elsewhere touched upon the quotation attributed to TertuUian,^ I need not repeat 
what has been said of this once very painfully agitated matter. But, as to the quotations of the 
African Fathers generally, it ought to be understood that there was a vetus Itala before Jerome, — 
more than one, no doubt, — to which that Father was largely indebted for the text now called the 
Vulgate. Vercellone assured Dean Burgon that there was indeed one established Latin text,^ 
an old Itala. 

Scrivener'* says candidly, " It is hard to believe that i John v. 7 was not cited by Cyprian ; " 
and again, " The African writers Vigilius of Thapsus (at the end of the fifth century) and Fulgen- 
tius {circa 520) in two places expressly appeal to the three heavenly Witnesses'' So, too, Victor 
Vitensis, in the notable case of the African king of the Vandals. The admission of Tischendorf 
is also cited by Scrivener. Tischendorf says, " Gravissivius est Cyprianus (in Tract, de Eccles. 
Unitate), Dicit Dominus, Ego et Pater unum sumus (Joann. x. 30) ; et, iterum, de Patre, Filio, 
et Spiritu Sancto, scriptum est, Et tres unuvi siaity Tischendorf adds the testimony of this 
epistle to Jubaianus. And Scrivener decides that " it is surely safer and more candid to admit 
that Cyprian read it in his copies, than to resort to," etc., the usual explainings away. To this 
note of this same erudite scholar the reader may also turn for satisfaction as to the reasons against 
authenticity. But primarily, to meet questions as to versions used by Cyprian, let him consult 
the same invaluable work (p. 269) on the Old Latin before Jerome. I have added an important 
consideration in a note to the Anonymous Treatise on Baptistn, which follows {infra), with 
other documents, in our Appendix.5 

XVIII. 

(Return to our Lord and Origin, p. 389.) 

Here is an appeal to the ap-)((xia IB-q, that explains other references to " the Root and 
Origin," which he here identifies with our Lord,^ and " the evangelical and apostolic tradition." 
This was the understanding at Nicoea : " ut si in aliquo nutaverit et vacillaverit Veritas, ad origi- 
nem dominicam et evangelicam et apostolicam traditionem revertamur." Is not this the grand 
catholicon for the disorders of modern Christendom ? " Nam consuetudo, sine vcritate, vetustas 

' Consult Cave, Dissertation on the Ancient Church Govertnnent, appended to his Primitive Christianity, p 366. 

* Vol. iii. p. 631. 

3 Burgon, Li'ttersfrovi Rome, p. 34. London, 1862. 

* fiitroiiintioH to Criticism, etc., p. 455, also 564. Comp.ire the Treatise on Unity, .sec. 6, p. 423, infra. 

i Calling attention to evidence that verse 8 is a sort of apodosis implying the protasis of verse 7, as read in the Vulgate and English 
Received. 

* P. 322, note 3, 

ELUCIDATIONS. 419 

erroris est," says Cyprian in this very Epistle.' And, " If we return to the head and source of 
divine tradition, human error ceases." 

XIX. 

(Firmilianus to Cyprian, p. 390.) 

The contest with Stephen, bishop of Rome, will require no great amount of annotation here, 
chiefly because the matter has no practical bearings, except as it incidentally proves what was the 
relation of Stephen to other bishops and to the Catholic Church. In this letter (sec. 6) Fir- 
milian accuses Stephen of " daring to make a departure from the peace and unity of the Catholic 
Church." And (in sec. 16), further, he sets forth, for the Easterns, the same theory of unity 
which Cyprian had expounded for the West ; viz., the unity of the episcopate. He interprets 
the parallel texts (Matt. xvi. 19 and John xx. 22, 23) of bestowal in the same manner. His 
idea is, that, had the latter bestowal been the only one, the apostles might have felt that each had 
only a share in the same respectively ; while, as it stands, there is one episcopate only : in effect, 
only " one bishop ; " each apostle and every bishop, by " vicarious ordination," holding for his 
flock in his own See all that Christ gave to Peter himself, save only the personal privilege of a 
leader in opening the door to the Gentiles,^ and in teaching the apostles the full meaning of the 
gift. The point here is not whether this was the true meaning of our Lord : it is merely that 
such was the understanding of the Ante-Nicene Fathers.^ 

Further (sec. 17), he complains of Stephen for \i\'s, folly in assuming that he had received 
some superior privileges as the successor of Peter ; also censures him for " betraying and desert- 
ing unity." So (in sec. 25) he reflects on Stephen for "disagreeing with so many bishops 
throughout the world . . . with the Eastern churches and with the South." He adds, " with 
such a man, can there be one spirit and one body?" 

Firmilian was of Cappadocia, and a disciple of Origen. The interest of his letter turns 
upon its entire innocence of any conception that Stephen has a right to dictate ; and, while it 
shows a dangerous tendency in the latter personally to take airs upon himself as succeeding the 
primate of the apostolic college, it proves not less that the Church was aware of no ground for it, 
but held all bishops equally responsible for unity by communion with their brethren. To make 
them thus responsible to him and his See had probably not even entered Stephen's head. He 
was rash and capricious in his resort to measures by which every bishop felt bound to separate 
himself from complicity with open heretics, and he seems to have had local usage on his side. 
But how admirable the contrasted forbearance of Cyprian, whose views were equally strong, but 
who protested against all coercive measures against others. 

XX. 

(Clinics, p. 401.) 

Cyprian's moderation is conspicuous in his views of clinic baptism ; for, though Novatian knew 
none other, he forbore to urge this irregularity against him. Even the good Cornelius was not 
so forbearing."* St. Cyprian seems to be the earliest apologist for sprinkling. See Wall, Reflec- 
tions on Baptism of Infants (JVall's IVor/is), vol. iii. p. 219, for a refutation of Tertullian's sup- 
posed admission of " a little sprinkling." s And see Beveridge on Trine Immersion, Works, vol. 
xii. p. 86 ; also Canon L., Apostolical Canons. 

' See sees. 9 and 10. 

2 Acts XV. 7. 

3 See illustrations in Faber's Difficulties 0/ Romanism, cap. iii. pp. 46-88, London, 1830. This work is a succinct reply to Berington 
and Kirk lately reprinted in New York. It refutes itself. Compare vol. i. pp. ix. and x., with the new dogmas, vol. iii. pp. 443-460. 

* See Euscbius, H. E., vi. cap. Ixiii. 
5 TertuUian, vol. iii. p. 66i. 

420 ELUCIDATIONS. 

XXI. 

(Senators and men of importance and Roman knights, p. 408.) 

I Cor. i. 26. We have already seen tokens of the gradual enlightenment of the higher classes 
in the empire ; " the palace, senate, forum," are mentioned by TertuUian.' The fiercer persecu- 
tions seem now to be stimulated by this very fact, and a fear lest Christianity should spread too 
freely among patricians must have prompted this decree. 

XXII. 

(The Lord . . . speaks in that hour, p. 409.) 

The saying of Christ (Matt. x. 10, Mark xiii. 11), "It is not ye that speak, but the Holy 
Ghost," was literally accepted, and acted upon. Is it marvellous that it inspired believing men 
to be martyrs, or that martyrs were so much venerated ? And ought not the same texts to be 
more faithfully accepted in explaining the inspiration of the Holy Scriptures ? Language could 
hardly be stronger : " // is not ye that speak.'' So we reach the close of this holy and heroic life 
of the great, the fervid, the intrepid, but, withal, the gentle and generous Cyprian. And in these 
last words we see the spirit of the man cropping out in his proposal to " arrange in common '* 
with the clergy and people what should be observed, as requisite for the diocese after his de- 
cease, according to " the instruction of the Lord." Qui facit voluntatem Dei manet in aeternum, 
I St. John ii. 17. 

• V«l. iii. p. 45, this series. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

TREATISE I. 

ON THE UNITY OF THE CHURCH.' 

ARGUMENT. — ON THE OCCASION OF THE SCHISM 
OF NOVATUN, TO KEEP BACK FROM HIM THE 
CARTHAGINIANS, WHO ALREADY WERE NOT AVERSE 
TO HIM, ON ACCOUNT OF NOVATUS AND SOME 
OTHER PRESBYTERS OF HIS CHURCH, WHO HAD 
ORIGINATED THE WHOLE DISTURBANCE, CYPRIAN 
WROTE THIS TREATISE. AND FIRST OF ALL, 
FORTIFYING THEM AGAINST THE DECEITS OF 
THESE, HE EXHORTS THEM TO CONSTANCY, AND 
INSTRUCTS THEM THAT HERESIES EXIST BECAUSE 
CHRIST, THE HEAD OF THE CHURCH, IS NOT 
LOOKED TO, THAT THE COMMON COMMISSION 
FIRST ENTRUSTED TO PETER IS CONTEMNED, 
AND THE ONE CHURCH AND THE ONE EPISCO- 
PATE ARE DESERTED. THEN HE PROVES, AS 
WELL BY THE SCRIPTURES AS BY THE FIGURES 
OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT, THE UNITY 
OF THE CHURCH.^ 

I . Since the Lord warns us, saying, " Ye are 
the salt of the earth," ^ and since He bids us to 
be simple to harmlessness, and yet with our 
simplicity to be prudent, what else, beloved 
brethren, befits us, than to use foresight and 
watching with an anxious heart, both to perceive 
and to beware of the wiles of the crafty foe, that 
we, who have put on Christ the wisdom of God 
the Father, may not seem to be wanting in wis- 
dom in the matter of providing for our salvation ? 

1 [Written ad. 251. Although, in order of time, this treatise 
■would he the third, I have placed it here because of its dignity, and 
because of its importance as a key to the entire writings of Cyprian: 
for this theory is everywhere the underlying principle of his conduct 
and of his correspondence. It illustrates the epistles of Ignatius as 
well as his own, and gives the sense in which the primitive Christians 
understood these words of the Creed, " the Holy Catholic Church." 
This treatise has been subjected to falsifying iiiterpolations, long 
since exposed and detected, to make it less subversive of the coimter- 
theory of Rome as developed by the school doctors. Elucidation I.] 

2 Describing in few words the ambition and dissimulation of 
Novatian in invading the episcopate of Rome, he argues at length, 
that neither on the one hand is the passage in Matthew xviii of any 
avail to compensate for their fewness as against the Church: " Wher- 
ever two or three are gathered together in my name," etc. : nor, on 
the other, could martyrdom be of any benefit to them outside the 
Church. Then he tells them that they need not marvel that heresies 
flourished, since they had been foretold by Christ; nor that certain 
Roman confessors acquiesced in the schism, because before one's 
death no one is blessed, and the traitor Judas was found in the very 
company of the apostles. Yet he charges them to shun the associa- 
tion of schismatics and heretics, and finally exhorts them by the 
Scriptures to peace and unanimity. 

3 Matt. v. 13. 

For it is not persecution alone that is to be 
feared ; nor those things which advance by open 
attack to overwhelm and cast down the servants 
of God. Caution is more easy where danger is 
manifest, and the mind is prepared beforehand 
for the contest when the adversary avows him- 
self. The enemy is more to be feared and to be 
guarded against, when he creeps on us secretly ; 
when, deceiving by the appearance of peace, he 
steals forward by hidden approaches, whence 
also he has received the name of the Serpent.* 
That is always his subtlety ; that is his dark and 
stealthy artifice for circumventing man. Thus 
from the very beginning of the world he de- 
ceived ; and flattering with lying words, he misled 
inexperienced souls by an incautious credulity. 
Thus he endeavoured to tempt the Lord Him- 
self: he secretly approached Him, as if he would 
creep on Him again, and deceive ; yet he was 
understood, and beaten back, and therefore pros- 
trated, because he was recognised and detected. 
2. From which an example is given us to 
avoid the way of the old man, to stand in the 
footsteps of a conquering 5 Christ, that we may 
not again be incautiously turned back into the 
nets of death, but, foreseeing our danger, may 
possess the immortality that we have received. 
But how can we possess immortality, unless we 
keep those commands of Christ whereby death 
is driven out and overcome, when He Himself 
warns us, and says, " If thou wilt enter into life, 
keep the commandments? " ^ And again : " If 
ye do the things that I command you, hence- 
forth I call you not servants, bul' friends." ^ 
Finally, these persons He calls strong and sted- 
fast ; these He declares to be founded in robust 
security upon the rock, established with immove- 
able and unshaken firmness, in opposition to all 
the tempests and hurricanes of the world. " Who- 
soever," says He, " heareth my words, and doeth 
them, I will liken him unto a wise man, that 
built his house upon a rock : the rain descended, 
the floods came, the winds blew, and beat upon 

* The creeping, stealing thing. 

5 Or, " living." 

6 Matt. xix. 17. 
1 John xiv. 15. 

421 

422 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

that house : and it fell not : for it was founded 
upon a rock." ' We ought therefore to stand 
fast on His words, to learn and do whatever He 
both taught and did. But how can a man say 
that he believes in Christ, who does not do what 
Christ commanded him to do ? Or whence shall 
he attain to the reward of faith, who will not } 
keep the faith of the commandment? He must ' 
of necessity waver and wander, and, caught away 
by a spirit of error, like dust which is shaken by 
the wind, be blown about ; and he will make no 
advance in his walk towards salvation, because he 
dues not keep the truth of the way of salvation. 
3. But, beloved brethren, not only must we 
beware of what is open and manifest, but also | 
of what deceives by the craft of subtle fraud. | 
And what can be more crafty, or what more j 
subtle, than for this enemy, detected and cast ! 
down by the advent of Christ, after light has 
come to the nations, and saving rays have shone 
for the preservation of men, that the deaf might 
receive the hearing of spiritual grace, the blind 
might open their eyes to God, the weak might 
grow strong again with eternal health, the lame 
might run to the church, the dumb might pray 
with clear voices and prayers — seeing his idols 
forsaken, and his fanes and his temples deserted 
by the numerous concourse of believers — to 
devise a new fraud, and under the very title of 
the Christian name to deceive the incautious? 
He has invented heresies and schisms, whereby 
he might subvert the faith, might corrupt the 
truth, might divide the unity.^ Those whom he 
cannot keep in the darkness of the old way, 
he circumvents and deceives by the error of a 
new way. He snatches men from the Church 
itself; and while they seem to themselves to 
have already approached to the light, and to have 
escaped the night of the world, he pours over 
them again, in their unconsciousness, new dark- 
ness ; so that, although they do not stand firm 
with the Gospel of Christ, and with the observa- 
tion and law of Christ, they still call themselves 
Christians, and, walking in darkness, tliey think 
that they have the light, while the adversary is 
flattering and deceiving, who, according to the 
apostle's word, transforms himself into an angel 
of light, and equips his ministers as if they were 
the ministers of righteousness, who maintain 
night instead of day, death for salvation, despair 
luider the offer of hope, perfidy under the ])re- 
text of faith, antichrist under the name of Christ ; 

' Matt, vii 24. 

- [Here note that our author's entire ignorance of any Centre 
of Unity, of any one See as the test of communion; in short, of any 
one bishop as having more of Peter's authority than others, — is a 
siifficient disproof of the existence of any such things. Otherwise, 
how could they have been overlooked in a treatise devoted to the 
subject of unity, its nature and its criteria ? The effort to foist into 
the text something of the kind, by corruption, demonstrates how en- 
tirely unsatisfactory' to the Middle- Age theorists and dogmatists is the 
unadulterated work, which they could not let alone.] 

SO that, while they feign things like the truth, 
they make void the truth by their subdety. This 
happens, beloved brethren, so long as we do not 
return to the source of truth, as we do not seek 
the head nor keep the teaching of the heavenly- 
Master. 

4. If any one consider and examine these 
things, there is no need for lengthened discus- 
sion and arguments. There is easy proof for 
faith in a short summary of the triith. The 
Lord speaks to Peter,^ saying, " I say unto thee, 
that thou art Peter ; and upon this rock I will 
build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not 
prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the 
keys of the kingdom of heaven ; and whatsoever 
thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound also in 
heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth 
shall be loosed in heaven." •♦ And again to the 
same He says, after His resurrection, " Feed my 
sheep." 5 And although to all th^ apostles, after 
His resurrection, He gives an equal power, and 
says, " As the Father hath sent me, even so send 
I you : Receive ye the Holy Ghost : Whose so- 
ever sins ye remit, they shall be remitted unto 
him ; and whose soever sins ye retain, they shall 
be retained;"^' yet, that He might set forth 
unity. He arranged by His authority the origin 
of that unity, as beginning from one. Assuredly 
the rest of the apostles were also the same as 
was Peter, endowed with a like partnership both 
of honour and power ; but the beginning pro- Y 
ceeds from unity.^ Which one Church, also, the 
Holy Spirit in the Song of Songs designated in. 
the person of our Lord, and says, " My do\e,. 
my spotless one, is but one. She is fhe only 
one of her mother, elect of her that bare her."** 
Does he who does not hold this unity of the 
Church think that he holds the faith ? Does he 
who strives against and resists the Church ''' trust 
that he is in the Church, when moreover the 
blessed Apostle Paul teaches the same thing, 
and sets forth the sacrament of unity, saying, 

" There is one body and one spirit, one hope of 
your calling, one Lord, one fiiith, one baptism,. 
one God ? " '° 

5. And this unity we ought firmly to hold ^ 
and assert, especially those of us that are bish- 
ops who preside in the Church, that we may 

11.1 

3 [On the falsifying of the text by Romish editors, see EIucidatioi>. 

•• Matt. xvi. 18, 19. 

5 John xxi. 15. I Here is interpolated] : " Upon him, being one. 
He builds His Church, and commits His sheep to be fed." 

*> John XX. 21. 

7 [Here is interpolated]: "And the primacy is given to Peter, 
that there might be shown one Church of Christ undone See; and 
they are all shepherds, and the flock is one, which is fed by all the 
apostles with unanimous consent." Ibis passage, as well as the one 
a few lines before, is beyond all question spurious. 

* Cant. vi. Q. 

9 [Here is interpolated] : " Who deserts the chair of Peter, upon 
whom the Church is founded." This passage also is undoubtedly 
spurious. 

"° Kph. iv. 4. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

423 

also prove the episcopate itself to be one and ; 
undivided.' Let no one deceive the brother- 
hood by a falsehood : let no one corrupt the 
truth of the faith by perfidious prevarication. 
The episcopate is one, each part of which is% 
held by each one for the whcle.^ The Church- 
also is one, which is spread abroad far and wide 
into a multitude by an increase of fruitfulness. 
As there are many rays of the sun, but one light ; 
and many branches of a tree, but one strength 
based in its tenacious root ; and since from one 
spring flow many streams, although the multi- 
plicity seems diffused in the liberality of an 
overflowing abundance, yet the unity is still pre- 
served in the source. Separate a ray of the sun 
from its body of light, its unity does not allow 
a division of light ; break a branch from a tree, 
— when broken, it will not be able to bud ; cut | 
off the stream from its fountain, and that which 
is cut off dries up. Thus also the Church, shone 
over with the light of the Lord, sheds forth her j 
rays over the whole world, yet it is one light 
which is everywhere diffused, nor is the unity of , 
the body separated. Her fruitful abundance 
spreads her branches over the whole world. 
She broadly expands her rivers, liberally flowing, ■ 
yet her head is one, her source one ; and she is i 
one mother, plentiful in the results of fruitful- 
ness : from her womb we are born, by her milk 
we are nourished, by her spirit we arc animated. , 
6. The spouse of Christ cannot be adulter- 
ous ; she is uncorrupted and pure. She knows | 
one home ; she guards with chaste modesty 
the sanctity of one couch. She keeps us for ^ 
God. She appoints the sons whom she has j 
born for the kingdom. Whoever is separated 
from the Church and is joined to an adulteress, ' 
is separated from the promises of the Church ; 
nor can he who forsakes the Church of Christ 
attain to the rewards of Christ. He is a 
stranger ; he is profane ; he is an enemy. He 
can no longer have God for his Father, who has 
not the Church for his mother. If any one 
could escape who was outside the ark of Noah, 
then he also may escape who shall be outside of 
the Church. The Lord warns, saying, " He who 
is not with me is against me, and he who gath- 
ereth not with me scattereth." ^ He who breaks 
the peace and the concord of Christ, does so in 
opposition to Christ ; he who gathereth else- 
where than in the Church, scatters the Church 
of Christ. The Lord says, " I and the Father 
are one ; " "* and again it is written of the Father, 
and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, " And 
these three are one." 5 And does any one 

believe that this unity which thus comes from 
the divine strength and coheres in celestial sac- 
raments, can be divided in the Church, and can 
be separated by the parting asunder of oppos- 
ing wills? He who does not hold this unity 
does not hold God's law, does not hold the faith 
of the Father and the Son, does not hold life 
and salvation. 

7. This sacrament of unity, this bond of a 
concord inseparably cohering, is set forth where 
in the Gospel the coat of the Lord Jesus Christ ^ " 
' is not at all divided nor cut, but is received as '■ 
an entire garment, and is possessed as an unin- 
I jured and undivided robe by those who cast lots ^ 
tysoncerning Christ's garment, who should rather 
jput on Christ.^ Holy Scripture speaks, saying, 
" But of the coat, because it was not sewed, but 
I woven from the top throughout, they said one to 
' another. Let us not rend it, but cast lots whose 
it shall be." ^ That coat bore with it an unity 
j that came down from the top, that is, that came . 
from heaven and the Father, which was not to 
be at all rent by the receiver and the possessor, 
but without separation we obtain a whole and 
substantial entireness. He cannot possess the 
garment of Christ who parts and divides the 
Church of Christ. On the other hand, again, 
when at Solomon's death his kingdom and peo- 
ple were divided, Abijah the prophet, meeting 
Jeroboam the king in the field, divided his gar- 
ment into twelve sections, saying, " Take thee 
ten pieces ; for thus saith the Lord, Behold, I 

;b 

the universal episcopate is the chair of Peter.] 
[This maxim is the essence of the treatise; i.e., Ecclesia in 
Episcopo." Conipare p. 333, note 9, su/ra.] 
3 Matt. xii. 30. 
* John X. 30. 
5 I John V. 7. 

will rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solo- 
mon, and I will give ten sceptres unto thee ; 

j and two sceptres shall be unto him for my ser- 
vant David's sake, and for Jerusalem, the city 

' which I have chosen to place my name there." ** 
As the twelve tribes of Israel were divided, the 

I prophet Abijah rent his garment. But because 
Christ's people cannot be rent. His robe, woven 

I and united throughout, is not divided by those 

j who possess it ; undivided, united, connected, it 
shows the coherent concord of our people who 

' put on Christ. By the sacrament and sign of 
His garment, He has declared the unity of the 
Church. 

8. Who, then, is so wicked and faithless, who 
is so insane with the madness of discord, that \ 
either he should believe that the unity of God 
can be divided, or should dare to rend it — the 
garment of the Lord — the Church of Christ? 
He Himself in His Gospel warns us, and teaches, 
saying, "And there shall be one flock and one 
shepherd." 9 And does any one believe that in. 

* The above reading of this passage seems hopelessly obscure; 
and it is not much mended apparently by substifutirg " ipoam " for 
Christum, unless " potius " be omitted, as in some cdi'iopi, iii which 
case we should read, " who should put it on." 

7 John xix. 23, 24. 

* I Kings xi. 31. 
9 John X. i6. 

424 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

one place there can be either many shepherds 
or many flocks? The Apostle Paul, moreover, 
urging upon us this same unity, beseeches and 
exhorts, saying, " I beseech you, brethren, by 
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all 
speak the same thing, and that there be no 
schisms among you ; but that ye be joined to- 
gether in the same mind and in the same judg- 
ment." ' And again, he says, " Forbearing one 
another in love, endeavouring to keep the unity 
of the Spirit in the bond of peace." ^ Do you 
think that you can stand and live if you withdraw 
from the Church, building for yourself other 
homes and a different dwelling, when it is said 
to Rahab, in whom was prefigured the Church, 
" Thy father, and thy mother, and thy brethren, 
and all the house of thy father, thou shall gather 
unto thee into thine house ; and it shall come to 
pass, whosoever shall go abroad beyond the door 
of thine house, his blood shall be upon his own 
head? "J Also, the sacrament of the passover 
contains nothing else in the law of the Exodus 
than that the lamb which is slain in the figure of 
Christ should be eaten in one house. God 
speaks, saying, " In one house shall ye eat it ; ye 
shall not send its flesh abroad from the house." •♦ 
The flesh of Christ, and the holy of the Lord, 
cannot be sent abroad, nor is there any other 
home to believers but the one Church. This 
home, this household 5 of unanimity, the Holy 
Spirit designates and points out in the Psalms, 
saying, " God, who maketh men to dwell with 
one mind in a house." '' In the house of God, 
in the Church of Christ, men dwell with one 
mind, and continue in concord and simplicity. 

9. Therefore also the Holy Spirit came as a 
dove, a simple and joyous creature, not bitter 
with gall, not cruel in its bite, not violent with 
the rending of its claws, loving human dwellings, 
knowing the association of one home ; when they 
have young, bringing forth their young together ; 
when they fly abroad, remaining in their flights 
by the side of one another, spending their life 
in mutual intercourse, acknowledging the con- 
cord of peace with the kiss of the beak, in all 
things fulfilling the law of unanimity. This is 
the simplicity that ought to be known in the 
Church, this is the charity that ought to be 
attained, that so the love of the brotherhood 
may imitate the doves, that their gentleness and 
meekness may be like the lambs and sheep. 
What does the fierceness of wolves do in the 
Christian breast ? What the savageness of dogs, 
and the deadly venom of serpents, and the 
sanguinary cruelty of wild beasts? We are to 

' I Cor. i. 10. 
2 Eph. iv. 3. 
•^ Josh. ii. 19. 
■♦ Kx. xii. 46.' 
5 " Hospitium." 
* Ps. Ixviii. 6. 

be congratulated when such as these are sepa- 
rated from the Church, lest they should lay waste 
the doves and sheep of Christ with their cruel 
and envenomed contagion. Bitterness cannot 
consist and be associated with sweetness, dark- 
ness with light, rain with clearness, battle with 
peace, barrenness with fertility, drought with 
springs, storm with tranquillity. Let none think 
that the good can depart from the Church. The 
wind does not carry away the wheat, nor does 
the hurricane uproot the tree that is based on a 
solid root. The light straws are tossed about by 
the tempest, the feeble trees are overthrown 
by the onset of the whirlwind. The Apostle 
John execrates and severely assails these, when 
he says, " They went forth from us, but they 
were not of us ; for if they had been of us, surely 
they would have continued with us." 7 

10. Hence heresies not only have frequently^ 
been originated, but continue to be so ; while \) 
the perverted mind has no peace — while a dis- 
cordant faithlessness does not maintain unity.p. 
But the Lord permits and suffers these things to 
be, while the choice of one's own liberty remains, 
so that while the discrimination of truth is testing 
our hearts and our minds, the sound faith of those 
that are approved may shine forth with manifest ^ ) 
light. The Holy Spirit forewarns and says by 
the apostle, " It is needful also that there should 
be heresies, that they which are approved may 
be made manifest among you." ^ Thus the faith- 
ful are approved, thus the perfidious are detected ; 
thus even here, before the day of judgment, the 
souls of the righteous and of the unrighteous 
are already divided, and the chaff is separated 
from the wheat. These are they who of their 
own accord, without any di\ine arrangement, set 
themselves to preside among the daring strangers 
assembled, who appoint themselves prelates with- 
out any law of ordination, who assume to them- 1 
selves the name of bishop, although no one gives ^ 
them the episcopate ; whom the Holy Spirit 
points out in the Psalms as sitting in the seat of 
pestilence, plagues, and spots of the faith, deceiv- 
ing with serpent's tongue, and artful in corrupt- 
ing the truth, vomiting forth deadly poisons from 
pestilential tongues ; whose speech doth creep 
like a cancer, whose discourse forms a deadly 
poison in the heart and breast of every one. 

1 1 . Against people of this kind the Lord cries ; 
from these He restrains anil recalls His erring 
people, saying, " Hearken not unto the words 
of the false prophets ; for the visions of their 
hearts deceive them. They speak, but not out 
of the mouth of the Lord. They say to those 
who cast away the word of God, Ye shall have 
peace, and every one that walketh after his own 
will. Every one who walketh in the error of his 

' I John ii. 19. 
' I Cor. xi. ig. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

425 

heart, no evil shall come upon him. I have not 
spoken to them, yet they prophesied. If they 
had stood on my foundation {substantia, viroa-ra- 
o-ti), and had heard my words, and taught my 
people, I would have turned them from their evil 
thoughts." ' Again, the Lord points out and 
designates these same, saying, "They have for- 
saken me, the fountain of living waters, and have 
hewed them out broken cisterns which can hold 
no water." ^ Although there can be no other 
baptism but one, they think that they can bap-' 
tize ; although they forsake the fountain of life,/*, 
they promise the grace of living and saving water.'' 
Men are not washed among them, but rather 
are made foul ; nor are sins purged away, but 
are even accumulated. Such a nativity does not 
generate sons to God, but to the devil. By a 
falsehood they are born, and they do not receive 
the promises of truth. Begotten of perfidy, they 
lose the grace of faith. They cannot attain to 
the reward of peace, since they have broken the 
Lord's peace with the madness of discord. 

12. Nor lei any deceive themselves by a futile 
interpretation, in respect of the Lord having said, 
" Wheresoever two or three are gathered together 
in my name, there am I in the midst of them." ^ 
Corrupters and false interpreters of the Gospeli 
quote the last words, and lay aside the former 
ones, remembering part, and craftily suppressing 
part : as they themselves are separated from the 
Church, so they cut off the substance of one 
section. For the Lord, when He would urge 
unanimity and peace upon His disciples, said, 
■" I say unto you. That' if two of you shall agree 
on earth touching anything that ye shall ask, 
it shall be given you by my Father which is in 
heaven. For wheresoever two or three are gath- 
ered together in my name, I am with them ; " * 
showing that most is given, not to the multitude, 
but to the unanimity of those that pray. " If," 
He says, " two of you shall agree on earth : " 
He placed agreement first ; He has made the 
concord of peace a prerequisite ; He taught that 
we should agree firmly and faithfully. But how 
can he agree with any one who does not agree 
with the body of the Church itself, and with the 
universal brotherhood ? How can two or three 
be assembled together in Christ's name, who, it 
is evident, are separated from Christ and from 
His Gospel ? For we have not withdrawn from 
them, but they from us ; and since heresies and 
schisms have risen subsequently, from tlieir es- 
tablishment for themselves of diverse places of 
worship, they have forsaken the Head and Source 
of the truth. But the Lord speaks concerning 
His Church, and to those also who are in the 

' Jer. xxiii. 16-21. 

2 Jer. ii. 13. 

3 Matt, xviii. 20. 

-* Malt, xviii. 19, 20. [Compare John xx. 26-29.] 

Church He speaks, that if they are in agreement, 
if according to what He commanded and ad- 
monished, although only two or three gathered 
together with unanimity should pray — though 
they be only two or three — they may obtain from 
the majesty of God what they ask. " Whereso- 
ever two or three are gathered together in my 
name, I," says He, " am with them ; " that is, 
with the simple and peaceable — with those who 
fear God and keep God's commandments. With 
these, although only two or three. He said that 
He was, in the same manner as He was with the 
three youths in the fiery furnace ; and because 
they abode towards God in simplicity, and in 
unanimity among themselves. He animated them, 
in the midst of the surrounding flames, with the 
breath of dew : in the way in which, with the 
two apostles shut up in prison, because they were 
simple-minded and of one mind, He Himself 
was present ; He Himself, having loosed the bolts 
of the dungeon, placed them again in the market- 
place, that they might declare to the multitude 
the word which they faithfully preached. When, 
therefore, in His commandments He lays it down, 
and says, " Where two or three are gathered to- 
gether in my name, I am with them," He does 
Inot divide men from the Church, seeing that He 
Himself ordained and made the Church ; but 
rebuking the faithless for their discord, and com- 
mending peace by His word to the faithful. He 
shows that He is rather with two or three who 
pray with one mind, than with a great many who 
differ, and that more can be obtained by the con- 
cordant prayer of a few, than by the discordant 
supplication of many. 

13. Thus, also, when He gave the law of prayer, 
He added, saying, " And when ye stand praying, 
forgive, if ye have ought against any ; that your 
Father also which is in heaven may forgive you 

'your trespasses." 5 And He calls back from the -^ 
altar one who comes to the sacrifice in strife, and ^ 
bids him first* agree with his brother, and then 
return with 'peace and offer his gift to God : 
for God had not respect unto Cain's offerings ; for 
he could not have God at peace with him, who 
through envious discord had not peace with his 
brother. What peace, then, do the enemies of 
the brethren promise to themselves ? What sac- 
rifices do those who are rivals of the priests think 
that they celebrate ? Do they deem that they 
have Christ with them when they are collected 
together, who are gathered together outside the 
Church of Christ? 

14. Even if such men were slain in confession 
of the Name, that stain is not even washed away 
by blood : the inexpiable and grave fault of dis- 
cord is not even purged by suffering. He can- 
not be a martyr who is not in the Church ; he 

5 Mark xi. 25. [Freeman, Principles, etc. vol. i. 417.] 

426 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

cannot attain unto the kingdom who forsakes 
that which shall reign there. Christ gave us 
peace ; He bade us be in agreement, and of 
one mind. He charged the bonds of love and 
charity to be kept uncorrupted and inviolate ; 
he cannot show himself a martyr who has not 
maintained brotherly love. Paul the apostle 
teaches this, and testifies, saying, " And though 
I have faith, so that I can remove mountains, 
and have not charity, I am nothing. And though 
I give all my goods to feed the poor, and though I 
give, my body to be burned, and have not charity, 
it profiteth me nothing. Charity is magnanimous ; 
charity is kind ; charity envieth not ; charity act- 
eth not vainly, is not puffed up, is not easily 
j)rovoked, thinketh no evil ; loveth all things, 
believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth 
all things. Charity never faileth." ' " Charity," 
says he, " never faileth." For she will ever be 
in the kingdom, she will endure for ever in the 
unity of a brotherhood linked to herself. Discord 
cannot attain to the kingdom of heaven ; to the 
rewards of Christ, who said, " This is my com- 
mandment, that ye love one another, even as I 
have loved you : " ^ he cannot attain ^ who has 
violated the love of Christ by faithless dissension. 
He who has not charity has not God. The word 
of the blessed Apostle John is : "God," saith he, 
" is love ; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth 
in God, and God dwelleth in him." ^ They can 
not dwell with God who would i]ot be of one 
mind in God's Church. Although they burn, 
given up to flames and fires, or lay down their 
lives, thrown to the wild beasts, that will not be 
the crown of faith, but the ])unishment of perfidy ; 
nor will it be the glorious ending of religious 
valour, but the destruction of despair. Such a 
one may be slain ; crowned he cannot be. He 
professes himself to be a Christian in such a way 
as the devil often feigns himself to be Christ, as 
the Lord Himself forewarns us, and says, " Many 
shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and 
shall deceive many." 5 As he is not Christ, al- 
though he deceives in respect of the name ; so 
neither can he appear as a Christian who does 
not abide in the truth of His Gospel and of 
faith. 

15. For both to prophesy and to cast out 
devils, and to do great acts upon the earth, is 
certainly a sublime and an admirable thing ; but 
one does not attain the kingdom of heaven al- 
though he is found in all these things, unless he 
walks in the observance of the right and just 
way. The Lord denounces, and says, " Many 
shall say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have 

^ 

* I Cor. xiii. 2-5, 7, 8. 

* John XV. 12. 

3 According to some readings, " to Chri&t," or 
of Christ." 

* I John iv. 16. 
S Mark xiii. 6. 

' to the rewards 

we not prophesied in Thy name, and in Thy 
name have cast out devils, and in Thy name 
done many wonderful works ? And then will I 
profess unto them, I never knew you : depart 
from me, ye that work iniquity." ^ There is 
need of righteousness, that one may deserve 
well of God the Judge ; we must obey His pre- 
cepts and warnings, that our merits may receive 
their reward. The Lord in His Gospel, when 
He would direct the way of our hope and faith 
in a brief summary, said, " The Lord thy God is 
one God : and thou shalt love the Lord thy God 
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with 
all thy strength. This is the first commandment ; 
and the second is like unto it : Thou shalt love 
thy neighbour as thyself. On these two com- 
mandments hang all the law and the prophets." 7 , 
He taught, at the same time, love and unity by 
His instruction. He has included all the proph- 
ets and the law in two precepts. But what unity 
does he keep, what love does he maintain or 
consider, who, savage with the madness of dis- 
cord, divides the Church, destroys the faith, 
disturbs the peace, dissipates charity, profanes 
the sacrament? 

1 6. This evil, most faithful brethren, had long 
ago begun, but now the mischievous destruction 
of the same evil has increased, and the enven- 
omed plague of heretical perversity and schisms 
has begun to spring forth and shoot anew ; be- 
cause even thus it must be in the decline of the 
world, since the Holy Spirit foretells and fore- 
warns us by the apostle, saying, " In the last 
days," says he, " perilous times shall come, and 
men shall be lovers of their own selves, proud, 
boasters, covetous, blasphemers, disobedient to 
parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural af- 
fection, truce-breakers, false accusers, inconti- 
nent, fierce, hating the good, traitors, heady, 
high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers 
of God, having a sort of form ^ of religion, but 
denying the power thereof. Of this sort are 
they who creep into houses, and lead captive 
silly women laden with sins, which are led away 
with divers lusts ; ever learning, and never com- 
ing to the knowledge of the truth. And as 
Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do 
these also resist the truth ; ^ but they shall pro- 
ceed no fiirther, for their folly shall be manifest 
unto all men, even as theirs also was." '° What- 
ever things were predicted are fulfilled ; and as 
the end of the world is approaching, they have 
come for the probation as well of the men as of 
the times. Error deceives as the adversary rages 
more and more ; senselessness lifts up, envy in- 

*> Matt. vii. 22. 

7 Mark xii. 29-31. 

8 1 )eformationem religionis. 

9 Some introduce, " men corrupted in feeling, reprobate concern- 
ing the faith." 

'° 2 Tim. iii. 1-9. [Vol. iv. p. 521, this series.] 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

427 

flames, covetousness makes blind, impiety de- 
praves, pride puffs up, discord exasperates, anger 
hurries headlong. 

17. Yet let not the excessive and headlong 
faithlessness of many move or disturb us, but 
rather strengthen our faith in the truthfulness 
which has foretold the matter. As some have 
become such, because these things were pre- 
dicted beforehand, so let other brethren beware 
of matters of a like kind, because these also 
were predicted beforehand, even as the Lord in- 
structs us, and says, " But take ye heed : behold, 
I have told you all things." ' Avoid, I beseech 
you, brethren, men of this kind, and drive away 
from your side and from your ears, as if it were 
the contagion of death, their mischievous con- 
versation ; as it is written, " Hedge thine ears 
about with thorns, and refuse to hear a wicked 
tongue." ^ And again, " Evil communications 
corrupt good manners." ^ The Lord teaches 
and warns us to depart from such. He saith, 
" They are blind leaders of the blind ; and if the 
blind lead the blind, they shall both fall into the 
ditch." •* Such a one is to be turned away 
from and avoided, whosoever he may be, that is 
separated from the Church. Such a one is per- 
verted and sins, and is condemned of his own 
self Does he think that he has Christ, who 
acts in opposition to Christ's priests, who sepa- 
rates himself from the company of His clergy 
and people ? He bears arms against the Church, 
he contends against God's appointment. An 
enemy of the altar, a rebel against Christ's sac- 
rifice, for the feith faithless, for religion profane, 
a disobedient servant, an impious son, a hostile 
brother, despising the bishops, and forsaking 
God's priests, he dares to set up another altar, 
to make another prayer with unauthorized words, 
to profane the truth of the Lord's offering by 
false sacrifices, and nots to know that he who 
strives against the appointment of God, is pun- 
ished on account of the daring of his temerity 
by divine visitation. 

18. Thus Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, who 
endeavoured to claim to themselves the power 
of sacrificing in opposition to Moses and Aaron 
the priest, underwent immediate punishment for 
their attempts. The earth, breaking its fasten- 
ings, gaped open into a deep gulf, and the cleft 
of the receding ground swallowed up the men 
standing and living. Nor did the anger of the 
indignant God strike only those who had been 
the movers (of the sedition) ; but two hundred 
and fifty sharers and associates of that madness 
besides, who had been mingled with them in 
that boldness, the fire that went out from the 

' Mark xiii. 23. 

2 Ecclus. xxviii. 24, Vulg. 

5 1 Cor. XV. 33. 

* Matt. XV. 14. 

5 According to some, "does not deign," or " disdains to know.' 

Lord consumed with a hasty revenge ; doubtless 
to admonish and show that whatever those wicked 
men had endeavoured, in order by human will to 
overthrow God's appointment, had been done in 
opposition to God. Thus also Uzziah the king, 
— when he bare the censer and violently claimed 
to himself to sacrifice against God's law, and 
when Azariah the priest withstood him, would 
not be obedient and yield, — was confounded 
by the divine indignation, and was polluted upon 
his forehead by the spot of leprosy : he was 
marked by an offended Lord in that part of his 
body where they are signed who deserve well of 
the Lord. And the sons of Aaron, who placed 
strange fire upon the altar, which the Lord had 
not commanded, were at once extinguished in 
the presence of an avenging Lord. 

19. These, doubtless, they imitate and follow, 
who, despising God's tradition, seek after strange 
doctrines, and bring in teachings of human ap- 
pointment, whom the Lord rebukes and reproves 
in His Gospel, saying, "Ye reject the com- 
mandment of God, that ye may keep your own 
tradition." ^ This is a worse crime than that 
which the lapsed seem to have fallen into, who 
nevertheless, standing as penitents for their 
crime, beseech God with full satisfactions. In 
this case, the Church is sought after and en- 
treated ; in that case, the Church is resisted : 
here it is possible that there has been necessity ; 
there the will is engaged in the wickedness : on 
the one hand, he who has lapsed has only injured 
himself; on the other, he who has endeavoured 
to cause a heresy or a schism has deceived many 
by drawing them with him. In the former, it is 
the loss of one soul ; in the latter, the risk of 
many. Certainly the one both understands that 
he has sinned, and laments and bewails it ; the 
other, puffed up in his heart, and pleasing him- 
self in his very crimes, separates sons from their 
Mother, entices sheep from their shepherd, dis- 
turbs the sacraments of God ; and while the 
lapsed has sinned but once, he sins daily. Fi- 
nally, the lapsed, who has subsequently attained 
to martyrdom, may receive the promises of the 
kingdom ; while the other, if he have been slain 
without the Church, cannot attain to the rewards 
of the Church. 

20. Nor let any one marvel, beloved brethren, 
that even some of the confessors advance to these 
lengths, and thence also that some others sin 
thus wickedly, thus grievously. For neither does 
confession make a man free from the snares of 
the devil, nor does it defend a man who is still 
placed in the world, with a perpetual security 
from temptations, and dangers, and onsets, and 
attacks of the world ; otherwise we should never 
see in confessors those subsequent frauds, and 

^ Mark vii. 9. 

428 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

fornications, and adulteries, which now with 
groans and sorrow we witness in some. Who- 
soever that confessor is, he is not greater, or bet- 
ter, or dearer to God than Solomon, who, although 
so long as he walked in Ood's ways, retained that 
grace which he had received" from the Lord, yet 
after he forsook the Lord's way he lost also the 
Lord's grace." And therefore it is written, " Hold 
fast that which thou hast, lest another take thy 
crown." ^ But assuredly the Lord would not 
threaten that the crown of righteousness might 
be taken away, were it not that, when righteous- 
ness departs, the crown must also depart. 

21. Confession is the beginning of glory, not 
the full desert of the crown ; nor does it perfect 
our praise, but it initiates our dignity ; and since 
it is written, " He that endureth to the end, the 
same shall be saved," ^ whatever has been before 
the end is a step by which we ascend to the sum- 
mit of salvation, not a terminus wherein the full 
result of the ascent is already gained. He is a 
confessor ; but after confession his peril is greater, 
because the adversary is more provoked. He is 
a confessor ; for this cause he ought the more to 
stand on the side of the Lord's Gospel, since he 
has by the Gospel attained glory from the Lord. 
For the Lord says, "To whom much is given, of 
him much shall be required ; and to whom more 
dignity is ascribed, of him more service is ex- 
acted." •» Let no one perish by the example of 
a confessor ; let no one learn injustice, let no one 
learn arrogance, let no one learn treachery, from 
the manners of a confessor. He is a confessor, 
let him be lowly and quiet ; let him be in his 
doings modest with discipline, so that he who is 
called a confessor of Christ may imitate Christ 
whom he confesses. For since He says, " Who- 
soever exalteth himself sliall be abased, and he 
who humbleth himself shall be exalted ; " s and 
since He Himself has been exalted by the 
Father, because as the Word, and the strength, 
and the wisdom of God the Father, He humbled 
1 limself upon earth, how can He love arrogance, 
who even by His own law enjoined upon us hu- 
mility, and Himself received the highest name 
from the Father as the reward of His humility? 
He is a confessor of Christ, but only so if the 
majesty and dignity of Christ be not afterwards 
blasphemed by him. Let not the tongue which 
has confessed Christ be evil-speaking ; let it not 
l)e turbulent, let it not be heard jarring with re- 
])roaches and (}uarrels, let it not after words of 
praise, dart forth serpents' venom against the 
l)rethren and God's priests. But if one shall 

' Some read, " As it is written, And the I-ord stirred up the 
adversary (Satan) against Solomon; and therefore in the Apocalypse 
the I-ord solemnly warns John." 

2 Apoc. iii. II. 

3 Matt. X. 22. 
* Luke xii. 48. 

^ Luke xviii. 14. 

have subsequently been blameworthy and obnox- 
ious ; if he shall have wasted his confession by 
evil conversation ; if he shall have stained his life 
by disgraceful foulness ; if, finally, forsaking the 
Church in which he has become a confessor, and 
severing the concord of unity, he shall have ex- 
changed his first faith for a subsequent unbelief, 
he may not flatter himself on account of his con- 
fession that he is elected to the reward of glory, 
when from this very fact his deser\'ing of punish- 
ment has become the greater. 

22. For the Lord chose Judas also among the 
apostles, and yet afterwards Judas betrayed the 

. Lord. Yet not on that account did the faith 
I and firmness of the apostles fail, because the 
traitor Judas failed from their fellowship : so also 
in the case in question the holiness and dignity 
of confessors is not forthwith diminished, be- 
cause the faith of some of them is broken. The 
blessed Apostle Paul in his epistle speaks in this 
manner : " For what if some of them fall away 
from the faith, shall their unbelief make the faith 
of God without effect ? God forbid : for God is 
true, though every man be a liar."^ The greater 
and better part of the confessors stand firm in 
the strength of their faith, and in the truth of 
the law and discipline of the Lord ; neither do 
they depart from the peace of the Church, who 
remember that they have obtained grace in the 
Church by the condescension of God ; and by 
this very thing they obtain a higher praise of 
their faith, that they have separated from the 
faithlessness of those who have been associated 
with them in the fellowship of confession, and 
withdrawn from the contagion of crime. Illu- 
minated by the true light of the Gospel, shone 
upon with the Lord's pure and white brightness, 
they are as praiseworthy in maintaining the peace 
of Christ, as they have been victorious in their 
combat with the devil. 

23. I indeed desire, beloved brethren, and I 
ecjually endeavour and exhort, that if it be possi- ' 
ble, none of the brethren should perish, and that 
our rejoicing Mother may enclose in her bosom 
the one body of a people at agreement. Vet if 
wholesome counsel cannot recall to the way of 
salvation certain leaders of schisms and origi- 
nators of dissensions, who abide in blind and 
obstinate madness, yet do you others, if either 
taken in simplicity, or induced by error, or de- 
ceived by some craftiness of misleading cunning, 
loose yourselves from the nets of deceit, free 
your wandering steps from errors, acknowledge 
the straight way of the heavenly road. The 
word of the witnessing apostle is : *' We com- 
mand you," says he, " in the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves from 
all brethren that walk disorderly, and not after 

* Rom. iii. 3. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

429 

the tradition that they have received from us." ' 
And again he says, ** Let no man deceive you 
with vain words ; for because of these things 
Cometh the wrath of God upon the children of 
disobedience. Be not ye therefore, partakers 
with them." ^ We must withdraw, nay rather 
must flee, from those who fall away, lest, while 
any one is associated with those who walk wick- 
edly, and goes on in ways of error and of sin, he 
himself also, wandering away from the path of 
the true road, should be found in like guilt. 
God is one, and Christ is one, and His Church 
is one, and the faith is one, and the people ^ is 
joined into a substantial unity of body by the 
cement of concord. Unity cannot be severed ; 
nor can one body be separated by a division of 
its structure, nor torn into pieces, with its entrails 
wrenched asunder by laceration. Whatever has 
proceeded from the womb cannot live and 
breathe in its detached condition, but loses the 
substance of health. 

24. The Holy Spirit warns us, and says, "What 
man is he that desireth to live, and would fain 
see good days? Refrain thy tongue from evil, 
and thy lips that they speak no guile. Eschew 
evil, and do good ; seek peace, and ensue it." •♦ 
The son of peace ought to seek peace and ensue 
it. He who knows and loves the bond of charity, 
ought to refrain his tongue from the evil of dis- 
sension. Among His divine commands and sal- 
utary teachings, the Lord, when He was now 
very near to His passion, added this one, saying, 
" Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto 
you." 5 He gave this to us as an heritage ; He 
promised all the gifts and rewards of which He 
spoke through the preservation of peace. If we 
are fellow-heirs with Christ, let us abide in the 
peace of Christ ; if we are sons of God, we ought 
to be peacemakers. " Blessed," says He, " are 
the peacemakers ; for they shall be called the 
sons of God." '' It behoves the sons of God to 
be peacemakers, gentle in heart, simple in 
speech, agreeing in affection, faithfully linked to 
one another in the bonds of unanimity. 

25. This unanimity formerly prevailed among 
the apostles ; and thus the new assembly of be- 
lievers, keeping the Lord's commandments, 
maintained its charity. Divine Scripture proves 
this, when it says, " But the multitude of them 
which believed were of one heart and of one 
soul." 7 And again : " These all continued with 
one mind in prayer with the women, and Mary 
the mother of Jesus, and with His brethren."^ 

' 2 Thess. iii. 6. 

2 Eph. V. 6. 

3 " is one." 

* Ps. xxxiv. 12, 13. 
5 John xiv. 27. 

* Matt. V. 9. 

7 Acts iv. 32. [Bernard., Epist. ccxxxviii., C^^. i. sea.] 

* Acts i. 14. 

And thus "^ they prayed with effectual prayers ; 
thus they were able with confidence to obtain 
whatever they asked from the Lord's mercy. 

26. But in us unanimity is diminished in pro- 
portion as liberality of working is decayed. 
Then they used to give for sale houses and 
estates ; and that they might lay up for them- 
selves treasures in heaven, presented to the 
apostles the price of them, to be distributed for 
the use of the poor. But now we do not even 
give the tenths from our patrimony ; and while 
our Lord bids us sell, we rather buy and increase 
our store. Thus has the vigour of faith dwindled 
away among us ; thus has the strength of believ- 
ers grown weak. And therefore the Lord, look- 
ing to our days, says in His Gospel, " When the 
Son of man cometh, think you that He shall find 
faith on the earth?" ■" We see that what He 
foretold has come to pass. There is no faith in 
the fear of God, in the law of righteousness, in 
love, in labour ; none considers the fear of futu- 
rity, and none takes to heart the day of the Lord, 
and the wrath of God, and the punishments to 
come upon unbelievers, and the eternal torments 
decreed for the faithless. That which our con- 
science would fear if it believed, it fears not 
because it does not at all believe. But if it be- 
lieved, it would also take heed ; and if it took 
heed, it would escape. 

27. Let us, beloved brethren, arouse ourselves -^^^ 
as much as we can ; and breaking the slumber "^ 
of our ancient listlessness, let us be watchful to 
observe and to do the Lord's precepts. Let us 
be such as He Himself has bidden us to be, 
saying, " Let your loins be girt, and your lamps 
burning ; ' ' and ye yourselves like unto men that 
wait for their Lord, when He shall come from 
the wedding, that when He cometh and knock- 
eth, they may open to Him. Blessed are those 
servants whom their Lord, when He cometh, shall 
find watching." '^ We ought to be girt about, 
lest, when the day of setting forth comes, it 
should find us burdened and entangled. Let our 
light shine in good works, and glow in such wise 
as to lead us from the night of this world to the 
daylight of eternal brightness. Let us always 
with solicitude and caution wait for the sudden 
coming of the Lord, that when He shall knock, 
our faith may be on the watch, and receive from 
the Lord the reward of our vigilance. If these 
commands be observed, if these warnings and 
precepts be kept, we cannot be overtaken in 
slumber by the deceit of the devil ; but we shall 
reign with Christ in His kingdom as servants 
that watch. 

9 Some interpolate " because." 
1° Luke xviii. 8. 
" Some read, " in your hands." 
'- Luke xii. 34. 

430 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

TREATISE XL' 

ON THE DRESS OF VIRGINS. 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN CELEBRATES THE PRAISES 
OF DISCIPLINE, AND PROVES ITS USEFULNESS FROM 
SCRIPTURE. THEN, DESCRIBING THE GLORY, 
HONOUR, AND MERITS OF VIRGINITY, AND OF 
THOSE WHO HAD VOWED AND DEDICATED THEIR 
VIRGINITY TO CHRIST, HE TEACHES THAT CON- 
TINENCE NOT ONLY CONSISTS IN FLESHLY PURITY, 
BUT ALSO IN SEEMLINESS OF DRESS AND ORNA- 
MENT, AND THAT EVEN WEALTH DID NOT EXCUSE 
SUPERFLUOUS CARE FOR DRESS ON THE PART OF 
THOSE WHO H.\D ALREADY RENOUNCED THE 
WORLD. R.-\THF.R, SINCE THE APOSTLE PRE- 
SCRIBES EVEN TO MARRIED WOMEN A DRESS TO 
BE REGULATED BY FITl'ING LIMITS, MODERATION 
OUGHT EVEN MORE TO BE OBSERVED BY A VIR- 
GIN. THEREFORE, EVEN IF SHE BE WEALTHY, 
SHE SHOULD CONSIDER CERTAINLY HOW TO USE 
WEALTH, BUT FOR GOOD PURPOSES, FOR THOSE 
THINGS WHICH GOD FIAS COMMANDED, TO WIT, 
FOR BEING SPENT ON THE POOR.^ MOREOVER, 
ALSO, HE FORBIDS TO VIRGINS THOSE THINGS 
WHICH HAD NEGLIGENTLY COME INTO USE, AS 
BEING PRESENT AT WEDDINGS, AS WELL AS GOING 
TO PROMISCUOUS BATHING-PLACES. FINALLY, IN 
A BRIEF EPILOGUE,^ DECLARING WHAT BENEFIT 
THE VIRTUE OF CONTINENCY AFFORDS, AND 
WHAT EVIL IT IS WITHOUT, HE CONCLUDES THE 
BOOK. 

I, Discipline, the safeguard of hope, the bond 
of faith, the guide of the way of salvation, the 
stimulus and nourishment of good dispositions, 
the teacher of virtue, causes us to abide always 
in Christ, and to live continually for God, and to 
attain to the heavenly promises and to the divine 
rewards. To follow her is wholesome, and to 
turn away from her and neglect her is deadly. 
The Holy Spirit says in the Psalms, " Keep dis- 
cipline, lest i)erchance the Lord be angry, and 
ye perish from the right way, when His wrath is 
(juickly kindled against you." ■* And again : 
" But unto the ungodly saith God, " Why dost 
thou preach my laws, and takest my covenant 
into thy mouth ? Whereas thou hatest discipline, 
and hast cast my words behind thee." 5 And 
again we read : " He that casteth away discipline 

' The deacon Pontius, in his life of Cyprian, in few words com- 
prises the argument of the following treatise. '' Who," says he, 
" would restrain virgins into a fitting discipline of modesty, and a 
dress meet for holiness, as if with a bridle of the Lord's lessons ? " 

- After this he teaches from the Apostle, and from the third chap- 
ter of Isaiah also, that distinctions of dress and ornaments are more 
suited to prostitutes than to virgins: and he infers that, while so many 
things are offensive to God, more especially are the sumptuous orna- 
ments ol women ; and therefore making a transition from superfluous 
ornament to the difl'erent kinds of dyes and paints, he forbids such 
things, not only to virgins, but absolutely also to married women, 
who assuredly cannot with impunity strive to improve, to transfigure, 
and to adulterate God's work. 

^ [Written, A.u. 248. Compare TertuUian, vol. iv. p. 14.] 

* Ps. ii. 12. 

^ Ps. 1. 17. 

is miserable."^ And from Solomon we have re- 
ceived the mandates of wisdom, warning us : 
" My son, despise not thou the discipline of the 
Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of Him : 
for whom the Lord loveth He correcteth." ^ 
But if God rebukes whom He loves, and rebukes 
him for the very purpose of amending him, 
brethren also, and especially priests, do not hate, 
but love those whom they rebuke, that they may 
amend them ; since God also before predicted 
by Jeremiah, and pointed to our times, when he 
said, "And I will give you shepherds according 
to my heart : and they shall feed you with the 
food of discipline." ** 

2. But if in Holy Scripture discipline is fre- 
quently and everywhere prescribed, and the whole 
foundation of religion and of faith proceeds from 
obedience and fear ; what is more fitting for us 
urgently to desire, what more to wish for and to 
hold fast, than to stand with roots strongly fi.xed, 
and with our houses based with solid mass upon 
the rock unshaken by the storms and whirlwinds 
of the world, so that we may come by the divine 
precepts to the rewards of God ? considering as 
well as knowing that our members, when purged 
from all the filth of the old contagion by the 
sanctification of the laver of life, are God's tem- 
ples, and must not be violated nor polluted, since 
he who does violence to them is himself injured. 
We are the worshippers and priests of those tem- 
ples ; let us obey Him whose we have already 
begun to be. Paul tells us in his epistles, in 
which he has formed us to a course of living by 
divine teaching, " Ye are not your own, for ye 
are bought with a great price ; glorify and bear 
(iod in your body." ^ Let us glorify and bear 
God in a pure and chaste body, and with a more 
complete obedience ; and since we have been re- 
deemed by the blood of Christ, let us obey and 
give furtherance to the empire of our Redeemer 
by all the obedience of service, that nothing im- 
pure or profane may be brought into the temple 
of God, lest He should be offended, and forsake 
the temple which He inhabits. The words of 
the Lord giving health and teaching, as well 
curing as warning, are : " Behold, thou art made 
whole : sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto 
thee." '° He gives the course of life, He gives 
the law of innocency after He has conferred 
health, nor suffers the man afterwards to wander 
with free and unchecked reins, but more severely 
threatens him who is again enslaved by those 
same things of which he had been healed, be- 
cause it is doubtless a smaller fault to have sinned 
before, while as yet you had not known (Jod's 
discipline ; but there is no further pardon for 

* Wisd. iii. 11. 
7 Prov. iii. 11. 
^ Jer. iii. 15. 
9 I Cor. vi. 19. 
«* Jah« V. 14. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

431 

sinning after you have begun to know God. 
And, indeed, let as well men as women, as well 
boys as girls ; let each sex and every age observe 
this, and take care in this respect, according to 
the religion and faith which they owe to God, 
that what is received holy and pure from the 
condescension of the Lord be preserved with a 
no less anxious fear.' 

3. My address is now to virgins, whose glory, 
as it is more eminent, excites the greater interest. 
This is the flower of the ecclesiastical seed,- the 
grace and ornament of spiritual endowment, a 
joyous disposition, the wholesome and uncor- 
rupted work of praise and honour, God's image 
answering to the holiness of the Lord, the more 
illustrious portion of Christ's flock. The glorious 
fruitfulness of Mother Church rejoices by their 
means, and in them abundantly flourishes ; and 
in proportion as a copious virginity is added to 
her number, so much the more it increases the 
joy of the Mother. To these I speak, these I 
exhort with affection rather than with power ; not 
that I would claim — last and least, and very 
conscious of my lowliness as I am — any right 
to censure, but because, being unceasingly careful 
even to solicitude, I fear more from the onset of 
Satan. 

4. For that is not an empty carefulness nor a 
vain fear, which takes counsel for the way of 
salvation, which guards the commandments of 
the Lord and of life ; so that they who have dedi- 
cated themselves to Christ, and who depart from 
carnal concupiscence, and have vowed them- 
selves to God as well in the flesh as in the spirit, 
may consummate their work, destined as it is to 
a great reward, and may not study any longer to 
be adorned or to please anybody but their Loi'd, 
from whom also they expect the reward of vir- 
ginity ; as He Himself says : " All men cannot 
receive this word, but they to whom it is given. 
For there are some eunuchs, which were so born 
from their mother's womb ; and there are some 
eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of men ; and 
there are eunuchs which have made themselves 
eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake." ^ 
Again, also by this word of the angel the gift of 
continency is set forth, and virginity is preached : 
" These are they which have not defiled them- 
selves with women, for they have remained vir- 
gins ; these are they which follow the Lamb 
whithersoever He goeth." + For not only thus 
does the Lord promise the grace of continency 
to men, and pass over women ; but since the 
woman is a portion of the man, and is taken and 
formed from him, God in Scripture almost always 
speaks to the Protoplast, the first formed, because 

' One codex adds here: " since it is written, ' He who perseveres 
Ejnto the end, the same shall be saved.' " 

2 Otherwise, " These are the flowers of the ecclesiastical seed." 
■5 Matt. xix. II. 
* Apoc. xiv. 4. 

they are two in one flesh, and in the male is at 
the same time signified the woman also. 

5. But if continency follows Christ, and vir- 
ginity is destined for the kingdom of God, what 
have they to do with earthly dress, and with or- 
naments, wherewith while they are striving to 
please men they offend God? Not considering 
that it is declared, " They who please men are 
put to confusion, because God hath despised 
them ; " 5 and that Paul also has gloriously and 
sublimely uttered, " If I yet pleased men, I should 
not be the servant of Christ." ^ But continence 
and modesty consist not alone in purity of the 
flesh, but also in seemliness, as well as in modesty 
of dress and adornment ; so that, according to 
the apostle, she who is unmarried may be holy 
both in body and in spirit. Paul instructs and 
teaches us, saying, " He that is unmarried careth 
for the things of the Lord, how he may please 
God : but he who has contracted marriage careth 
for the things which are of this world, how he 
may please his wife. So both the virgin and the 
unmarried woman consider those things which 
are the Lord's, that they may be holy both in 
body and spirit." ^ A virgin ought not only to 
be so, but also to be perceived and beheved to 
be so : no one on seeing a virgin should be in 
any doubt as to whether she is one. Perfectness 
should show itself equal in all things ; nor should 
the dress of the body discredit the good of the 
mind. Why should she walk out adorned ? Why 
with dressed hair, as if she either had or sought 
for a husband ? Rather let her dread to please 
if she is a virgin ; and let her not invite her own 
risk, if she is keeping herself for better and divine 
things. They who have not a husband whom 
they profess that they please, should persevere, 
sound and pure not only in body, but also in 
spirit. For it is not right that a virgin should 
have her hair braided for. the appearance of her 
beauty, or boast of her flesh and of its beauty, 
when she has no struggle greater than that against 
her flesh, and no contest more obstinate than 
that of conquering and subduing the body. 

6. Paul proclaims in a loud and lofty voice, 
" But God forbid that I should glory, save in 
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom 
the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the 
world." ^ And yet a virgin in the Church glories 
concerning her fleshly appearance and the beauty 
of her body ! Paul adds, and says, " For they 
that are Christ's have crucified their flesh, with 
its faults and lusts." 9 And she who professes 
to have renounced the lusts and vices of the flesh, 
is found in the midst of those very things which 
she has renounced ! Virgin, thou art taken, thou 

3 Ps. liii. 5. 

6 Gal. i. 10. 

7 I Cor. vii. 32. 
^ Gal. vi. 14. 

9 Gal. v. 24. 

■ry-'-r 

432 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

art exposed, thou boastest one thing and affect- 
est another. You sprinkle yourself with the 
stains of carnal concupiscence, although you are 
a candidate of purity and modesty. " Cry," says 
ihe Lord to Isaiah, " All flesh is grass, and all 
the glory of it as the flower of the grass : the 
grass withereth, and the flower fadeth ; but the 
word of the Lord endureth for ever." ' It is be- 
coming for no Christian, and especially it is not 
becoming for a virgin, to regard any glory and 
honour of the flesh, but only to desire the word 
of God, to embrace benefits which shall endure 
for ever. Or, if she must glory in the flesh, then 
assuredly let her glory when she is tortured in 
confession of the name ; when a woman is found 
to be stronger than the tortures ; when she suf- 
fers fire, or the cross, or the sword, or the wild 
beasts, that she may be crowned. These are the 
precious jewels of the flesh, these are the better 
ornaments of the body. 

7. But there are some rich women, and wealthy 
in the fertility of means, who prefer their own 
wealth, and contend that they ought to use these 
blessings. Let them know first of all that she is 
rich who is rich in God ; that she is wealthy who 
is wealthy in Christ ; that those are blessings 
which are spiritual, divine, heavenly, which lead 
us to God, which abide with us in perpetual pos- 
session with God. But whatever things are 
earthly, and have been received in this world, 
and will remain here with the world, ought so 
to be contemned even as the world itself is con- 
temned, whose pomps and delights we have al- 
ready renounced when by a blessed passage we 
came to God. John stimulates and exhorts us, 
witnessing with a spiritual and heavenly voice. 
" Love not the world," says he, " neither the 
things that are in the world. If any man love 
the world, the love of the Father is not in him. 
For all that is in the world, is lust of the flesh, 
and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, 
which is not from the Father, l)ut is of the lust 
of the world. And the world passeth away, and 
the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of 
God abideth for ever, even as God also abideth 
for ever." - Therefore eternal and divine things 
are to be followed, and all things must l)e done 
after the will of God, that we may follow the 
divine footsteps and teachings of our Lord, who 
warned us. and said, " I came down from heaven, 
not to do my own will, but the will of Him that 
sent me." ^ But if the servant is not greater 
than his lord, and he that is freed owes obedi- 
ence to his deliverer, we who desire to be Chris- 
tians ought to imitate what Christ said and did. 
It is written, and it is read and heard, and is 
celebrated for our example by the Church's 

' Isa. xl. 6. 

- I John ii. 15-17. 

' John vi. 38. 

mouth, " He that saith he abideth in Christ, 
ought himself also so to walk even as He walked."* 
Therefore we must walk with equal steps ; we 
must strive with emulous walk. Then the fol- 
lowing of truth answers to the faith of our name, 
and a reward is given to the believer, if what is 
believed is also done. 

8. You call yourself wealthy and rich ; but 
Paul meets your riches, and with his own voice 
prescribes for the moderating of your dress and 
ornament within a just limit. " Let women," 
said he, " adorn themselves with shamefacedness 
and sobriety, not with broidered hair, nor gold, 
nor pearls, nor costly array, but as becometh 
women professing chastity, with a good conver- 
sation." 5 Also Peter consents to these same 
precepts, and says, " Let there be in the woman 
not the outward adorning of array, or gold, or 
apparel, but the adorning of the heart." '' But 
if these also warn us that the women who are 
accustomed to make an excuse for their dress by 
reference to their husband, should be restrained 
and limited by religious observance to the 
Church's discipline, how much more is it right 
that the virgin should keep that observance, who 
has no excuse for adorning herself, nor can the 
deceitfulness of her fault be laid upon another, 
but she herself remains in its guilt ! 

9. You say that you are wealthy and rich. 
But not everything that can be done oiight also 
to be done ; nor ought the broad desires that 
arise out of the pride of the world to be ex- 
tended beyond the honour and modesty of 
virginity ; since it is written, " All things are 
lawful, l)ut all things are not expedient : all things 
are lawful, but all things edify not." ^ For the 
rest, if you dress your hair sumptuously, and 
walk so as to draw attention in public, and 
attract the eyes of youth upon you, and draw 
the sighs of young men after you, nourish the 
lust of concupiscence, and inflame the fuel of 
sighs, so that, although you yourself perish not, 
yet you cause others to perish, and offer your- 
self, as it were, a sword or poison to the spec- 
tators ; you cannot be excused on the pretence 
that you are chaste and modest in mind. Your 
shamefiil dress and immodest ornament accuse 
you ; nor can you be counted now among 
Christ's maidens and virgins, since you live in 
such a manner as to make yourselves objects of 
desire. 

10. You say that you are wealthy and rich; 
but it becomes not a virgin to boast of her riches, 
since Holy Scripture says, "What hath ])ride 
profited us? or what benefit hath the vaunting 
of riches conferred upon us? And all these 

■• I John ii. 6. 
5 1 Tim. ii. 9, 10. 
*> I Pet. iii. 3, 4. 
7 I Cor. X. aj. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

43: 

things have passed away like a shadow." ' And 
the apostle again warns us, and says, "And they 
that buy, as though they bought not ; and they 
that possess, as though they possessed not ; and 
they that use this world, as though they used it 
not. For the fashion of this world passeth 
away." ^ Peter also, to whom the Lord com- 
mends His sheep to be fed and guarded, on 
whom He placed and founded the Church, says 
indeed that he has no silver and "gold, but says 
that he is rich in the grace of Christ — that he 
is wealthy in his faith and virtue — wherewith he 
performed many great works with miracle, where- 
with he abounded in spiritual blessings to the 
grace of glory. These riches, this wealth, she 
cannot possess, who had rather be rich to this 
world than to Christ. 

1 1 . You say that you are wealthy and rich, 
and you think that you should use those things 
which God has willed you to possess. Use them, 
certainly, but for the things of salvation ; use 
them, but for good purposes ; use them, but for 
those things which God has commanded, and 
which the Lord has set forth. Let the poor feel 
that you are wealthy ; let the needy feel that you 
are rich. Lend your estate to God ; give food 
to Christ. Move Him by the prayers of many ^ 
to grant you to carry out the glory of virginity, 
and to succeed in coming to the Lord's rewards. 
There entrust your treasures, where no thief digs 
through, where no insidious plunderer breaks in. 
Prepare for yourself possessions ; but let them 
rather be heavenly ones, where neither rust wears 
out, nor hail bruises, nor sun burns, nor rain 
spoils your fruits constant and perennial, and 
free from all contact of worldly injury. For in 
this very matter you are sinning against God, if 
you think that riches were given you by Him for 
this purpose, to enjoy them thoroughly, without 
a view to salvation. For God gave man also a 
voice ; and yet love-songs and indecent things 
are not on that account to be sung. And God 
willed iron to be for the culture of the earth, but 
not on that account must murders be committed. 
Or because God ordained incense, and wine, and 
fire, are we thence to sacrifice to idols? Or be- 
cause the flocks of cattle abound in your fields, 
ought you to immolate victims and offerings to 
the gods? Otherwise a large estate is a tempta- 
tion, unless the wealth minister to good uses ; so 
that every man, in proportion to his wealth, 
ought by his patrimony rather to redeem his 
transgressions than to increase them. 

12. The characteristics of ornaments, and of 
garments, and the allurements of beauty, are not 
fitting for any but prostitutes and immodest 

I Wisd. V. 8. 

* I Cor. vii. 30, 31. 

3 The meaning is, — gifts to the poor will induce them to pray for 
the virgin, and in answer to their prayers, God will grant her the 
glory of virginity. [Luke xvi. 9.] 

women ; and the dress of none is more precious 
than of those whose modesty is lowly.'* Thus in. 
the Holy Scriptures, by which the Lord wished 
us to be both instructed and admonished, the 
harlot city is described more beautifully arrayed 
and adorned, and with her ornaments ; and the 
rather on account of those very ornaments about 
to perish. " And there came," it is said, " one 
of the seven angels, which had the seven phials, 
and talked with me, saying. Come hither, I will 
show thee the judgment of the great whore, that 
sitteth upon many waters, with whom the kings 
of the earth have committed fornication. And 
he carried me away in spirit ; and I saw a 
woman sit upon a beast, and that woman was ar- 
rayed in a purple and scarlet mantle, and was 
adorned with gold, and precious stones, and 
pearls, having a golden cup in her hand, full of 
curses, and filthiness, and fornication of the 
whole earth." s Let chaste and modest virgins 
avoid the dress of the unchaste, the manners of 
the immodest, the ensigns of brothels, the orna- 
ments of harlots. 

13. Moreover Isaiah, full of the Holy Spirit, 
cries out and chides the daughters of Sion, cor- 
rupted with gold, and silver, and raiment, and re- 
bukes them, affluent as they were in pernicious 
wealth, and departing from God for the sake of 
the world's delights. "The daughters of Sion,"^ 
says he, " are haughty, and walk with stretched- 
out neck and beckoning of the eyes, trailing 
their gowns as they go, and mincing with their 
feet. And God will humble the princely daugh- 
ters of Sion, and the Lord will unveil their dress ; 
and the Lord will take away the glory of their 
apparel, and their ornaments, and their hair, and 
their curls, and their round tires like the moon, 
and their crisping-pins, and their bracelets, and 
their clusters of pearls, and their armlets and 
rings, and ear-rings, and silks woven with gold and 
hyacinth. And instead of a sweet smell there 
shall be dust ; and thou shall be girt with a rope 
instead of with a girdle ; and for a golden orna- 
ment of thy head thou shalt have baldness." ^ 
This God blames, this He marks out : hence He 
declares that virgins are corrupted ; hence, that 
they have departed from the true and divine 
worship. Lifted up, they have fallen ; with their 
heads adorned, they merited dishonour and dis- 
grace. Having put on silk and purple, they 
cannot put on Christ ; adorned with gold, and 
pearls, and necklaces, they have lost the orna- 
ments of the heart and spirit. Who would not 
execrate and avoid that which has been the de- 
struction of another? Who would desire and 

* Perhaps this sentence would be more literally translated, " and 
the dress of no women is, generally speaking, more expensive than 
the dress of those whose modesty is cheap; " i.e., who have no mod- 
esty at all, or very little. 

5 Apoc. xvii. I. 

* Isa. iii. 16. 

434 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

take up that which has served as the sword and 
weapon for the death of another? If he who 
had drunk should die by draining the cup, you 
would know that what he had drunk was poison ; 
if, on taking food, he who had taken it were to 
perish, you would know that what, when taken, 
could kill, was deadly ; nor would you eat or 
drink of that whence you had before seen that 
others had perished. Now what ignorance of 
truth is it, what madness of mind, to wish for 
that which both has hurt and always will hurt ; 
and to think that you yourself will not perish by 
those means whereby you know that others have 
perished ! 

14. For God neither made the sheep scarlet 
or purple, nor taught the juices of herbs and 
shell- fish to dye and colour wool, nor arranged 
necklaces with stones set in gold, and with pearls 
■distributed in a woven series or numerous clus- 
ter, wherewith you would hide the neck which 
He made ; that what God formed in man may 
be covered, and that may be seen upon it which 
the devil has invented in addition. Has God 
willed that wounds should be made in the ears, 
wherewith infancy, as yet innocent, and uncon- 
scious of worldly evil, may be put to pain, that 
subsequently from the scars and holes of the ears 
precious beads may hang, heavy, if not by their 
weight, still by the amount of their cost? All 
which things sinning and apostate angels put 
forth by their arts, when, lowered to the con- 
tagions of earth, they forsook their heavenly 
vigour. They taught them also to paint the eyes 
with blackness drawn round them in a circle, 
and to stain the cheeks with a deceitful red, and 
to change the hair with false colours, and to 
drive out all truth, both of face and head, by the 
assault of their own corruption. 

15. And indeed in that very matter, for the 
sake of the fear which faith suggests to me, for 
the sake of the love which brotherhood requires, 
I think that not virgins only and widows, but 
married women also, and all of the sex alike, 
should be admonished, that the work of Ciod 
and His fashioning and formation ought in no 
manner to be adulterated, either with the appli- 
cation of yellow colour, or with black dust or 
rouge, or with any kind of medicament which 
can corrupt the native lineaments. God says, 
"Let us make man in our image and likeness ;" ' 
and does any one dare to alter and to change 
what God has made ? They are laying hands on 
God when they try to re-form that which He 
formed, and to transfigure it, not knowing that 
everything which comes into being is God's work, 
everything that is changed is the devil's If any 
artist, in painting, were to delineate in envious 
colouring the countenance and likeness and 

bodily appearance of any one ; and the likeness 
being now painted and completed, another per- 
son were to lay hands on it, as if, when it was 
already formed and already painted, he, being 
more skilled, could amend it, a serious wrong 
and a just cause of indignation would seem 
natural to the former artist. And do you think 
yourself likely with impunity to commit a bold- 
ness of such wicked temerity, an offence to God 
the artificer? For although you may not be 
immodest among men, and are not unchaste 
with your seducing dyes, yet when those things 
which belong to God are corrupted and violated, 
you are engaged in a worse adultery. That you 
think yourself to be adorned, that you think 
your hair to be dressed, is an assault upon the 
divine work, is a prevarication of the truth; 

16. The voice of the warning apostle is, " Purge 
out the old leaven, that ye may be a new lum.p, 
as ye are unleavened ; for even Christ our pass- 
over is sacrificed. Therefore let us keep the 
feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven 
of malice and wickedness, but with the un- 
leavened bread of sincerity and truth." ^ But 
are sincerity and truth preserved, when what is 
sincere is polluted by adulterous colours, and 
what is true is changed into a lie by the deceitful 
dyes of medicaments ? Your Lord says, " Thou 
canst not make one hair white or black ; " ^ and 
you, in order to overcome the word of your Lord, 
will be more mighty than He, and stain your 
hair with a daring endeavour and with profane 
contempt. With evil presage of the future, you 
make a beginning to yourself already of flame- 
coloured hair; and sin (oh, wickedness !) with 
your head — that is, with the nobler part of your 
body ! And although it is written of the Lord, 
" His head and His hair were white like wool 
or snow,"-* you curse that whiteness and hate 
that hoariness which is like to the Lord's head. 

17. Are you not afraid, I entreat you, being 
such as you are, that when the day of resurrec- 
tion comes, your Maker may not recognise you 
again, and may turn you away when you come 
to His rewards and promises, and may exclude 
you, rebuking you with the vigour of a Censor 
and Judge, and say : " This is not my work, nor 
is this our image. You have polluted your skin 
with a false medicament, you have changed your 
hair with an adulterous colour, your face is vio- 
lently taken possession of by a lie, your figure is 
corrupted, your countenance is another's. You 
cannot see God, since your eyes are not those 
which God made, but those which the devil has 
spoiled. You have followed him, you have imi- 
tated the red and painted eyes of the serpent. 
As you are adorned in the fashion of your enemy. 

I Gen. i. a6 

2 I Cor. V. 7. 
■J Matt. V. 36. 
•♦ Apoc. i. 14. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

435 

•with him also you shall burn by and by." Are 
not these, I beg, matters to be reflected on by 
God's servants? Are they not always to be 
dreaded day and night? Let married women 
see to it, in what respect they are flattering them- 
selves concerning the solace of their husbands 
with the desire of pleasing them, and while they 
put them forward indeed as their excuse, they 
make them partners in the association of guilty 
consent. Virgins, assuredly, to whom this ad- 
dress is intended to appeal, who have adorned 
themselves with arts of this kind, I should think 
ought not to be counted among virgins, but, like 
infected sheep and diseased cattle, to be driven 
from the holy and pure flock of virginity, lest 
by living together they should pollute the rest 
■with their contagion ; lest they ruin others even 
as they have perished themselves. 

1 8. And since we are seeking the advantage 
of continency, let us also avoid everything that 
is pernicious and hostile to it. And I will not 
pass over those things, which while by negligence 
they come into use, have made for themselves 
a usurped licence, contrary to modest and sober 
manners. Some are not ashamed to be present 
•at marriage parties, and in that freedom of lasciv- 
ious discourse to mingle in unchaste conversa- 
tion, to hear what is not becoming, to say what 
is not lawful, to expose themselves, to be present 
in the midst of disgraceful words and drunken 
banquets, by which the ardour of lust is kindled, 
and the bride is animated to bear, and the bride- 
groom to dare lewdness.' What place is there 
at weddings for her whose mind is not towards 
marriage? Or what can there be pleasant or 
joyous in those engagements for her, where both 
•desires and wishes are different from her own? 
What is learnt there — what is seen ? How 
greatly a virgin falls short of her resolution, when 
she who had come there modest goes away im- 
modest ! Although she may remain a virgin in 
body and mind, yet in eyes, in ears, in tongue, 
she has diminished the virtues that she pos- 
sessed. 

19. But what of those who frequent promiscu- 
ous baths ; who prostitute to eyes that are curious 
to lust, bodies that are dedicated to chastity and 
modesty? They who disgracefully behold naked 
men, and are seen naked by men, do they not 
themselves afford enticement to vice, do they 
not solicit and invite the desires of those present 
to their own corruption and wrong? " Let every 
one," say you, " look to the disposition with 
which he comes thither : my care is only that 
of refreshing and washing my poor body." That 
kind of defence does not clear you, nor does it 

' [The utterly intolerable paganism here exposed, and fully sus- 
tained by Martial and other Latin poets, accounts for much of the 
discipline of the early Church, and its excessive laudations of vir- 
ginity.] 

excuse the crime of lasciviousness and wanton- 
ness. Such a washing defiles ; it does not purify 
nor cleanse the limbs, but stains them. You 
behold no one immodestly, but you yourself are 
gazed upon immodestly. You do not pollute 
your eyes with disgraceful delight, but in delight- 
ing others you yourself are polluted. You make 
a show of the bathing-place ; the places where 
you assemble are fouler than a theatre. There 
all modesty is put ; off together with the cloth- 
ing of garments, the honour and modesty of the 
body is laid aside ; virginity is exposed, to be 
pointed at and to be handled. And now, then, 
consider whether when you are clothed you are 
modest among men, when the boldness of naked- 
ness has conduced to immodesty. 

20. For this reason, therefore, the Church 
frequently mourns over her virgins ; hence she 
groans at their scandalous and dete.^table stories ; 
hence the flower of her virgins is extinguished, 
the honour and modesty of continency are in- 
jured, and all its glory and dignity are profaned. 
Thus the hostile besieger insinuates himself by 
his arts ; thus by snails thaT" deceive, by secret 
ways, the devil creeps i». Thus, while virgins 
wish to be more carefully adorned, and to wander 
with more^ liberty, tney cease to be virgins, cor- 
rupted by a J"j.»rtive dishonour ; widows before 
they are nifH^ried, adulterous, not to their hus- 
band, biijt to Christ. In jDroportion as they had 
been a^ virgins destined to great rewards, so will 
th«y experience great punishments for the loss 
of their virginity. 

21. Therefore hear me, O virgins, as a parent ; 
hear, I beseech you, one who fears while he 
warns ; hear one who is faithfully consulting for 
your advantage and your profit. Be such as 
God the Creator made you ; be such as the 
hand of your Father ordained you. Let your 
countenance remain in you incorrupt, your neck 
unadorned, your figure simple ; let not wounds 
be made ni your ears, nor let the precious chain 
of bracelets and necklaces circle your arms or 
your neck ; let your feet be free from golden 
bands, your hair stained with no dye, your eyes 
worthy of beholding God. Let your baths be 
performed with women, among whom your 
bathing is modest.- Let the shameless feasts 
and lascivious banquets of marriages be avoided, 
the contagion of which is perilous. Overcome 
dress, since you are a virgin ; overcome gold, 
since you overcome the flesh and the world. It 
is not consistent to be unable to be conquered 
by the greater, and to be found no match for the 
less. Strait and narrow is the way which leadeth 
to life ; hard and difficult is the track which 
tends to glory. By this pathway the martyrs pro- 

- Otherwise read, " among you; " or possibly, " whose bathing is 
modest towards you." 

436 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

gress, the virgins pass, the just of all kinds ad- 
vance. Avoid the broad and roomy ways. There ; 
are deadly snares and death-bringing pleasures ; 
there the devil flatters, that he may deceive ; 
smiles, that he may do mischief; entices, that 
he may slay. The first fruit for the martyrs is a 
hundred-fold ; the second is yours, sixty-fold. 
As with the martyrs there is no thought of the 
flesh and of the world, no small, and trifling, 
and delicate encounter ; so also in you, whose 
reward is second in grace, let there be the 
strength in endurance next to theirs. The ascent 
to great things is not easy. What toil we suffer, 
what labour, when we endeavour to ascend the 
hills and the tops of mountains ! What, then, 
that we may ascend to heaven ? If you look to 
the reward of the promise, your labour is less. 
Immortality is given to the persevering, eternal 
life is set before them ; the Lord promises a 
kingdom. 

2 2. Hold fast, O virgins ! hold fast what you 
have begun to be ; hold fast what you shall be. 
A great reward awaits you, a great recompense 
of virtue, the immense advantage of chastity. Do 
you wish to know what ill the virtue of continence 
avoids, what good it possesses ? "I will multi- 
ply," says God to the woman, " thy sorrows and 
thy groanings ; and in sorrow shalt thou bring 
forth children ; and thy desire shall be to thy 
husband, and he shall rule over thee." ' You 
are free from this sentence. You do not fear 
the sorrows and the groans of women. You have 
no fear of child-bearing ; nor is your husband 
lord over you ; but your Lord and Head is 
Christ, after the likeness and in the place of the 
man ; with that of men your lot and your con- 
dition is equal. It is the word of the Lord 
which says, " The children of this world beget 
and are begotten ; but they who are counted 
worthy of that world, and of the resurrection 
from the dead, neither marry nor are given in 
marriage : neither shall they die any more : for 
they are equal to the angels of God, being the 
children of the resurrection." ^ That which we 
shall be, you have already begun to be. You 
possess already in this world the glory of the 
resurrection. You pass through the world with- 
out the contagion of the world ; in that you 
continue chaste and virgins, you are ecjual to the 
angels of God. Only let your virginity remain 
and endure substantial and uninjured ; and as it 
began bravely, let it persevere continuously, and 
not seek the ornaments of necklaces nor gar- 
ments, but of conduct. Let it look towards 
(lod and heaven, and not lower to the lust of 
the flesh and of the world, the eyes uplifted to 
things above, or set them upon earthly things. 

' Gen. iii. i6. 

2 Luke XX. 35, 36. 

23. The first decree commanded to increase 
and to multiply ; the second enjoined continency. 
While the world is still rough and void, we are 
propagated by the fruitful begetting of numbers, 
and we increase to the enlargement of the human 
race. Now, when the world is filled and the 
earth supplied, they who can receive continencv, 
living after the manner of eunuchs, are made 
eunuchs unto the kingdom. Nor does the Lord 
command this, but He exhorts it ; nor does 
He impose the yoke of necessity, since the free 
choice of the will is left. But when He says 
that in His Father's house are many mansions. 
He points out the dwellings of the better habi- 
tation. Those better habitations you are seek- 
ing ; cutting away the desires of the flesh, you 
obtain the reward of a greater grace in the heav- 
enly home. All indeed who attain to the divine 
gift and inheritance by the sanctification of bap- 
tism, therein put off the old man by the grace 
of the saving laver, and, renewed by the Holy 
Spirit from the filth of the old contagion, are 
purged by a second nativity. But the greater 
holiness and truth of that repeated birth belongs 
to you, who have no longer any desires of the 
flesh and of the body. Only the things which 
belong to virtue and the Spirit have remained in 
you to glory. It is the apostle's word whom the 
Lord called His chosen vessel, whom God sent 
to proclaim the heavenly command : " The first 
man," says he, " is from the earth, of earth ; 
the second man is from heaven. Such as is the 
earthy, such are they also who are earthy ; and 
such as is the heavenly, such also are the 
heavenly. As we have borne the image of him 
who is earthy, let us also bear the image of 
Him who is heavenly."'' Virginity bears this 
image, integrity bears it, holiness bears it, 
and truth. Disciplines which are mindfiil of 
God bear it, retaining righteousness with reli- 
gion, stedfast in faith, humble in fear, brave to 
all suffering, meek to sustain wrong, easy to show 
mercy, of one mind and one heart in fraternal 
peace. 

24. Every one of which things, O good virgins, 
you ought to observe, to love, to fulfil, who, giv- 
ing yourselves to God and Christ, are advancing 
in both the higher and better part to the Lord, 
to whom you have dedicated yourselves. You 
that are advanced in years, suggest a teachinor to 
the younger. You that are younger, give a stim- 
ulus to your coevals. Stir one another uj) with 
mutual exhortations ; provoke to glory by rival 
proofs of virtue. Endure bravely, go on spiritu- 
ally, attain happily. Only remember us at that 
time, when virginity shall begin to be rewarded 
in you. 

3 I Cor. XV. 47. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

437 

TREATISE III.' 

ON THE LAPSED.^ 

ARGUMENT. — HAVING ENLARGED UPON THE 
UNLOOKED-FOR PEACE OF THE CHURCH, AND 
THE CONSTANCY OF THE CONFESSORS AND 
THOSE WHO HAD STOOD FAST IN THE FAITH ; 
AND THEN WITH EXTREME GRIEF HAVING 
POINTED TO THE DOWNFALL OF THE LAPSED, 
AND UNFOLDED THE CAUSES OF THE BYGONE 
PERSECUTION, NAMELY, THE NEGLECT OF DISCI- 
PLINE, AND THE SINS OF THE FAITHFUL ; OUR 
AUTHOR SEVERELY REPROACHES THE LAPSED, 
THAT, AT THE VERY FIRST WORDS OF THE 
ENEMY THREATENING THEM, THEY HAD SACRI- 
FICED TO IDOLS, AND HAD NOT RATHER WITH- 
DRAWN, ACCORDING TO CHRIST'S COUNSEL. ^ 
LASTLY, HE WARNS HIS READERS TO AVOID 
THE NOVATIANS, CONFUTING THEIR HERESY WITH 
MANY SCRIPTURES. 

1. Behold, beloved brethren, peace is restored 
to the Church ; and ahhough it lately seemed to 
incredulous people difficult, and to traitors im- 
possible, our security is by divine aid and retri- 
bution re-established. Our minds return to 
gladness ; and the season of affliction and the 
cloud being dispersed, tranquillity and serenity 
have shone forth once more. Praises must be 
given to God, and His benefits and gifts must 
be celebrated with giving of thanks, although 
even in the time of persecution our voice has 
not ceased to give thanks. For not even an 
enemy has so much power as to prevent us, who 
love the Lord with our whole heart, and life, 
and strength, from declaring His blessings and 
praises always and everywhere with glory. The 
day earnestly desired, by the prayers of all has 
come ; and after the dreadful and loathsome 
darkness of a long night, the world has shone 
forth irradiated by the light of the Lord. 

2. We look with glad countenances upon con- 
fessors illustrious with the heraldry of a good 
name, and glorious with the praises of virtue and 
of faith ; clinging to them with holy kisses, we 
embrace them long desired with insatiable eager- 
ness. The white-robed cohort of Christ's soldiers 
is here, who in the fierce conflict have broken 
the ferocious turbulence of an urgent persecu 

' [Written a.d. 251.] 

2 Cyprian had frequently promised, that as soon as peace should 
be restored to the Church, he would write something definite on the 
subject of the lapsed; and in the following treatise he fulfils his prom- 
ise. 

3 Now that they had been polluted with sacrifices, contrary to 
the law of the Gospel, before their sins were atoned for, before con- 
fession of their crime had been made, they were doing violence to the 
body and blood of the Lord, and were extorting communion and peace 
from certain presbyters, without the bishop's judgment. He exhorts 
them accordingly, in many words, that, — deterred by the divine ven- 
geance on certain of the lapsed who had communicated unworthily, 
and animated by the example of those, who, although, under the bon- 
dage of no crime, either of sacrifice or of certificate, yet, because they 
had even thought of these things, confessed with grief and sincerity 
the actual sin to God's priests and made avowal, — they should con- 
fess their sin, to public repentance and full satisfaction. 

tion, having been prepared for the suffering of 
the dungeon, armed for the endurance of death. 
Bravely you have resisted the world : you have 
afforded a glorious spectacle in the sight of God ; 
you have been an example to your brethren that 
shall follow you. That religious voice has named 
the name of Christ, in whom it has once con- 
fessed that it believed ; those illustrious hands, 
which had only been accustomed to divine works, 
have resisted the sacrilegious sacrifices ; those 
lips, sanctified by heavenly food after the body 
and blood of the Lord, have rejected the profane 
contacts and the leavings of the idols. Your 
head has remained free from the impious and 
wicked veil •♦ with which the captive heads of 
those who sacrificed were there veiled ; your 
brow, pure with the sign of God, could not bear 
the crown of the devil, but reserved itself for the 
Lord's crown. How joyously does your Mother 
Church receive you in her bosom, as you return 
from the battle ! How blissfully, how gladly, 
does she open her gates, that in united bands 
you may enter, bearing the trophies from a pros- 
trate enemy ! With the triumphing men come 
women also, who, while contending with the 
world, have also overcome their sex ; and virgins 
also come with the double glory of their warfare, 
and boys transcending their years with their vir- 
tues.5 Moreover, also, the rest of the multitude 
of those who stand fast follow your glory, and 
accompany your footsteps with the insignia of 
praise, very near to, and almost joined with, your 
own. In them also is the same sincerity of 
heart, the same soundness of a tenacious faith. 
Resting on the unshaken roots of the heavenly 
precepts, and strengthened by the evangelical 
traditions, the prescribed banishment, the des- 
tined tortures, the loss of property, the bodily 
punishments, have not terrified them. The days 
for proving their faith were limited beforehand ; 
but he who remembers that he has renounced 
the world knows no day of worldly appointment, 
neither does he who hopes for eternity from God 
calculate the seasons of earth any more. 

3. Let none, my beloved brethren, let none 
depreciate this glory ; let none by malignant 
dispraise detract from the uncorrupted sted- 
fastness of those who have stood. When the 
day appointed for denying was gone by, every 
One who had not professed within that time not 
to be a Christian, confessed that he was a Chris- 
tian. It is the first title to victory to confess 
the Lord under the violence of the hands of 
the Gentiles. It is the second step to glory to 
be withdrawn by a cautious retirement, and to be 

* The veiled head was the sign of Roman worship. — Oxford 
trans. [This helps to interpret i Cor. xi. 4, which was equally 
against the Jewish practice.] 

5 Some read, with very uncertain authority, " with the virtues of 
continency." 

438 

thp: treatises of cyprian. 

reserved for the Lord. The former is a pubHc, 
the latter is a private confession. The former 
overcomes the judge of this world ; the latter, 
content with God as its judge, keeps a pure con- 
science in integrity of heart. In the former 
case there is a readier fortitude ; in the latter, 
solicitude is more secure. The former, as his 
hour approached, was already found mature ; the 
latter perhaps was delayed, who, leaving his 
estate, withdrew for a while, because he would 
not deny, but would certainly confess if he too 
had been apprehended. 

4. One cause of grief saddens these heavenly 
crowns of martyrs, these glorious spiritual con- 
fessions, these very great and illustrious virtues 
of the brethren who stand ; which is, that the 
hostile violence has torn away a part of our own 
bowels, and thrown it away in the destructiveness 
of its own cruelty. What shall I do in this 
matter, beloved brethren? Wavering in the va- 
rious tide of feeling, what or how shall I speak? 
I need tears rather than words to express the 
sorrow with which the wound of our body should 
be bewailed, with which the manifold loss of a 
people once numerous should be lamented. For 
whose heart is so hard or cruel, who is so un- 
mindful of brotherly love, as, among the varied 
ruins of his friends, and the mournful relics dis- 
figured with all degradation, to be able to stand 
and to keep dry eyes, and not in the breaking 
out of his grief to express his groanings rather 
with tears than with words ? I grieve, brethren, 
I grieve with you ; nor does my own integrity 
and my jjersonal soundness beguile me to the 
soothing of my griefs, since it is the shepherd 
that is chiefly wounded in the wound of his flock. 
I join my breast with each one, and I share in 
the grievous burden of sorrow and mourning. 
I wail with the wailing, I weep with the weeping, 
I regard myself as prostrated with those that are 
prostrate. My limbs are at the same time stricken 
with those darts of the raging enemy ; their cruel 
swords have pierced through my bowels ; my 
mind could not remain untouched and free from 
the inroad of persecution among my downfallen 
brethren ; sympathy has cast me down also. 

5. Yet, beloved brethren, the cause of truth 
is to be had in view ; nor ought the gloomy 
darkness of the terrible persecution so to have 
blinded the mind and feeling, that there should 
remain no light and illumination whence the 
divine precepts may be beheld. If the cause of 
disaster is recognised, there is at once found a 
remedy for the wound. The Lord has desired 
His family to be proved ; and because a long 
peace had corrupted the discipline ' that had 
been divinely delivered to us, the heavenly re- 

' [This and the whole passage which follows are cited by Words- 
worth, to illustrate the times that produced a Callistus. See his 
HippoL, p. 140.] 

buke has aroused our faith, which was giving way, 
and I had almost said slumbering ; and although 
we deserved ^ more for our sins, yet the most 
merciful Lord has so moderated all things, that 
all which has happened has rather seemed a trial 
than a persecution. 

6. Each one was desirous of increasing his 
estate ; and forgetful of what behevers had either 
done before in the times of the apostles, or al- 
ways ought to do, they, with the insatiable ardour 
of covetousness, devoted themselves to the in- 
crease of their property. Among the priests- 
there was no devotedness of religion ; among 
the ministers 3 there was no sound faith : in their 
works there was no mercy ; in their manners 
there was no discipline. In men, their beards 
were defaced ; '^ in women, their complexion was 
dyed : the eyes were falsified from what God's 
hand had made them ; their hair was stained 
with a falsehood. Crafty frauds were used to 
deceive the hearts of the simple, subtle mean- 
ings for circumventing the brethren. They united 
in the bond of marriage with unbelievers ; they 
prostituted the members of Christ to the Gen- 
tiles. They would swear not only rashly, but 
even more, would swear falsely ; would despise 
those set over them with haughty swelling, would 
speak evil Of one another with envenomed tongue, 
would quarrel with one another with obstinate 
hatred. Not a few bishops s who ought to fur- 
nish both exhortation and example to others, 
despising their divine charge, became agents in 
secular business, forsook their throne, deserted 
their people, wandered about over foreign prov- 
inces, iumted the markets for gainful merchan- 
dise, while brethren were starving in the Church.^ 
They sought to possess money in hoards, they 
seized estates by crafty deceits, they increased 
their gains by multiplying usuries. What do not 
such as we deserve to suffer for sins of this kind, 
when even already the divine rebuke has fore- 
warned us, antl said, " If they shall forsake my 
law, and walk not in my judgments ; if they shall 
profane my statutes, and shall not observe my 
l)recepts, I will visit their offences with a rod, 
and their sins with scourges?" ^ 

7. These things were before declared to us, 
and predicted. But we, forgetful of the law and 
obedience recjuired of us, have so acted by our 
sins, that while we despise the Lord's command- 
ments, we have come by severer remedies to the 
correction of our sin and probation of our faith. 
Nor indeed have we at last been converted to 
the fear of the Lord, so as to undergo patiently 

2 Some read, " to suffer." 

3 A late version gives, " in the ministries." 

* [Vol. iv. p. 22. Here Cyprian's "master" seems to speak 
againri 

5 [The state of things at Rome under Callistus and his prede- 
cessor is here very delicately reflected.] 

<> Or, " brpught no aid to starving brethren in the Church." 

7 I's. Ixxxix. io. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

439 

and courageously this our correction and divine 
proof. Immediately at the first words of the 
threatening foe, the greatest number of the breth- 
ren betrayed their faith, and were cast down, not 
by the onset of persecution, but cast themselves 
down by voluntary lapse. What unheard-of thing, 
I beg of you, what new thing had happened, that, 
as if on the occurrence of things unknown and 
unexpected, the obligation to ' Christ should be 
dissolved with headlong rashness? Have not 
prophets aforetime, and subsequently apostles, 
told of these things ? Have not they, full of the 
Holy Spirit, predicted the afflictions of the right- 
eous, and always the injuries of the heathens? 
Does not the sacred Scripture, which ever arms 
our faith and strengthens with a voice from 
heaven the servants of God, say, "Thou shalt 
worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt 
thou serve? "^ Does it not again show the 
anger of the divine indignation, and warn of the 
fear of punishment beforehand, when it says, 
" They worshipped them whom their fingers have 
made ; and the mean man boweth down, and the 
great man humbleth himself, and I will forgive 
them not? " ^ And again, God speaks, and says, 
" He that sacrifices unto any gods, save unto the 
Lord only, shall be destroyed." ■♦ In the Gospel 
also subsequently, the Lord, who instructs by His 
words and fulfils by His deeds, teaching what 
should be done, and doing whatever He had 
taught, did He not before admonish us of what- 
ever is now done and shall be done ? Did He 
not before ordain bo^^h for those who deny Him 
eternal punishments, and for those that confess 
Him saving rewards? 

8. From some — ah, misery ! — all these things 
have fallen away, and have passed from memory. 
They indeed did not wait to be apprehended ere 
they ascended, or to be interrogated ere they 
denied. Many were conquered before the battle, 
prostrated before the attack. Nor did they even 
leave it to be said for them, that they seemed to 
sacrifice to idols unwiUingly. They ran to the 
market-place of their own accord ; freely they 
hastened to death, as if they had formerly wished 
it, as if they would embrace an opportunity now 
given which they had always desired. How 
many were put off by the magistrates at that 
time, when evening was coming on ; how many 
even asked that their destruction might not be 
delayed ! What violence can such a one plead 
as an excuse? How can he purge his crime, 
when it was he himself who rather used force to 
bring about his own ruin ? • When they came 
voluntarily to the Capitol, — when they freely 
approached to the obedience of the terrible wick- 

' "Christ! sacramentum.' 
army.] 

- Deut. vi. 13. 
3 Isa. ii. 8, 9. 
^ Ex. xxii. 20. 

[Like a panic in an undisciplined 

edness, — did not their tread falter? Did not 
their sight darken, their heart tremble, their arms 
fall helplessly down? Did not their senses fail, 
their tongue cleave to their mouth, their speech 
grow weak ? Could the servant of God stand 
there, and speak and renounce Christ, when he 
had already renounced the devil and the world ? 
Was not that altar, whither he drew near to perish, 
to him a funeral pile ? Ought he not to shudder 
at and flee from the devil's altar, which he had 
seen to smoke, and to be redolent of a foul foetor, 
as if it were the funeral and sepulchre of his life? 
Why bring with you, O wretched man, a sacri- 
fice ? why immolate a victim ? You yourself 
have come to the altar an offering ; you your- 
self have come a victim : there you have immo- 
lated your salvation, your hope ; there you have 
burnt up your faith in those deadly fires.5 

9. But to many their own destruction was not 
sufficient. With mutual exhortations, people 
were urged to their ruin ; death was pledged by 
turns in the deadly cup. And that nothing 
might be wanting to aggravate the crime, infants 
also, in the arms of their parents, either carried 
or conducted, lost, while yet little ones, what in 
the \'ery first beginning of their nativity they 
had gained.*^ Will not they, when the day of 
judgment comes, say, " We have done nothing ; ^ 
nor have we forsaken the Lord's bread and cup 
to hasten freely to a profane contact ; the faith- 
lessness of others has ruined us. We have found 
our parents our murderers ; they have denied to 
us the Church as a Mother ; they have denied 
God as a Father : so that, while we were little, and 
unforeseeing, and unconscious of such a crime, 
we were associated by others to the partnership 
of wickedness, and we were snared by the deceit 
of others?" 

10. Nor is there, alas, any just and weighty 
reason which excuses such a crime. One's coun- 
try was to be left, and loss of one's estate was 
to be suffered. Yet to whom that is born and 
dies is there not a necessity at some time to 
leave his country, and to suffer the loss of his 
estate ? But let not Christ be forsaken, so that 
the loss of salvation and of an eternal home 
should be feared. Behold, the Holy Spirit cries 
by the prophet, " Depart ye, depart ye, go ye 
out from thence, touch not the unclean thing ; 
go ye out from the midst of her, and be ye sep- 
arate, that bear the vessels of the Lord."** Yet 
those who are the vessels of the Lord and the tem- 
ple of God do not go out from the midst, nor de- 
part, that they may not be compelled to touch the 
unclean thing, and to be polluted and corrupted 
with deadly food. Elsewhere also a voice is 

5 [Mark viii. 36.] 

6 [The baptism of infants seems now to be general, and also the 
communion of infants. See sec. 25, iiifra.\ 

7 Some read, " evil." 
S Isa. Hi. II. 

440 

THE TREATISES OF CVi^^lAX. 

' heard from heaven, forewarning what is becom- 
ing for the servants of God to do, saying, " Come 
out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers 
of her sins, and that ye receive not of her 
plagues." ' He who goes out and departs does 
not become a partaker of the guilt ; but he will 
be wounded with the plagues who is found a 
companion in the crime. .And therefore the 
Ivord commanded us in the persecution to de- 
part and to flee ; and both taught that this should 
be done, and Himself did it. For as the crown 
is given of the condescension of God, and can- 
not be received unless the hour comes for 
accepting it, whosoever abiding in Christ departs 
for a while does not deny his faith, but waits for 
the time ; but he who has fallen, after refusing 
to depart, remained to deny it. 

11. The truth, brethren, must not be dis- 
guised ; nor must the matter and cause of our 
wound be concealed. A blind love of one's 
own property has deceived many ; Hor could 
they be prepared for, or at ease in, departing 
■when their wealth fettered them like a chain. 
Those were the chains to them that remained — 
those were the bonds by which both virtue was 
retarded, and faith burdened, and the spirit 
bound, and the soul hindered ; so that they who 
were involved in earthly things ^ might become 
a booty and food for the serpent, which, accord- 
ing to God's sentence, feeds upon earth. And 
therefore the Lord the teacher of good things, 
forewarning for the future time, says, " If thou 
wilt be ])erfect, go, sell all that thou hast, and 
^ive to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in 
heaven : and come and follow me." ^ If rich 
men did this, they would not perish by their 
riches ; if they laid up treasure in heaven, they 
would not now have a domestic enemy and 
assailant. Heart and mind and feeling would 
()e in heaven, if the treasure were in heaven ; 
nor could he be overcome by the world who had 
nothing in the world whereby he could be over- 
come.+ He would follow tlie Lord loosed and 
free, as did the apostles, and many in the times 
of the apostles, and many who forsook both tiieir 
means and their relatives, and clave to Christ 
with undivided ties. 

12. But how can they follow Christ, who are 
held back by the chain of their wealth ? Or 
how can they seek heaven, and climb to sublime 
and lofty heights, who are weighed down by 
earthly desires ? They think that they possess, 
when they are rather possessed ; as slaves of 
their profit, and not lords with respect to their 
own money, but rather the bond-slaves of their 
money. These times and these men are indi- 

' Apoc. xviii. 4. 

^ According to some, for " things ' 

3 Mntt. XIX. 2t. 

■♦ Otherwise, " i;oulJ be bound." 

read "desir«s.' 

cated by the apostle, when he says, " But they 
that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, 
and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which 
drown men in destruction and in perdition. For 
the root of all evil is the love of money, which, 
while some have coveted, they have erred 5 from 
the faith, and pierced themselves through with 
many sorrows." ^ But with what rewards does 
the Lord invite us to contempt of worldly wealth ? 
U'ith what compensations does He atone for the 
small and trifling losses of this present time? 
" There is no man," saith He, " that leaves house, 
or land, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or chil- 
dren, for the kingdom of God's sake, but he shall 
receive seven-fold ' even in this tin^e, but in the 
world to come life everlasting." ** If we know 
these things, and have found them out from the 
truth of the Lord who promises, not only is not 
loss of this kind to be feared, but even to be 
desired ; as the Lord Himself again announces 
and warns us, " Blessed are ye when men shall 
persecute you, and when they shall separate you 
from their company, and shall cast you out, and 
shall speak of your name as evil for the Son of 
man's sake ! Rejoice ye in that day, and leap 
for joy ; for, behold, your reward is great in 
heaven." ^ 

13. But (say they) subsequently tortures had 
come,'" and severe sufferings were threatening 
those who resisted. He may com])lain of tor- 
tures who has been overcome b\' tortures ; he 
may offer the excuse of suffering who has been 
van(]uished in suffering. Such a one may ask, 
and say, " I wished indeed to strive bravely, and, 
rememi)ering my oath, I took up the arms of 
devotion and faith ; but as I was struggling in 
the encounter, varied tortures and long-continued 
sufferings overcame me. My mind stood firm, 
and my faith was strong, and my soul struggled 
long, unshaken with the torturing pains ; but 
when, with the renewed barbarity of the most 
cruel judge, wearied out as I was, the scourges 
were now tearing me," the clubs bruised me, the 
rack strained me, the claw dug into me, the fire 
roasted me ; my flesh deserted me in the strug- 
gle, the weakness of my bodily frame gave way, 
— not my mind, but my body, yielded in the 
suffering." Such a plea may readily avail to for- 
giveness ; an apology of that kind may excite 
compassion. Thus at one time the Lord forgave 
Castus and ^milius ; thus, overcome in the first 
encounter, they were made victors in the second 
battle. So that they who had formerly given 
way to the fires became stronger than the fires, 

i Some substitute, " have made shipwreck of." 

* I Tim. vi. 9. 

' Or, "a hundred-fold." 

8 Mark x. 29. 

9 Luke vi. 22. 

10 " Were at hand." 

" Or, " the scourges were lacerating my already wearied body.' 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

441 

and in that in which they had been vanquished 
they were conquerors. They entreated not for 
pity of their tears, but of their wounds ; nor with 
a lamentable voice alone, but with laceration and 
suffering of body. Blood flowed instead of weep- 
ing ; and instead of tears, gore poured forth from 
their half-scorched entrails. 

14. But now, what wounds can those who are 
overcome show ? what gashes of gaping entrails, 
what tortures of the limbs, in cases where it was 
not faith that fell in the encounter, but faithless- 
ness that anticipated the struggle? Nor does 
the necessity of the crime excuse the person 
compelled, where the crime is committed of 
free will. Nor do I say this in such a way as 
that I would burden the cases of the brethren, 
but that I may rather instigate the brethren to a 
prayer of atonement. For, as it is written, 
•" They who call you happy cause you to err, and 
destroy the paths of your feet," ' he who soothes 
the sinner with flattering blandishments furnishes 
the stimulus to sin ; nor does he repress, but 
nourishes wrong-doing. But he who, with braver 
counsels, rebukes at the same time that he in- 
structs a brother, urges him onward to salvation. 
" As many as I love," saith the Lord, " I rebuke 
and chasten." ^ And thus also it behoves the 
Lord's priest not to mislead by deceiving con- 
cessions, but to provide with salutary remedies. 
He is an unskilful physician who handles the 
swelling edges of wounds with a tender hand, 
and, by retaining the poison shut up in the deep 
recesses of the body, increases it. The wound 
must be opened, and cut, and healed by the 
stronger remedy of cutting out the corrupting 
parts. The sick man may cry out, may vocifer- 
ate, and may complain, in impatience of the 
pain ; but he will afterwards give thanks when 
he has felt that he is cured. 

15. Moreover, beloved brethren, a new kind 
of devastation has appeared ; and, as if the 
storm of persecution had raged too little, there 
has been added to the heap, under the title of 
mercy, a deceiving mischief and a fair-seeming 
calamity. Contrary to the vigour of the Gospel, 
contrary to the law of the Lord and God, uy 
the temerity of some, communion is relaxed to 
heedless persons, — a vain and false peace, dan- 
gerous to those who grant it, and likely to 
avail nothing to those who receive it. They do 
not seek for the patience necessary to health, 
nor the true medicine derived from atonement. 
Penitence is driven forth from their breasts, and 
the memory of their very grave and extreme sin 
is taken away. The wounds cf Liie dying are 
covered over, and the deadly dIow that is planted 
in the deep and secret entrails is concealed by 

' Isa. iii. 12. 
^ Apoc. iii. 19. 

a dissimulated suffering. Returning from the 
altars of the devil, they draw near to the holy 
place of the Lord, with hands filthy and reeking 
with smell, still almost breathing of the plague- 
bearing idol-meats ; and even with jaws still 
exhaling their crime, and reeking with the fatal 
contact, they intrude on the body of the Lord, 
although the sacred Scripture stands in their 
way, and cries, saying, " Every one that is clean 
shall eat of the flesh ; and whatever soul eateth 
of the flesh of the saving sacrifice, which is the 
Lord's, having his uncleanness upon him, that 
soul shall be cut off" from his people." ^ Also, 
the apostle testifies, and says, " Ye cannot drink 
the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils ; ye 
cannot be partakers of the Lord's table and of 
the table of devils." ■♦ He threatens, moreover, 
the stubborn and froward, and denounces them, 
saying, " Whosoever eateth the bread or drinketh 
the cup of the Lord unworthily, is guilty of the 
body and blood of the Lord." 5 

16. All these warnings being scorned and con- 
temned,— before their sin is expiated, before 
confession has been made of their crime, before 
their conscience has been purged by sacrifice 
and by the hand of the priest,*" before the offence 
of an angry and threatening Lord has been 
appeased, violence is done to His body and 
blood ; and they sin now against their Lord 
more with their hand and mouth than when they 
denied their Lord. They think that that is 
peace which some with deceiving words are 
blazoning forth : ^ that is not peace, but war ; 
and he is not joined to the Church who is sepa- 
rated from the Gospel. Why do they call an 
injury a kindness? Why do they call impiety 
by the name of piety? Why do they hinder 
those who ought to weep continually and to 
entreat their Lord, from the sorrowing of re- 
pentance, and pretend to receive them to com- 
munion ? This is the same kind of thing to the 
lapsed as hail to the harvests ; as the stormy 
star to the trees ; as the destruction of pesti- 
lence to the herds ; as the raging tempest to 
shipping. They take away the consolation of 
eternal hope ; they overturn the tree from the 
roots ; they creep on to a deadly contagion with 
their pestilent words ; they dash the ship on the 
rocks, 90 that it may not reach to the harbour. 
Such a facility does not grant peace, but takes 
it away ; nor does it give communion, but it 
hinders from salvation. This is another perse- 
cution, and another temptation, by which the 
crafty enemy still further assaults the lapsed ; 
attacking them by a secret corruption, that their 

3 Lev. vii. 20. 

■» I Cor. X. 21. 

5 I Cor. xi. 27. 

^ By some, the rest of the sentence .ifter this word (" priest") is 
placed at the beginning of the paragraph, after the word " con- 
temned." 

' Venditant. 

442 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

lamentation may be hushed, that their grief may 
be silent, that the memory of their sin may pass 
away, that the groaning of their heart may be 
repressed, that the weeping of their eyes may 
be quenched ; nor long and full penitence dep- 
recate the Lord so grievously offended, although 
it is written, " Remember from whence thou art 
fallen, and repent." ' 

1 7. Let no one cheat himself, let no one de- 
ceive himself. The Lord alone can have mercy. 
He alone can bestow pardon for sins which have 
been committed against Himself, who bare our 
sins, who sorrowed for us, whom God delivered 
up for our sins. Man cannot be greater than 
Ood, nor can a servant remit or forego by his 
indulgence what has been committed by a greater 
crime against the Lord, lest to the person lapsed 
this be moreover added to his sin, if he be igno- 
rant that it is declared, "Cursed is the man that 
putteth his hope in man." ^ The Lord must be 
besought. The Lord must be appeased by our 
atonement, who has said, that him that denieth 
Him He will deny, who alone has received all 
judgment from His Father. We believe, indeed, 
that the merits of martyrs and the works of the 
righteous are of great avail with the Judge ; but 
that will be when the day of judgment shall 
come ; ^ when, after the conclusion of this life 
and the world. His people shall stand before the 
tribunal of Christ. 

18. But if any one, by an overhurried haste, 
rashly thinks that he can give remission of sins 
to aU,-* or dares to rescind the Lord's precepts, 
not only does it in no respect advantage the 
lapsed, but it does them harm. Not to have 
observed His judgment is to have provoked His 
wrath, and to think that the mercy of God must 
not first of all be entreated, and, despising the 
Lord, to presume on His power.s Under the 
altar of God the souls of the slain martyrs cry 
with a loud voice, saying, " How long, O Lord, 
holy and true, dost Thou not judge and avenge 
our blood upon those who dwell on the earth ?"^' 
And they are bidden to rest, and still to keep 
patience. And does any one think that, in op- 
position to the Judge, a man can become of 
avail 7 for the general remission and pardon of 
sins, or that he can shield others before he him- 
self is vindicated ? The martyrs order something 
to be done ; ^ but only if this thing be just and 

' Apoc. ii. 5. 

2 Jer. xvii. 5. [Here is an emphatic repudiation of what pro- 
duced niedia;val indulgences, saint-worship, and Mariolalry. Of the 
latter, so pre-eminently the system of modern Rome, not a syllable in 
all these Fathers. " Quam ritus eccles. nescit." Bernard, Ep. 
clxxiv., O//., i. 389.] 

^ (All the whole base on which " indulgences" and the like rest, 
is here shown to be worthless ] 

* " 'I'o any." 

5 " On his facility; " v. I. 

* Apoc. vi 10. 

' "Worthy of." 

' [i.e., the confessors awaiting martyrdom. See vol. iv. p. 693, 
note 2.] 

I lawful, if it can be done without opposing the 

j Lord Himself by God's priest, if the consent of 

1 the obeying party be easy and yielding, if the 

I moderation of the asking party be religious. 

[ The martyrs order something to be done ; but 

if what they order be not written in the law of 

the Lord, we must first know that they have 

obtained what they ask from God, and then do 

what they command. For that may not always 

appear to be immediately conceded by the 

divine majesty, which has been promised by 

man's undertaking. 

19. For Moses also besought for the sins of 
the people ; and yet, when he had sought par- 
don for these sinners, he did not receive it. 
" 1 pray Thee," said he, " O Lord, this people 
have sinned a great sin, and have made them 
gods of gold. Yet now, if Thou wilt forgive 
their sin, forgive it ; but if not, blot me out of 
the book which Thou hast written. And the 
Lord said unto Moses, Whosoever hath sinned 
against me, him will I blot out of my book." ^ 
He, the friend of God ; he who had often spoken 
face to face with the Lord, could not obtain 
what he asked, nor could appease the wrath of 
an indignant God by his entreaty. God praise.s 
Jeremiah, and announces, saying, " Before I 
formed thee in the belly, I knew thee ; and 
before thou camest out of the womb I sanctified 
thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the 
nations." '° And to the same man He saith, 
when he often entreated and pra) cd for the sins 
of the people, " Pray not thou for this people, 
neither lift up cry nor prayer for them ; for I 
will not hear them in the time wherein they call 
on me, in the time of their affliction." " But 
who was more righteous than Noah, who, when 
the earth was filled with sins, was alone found 
righteous on the earth? Who more glofious 
than Daniel? Who more strong for suffering 
martyrdom in firmness of faith, more happy in 
God's condescension, who so many times, both 
when he was in conflict conquered, and, when 
he had conquered, lived on? Was any more 
ready in good works than Job, braver in temp- 
tations, more patient in sufferings, more submis- 
sive in his fear, more true in his faith? And 
yet God said that He would not grant to them 
if they were to seek. When the j^rophet Ezekiel 
entreated for the sin of the people, " U'hatsoever 
land," said He, " shall sin against me by tres- 
passing grievously, I will stretch out mine hand 
upon it, and will break the staff of bread thereof, 
and will send famine upon it, and will cut off 
man and beast from it. Though these three 
men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were iia it, they 
should deliver neither sons nor daughters ; but 

9 Ex. xxxii. 31. 
'° Jer. i. 5. 
" Jer. vii. 16. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

443 

they only should be delivered themselves." ' 
Thus, not everything that is asked is in the pre- 
judgment of the asker, but in the free will of 
the giver ; neither can human judgment claim 
to itself or usurp anything, unless the divine 
pleasure approve. 

20. In the Gospel the Lord speaks, and says, 
" Whosoever shall confess me before men, him 
will I also confess before my Father which is in 
heaven : but he that denieth me, him will I also 
deny." ^ If He does not deny him that denies, 
neither does He confess him that confesses ; the 
Gospel cannot be sound in one part and waver 
in another. Either both must stand firm, or 
both must lose the force of truth. If they who 
deny shall not be guilty of a crime, neither shall 
they who confess receive the reward of a virtue. 
Again, if faith which has conquered be crowned, 
it is of necessity that faithlessness which iS con- 
quered should be punished. Thus the martyrs 
can either do nothing if the Gospel may be 
broken ; or if the Gospel cannot be broken, they 
can do nothing against the Gospel, since they 
become martyrs on account of the Gospel. Let 
no one, beloved brethren, let no one decry the 
dignity of martyrs, let no one degrade their 
glories and their crowns. The strength of their 
uncorrupted faith abides sound ; nor can he 
either say or do anything against Christ, whose 
hope, and faith, and virtue, and glory, are all in 
Christ : those cannot be the authority for the 
bishops doing anything against God's command, 
who themselves have done God's command. Is 
any one greater than God, or more merciful than 
God's goodness, that he should either wish that 
undone which God has suffered to be done, or, 
as if God had too little power to protect His 
Church, should think that we could be preserved 
by his help ? 

2 1 . Unless, perchance, these things have been 
done without God's knowledge, or all these things 
have happened without His permission ; although 
Holy Scripture teaches the indocile, and admon- 
ishes the unmindful, where it speaks, saying, 
"Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to those 
who made a booty of him? Did not the Lord 
against whom they sinned, and would not walk 
in His ways, neither were obedient unto His 
law? And He has poured upon them the fury 
of His anger." 3 And elsewhere it testifies and 
says, " Is the Lord's hand shortened, that it 
cannot save ; or His ear heavy, that it cannot 
hear ? But your iniquities separate between you 
and your God ; and because of your sins He 
hath hid His face from you, that He may not 
have mercy." '* Let us rather consider our of- 

' Ezelc. xiv. 13. 
2 Luke xii. S. 
^ Isa. xlii. 24. 
* Isa. lix. I. 

fences, revolving our doings and the secrets of 
our mind ; let us weigh the deserts of our con- 
science ; let it come back upon our heart that 
we have not walked in the Lord's ways, and have 
cast away God's law, and have never been will- 
ing to keep His precepts and saving counsels. 

22. What good can you think of him, what 
fear can you suppose to have been with him, or 
what faith, whom neither fear could correct nor 
persecution itself could reform ? His high and 
rigid neck, even when it has fallen, is unbent ; 
his swelling and haughty soul is not broken, 
even when it is conquered. Prostrate, he threat- 
ens those who stand ; and wounded, the sound. 
And because he may not at once receive the 
body of the Lord in his polluted hands, the sac- 
rilegious one is angry with the priests. And — 
oh your excessive madness, O frantic one — you 
are angry with him who endeavours to avert the 
anger of God from you ; you threaten him who 
beseeches the divine mercy on your behalf, who 
feels your wound which you yourself do not feel, 
who sheds tears for you, which perhaps you 
never shed yourself. You are still aggravating 
and enhancing your crime ; and while you 
yourself are implacable s against t«he ministers 
and priests ^ of God, do you think that the Lord 
can be appeased concerning you ? 

23. Receive rather, and admit what we say. 
Why do your deaf ears not hear the salutary pre- 
cepts with which we warn you ? Why do your 
blind eyes not see the way of repentance which 
we point out? Why does your stricken and 
alienated mind not perceive the lively remedies 
which we both learn and teach from the heavenly 
Scriptures ? ^ Or if some unbelievers have little 
faith in future events, let them be terrified with 
present ones. Lo, what punishments do we be- 
hold of those who have denied ! what sad deaths 
of theirs do we bewail I Not even here can 
they be without punishment, although the day 
of punishment has not yet arrived. Some are 
punished in the meantime, that others may be 
corrected. The torments of a few are the ex- 
amples of all. 

24. One of those who of his own will ascended 
the Capitol to make denial, after he had denied 
Christ, became dumb. The punishment began 
from that point whence the crime also began ; ^ 
so that now he could not ask, since he had no 
words for entreating mercy.'' Another, who was 
in the baths, (for this was wanting to her crime 
and to her misfortunes, that she even went at 
once to the baths, when she had lost the grace 
of the laver of life) ; there, unclean as she was. 

S ' And are angry." 

* Some omit " and priests " 

' [There can be no doubt where Cyprian would have been found 
in the times of Savonarola. Sec Perren:,, >' '/-■, etc., torn. ii. p. 350. J 

* [.?ee p. 340, note 2, siiZ-ra.] • 
9 Otherwise, " for the mercifulness of prayers." 

444 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

was seized by an unclean spirit,' and tore with 
her teeth the tongue with which she had either 
impiously eaten or spoken. After the wicked 
food had been taken, the madness of the mouth 
was armed to its own destruction. She herself 
was her own executioner, nor did she long con- 
tinue to live afterwards: toi aired with pangs of 
the belly and bowels, she expired. 

25. Learn what occurred when I myself was 
present and a witness.^ Some parents who by 
chance were escaping, being little careful ^ on 
account of their terror, left a little daughter 
under the care of a wet-nurse. The nurse gave 
up the forsaken child to the magistrates. They 
gave it, in the presence of an idol whither the 
people flocked (because it was not yet able to 
eat flesh on account of its years), bread mingled 
with wine, which however itself was the remain- 
der of what had been used in the immolation of 
those that had perished. Subsequently the 
mother recovered her child. But the girl was 
no more able to speak, or to indicate the crime 
that had been committed, than she had before 
been able to understand or to prevent it. There- 
fore it happened unawares in their ignorance, 
that when we were sacrificing, the mother 
brought it in with her. Moreover, the girl min- 
gled with the saints, became impatient of our 
prayer and supplications, and was at one mo- 
ment shaken with weeping, and at another tossed 
iibout like a wave of the sea by the violent ex- 
citement of her mind ; as if by the compulsion 
of a torturer the soul of that still tender child 
confessed a consciousness of the fact with such 
signs as it could. When, however, the solemni- 
ties were finished, and the deacon began to offer 
the cup to those present, and when, as the rest 
received it, its turn apjiroached, the little child, 
by the instinct of the divine majesty, turned away 
its face, compressed its mouth with resisting lips, 
and refused the cup.-* Still the deacon j^ersisted, 
and, although against her efforts, forced on her 
some of the sacrament of the cup. Then there 
followed a sobbing and vomiting. In a profane 
l)ody and mouth the lOucharist could not re- 
main ; the draught sanctified in the blood of 
the Lord burst forth from tlie polluted stomach. 
So great is the Lord's power, so great is His 
majesty. The secrets of tlarkness were dis- \ 
closed under His light, and not even hidden 
crimes deceived God's priest. 

26. This much about an infant, wliich was not 
yet of an age to speak of the crime committed 
by others in respect of herself. But the woman 

■ Some read, " and fell down." 

= [What Cyprian testifies as of his own knowledge, we must ac- 
cept as fact, however it be accounted for. For the rest, we may be- 
lieve that the terrible excitements of the times led him to accept as 
real the exaggerated stories which became current. In our own days 
" the faith-cure " excites a like credulity.] 

3 Some re.ad, " of themselves; " others, " of their belongings." 

* [Infant communion.] 

who in advanced life and of more mature age 
secretly crept in among us when we were sacri- 
ficing, received not food, but a sword for herself; 
and as if taking some deadly poison 5 into her 
jaws and body, began presently to be tortured, 
and to become stiffened with frenzy ; and suf- 
fering the misery no longer of persecution, but 
of her crime, shivering and trembling, she fell 
down. The crime of her dissimulated con- 
science was not long unpunished or concealed. 
She who had deceived man, felt that God was 
taking vengeance. And another woman, when 
she tried with unworthy hands to open her box,'' 
in which was the holy (body) of the Lord, was 
deterred by fire rising from it from daring to 
touch it. And when one,? who himself was de- 
filed, dared with the rest to receive secretly a 
part of the sacrifice celebrated by the priest ; he 
could not eat nor handle the holy of the Lord, 
but found in his hands ^ when opened that he 
had a cinder. Thus by the experience of one it 
was shown that the Lord withdraws when He is 
denied ; nor does that which is received benefit 
the undeser\'ing for salvation, since saving grace 
is changed by the departure of the sanctity into 
a cinder. How many there are daily who do 
not repent nor make confession of the con- 
sciousness of their crime, who are filled with 
unclean spirits ! "^ How many are shaken even 
to unsoundness of mind and idiotcy by the 
raging of madness ! Nor is there any need 
to go through the deaths of individuals, since 
through the manifold lapses occurring in the 
world the punishment of their sins is as varied 
as the multitude of sinners is abundant. Let 
each one consider not what another has suffered, 
but what he himself deserves to suffer ; nor think 
that he has escaped if his i)unishment delay for 
a time, since he ought to fear it the more that 
the wrath of God the judge has reserved it for 
Himself. 

27. Nor let those persons flatter themselves 
that they need repent the less, who, although 
they have not polluted their hands with abomi- 
nable sacrifices, yet have defiled their conscience 
with certificates.'" That profession of one who 
denies, is the testimony of a Christian disowning 
what he had been. He says that he has done 
what another has actually committed ; and al- 
though it is written, "Ye cannot serve two mas- 
ters," " he has served an earthly master in that 

5 " And receiving the blood as if some deadly poison," etc. ; 7'. /. 

* [They carried the sacred bread in this manner to invalids at 
home. The idea of " worshipping the host," therefore, could not have 
been possible.] 

7 Or, " a certain one." 

' ( Tlie holy bread was delivered into the hands of the recipient. 
See Cyril of Jerusalem, Mysta^o,^., xxiii. 21.] 

9 I Luke xi. 20. The whole of scriptural teachings concornini* 
these, requires renewed study. Consult Tillotson, li'orks, ii. 508, 
ed. 1722.] 

'° J The kindly but unwise interposition of the confessors in their 
behalf. See vol. iii. p. 693, note 2.] 

" Matt. vi. 34. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

445 

he has obeyed his edict ; he has been more 
obedient to human authority than to God. It 
matters not whether he has pubhshed what he 
has done with less either of disgrace or of guilt 
among men. Be that as it may, he will not be 
able to escape and avoid God his judge, seeing 
that the Holy Spirit says in the Psalms, " Thine 
eyes did see my substance, that it was imperfect, 
and in Thy book shall all men be written." • 
And again : " Man seeth the outward appear- 
ance, but God seeth the heart." ^ The Lord 
Himself also forewarns and prepares us, saying, 
" And all the churches shall know that I am He 
which searcheth the reins and the heart." ^ He 
looks into the hidden and secret things, and 
considers those things which are concealed ; 
nor can any one evade the eyes of the Lord, 
who says, " I am a God at hand, and not a God 
afar off. If a man be hidden in secret places, 
shall not I therefore see him? Do not I fill 
heaven and earth?"'* He sees the heart and 
mind of every person ; and He will judge not 
alone of our deeds, but even of our words and 
thoughts. He looks into the minds, and the 
wills, and conceptions of all men, in the very 
lurking-places of the heart that is still closed up. 
28. Moreover, how much are they both greater 
in faith and better in their fear, who, although 
bound by no crime of sacrifice to idols or of 
certificate, yet, since they have even thought 
of such things, with grief and simplicity confess 
this very thing to God's priests, and make the 
conscientious avowal, put off from them the load 
of their minds, and seek out the salutary medi- 
cine even for slight and moderate wounds, know- 
ing that it is written, " God is not mocked." ^ 
God cannot be mocked, nor deceived, no^ de- 
luded by any deceptive cunning. Yea, he sins 
the more, who, thinking that God is like man, be- 
lieves that he evades the penalty of his crime if 
he has not openly admitted his crime. Christ says 
in His precepts, " Whosoever shall be ashamed of 
me, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed."^ 
And does he think that he is a Christian, who 
is either ashamed or afraid to be a Christian ? 
How can he be one with Christ, who either 
blushes or fears to belong to Christ? He will 
certainly have sinned less, by not seeing the 
idols, and not profaning the sanctity of the faith 
under the eyes of a people standing round and 
insulting, and not polluting his hands by the 
deadly sacrifices, nor defiling his lips with the 
wicked food. This is advantageous to this ex- 
tent, that the fault is less, not that the conscience 
is guiltless. He can more easily attain to pardon 

^ Ps. cxxxix. 16. 
' I Sam. xvi. 7. 
' Apoc. ii. «3. 

* Jer. xxiii. 23. 
5 Gal. vi. 7. 

* Mark viii. 83, 

of his crime, yet he is not free from crime ; and 
let him not cease to carry out his repentance, 
and to entreat the Lord's mercy, lest what seems 
to be less in the quality of his fault, should be 
increased by his neglect of atonement. 

29. I entreat you, beloved brethren, that each 
one should confess his own sin, while he who has 
sinned is still in this world, while his confession 
may be received, while the satisfaction and re- 
mission made by the priests are pleasing to the 
Lord.7 Let us turn to the Lord with our whole 
heart, and, expressing our repentance for our sin 
with true grief, let us entreat God's mercy. Let 
our soul lie low before Him. Let our mourn- 
ing atone to Him. Let all our hope lean upon 
Him. He Himself tells us in what manner we 
ought to ask. " Turn ye,," He says, " to me with 
all your heart, and at the same time with fast- 
ing, and with weeping, and with mourning ; and 
rend your hearts, and not your garments." ^ 
Let us return to the Lord with our whole heart. 
Let us appease His wrath and indignation with 
fastings, with weeping, with mourning, as He 
Himself admonishes us. 

30, Do we believe that a man is lamenting with 
his whole heart, that he is entreating the Lord with 
fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, 
who from the first day of his sin daily frequents 
the bathing-places with women ; who, feeding at 
rich banquets, and puffed out with fuller dainties, 
belches forth on the next day his indigestions, 
and does not dispense of his meat and drink 
so as to aid the necessity of the poor? How 
does he who walks with joyous and glad step 
mourn for his death ? And although it is writ- 
ten, " Ye shall not mar the figure of your beard," ^ 
he plucks out his beard, and dresses his hair ; 
and does he now study to please any one who 
displeases God ? Or does she groan and lament 
who has time to put on the clothing of precious 
apparel, and not to consider the robe of Christ 
which she has lost ; to receive valuable orna- 
ments and richly wrought necklaces, and not to 
bewail the loss of divine and heavenly orna- 
ment ? Although thou clothest thyself in foreign 
garments and silken robes, thou art naked ; al- 
though thou adornest thyself to excess both in 
pearls, and gems, and gold, yet without the 
adornment of Christ thou art unsightly. And 
you who stain your hair, now at least cease in 
the midst of sorrows ; and you who paint the 
edges of your eyes with a line drawn around 
them of black powder, now at least wash your 
eyes with tears. If you had lost any dear one 
of your friends by the death incident to mortali- 
ty, you would groan grievously, and weep with 
disordered countenance, with changed dress. 

7 [See .sec. 32, p. 446, infra. 

8 Jo ■ ■■ 

Joel ii. 12. 
9 Lev. xix. 27 

Note, not after this life.] 

446 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

with neglected hair, with clouded face, with de- 
jected appearance, you would show the signs of 
grief. Miserable creature, you have lost your 
soul ; spiritually dead here, you are continuing 
to live to yourself, and although yourself walking 
about, you have begun to carry your own death 
with you. And do you not bitterly moan ; do 
you not continually groan ; do you not hide your- 
self, either for shame of your sin or for continu- 
ance of your lamentation ? Behold, these are 
still worse wounds of sinning ; behold, these 
are greater crimes — to have sinned, and not to 
■nake atonement — to have committed crimes, 
and not to bewail your crimes. 

31. Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, the illustri- 
ous and noble youths, even amid the flames and 
the ardours of a raging furnace, did not desist 
from making public confession to God. .Al- 
though possessed of a good conscience, and 
having often deserved well of the Lord l)y obe- 
dience of faith and fear, yet they did not cease 
from maintaining their humility, and from mak- 
ing atonement to the Lord, even amid the glori- 
ous martyrdoms of their virtues. The sacred 
Scripture speaks, saying, " Azarias stood up and 
prayed, and, opening his mouth, made confession 
before God together with his companions in the 
midst of the fire." ' Daniel also, after the mani- 
fold grace of his faith and innocency, after the 
condescension of the Lord often repeated in 
respect of his virtues and praises, strives by fast- 
ings still further to deserve well of God, wraps 
himself in sackcloth and ashes, sorrowfully mak- 
ing confession, and saying, " O Lord God, great, 
and strong, and dreadful, keeping Thy covenant 
and mercy for them that love Thee and keep 
Thy commandments, we have sinned, we have 
committed iniciuity, and have done wickedly : 
we have transgressed, and dei)arted from Thy 
l)recepts, and from Thy judgments ; neither have 
we hearkened to the words of Thy servants the 
prophets, which they spake in Thy name to our 
kings, and to all the nations, and to all the earth. 
O Lord, righteousness - belongs unto Thee, but 
unto us confusion." ^ 

32. These things were done by men, meek, 
simple, innocent, in deserving well of the majesty 
of God ; and now those who have denied the 
Lord refuse to make atonement to the Lord, 
and to entreat Him. I beg you, brethren, acqui- 
esce in wholesome remedies, obey better coun- 
sels, associate your tears with our tears, join your 
groans with ours ; we beseech you in order that 
we may beseech God for you : we turn our very 
jjrayers to you first ; our prayers with which we 
pray* God for you that He would pity you. 

' Song of the Three Children. 

^ Some add, " to Thee, glory." 

3 Dan. ix. 4. 

* [Sec. 29, supra. , " While still in thit world."\ 

Repent abundantly, prove the sorrow of a griev- 
ing and lamenting mind. 

T^T,. Neither let that imprudent error or vain 
stupor of some move you, who, although they 
are involved in so grave a crime, are struck with 
blindness of mind, so that they neither under- 
stand nor lament their sins. This is the greater 
visitation of an angry God ; as it is written, 
" And God gave them the spirit of deadness." s 
.•\nd again : " They received not the love of the 
truth, that they might be saved. .And for this 
cause God shall send them the working of error, 
that they should believe a lie ; that they all 
might be damned who believed not the truth, 
but had pleasure in unrighteousness." ^ Unright- 
eously pleasing themselves, and mad with the 
alienation of a hardened mind, they despise the 
Lord's precepts, neglect the medicine for their 
wound, and will not repent. Thoughtless before 
their sin was acknowledged, after their sin they 
are obstinate ; neither stedfast before, nor sup- 
pliant afterwards : when they ought to have stood 
fast, they fell ; when they ought to fall and pros- 
trate themselves to God, they think they stand 
fast. They have taken peace for themselves of 
their own accord when nobody granted it ; se- 
duced by false promises, and linked with apos- 
tates and unbelievers, they take hold of error 
instead of truth : they regard a communion as 
valid with those who are not communicants ; 
they believe men against God, although they 
have not believed God against men. 

34. Flee from such men as much as you can ; 
avoid with a wholesome caution those who ad- 
here to their mischievous contact. Their wortl 
doth eat as doth a cancer ; 7 their conversation 
advances like a contagion ; their no.xious and 
envenomed persuasion kills worse than persecu- 
tion itself. In such a case there remains only 
penitence which can make atonement. But they 
who take away repentance for a crime, close the 
way of atonement. Thus it happens that, while 
by the rashness of some a false safety is either 
promised or trusted, the hope of true safety is 
taken away. 

35. But you, beloved brethren, whose fear is 
ready towards God, and whose mind, although 
it is placed in the midst of lapse, is mindful of 
its misery, do you in repentance and grief look 
into your sins ; acknowledge the very grave sin 
of your conscience ; open the eyes of your heart 
to the understanding of your sin, neither despair- 
ing of the Lord's mercy nor yet at once claiming 
His pardon. God, in proj)ortion as with the 
affection of a Father He is always indulgent and 
good, in the same proportion is to be dreaded 
with the majesty of a judge. Even as we have 

5 Isa. xxix. 10; Vulg. " transpunctionis.' 
* 2 Thess. ii. lo. 
" [2 Tim. ii. 17.] 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

447 

sinned greatly, so let us greatly lament. To a 
deep wound let there not be wanting a long and 
careful treatment ; let not the repentance be less 
than the sin. Think you that the Lord can be 
quickly appeased, whom with faithless, words 
you have denied, to whom you have rather pre- 
ferred your worldly estate, whose temple you 
have violated with a sacrilegious contact ? Think 
you that He will easily have mercy upon you 
whom you have declared not to be your God ? 
You must pray more eagerly and entreat ; you 
must spend the day in grief; .wear out nights in 
watchings and weepings ; occupy all your time 
in wailful lamentations ; lying stretched on the 
ground, you must cling close to the ashes, be 
surrounded with sackcloth and filth ; after losing 
the raiment of Christ, you must be willing now 
to have no clothing ; after the devil's meat, you 
must prefer fasting ; be earnest in righteous works, 
whereby sins may be purged ; frequently apply 
yourself to almsgiving, whereby souls are freed 
from death.' What the adversary took from 
you, let Christ receive ; nor ought your estate 
now either to be held or loved, by which 
you have been both deceived and conquered. 
Wealth must be avoided as an enemy ; must be 
fled from as a robber ; must be dreaded by its 
possessors as a sword and as poison.^^ To this 
<end only so much as remains should be of ser- 
vice, that by it the crime and the fault may be 
redeemed. Let good works be done without 
delay, and largely ; let all your estate be laid 
out for the healing of your wound ; let us lend 
of our wealth and our means to the Lord, who 
shall judge concerning us. Thus faith flourished 
in the time of the apostles ; thus the first people 
of believers kept Christ's commands : they were 
prompt, they were liberal, they gave their all to 
be distributed by the apostles ; and yet they 
were not redeeming sins of such a character as 
these. 

36. If a man make prayer with his whole 
heart, if he groan with the true lamentations and 
tears of repentance, if he incline the Lord to 
pardon of his sin by righteous and continual 
■works, he who expressed His mercy in these 
words may pity such men : " When you turn and 
lament, then shall you be saved, and shall know 
where you have been." ^ And again : " I have 
no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith 
the Lord, but that he should return and live." *♦ 
And Joel the prophet declares the mercy of the 
Lord in the Lord's own admonition, when he 
■says : " Turn ye to the Lord your God, for He 
is merciful and gracious, and patient, and of 
great mercy, and repenteth Him with respect 

to the evil that He hath inflicted." 5 He can 
show mercy ; He can turn back His judgment. 
He can mercifully pardon the repenting, the 
labouring, the beseeching sinner. He can re- 
gard as effectual whatever, in behalf of such as 
these, either martyrs have besought or priests 
have done. Or if any one move Him still more 
by his own atonement, if he appease His anger, 
if he appease the wrath of an indignant God by 
righteous entreaty, He gives arms again whereby 
the vanquished may be armed ; He restores and 
confirms the strength whereby the refreshed faith 
may be invigorated. The soldier will seek his 
contest anew ; he will repeat the fight, he will 
provoke the enemy, and indeed by his very suf- 
fering he is made braver for the battle. He who 
has thus made atonement to God ; he who by 
repentance for his deed, who by shame for his 
sin, has conceived more both of virtue and of 
faith from the very grief of his fall, heard and 
aided by the Lord, shall make the Church which 
he had lately saddened glad, and shall now de- 
serve of the Lord not only pardon, but a crown. 

TREATISE IV .^ 

ON THE LORD'S PRAYER. 

ARGUMENT. — THE TREATISE OF CYPRIAN ON" 
THE lord's prayer COMPRISES THREE POR- 
TIONS, IN WHICH DIVISION HE IMITATES TER- 
TULLIAN IN HIS BOOK ON PRAYER. IN THE 
FIRST PORTION, HE POINTS OUT THAT THE 
lord's PRAYER IS THE MOST EXCELLENT OF 
ALL PRAYERS, PROFOUNDLY SPIRITUAL, AND MOST 
EFFECl'UAL FOR OBTAINING OUR PETITIONS. IN 
THE SECOND PART, HE UNDERTAKES AN EX- 
PLANATION OF THE lord's PRAYER ; AND, STILL 
TREADING IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF TERTULLUN, 
HE GOES THROUGH ITS SEVEN CHIEF CLAUSES. 
FINALLY, IN THE THIRD PART, HE CONSIDERS 
THE CONDITIONS OF PRAYER, AND TELLS US 
WHAT PRAYER OUGHT TO BE. 7 

I. The evangelical precepts, beloved breth- 
ren, are nothing else than divine teachings, — 
foundations on which hope is to be built, sup- 
ports to strengthen faith, nourishments for cheer- 
ing the heart, rudders for guiding our way, 
guards for obtaining salvation, — which, while 
they instruct the docile minds of believers on 
the earth, lead them to heavenly kingdoms. 
God, moreover, willed many things to be said 
and to be heard by means of the prophets His 

' [In view of Matt. xxv. 36.] 

' Instead of " and a poison," some read, " and sold." 

3 Isa. XXX. 51. 

-* Ezek. xxxiii. 11. 

5 Joel li 13. 

6 [Written ad. 252. Compare Tertullian, vol. ui. p. 681.] ^ 

7 ist, persevering and continuous, after the example of Christ 
our Lord; 2dly, watchful, and poured forth from the heart, after the 
example of the priest who, in the prefafce which precedes the prayer, 
prepares the minds of the brethren by saying Sursum Corda, to 
which the people answer llahcinns ad Doininuin; 3dly, associated 
with good works and alms, like that of Tobias and Cornelius; 4thly, 
at every hour of the day, and especially at the three hours appointed 
by the Church for prayer, to wit, the third, the sixth, and the nmth 
hour; and, moreover, we must pray mornuig and evening. 

448 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

servants ; but how much greater are those which 
the Son speaks, which the Word of God who 
was in the prophets testifies with His own voice ; 
not now bidding to prepare the way for His 
coming, but Himself coming and opening and 
showing to us the way, so that we who have 
before been wandering in the darkness of death, 
without forethought and blind, being enlightened 
by the light of grace, might keep the way of 
Hfe, with the Lord for our ruler and guide ! 

2. He, among the rest of His salutary ad- 
monitions and divine precepts wherewith He 
counsels His people for their salvation, Himself 
also gave a form of praying — Himself advised 
and instructed us what we should pray for. He 
who made us to live, taught us also to pray, 
with that same benignity, to wit, wherewith He 
has condescended to give and confer all things 
else ; in order that while we speak to the Father 
in that prayer and supplication which the Son 
has taught us, we may be the more easily heard. 
Already He had foretold that the hour was com- 
ing "when the true worshippers should worship 
the Father in spirit and in truth ; " ' and He 
thus fulfilled what He before promised, so that 
we who by His sanctification ^ have received the 
Spirit and truth, may also by His teaching wor- 
ship truly and spiritually. For what can be a 
more spiritual prayer than that which was given 
to us by Christ, by whom also the Holy Spirit 
was given to us ? What praying to the Father 
can be more truthful than that which was deliv- 
ered to us by the Son who is the Truth, out of 
His own mouth? So that to pray otherwise 
than He taught is not ignorance alone, but also 
sin ; since He Himself has established, and 
said, "Ye reject the commandments of God, 
that ye may keep your own traditions." ^ 

3. Let us therefore, brethren beloved, pray as 
God our Teacher has taught us. It is a loving 
and friendly prayer to beseech God with His 
own word, to come up to His ears in the prayer 
of Christ. Let the Father acknowledge the 
words of His Son when we make our prayer, 
and let Kim also who dwells within in our breast 
Himself dwell in our voice. And since we have 
Him as an Advocate with the Father for our 
sins, let us, when as sinners we petition on behalf 
of our sins, put forward the words of our Advo- 
cate. For since He says, that " whatsoever we 
shall ask of the Father in His name, He will give 
us," ■♦ how much more effectually do we obtain 
what we ask in Christ's name, if we ask for it in 
His own prayer ! s 

' John iv. 2j. 

2 " S.itisfaction." 

3 Mark vii 9. [On the Shemoneh Eshreh, Prideaux, 1. vi. 2 ] 
< John xvi. 23. 

5 [Compare John xiv. 6. How can v/e come to the Father by the 
Son more effectually than by using the words which the Son has 
taught? Dr. Johnson thought extemporaneous prayers very good if 
the Lord's Prayer were not omitted.] 

4. But let our speech and petition when we 
pray be under discipline, observing cjuietness 
and modesty. Let us consider that we are 
standing in God's sight. We must please the 
divine eyes both with the habit of body and with 
the measure of voice. For as it is character- 
istic of a shameless man to be noisy with his 
cries, so, on the other hand, it is fitting to the 
modest man to pray with moderated petitions. 
Moreover, in His teaching the Lord has bidden 
us to pray in secret — in hidden and remote 
places, in our very bed-chambers — which is 
best suited to faith, that we may know that God 
is everywhere present, and hears and sees all,, 
and in the plenitude of His majesty penetrates 
even into hidden and secret places, as it is 
written, " I am a God at hand, and not a God 
afar off. If a man shall hide himself in secret 
places, shall I not then see him ? Do not I fill 
heaven and earth? "^ And again: "The eyes 
of the Lord are in every place, beholding the 
evil and the good." ^ And when we meet to- 
gether with the brethren in one place, and cele- 
brate divine sacrifices with God's priest, we 
ought to be mindful of modesty and discipline 
— not to throw abroad our prayers indiscrimi- 
nately, with unsubdued voices, nor to cast to 
God with tumultuous wordiness a petition that 
ought to be commended to God by modesty ; 
for God is the hearer, not of the voice, but of 
the heart. Nor need He be clamorously re- 
minded, since He sees men's thoughts, as the 
Lord proves to us when He says, '"* Why think 
ye evil in your hearts?"** And in another 
place : "And all the churches shall know that I 
am He that searcheth the hearts and reins." ^ 

5. And this Hannah in the first book of Kings, 
who was a type of the Church, maintains and 
observes, in that she prayed to God not with 
clamorous petition, but silently and modestly, 
within the very recesses of her heart. She spoke 
with hidden prayer, but with manifest faith. She 
spoke not with her voice, but with her heart, be- 
cause she knew that thus God hears ; and she 
effectually obtained what she sought, because 
she asked it with belief. Divine Scripture asserts 
this, when it says, " She spake in her heart, and 
; her lips moved, and her voice was not heard ; 
\ and (;od did hear her." '° We read also in the 
! Psalms, " Speak in your hearts, and in your beds, 
'and be ye pierced."" The Holy Spirit, more- 
\ over, suggests these same things by Jeremiah, 
and teaches, saying, " But in the heart ought 
God to be adored by thee." "^ 

* Jer. xxiii. 23, 24. 
' Prov. XV. 3. 

8 Matt. ix. 4. 

9 Apoc. ii. 23. 
'° I Sam. i. 13. 

" Ps. iv. 4, " transpungimini." 

1= Or, " In the heart, O God, ought we to worship Thee." (Ba- 
ruch vi. 6.) 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

449 

6. And let not the worshipper, beloved breth- 
ren, be ignorant in what manner the publican 
prayed with the Pharisee in the temple. Not 
with eyes lifted up boldly to heaven, nor with 
hands proudly raised ; but beating his breast, 
and testifying to the sins shut up within, he im- 
plored the help of the divine mercy. And while 
the Pharisee was pleased with himself, this man 
who thus asked, the rather deserved to be sanc- 
tified, since he placed the hope of salvation not 
in the confidence of his innocence, because 
there is none who is innocent ; but confessing 
his sinfulness, he humbly prayed, send He who 
pardons the humble heard the petitioner. And 
these things the Lord records in His Gospel, 
saying, " Two men went up into the temple to 
pray ; the one a Pharisee, and the other a publi- 
can. The Pharisee stood, and prayed thus with 
himself: God, I thank Thee that I am not as 
other men are, unjust, extortioners, adulterers, 
even as this publican. I fast twice in the week, 
I give tithes of all that I possess. But the pub- 
lican stood afar off, and would not so much as 
lift up his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his 
breast, saying, God, be merciful to me a sinner. 
I say unto you, this man went down to his house 
justified rather than the Pharisee : for every one 
that exalteth himself shall be abased ; and who- 
soever humbleth himself shall be exalted." ' 

7. These things, beloved brethren, when we 
have learnt from the sacred reading, and have 
gathered in what way we ought to approach to 
prayer, let us know also from the Lord's teach- 
ing what we should pray. "Thus," says He, 
" pray ye : — 

"Our Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be Thy 
name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done, as in 
heaven so in earth. Give us this day our daily bread. 
And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. 
And suffer us not to be led into temptation ; but deliver 
us from evil. Amen."^ 

8. Before all things, the Teacher of peace and 
the Master of unity would not have prayer to be 
made singly and individually, as for one who 
prays to pray for himself alone. For we say not 
" My Father, which art in heaven," nor " Give 
me this day my daily bread ;" nor does each one 
ask that only his own debt should be forgiven 
him ; nor does he request for himself alone that 
he may not be led into temptation, and delivered 
from evil. Our prayer is public and common ; 
and when we pray, we pray not for one, but for 
the whole people, because we the whole people 
are one. The God of peace and the Teacher of 
concord, who taught unity, willed that one should 
thus pray for all, even as He Himself bore us all 
in one. 3 This law of prayer the three children 

' Luke xviii. 10-14. 

2 Matt. vi. 9. 

3 [Unity is never out of our author's mind or heart.] 

observed when they were shut up in the fiery fur- 
nace, speaking together in prayer, and being of 
one heart in the agreement of the spirit ; and this 
the faith of the sacred Scripture assures us, and 
in telling us how such as these prayed, gives an 
example which we ought to follow in our prayers, 
in order that we may be such as they were : " Then 
these three," it says, " as if from one mouth sang 
an hymn, and blessed the Lord." * They spoke 
as if from one mouth, although Christ had not yet 
taught them how to pray. And therefore, as they 
prayed, their speech was availing and effectual, 
because a peaceful, and sincere, and spiritual 
prayer deserved well of the Lord. Thus also we 
find that the apostles, with the disciples, prayed 
after the Lord's ascension : " They all," says the 
Scripture, " continued with one accord in prayer, 
with the women, and Mary who was the mother 
of Jesus, and with His brethren." 5 They con- 
tinued with one accord in prayer, declaring both 
by the urgency and by the agreement ^ of their 
praying, that God, "who maketh men to dwell 
of one mind in a house," 7 only admits into the 
divine and eternal home those among whom 
prayer is unanimous. 

9. But what matters of deep moment*' are 
contained in the Lord's prayer ! How many and 
how great, briefly collected in the words, but 
spiritually abundant in virture ! so that there is 
absolutely nothing passed over that is not com- 
prehended in these our prayers and petitions, as 
in a compendium of heavenly doctrine. " After 
this manner," says He, " pray ye : Our Father, 
which art in heaven." The new man, born again 
and restored to his God by His grace, says 
" Father," in the first place because he has now 
begun to be a son. " He came," He says, " to 
His own, and His own received Him not. But 
as many as received Him, to them gave He power 
to become the sons of God, even to them that 
believe in His name." ^ The man, therefore, who 
has believed in His name, and has become God's 
son, ought from this point to begin both to give 
thanks and to profess himself God's son, by de- 
claring that God is his Father in heaven ; and 
also to bear witness, among the very first words 
of his new birth, that he has renounced an earthly 
and carnal father, and that he has begun to know 
as well as to have as a father Him only who is in 
heaven, as it is written: "They who say unto 
their father and their mother, I have not known 
thee, and who have not acknowledged their own 
children ; these have observed Thy precepts, and 
have kept Thy covenant." '° Also the Lord in 

* Song of the Three Children, v. 28. 

5 Acts i. 14. 

6 " Both the urgency and the agreement.' 
^ Ps. Ixviii. 6. 

8 Sacramenta. 

9 John i. II. 

■o Deut. xxxiii. 9. 

450 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN 

His Gospel has bidden us to call " no man our 
father upon earth, because there is to us one 
Father, who is in heaven." ' And to the disciple 
who had made mention of his dead father, He 
replied, " Let the dead bury their dead ; " ^ for 
he had said that his father was dead, while the 
Father of believers is living. 

10. Nor ought we, beloved brethren, only to 
Dbserve and understand that we should call Him 
Father who is in heaven ; but we add to it, and 
say our Father, that is, the Father of those who 
believe — of those who, being sanctified by Him, 
and restored by the nativity of spiritual grace, 
have begun to be sons of God. A word this, 
moreover, which rebukes and condemns the Jews, 
who not only unbelievingly despised Christ, who 
had been announced to them by the prophets, 
and sent first to them, but also cruelly put Him 
to death ; and these cannot now call God their 
Father, since the Lord confounds and confutes 
them, saying, " Ye are born of your father the 
devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. 
For he was a murderer from the beginning, and 
abode not in the truth, because there is no truth 
in him." ^ And by Isaiah the propliet God cries 
in wrath, " I have begotten and brought up chil- 
dren ; but they have despised me. The ox 
knovveth his owner, and the ass his master's crib ; 
but Israel hath not known me, and my people 
hath not understood me. Ah sinful nation, a 
yjeople laden with sins, a wicked seed, corrupt 
children ! ■* Ye have forsaken the Lord ; ye have 
provoked the Holy One of Israel to anger." 5 
In repudiation of these, we Christians, when we 
pray, say Our Father ; because He has begun to 
be ours, and has ceased to be the Father of the 
Jews, who have forsaken Him. Nor can a sinful 
people be a son ; but the name of sons is at 
tributed to those to whom remission of sins is 
granted, and to them immortality is promised 
anew, in the words of our Lord Himself: " Who- 
soever committeth sin is the servant of sin. 
And the servant abideth not in the house for 
■ever, but the son abideth ever." '" 

11. But how great is the Lord's indulgence! 
how great His condescension and plenteousness 
of goodness towards us, seeing that He has 
wished us to pray in the sight of God in such a 
way as to call God Father, and to call ourselves 
sons of God, even as Christ is the Son of God, — 
a name which none of us would dare to venture 
on in prayer, unless He Himself had allowed us 
thus to pray ! We ought then, beloved brethren, 
to remember and to know, that when we call 
God Father, we ought to act as God's children ; 

' Matt, xxiii. 9. 
- Matt. viii. 22. 
3 John viii. 44. 

* " A vciy evil seed, lawless childrea.' 
s Isa. i. 3. 

* John viii. 34. 

so that in the measure in which we find pleasure 
in considering God as a Father, He might also 
be able to find pleasure in us. Let us converse 
as temples of God, that it may l)e plain that God 
dwells in us. Let not our doings be degenerate 
from the Spirit ; so that we who have begun to 
be heavenly and spiritual, may consider and do 
nothing but spiritual and heavenly things ; since 
the Lord God Himself has said, " Them that 
honour me I will honour ; and he that despiseth 
me shall be despised." ^ The blessed apostle also 
has laid down in his epistle : " Ye are not your 
own ; for ye are bought with a great price. Glo- 
rify and bear about God in your body." ^ 

12. After this we say, "Hallowed be Thy 
name ; " not that we wish for God that He may 
be hallowed by our prayers, but that we beseech 
of Him that His name may be hallowed in us. 
But by whom is God sanctified, since He Him- 
self sanctifies ? Well, because He says, " Be ye 
holy, even as I am holy," ^ we ask and entreat, 
that we who were sanctified in baptism may con- 
tinue in that which we have begun to be. And 
this we daily pray for ; for we have need of daily 
sanctification, that we who daily fall away may 
wash out our sins by continual sanctification. 
And what the sanctification is which is conferred 
upon us by the condescension of God, the apos- 
tle declares, when he says, " neither fornicators, 
nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor 
abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, 
nor deceivers, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor 
extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. 
And such indeed were you ; but ye are washed ; 
but ye are justified ; but ye are sanctified in the 
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit 
of our God." '" He says that we are sanctified 
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the 
Spirit of our God. We pray that this sanctifica- 
tion may abide in us ; and because our Lord and 
Judge warns the man that was healed and quick- 
ened bv Him, to sin no more lest a worse thing 
happen unto him, we make this supplication in 
our constant prayers, we ask this day and night, 
that the sanctification and quickening which is 
received from the grace of God may be pre- 
served by His protection. 

13. There follows in the prayer, Thy kingdom 
come, ^^^e ask that the kingdom of God may 
be set forth to us, even as we also ask that His 
name may be sanctified in us. For when does 
God not reign, or when does that begin with Him 
which both always has been, and never ceases to 
be ? We pray that our kingdom, which has been 
promised us by God, may come, which was ac- 
quired by the blood and passion of Christ ; that 

" I Sam. ii. 30. 

' I Cor. vi. 2o. 

9 lyCV. XX. 7. 

'° I Cor. vi. 9. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

451 

we who first are His subjects in the world, may 
hereafter reign with Christ when He reigns, as 
He Himself promises and says, " Come, ye blessed 
of my Father, receive the kingdom which has 
been prepared for you from the beginning of the 
world." • Christ Himself, dearest brethren, how- 
ever, may be the kingdom of God, whom we day 
by day desire to come, whose advent we crave 
to be quickly manifested to us. For since He 
is Himself the Resurrection,^ since in Him we 
rise again, so also the kingdom of God may be 
understood to be Himself, since in Him we shall 
reign. But we do well in seeking the kingdom 
of God, that is, the heavenly kingdom, because 
there is also an earthly kingdom. But he who 
has already renounced the world, is moreover 
greater than its honours and its kingdom. And 
therefore he who dedicates himself to God and 
Christ, desires not earthly, but heavenly king- 
doms. But there is need of continual prayer 
and supplication, that we fall not away from the 
heavenly kingdom, as the Jews, to whom this 
promise had first been given, fell away ; even as 
the Lord sets forth and proves : " Many," says 
He, " shall come from the east and from the 
west, and shall recline with Abraham, and Isaac, 
and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. But the 
children of the kingdom shall be cast out into 
outer darkness : there shall be weeping and 
gnashing of teeth." 3 He shows that the Jews 
were previously children of the kingdom, so long 
as they continued also to be children of God ; 
but after the name of Father ceased to be recog- 
nised among them, the kingdom also ceased ; 
and therefore vve Christians, who in our prayer 
begin to call God our Father, pray also that 
God's kingdom may come to us. 

14. We add, also, and say, "Thy will be done, 
as in heaven so in earth ; " not that God should 
do what He wills, but that we may be able to 
do what God wills. For who resists God, that 
He may not do what He wills? But since we 
are hindered by the devil from obeying with our 
thought and deed God's will in all things, we 
pray and ask that God's will may be done in us ; 
and that it may be done in us we have need of 
God's good will, that is, of His help and protec- 
tion, since no one is strong in his own strength, 
but he is safe by the grace and mercy of God. 
And further, the Lord, setting forth the infirmity 
of the humanity which He bore, says, " Father, 
if it be possible, let this cup pass from me ; " 
and affording an example to His disciples that 
they should do not their own will, but God's, 
He went on to say, " Nevertheless not as I will, 
but as Thou wilt." ■♦ And in another place He 

' Matt. XXV. 34. 

- Or, " our resurrection." 

3 Matt. viii. ii. 

■♦ Matt. xxvi. 39. 

says, " I came down from heaven not to do my 
own will, but the will of Him that sent me." 5 
Now if the Son was obedient to do His Father's 
will, how much more should the servant be obe- 
dient to do his Master's will ! as in his epistle 
John also exhorts and instructs us to do the will 
of God, saying, " Love not the world, neither the 
things that are in the world. If any man love 
the world, the love of the Father is not in him. 
For all that is in the world is the lust of the 
flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the ambition 
of life, which is not of the Father, but of the 
lust of the world. And the world shall pass 
away, and the lust thereof: but he that doeth 
the will of God abideth for ever, even as God 
also abideth for ever." '^ We who desire to 
abide for ever should do the will of God, who is 
everlasting. 

15. Now that is the will of God which Christ 
both did and taught. Humility in conversation ; 
stedfastness in faith ; modesty in words ; justice 
in deeds ; mercifulness in works ; discipline in 
morals ; to be unable to do a wrong, and to be 
able to bear a wrong when done ; to keep peace 
with the brethren ; to love God with all one's 
heart ; to love Him in that He is a Father ; to 
fear Him in that He is God ; to prefer nothing 
whatever to Christ, because He did not prefer 
anything to us ; to adhere inseparably to His 
love ; to stand by His cross bravely and faith- 
fully ; when there is any contest on behalf of 
His name and honour, to exhibit in discourse 
that constancy wherewith we make confession ; 
in torture, that confidence wherewith we do bat- 
tle ; in death, that patience whereby we are 
crowned ; — this is to desire to be fellow-heirs 
with Christ : this is to do the commandment of 
God ; this is to fulfil the will of the Father. 

16. Moreover, we ask that the will of God may 
be done both in heaven and in earth, each of 
which things pertains to the fulfilment of our 
safety and salvation. For since we possess the 
body from the earth and the spirit from heaven, 
we ourselves are earth and heaven ; and in both 
— that is, both in body and spirit — we pray 
that God's will may be done. For between the 
flesh and spirit there is a struggle ; and there is 
a daily strife as they disagree one with the other, 
so that we cannot do those very things that we 
would, in that the spirit seeks heavenly and divine 
things, while the flesh lusts after earthly and tem- 
poral things ; and therefore we ask 7 that, by the 
help and assistance of God, agreement may be 
made between these two natures, so that while 
the will of God is done both in the spirit and in 
the flesh, the soul which is new-born by Him 
may be preserved. This is what the Apostle 

5 John vi. 38. 

^ I John ii. 15-17. 

7 Some add " earnestly." 

452 

THE TREATISES OP^ CYPRIAN. 

Paul openly and manifestly declares by his words : 
*' The flesh," says he, " lusteth against the spirit, 
and the spirit against the flesh : for these are 
contrary the one to the other ; so that ye can- 
not do the things that ye would. Now the works 
of the flesh are manifest, which are these ; adul- 
teries, fornications, uncleanness, lasciviousness, 
idolatry, witchcraft, murders, hatred, variance, 
emulations, wraths, strife, seditions, dissensions, 
heresies, envyings, drunkenness, revellings, and 
such like : of the which I tell you before, as I 
have also told you in times past, that they which 
do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of 
(}od. But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, 
peace, magnanimity, goodness, faith, gentleness, 
continence, chastity." ' And therefore we make 
it our prayer in daily, yea, in continual supplica- 
tions, that the will of God concerning us should 
be done both in heaven and in earth ; because 
this is the will of God, that earthly things should 
give place to heavenly, and that spiritual and 
divine things should prevail. 

1 7. And it may be thus understood, beloved 
brethren, that since the Lord commands and ad- 
monishes us even to love our enemies, and to 
pray even for those who persecute us, we should 
ask, moreover, for those who are still earth, and 
have not yet begun to be heavenly, that even in 
respect of these Ciod's will should be done, which 
Christ accomplished in preserving and renewing 
humanity. For since the disciples are not now 
called by Him earth, but the salt of the earth, 
and the apostle designates the first man as being 
from the dust of the earth, but the second from 
heaven, we reasonably, who ought to be like God 
our Father, who maketh His sun to rise upon the 
good and bad, and sends rain upon the just and 
the unjust, so pray and ask by the admonition 
of Christ as to make our prayer for the salvation 
of all men ; that as in heaven — that is, in us by 
our faith — the will of (iod has been done, so 
that we might be of heaven ; so also in earth - — 
that is, in those who believe not^ — God's will 
may be done, that they who as yet are by their 
first birth of earth, may, being born of water and 
of the Spirit, begin to be of heaven. 

18. As the prayer goes forward, we ask and 
say, " Give us this day our daily bread." And 
this may be understood both s])iritually and lit- 
erally, because either way of understanding it is 
rich in divine usefulness to our salvation. For 
Christ is the bread of life ; and this bread does 
not belong to all men, but it is ours. And ac- 
cording as we say, " Our Father," because He is 
the Father of those who understand ai)d believe ; 
so also we call it " our bread," because Christ is 

' Oal. V. 17-23. 

^ [See Hooker (a beautiful passage) in W.-ilton's Life, " on the 
angels in heaven; " also, E. P., book v. cap. xxxv. at close.] 
■* .Some editions omit this " not." 

the bread of those who are in union with His 
body.-* And we ask that this bread should be 
given to us daily, that we who are in Christ, and 
daily 5 receive the Eucharist for the food of sal- 
vation, may not, by the interposition of some 
heinous sin, by being prevented, as withheld and 
not communicating, from partaking of the heav- 
enly bread, be separated from Christ's body, as 
He Himself predicts, and warns, " I am the 
bread of Hfe which came down from heaven. If 
any man eat of my bread, he shall live for ever : 
and the bread which I will give is my flesh, for 
the life of the world." ^ When, therefore, He 
says, that whoever shall eat of His bread shall 
live for ever ; as it is manifest that those who par- 
take of His body and receive the Eucharist by 
the right of communion are living, so, on the 
other hand, we must fear and pray lest any one 
who, being withheld from communion, is sepa- 
rate from Christ's body should remain at a dis- 
tance from salvation ; as He Himself threatens, 
and says, " Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of 
man, and drink His blood, ye shall have no life 
in you." 7 And therefore we ask that our bread 
— that is, Christ — may be given to us daily, 
that we who abide and live in Christ may not 
depart from His sanctification and body.* 

19. But it may also be thus understood, that 
we who have renounced the world, and have cast 
away its riches and pomps in the faith of spiritual 
grace, should only ask for ourselves food and 
support, since the Lord instructs us, and says, 
•'Whosoever forsaketh not all that he hath, can- 
not be my disciple." 9 But he who has begun 
to be Christ's disciple, renouncing all things ac- 
cording to the word of his Master, ought to ask 
for his daily food, and not to extend the desires of 
his petition to a long i)eriod, as the Lord again 
prescribes, and says, " Take no thought for the 
morrow, for the morrow itself shall take thought 
for itself. Sufficient for the day is the evil there- 
of." '° With reason, then, does Christ's disciple 
ask food for himself for the day, since he is pro- 
hibited from thinking of the morrow ; because 
it becomes a contradiction and a repugnant thing 
for us to seek to live long in this world, since 
we ask that the kingdom of God should come 
quickly. Thus also the blessed apostle admon- 
ishes us, giving substance and strength to the 
stedfastness of our ho])e and faith : " We brought 
nothing," says he, " into this world, nor indeed 

< This passage is differently read as follows: " And according as 
we say Our Father, so also we call Christ our bread, because He is 
ours as we come in contact with His body." 

5 [Probably in times of persecution. See Freeman, Principles 
of Di-.iine Scr-L'icc.\ 

^ John vi. 58. 

' John vi. 53. 

^ [Not tied to actual daily reception, however. See the figure, i 
Kings xix. 7, 8. But see valuable note on (tn-iovo-tos.) the super- 
substantial bread. Cyril of Jerusalem, p. 277, Oxford trans, of the 
Mystagogic Lectures.^ 

9 Luke xiv. 33. 
'° Matt. vi. 34. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

453 

can we carry anything out. Having therefore 
food and raiment, let us be herewith content. 
But they that will be rich fall into temptation 
and a snare, and into many and hurtful lusts, 
which drown men in perdition and destruction. 
For the love of money is the root of all evil ; 
which while some coveted after, they have made 
shipwreck from the faith, and have pierced 
themselves through with many sorrows." ' 

20. He teaches us that riches are not only to 
be contemned, but that they are also full of 
peril ; that in them is the root of seducing evils, 
that deceive the blindness of the human mind 
by a hidden deception. Whence also God re- 
bukes the rich fool, who thinks of his earthly 
"wealth, and boasts himself in the abundance of 
his overflowing harvests, saying, " Thou fool, 
this night thy soul shall be required of thee ; 
then whose shall those things be which thou hast 
provided ? " ^ xhe fool who was to die that very 
night was rejoicing in his stores, and he to whom 
life already was failing, was thinking of the 
abundance of his food. But, on the other hand, 
the Lord tells us that he becomes perfect and 
complete who sells all his goods, and distributes 
them for the use of the poor, and so lays up for 
himself treasure in heaven. He says that that 
man is able to follow Him, and to imitate the 
glory of the Lord's passion, who, free from hin- 
drance, and with his loins girded, is involved in 
no entanglements of worldly estate, but, at large 
and free himself, accompanies his possessions, 
which before have been sent to God. For which 
result, that every one of us may be able to pre- 
pare himself, let him thus learn to pray, and 
know, from the character of the prayer, what he 
ought to be. 

2 1 . For daily bread cannot be wanting to the 
righteous man, since it is written, "The Lord 
will not slay the soul of the righteous by hun- 
ger ; " 3 and again, " I have been young, and now 
am old, yet have I not seen the righteous for- 
saken, nor his seed begging their bread." ■♦ And 
the Lord moreover promises and says, " Take no 
thought, saying, " What shall we eat, or what 
shall we drink, or wherewithal shall we be 
clothed ? For after all these things do the na- 
tions seek. And your Father knoweth that ye 
have need of all these things. Seek ye first the 
kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all 
these things shall be added unto you." 5 To 
those who seek God's kingdom and righteous- 
ness, He promises that all things shall be added.^ 
For since all things are God's, nothing will be 
wanting to him who possesses God, if God Him- 

' I Tim. vi. 7. 
^ Luke xii. 20. 
3 Prov. X. 3. 

* Ps. xxxvii. 25. 
5 Matt. vi. 31. 

* [Thus the petition covers (i) our spirftual food, John vi. 27; and 
[2) our bodily sustenance, Matt. vi. 8.] 

self be not wanting to him. Thus a meal was 
divinely provided for Daniel : when he was shut 
up by the king's command in the den of lions, 
and in the midst of wild beasts who were hun- 
gry, and yet spared him, the man of God was 
fed. Thus Elijah in his flight was nourished 
both by ravens ministering to him in his solitude, 
and by birds bringing him food in his persecu- 
tion. And — oh detestable cruelty of the malice 
of man ! — the wild beasts spare, the birds feed, 
while men lay snares, and rage ! 

22. After this we also entreat for our sins, 
saying, " And forgive us our debts, as we also 
forgive our debtors." After the supply of food, 
pardon of sin is also asked for, that he who is 
fed by God may live in God, and that not only 
the present and temporal life may be provided 
for, but the eternal also, to which we may come 
if our sins are forgiven ; and these the Lord 
calls debts, as He says in His Gospel, " I for- 
gave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst 
me." 7 And how necessarily, how providently 
and salutarily, are we admonished that we are 
sinners, since we are compelled to entreat for 
our sins, and while pardon is asked for from 
God, the soul recalls its own consciousness of 
sin ! Lest any one should flatter himself that 
he is innocent,^ and by exalting himself should 
more deeply perish, he is instructed and taught 
that he sins daily, in that he is bidden to entreat 
daily for his sins. Thus, moreover, John also 
in his epistle warns us, and says, "If we say 
that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and 
the truth is not in us ; but if we confess our 
sins, the Lord is faithful and just to forgive us 
our sins." '^ In his epistle he has combined both, 
that we should entreat for our sins, and that we 
should obtain pardon when we ask. Therefore 
he said that the Lord was faithful to forgive sins, 
keeping the faith of His promise ; because He 
who taught us to pra)- for our debts and sins, 
has promised that His fatherly mercy and pardon 
shall follow. 

23. He has clearly joined herewith and added 
the law, and has bound us by a certain condi- 
tion and engagement, that we should ask that 
our debts be forgiven us in such a manner as we 
ourselves forgive our debtors, knowing that that 
which we seek for our sins cannot be obtained 
unless we ourselves have acted in a similar way 
in respect of our debtors. Therefore also He 
says in another place, "With what measure ye 
mete, it shall be measured to you again." '° And 
the servant who, after having had all his debt 
forgiven him by his master, would not forgive 
his fellow-servant, is cast back into prison ; be- 

7 Matt, xviii. 32. 

8 " Although none is innocent " is here added by some. 

9 I John i. 8. [Connect with this, Matt. vi. 15, and compare Free- 
man on the Principles of Divine Service, vol. i. p. 417.] 

'0 Matt, vii, 2. 

454 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

cause he would not forgive his fellow-servant, he 
lost the indulgence that had been shown to 
himself by his lord. And these things Christ 
still more urgently sets forth in His precepts 
with yet greater power of His rebuke. " When 
ye stand praying," says He, " forgive if ye have 
aught against any, that your Father which is in 
heaven may forgive you your trespasses. But 
if ye do not forgive, neither will your Father 
which is in heaven forgive you your trespasses." ' 
There remains no ground of excuse in the day 
of judgment, when you will be judged accord- 
ing to your own sentence ; and whatever you 
have done, that you also will suffer. For God 
commands us to be peacemakers, and in agree- 
ment, and of one mind in His house ;^ and 
such as He makes us by a second birth, such 
He wishes us when new-born to continue, that 
we who have begun to be sons of Cod may 
abide in Ciod's peace, and that, having one 
spirit, we should also have one heart and one 
mind. Thus God does not receive the sacrifice 
of a person who is in disagreement, but com- 
mands him to go back from the altar and first 
be reconciled to his brother, that so God also 
may be aj^peased by the prayers of a peace- 
maker. Our peace and brotherly agreement ^ is 
the greater sacrifice to God, — and a people 
imited in one in the unity of the Father, and of 
the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. 

24. For even in the sacrifices which Abel and 
Cain first offered, God looked not at their gifts, 
but at their hearts, so that he was acceptable in 
his gift who was acceptable in his heart. Abel, 
peaceable and righteous in sacrificing in inno- 
cence to God, taught others also, when they 
bring their gift to the altar, thus to come with 
the fear of God, with a simple heart, with the 
law of righteousness, with the peace of concord. 
With reason did he, who was such in respect of 
(iod's sacrifice, become subsequently himself a 
sacrifice to (iod ; so that he who first set forth 
martyrdom, and initiated the Lord's passion by 
the glory of his blood, had both the Lord's 
righteousness and His peace. Finally, such are 
crowned by the Lord, such will be avenged ■♦ 
with the Lord in the day of judgment ; but the 
quarrelsome and disunited, and he who has not 
peace with his brethren, in accordance with 
what the blessed apostle and the Holy Scripture 
testifies, even if he have been slain for the liame 
of Christ, shall not be able to escape the crime 
of fraternal dissension, because, as it is written, 
" He who hateth his brother is a murderer," 5 
and no murderer attains to the kingdom of 

' Mark xi. 25. [Elucidation III.] 
- [Ps. Ixviii. 6. Vulgate and Angl. Psalter ] 
' [Cyprian was very mild in his position against the accusations 
of Stephen. Sec. 26, p. 386, supra ; also Treatise Lx., infra.\ 
* Or, " will judge." 
s I John iii. 15. 

heaven, nor does he live with God. He cannot 
be with Christ, who had rather be an imitator 
of Judas than of Christ. How great is the sin 
which cannot even be washed away by a bap- 
tism of blood — how heinous the crime which 
cannot be expiated by martyrdom ! 

25. Moreover, the Lord of necessity admon- 
ishes us to say in prayer, " And suffer us not to 
be led into temptation." In which words it is 
shown that the adversary can do nothing against 
us except God shall have previously permitted 
it ; so that all our fear, and devotion, and obe- 
dience may be turned towards God, since in our 
temptations nothing is permitted to evil unless 
power is given from Him. This is proved by 
divine Scripture, which says, " Nebuchadnezzar 
king of Babylon came to Jerusalem, and besieged 
it; and the Lord delivered it into his hand.'"' 
But power is given to evil against us according 
to our sins, as it is written, " Who gave Jacob 
for a spoil, and Israel to those who make a prey 
of Him? Did not the Lord, against whom they 
sinned, and would not walk in His ways, nor 
hear His law? and He has brought upon them 
the anger of His wrath." ^ And again, when 
Solomon sinned, and departed from the Lord's 
commandments and ways, it is recorded, " And 
the Lord stirred up Satan against Solomon him- 
self." *^ 

26. Now power is given against us in two 
modes : either for punishment when we sin, or 
for glory when we are proved, as we see was 
done with respect to Job ; as (iod Himself sets 
forth, saying, " Behold, all that he hath 1 give 
unto thy hands ; but be careful not to touch 
himself." 9 And the Lord in His (iospel says, 
in the time of His passion, "Thou couldest have 
no power against me unless it were given thee 
from above." '° But when we ask that we may 
not come into temptation, we are reminded of 
our infirmity and weakness in that we thus ask, 
lest any should insolently vaunt himself, lest any 
should proudly and arrogantly assume anything 
to himself, lest any should take to himself the 
glory either of confession or of suffering as^ his 
own, when the Lord Himself, teaching humility, 
said, " Watch and pray, that ye enter not into 
temptation ; the spirit indeed is willing, but the 
flesh is weak ; " " so that while a humble and sub- 
missive confession comes first, and all is attrib- 
uted to God, whatever is sought for suppliant!)- 
with fear and honour of God, may be granted by 
His own loving-kindness. 

27. After all these things, in the conclusion 
of the prayer comes a brief clause, which shortly 

* 2 Kings xxiv. ii. 
^ Isa. xlii. 24. 

* I Kings xi. 14. 
9 Job i. 12. 

'° John xix. II. 
" iMark xiv. 38. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

455 

and comprehensively sums up all our petitions 
and our prayers. For we conclude by saying, 
" But deliver us from evil," comprehending all 
adverse things which the enemy attempts against 
us in this world, from which there may be a 
faithful and sure protection if God deliver us, 
if He afford His help to us who pray for and 
implore it. And when we say. Deliver us from 
evil, there remains nothing further which ought 
to be asked. When we have once asked for 
God's protection against evil, and have obtained 
it, then against everything which the devil and 
the world work against us we stand secure and 
safe. For what fear is there in this life, to the 
man whose guardian in this life is God? 

28. What wonder is it, beloved brethren, if 
such is the prayer which God taught, seeing that 
He condensed in His teaching all our prayer in 
one saving sentence? This had already been 
before foretold by Isaiah the prophet, when, 
being filled with the Holy Spirit, he spoke of 
the majesty and loving-kindness of God, " con- 
summating and shortening His word," ' He says, 
" in righteousness, because a shortened word ^ 
will the Lord make in the whole earth." ^ For 
when the Word of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, 
came unto all, and gathering alike the learned 
and unlearned, published to every sex and every 
age the precepts of salvation, He made a large 
compendium of His precepts, that the memory 
of the scholars might not be burdened in the 
celestial learning, but might quickly learn what 
was necessary to a simple faith. Thus, when 
He taught what is life eternal. He embraced the 
sacrament of life in a large and divine brevity, 
saying, " And this is life eternal, that they might 
know Thee, the only and true God, and Jesus 
Christ, whom Thou hast sent."-^ Also, when 
He would gather from the law and the prophets 
the first and greatest commandments, He said, 
" Hear, O Israel ; the Lord thy God is one 
God : and thou shalt love the Lord thy God 
with all thy heart, and with all thy mind, and 
with all thy strength. This is the first command- 
ment. And the second is like unto it, Thou 
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." 5 " On 
these two commandments hang all the law and 
the prophets."^ And again : "Whatsoever good 
things ye would that men should do unto you, 
do ye even so to them. For this is the law and 
the prophets." ^ 

29. Nor was it only in words, but in deeds 
also, that the Lord taught us to pray. Himself 
praying frequently and beseeching, and thus 
showing us, by the testimony of His example, 

' Verbum. 

2 Sermonem. 

3 Isa. X. 22. 

^ John xvii. 3. 

5 Matt. xii. 29-31. (V\^ » J J a ^2. 

* Matt. xxii. 40. 

7 Matt. vii. 12. 

what it behoved us to do, as it is written, " But 
Himself departed into a solitary place, and there 
prayed." ^ And again : " He went out into a 
mountain to pray, and continued all night in 
prayer to God." ^ But if He prayed who was 
without sin, how much more ought sinners to 
pray; and if He prayed continually, watching 
through the whole night in uninterrupted peti- 
tions, how much more ought we to watch '° 
nightly in constantly repeated prayer ! 

30. But the Lord prayed and besought not 
for Himself — for why should He who was guilt- 
less pray on His own behalf? — but for our sins, 
as He Himself declared, when He said to Peter, 
" Behold, Satan hath desired that he might sift 
you as wheat. But I have prayed for thee, that 
thy faith fail not." " And subsequently He be- 
seeches the Father for all, saying, " Neither 
pray I for these alone, but for them also which 
shall believe on me through their word ; that 
they all may be one ; as Thou, Father, art in 
me, and I in Thee, that they also may be one 
in us." '^ The Lord's loving-kindness, no less 
than His mercy, is great in respect of our sal- 
vation, in that, not content to redeem us with 
His blood. He in addition also prayed for us. 
Behold now what was the desire of His petition, 
that like as the Father and Son are one, so also 
we should abide in absolute unity ; so that from 
this it may be understood how greatly he sins 
who divides unity and peace, since for this same 
thing even the Lord besought, desirous doubt- 
less that His people should thus be saved and 
live in peace, since He knew that discord can- 
not come into the kingdom of God.'^ 

31. Moreover, when we stand praying, be 
loved brethren, we ought to be watchful anc". 
earnest with our whole heart, intent on our 
prayers. Let all carnal and worldly thoughts 
pass away, nor let the soul at that time think on 
anything but the object only of its prayer. For 
this reason also the priest, by way of prefact- 
before his prayer, prepares the minds of the 
brethren by saying, " Lift up your hearts," that 
so upon the people's response, " We lift them 
up unto the Lord," he may be reminded that he 
himself ought to think of nothing but the Lord.'-* 
Let the breast be closed against the adversary,, 
and be open to God alone ; nor let it suffer 
God's enemy to approach to it at the time of 
prayer. For frequently he steals upon us, and 
penetrates within, and by crafty deceit calls 
away our prayers from God, that we may have 
one thing in our heart and another in our voice. 

^ Luke V. 16. 

9 Luke vi. 12. 

'° [Such was the example of Cotton Mather. Ma^nah'a, i. 35.] 
" Luke xxii. 31. 
'- John xvii. 20. 
'3 Unity again enforced.] 

^* [The antiquity of the Sursum Corda is here shown. Elucida- 
tion IV.] 

456 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

when not the sound of the voice, but the soul 
and mind, ought to be praying to the Lord with 
a simple intention. But what carelessness it is, 
to be distracted and carried away by foolish and 
profane thoughts when you are praying to the 
Lord, as if there were anything which you should 
rather be thinking of than that you are speaking 
with God ! How can you ask to be heard of 
God, when you yourself do not hear yourself? 
Do you wish that God should remember you 
when you ask, if you yourself do not remember 
yourself? This is absolutely to take no precau- 
tion against the enemy ; this is, when you pray 
to God, to offend the majesty of God by the 
carelessness of your prayer ; this is to be watch- 
ful with your eyes, and to be asleep with your 
heart, while the Christian, even though he is 
asleep with his eyes, ought to be awake with 
his heart, as it is written in the person of the 
Church speaking in the Song of Songs, " I sleep, 
yet my heart waketh." ' Wherefore the apostle 
anxiously and carefully warns us, saying, " Con- 
tinue in prayer, and watch in the same ; " ^ 
teaching, that is, and showing that those are 
able to obtain from God what they ask, whom 
God sees to be w-atchful in their prayer. 

32. Moreover, those who pray should not 
come to God with fruitless or naked prayers. 
Petition is ineffectual when it is a barren en- 
treaty that beseeches God.^ For as every tree 
that bringeth not forth fruit is cut down and cast 
into the fire ; assuredly also, words that do not 
bear fruit cannot deserve anything of God, be- 
cause they are fruitful in no result. And thus 
Holy Scripture instructs us, saying, " Prayer is 
good with fasting and almsgiving." •♦ For He 
who will give us in the day of judgment a reward 
for our labours and alms, is even in this life a 
merciful hearer of one who comes to Him in 
prayer associated with good works. Thus, for in- 
stance, Cornelius the centurion, when he prayed, 
had a claim to be heard. For he was in the 
habit of doing many alms-deeds towards the 
people, and of ever praying to God. To this 
man, when he prayed about the ninth hour, 
ai)peared an angel bearing testimony to his 
labours, and saying, " CorneHus, thy i)rayers and 
thine alms are gone up in remembrance before 
God." 5 

33. Those prayers quickly ascend to God 
which the merits of our labours urge upon God. 
Thus also Raphael the angel was a witness to the 
constant prayer and the constant good works of 
Tobias, saying, " It is honourable to reveal and 
confess the works of God. For when thou didst 
pray, and Sarah, I did bring the remembrance 

' Cant. V. 2. 

2 Col. i. 2. 

■• [Should not this principle be more effectually taught?] 

* Tob. XX. 8. 

i Acts X. 2, 4. 

of your prayers before the holiness of God. 
And when thou didst bury the dead in simplicity, 
and because thou didst not delay to rise up and 
to leave thy dinner, but didst go out and cover 
the dead, I was sent to prove thee ; and again 
God has sent me to heal thee, and Sarah thy 
daughter-in-law. For I am Raphael, one of the 
seven holy angels which stand and go in and 
out before the glory of God." '' By Isaiah also 
the Lord reminds us, and teaches similar things, 
saying, " Loosen every knot of iniquity, release 
the oppressions of contracts which have no 
power, let the troubled go into peace, and break 
every unjust engagement. Break thy bread to 
the hungry, and bring the poor that are without 
shelter into thy house. When thou seest the 
naked, clothe him ; and despise not those of the 
same family and race as thyself. Then shall thy 
light break forth in season, and thy raiment shall 
spring forth speedily ; and righteousness shall go 
before thee, and the glory of God shall surround 
thee. Then shalt thou call, and God shall hear 
thee ; and while thou shalt yet speak. He shall 
say, Here I am." ^ He promises that He will 
be at hand, and says that He will hear and pro- 
tect those who, loosening the knots of unright- 
eousness from their heart, and grving alms among 
the members of God's household according to 
His commands, even in hearing what God com- 
mands to be done, do themselves also deser\e 
to be heard by God. The blessed Apostle Paul, 
when aided in the necessity of affliction by his 
brethren, said that good works which are per- 
formed are sacrifices to God. " I am full," 
saith he, " having received of Epaphroditus the 
things which were sent from you, an odour of a 
sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing 
to God." ^ For when one has pity on the poor, 
he lends to God ; and he who gives to the least 
gives to God — sacrifices spiritually to God an 
odour of a sweet smell. 

34. And in discharging the duties of prayer, 
we find that the three children with Daniel, being 
strong in faith and victorious in captivity, ob- 
served the third, sixth, and ninth hour, as it 
were, for a sacrament of the Trinity, which in 
the last times had to be manifested. For both 
the first hour in its progress to the third shows 
forth the consummated number of the Trinit)-, 
and also the fourth proceeding to the sixth de- 
clares another Trinity ; and when from the sev- 
enth the ninth is completed, the perfect Trinity 
is numbered every three hours, which spaces of 
hours the worshippers of God in time past hav- 
ing spiritually decided on, made use of for 
determined and lawful times for prayer. And 
subsequently the thing was manifested, that 

^ Tob. xii. 12-15. 
^ Isa. Iviii. 6-9. 
8 Phil. iv. 18. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

457 

these things were of old Sacraments, in that an- 
ciently righteous men prayed in this manner. 
For upon the disciples at the third hour the 
Holy Spirit descended, who fulfilled the grace 
of the Lord's promise. Moreover, at the sixth 
hour, Peter, going up unto the house-top, was 
instructed as well by the sign as by the word of 
God admonishing him to receive all to the grace 
of salvation, whereas he was previously doubtful 
of the receiving of the Gentiles to baptism. 
And from the sixth hour to the ninth, the Lord, 
being crucified, washed away our sins by His 
blood ; and that He might redeem and quicken 
us, He then accomplished His victory by His 
passion. 

35. But for us, beloved brethren, besides the 
hours of prayer observed of old,' both the times 
and the sacraments have now increased in 
number. For we must also pray in the morn- 
ing, that the Lord's resurrection may be cele- 
brated by morning prayer. And this formerly 
the Holy Spirit pointed out in the Psalms, say- 
ing, "My King, and my God, because unto Thee 
will I cry ; O Lord, in the morning shall Thou 
hear my voice ; in the morning will I stand be- 
fore Thee, and will look up to Thee." ^ And 
again, the Lord speaks by the mouth of the 
prophet : " Early in the morning shall they watch 
for me, saying. Let us go, and return unto the 
Lord our God." ^ Also at the sunsctting and at 
the decline of day, of necessity we must pray 
again. For since Christ is the true sun and the 
true day, as the worldly sun and worldly day de- 
part, when we pray and ask that light may re- 
turn to us again, we pray for the advent of Christ, 
which shall give us the grace of everlasting light. 
Moreover, the Holy Spirit in the Psalms mani- 
fests that Christ is called the day. "The stone," 
says He, "which the builders rejected, is become 
the head of the corner. This is the Lord's do- 
ing ; and it is marvellous in our eyes. This is the 
day which the Lord hath made ; let us walk and 
rejoice in it." •♦ Also the prophet Malachi testi- 
fies that He is called the Sun, when he says, 
"But to you that fear the name of the Lord shall 
the Sun of righteousness arise, and there is heal- 
ing in His wings." 5 But if in the Holy Scrip- 
tures the true sun and the true day is Christ, 
there is no hour excepted for Christians wherein 
God ought not frequently and always to be wor- 
shipped ; so that we who are in Christ — that is, 
in the true Sun and the true Day — should be in- 
stant throughout the entire day in petitions, and 
should pray ; and when, by the law of the world, 
the revolving night, recurring in its alternate 
changes, succeeds, there can be no harm arising 

[By the 

Ps. V. 2. 

apostles, as here mentioned. Acts iii. i znd passim.] 

3 Hos. vi. I. 
* Ps. cxviii. 22. 
■5 Mai. iv. 2. 

from the darkness of night to those who pray, 
because the children of light have the day even 
in the night. For when is he without light who 
has light in his heart ? or when has not he the 
sun and the day, whose Sun and Day is Christ? 
36. Let not us, then, who are in Christ — that 
is, always m the light — cease from praying even 
during night. Thus the widow Anna, without 
intermission praying and watching, persevered 
in deserving well of God, as it is written in the 
Gospel : " She departed not," it says, " from the 
temple, serving with fastings and prayers night 
and day.'"^ Let the Gentiles look to this, who 
are not yet enlightened, or the Jews who have re- 
mained in darkness by having forsaken the light. 
Let us, beloved brethren, who are always in the 
light of the Lord, who remember and hold fast 
what by grace received we have begun to be, 
reckon night for day ; let us believe that we 
always walk in the light, and let us not be hin- 
dered by the darkness which we have escaped. 
Let there be no failure of prayers in the hours 
of night — no idle and reckless waste of the 
occasions of prayer. New-created and new- 
born of the Spirit by the mercy of God, let us 
imitate what we shall one day be. Since in the 
kingdom we shall possess day alone, without in- 
tervention of night, let us so watch in the night 
as if in the daylight. Since we are to pray and 
give thanks to God for ever, let us not cease in 
this life also to pray and give thanks. ^ 

TREATISE V.8 

AN ADDRESS TO DEMETRIANUS. 

ARGUMENT. CYPRIAN, IN REPLY TO DEMETRI- 
ANUS THE PROCONSUL OF AFRICA, WHO CON- 
TENDED THAT THE WARS, AND FAMINE, AND 
PESTILENCE WITH WHICH THE WORLD W.4S THEN 
PLAGUED MUST BE IMPUTED TO THE CHRISTIANS 
BECAUSE THEY DID NOT WORSHIP THE GODS J 
FAIRLY URGES (HAVING ARGUED THAT ALL 
THINGS ARE GRADUALLY DETERIORATING WITH 
THE OLD AGE OF THE WORLD) THAT IT WAS 
RATHER THE HEATHENS THEMSELVES WHO WERE 
THE CAUSE OF SUCH MISCHIEFS, BECAUSE THEY 
DID NOT WORSHIP GOD, AND, MOREOVER, WERE 
DISTRESSING THE CHRISTIANS WITH UNJUST PER- 
SECUTIONS.'^ 

I. I had frequently, Demetrianus, treated with 
contempt your railing and noisy clamour with 

6 Luke ii. 37. 

^ [On the Amen see Elucidation V. See vol. i. p. 186. J 

^ [Written a.d. 252.] 

9 Next, having reproached him with the unaccustomed kinds of 
tortures with which he tormented the Christians more severely than 
any other criminals, not for the purpose of making them confess, hut 
of making them deny their faith, he shows the impotence of the gods. 
— as well because they themselves cannot defend themselves, and so 
Demetrianus, who pretended to avenge them, should rather be wor- 
shipped by them, than himself worship them: — as because, when ev- 
pelled by Christians from possessed bodies, they themselves confess 
what they are. Nor indeed must the fall of kings, the destruction of 

458 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

sacrilegious mouth and impious words against 
the one and true God, thinking it more modest 
and better, silently to scorn the ignorance of a 
mistaken man, than by speaking to provoke the 
fury of a senseless one. Neither did I do this 
without the authority of the divine teaching," 
since it is written, " Speak not in the ears of a 
fool, lest when he hear thee he should despise 
the wisdom of thy words ; " ^ and again, " An- 
swer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou I 
also be like unto him." ^ And we are, moreover, I 
bidden to keep what is holy within our own 
knowledge, and not e.xpose it to be trodden 
down by swine and dogs, since the Lord speaks, 
saying, " Give not that which is holy unto the 
dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, 
lest they trample them under their feet, and 
turn again and rend you." ■* For when you used 
often to come to me with the desire of contra- 
dicting rather than with the wish to learn, and 
preferred impudently to insist on your own views, 
which you shouted with noisy words, to patiently 
listening to mine, it seemed to me foolish to 
contend with you ; since it would be an easier 
and slighter thing to restrain the angry waves of 
a turbulent sea with shouts, than to check your 
madness by arguments. Assuredly it would be 
both a vain and ineffectual labour to offer light 
to a blind man, discourse to a deaf one, or wis- 
dom to a brute ; since neither can a brute ap- 
prehend, nor can a Wind man admit the light, 
nor can a deaf man hear. 

2. In consideration of this, I have frequently 
held my tongue, and overcome an impatient man 
with patience ; since I could neither teach an 
imteachable man, nor check an impious one 
with religion, nor restram a frantic man with 
gentleness. But yet, when you say that very 
many are complaining that to us it is ascribed 
that wars arise more frecjuently, that plague, that 
famines rage, and that long droughts are suspend- 
ing the showers and rains, it is not fitting that I 
should be silent any longer, lest my silence 
should begin to be attributed to mistrust rather 
than to modesty ; and while I am treating the 
false charges with contempt, I may seem to be 
acknowledging the crime. I reply, therefore, as 
well to you, Demetrianus, as to others whom per- 
haps you have stirred up, and many of whom, by 
sowing hatred against us with malicious words, 
you have made your own partisans, from the 

property, and such like evils which accompanied the persecutions of 
Christians as a punishment from Heaven, he judged not to be pun- 
ishments, because they were shared by the Christians themselves; in- 
asmuch as all these things are a joy to them rather than a punishment. 
Accordingly, while there is time, he urges him to return to a better 
mind, or at least to dre.^d the judgment and an ever burning fiery 
Gehenna. In this tract Cyprian partly imitates Tertullian's Apology 
and his treatise to Scapula, partly the Octavius of Minucius Felix. 

■ Some add. "and name." 

^ Prov. xxiii. 9. 

3 Prov. xxvi. 4. 

4 Matt. vii. 6. • 

budding forth of your own root and origin, who, 
however, I believe, will admit the reasonableness. 
of my discourse ; for he who is moved to evil by 
the deception of a lie, will much more easily be 
moved to good by the cogency of truth. 

3. You have said that all these things are 
caused by us, and that to us ought to be at- 
tributed the misfortunes wherewith the world is 
now shaken and distressed, because your gods are 
not worshipped by us. And in this behalf, since 
you are ignorant of divine knowledge, and a 
stranger to the truth, you must in the first place 
know this, that the world has now grown old,, 
and does not abide in that strength in which it 
formerly stood ; nor has it that vigour and force 
which it formerly possessed. This, even were 
we silent, and if we alleged no proofs from the 
sacred Scriptures and from the divine declara- 
tions, the world itself is now announcing, and 
bearing witness to its decline by the testimony 
of its failing estate. s In the winter there is not 
such an abundance of showers for nourishing the 
seeds ; in the summer the sun has not so much 
heat for cherishing the harvest ; nor in the spring 
season are the corn-fields so joyous ; nor are the 
autumnal seasons so fruitful in their leafy prod- 
ucts. The layers of marble are dug out in less 
quantity from the disembowelled and wearied 
mountains ; the dmiinished quantities of gold 
and silver suggest the early exhaustion of the 
metals, and the impoverished veins are strait- 
ened and decreased day by day ; the husband- 
man is failing in the fields, the sailor at sea, the 
soldier in the camp, innocence in the market, 
justice in the tribunal, concord in friendships,, 
skilfulness in the arts, discipline in morals. 
Think you that the substantial character of a 
thing that is growing old remains so robust as 
that wherewith it might previously flourish in its 
youth while still new and vigorous? Whatever 
is tending downwards to decay, with its end 
nearly approaching, must of necessity be weak- 
ened. Thus, the sun at his settinsr darts his ravs 
with a less bright and fiery splendour ; thus, in her 
declining course, the moon wanes with exhausted 
horns ; and the tree, which before had been green 
and fertile, as its branches dry up, becomes by 
and by misshapen -in a barren old age ; and the 
fountain which once gushed forth liberally from 
its overflowing veins, as old age causes it to f.iil, 
scarcely trickles with a sparing moi: Uire. This 
is the sentence passed on the world, this is God's 
law, that everything that has had a beginning 
should perish, and things that have grown should 
become old, and that strong things should be- 
come weak, and great things become small, and 
that, when they have become weakened and di- 
minished, they should come to an end. 

S [Elucidation'VI. See Commodian, vol. iv. 219.] 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

459 

4. You impute it to the Christians that every- 
thing is decaying as the world grows old. What 
if old men should charge it on the Christians that 
they grow less strong in their old age ; that they 
no longer, as formerly, have the same faculties, 
in the hearing of their ears, in the swiftness of 
their feet, in the keenness of their eyes, in the 
vigour of their strength, in the freshness of their 
organic powers, in the fulness of their limbs, and 
that although once the life of men endured be- 
yond the age of eight and nine hundred years, 
it can now scarcely attain to its hundredth year? 
We see grey hairs in boys — the hair fails before 
it begins to grow ; and life does not cease in old 
age, but it begins with old age. Thus, even at 
its very commencement, birth hastens to its 
close ; ' thus, whatever is now born degenerates 
with the old age of the world itself; so that no 
one ought to wonder that everything begins to 
fail in the world, when the whole world itself is 
already in process of failing, and in its end. 

5. Moreover, that wars continue frequently to 
prevail, that death and famine accumulate anxi- 
ety, that health is shattered by raging diseases, 
that the human race is wasted by the desolation 
of pestilence, know that this was foretold ; that 
evils should be multiplied in the last times, and 
that misfortunes should be varied ; and that as 
the day of judgment is now drawing nigh, the 
censure of an indignant God should be more 
and more aroused for the scourging of the human 
race. For these things happen not, as your false 
complaining and ignorant inexperience of the 
truth asserts and repeats, because your gods are 
not worshipped by us, but because God is not 
worshipped by you. For since He is Lord and 
Ruler of the world, and all things are carried on 
by His will and direction, nor can anything be 
done save what He Himself has done or allowed 
to be done, certainly when those things occur 
which show the anger of an offended God, they 
happen not on account of us by whom God is 
worshipped, but they are called down by your 
sins and deservings, by whom God is neither in 
any way sought nor feared, because your vain 
superstitions are not forsaken, nor the true reli- 
gion known in such wise that He who is the one 
God over all might alone be worshipped and 
petitioned. 

6. In fine, listen to Himself speaking ; Him- 
self with a divine voice at once instructing and 
warning us : " Thou shalt worship the Lord thy 
God," says He, "and Him only shalt thou serve." ^ 
And again, " Thou shalt have none other gods 
but me." 3 And again, " Go not after other gods, 
to serve them ; and worship them not, and pro- 
voke not me to anger with the works of your 

I [Wisd. y. 13.] 
^ Deut. vi. 13. 

3 Ex. XMXX. 3. 

hands to destroy you."-* Moreover, the prophet, 
filled with the Holy Spirit, attests and denounces 
the anger of God, saying, " Thus saith the Lord 
Almighty : Because of mine house that is waste, 
and ye run every man to his own house, therefore 
the heavens shall be stayed from dew, and the 
earth shall withhold her fruits : and I will bring 
a sword upon the earth, and 'upon the corn, and 
upon the wine, and upon the oil, and upon men, 
and upon catde, and upon all the labours of their 
hands." s Moreover, another prophet repeats, 
and says, " And I will cause it to rain upon one 
city, and upon another city I will cause it not to 
rain. One piece shall be rained upon, and the 
piece whereon I send no rain shall be withered. 
And two and three cities shall be gathered into one 
city to drink water, and shall not be satisfied ; and 
ye are not converted unto me, saith the Lord." ^ 

7. Behold, the Lord is angry and wrathful, 
and threatens, because you turn not unto Him. 
And you wonder or complain in this your obsti- 
nacy and contempt, if the rain comes down with 
unusual scarcity ; and the earth falls into neglect 
with dusty corruption ; if the barren glebe hardly 
brings forth a few jejune and pallid blades of 
grass ; if the destroying hail weakens the vines ; 
if the overwhelming whirlwind roots out the 
olive ; if drought stanches the fountain ; a pes- 
tilent breeze corrupts the air ; the weakness of 
disease wastes away man ; although all these 
things come as the consequence of the sins that 
provoke them, and God is more deeply indignant 
when such and so great evils avail nothing ! For 
that these things occur either for the discipline 
of the obstinate or for the punishment of the 
evil, the same God declares in the Holy Scrip- 
tures, saying, " In vain have I smitten your chil- 
dren ; they have not received correction." ? And 
the prophet devoted and dedicated to God an- 
swers to these words in the same strain, and 
says, " Thou hast stricken them, but they have 
not grieved ; Thou hast scourged them, but they 
have refused to receive correction." ^ Lo, stripes 
are inflicted from God, and there is no fear of 
God. Lo, blows and scourgings from above are 
not wanting, and there is no trembling, no fear. 
What if even no such rebuke as that interfered 
in human affairs? How much greater still would 
be the audacity in men, if it were secure in the 
impunity of their crimes ! 

8. You complain that the fountains are now 
less plentiful to you, and the breezes less salu- 
brious, and the frequent showers and the fertile 
earth afford you less ready assistance ; that the 
elements no longer subserve your uses and your 
pleasures as of old. But do you serve God, by 

* Jer. XXV. 6. 
5 Hag. i. 9. 

^ Amos iv. 7. 

^ Jer. ii. 30. [Compare Aug., d'iy o/Go(i,fassim.'\ 

^ Jer. V. 3. 

460 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

whom all things are ordained to your service ; 
do you wait upon Him by whose good pleasure 
all things wait upon you?' From your slave you 
yourself require service ; and though a man, you 
compel your fellow- man to submit, and to be 
obedient to you ; and although you share the 
same lot in respect of being born, the same con- 
dition in respect of dying ; although you have 
like bodily sul)stance and a common order of 
souls, and although you come into this world of 
ours and depart from it after a time with equal 
rights, 2 and by the same law ; yet, unless you 
are served by him according to your pleasure, 
unless you are obeyed by him in conformity to 
your will, you, as an imperious and excessive 
exactor of his service, flog and scourge him : 
you afflict and torture him with hunger, with 
thirst and nakedness, and even frequently with 
the sword and with imprisonment. And, wretch 
that you are, do you not acknowledge the Lord 
your God while you yourself are thus exercising 
lordship ? ^ 

9. And therefore with reason in these plagues 
that occur, there are not wanting God's stripes 
and scourges ; and since they are of no avail in 
this matter, and do not convert individuals to 
(iod by such terror of destructions, there remains 
after all the eternal dungeon, and the continual 
fire, and the everlasting punishment ; nor shall 
the groaning of the suppliants be heard there, 
because here the terror of the angry God was 
not heard, crying by His prophet, and saying, 
'' Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of 
Israel : for the judgment of the Lord is against 
the inhabitants of the earth ; because there is 
neither mercy, nor truth, nor knowledge of God 
upon the earth. But cursing, and lying, and 
killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, is 
l)roken out over the land, they mingle blood with 
blood. Therefore shall the land mourn, with 
every one that dwelleth therein, with tlie beasts 
of the field, with things that creep on the earth, 
and with the fowls of heaven ; and the fishes of 
the sea shall languish, so that no man shall judge, 
no man shall rebuke." •♦ God says He is wrath- 
ful and angry, because there is no acknowledg- 
ment of (iod in the earth, and God is neither 
known nor feared. The sins of lying, of lust, 
of fraud, of cruelty, of impiety, of anger, God 
rebukes and finds fault with, and no one is 
converted to innocency. Lo, those things are 
happening which were before foretold by the 
words of God ; nor is any one admonished by 

' Some read, " But you do not serve God, by whom all things are 
ordained to your service; you do not wait upon Him, " etc. 

- [" /Equali jure et pari lege." This would have furnished ground 
for Jefferson's famous sentence in the American Declaration of Inde- 
pendence. See also Franklin's sentiment, vol. i. p. 552, note 9. There 
IS a very remarkable passage in Massillnn which might have engen- 
dered the French Revolution had it been known to the ueople. See 
Petit Careme, On Palm Sunday, p 189, etc., ed. 1745. J 

■5 Some add, " over man." 

■♦ Hos. iv. 1-4. 

the belief of things present to take thouglit fc 
what is to come. Amongst those very misfor- 
tunes wherein the soul, closely bound and shut 
up, can scarcely breathe, there is still found 
opportunity for men to be evil, and in such 
great dangers to judge not so much of them- 
selves as of others. You are indignant that God 
is angry, as if by an evil life you were deserving 
any good, as if all things of that kind which 
happen were not infinitely less and of smaller 
account than your sins. 

10. You who judge others, be for once also a 
judge of yourself; look into the hiding-places 
of your own conscience ; nay, since now there is 
not even any shame in your sin, 5 and you are 
wicked, as if it were rather the very wickedness 
itself that pleased you, do you, who are seen 
clearly and nakedly by all other men, yourself 
also look upon yourself. For either you are 
swollen with pride, or greedy with avarice, or 
cruel with anger, or prodigal with gambling, or 
flushed with intemperance, or envious with jeal- 
ousy, or unchaste with lust, or violent with cru- 
elty ; and do you wonder that God's anger 
increases in punishing the human race, when the 
sin that is punished is daily increasing? You 
complain that the enemy rises up, as if, though 
an enemy were wanting, there could be peace 
for you even among tlie \'ery togas of peace. 
You complain that the enemy rises up, as if, 
even although external arms and dangers from 
barbarians were repressed, the weapons of domes- 
tic assault from the calumnies and wrongs of 
powerful citizens, would not be more ferocious 
and more harshly wielded within. You complain 
of barrenness and flimine, as if drought made a 
greater famine than rapacity, as if the fierceness 
of want did not increase more terribly from 
grasping at the increase of the year's produce, 
and the accumulation of their price. You com- 
plain that the heaven is shut up from showers, 
although in the same way the barns are shut up 
on earth. You complain that now less is pro- 
duced, as if what had already been produced 
were given to the indigent. You reproach plague 
and disease, while by plague itself and disease 
the crimes of individuals are either detected or 
increased, while mercy is not manifested to the 
weak, and avarice and rapine are waiting open- 
mouthed for the dead. The same men are timid 
in the duties of affection, but rash in quest of 
impious gains ; shunning the deaths of the dying, 
and craving the spoils of the dead, so that it may 
appear as if the wretched are probably forsaken 
in their sickness for this cause, that they may 
not, by being cured, escape : for he who enters 
so eagerly upon the estate of the (\\\x\'i,. probal>!y 
desired the sick man to perish. 

5 Some texts read, " fear or shame in sinning." 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

461 

11. So great a terror of destruction cannot 
give the teaching of innocency ; and in the midst 
of a people dying with constant havoc, nobody 
considers that he himself is mortal. Everywhere 
there is scattering, there is seizure, there is tak- 
ing possession ; no dissimulation about spoiling, 
and no delay.' As if it were all lawful, as if it 
were all becoming, as if he who does not rob 
were suffering loss and wasting his own property, 
thus every one hastens to the rapine. Among 
thieves there is at any rate some modesty in their 
crimes. They love pathless ravines and deserted 
solitudes ; and they do wrong in such a way, 
that still the crime of the wrong-doers is veiled 
by darkness and night. Avarice, however, rages 
openly, and, safe by its very boldness, exposes the 
weapons of its headlong craving in the light of 
the market-place. Thence cheats, thence poi- 
soners, thence assassins in the midst of the city, 
are as eager for wickedness as they are wicked 
with impunity. The crime is committed by the 
guilty, and the guiltless who can avenge it is not 
found. There is no fear from accuser or judge : 
the wicked obtain impunity, while modest men 
are silent ; accomplices are afraid, and those 
who are to judge are for sale. And therefore 
by the mouth of the prophet the truth of the 
matter is put forth with the divine spirit and in- 
stinct : it is shown in a certain and obvious way 
that God can prevent adverse things, but that 
the evil deserts of sinners prevent His bringing 
aid. " Is the Lord's hand," says he, "not strong 
to save you ; or has He made heavy His ear, that 
He cannot hear you? But your sins separate 
between you and God ; and because of your sins 
He hath hid His face from you, that He may not 
have mercy." ^ Therefore let your sins and of- 
fences be reckoned up ; let the wounds of your 
conscience be considered ; and let each one 
cease complaining about God, or about us, if he 
should perceive that himself deserves what he 
suffers. 

12. Look what that very matter is of which 
is chiefly our discourse — that you molest us, 
although innocent ; that, in contempt of God, 
you attack and oppress God's servants. It is 
little, in your account, that your life is stained 
with a variety of gross vices, with the iniquity of 
deadly crimes, with the summary of all bloody 
rapines ; that true religion is overturned by false 
superstitions ; that God is neither sought at all, 
nor feared at all ; but over and above this, you 
weary ^ God's servants, and those who are dedi- 
cated to His majesty and His name, with unjust 
persecutions. It is not enough that you yourself 
do not worship God, but, over and above, you 
persecute those who do worship, with a sacrile- 

' Or, " no pretence." Some add, " no fear." 

^ Isa. lix. I. 

3 Or, "distress; " v. l. 

gious hostility. You neither worship God, nor 
do you at all permit Him to be worshipped ; and 
while others who venerate not only those foolish 
idols and images made by man's hands, but even 
portents and monsters besides, are pleasing to 
you, it is only the worshipper of God who is dis- 
pleasing to you. The ashes of victims and the 
piles of cattle everywhere smoke in your temples, 
and God's altars are either nowhere or are hid- 
den. Crocodiles, and apes, and stones, and ser- 
pents are worshipped by you ; and God alone 
in the earth is not worshipped, or if worshipped, 
not with impunity. You deprive the innocent, 
the just, the dear to God, of their home ; you 
spoil them of their estate, you load them with 
chains, you shut them up in prison, you punish 
them with the sword, with the wild beasts, with 
the flames. Nor, indeed, are you content with 
a brief endurance of our sufferings, and with a 
simple and swift exhaustion of pains. You set 
on foot tedious tortures, by tearing our bodies ; 
you multiply numerous punishments, by lacerat- 
ing our vitals ; nor can your brutality and fierce- 
ness be content with ordinary tortures ; your 
ingenious cruelty devises new sufferings. 

13. What is this insatiable madness for blood- 
shedding, what this interminable lust of cru- 
elty? Rather make your election of one of two 
alternatives. To be a Christian is either a crime, 
or it is not. If it be a crime, why do you not 
put the man that confesses it to death ? If it 
be not a crime, why do you persecute an in- 
nocent man? For I ought to be put to the 
torture if I denied it. If in fear of your pun- 
ishment I should conceal, by a deceitful false- 
hood, what I had previously been, and the fact 
that I had not worshipped your gods, then I 
might deserve to be tormented, then I ought to 
be compelled to confession of my crime by 
the power of suffering, as in other examinations 
the guilty, who deny that they are guilty of the 
crime of which they are accused, are tortured 
in order that the confession of the reality of 
the crime, which the tell-tale voice refuses to 
make, may be wrung out by the bodily suffering. 
But now, when of my own free will I confess, 
and cry out, and with words frequent and re- 
peated to the same effect bear witness that I am 
a Christian, why do you apply tortures to one 
who avows it, and who destroys your gods, not 
in hidden and secret places, but openly, and 
publicly, and in the very market-place, in the 
hearing of your magistrates and governors ; so 
that, although it was a slight thing which you 
blamed in me before, that which you ought 
rather to hate and punish has increased, that by 
declaring myself a Christian in a frequented 
place, and with the people standing around, I 
am confounding both you and your gods by an 
open and public announcement? 

462 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

14. Why do you turn your attention to the 
weakness of our body? why do you strive with 
the feebleness of this earthly flesh? Contend 
rather with the strength of the mind, break 
down the power of the soul, destroy our faith, 
conquer if you can by discussion, overcome by 
reason ; or, if your gods have any deity and 
power, let them themselves rise to their own 
vindication, let them defend themselves by their 
own majesty. But what can they advantage 
their worshippers, if they cannot avenge them- 
selves on those who worship them not? For if : 
he who avenges is of more account than he who 
is avenged, then you are greater than your gods. 
And if you are greater than those whom you 
worship, you ought not to worship them, but 
rather to be worshipped and feared by them as 
their lord. Your championship defends them 
when injured, just as your i)rotection guards 
them when shut up from perishing. You should 
be ashamed to worship those whom you your- 
self defend ; you should be ashamed to hope 
for protection from those whom you yourself 
protect. 

15. Oh, would you but hear and see them 
when they are adjured by us, and tortured with 
spiritual scourges, and are ejected from the 
possessed bodies with tortures of words,' when 
howling and groaning at the voice of man and 
the power of Cod, feeling the stripes and blows, 
they confess the judgment to come ! Come and 
acknowledge that what we say is true ; and 
since you say that you thus worship gods, believe 
even those whom you worship. ()r if you will 
even believe yourself, he — i.e., the demon — who 
has now possessed your breast, who has now 
darkened your mind with the night of ignorance, 
shall speak concerning yourself in your hearing. 
You will see that we are entreated by those 
whom you entreat, that we are feared by those 
whom you fear, whom you adore. You will see 
that under our hands they stand bound, and 
tremble as captives, whom you look up to and 
venerate as lords : assuredly even thus you might 
be confounded in those errors of yours, when 
you see and hear your gods, at once upon our 
interrogation betraying what they are, and even 
in your presence unable to conceal those deceits 
and trickeries of theirs. 

16. What, then, is that sluggishness of mind ; 
yea, what blind and stupid madness of fools, to 
be unwilling to come out of darkness into light, 
and to be unwilling, when bound in the toils of 
eternal death, to receive the hope of immor- 
tality, and not to fear Cod when He threatens 
and says, " He that sacrifices unto any gods, but 
unto the Lord only, shall be rooted out?"^ 
And again : " They worshipped them whom 

' [Vol. iii. pp. 176, 180.] 
'^ Ex. .\xii. 30. 

their fingers made ; and the mean man hath 
bowed down, and the great man hath humbled 
himself, and I will not forgive them." ^ Why 
do you humble and bend yourself to false gods ? 
Why do you bow your body captive before 
foolish images and creations of earth? Cod 
made you upright ; and while other animals are 
dovvnlooking, and are depressed in posture bend- 
ing towards the earth, yours is a lofty attitude ; 
and your countenance is raised upwards to 
heaven, and to Cod. Look thither, lift your 
eyes thitherward, seek Cod in the highest, that 
you may be free from things below ; lift your 
heart to a dependence on high and heavenly 
things. Why do you prostrate yourself into 
the ruin of death with the serpent whom you 
worship ? Why do you fall into the destruction 
of the devil, by his means and in his company? 
Keep the lofty estate in which you were born. 
Continue such as you were made by Cod. To 
the posture of your countenance and of your 
body, conform your soul. That you may be 
able to know Cod, first know yourself. Forsake 
the idols which human error has in\-ented. Be 
turned to Cod, whom if you implore He will 
aid you. Believe in Christ, whom ■* the Father 
has sent to quicken and restore us. Cease to 
hurt the servants of Cod and of Christ with 
your persecutions, since when they are injured 
the divine vengeance defends them. 

1 7. For this reason it is that none of us, when 
he is apprehended, makes resistance, nor avenges 
himself against your unrigliteous \iolence, al- 
though our people are numerous and plentiful. 
Our certainty of a vengeance to follow makes 
us patient. The innocent give place to the 
guilty ; the harmless acquiesce in punishments 
and tortures, sure and confident that whatsoever 
we suffer will not remain unavenged, and that in 
proportion to the greatness of the injustice of 
our persecution so will be the justice and the 
severity of the vengeance exacted for those per- 
secutions. Nor does the wickedness of the 
impious ever rise uj) against the name we bear, 
without immediate vengeance from above at- 
tending it. To say nothing of the memories of 
ancient times, and not to recur with wordy 
commemoration to frecjuently rei)eated ven- 
geance on behalf of Cod's worshippers, the 
instance of a recent matter is sufficient to prove 
that our defence, so S]ieedily, and in its speed 
so powerfully, followed of late in the ruins of 
things, 5 in the destruction of wealth, in the waste 
of soldiers, and the diminution of forts. Nor 
let any one think that this occurred by chance, 
or think that it was fortuitous, since long ago 
Scripture has laid down, and said, " Vengeance 

3 Isa. ii. 8. 

* Some read, " the Son whom." 

S Or, according to som«, " of kings." 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

46: 

is mine ; I will repay, saith the Lord." ' And 
again the Holy Spirit forewarns, and says, " Say 
not thou, I will avenge myself of mine enemy, 
but wait on the Lord, that He may be thy help."^ 
Whence it is plain and manifest, that not by our 
means, but for our sakes, all those things are hap- 
pening which come down from the anger of God. 

18. Nor let anybody think that Christians are 
not avenged by those things that are happening, 
for the reason that they also themselves seem to 
be affected by their visitation. A man feels the 
punishment of worldly adversity, when all his 
joy and glory are in the world. He grieves and 
groans if it is ill with him in this life, with whom 
it cannot be well after this life, all the fruit of 
whose life is received here, all whose consolation 
is ended here, whose fading and brief life here 
reckons some sweetness and pleasure, but when 
it has departed hence, there remains for him 
only punishment added to sorrow. But they 
have no suffering from the assault of present 
■evils who have confidence in future good things. 
In fact, we are never prostrated by adversity, 
nor are we broken down, nor do we grieve or 
murmur in any external misfortune or weakness 
of body : living by the Spirit rather than by the 
flesh, we overcome bodily weakness by mental 
strength. By those very things which torment 
and weary us, we know and trust that we are 
proved and strengthened. ^ 

19. Do you think that we suffer adversity 
equally with yourselves, when you see that the 
same adverse things are not borne equally by 
us and by you ? Among you there is always a 
clamorous and complaining impatience ; with us 
there is a strong and religious patience, always 
quiet and always grateful to God. Nor does it 
claim for itself anything joyous or prosperous 
in this world, but, meek and gentle and stable 
against all the gusts of this tossing world, it 
waits for the time of the divine promise ; for as 
long as this body endures, it must needs have a 
common lot with others, and its bodily condition 
must be common. Nor is it given to any of the 
human race to be separated one from another, 
except by withdrawal from this present life. In 
the meantime, we are all, good and evil, con- 
tained in one household. Whatever happens 
within the house, we suffer with equal fate, until, 
when the end of the temporal life shall be at- 
tained, we shall be distributed among the homes 
either of eternal death or immortality. Thus, 
therefore, we are not on the same level, and 
equal with you, because, placed in this present 
workLand in this flesh, we incur equally with 
you the annoyances of the world and of the flesh ; 
for since in the sense of pain is all punishment, 

' Rom. xit. 19. 
- Prov. XX. 22. 
■5 [Beautiful triumph of faith, " peace in believing! "] 

it is manifest that he is not a sharer of your pun- 
ishment who, you see, does not suffer pain 
equally with yourselves.'* 

20. There flourishes with us the strength of 
hope and the firmness of faith. Among these 
very ruins of a decaying world our soul is lifted 
up, and our courage unshaken : our patience is 
never anything but joyous ; and the mind is al- 
ways secure of its God, even as the Holy Spirit 
speaks through the prophet, and exhorts us, 
strengthening with a heavenly word the firmness 
of our hope and faith. "The fig-tree," says He, 
" shall not bear fruit, and there shall be no blos- 
som in the vines. The labour of the olive shall 
fail, and the fields shall yield no meat. The 
flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there 
shall be no herd in the stalls. But I will rejoice 
in the Lord, and I will joy in the God of my 
salvation." 5 He says that the man of God and 
the worshipper of God, depending on the truth 
of his hope, and founded on the stedfastness of 
his faith, is not moved by the attacks of this 
world and this life. Although the vine should 
fail, and the olive deceive, and the field parched 
with grass dying with drought should wither, 
what is this to Christians? what to God's ser- 
vants whom paradise is inviting, whom all the 
grace and all the abundance of the kingdom of 
heaven is waiting for? They always exult in the 
Lord, and rejoice and are glad in their God ; 
and the evils and adversities of the world they 
bravely sufter, because they are looking forward 
to gifts and prosperities to come : for we who 
have put off our earthly birth, and are now cre- 
ated and regenerated by the Spirit, and no 
longer live to the world but to God, shall not 
receive God's gifts and promises until we arrive 
at the presence of God. And yet we always 
ask for the repulse of enemies, and for obtain- 
ing showers, and either for the removal or the 
moderating of adversity ; and we pour forth our 
prayers, and, propitiating and appeasing God, 
we entreat constantly and urgently, day and 
night, for your peace and salvation. 

21. Let no one, however, flatter himself, be- 
cause there is for the present to us and to the 
profane, to God's worshippers and to God's op- 
ponents,^ by reason of the equality of the flesh 
and body, a common condition of worldly 
troubles, in such a way as to think from this, 
that all those things which happen are not drawn 
down by you ; since by the announcement of 
God Himself, and by prophedc testimony, it has 
previously been foretold that upon the unjust 
should come the wrath of God, and that perse- 
cutions which humanly would hurt us should not 

■* Or, " whom you do not see not to sufferwith yourself." 
5 Hab. iii. 17. 

*> Otherwise read, " to us the worshippers of God, and to His pro- 
fane opponents." 

464 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

be wanting ; but, moreover, that vengeance, 
which should defend with heavenly defence those 
who were hurt, should attend them. 

2 2. And how great, too, are those things which 
in the meantime are happening in that respect 
on our bebalf ! Something is given for an ex- 
ample, that the anger of an avenging God may 
be known. But the day of judgment is still 
future which the Holy Scripture denounces, say- 
ing, " Howl ye, for the day of the Lord is at 
hand, and destruction from God shall come ; 
for, lo, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel with 
wrath and anger, to lay the earth desolate, and 
to destroy the sinners out of it." ' And again : 
" Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, burning 
as an oven ; and all the aliens and all that do 
wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day that 
cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord." ^ 
The Lord prophesies that tlie aliens shall be 
burnt up and consumed ; that is, aliens from the 
divine race, and the profane, those who are not 
spiritually new-born, nor made children of God. 
For that those only can escape who have been 
new-born and signed with the sign of Christ, 
God says in another place, when, sending forth 
His angels to the destruction of the world and 
the death of the human race, He threatens more 
terribly in the last time, saying, " Go ye, and 
smite, and let not your eye spare. Have no 
]iity upon old or young, and slay the virgins and 
the little ones and the women, that they may be 
utterly destroyed. But touch not any man upon 
whom is written the mark." ^ Moreover, what 
this mark is, and m what ])art of the body it is 
placed, (jod sets forth in another place, saying, 
"Go through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a 
mark upon tlie foreheads of the men that sigh 
and that cry for all the abominations that be 
done in the midst thereof." •* And that the sign 
pertains to the passion and blood of Christ, and 
that whoever is found in this sign is kept safe 
and unharmed, is also proved by God's testi- 
mony, saying, " And the blood shall be to you 
for a token upon the houses in which ye shall 
be ; and I will see the blood, and will protect 
you, and the plague of diminution shall not be 
upon you when I smite the land of Egypt." 5 
What previously preceded by a figure in the slain 
lamb is fulfilled in Christ, the truth which fol- 
lowed afterwards. As, then, when I'>gypt was 
smitten, the Jewish people could not escape ex- 
cept by the blood and the sign of the lamb ; 
so also, when the world shall begin to be deso- 
lated and smitten, whoever is found in the blood 
and the sign of Christ alone shall escape." 

' Isa. xiH. 6-9. 

2 Mai. iv. I. 

3 Ezek. ix. 5. 

* Ezek. ix.4. 
5 F.x. xii. 13. 

* (I-^ek. ix. a; 

Rev, vii. 3, ix. 4.J 

23. Look, therefore,^ while there is time, to 
the true and eternal salvation ; and since now 
the end of the world is at hand, turn your minds 
to God, in the fear of God ; nor let that power- 
less and vain dominion in the world over the just 
and meek delight you, since in the field, even 
among the cultivated and fruitful corn, the tares 
and the darnel have dominion. Nor say ye 
that ill fortunes happen because your gods are 
not worshipped by us ; but know that this is the 
judgment of God's anger, that He who is not 
acknowledged on account of His benefits may at 
least be acknowledged through His judgments. 
Seek the Lord even late ; for long ago, God, 
forewarning by His prophet, exhorts and says, 
" Seek ye the Lord, and your soul shall live." ** 
Know God even late ; for Christ at His coming 
admonishes and teaches this, saying, " This is 
life eternal, that they might know Thee, the only 
true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast 
sent." 9 Believe Him who deceives not at all. 
Believe Him who foretold that all these things 
should come to pass. Believe Him who will 
give to all that believe the reward of eternal life. 
Believe Him who will call down on them that 
believe not, eternal punishments in the fires of 
Gehenna. 

24. What wdll then be the glory of faith? 
what the punishment of faithlessness? When 
the day of judgment shall come, what joy of 
believers, what sorrow of unbelievers; that they 
should have been unwilling to believe here, and 
now that they should be unable to return that 
they might believe ! An ever-burning Gehenna 
will burn up the condemned, and a punishment 
devouring with living flames ; nor will there be 
any source whence at any time they may have 
either respite or end to their torments. Souls 
with their bodies will be reserved in infinite tor- 
tures for suffering. Thus the man will be for 
ever seen by us who here gazed ui)on us for a 
season ; and the short jpy of those cruel eyes in 
the persecutions that they made for us will be 
compensated by a perpetual spectacle, accord- 
ing to the truth of Holy Scripture, which says, 
" Their worm shall not die, and their fire shall 
not be (juenched ; and they shall be for a vision 
to all flesh." '° And again : " Then shall the 
righteous men stand in great constancy before 
the face of those who have afflicted them, and 
have taken away their labours. When they see 
it, they shall be troubled with horrible fear, and 
shall be amazed at the suddenness of their un- 
expected salvation ; and they, repenting and 
groaning for anguish of spirit, shall say within 
themselves. These are they whom we had some 

7 Or, according to some readings, "' Be wise, therefore." 
* Amos V. 6. 
9 John xvii. 3. 
'° Ita. Lxvi. 24. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

465. 

time in derision, and a proverb of reproach ; we 
fools counted their Hfe madness, and their end 
to be without honour. How are they numbered 
among the children of God, and their lot is 
among the saints ! Therefore have we erred 
from the way of truth, and the light of righteous- 
ness hath not shined upon us, and the sun rose 
not on us. We wearied ourselves in the way 
of wickedness and destruction ; we have gone 
through deserts where there lay no way ; but we 
have not known the way of the Lord. What 
hath pride profited us, or what good hath the 
boasting of riches done us? All those things 
are passed away like a shadow." ' The pain of 
punishment will then be without the fruit of peni- 
tence ; weeping will be useless, and prayer in- 
effectual. Too late they will believe in eternal 
punishment who would not believe in eternal 
life. 

25. Provide, therefore, while you may, for 
your safety and your life. We offer you the 
wholesome help of our mind and advice. And 
because we may not hate, and we please God 
more by rendering no return for wrong, we ex- 
hort you while you have the power, while there 
yet remains to you something of life, to make 
satisfaction to God, and to emerge from the 
abyss of darkling superstition^ into the bright 
light of true religion. We do not envy your 
comforts, nor do we conceal the divine bene- 
fits. We repay kindness for your hatred ; and 
for the torments and penalties which are inflicted 
on us, we point out to you the ways of salva- 
tion. Believe and live, and do ye who persecute 
us in time rejoice with us for eternity. When 
you have once departed thither, there is no 
longer any place for repentance, and no possi- 
bility of making satisfaction. Here life is either 
lost or saved ; here eternal safety is provided for 
by the worship of God and the fruits of faith. 
Nor let any one be restrained either by his sins 
or by his years from coming to obtain salvation. 
To him who still remains in this world no re- 
pentance is too late. The approach to God's 
mercy is open, and the access is easy to those 
who seek and apprehend the truth. Do you en- 
treat for your sins, although it be in the very end 
of life, and at the setting of the sun of time ; and 
implore God, who is the one and true God, in 
confession and faith of acknowledgment of Him, 
and pardon is granted to the man who confesses, 
and saving mercy is given from the divine good- 
ness to the believer, and a passage is opened to 
immortality even in death itself. This grace 
Christ bestows ; this gift of His mercy He con- 
fers upon us, by overcoming death in the trophy 
of the cross, by redeeming the believer with the 

' Wisd. V. 1-9. 

'^ " From the deep and darkling night of superstition " is another 
reading. 

price of His blood, by reconciling man to God 
the Father, by quickening our mortal nature 
with a heavenly regeneration. If it be possible, 
let us all follow Him ; let us be registered in His 
sacrament and sign. He opens to us the way 
of life ; He brings us back to paradise ; He leads 
us on to the kingdom of heaven. Made by Him 
the children of God, with Him we shall ever 
live ; with Him we shall always rejoice, restored 
by His own blood. We Christians shall be glo- 
rious together with Christ, blessed of God the 
Father, always rejoicing with perpetual pleasures 
in the sight of God, and ever giving thanks to 
God. For none can be other than always glad 
and grateful, who, having been once subject to 
death, has been made secu"^e in the possession- 
of immortality.3 

TREATISE VI.4 

ON THE VANITY OF IDOLS: SHOWING THAT 
THE IDOLS ARE NOT GODS, AND THAT GOD 
IS ONE, AND THAT THROUGH CHRIST SAL- 
VATION IS GIVEN TO BELIEVERS. 

ARGUMNET. THIS HEADING EMBRACES THE 

THREE LEADING DIVISIONS OF THIS TREATISE. 
THE WRITER FIRST OF ALL SHOWS THAT THEY IN 
WHOSE HONOUR TEMPLES WERE FOUNDED, STAT- 
UES MODELLED, VICTIMS SACRIFICED, AND FESTAL 
DAYS CELEBRATED, WERE KINGS AND MEN AND 
NOT GODS ; AND THEREFORE THAT THEIR WOR- 
SHIP COULD BE OF NO AVAIL EITHER TO' 
STRANGERS OR TO ROMANS, AND THAT THE 
POV^ER OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE WAS TO BE 
ATTRIBUTED TO FATE RATHER THAN TO THEM, 
INASMUCH AS IT HAD ARISEN BY A CERTAIN 
GOOD FORTUNE, AND WAS ASHAIMED OF ITS 
OWN ORIGIN. 5 

I. That those are no gods wnom the common 
people worship, is known from this. They were 
formerly kings, who on account of their royal 
memory subsequently began to be adored by 
their people even in death. Thence temples 
were founded to them ; thence images were 
sculptured to retain the countenances of the 
deceased by the likeness ; and men sacrificed 
victims, and celebrated festal days, by way of 
giving them honour. Thence to posterity those 
rites became sacred which at first had been 
adopted as a consolation. And now let us see 

3 [Compare the Octavius of Minucius Felix with this treatise, and 
also the other apologists, e.g., vol. ii. 93. j 

■« [Written a.d. 247. Compare vol. ii. pp. 79, 136, 184, etc.] 
S Moreover, that it was manifest from their deceitful results, that 
nothing could be referred to auspices or auguries; nay, even those 
who acknowledged both one God and the demons, allowed that these 
illusions were the work of the demons, according to the testimony of 
the poets themselves, and Socrates, Plato, Trismegistus, and Hostanes. 
The second point, that God is one, he makes evident in a few words, 
as well from the greater dignity of a monarchy than of other forms of 
government, as from the very expressions of the heathen and of the 
common people — "O God!" and the like. Finally, he treats of 
Christ more at large, from the Jewish prophets and from the evangel- 
ical history. 

466 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

whether this truth is confirmed in individual 
instances. 

2. Melicertes and Leucothea are precipitated 
into the sea, and subsequently become sea- 
divinities. The Castors ' die by turns, that they 
may live. yEsculapius is struck by lightning, 
that he may rise into a god. Hercules, that he 
may put off the man, is burnt up in the fires of 
Oeta. Apollo fed the flocks of Admetus ; Nep- 
tune founded walls for Laomedon, and received 
— unfortunate builder — no wages for his work. 
The cave of Jupiter is to be seen in Crete, and 
his sepulchre is shown ; and it is manifest that 
Saturn was driven away by him, and that from 
him Latium received its name, as being his lurk- 
ing-place.^ He was the first that taught to print 
letters ; he was the first that taught to stamp 
money in Italy,^ and thence the treasury is 
called the treasury of Saturn. And he also was 
the cultivator of the rustic life, whence he is 
painted as an old man ■♦ carrying a sickle. Janus 
had received hmi to hosi)itality when he was 
driven away, from whose name the Janiculum is 
so called, and the month of January is appointed. 
He himself is portrayed with two faces, because, 
placed in the middle, he seems to look equally 
towards the commencing and the closing year. 
The Mauri, indeed, manifestly worship kings, 
and do not conceal their name by any disguise. 

3. From this the religion of the gods is vari- 
ously changed among individual nations and 
provinces, inasmuch as no one god is worshipped 
by all, but by each one the worship of its own 
ancestors is kept peculiar. Proving that this is 
so, Alexander the Great writes in the remark- 
able volume addressed to his mother, that through 
fear of his power the doctrine of the gods being 
men, which was kept secret,^ had been dis- 
closed to him by a priest, that it was the memory 
of ancestors and kings that was (really) kept up, 
and that from this tlie rites of worship and sac- 
rifice have grown up. But if gods were born at 
any time, why are they not born in these days 
also? — unless, indeed, Jupiter possibly has 
grown too old, or the faculty of bearing 
failed Juno. 

4. But why do you think that the gods 
avail on behalf of the Romans, when you 
that they can do nothing for their own worship- 
l)ers in opposition to the Roman arms? For we 
know that the gods of the Romans are indige- 
nous. Romulus was made a god by the perjury 
of Proculus, and Picus, and Tiberinus, and Pilum- 

' Most editors read, " Castor and Pollux," 

- Lniebra. 

3 [" Litteras imprimerc . . . signare nummos. How could the 
art of printing have failed to follow such inventions and such words? 
f^very coin was a hint of the printer's art. God only could have re- 
Wrained the invention till the set time. Dan. xii. 4.] 

* According to some readings, the words " an old man " are 
omitted. 

5 The readings here vary much. The first part of the sentence is 
found in Minucius Felix, c. 21. [Vol. iv. p. iSj.] 

has 

can 

see 

nus, and Consus, whom as a god of treachery 
Romulus would have to be worshipped, just as 
if he had been a god of counsels, when his per- 
fidy resulted in the rape of the Sabines. Tatius 
also both invented and worshipped the goddess 
Cloacina ; Hostilius, Fear and Paleness. By and 
by, I know not by whom, Fever was dedicated, 
and Acca and Flora the harlots.'^ These are 
the Roman gods. But Mars is a Thracian, and 
Jupiter a Cretan, and Juno either Argive or Sa- 
mian or Carthaginian, and Diana of Taurus, and 
the mother of the gods of Ida ; and there are 
Egyptian monsters, not deities, who assuredly, 
if they had had any power, would have preserved 
their own and their people's kingdoms. Certainly 
there are also among the Romans the conquered 
Penates whom the fugitive yEneas introduced 
thither. There is also Venus the bald, — far 
more dishonoured by the fact of her baldness in 
Rome than by her having been wounded in Homer. 
5. Kingdoms do not rise to supremacy through 
merit, but are varied by chance. F^mpire was 
formerly held by both Assyrians and Medes and 
Persians ; and we know, too, that both Greeks 
and Egyptians have had dominion. Thus, in 
the varj'ing vicissitudes of power, the period of 
empire has also come to the Romans as to the 
others. But if you recur to its origin, you must 
needs blush. A people is collected together from 
profligates and criminals, and by founding an 
asylum, impunity for crimes makes the number 
great ; and that their king himself may have a 
superiority in crime, Romulus becomes a fratri- 
cide ; 7 and in order to promote marriage, he 
makes a beginning of that affair of concord by 
discords. They steal, they do violence, they 
deceive in order to increase the population of 
the state ; their marriage consists of the broken 
covenants of hospitality and cruel wars with their 
fathers-in-law. The consulship, moreover, is the 
highest degree in Roman honours, yet we see 
that the consulship began even as did the king- 
dom. Brutus puts his sons to death, that the 
commendation of his dignity may increase by 
the approval of his wickedness. The Roman 
kingdom, therefore, did not grow from the sanc- 
tities of religion, nor from auspices and auguries, 
but it keeps its appointed time within a definite 
limit. Moreover, Regulus observed the auspices, 
yet was taken prisoner ; and Mancinus ol)served 
their religious obligation, yet was sent under the 
yoke. Paulus had chickens that fed, and yet 
he was slain at Cannae. Caius C«sar despised 

* The following passage, accepted in some editions, is of doubtful 
authenticity: "To such an extent, indeed, were feigned the names 
of gods among the Romans, that there is even among them a god, 
Viduus, who widows the body from the soul — who, as being sad and 
funereal, is not kept within the walls, but placed outside; but who 
nevertheless, in that he is excluded, is rather condemned by the 
Roman religion than worshipped. There is also Scansus, so called 
from ascents, and Forculus from doors, and Limentinus from thresh- 
olds, and Cardea from hinges, and Orbona from bereavement." 

' " Parricida." 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

467 

the auguries and auspices that were opposed to 
his sending ships before the winter to Africa ; 
yet so much the more easily he both sailed and 
conquered. 

6. Of all these, however, the principle is the 
same, which misleads and deceives, and with 
tricks which darken the truth, leads away a cred- 
ulous and foolish rabble. They are impure and 
wandering spirits, who, after having been steeped 
in earthly vices, have departed from their celes- 
tial vigour by the contagion of earth, and do 
not cease, when ruined themselves, to seek the 
ruin of others ; and when degraded themselves, 
to infuse into others the error of their own degra 
dation. These demons the poets also acknowl- 
edge, and Socrates declared that he was instructea 
and ruled at the will of a demon ; and thence 
the Magi have a power either for mischief or for 
mockery, of whom, however, the chief Hostanes 
both says that the form of the true God cannot 
be seen, and declares that true angels stand round 
about His throne. Wherein Plato also on the 
same principle concurs, and, maintaining one 
God, calls the rest angels or demons. More- 
over, Hermes Trismegistus speaks of one God, 
and confesses that He is incomprehensible, and 
beyond our estimation. 

7. These spirits, therefore, are lurking under 
the statues and consecrated images : these in- 
spire the breasts of their prophets with their 
afflatus, animate the fibres of the entrails, direct 
the flights of birds, rule the lots, give efficiency 
to oracles, are always mixing up falsehood with 
truth, for they are both deceived and they de- 
ceive ; ' they disturb their life, they disquiet their 
slumbers ; their spirits creeping also into their 
bodies, secretly terrify their minds, distort their 
limbs, break their health, excite diseases to force 
them to worship of themselves, so that when 
glutted with the steam of the altars and the piles 
of cattle, they may unloose what they had bound, 
and so appear to have effected a cure. The 
only remedy from them is when their own mis- 
chief ceases ; nor have they any other desire 
than to call men away from God, and to turn 
them from the understanding of the true reli- 
gion, to superstition with respect to themselves ; 
and since they themselves are under punishment, 
(they wish) to seek for themselves companions 
in punishment whom they may by their misguid- 
ance make sharers in their crime. These, how- 
ever, when adjured by us through the true God, 
at once yield and confess, and are constrained 
to go out from the bodies possessed. You may 
see them at our voice, and hy the operation of 
the hidden majesty, smitten with stripes, burnt 
with fire, stretched out with the increase of a 
growing punishment, howling, groaning, entreat- 

' [2 Tim. iii. 13. See vol. iii. 68.] 

ing, confessing whence they came and when 
they depart, even in the hearing of those very 
persons who worship them, and either springing 
forth at once or vanishing gradually, even as the 
faith of the sufferer comes in aid, or the grace 
of the healer effects. Hence they urge the 
common people to detest our name, so that men 
begin to hate us before they know us, lest they 
should either imitate us if known, or not be able 
to condemn us.^ 

8. Therefore the one Lord of all is God. 
For that sublimity cannot possibly have any 
compeer, since it alone possesses all power. 
Moreover, let us borrow an illustration for the 
divine government from the earth. When ever 
did an alliance in royalty either begin with good 
faith or end without bloodshed? Thus the 
brotherhood of the Thebans was broken, and 
discord endured even in death in their disunited 
ashes. And one kingdom could not contain the 
Roman twins, although the shelter of one womb 
had held them. Pompey and Caesar were kins- 
men, and yet they did not maintain the bond 
of their relationship in their envious power. 
Neither should you marvel at this in respect of 
man, since herein all nature consents. The bees 
have one king, and in the flocks there is one 
leader, and in the herds one ruler. Much rather 
is the Ruler of the world one ; who commands 
all things, whatsoever they are, with His word,, 
disposes them by His wisdom, and accomplishes 
them by His power. 

g. He cannot be seen — He is too bright for 
vision ; nor comprehended — He is too pure for 
our discernment ; nor estimated — He is too 
great for our perception ; and therefore we are 
only worthily estimating Him when we say that 
He is inconceivable. But what temple can God 
have, whose temple is the whole world ? And 
while man dwells far and wide, shall I shut up 
the power of such great majesty within one small 
building? He must be dedicated in our mind ; 
in our breast He must be consecrated. Neither 
must you ask the name of God. God is His 
name. Among those there is need of names 
where a multitude is to be distinguished by the 
appropriate characteristics of appellations. To 
God who alone is, belongs the whole name of 
God ; therefore He is one, and He in His en- 
tirety is everywhere diffused. For even the 
common people in many things naturally confess 
God, when their mind and soul are admonished 
of their author and origin. We frequently hear it 
said, " O God," and " God sees," and " I com- 
mend to God," and " God give you," and " as 
God will," and " if God should grant ; " and this 
is the ver)' height of sinfulness, to refuse to ac- 
knowledge Him whom you cannot but know.^ 

2 [Vol. iii. p. hi; also other apologists.] 

3 [See vol. iii p, 179, elucidation.] 

468 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

10. But that Christ is, and in what way salva- 
tion came to us through Him, after this manner 
is the plan, after this manner is the means. First 
of all, favour with God was given to the Jews. 
Thus they of old were righteous ; thus their an- 
cestors were obedient to their religious engage- 
ments. Thence with them both the loftiness of 
their rule flourished, and the greatness of their 
race advanced. But subsequently becoming neg- 
lectful of discipline, proud, and puffed up with 
confidence in their fathers, they despised the di- 
vine precepts, and lost the favour conferred upon 
them. But how profane became their life, what 
offence to their violated religion was contracted, 
even they themselves bear witness, since, although 
they are silent with their voice, they confess it by 
their end. Scattered and straggling, they wan- 
der about ; outcasts from their own soil and ch- 
mate, they are thrown upon the hospitality of 
strangers." 

11. Moreover, God had previously foretold 
that it would happen, that as the ages passed on, 
and the end of the world was near at hand, God 
would gather to Himself from every nation, and 
people, and place, worshippers much better in 
obedience and stronger in faith,^ who would 
draw from the divine gift that mercy which the 
Jews had received and lost by despising their 
religious ordinances. Therefore of this mercy 
and grace ^ the Word and Son of God is sent as 
the dispenser and master, who by all the prophets 
of old was announced as the enlightener and 
teacher of the human race. He is the power of 
God, He is the reason. He is His wisdom and 
glory ; He enters into a virgin ; being the holy 
Spirit,-* He is endued with flesh ; God is mingled 
with man. This is our God, this is Christ, who, 
as the mediator of the two, puts on man that He 
may lead them to the Father. What man is, 
Christ was willing to be, that man also may be 
what Christ is. 

12. And the Jews knew that Christ was to 
come, for He was always being announced to 
them by the warnings of prophets. But His ad- 
vent being signified to them as twofold — the 
one which should discharge the office and ex- 
ample of a man, the other which should avow 
Him as God — they did not understand the first 
advent which preceded, as being hidden in His 
passion, but believe in the one only which will be 
manifesjt in power.s But that the people of the 
Jews could not understand this, was the desert 
of their sins. They were so punished by their 
blindness of wisdom and intelligence, that they 

* [Ps. lix. II ; and see p. 202, supra.'\ 

* ' Of greater obedience and of stronger faith " is a varied reading 
here. 

3 Some add, " and discipline." 

* " With the co-operation of the Holy Spirit," is perhaps a more 
probable reading. [See vol. iii. p. 609.] 

i [See Treatise xii. book ii. sees. 13 and 28, in/ra.] 

who were unworthy of life, had life before their 
eyes, and saw it not. 

13. Therefore when Christ Jesus, in accord- 
ance with what had been previously foretold by 
the prophets, drove out from men the demons 
by His word, and by the command of His voice 
nerved up the paralytics, cleansed the leprous, 
enlightened the blind, gave power of movement 
to the lame, raised the dead again, compelled 
the elements to obey Him as servants, the winds 
to serve Him, the seas to obey Him, the lower 
regions to yield to Him ; the Jews, who had be- 
lieved Him man only from the humility of His 
flesh and body, regarded Him as a sorcerer for 
the authority of His power. Their masters and 
leaders — that is, those whom He subdued both 
by learning and wisdom — inflamed with wrath 
and stimulated with indignation,-' finally seized 
Him and delivered Him to Pontius Pilate, who 
was then the procurator of Syria on behalf of the 
Romans, demanding with violent and obstinate 
urgency His crucifixion and death. 

14. That they would do this He Himself also 
had foretold ; and the testimony of all the proph- 
ets had in like manner preceded Him. that it 
behoved Him to suffer, not that He might feel 
death, but that He might conquer death, and 
that, when He should have suffered. He should 
return again into heaven, to show the power of 
the divine majesty. Therefore the course of 
events fulfilled the promise. For when crucified, 
the office of the executioner being forestalled, 7 
He Himself of His own will yielded up His spirit, 
and on the third day freely rose again from the 
dead. He appeared to His disciples like as He 
had been. He gave Himself to the recognition 
of those that saw Him, associated together with 
Him ; and being evident by the sulistance of His- 
bodily existence. He delayed for forty days, that 
they might be instructed by Him in the precepts 
of life, and might learn what they were to teach. 
Then in a cloud spread around Him He wax 
lifted up into heaven, that as a conqueror He 
might bring to the Father, Man whom He loved,, 
whom He put on, whom He shielded from death ; 
soon to come from heaven for the punishment 
of the devil and to the judgment of the human 
race, with the force of an avenger and with the 
power of a judge ; whilst the disciples, scattered 
over the world, at the bidding of their Master 
and God gave forth His precepts for salvation, 
guided men from their wandering in darkness to 
the way of light, and gave eyes to the blind and 
ignorant for the acknowledgment of the truth. 

15. And that the proof might not be the less 
substantial, and the confession of Christ might 
not be a matter of pleasure, they are tried by 

* " Set upon Him and " is here interpolated by some. 
' [John X. 18 See Pearson, Creed, art. v. p. 424 J 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

469 

tortures, by crucifixions, by many kinds of pun- 
ishments. Pain, which is the test of truth, is 
brought to bear, that Christ the Son of God, 
who is trusted in as given to men for their hfe, 
might not only be announced by the heralding 
of the voice, but by the testimony of suffering. 
Therefore we accompany Him, we follow Him, 
we have Him as the Guide of our way, the 
Source of light, the Author of salvation, prom- 
ising as well the Father as heaven to those who 
seek and believe. What Christ is, we Christians 
shall be, if we imitate Christ. 

TREATISE VII. 

ON THE MORTALITY.! 

ARGUMENT. — THE DEACON PONTIUS IN A FEW 
WORDS UNFOLDS THE BURTHEN OF THIS TREA- 
TISE IN HIS LIFE OF CYPRIAN.^ FIRST OF ALL, 
HAVING POINTED OUT THAT AFFLICTIONS OF THIS 
KIND HAD BEEN FORETOLD BY CHRIST, HE TELLS 
THEM THAT THE MORTALITY OR PLAGUE WAS NOT 
TO BE FEARED, IN THAT IT LEADS TO IMMOR- 
TALITY, AND THAT THEREFORE, THAT MAN IS 
WANTING IN FAITH WHO IS NOT EAGER FOR A 
BETTER WORLD. NOR IS IT WONDERFUL THAT 
THE EVILS OF THIS LIFE ARE COMMON TO THE 
CHRISTIANS WITH THE HEATHENS, SINCE THEY 
HAVE TO SUFFER MORE THAN OTHERS IN THE 
WORLD, AND THENCE, AFTER THE EXAMPLE OF 
JOB AND TOBIAS, THERE IS NEED OF PATIENCE 
WITHOUT MURMURING. FOR UNLESS THE STRUG- 
GLE PRECEDED, THE VICTORY COULD NOT EN- 
SUE ; AND HOW MUCH SOEVER DISEASES ARE 
COMMON TO THE VIRTUOUS AND VICIOUS, YET 
THAT DEAIH IS NOT COMMON TO THEM, FOR 
/THAT THE RIGHTEOUS ARE TAKEN TO CONSO- 
\LATION, WHILE THE UNRIGHTEOUS ARE TAKEN 
TO PUNISHMENT.^ 

I. Although in very many of you, dearly be- 
loved brethren, there is a stedfast mind and a 
firm faith, and a devoted spirit that is not dis- 
turbed at the frequency of this present mortality. 

' Eusebius in his Chronicon makes mention of the occasion on 
■which Cyprian wrote this treatise, saying, " A pestilent disease took 
possession of many provinces of the whole world, and especially 
Alexandria and Egypt; as Dionysius writes, and the treatise of Cyp- 
rian ' concerning the Mortality ' bears witness." a.d. 252. 

2 He says: " By whom were Christians, — grieved with excessive 
fondness at the loss of their friends, or what is of more consequence, 
with their decrease of faith, — comforted with the hope of things to 
come ? " [See p. 265, supra P\ 

3 Then to the tacit objection that by this mortality they would be 
deprived of martyrdom, he replies that martyrdom is not in our 
power, and that even the spirit that is ready for martyrdom is crowned 
hy God the judge. Finally, he tells them that the dead must not be 
bewailed in such a matter as that we should become a stumbling- 
block to the Gentiles, as if we were without the hope of a resurrec- 
tion. But if also the day of our summons should come, we must 
depart hence with a glad mind to the Lord, especially since we are 
departing to our country, where the large number of those dear to us 
are waiting for us : a dense and abundant multitude are longing for us, 
who, being already secure of their own immortality, are still solici- 
tous about our salvation. 

but, like a strong and stable rock, rather shatters 
the turbulent onsets of the world and the raging 
waves of time, while it is not itself shattered, and 
is not overcome but tried by these temptations ; 
yet because I observe that among the people 
some, either through weakness of mind, or 
through decay of faith, or through the sweetness 
of this worldly life, or through the softness of 
their sex, or what is of still greater account, 
through error from the truth, are standing less 
steadily, and are not exerting the divine and un- 
vanquished vigour of their heart, the matter may 
not be disguised nor kept in silence, but as far 
as my feeble powers suffice with my full strength, 
and with a discourse gathered from the Lord's 
lessons, the slothfulness of a luxurious disposi- 
tion must be restrained, and he who has begun 
to be already a man of God and of Christ, must 
be found worthy of God and of Christ. 

2. For he who wars for God, dearest brethren, 
ought to acknowledge himself as one who, placed 
in the heavenly camp, already hopes for+ divine 
things, so that we may have no trembling at the 
storms and whirlwinds of the world, and no dis- 
turbance, since the Lord had foretold that these 
would come. With the exhortation of His fore- 
seeing word, instructing, and teaching, and pre- 
paring, and strengthening the people of His 
Church for all endurance of things to come. He 
predicted and said that wars, and famines, and 
earthquakes, and pestilences would arise in each 
place ; and lest an unexpected and new dread 
of mischiefs should shake us, He previously 
warned us that adversity would increase more 
and more in the last times. Behold, the very 
things occur which were spoken ; and since 
those occur which were foretold before, whatever 
things were promised will also follow ; as the 
Lord Himself promises, saying, " But when ye 
see all these things come to pass, know ye that 
the kingdom of God is at hand." 5 The king- 
dom of God, beloved brethren, is beginning to 
be at hand ; the reward of life, and the rejoicing 
of eternal salvation, and the perpetual gladness ^ 
and possession lately lost of paradise, are now 
coming, with the passing away of the world ; 
already heavenly things are taking the piace of 
earthly, and great things of small, and eternal 
things of things that fade away. What room is 
there here for anxiety and solicitude ? Who, in 
the midst of these things, is trembling and sad, 
except he who is without hope and faith? For 
it is for him to fear death who is not willing to 
go to Christ. It is for 'him to be unwilling to go 
to Christ who does ^ot believe that he is about 
to reign ^ with Christ. 

♦ Spme read " breathes.' 
S Luke xxi.'^i. 

* Or, " security." 

7 Some add, " for ever." 

470 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

3. For it is written that the just lives by faith.' 
If you are just, and live by faith, if you truly 
believe in Christ, why, since you are about to 
be with Christ, and are secure of the Lord's 
promise, do you not embrace the assurance that 
you are called to Christ, and rejoice that you are 
freed from the devil? Certainly Simeon, that 
just man, who was truly just, who kept God's 
commands with a full faith, when it had been 
pledged him from heaven that he should not die 
before he had seen the Christ, and Christ had 
come an infant into the temple with His mother, 
acknowledged in spirit that Christ was now born, 
concerning whom it had before been foretold to 
him ; and when he had seen Him, he knew that 
he should soon die. Therefore, rejoicing con- 
cerning his now approaching death, and secure 
of his immediate summons, he received the child 
into his arms, and blessing the Lord, he ex- 
claimed, and said, " Now lettest Thou Thy ser- 
vant depart in peace, according to Thy word ; 
for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation ; " ^ as- 
suredly proving and bearing witness that the 
servants of God then had peace, then free, then 
trantjuil repose, when, withdrawn from these 
whirlwinds of the world, we attain the harbour 
of our home and eternal security, when having 
accomplished this death we come to immor- 
tality. For that is our ^ peace, that our faithful 
tranquillity, that our stedfast, and abiding, and 
perpetual security. 

4. But for the rest, what else in the world than 
a battle against the devil is daily carried on, than 
a struggle against his darts and weapons in con- 
stant conflicts? Our warfare is with avarice, with 
immodesty, with anger, with ambition ; our dili- 
gent and toilsome wrestle with carnal vices, with 
enticements of the world. The mind of man 
besieged, and in every quarter invested with the 
onsets of the devil, scarcely in each point meets 
the attack, scarcely resists it. If avarice is pros- 
trated, lust springs up. If lust is overcome, am- 
bition takes its place. If ambition is despised, 
anger exasperates, pride puffs up, wine-bibbing 
entices, envy breaks concord, jealousy cuts friend- 
ship ; you are constrained to curse, which the 
divine law forbids ; you are compelled to swear, 
which is not lawful. 

5. So many persecutions the soul suffers daily, 
with so many risks is the heart wearied, and yet 
it dehghts to abide here long among the devil's 
weapons, although it should rather be our craving 
and wish to hasten to Christ by the aid of a quicker 
death ; as He Himself instructs us, and says, 
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, That ye shall weep 

' [To live by faith = to be just, through Christ the object of faith. 
The Fathers always accept "justification by faith." See Faber's 
Primitive Doctrine of Justification ; and compare Bull, Har- 
mania Afiostoiica.^ 

^ Luke. ii. 29. 

' Baliuius interpolates here, without authority, " true." 

and lament, but the world shall rejoice ; and ye 
shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned 
into joy." '' Who would not desire to be with- 
out sadness? who would not hasten to attain to 
joy? But when our sadness shall be turned into 
I joy, the Lord Himself again declares, when He 
j says, " I will see you again, and your heart shall 
rejoice ; and your joy no man shall take from 
you." 5 Since, therefore, to see Christ is to re- 
joice, and we cannot have joy unless when we 
shall see Christ, what blindness of mind or what 
folly is it to love the world's afflictions, and pun- 
ishments, and tears, and not rather to hasten to 
the joy which can never be taken away ! 

6. 13ut, beloved brethren, this is so, because 
faith is lacking, because no one believes that the 
things which God promises are true, although He 
is true, whose word to believers is eternal and un- 
changeable. If a grave and praiseworthy man 
should promise you anything, you would assur- 
edly have faith in the promiser, and would not 
think that you should be cheated and deceived 
by him whom you knew to be stedfast in his 
words and his deeds. Now God is speaking 
with you ; and do you faithlessly waver in your 
unbelieving mind? God promises to you, on 
your departure from this world, immortality and 
eternity ; and do you doubt ? This is not to 
know God at all ; this is to offend Christ, the 
Teacher^ of believers, with the sin of incredu- 
lity ; this is for one established in the Church not 
to have faith in the house of faith. 

7. How great is the advantage of going out 
of the world, Christ Himself, the Teacher of our 
salvation and of our good works, shows to us, 
who, when His disciples were saddened that He 
said that He was soon to depart, spoke to them, 
and said, " If ye loved me, ye would surely re- 
joice because I go to the Father ; " 7 teaching 
thereby, and manifesting that when the dear ones 
whom we love depart from the world, we should 
rather rejoice than grieve. Remembering which 
truth, the blessed Apostle Paul in his epistle lays 
it down, saying, " To me to live is Christ, and 
to die is gain ; " ** counting it the greatest gain 
no longer to be held by the snares of this world, 
no longer to be liable to the sins and vices of 
the flesh, but taken away from smarting troubles, 
and freed from the envenomed fangs of the devil, 
to go at the call of Christ to the joy of eternal 
salvation. 

8. But nevertheless it disturbs some that the 
power of this Disease attacks our people equally 
with the heathens, as if the Christian believed 
for this purpose, that he might have the enjoy- 
ment of the world and this life free from the 

•* John xvi. 20. 
5 John xvi. 22. 
<> Or, " Master and Teacher." 

7 John xvi. 28, 

8 Phil. i. 21. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

471 

contact of ills ; and not as one who undergoes 
all adverse things here and is reserved for future 
joy. It disturbs some that this mortality is com- 
mon to us with others ; and yet what is there in 
this world which is not common to us with others, 
so long as this flesh of ours still remains, accord- 
ing to the law of our first birth, common to us 
with them ? So long as we are here in the world, 
we are associated with the human race in fleshly 
equality,' but are separated in spirit. Therefore 
until this corruptible shall put on incorruption, 
and this mortal receive immortality, and the 
Spirit 2 lead us to God the Father, whatsoever 
are the disadvantages of the flesh are common 
to us with the human race. Thus, when the 
earth is barren with an unproductive harvest, 
famine makes no distinction ; thus, when with 
the invasion of an enemy any city is taken, cap- 
tivity at once desolates all ; and when the serene 
clouds withhold the rain, the drought is alike to 
all ; and when the jagged rocks rend the ship, 
the shipwreck is common without exception to 
all that sail in her ; and the disease of the eyes, 
and the attack of fevers, and the feebleness of 
all the limbs is common to us with others, so 
long as this common flesh of ours is borne by us 
in the world. 

9. Moreover, if the Christian know and keep 
fast under what condition and what law he has 
believed, he will be aware that he must suffer 
more than others in the world, since he must 
struggle more with the attacks of the devil. 
Holy Scripture teaches and forewarns, saying, 
" My son, when thou comest to the service of 
God, stand in righteousness and fear, and pre^ 
pare thy soul for temptation." s And again : 
" In pain endure, and in thy humility have pa- 
tience ; for gold and silver is tried in the fire, 
but acceptable men in the furnace of humiUa- 
tion." 4 

10. Thus Job, after the loss of his wealth, 
after the death of his children, grievously afflicted, 
moreover, with sores and worms, was not over- 
come, but proved ; since in his very struggles 
and anguish, showing forth the patience of a 
religious mind, he says, " Naked came I out of 
my mother's womb, naked also I shall go under 
the earth : the Lord gave, the Lord hath taken 
away ; as it seemed fit to the Lord, so it hath 
been done. Blessed be the name of the Lord." s 
And when his wife also urged him, in his impa- 
tience at the acuteness of his pain, to speak 
something against God with a complaining and 
envious voice, he answered and said, " Thou 

' [The Christian is not exempted from the common lot of human- 
ity; but all men, if they would live godly, would escape many evils 
(i Tim. vi. 6), even in the light of 2 Tim. iii. 12.] 

- A few codices read, for " the Spirit," " Christ." 

3 Ecclus. ii. I, 4. 

■♦ Ecclus. ii. 5. 

5 Job i. 21. [" The Christian's sorrow," says Bishop Home, " is 
better than the world's joy." John xvi. 33. J 

speakest as one of the foolish women. If we 
have received good from the hand of the Lord, 
why shall we not suffer evil ? In all these things 
which befell him. Job sinned not with his lips in 
the sight of the Lord."^ Therefore the Lord 
God gives him a testimony, saying, " Hast thou 
considered my servant Job? for there is none 
like him in all the earth, a man without com- 
plaint, a true worshipper of God." 7 And To- 
bias, after his excellent works, after the many 
and glorious illustrations of his merciful spirit, 
having suffered the loss of his sight, fearing and 
blessing God in his adversity, by his very bodily 
affliction increased in praise ; and even him also 
his wife tried to pervert, saying, " Where are thy 
righteousnesses ? Behold what thou sufferest ! " ^ 
But he, stedfast and firm in respect of the fear 
of God, and armed by the faith of his religion 
to all endurance of suffering, yielded not to the 
temptation of his weak wife in his trouble, but 
rather deserved better from God by his greater 
patience ; and afterwards Raphael the angel 
praises him, saying, " It is honourable to show 
forth and to confess the works of God. For 
when thou didst pray, and Sara thy daughter-in- 
law, I did offer the remembrance of your prayer 
in the presence of the glory of God. And when 
thou didst bury the dead in singleness of heart, 
and because thou didst not delay to rise up and 
leave thy dinner, and wentest and didst bury 
the dead, I was sent to make proof of thee. 
And God again hath sent me to heal thee and 
Sara thy daughter-in-law. For I am Raphael, 
one of the seven holy angels, who are present, 
and go in and out before the glory of God." 9 

1 1 . Righteous men have ever possessed this 
endurance. The apostles maintained this disci- 
pline from the law of the Lord, not to murmur 
in adversity, but to accept bravely and patiently 
whatever things happen in the world ; since the 
people of the Jews in this matter always offended, 
that they constantly murmured against God, as 
the Lord God bears witness in the book of 
Numbers, saying, " Let their murmuring cease 
from me, and they shall not die." '° We must 
not murmur in adversity, beloved brethren, but 
we must bear with patience and courage what- 
ever happens, since it is written, " The sacrifice 
to God is a broken spirit ; a contrite and hum- 
bled heart God does not despise ; " " since also 
in Deuteronomy the Holy Spirit warns by Moses, 
and says, " The Lord thy God will vex thee, and 
will bring hunger upon thee ; and it shall be 
known in thine heart if thou hast well kept His 
commandments or no."" And again: "The 

* Job ii. TO. 
7 Job i. 8. 

* Tob. ii. 14. 

9 Tob. xii. 11-15. 
'° Num. xvii. lo. 
" Ps. Ii. 17. 
'- Deut. viii. 2. 

472 

thp: treatises of cyprian. 

Lord your God proveth you, that He may know 
-whether ye love the Lord your God with all your 
heart, and with all your soul." ' 

12. Thus Abraham pleased God, who, that 
he might please God, did not shrink even from 
losing his son, or from doing an act of parricide. 
You, who cannot endure to lose your son by the 
law and lot of mortality, what would you do if 
you were bidden to slay your son? The fear 
and faith of God ought to make you prepared 
for everything, although it should be the loss of 
private estate, although the constant and cruel 
harassment of your limbs by agonizing disorders, 
although the deadly and mournful wrench from 
wife, from children, from departing dear ones ; 
let not these things be offences to you, but bat- 
tles : nor let them weaken nor break the Chris- 
tian's faith, but rather show forth his strength 
in the struggle, since all the injury inflicted by 
present troubles is to be despised in the assur- 
ance of future blessings. Unless the battle has 
preceded, there cannot be a victory : when there 
shall have been, in the onset of battle, the vic- 
tory, then also the crown is given to the victors. 
For the helmsman ^ is recognised in the tempest ; 
in the warfare the soldier is proved. It is a wan- 
ton display when there is no danger. Struggle 
in adversity is the trial of the truth.^ The tree 
■which is dee])ly founded in its root is not moved 
by the onset of winds, and the ship which is 
compacted of solid timbers is beaten by the 
waves and is not shattered ; and when the thresh- 
ing-tloor brings out the corn, the strong and 
robust grains despise the winds, while the empty 
chaff is carried away by the blast that falls upon 
it. 

13. Thus, moreover, the Apostle Paul, after 
shipwrecks, after scourgings, after many and 
grievous tortures of the flesh and body, says that 
"he is not grieved, but benefited by his adversity, 
in order that while he is sorely afflicted he might 
more truly be proved. " There was given to 
me," he says, "a thorn in the flesh, the messen- 
ger of Satan to buff"et me, that I should not be 
lifted up : for which thing I besought the Lord 
thrice, that it might depart from me ; and He 
said unto me. My. grace is sufficient for thee, for 
strength is made perfect in weakness." •♦ When, 
therefore, weakness and inefficiency and any de- 
.struction seize us, then our strength is made 
perfect ; then our faith, if when tried it shall 
stand fast, is crowned ; as it is written, " The 
furnace trieth the vessels of the potter, and the 
trial of tribulation just men." 5 This, in short, 
is the difference between us and others who 

' Deut. xiii. 3. 

2 According to some, " the ship's helmsman." [Vol. i. 94.] 

3 .Some read, " of virtue." [In tlie Igoatian manner. Compare 
wol. i. p. 45.] 

* 2 Cor. xii. 7-9. 
5 Ecclus. ocxvii. 5. 

know not God, that in misfortune they complain 
and murmur, while adversity does not call us 
! away from the truth of virtue and faith, but 
strengthens us by its suffering. 

14. This trial, that now the bowels, relaxed 
into a constant flux, discharge the bodily strength ; 
that a fire originated in the marrow ferments 
into wounds of the fauces ; that the intestines 
are shaken with a continual vomiting ; that the 
eyes are on fire with the injected blood ; that in 
some cases the feet or some parts of the limbs 
are taken off by the contagion of diseased putre- 
faction ; that from the weakness arising by the 
maiming and loss of the body, either the gait is 
enfeebled, or the hearing is obstructed, or the 
sight darkened ; — is profitable as a proof of 
faith. What a grandeur of spirit it is to struggle 
with all the powers of an unshaken mind against 
so many onsets of devastation and death ! what 
sublimity, to stand erect amid the desolation of 
the human race, and not to lie prostrate with 
those who have no hope in God ; but rather to 
rejoice,^ and to embrace the benefit of the oc- 
casion ; that in thus bravely showing forth our 
faith, and by suffering endured, going forward 
to Christ by the narrow way that Christ trod, 
we may receive the reward of His life ^ and faith 
according to His own judgment ! Assuredly he 
may fear to die, who, not being regenerated of 
water and the Spirit, is delivered over to the 
fires of Gehenna ; he may fear to die who is not 
enrolled in the cross and passion of Christ ; he 
may fear to die, who from this death shall pass 
over to a second death ; he may fear to die, 
whom on his departure from this world eternal 
flame shall torment with never-ending punish- 
ments ; he may fear to die who has this achan- 
tage in a lengthened delay, that in the meanwhile 
his groanings and his anguish are being post- 
poned. 

15. Many of our people die in this mortality, 
that is, many of our people are liberated from this 
world. This mortality, as it is a j)lague to Jews 
and Gentiles, and enemies of Christ, so it is a 
departure to salvation to God's servants. The 
fact that, without any difference made between 
one and another, the righteous die as well as the 
unrighteous, is no reason for you to suppose 
that it is a common death for the good and evil 
alike. The righteous are called to their place 
of refreshing, the unrighteous are snatched away 
to punishment ; safety is the more speedily 
given to the faithful, penalty to the unbelieving. 
We are thoughtless and ungrateful, beloved 
brethren, for the divine benefits, and do not 
acknowledge what is conferred upon us. Lo, 
virgins depart in peace, safe with their glory, 
not fearing the threats of the coming Antichrist, 

* Some read, " rather it behoves us to rejoice." 
I 7 Or, "of the way." 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

47. 

and his corruptions and his brothels. Boys 
escape the peril of their unstable age, and in 
happiness attain the reward of continence and 
innocence. Now the delicate matron does not 
fear the tortures ; for she has escaped by a rapid 
death the fear of persecution, and the hands 
and the torments of the executioner. By the 
dread of the mortality and of the time the luke- 
warm are inflamed, the slack are nerved up, the 
slothful are stimulated, the deserters are com- 
pelled to return, the heathens are constrained to 
believe, the ancient congregation of the faithful 
is called to rest, the new and abundant army is 
gathered to the battle with a braver vigour, to 
fight without fear of death when the battle shall 
come, because it comes to the warfare in the 
time of the mortality. 

1 6. And further, beloved brethren, what is it, 
what a great thing is it, how pertinent, how 
necessary, that that pestilence and plague which 
seems horrible and deadly, searches out the 
righteousness of each one, and examines the 
minds of the human race, to see whether they 
who are in health tend the sick ; whether rela- 
tions affectionately love their kindred ; whether 
masters pity their languishing servants ; whether 
physicians do not forsake the beseeching patients ; 
whether the fierce suppress their violence ; 
whether the rapacious can quench the ever insa- 
tiable ardour of their raging avarice even by the 
fear of death ; whether the haughty bend their 
neck ; whether the wicked soften their boldness ; 
whether, when their dear ones perish, the rich, 
even then bestow anything,' and give, when they 
are to die without heirs. Even although this 
mortality conferred nothing else, it has done 
this benefit to Christians and to God's servants, 
that we begin gladly to desire martyrdom as we 
learn not to fear death. These are trainings for 
tis, not deaths : they give the mind the glory of 
fortitude ; by contempt of death they prepare 
for the crown. 

1 7. But perchance some one may object, and 
■say, " It is this, then, that saddens me in the 
present mortality, that I, who had been pre- 
pared for confession, and had devoted myself 
to the endurance of suffering with my whole 
heart and with abundant courage, am deprived 
of martyrdom, in that I am anticipated by death." 
In the first place, martyrdom is not in your 
power, but in the condescension of God ; neither 
can you say that you have lost what you do not 
know whether you would deserve to receive. 
Then, besides, God the searcher of the reins 
and heart, and the investigator and knower of 
secret things, sees you, and praises and approves 
you ; and He who sees that your virtue was 
ready in you, will give you a reward for your 

• Some add, " on the poor." 

virtue. Had Cain, when he offered his gift to 
God, already slain his brother? And yet God, 
foreseeing the fratricide conceived in his mind, 
anticipated its condemnation. As in that case 
the evil thought and mischievous intention were 
foreseen ^ by a foreseeing God, so also in God's 
servants, among whom confession is purposed 
and martyrdom conceived in the mind, the in- 
tention dedicated to good is crowned by God 
the judge. It is one thing for the spirit to be 
wanting for martyrdom, and another for martyr- 
dom to have been wanting for the spirit. Such 
as the Lord finds you when He calls you, such 
also He judges you ; since He Himself bears 
witness, and says, "And all the churches shall 
know that I am the searcher of the reins and 
heart." ^ For God does not ask for our blood, 
but for our faith.'* For neither Abraham, nor 
Isaac, nor Jacob were slain ; and yet, being 
honoured by the deserts of faith and righteous- 
ness, they deserved to be first among the patri- 
archs, to whose feast is collected every one that 
is found faithful, and righteous, and praiseworthy. 

18. We ought to remember that we should do 
not our own will, but God's, in accordance with 
what our Lord has bidden us daily to pray. 
How preposterous and absurd it is, that while 
we ask that the will of God should be done, yet 
when God calls and summons us from this world, 
we should not at once obey the command of 
His will ! We struggle and resist, and after the 
manner of froward servants we are dragged to 
the presence of the Lord with sadness and grief, 
departing hence under the bondage of necessity, 
not with the obedience of free will ; and we wish 
to be honoured with heavenly rewards by Him 
to whom we come unwillingly. Why, then, do 
we pray and ask that the kingdom of heaven 
may come, if the captivity of earth delights us ? 
Why with frequently repeated prayers do we en- 
treat and beg that the day of His kingdom may 
hasten, if our greater desires and stronger wishes 
are to obey the devil here, rather than to reign 
with Christ? 

19. Besides, that the indications of the divine 
providence may be more evidently manifest, 
proving that the Lord, prescient of the future, 
takes counsel for the true salvation of His peo- 
ple, when one of our colleagues and fellow- 
priests, wearied out with infirmity, and anxious 
about the present approach of death, prayed for 
a respite to himself; there stood by him as he 
prayed, and when he was now at the point of 
death, a youth, venerable in honour and majesty, 
lofty in stature and shining in aspect, and on 
whom, as he stood by him, the human glance 

2 Or, " perceived." 

3 Apoc. ii. 2^. 

* Some origmals read, " does not desire our blood, but asks fot 
our faith." 

474 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

could scarcely look with fleshly eyes, except 
that he who was about to depart from the world 
could already behold such a one. And he, not 
without a certain indignation of mind and voice, 
rebuked him, and said, You fear to suffer, you 
do not wish to depart ; what shall I do to you ? 
It was the word of one rebuking and warning, 
one who, when men are anxious about persecu- 
tion, and indifferent concerning their summons, 
consents not to their present desire, but consults 
for the future. Our dying brother and colleague 
heard what he was to say to others. For he 
who heard when he was dying, heard for the 
very purpose that he might tell it ; he heard not 
for himself, but for us. For what could he, who 
was already on the eve of departure, learn for 
himself? Yea, doubtless, he learnt it for us who 
remain, in order that, when we find the priest 
who sought for delay rebuked, we might ac- 
knowledge what is beneficial for all. 

20. To myself also, the very least and last, 
how often has it been revealed, how frequently 
and manifestly has it been commanded by the 
condescension of God, that I should diligently 
bear witness and publicly declare that our breth- 
ren who are freed from this world by the Lord's 
summons are not to be lamented, since we know 
that they are not lost, but sent before ; ' that, 
departing from us, they precede us as travellers, 
as navigators are accustomed to do ; that they 
should be desired, but not bewailed ; that the 
black garments should not be taken upon us 
here,^ when they have already taken upon them 
white raiment there ; that occasion should not 
be given to the Gentiles for them deservedly and 
rightly to reprehend us, that we mourn for those, 
who, we say, are alive with God, as if they were 
extinct and lost ; and that we do not approve 
with the testimony of the heart and breast the 
faith which we express with speech and word. 
We are prevaricators of our hope and faith : 
what we say appears to be simulated, feigned, 
counterfeit. There is no advantage in setting 
forth virtue by our words, and destroying the 
truth by our deeds. 

2 1 . Finally, the Apostle Paul reproaches, and 
rebukes, and blames any who are in sorrow at 
the departure of their friends. " I would not," 
says he, have you ignorant, brethren, concerning 
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even 
as others which have no hope. For if we believe 
that Jesus died and rose again, even so them 
which are asleep in Jestis will God bring with 
Him." 3 He says that those have sorrow in the 
departure of their friends who have no hope. 
But we who live in hope, and believe in God, 

* [Sciamus non eos amitti sed prsemitti. Current even in our day.] 
° [The clouds of black which are still customary in affliction are 

not according to the faith, in Cyprian's idea. L«ighton, Si. Peter, 

ii. 24.] 

3 1 Thess. iv 13. 

and trust that Christ suffered for us and rose 
again, abiding in Christ, and through Him and 
in Him rising again, why either are we ourselves 
unwilling to depart hence from this life, or do 
we bewail and grieve for our friends when they 
depart as if they were lost, when Christ Himself, 
our Lord and God, encourages us and says, " I 
am the resurrection and the life : he that be- 
lieveth in me, though he die, yet shall live ; and 
whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall not 
die eternally?"'* If we believe in Christ, let 
us have faith in His words and promises ; and 
since we shall not die eternally, let us come with 
a glad security unto Christ, with whom we are 
both to conquer and to reign for ever. 

22. That in the meantime we die, we are pass- 
ing over to immortality by death ; nor can eter- 
nal life follow, unless it should befall us to depart 
from this life. That is not an ending, but a 
transit, and, this journey of time being traversed, 
a passage to eternity. Who would not hasten to 
better things? Who would not crave to be 
changed and renewed 5 into the likeness of 
Christ, and to arrive more quickly to the dignity 
of heavenly glory, smce Paul the apostle an- 
nounces and says, " For our conversation is in 
heaven, from whence also we look for the Lord 
Jesus Christ ; who shall change the body of our 
humiliation, and conform it to the body of His 
glory? "^ Christ the Lord also promises that 
we shall be such, when, that we may be with 
Him, and that we may live with Him in eternal 
mansions, and may rejoice in heavenly kingdoms, 
He prays the Father for us, saying, " Father, I 
will that they also whom Thou hast given me be 
with me where I am, and may see the glory 
which Thou hast given me before the world was 
made." 7 He who is to attain to the throne of 
Christ, to the glory of the heavenly kingdoms, 
ought not to mourn nor lament, but rather, in 
accordance with the Lord's promise, in accord- 
ance with his faith in the truth, to rejoice in this 
his departure and translation. 

23. Thus, moreover, we find that Enoch also 
was translated, who pleased God, as in Genesis 
the Holy Scripture bears witness, and says, "And 
Enoch pleased God ; and afterwards he was not 
found, because God translated him." ^ To have 
been pleasing in the sight of God was thus to 
have merited to be translated from this conta- 
gion of the world. And moreover, also, the 
Holy Spirit teaches by Solomon, that they who 
please God are more early taken hence, and are 
more quickly set free, lest while they are delay- 
ing longer in this world they should be polluted 

* John xi. 25. 

5 " Transformed." 
*> Phil. iii. 21. 
" John xvii. 24.41 

* Gen. V. 24. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

475 

with the contagions of the world. " He was 
taken away," says he, " lest wickedness should 
change his understanding. For his soul was 
pleasing to God ; wherefore hasted He to take 
him away from the midst of wickedness." ' So 
also in the Psalms, the soul that is devoted to its 
God in spiritual faith hastens to the Lord, say- 
ing, " How amiable are thy dwellings, O God of 
hosts ! My soul longeth, and hasteth unto the 
courts of God." ^ 

24. It is for him to wish to remain long in the 
world whom the world delights, whom this life, 
flattering and deceiving, invites by the entice- 
ments of earthly pleasure. Again, since the 
world hates the Christian, why do you love that 
which hates you? and why do you not rather 
follow Christ, who both redeemed you and loves 
you ? John in his epistle cries and says, exhort- 
ing that we should not follow carnal desires and 
love the world. " Love not the world," says he, 
'* neither the things which are in the world. If 
any man love the world, the love of the Father 
is not in him. For all that is in the world is the 
lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and 
the pride of life, which is not of the Father, but 
of the lust of the world. And the world shall 
pass away, and the lust thereof; but he who 
doeth the will' of God abideth for ever, even 
as God abideth for ever." ^ Rather, beloved 
brethren, with a sound mind, with a firm faith, 
with a robust virtue, let us be prepared for the 
whole will of God : laying aside the fear of 
death, let us think on the immortality which 
follows. By this let us show ourselves to be 
what we believe, that we do not grieve over the 
departure of those dear to us, and that when 
the day of our summons shall arrive, we come 
witnout delay and without resistance to the Lord 
when He Himself calls us. 

25. And this, as it ought always to be done 
by God's servants, much more ought to be done 
now — now that the world is collapsing and is 
oppressed with the tempests of mischievous ills ; 
in order that we who see that terrible things 
have begun, and know that still more terrible 
things are imminent, may regard it as the great- 
est advantage to depart from it as quickly as 
possible. If in your dwelling the walls were 
shaking with age, the roofs above you were trem- 
bling, and the house, now worn out and wearied, 
were threatening an immediate destruction to 
its structure crumbling with age, would you not 
with all speed depart? If, when you were on 
a voyage, an angry and raging tempest, by the 
waves violently aroused, foretold the coming 

1 Wisd. iv. II. 

2 Ps. Ixxxiv. I, 

3 I John ii. 15. 

shipwreck, would you not quickly seek the har- 
bour? Lo, the world is changing and passing 
away, and witnesses to its ruin not now by its 
age, but by the end of things. And do you not 
give God thanks, do you not congratulate your- 
self, that by an earlier departure you are taken 
away, and delivered from the shipwrecks and 
disasters that are imminent ? 

26. We should consider, dearly beloved breth- 
ren— we should ever and anon reflect that we 
have renounced the world, and are in the mean- 
time living here as guests and strangers. Let us 
greet the day which assigns each of us to his 
own home, which snatches us hence, and sets us 
free from the snares of the world, and restores 
us to paradise and the* kingdom. Who that has 
been placed in foreign lands would not hasten 
to return to his own country? Who that is 
hastening to return to his friends would not 
eagerly desire a prosperous gale, that he might 
the sooner embrace those dear to him? We 
regard paradise as our country — we already 
begin to consider the patriarchs as our parents : 
why do we not hasten and run, that we may be- 
hold our country, that we may greet our parents ? 
There a great number of our dear ones is await- 
ing us, and a dense crowd of parents, brothers, 
children, is longing for us, already assured of 
their own safety, and still solicitous for our sal- 
vation. To attain to their presence and their 
embrace, what a gladness both for them and for 
us in common ! What a pleasure is there in the 
heavenly kingdom, without fear of death ; and 
how lofty and perpetual a happiness with eternity 
of living ! There the glorious company of the 
apostles 5 — there the host of the rejoicing proph- 
ets — there the innumerable multitude of mar- 
tyrs, crowned for the victory of their struggle 
and passion — there the triumphant virgins, who 
subdued the lust of the flesh and of the body by 
the strength of their continency — there are 
merciful men rewarded, who by feeding and 
helping the poor have done the works of right- 
eousness — who, keeping the Lord's precepts, 
have transferred their earthly patrimonies to the 
heavenly treasuries. To these, beloved brethren, 
let us hasten with an eager desire ; let us crave 
quickly to be with them, and quickly to come to 
Christ. May God behold this our eager desire ; 
may the Lord Christ look upon this purpose of 
our mind and faith. He who will give the larger 
rewards of His glory to those whose desires in 
respect of Himself were greater ! 

* Some have " heavenly." 

5 [A prelude to the Te Deutn, and very possibly from a Western 
hymn: — 

Apostolorum gloriosus chorus; 

Prophetarum exultantium numerus; 

Marly rum innumerabilis populus.] 

476 

THE TREATISES OE CYPRIAN. 

TREATISE VIII.' 

ON WORKS AND ALMS. 

ARGUMENT. HE POWERFULLY EXHORTS TO THE 

MANIFESTATION OF FAITH BY WORKS, AND EN- 
FORCES THE WISDOM OF OFFERINGS TO THE 
CHURCH AND OF BOUN'TY TO THE POOR AS 
THE BEST INVESTMENT OF A CHRISTIAN'S F^TATE. 
THIS HE PROVES OUT OF MANY SCRIPTURES. 

1. Many and great, beloved brethren, are the 
divine benefits wherewith the large and abundant 
mercy of God the Father and Christ both has 
laboured and is always labouring for our salva- 
tion : that the Father sent the Son to preserve 
us and give us life, in order that He might re- 
store us ; and that the Son was willing - to be 
sent and to become the Son of man, that He 
might make us sons of God ; humbled Himself, 
that He might raise up the people who before 
were prostrate ; was wounded that He might 
heal our wounds ; served, that He might draw 
out to liberty those who were in bondage ; 
underwent death, that He might set forth im- 
mortality to mortals. These are many and great 
boons of divine compassion. But, moreover, 
what is that providence, and how great the clem- 
ency, that by a plan of salvation it is provided 
for us, that more abundant care should be taken 
for preserving man after he is already redeemed ! 
For when the Lord at His advent had cured 
those wounds which Adam had borne, -^ and had 
healed the old poisons of the serpent,-* He gave 
a law to the sound man, and bade him sin no 
more, lest a worse thing should befall the sinner. 
We had been limited and shut up into a narrow 
space by the commandment of innocence. Nor 
would the infirmity and weakness of human 
frailty have any resource, unless the divine mercy, 
coming once more in aid, should open some way 
of securing salvation by pointing out works of 
justice and mercy, so that by almsgi\ing we may^""' 
wash away whatever foulness we subsequently ^^'hoever 
contract.s 

2. The Holy Spirit speaks in the sacred Scrip- 
tures, and says, " By almsgiving and faith sins 
are purged."*' Not assuredly those sins which 
had been previously contracted, for those are 
purged by the blood and sanctification of Christ. 
Moreover, He says again, " As water extinguisheth 
fire, so almsgiving quencheth sin." ^ Here also 
it is shown and proved, that as in the laver of 
saving water the fire of Gehenna is extinguished, 

' [Numbered x. in Oxford ed., and assigned to A.n. 254.] 

^ A slight and scarcely noticeable difference occurs here in the 
Oxford text, which reads the passage, " that the Son was sent, and 
willed to be called the Son of man." 

J Portaverat; " had brought " (Oxf. transl.). 

* " Poisons of the old serpent." 

5 [The beauty of Cyprian's exordiums and perorations proves that 
he was a true orator. " Great and manifold," etc., Translators of 
^"'^ 7ames.'\ 

•> Prov. XVI. 

' Exclus. iii. 

SO by almsgiving and works of righteousness the 
flame of sins is subdued. xAnd because in bap- 
tism remission of sins is granted once for all, 
constant and ceaseless labour, following the like- 
ness of baptism, once again bestows the mercy 
of God. The Lord teaches this also in the 
Gospel. For when the disciples were pointed 
out, as eating and not first washing their hands. 
He replied and said, " He that made that which 
is within, made also that which is without. But 
give alms, and behold all things are clean unto 
you ; " ^ teaching hereby and showing, that not 
the hands are to be washed, but the heart, and 
that the foulness from inside is to be done away 
rather than that from outside ; but that he who 
shall have cleansed what is within has cleansed 
also that which is without ; and that if the mind 
is cleansed, a man has begun to be clean also in 
skin and body. Further, admonishing, and show- 
ing whence we may be clean and purged, He 
added that alms must be given. He who is piti- 
ful teaches and warns us that pity must be shown ; 
and because He seeks to save those whom at a 
reat cost He has redeemed. He teaches that 
hose who, after the grace of baptism, have be- 
ome foul, may once more be cleansed. 
3. Let us then acknowledge, beloved brethren, 
the wholesome gift of the divine mercy ; and let 
us, who cannot be without some wound of con- 
science, heal our wounds by the spiritual remedies 
for the cleansing and purging of our sins. Nor 
let any one so flatter himself with the notion of 
a pure and immaculate heart, as, in dependence 
on his own" innocence, to think that the medicine 
needs n'ol; to be applied to his wounds ; since it 
is written, " Who shall boast that he hath a clean 
heart, or who shall boast that he is j)ure. from 
sins? "9 And again, in his epistle, John lay's it 
down, and says, " If we say that we have no sin, 
we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in 

us 

" 10 

sin^ and 

But if no one can be without 
should say that he is without fault is 
either proud or foolish, how needful, how kind 
is the divine mercy, which, knowing that there 
are still found some wounds in those that have 
been healed, even after their healing, has given 
wholesome remedies for the curing and healing 
of their wounds anew ! 

4. Finally, beloved brethren, the divine ad- 
monition in the Scriptures, as well old as new, 
has never failed, has never been silent in urging 
Kiod's people always and everywhere to works 
jof mercy ; and in the strain and exhortation of 
the Holy Si)irit, every one who is instructed into 
the hope of the heavenly kingdom is com- 

. 6. [" By mercy and truth," etc., Eng. Version ] 

30. 

' Luke xi. 41. 

9 Prov. XX. 9. 

'° I John i. 8,9.' Oxford editors add: " If we confess our sins, 
the I-ord is faithful and just to forgive us our sins." [They remiiul 
us that this passage is expounded in the Anglican Book 0/ Honn'lie:^, 
Horn. xi. part ii. p. 347, ed. Philadelphia, 1844.] 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

477 

manded to give alms. ) God commands and 
prescribes to Isaiah: "Cry," says He, "with 
strength, and spare not. Lift up thy voice as a 
trumpet, and declare to my people their trans- 
gressions, and to the house of Jacob their sins." ' 
And when He had commanded their sins to be 
charged upon them, and with the full force of 
His indignation had set forth their iniquities, 
and had said, that not even though they should 
use supplications, and prayers, and fastings, 
should they be able to make atonement for their 
sins ; nor, if they were clothed in sackcloth and 
ashes, be able to soften God's anger, yet in the 
last part showing that God can be appeased by 
almsgiving alone, he added, saying, " Break thy 
bread to the hungry, and bring the poor that are 
without a home into thy house. If thou seest 
the naked, Vlothe him ; and despise not the 
household of 'thine own seed. Then shall thy 
light break forth in season, and thy garments 
shall arise speedily ; and righteousness shall go 
before thee, and the glory of God shall surround 
thee. Then shalt thou cry, and God shall hear 
thee ; whilst yet thou art speaking. He shall say. 
Here I am." ^ 

5. The remedies for propitiating God are give?i 
in the words of God Himself; the divine in- 
structions have taught what sinners ought to do, 
that by works of righteousness God is satisfied, 
that with the deserts of mercy sins are cleansedy 
And in Solomon we read, " Shut up alms in the 
heart of the poor, and these shall intercede for 
thee from all evil."^ And again : " VV^hoso stop- 
peth his ears that he may not hear the weak, he 
also shall call upon God, and there will be none 
to hear him." * For he shall not be able to 
deserve the mercy of the Lord, who himself 
shall not have been merciful ; nor shall he ob- 
tain aught from the divine pity in his prayers, 
who shall not have been humane towards the 
poor man's prayer. And this also the Holy 
Spirit declares in the Psalms, and proves, say- 
ing, " Blessed is he that considereth of the poor 
and needy ; the Lord will deliver him in the 
evil day." s Remembering which precepts, Dan- 
iel, when king Nebuchodonosor was in anxiety, 
being frightened by an adverse dream, gave him, 
for the turning away of evils, a remedy to ob- 
tain the divine help, saying, " Wherefore, O 
king, let my counsel be acceptable to thee ; and 
redeem thy sins by almsgivings, and thine un- 
righteousness by mercies to the poor, and God 
will be patient^ to thy sins." ^ And as the king 
did not obey him, he underwent the misfortunes 

■ Isa. Iviii. i. 

* Isa. Iviii. i-g. 

3 Ecclus. xxix. 12. 

* Prov. xxi. 13. 
5 Ps. xli. I. 

' Some editors read " jjarcens" instead of "patiens," making the 
meaning " sparing to thy sins." 
' Dan. iv. 27. 

and mischiefs which he had seen, and which he 
might have escaped and avoided had he re- 
deemed his sins by almsgiving. Raphael the 
angel also witnesses the like, and exhorts that 
alms should be freely and liberally bestowed, 
saying, " Prayer is good, with fasting and alms ; 
because alms doth deliver from death, and it 
purgeth away sins." ^ He shows that our prayers 
and fastings are of less avail, unless they are 
aided by almsgiving; that entreaties alone are 
of little force to obtain what they seek, unless 
they be made sufficient 9 by the addition of deeds 
and good works. The angel reveals, and mani- ~— 
fests, and certifies that our petitions become 
efficacious by almsgiving, that life is redeemed 
from dangers by almsgiving, that souls are deliv- 
ered from death by almsgiving. 

j6. Neither, beloved brethren, are we so bring- 
ing forward these things, as that we should not 
prove what Raphael the angel said, by the testi- 
mony of the truth. In the Acts of the Apostles / 
the faith of the fact is established ; and that souls 
are delivered by almsgiving not only from the 
second, but from the first death, is discovered 
by the evidence of a matter accomplished and 
completed. When T^bitha, being greatly given 
to good works and to bestowing alms, fell sick 
and died, Peter was summoned to her lifeless 
body ; and when he, with apostolic humanity, 
had come in haste, there stood around him widows 
weeping and entreating, showing the cloaks, and 
coats, and all the garments which they had pre- 
viously received, and praying for the deceased 
not by their words, but by her own deeds. Peter 
felt that what was asked in such a way might 
be obtained, and that Christ's aid would not be 
wanting to the petitioners, since He Himself was 
clothed in the clothing of the widows. When, 
therefore, falling on his knees, he had prayed, 
and — fit advocate for the widows and poor — 
had brought to the Lord the prayers entrusted 
to him, turning to the body, \\diich was now lying 
washed on the bier,'° he said, " Tabitha, in the 
name of Jesus Christ, arise !" '■ Nor did He 
fail to bring aid to Peter, who had said in the 
Gospel, that whatever should be asked in His 
name should be given. Therefore death is suj|^ 
pended, and the spirit is restored, and, to the 
marvel and astonishment of all, the revived body 
is quickened into this worldly light once more ; 
so effectual were the merits of mercy, so much 
did righteous works avail ! She who had con- 
ferred upon suffering widows the help needful 
to live, deserved to be recalled to life by the 
widows' petition. > 

7. Therefore in the Gospel, the Lord, the 

* Tob. xii. 8, 9. 

9 Some have read for " satientur," " farciantur," and others " so 
cientur," " be filled up," or " be associated." 

■° Other translators read, " in the upper chamber." 
" Acts ix. 40. 

4/8 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

Teacher of our life and Master of eternal salva- 
tion, quickening the assembly of believers, and 

"providing for them for ever when quickened, 
among His divine commands and precepts of 
heaven, commands and prescribes nothing more 
frequently than that we should devote ourselves 
to almsgiving, and not depend on earthly pos- 
sessions, but rather lay up heavenly treasures. 
''^Sell," says He, " your goods, and give alms." ' 
And again : " Lay not up for yourselves treasures 
upon the earth, where moth and rust do corrupt, 
and where thieves break through and steal. But 
lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where 
neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where 
thieves do not break through nor steal. For 
where thy treasure is, there will thy heart be 
also."^ And when He wished to set forth a man 
perfect and complete by the observation of the 
law,3 He said, " If thou wilt be perfect, go and 
sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and 
thou shalt have treasure in heaven ; and come 
and follow me."-* Moreover, in another place 
He says that a merchant of the heavenly grace, 
and a gainer of eternal salvation, ought to pur- 
chase the precious pearl — that is, eternal life — 
at the price of the blood of Christ, from the 
amount of his patrimony, parting with all his 
wealth for it. He says : " The kingdom of 
heaven is like unto a merchantman seeking 
goodly pearls. And when he found a precious 
pearl, he went away and sold all that he had, 
and bought it." 5 

8. In fine. He calls those the children of 
Abraham whom He sees to be laborious in aid- 
ing and nourishing the poor. For when Zac- 
chceus said, " Behold, the half of my goods I 
give to the poor ; and if I have done any wrong 
to any man, I restore fourfold," Jesus answered 
and said, " That salvation has this day come to 
this house, for that he also is a son of Abra- 
ham." ^ For if Abraham believed in God, and 
ij was counted unto him for righteousness, cer- 

^tainly he who gives alms according to God's 
precept believes in (iod, and he who has the 
truth of faith maintains the fear of God ; more- 
over, he who maintains the fear of God considers 

^pbd in showing mercy to the poor. For he 

^rabours thus because he believes — because he 
knows that what is foretold by God's word is 
true, and that the Holy Scripture cannot lie — 
that unfruitful trees, that is, unproductive men, 
are cut off and cast into the fire, but that the 
mercifiil are called into the kingdom. He also, 
in another place, calls laborious and fruitful men 
faithful ; but He denies faith to unfruitful and 

' Luke xii. 33. 

2 Matt. vi. 19-21. 

3 " When He would show to one who had observed the law how 
to become perfect and finished" (Oxf. transl.). 

* Matt. xix. 21. 
5 Matt. xiii. 45, 46. 
<> Luke xix. 8, 9. 

barren ones, saying, " If ye have not been faith- 
ful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit 
to you that which is true ? And if ye have not 
been faithful in that which is another man's, who 
shall give you that which is your own? " ^ . 

9. If you dread and fear, lest, if you begin to 
act thus abundantly, your patrimony being ex- 
hausted with your liberal dealing, you may per- 
chance be reduced to poverty ; be of good 
courage in this respect, be free from care : that 
cannot be exhausted whence the ser\'ice of Christ 
is supplied, whence the heavenly work is cele^ 
brated. Neither do I vouch for this on my 
own authority ; but I prQjnise i^qn_the_Jaith, of 
the Holy Scriptures, and on the authority of the 
divine promise. The Holy Spirit speaks by 
Solomon, and says, " He that giveth unto the 
poor shall never lack, but he that turneth away 
his eye shall be in great poverty ; " ^ showing 
that the merciful and those who do good works 
cannot want, but rather that the sparing and 
barren hereafter come to want. Moreover, the 
blessed Apostle Paul, full of the grace of the 
Lord's inspiration, says : " He that ministereth 
seed to the sower, shall both minister bread for 
your food, and shall multiply your seed sown, 
and shall increase the growth of the fruits of 
your righteousness, that in all things ye may be 
enriched." 9 And again: "The administration 
of this service shall not only supply the wants of 
the saints, but shall be abundant also by many 
thanksgivings unto God ; " '° because, while thanks 
are directed to God for our almsgivings and la- 
bours, by the prayer of the poor, the wealth of 
the doer is increased by the retribution of God, 
And the Lord in the Gospel, already consider- 
ing the hearts of men of this kind, and with pre- 
scient voice denouncing faithless and unbelieving 
men, bears witness, and says : "Take no thought, 
saying. What shall we eat? or, ^Vhat shall we 
drink? or. Wherewithal shall we be clothed? 
For for these things the Gentiles seek. And 
your Father knoweth that ye ha\-e need of all 
these things. Seek first the kingdom of God, 
and His righteousness ; and all these things shall 
be added unto you." " He says that all these 
things shall be added and given to them who 
seek the kingdom and righteousness of God. 
For the Lord says, that when the day of judg- 
ment shall come, those who have laboured in 
His Church are admitted to receive the kingdom. 
You are afraid lest perchance your estate 

10. 

should fail, if you begin to act liberally from it ; 

fand you do not know, miserable man that you 

are, that while you are fearing lest your family 

property should fail you, life itself, and salvation, 

' Luke xvi. 11, 13. 

8 Prov. xxviii. 27. 

9 2 Cor. ix. 10. 
■° 2 Cor. ix. 12. 

" Matt. vi. 31-33. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

479 

are failing ; and whilst you are anxious lest any 
of your wealth should be diminished, you do not 
see that you yourself are being diminished, in 
that you are a lover of mammon more than of. 
your own soul ; and while you fear, lest for tile 
sake of yourself, you should lose your patrimony, 
you yourself are perishing for the sake of your 
patrimony. And therefore the apostle well ex- 
claims, and says : " We brought nothing into this 
world, neither indeed can we carry anything out. 
Therefore, having food and clothing, let us there- 
with be content. For they who will be rich fall 
into temptation and a snare, and into many and 
hurtful desires, which drown a man in perdition 
and in destruction. For covetousness is a rootl| 
of all evils, which some desiring, have made ship-l 
wreck from the faith, and pierced themselves 
through with many sorrows." ' 

1 1 . Are you afraid that your patrimony per- 
chance may fall short, if you should begin to do 
liberally from it? Yet when has it ever hap- 
pened that resources^ could fail the righteous 
man, since it is written, " The Lord will not slay 
with famine the righteous soul?" ^ Elias in the 
desert is fed by the ministry of ravens ; and a 
meal from heaven is made ready for Daniel in 
the den, when shut up by the king's command 
for a prey to the lions ; and you are afraid that 
food should be wanting to you, labouring and 
■deserving well of the Lord, although He Himself 
in the Gospel bears witness, for the rebuke of 
those whose mind is doubtful and faith small, 
and says : " Behold the fowls of heaven, that 
they sow not, nor reap, nor gather into barns ; 
and your heavenly Father feedeth them : are 
you not of more value than they ? " + God feeds 
the fowls, and daily food is afforded to the spar- 
rows ; and to creatures whit^h have no sense of 
things divine there is no want of drink or food. 
Thinkest thou that to a Christian — thinkest 
thou that to a servant of the Lord — thinkest thou 
that to one given up to good works — thinkest 
thou that to one that is dear to his Lord, any-, 
thing will be wanting ? 

12. Unless you imagine that he who feeds 
Christ is not himself fed by Christ, or that 
earthly things will be wanting to those to whom 
heavenly and divine things are given, whence 
this unbelieving thought, whence this impious 
and sacrilegious consideration? What does a 
faithless heart do in the home of faith? Why 
is he who does not altogether trust in Christ 
named and called a Christian? The name of 
Pharisee is more fitting for you. For when in 
the Gospel the Lord was discoursing concern- 
ing almsgiving, and faithfully and wholesomely 

' I Tim. vi. 7-10. 

- Some editors read, " the resources of life." 

3 Prov. X. 3. 

-» Matt. V. 26. 

warned us to make to ourselves friends of our — 
earthly lucre by provident good works, who 
might afterwards receive us into eternal dwell- 
ings, the Scripture added after this, and said, 
" But the Pharisees heard all these things, who 
were very covetous, and they derided Him." 5 
Some suchlike we see now in the Church, whose - 
closed ears and darkened hearts admit no light 
from spiritual and saving warnings, of whom we 
need not wonder that they contemn the servant 
in his discourses, when we see the Lord Himself 
despised by such. 

13. Wherefore do you applaud yourself in 
those vain and silly conceits, as if you were with- 
held from good works by fear and solicitude for 
the future? Why do you lay out before you 
certain shadows and omens of a vain excuse? 
Yea, confess what is the truth ; and since you 
cannot deceive those who know,'' utter forth the 
secret and hidden things of your mind. The 
gloom of barrenness has besieged your mind ; 
and while the light of truth has departed thence, 
the deep and profound darkness of avarice has 
blinded your carnal heart. You are tlje captive- 
and slave of your money ; you are bound with 
the chains and bonds of covetousness ; and you 
whom Christ had once loosed, are once more in 
chains. You keep your money, which, when" 
kept, does not keep you.' You heap up a pat- 
rimony which burdens you * with its weight ; 
and you do not remember what God answered 
to the rich man, who boasted with a foolish ex- 
ultation of >,th& abundance of his exuberant har- 
vest: ITI10U fool," said He, "this night thy 
soul is required of thee ; then whose shall those 
things be which thou hast provided?"^ Why 
do you watch in loneliness over your riches? 
why for your punishment do you heap up the 
burden of your patrimony, that, in proportion 
as you are rich in this world, you may become 
poor to God? Divide your returns with thS^ 
Lord your God ; share your gains with Christ ; 
make Christ a partner with you in your earthly 
possessions, that He also may make you a fellow- 
heir with Him in His heavenly kingdom. ^ 

14. You are mistaken, and are deceived, who- 
soever you are, that think yourself rich in this- 
world. Listen to the voice of your Lord in the 
Apocalypse, rebuking men of your stamp with 
righteous reproaches : "Thou sayest," says He, 

" I am rich, and increased with goods, and have 
need of nothing ; and knowest not that thou art 
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, 
and naked. I counsel thee to buy of me gold 

5 Luke xvi. 14. 

6 " Him who knows it," Oxford translation. 

' [Prov. i. 19 " The eagle stole a lamb from the altar," say the 
Rabbins, " to feed his yovmg; but a coal from the altar came with it, 
and burnt up nest and all."] ^ 

8 According to Manutius, Pamelius, and others, " too heavily 
is here added. 

9 Luke xii. 20. 

48o 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich ; and 
white raiment, that thou mayest be clothed, and 
that the shame of thy nakedness may not appear 
in thee ; and anoint thine eyes with eye-salve. 

that their labours are given to God, and that 
whoever performs them deserves well of the 
Lx)rd, Christ calls this " the offerings of God," 
and intimates that the widow has cast in two 

that thou mayest see." ' You therefore, who i farthings into the offerings of God, that it may 

are rich and wealthy, buy for yourself of Christy 
gold tried by fire ; that you may be pure gold, 
with your filth burnt out as if by fire, if you are 
purged by almsgiving and righteous works. Buy 
for yourself white raiment, that you who had 
been naked according to Adam, and were before 
frightful and unseemly, may be clothed with the 
white garment of Christ. And you who are a 
wealthy and rich matron in Christ's Church,^ 
anoint your eyes, not with the collyrium of the 
devil,3 but with Christ's eye-salve, that you may 
-be alale to attain to see God, by deserving well 
of God, both by good works and character. 

15. But you who are such as this, cannot 
labour in the Church. For your eyes, overcast 
with the gloom of blackness, and shadowed in 
night, do not see the needy and poor. You are 
wealthy and rich, and do you think that you 
celebrate the Lord's Supper, not at all consid- 
ering the offering,-* who come to the Lord's 

Supper without a sacrifice, and yet take part of' For if we" love God with our whole heart, we 
the sacrifice which the poor man has offered? 
Consider in the Gospel the widow that remem- 
bered the heavenly precepts, doing good even iiis epistle, that the love of God is not in them 
amidst the difficulties and straits of poverty, whom we see unwilling to labour for the poor. 

be more abundantly evident that he who hath- 
pity on the poor lendeth to God. 

16. But neither let the consideration, dearest 
brethren, restrain and recall the Christian from 
good and righteous works, that any one should 
fancy that he could be excused for the benefit 
of his children ; since in spiritual expenditure 
we ought to think of Christ, who has declared 
that He receives them ; and not prefer our fel- 
low-servants, but the Lord, to our children, since 
He Himself instructs and warns us, saying, " He 
that loveth father or mother more than me is 
not worthy of me, and he that loveth son or 
daughter more than me is not worthy of me." ^ 
Also in Deuteronomy, for the strengthening of 
faith and the love of God, similar things are 
written : " Who say," he saith, "• unto their father 
or mother, I have not known thee ; neither did 
they acknowledge their children, these have ob- 
served Thy words, and kept Thy covenant." * 

casting two mites, which were all that she had, 
into the treasury ; whom when the Lord observed 
and saw, regarding her work not for its abun- 

dance, but for its intention, and considering not uof God in him? "9 For if by almsgiving to the 
how much, but from how much, she had given,'] poor we are lending to God — and when it is 

given, 

He answered and said, " Verily I say unto you, 
that that widow hath cast in more than they all 
into the offerings of God. For all these have, 
of that which they had in abundance, cast in 

unto the offerings of God ; but she of her penury"" 1 7. Thus that widow in the third book of 

hath cast in all the living that she had." s 
Greatly blessed and glorious woman, who even 
before the day of judgment hast merited to be 
praised by the voice of the Judge ! Let the 
rich be ashamed of their barrenness and un- 
belief. The widow, the widow needy in means,^ 
is found rich in works. And although every- 
thing that is given is conferred upon widows and 
orphans, she gives, whom it behoved to receive, 
that we may know thence what punishment 
awaits the barren rich man, when by this very 
instance even the poor ought to labour in good 
works. And in order that we may understand 

■ Rev. iii. 17, 18. 

^ These words, " in Christ's Church," are omitted in a few texts. 

3 [See Terliillian, vol. iv. p. 19; and for men, p. 22. Also, "eye- 
lid-powder," p. 23] 

< " Corban." [The note of the Oxford translation is iisefiil in this 
place, quoting from Palmer, Aniiq., iv. 8. But see PtUicia, Polity, 
etc., p. 237, trans. London, Alasters, 1883.] 

5 Luke xxi. 3, 4. 

6 This is differently read " a widow, a poor widow is found," etc. ; 
or, " a woman widowed and poor." 

" Whoso," says he, " hath this world's goods, 
and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth 
up his bowels from him, how dwelleth the love 

poor we are lending 

given to the least it is given to Christ — there 
is no ground for any one preferring earthly things 
to heavenly, nor for considering human things 
before divine. 

Kings, when in the drought and famine, having 
consumed everything, she had made of the little 
meal and oil which was left, a cake upon the 
ashes, and, having used this, was about to die 
with her children, Elias came and asked that 
something should first be given him to eat, and 
then of what remained that she and her children 
should eat. Nor did she hesitate to obey ; nor 
did the mother prefer her children to Elias in 
her hunger and poverty. Yea, there is done in 
God's sight a thing that pleases God : promptly 
and liberally is presented what is asked for. 
Neither is it a portion out of abundance, but the 
whole out of a little, that is given, and another 
is fed before her hungry children ; nor in penury 
and want is food thought of before mercy ; so 
that while in a saving work the life according to 

7 Matt. X. 37. 

8 IVut. xxxiii. g. 

9 I John iii. 17. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

481 

the flesh is contemned, the soul according to the 
spirit is preserved. Therefore Elias, being the 
type of Christ, and showing that according to 
His mercy He returns to each their reward, 
answered and saiii : " Thus saith the Lord, The 
vessel of meal shall not fail, and the cruse of 
oil shall not be diminished, until the day that 
the Lord giveth rain upon the earth." ' Accord- 
ing to her faith in the divine promise, those 
things which she gave were multiplied and 
heaped up to the widow ; and her righteous 
works and deserts of mercy taking augmenta- 
tions and increase, the vessels of meal and oil 
were filled. Nor did the mother take away 
from her children what she gave to Elias, but 
rather she conferred upon her children what she 
did kindly and piously.^ And she did not as 
yet know Christ ; she had not yet heard His 
precepts ; she did not, as redeemed by His cross 
and passion, repay meat and drink for His blood. 
So that from this it may appear how much he"' 
sins in the Church, who, preferring himself and 
his children to Christ, preserves his wealth, and 
does not share an abundant estate with the 
poverty of the needy. -^ 

18. Moreover, also, (you say) there are man^ 
children at home ; and the multitude of your 
children checks you from giving yourself freely 
to good works. And yet on this very accounf 
you ought to labour the more, for the reason 
that you are the father of many pledges. There 
are the more for whom you must beseech the 
Lord. The sins of many have to be redeemed, 
the consciences of many to be cleansed, the 
souls of many to be liberated. As in this worldly 
life, in the nourishment and bringing up of chil- 
dren, the larger the number the greater also is 
the expense ; so also in the spiritual and heav- 
enly life, the larger the number of children yoTf 
have, the greater ought to be the outlay of your 
labours. Thus also Job offered numerous sacri^ 
fices on behalf of his children ; and as large as 
was the number of the pledges in his home, so 
large also was the number of victims given to 
God. And since there cannot daily fail to be 
sins committed in the sight of God, there wanted 
not daily sacrifices wherewith the sins might be 
cleansed away. The Holy Scripture proves this, 
saying : " Job, a true and righteous man, had 
seven sons and three daughters, and cleansed 
them, offering for them victims to God accord- 
ing to the number of them, and for their sins 
one calf."^ If, then, you truly love your chil-" 
dren, if you show to them the full and paternal 
sweetness of love, you ought to be the mores ■ 
charitable, that by your righteous works you may 
commend your children to God. ** 

' I Kings xvii. 14. , 

2 [See p. 479, supra, note 7. 

3 Job i. 5, LXX. 

[Prov. xi. 24.] 

19. Neither should you think that he is father 
to your children who is both changeable and in- 
firm, but you should obtain Him who is the 
eternal and unchanging Father of spiritual chil- 
dren. Assign to Him your wealth which you 
are saving up for your heirs. Let Him be the 
guardian for your children ; let Him be their 
trustee ; let Him be their protector, by His 
divine majesty, against all worldly injuries. The 
state neither takes away the property entrusted to 
God, nor does the exchequer intrude on it, nor 
does any forensic calumny overthrow it. That 
inheritance is placed in security which is kept 
under the guardianship of God.'' This is to 
provide for one's dear pledges for the coming 
time ; this is with paternal affection to take care 
for one's future heirs, according to the faith of 
the Holy Scripture, which says : ^' I have been 
young, and now am old ; yet have I nCJt seen 
the righteous forsaken, nor his seed wanting 
bread. All the day long he is merciful, and 
lendeth ;5 and his seed is blessed."^ And again : 
" He who walketh without reproach in his integ- 
rity shall leave blessed children after him." 7 
Therefore you are an unfair and traitorous father, 
unless you faithfully consult for your children, 
unless you look forward to preserve them in 
religion and true piety. You who are carefuT" 
rather for their earthly than for their heavenly 
estate, rather to commend your children to the 
devil than to Christ, are sinning twice, and allow- 
ing a double and twofold crime, both in not 
providing for your children tlie aid of God their 
Father, and in teaching your children to love 
their property more than Christ. _- 

20. Be rather such a father to your children as 
was Tobias. Give useful and saving precepts to 
your pledges, such as he gave to his son ; com- 
mand your children what he also commanded 
his son, saying : " And now, my son, I command 
thee, serve God in truth, and do before Him 
that which pleaseth Him ; and command thy 
sons, that they exercise righteousness and alms, 
and be mindful of God, and bless His name al- 
ways." * And again : " All the days of thy life, 
most dear son, have God in your mind, and be 
not willing to transgress His commandments. 
Do righteousness all the days of thy life, and be 
not willing to walk in the way of iniquity ; be- 
cause if thou deal truly, there will be respect of 
thy works. Give alms of thy substance, and 
turn not away thy face from any poor man. So 

* [" The-howse shall be preserved and 
never will decaye 
Wheare the Almightie God is honored 
and served, daye by daye." 
This motto I copied from an old oaken beam in the hall of Rocking- 
ham Castle, with date a.d. 1579. In 1875 I saw the honseholdci 
kneeling under this motto, with ail his family and servants, daily.] 

5 The original is variously read " fosnerat " and " commodat.' 

6 Ps xxxvii. 25, 26. 
^ Prov. XX. 7. 

^ Tob. xiv 10. II. 

482 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

shall it be, that neither shall the face of God be 
turned away from thee. As thou hast, my son, 
so do. If thy substance is abundant, give alms 
■of it the more. If thou hast little, communicate 
of that little. And fear not when thou doest 
alms ; for thou layest up a good reward for thy- 
self against the day of necessity, because that 
alms do deliver from death, and suffereth not to 
•come into Gehenna. .\lms is a good gift to all 
that give it, in the sight of the most high God." ' 
21. What sort of gift is it, beloved brethren, 
whose setting forth is celebrated in the sight of 
■God? If, in a gift of the Gentiles, it seems a 
great and glorious thing to have proconsuls or 

-emperors present, and the preparation and dis- 
play is the greater among the givers, in order 
that they may jilease the higher classes ; how 
much more illustrious and greater is the glory 
to have God and Christ as the spectators of the 
gift ! How much more sumptuous the prepara- 
tion and more liberal the expense to be set forth 
in that case, when the powers of heaven assem- 
ble to the spectacle, when all the angels come 
together : where it is not a four-horsed chariot 
or a consulship that is sought for the giver, but 
life eternal is bestowed ; nor is the empty and 
fleeting favour of the rabble grasped at, but the 

■ perpetual reward of the kingdom of heaven is 
received ! 

2 2. And that the indolent and the barren, and 
those, who by their covetousness for money do 
nothing in respect of the fruit of their salvation, 
may be the more ashamed, and that the blush 
of dishonour and disgrace may the more strike 
upon their sordid conscience, let each one place 
before his eyes the devil with his servants, that 
is, with the people of perdition and death, 
springing forth into the midst, and provoking 
the people of Christ with the trial of comparison 
— Christ Himself being present, and judging — 
in these words : " I, for those whom thou seest 
with me, neither received buffets, nor bore 
scourgings, nor endured the cross, nor shed my 
blood, nor redeemed my family at the price of 
my suffering and blood ; but neither do I prom- 
ise them a celestial kingdom, nor do 1 recall 
them to paradise, having again restored to them 
immortality. But they prepare for me gifts how 
precious ! how large ! with how excessive and 
tedious a labour procured ! and that, with the 
most sumptuous devices, either pledging or sell- 
ing their means in the i)ro(uring of the gift I 
and, unless a competent manifestation followed, 
they are cast out with scoffings and hissings, and 
by the popular fury sometimes they are almost 
stoned ! Show, O Christ, such givers as these 
of Thine ^ — those rich men, those men affluent 

' Tob. iv. 5-1 1. 

^ Some editors add here, " warned by Thy precepts, and who 
.*hall receive heavenly tilings instead of earthly." 

with abounding wealth — whether in the Church 
wherein Thou presidest and beholdest, they set 
forth a gift of that kind, — having pledged or 
scattered their riches, yea, having transferred 
them, by the change of their possessions for the 
better, into heavenly treasures ! In those spec- 
tacles of mine, i)erishing and earthly as they are, 
no one is fed, no one is clothed, no one is sus- 
tained by the comfort either of any meat or 
drink. All things, between the madness of the 
exhibitor and the mistake of the spectator, are 
perishing in a prodigal and foolish vanity of 
deceiving pleasures. There, in Thy poor, Tliou 
art clothed and fed ; Thou promises! eternal life 
to those who labour for Thee ; and scarcely are 
Thy people made equal to mine that perish, al- 
though they are honoured by Thee with divine 
wages and heavenly rewards. 

23. What do we reply to these things, dearest 
brethren ? With what reason do we defend the 
minds of rich men, overwhelmed with a profane 
barrenness and a kind of night of gloom ? With 
what excuse do we acquit them, seeing that we 
are less than the devil's servants, so as not even 
moderately to repay Christ for the price of His 
passion and blood ? He has given us precepts ; 
what His servants ought to do He has instructed 
us ; promising a reward to those that are chari- 
table, and threatening punishment to the un- 
fruitful. He has set forth His sentence. He 
has before announced what He shall judge. 
What can be the excuse for the laggard? what 
the defence for the unfruitful? But when the 
servant does not do what is commanded, the 
Lord will do what He threatens, seeing that He 
says : " When the Son of man shall come in His 
glory, and all the angels with Him, then shall 
He sit in the throne of His glory : and before 
Him shall be gathered all nations ; and He shall 
separate them one from another, as a shepherd 
divideth his sheep from the goats : and He shall 
set the sheep on His right hand, but the goats 
on the left. Then shall the King say unto them 
that shall be on His right hand. Come, ye blessed 
of my Father, receive the kingdom that is pre- 
pared for you from the foundation of the world. 
Vov I was an hungered, and ye gave me to eat : 
I was thirsty, and ye gave me to drink : I was 
a stranger, and ye took me in : naked, and ye 
clothed me : I was sick, and ye visited me : I 
was in prison, and ye came to me. Then shall 
the righteous answer Him, saying. Lord, when 
saw we Thee an hungered, and fed Thee ? thirsty, 
and gave Thee drink? When saw we Thee a 
stranger, and took Thee in ? naked, and clothed 
Thee ? Or when saw we Thee sick, and in prison, 
and came unto Thee? Then shall the King 
answer and say unto them. Verily I say unto you, 
Insomuch as you did it to one of the least of 
these my brethren, ye did it unto me. Then 

thp: treatises of cyprian. 

48. 

shall He say also unto those that shall be at His 
left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into ever- 
lasting fire, which my Father hath prepared for 
the devil and his angels. For I was an hun- 
gered, and ye gave me not to eat : I was thirsty, 
and ye gave me not to drink : I was a stranger, 
and ye took me not in : naked, and ye clothed 
me not : sick, and in prison, and ye visited me 
not. Then shall they also answer Him, saying. 
Lord, when saw we Thee an hungered, or athirst, 
or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and 
ministered not unto Thee? And He shall an- 
swer them. Verily I say unto you, In so far as ye 
did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it 
not unto me. And these shall go away into 
everlasting burning : but the righteous into life 
eternal." ' What more could Christ declare unto 
us ? How more could He stimulate the works 
of our righteousness and mercy, than by saying 
that whatever is given to the needy and poor is 
given to Himself, and by saying that He is 
aggrieved unless the needy and poor be supplied ? 
So that he who in the Church is not moved by 
consideration for his brother, may yet be moved 
by contemplation of Christ ; and he who does 
not think of his fellow-servant in suffering and 
in poverty, may yet think of his Lord, who 
abideth in that very man whom he is despising. 
"^ 24. And therefore, dearest brethren, whose 
fear is inclined towards God, and who having 
already despised and trampled under foot the 
■world, have lifted up your mind to things 
heavenly and divine, let us with full faith, with^ 
devoted mind, with continual labour, give our 
obedience, to deserve well of the Lord. Let us 
give to Christ earthly garments, that we may 
receive heavenly raiment ; let us give food and 
drink of this world, that we may come with 
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob to the heavenly 
banquet. That we may not reap little, let us 
sow abundantly. Let us, while there is time, 
take thought for our security and eternal salva- 
tion, according to the admonition of the Apostle 
Paul, who says : " Therefore, while we have 
time, let us labour in what is good unto all men, 
but especially to them that are of the house- 
hold of faith. But let us not be weary in well- 
doing, for in its season we shall reap." - 

25. Let us consider, beloved brethren, what 
the congregation of believers did in the time 
of the apostles, when at the first beginnings the 
mind flourished with greater virtues, when the 
faith of believers burned with a warmth of faith 
as yet new. Then they sold houses and farms, 
and gladly and liberally presented to the apostles 
the proceeds to be dispensed to the poor ; sell- 
ing and alienating their earthly estate, they trans- 
ferred their lands thither where they might re- 

' Matt. XXV. 31-46. 
" Gal vi. to, g. 

y 

ceive the fruits of an eternal possession, and 
there prepared homes where they might begin 
an eternal habitation. Such, then, was the 
abundance in labours, as was the agreement in 
love, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles : 
" And the multitude of them that believed acted 
with one heart and one soul ; neither was there 
any distinction among them, nor did they esteem 
anything their own of the goods which belonged 
to them, but they had all things common." ^ 
This is truly to become sons of God by spiritual 
birth ; this is to imitate by the heavenly law the 
equity of God the Father. For whatever is of 
Ciod is common in our use ; nor is any one ex- 
cluded from His benefits and His gifts, so as to 
prevent the whole human race from enjoying 
equally the divine goodness and liberality. Thus 
the day equally enlightens, the sun gives radi- 
ance, the rain moistens, the wind blows, and the 
sleep is one to those that sleep, and the splen- 
dour of the stars and of the moon is common. 
In which example of equality,^* he who, as a~ 
possessor in the earth, shares his returns and his 
fruits with the fraternity, while he is common 
and just in his gratuitous bounties, is an imitator 
of God the Father. • 

26. What, dearest brethren, will be that glory 
of those who labour charitably — how great 
and high the joy when the Lord begins to num- 
ber His people, and, distributing to our merits 
and good works the promised rewards, to give 
heavenly things for earthly, eternal things for 
temporal, great things for small ; to present us 
to the Father, to whom He has restored us by 
His sanctification ; to bestow upon us immor- 
tality and eternity, to which He has renewed us 
by the quickening of His blood ; to bring us 
anew to paradise, to open the kingdom of 
heaven,' in the faith and truth of His promise ! 
Let these things abide firmly in our perceptions, 
let them be understood with full faith, let them 
be loved with our whole heart, let them be pur- 
chased by the magnanimity of our increasing 
labours. An illustrious and divine thing, dear=*~ 
est brethren, is the saving labour of charity ; a 
great comfort of believers, a wholesome guard 
of our security, a protection of hope, a safe- 
guard of faith, a remedy for sin, a thing placed 
in the power of the doer, a thing both great and 
easy, a crown of peace without the risk of per- 
secution ; the true and greatest gift of God, 
needful for the weak, glorious for the strong, 
assisted by which the Christian accomplishes 
spiritual grace, deserves well of Christ the Judge, 
accounts God his debtor. For this palm of 
works of salvation let us gladly and readily strive ; 
let us all, in the struggle of righteousness, run 

3 Acts iv. 32. 

■• This appears to be the less usual reading, the ordinary one being 
" equity." 

484 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

with (lod and Chrisl luoking on; and let us 
who have already begun to be greater than this 
life and the world, slacken our course by no 
desire of this life and of this world. If the day 
shall find us, whether it be the day of reward ' 
or of persecution, furnished, if swift, if running. 
in this contest of charity, the Lord will never 
fail of giving a reward for our merits : in peace 
He will give to us who conquer, a white crown 
for our labours ; in persecution, He will accom- 
pany it with a purple one for our passion. 

TRE.^TISK IX. 

ON THE ADVANTAGE OF PATIENCE.^ 

ARGUMENT. — CYPRIAN HIMSELF BRIEFLY SETS 
FORTH THE OCCASION OF THIS TREATISE AT THE 
CONCLUSION OF HIS EPISTLE TO JUBAIANUS AS 
FOLLOWS : " CHARITY OF SPIRIT, THE HONOUR 
OF OUR COLLEGE, THE BOND OF FAITH, AND 
PRIESTLY CONCORD, ARE MAINTAINED BY US 
WITH PATIENCE AND GENTLENESS. FOR THIS 
REASON, MOREOVER, WE HAVE, WITH THE BEST 
OF OUR POOR ABILITIES, BY THE PERMISSION 
AND INSPIRATION OF THE LORD, WRITTEN A 
PAMPHLET * ON THE BENEFIT OF PATIENCE,' 
WHICH, FOR THE SAKE OF OUR MUTUAL LOVE, 
WE HAVE TR.'VNSMITTED TO YOU." A.D. 256. 

1. As I am about to speak, beloved brethren, 
of patience, and to declare its advantages and 
benefits, from what point should 1 rather begin 
than this, that I see that even at this time, for 
your audience of me, patience is needful, as you 
cannot even discharge this duty of hearing and 
learning without patience ? For wholesome dis- 
course and reasoning are then effectually learnt, 
if what is said be patiently heard. Nor do I find, 
beloved brethren, among the rest of the ways 
of heavenly discipline wherein the i)ath of our 
hope and faith is directed to the attainment of 
the divine rewards, anything of more advantage, 
either as more useful for life or more helpful to 
glory, than that we who are labouring in the pre- 
cepts of the Lord with the obedience of fear 
and devotion, should especially, with our whole 
watchfulness, be careful of patience. ^ 

2. Philosophers also profess that they pursue 
this virtue ; but in their case the patience is as 

' A more ancient reading seems to be, " of return " {scil. " redi- 
tionis"). 

^ Having at the outset distinguished true patience from the false 
patience of philosophers, he commends Christian patience by the 
patience of (Jod. of Christ, an<l of all righteous men. He further 
proves, as well by Scripture as by reason, and, moreover, by the in- 
stances of Job and Tobias, that not only is patience useful, but that 
it is needful also; and in order that the excellence of patience may 
shine forth ihc more by contrast with the vice op[)osed to it, he sets 
forth what is the evil of impatience. Finally, he reproves the desire 
of vengeancej^and teaches that revenge ought, according to Scripture, 
to l)e left lo (jod rather than to be arrogated to ourselves. If in any 
writing Cyprian is an imitator of 'Tertullian, assuredly in this he imi- 
tates that writer's treatise Oit I'atien.e. (See vol lii. p. 707.] 

3 [Hermas, vol. ii. 23, 49; also Tertullian, iii. 714, and elucida- 
tion, p 717.] 

false as their wisdom also is. For whence can, 
I he be either wise or patient, who has neither 
known the wisdom nor the patience of God? 
since He Himself warns us, and says of those 
who seem to themselves to be wise in this world. 
" I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and I 
will reprove the understanding of the prudent." ■• 
Moreover, the blessed Aposde Paul, filled with 
; the Holy Spirit, and sent forth for the calling and 
training of the heathen, bears witness and instnicts 
us, saying, " See that no man despoil you through 
philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of 
men, after the elements of the world, and not after 
Christ, because in Him dwelleth all the fulness 
of divinity." 5 And in another place he says : 
"Let no man deceive himself; if any man among 
you thinketh himself to be wise, let him become 
a fool to this world, that he may become wise. 
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with 
Ood. For it is wTitten, I will rebuke the wise in 
their own craftiness." And again: " The Lord 
\ knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they are 
! foolish."^ Wherefore if the wisdom among them 
I be not true, the patience also cannot be true. 
j For if he is wise '' who is lowly and meek — but 
we do not see that philosophers are either lowly 
or meek, but greatly pleasing themselves, and, 
for the very reason that they please themselves, 
displeasing God — it is evident that the patience 
is not real among them where there is the inso- 
lent audacity of an affected liberty, and the im- 
modest boastfulness of an exposed and half-naked 
bosom. 

3. But for us, beloved brethren, who are 
philosophers, not in words, but in deeds, and 
do not put forward our wisdom in our garb, but 
in truth — who are better acquainted with the 
consciousness, than with the boast, of virtues — 
who do not speak great things, but live them, — 
let us, as servants and worshippers of God, show, 
in our spiritual obedience, the patience which 
we learn from heavenly teachings. For we have 
this virtue in common with God. From Him 
patience begins ; from Him its glory and its 
dignity take their rise. The origin and greatness 
of patience proceed from God as its author. 
Man ought to love the thing which is dear to 
God ; the good which the Divine Majesty loves, 
it commends. If God is our Lord and Father, 
let us imitate the patience of our Lord as well 
as our Father ; because it behoves servants to 
be obedient, no less than it becomes sons not 
to be degenerate. 

4. But what and how great is the patience in 
God, that, most patiently enduring the profane 
temples and the images of earth, and the sacri- 

* Isa. xxix. 14. 
s Col. li. 8, 10. 

* I Cor. iii. 18-20. 

7 'The Oxford edition (Treatise ix.), and many others read 
" patient." 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

485 

legious rites instituted by men, in contempt of 
His majesty and honour, He makes the day to 
begin and the light of the sun to arise ahke upon 
the good and the evil ; and while He waters the 
earth with showers, no one is excluded from His 
benefits, but upon the righteous equally with the 
unrighteous He bestows His undiscriminating 
rains. We see that with undistinguishing ' equali- 
ity of patience, at God's behest, the seasons 
minister to the guilty and the guiltless, the reli- 
gious and the impious — those who give thanks 
and the unthankful ; that the elements wait on 
them ; the winds blow, the fountains flow, the 
abundance of the harvests increases, the fruits of 
the vineyards ripen,^ the trees are loaded with 
apples, the groves put on their leaves, the mead- 
ows their verdure ; and while God is provoked 
with frequent, yea, with continual offences, He 
softens His indignation, and in patience waits for 
the day of retribution, once for all determined ; 
and although He has revenge in His power, He 
prefers to keep patience for a long while, bear- 
ing, that is to say, mercifully, and putting off, so ' 
that, if it might be possible, the long protracted i 
mischief may at some time be changed, and man, 
involved in the contagion of errors and crimes, 
may even though late be converted to God, as 
He Himself warns and says, " I do not will the 
death of him that dieth, so much as that he may 
return and live." ^ And again, " Return unto me, 
saith the Lord." + And again : " Return to the 
Lord your God ; for He is merciful, and gracious, 
and patient, and of great pity, and who inclines 
His judgment towards the evils inflicted." 5 
Which, moreover, the blessed apostle referring to, 
and recalling the sinner to repentance, sets for- 
ward, and says : " Or despisest thou the riches of 
His goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffer- 
ing, not knowing that the patience and goodness 
of God leadeth thee to repentance ? But after 
thy hardness and impenitent heart thou treasurest 
up unto thyself wrath in the day of wrath and of 
revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who 
shall render to every one according to his 

work 

-c- " 6 

He says that God's judgment is just. 

because it is tardy, because it is long and greatly 
deferred, so that by the long patience of God 
man may be benefited for life eternal. ^ Punish- 
ment is then executed on the impious and the 
sinner, when repentance for the sin can no longer 
avail. 

5. And that we may more fully understand, 
beloved brethren, that patience is a thing of 

■ " Inseparabili." 

2 The original here is read variously " maturescere " and " mites- 
cere." 

3 Ezek. xviii. 32. 

■* Mai. iii. 7. The Oxford edition omits this quotation, and in- 
troduces the next with the words, " And again the prophet." 
s Joel ii. 13. 
'' Rom. ii. 4-6. 
7 [" Deus patiens quia aeternus " (Augustine).] 

God, and that whoever is gentle, and patient, 
and meek, is an imitator of God the Father ; 
when the Lord in His Gospel was giving pre- 
cepts for salvation, and, bringing forth divine 
warnings, was instructing His disciples to per- 
fection. He laid it down, and said, " Ye have 
heard that it is said. Thou shalt love thy neigh- 
bour, and have thine enemy in hatred. But I 
say unto you. Love your enemies, and pray for 
them which persecute you ; that ye may be the 
children of your Father which is in heaven, who 
maketh His sun to rise on the good and on the 
evil, and raineth upon the just and on the un- 
just. For if ye love them which love you, what 
reward shall ye have ? do not even the publicans 
the same ? And if ye shall salute your brethren 
only, what do ye more (than others)? do not 
even the heathens the same thing ? Be ye there- 
fore perfect, even as your Father in heaven is 
perfect."'^ He said that the children of God 
would thus become perfect. He showed that 
they were thus completed, and taught that they 
were restored by a heavenly birth, if the patience 
of God our Father dwell in us — if the divine 
likeness, which Adam had lost by sin, be mani- 
fested and shine in our actions. What a glory is 
it to become like to God ! what and how great 
a felicity, to possess among our virtues, that 
which may be placed on the level of divine 
praises ! 

6. Nor, beloved brethren, did Jesus Christ, our 
God and Lord, teach this in words only ; but 
He fulfilled it also in deeds. And because He 
had said that He had come down for this pur- 
pose, that He might do the will of His Father ; 
among the other marvels of His virtues, whereby 
He showed forth the marks of a divine majesty. 
He also maintained the patience of His Father 
in the constancy of His endurance. Finally, all 
His actions, even from His very advent, are 
characterized by patience as their associate ; in 
that, first of all, coming down from that heavenly 
sublimity to earthly things, the Son of God did 
not scorn to put on the flesh of man, and although 
He Himself was not a sinner, to bear the sins of 
others. His immortality being in the meantime 
laid aside. He suffers Himself to become mortal, 
so that the guiltless may be put to death for the 
salvation of the guilty. The Lord is baptized 
by the servant ; and He who is about to bestow 
remission of sins, does not Himself disdain to 
wash His body in the laver of regeneration. For 
forty days He fasts, by whom others are feasted. 
He is hungr)', and suffers famine, that they who 
had been in hunger of the word and of grace 
may be satisfied with heavenly bread. He wres- 
tles with the devil tempting Him ; and, content 
only to have overcome the enemy, He strives na 

8 Matt. V. 43-48. 

4S6 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

farther than by words. He ruled over His dis- 
ciples not as servants in the power of a master ; 
but, kind and gentle, He loved them with a 
brotherly love. He deigned even to wash the 
apostles' feet, that since the Lord is such among 
His servants. He might teach, by His example, 
what a fellow-servant ought to be among his 
peers and ecjuals. Nor is it to be wondered at, 
that among the obedient ' He showed Himself 
such, since He could bear Judas even to the last 
with a long patience — could take meat with His 
en^my — could know the household foe, and not 
openly point him out, nor refuse the kiss of the 
traitor. Moreover, in bearing with the Jews, 
now great etjuanimity and how great patience, 
111 turning the unbelieving to the faith by persua- 
sion, in soothing the unthankful by concession, 
in answering gently to the contradictors, in bear- 
ing the prou(l with clemency, in yielding with 
humility to the persecutors, in wishing to gather 
together the slayers of the prophets, and those 
who were always rebellious against God, even to 
the very hour of His cross and passion ! 

7. And moreover, in His very passion and 
cross, before they had reached the cruelty of 
death and the effusion of blood, what infamies 
of reproach were patiently heard, what mockings 
of contumely were suffered, so that He received - 
the spittings of insulters, who with His spittle 
had a little before made eyes for a blind man ; 
and He in whose name the devil and his angels 
is now scourged by His servants, Himself suf- 
fered scourgings ! He was crowned with thorns, 
who crowns martyrs with eternal flowers. He 
was smitten on the face with palms, who gives 
the true palms to those who overcome. He was 
despoiled of His earthly garment, who clothes 
others in the vesture of immortality. He was 
fed with gall, who gave heavenly food. He was 
given to drink of vinegar, who appointed the 
cup of salvation. That guiltless, that just One, 
— nay. He who is innocency itself and justice 
itself, — is counted among transgressors, and truth 
is oppressed with false witnesses. He who shall 
judge is judged ; and the Word of Ood is led 
silently to the slaughter. And when at the cross 
of the Lortl the stars are confounded, the ele- 
ments are disturbed, the earth quakes, night 
shuts out the day, the sun, that he may not be 
compelled to look on the crime of the Jews, with- 
draws both his rays and his eyes, He speaks not, 
nor is moved, nor declares His majesty even in 
His very i)assion itself Even to the end, all 
things are borne perseveringly and constantly, 
in order that in Christ a full and perfect patience 
may be consummated.^ 

■ rialiizius reads, " compares obaudienles " — His obedient peers. 
The M'iS. have " obaudientes" only. 

- Er.ismus adds, " with patience." 

3 [This sublime passage recalls Bacon's Paradoxes. See p. 237, 
note 3, iupra.\ 

8. And after all these things. He still receives 
His murderers, if they will be converted and 

' come to Him ; and with a saving patience, He 
who is benignant-* to preserve, closes His Church 
to none. Those adversaries, those blasphemers, 
those who were always enemies to His name, if 
they repent of their sin, if they acknowledge 
the crime committed. He receives, not only to 
i the pardon of their sin, but to the reward of the 
, heavenly kingdom. \V'hat can be said more 
patient, what more merciful? Even he is made 
alive by Christ's blood who has shed Christ's 
blood. Such and so great is the patience of 
Christ ; and had it not been such and so great, 
the Church would never have possessed Paul as 
an apostle. 5 

9. But if we also, beloved brethren, are in 
Christ ; if we put Him on, if He is the way of 
our salvation, who follow Christ in the footsteps 
of salvation, let us walk by the example of 
Christ, as the Apostle John instructs us, saying, 
" He who saith he abideth in Christ, ought him- 
self also to walk even as He walked.'"' Peter 
also, upon whom by the Lord's condescension 
the Church was founded, ^ lays it down in his 
epistle, and says, " Christ suffered for us, leaving 

\ you an example, that ye should follow His steps, 
i who did no sin, neither was deceit found in His 
mouth ; who, when He was reviled, reviled not 
' again ; when He suffered, threatened not, but 
! gave Himself up to him that judged Him un- 
jusdy." ** 

! 10. Finally, we find that both patriarchs and 
j prophets, and all the righteous men who in their 
preceding likeness wore the figure of Christ, in 
. the praise of their virtues were watchful over 
■ nothing more than that they should preserve 
I patience with a strong and stedfast equanimity. 
Thus Abel, who first initiated and consecrated 
the origin of martyrdom, and the passion of the 
righteous man, makes no resistance nor struggles 
against his fratricidal '^ brother, but with lowliness 
' and meekness he is patiently slain. Thus .Vbra- 
ham, believing God, and first of all instituting 
the root and foundation of faith, when tried in 
respect of his son, does not hesitate nor delay, 
but obeys the commands of Ciod with all the 
patience of devotion. And Isaac, i)refigured as 
the likeness of the Lord's victim, when he is pre- 
sented by his father for immolation, is found 
patient. And Jacob, driven forth by his brother 
from his country, departs with patience ; and 
afterwards with greater patience, he suppliantly 
brings him back to concord with peaceful gifts, 

< Some editors insert " .ind patient." 

5 [1 Tim. i. 3. A striking suggestion, put in our author's terse 
way.] 

* I John ii. 6. 

7 [See Elucidation VII. The Trent Council itself (on Matt. xvi. 
18) affirms this of the Creed, not Peter. Vol. iv. pp. 99 and loi.] 

8 I Pet. ii 21-23, w'th 3 singular departure from the received text. 

9 According to some, " parricidal." 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

487 

\vhen he is even more impious and persecuting. 
Joseph, sold by his brethren and sent away, not 
only with patience pardons the.m, but even boun- 
tifully and mercifully bestows gratuitous supplies 
of corn on them when they come to him. Closes 
is frequently contemned by an ungrateful and 
faithless people, and almost stoned ; and yet with 
gentleness and patience he entreats the Lord for 
those people. But in David, from whom, accord- 
ing to the flesh, the nativity of Christ springs, how 
great and marvellous and Christian is the patience, 
that he often had it in his power to be al)le to kill 
king Saul, who was persecuting him and desiring 
to slay him : and yet, chose rather to save him 
when placed in his hand, and delivered up to him, 
not repaying his enemy in turn, but rather, on 
the contrary, even avenging him when slain ! In 
fine, so many prophets were slain, so many mar- 
tyrs were honoured with glorious deaths, who all 
have attained to the heavenly crowns by the 
praise of patience. For the crown of sorrows 
and sufferings cannot be received unless patience 
in sorrow and suffering precede it. 

11. But that it may be more manifestly and 
fully known how useful and necessary patience 
is, beloved brethren ; let the judgment of God 
be pondered, which even in the beginning of the 
world and of the human race, Adam, forgetful 
of the commandment, and a transgressor of the 
given law, received. Then we shall know how 
patient in this life we ought to be who are born 
in such a state, that we labour here with afflic- 
tions and contests. " Because," says He, " thou 
hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife, and hast 
eaten of the tree of which alone I had charged 
thee that thou shouldest not eat, cursed shall be 
the ground in all thy works : in sorrow and in 
groaning shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy 
life. Thorns and thistles shall it give forth to 
thee, and thou shalt eat the food of the field. 
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread, 
till thou return into the ground from which thou 
wast taken : for dust thou art, and to dust shalt 
thou go." ■ We are all tied and bound with the 
chain of this sentence, until, death being ex- 
punged, we depart from this life. In sorrow and 
groaning we must of necessity be all the days of 
our life : it is necessary that we eat our bread 
with sweat and labour. 

12. Whence every one of us, when he is born 
and received in the inn of this world, takes his 
beginning from tears ; and, although still uncon- 
scious and ignorant of all things, he knows noth- 
ing else in that very earliest birth except to weep. 
By a natural foresight, the untrained soul laments 
the anxieties and labours of the mortal life, and 
even in the beginning bears witness by its wails 
and groans to the storms of the world which it 

^ Gen. iii. 17-19. 

is entering. For the sweat of the brow andl 
labour is the condition of life so long as it lasts. 
Nor can there be supplied any consolations to- 
those that sweat and toil other than patience ; 
which consolations, while in this world they are 
fit and necessary for all men, are especially sO' 
for us who are more shaken by the siege of the 
devil, who, daily standing in the battle-field, are 
wearied with the wrestlings of an inveterate and 
skilful enemy ; for us who, besides the various, 
and continual battles of temptations, must also 
in the contest of persecutions - forsake our pat- 
rimonies, undergo imprisonment, bear chains,, 
spend our lives, endure the sword, the wild 
beasts, fires, crucifixions — in fine, all kinds of 
torments and penalties, to be endured in the 
faith and courage of patience ; as the Lord 
Himself instructs us, and says, " These things 
have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might 
have peace. But in the world ye shall have 
tribulation ; yet be confident, for I have overcome 
the world." ^ And if we who have renounced 
the devil and the world, suffer the tribulations and 
mischiefs of the devil and the world with more 
frequency and violence, how much more ought 
we to keep patience, wherewith as our helper 
and ally, we may bear all mischievous things ! 

13. It is the wholesome precept of our Lord 
and Master : " He that endureth," saith He, 
" unto the end, the same shall be saved ;" * and 
again, "If ye continue," saith He, "in my word, 
ye shall be truly my disciples ; and ye shall know 
the truth, and the truth shall make vou free." 5' 
We must endure and persevere, beloved breth- 
ren, in order that, being admitted to the hope 
of truth and liberty, we may attain to the truth 
and liberty itself; for that very fact that we are 
Christians is the substance of faith and hope. 
But that hope and faith may attain to their re- 
sult, there is need of patience. For we are not 
following after present glory, but fiiture, accord- 
ing to what Paul the apostle also warns us, and 
says, " We are saved by hope ; but hope that is. 
seen is not hope : for what a man seeth, why 
doth he hope for? But if we hope for that 
which we see not, then do we by patience wait 
for it."^ Therefore, waiting and patience are 
needful, that we may fulfil that which we have 
begun to be, and may receive that which we 
believe and hope for, according to God's own 
showing.'' Moreover, in another place, the same 
apostle instructs the righteous and the doers of 
good works, and them who lay up for themselves 

2 [How practical this treatise in an age when to be a Christiaa 
meant to be prepared for all these things ! " Fiery trials " the chronic- 
state,] 

^ John xvi. 33. 

* Matt. X. 22. 

S John viii. 31, 32. 

*> Rom. viii. 24, 25. 

7 A common reading here is " giving" instead of" showing," sct'S 
" praestante " for " representante." 

488 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

treasures in heaven with the increase of the 
<Hvine usury, that they also should be patient ; 
and teaches them, saying, " Therefore, while we 
have time, let us labour in that which is good 
unto all men, but especially to them who are of 
the household of fliith. liut let us not faint in 
well-doing, for in its season we shall reap." ' 
He admonishes that no man should impatiently 
faint in his labour, that none should be either 
called o'^ or overcome by temptations and desist 
in the midst of the praise and in the way of 
^lory ; and the things that are past perish, while 
those which have begun cease to be perfect ; as 
it is written, "The righteousness of the righteous 
shall not deliver him in whatever day he shall 
transgress ;" * and again, " Hold that which thou 
hast, that another take not thy crown." ^ Which 
word exhorts us to persevere with patience and 
courage, so that he who strives towards the 
crown with the praise now near at hand, may be 
crowned by the continuance of patience. 

14. But patience, beloved brethren, not only 
keeps watch over what is good, but it also repels 
what is evil. In harmony with the Holy Spirit, 
and associated with what is heavenly and divine, 
it struggles with the defence of its strength 
against the deeds of the flesh and the body, 
wherewith the soul is assaulted and taken. Let 
us look briefly into a few things out of many, 
that from a few the rest also may be understood. 
Adultery, fraud, manslaughter, are mortal crimes. 
Let patience be strong and stedfast in the heart ; 
and neither is the sanctified body and temple of 
God polluted by adultery, nor is the innocence 
dedicated to righteousness stained with the con- 
tagion of fraud ; nor, after the Kucharist carried 
in it,4 is the hand spotted with the sword and 
blood. 

15. Charity is the bond of brotherhood, the 
foundation of peace, the holdfast and security 
of unity, which is greater than both hope and 
faith, which excels both good works and martyr- 
doms, which will abide with us always, eternal 
with God in the kingdom of heaven. Take 
from it patience ; and deprived of it, it does not 
endure. Vakc from it the substance of bearing 
and of enduring, and it continues with no roots 
nor strength. The apostle, finally, when he 
would speak of charity, joined to it endurance 
and patience. " Charity," he says, " is large- 
souled ; charity is kind ; charity envieth not, is 
not puffed up, is not provoked, thinketh not 
evil ; loveth all things, believeth all things, 
hopeth all things, beareth all things." 5 Thence 

' Gal. vi. 10, 9. 

2 Ezek. xxxiii. 12. 

3 Rev. iii 11. 

* The older editions Tiave " gustatam," " tasted," instead of" ges- 
tatam," " carried," as above. [See page p. 350, su^rn. Also St. 
Cyril. KIucid.Ttion VI II.] 

5 I Cor xiii. 4-7. 

he shows that it can tenaciously persevere, be- 
cause it knows how to endure all things. And 
in another place : " Forbearing one another," he 
says, " in love, using every effort to keep the 
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace." ^ He 
proved that neither unity nor peace could be 
kept unless brethren should cherish one another 
with mutual toleration, and should keep the bond 
of concord by the intervention of patience. 

16. What beyond; — that you should not 
swear nor curse ; that you should not seek again 
your goods when taken from you ; that, when 
you receive a buffet, you should give your other 
cheek to the smiter ; that you should forgive a 
brother who sins against you, not only seven 
times, but seventy times seven times,^ but, more- 
over, all his sins altogether ; that you should love 
your enemies ; that you should offer prayer for 
your adversaries and persecutors? Can you ac- 
complish these things unless you maintain^ the 
stedfastness of patience and endurance? .And 
this we see done in the case of Stephen, who, 
when he was slain by the Jews with violence and 
stoning, did not ask for vengeance for himself, 
but for pardon for his murderers, saying, " Lord, 
lay not this sin to their charge." "^ It behoved 
the first martyr of Christ thus to be, who, fore- 
running the martyrs that should follow him in a 
glorious death, was not only the preacher of the 
Lord's passion, but also the imitator of His most 
patient gentleness. What shall I say of anger, 
of discord, of strife, which things ought not to 
be found in a Christian? Let there be patience 
in the breast, and these things cannot have place 
there ; or should they try to enter, they are 
quickly excluded and depart, that a peaceful 
abode may continue in the heart, where it de- 
lights the God of peace to dwell. Finally, the 
apostle warns us, and teaches, saying : " Grieve 
not the Holy Spirit of God, in whom ye are 
sealed unto the day of redemption. Let all bit- 
terness, and anger, and wrath, and clamour, and 
blasphemy, be put away from you." '° For if 
the Christian have departed from rage and carnal 
contention as if from the hurricanes of the sea, 
and have already begun to be tranquil and meek 
in the harbour of Christ, he ought to admit 
neither anger nor discord within his breast, since 
he must neither return evil for evil, nor bear 
hatred. 

17. And moreover, also, for the varied ills of 
the flesh, and the frequent and severe torments 
of the body, wherewith the human race is daily 
wearied and harassed, patience is necessary. 
For since in that first transgression of the com- 

* Eph. iv. a, 3. 

7 Manutius, Pamelius, and others add, " not only seventy limes 
seven times " 

» Or. " them with the stedfastness of patience," etc. 
1 Acts vii. 60. 
'^ Eph. iv. 30, 31. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

489 

mandment strength of body departed with im- 
mortaUty, and weakness came on with death — 
and strength cannot be received unless when 
immortality also has been received — it behoves 
us, in this bodily frailty and weakness, always to 
struggle and to fight. And this struggle and en- 
counter cannot be sustained but by the strength 
of patience. But as we are to be examined and 
searched out, diverse sufferings are introduced ; 
and a manifold kind of temptations is inflicted 
by the losses of property, by the heats of fevers, 
by the torments of wounds, by the loss of those 
dear to us. Nor does anything distinguish be- 
tween the unrighteous and the righteous more, 
than that in affliction the unrighteous man im- 
patiently complains and blasphemes, while the 
righteous is proved by his patience, as it is writ- 
ten : " In pain endure, and in thy low estate 
have patience ; for gold and silver are tried in 
the fire." ' 

18. Thus Job was searched out and proved, 
and was raised up to the very highest pinnacle 
of praise by the virtue of patience. What darts 
of the devil were sent forth against him ! what 
tortures were put in use ! The loss of his estate 
is inflicted, the privation of a numerous offspring 
is ordained for him. The master, rich in estate, 
and the father, richer in children, is on a sudden 
neither master nor father ! The wasting of 
wounds is added ; and, moreover, an eating pest 
of worms consumes his festering and wasting 
limbs. And that nothing at all should remain 
that Job did not experience in his trials, the devil 
arms his wife also, making use of that old device 
of his wickedness, as if he could deceive and 
mislead all by women, even as he did in the 
beginning of the world. And yet Job is not 
broken down by his severe and repeated conflicts, 
nor the blessing of God withheld from being de- 
clared in the midst of those difficulties and trials 
of his, by the victory of patience. Tobias also, 
who, after the sublime works of his justice and 
mercy, was tried with the loss of his eyes, in 
proportion as he patiently endured his blindness, 
in that proportion deserved greatly of God by 
the praise of patience. 

19. And, beloved brethren, that the benefit of 
patience may still more shine forth, let us con- 
sider, on the contrary, what mischief impatience 
may cause. For as patience is the benefit of 
Christ, so, on the other hand, impatience is the 
mischief of the devil ; and as one in whom Christ 
dwells and abides is found patient, so he appears 
always impatient whose mind the wickedness of 
the devil possesses. Briefly let us look at the 
very beginnings. The devil suffered with impa- 
tience that man was made in the image of God.- 

^ Ecclus. ii. 4, 5. 

- [Admirably worked out in I\fessi/ts and Anti-Messias, by the 
Rev. C. I. Black, ed. London, Masters, 1S54.] 

Hence he was the first to perish and to ruin 
others. Adam, contrary to the heavenly com- 
mand with respect to the deadly food, by im- 
patience fell into death ; nor did he keep the 
grace received from God under the guardianship 
of patience. And in order that Cain should put 
his brother to death, he was impatient of '^V; 
sacrifice and gift; and in that Esau descend*, 
from the rights of the first-born to those of the 
younger, he lost his priority by impatience for the 
pottage. Why was the Jewish people faithless 
and ungrateful in respect of the divine benefits? 
Was it not the crime of impatience, that they first 
departed from God? Not being able to bear 
the delays of Moses conferring with God, they 
dared to ask for profane gods, that they might 
call the head of an ox and an earthen image 
leaders of their march ; nor did they ever desist 
from their impatience, until, impatient always of 
docihty and of divine admonition, they put to 
death their prophets and all the righteous men, 
and plunged even into the crime of the cruci- 
fixion and bloodshedding of the Lord. More- 
over, impatience makes heretics in the Church, 
and, after the likeness of the Jews, drives them 
in opposition to the peace and charity of Christ 
as rebels, to hostile and raging hatred.^ And, 
not at length to enumerate single cases, abso- 
lutely everything which patience, by its works, 
builds up to glory, impatience casts down into 
ruin. 

20. Wherefore, beloved brethren, having dili- 
gently pondered both the benefits of patience 
and the evils of impatience, let us hold fast with 
full watchfulness the patience whereby we abide 
in Christ, that with Christ we may attain to God ; 
which patience, copious and manifold, is not 
restrained by narrow limits, nor confined by 
strait boundaries. The virtue of patience is 
widely manifest, and its fertility and liberality 
proceed indeed from a source of one name, but 
are diffused by overflowing streams through 
many ways of glory ; nor can anything in our 
actions avail for the perfection of praise, unless 
from this it receives the substance of its per- 
fection. It is patience which both commends 
and keeps us to God. It is patience, too, which 
assuages anger, which bridles the tongue, governs 
the mind, guards peace, rules discipline, breaks 
the force of lust, represses the violence of pride, 
extinguishes the fire of enmity, checks the power 
of the rich, soothes the want of the poor, pro- 
tects a blessed integrity in virgins, a careful 
purity in widows, in those who are united and 
married a single affection. It makes men humble 
in prosperity, brave in adversity, gentle towards 

3 [The downfall of Novatian and of Arius and others seems largely 
attributable to this sin. They could not await God's time to give 
them influence and power for good. See quotation from MassiUon, 
vol. iii. p. 718, this series. Also TertulL, iii. p. 677.] 

490 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

wrongs and contempts. It teaches us quickly 
to pardon those who wrong us ; and if you your- 
self do wrong, to entreat long and earnestly. 
It resists temptations, suffers persecutions, per- 
fects passions and martyrdoms. It is patience 
which firmly fortifies the foundations of our faith. 
It is this which lifts up on high the increase of 
our hope. It is this which directs our doing, 
that we may hold fast the way of Christ while 
we walk by His patience. It is this that makes 
us to persevere as sons of God, while we imitate 
our Father's patience. 

21. But since I know, beloved brethren, that 
very many are eager, either on account of the 
burden or the pain of smarting wrongs, to be 
quickly avenged of those who act harshly and 
rage against them,' we must not withhold the 
fact in the furthest particular, that placed as we 
are in the midst of these storms of a jarring 
world, and, moreover, the persecutions both of 
Jews or (ientiles, and heretics, we may patiently 
wait for the day of (God's) vengeance, and not 
hurry to revenge our suffering with a cjuerulous ^ 
haste, since it is written, " Wait ye upon me, 
saith the Lord, in the day of my rising up for 
a testimony ; for my judgment is to the congre- 
gations of the nations, that I may take hold on 
the kings, and pour out upon them my fury." ^ 
The Lord commands us to wait,-* and to bear 
with brave patience the day of future vengeance ; 
and He also speaks in the Apocalypse, saying, 
" Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this 
book : for now the time is at hand for them that 
persevere in injuring to injure, and for him that 
is filthy to be filthy still ; but for him that is 
righteous to do things still more righteous, and 
likewise for him that is holy to do things still 
more holy. Behold, I come (juickly ; and my 
reward is with me, to render to every man ac- 
cording to his deeds." 5 Whence also the mar- 
tyrs, crying out and hastening with grief breaking 
forth to their revenge, are bidden still to wait, 
and to give patience for the times to be fulfilled 
and the martyrs to be completed. " And when 
He had opened," says he, " the fifth seal, I saw 
under the altar of God the souls of them that 
were slain for the word of, God, and for their 
testimony ; and they cried with a loud voice, 
saying. How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost 
Thou not judge and avenge our blood on them 
that dwell on the earth ? And there were given 
to them each white robes ; and it was said unto 
them that they should rest yet for a little season. 

' The Oxford edition adds here, according to some authorities, 
" and will not put off the recompense of evils until that day of last 
ludjpiient, we exhort you, for the meanwhile, emhrace with us this 
benefit of patience, that," etc.; and it omits the following ten words. 

* On the authority of one codex, Pamelius here adds, " and 
envious." 

3 Zeph. iii. 8. 

* " Dearest brethren," Oxford edit. 
5 Rev. xxii. 10-12. 

until the number of their fellow-serx-ants and 
brethren is fulfilled, who afterwards shall be slain 
after their example."^ 

22. But when shall come the divine vengeance 
for the righteous blood, the Holy Spirit declares 
by Malachi the prophet, saying, " Behold, the 
day of the Lord cometh, burning as an oven ; 
and all the aliens and all the wicked shall be 
stubble ; and the day that cometh shall burn 
them up, saith the Lord." ^ And this we read 
also in the Psalms, where the approach of God 
the Judge is announced as worthy to be rever- 
enced for the majesty of His judgment : " God 
shall come manifest, our God, and shall not keep 
silence ; a fire shall burn before Him, and round 
about Him a great tempest. He shall call the 
heaven above, and the earth beneath, that He 
may separate His people. Gather His saints 
together unto Him, who establish His covenant 
in sacrifices ; and the heavens shall declare His 
righteousness, for God is the Judge." ^ And 
Isaiah foretells the same things, saying : " For, 
behold, the Lord shall come like a fire, and His 
chariot as a storm, to render vengeance in anger ; 
for in the fire of the Lord they shall be judged, 
and with His sword shall they be wounded."^ 
And again : " The Lord God of hosts shall go 
forth, and shall cruml)le the war to pieces ; He 
shall stir up the battle, and shall cry out against 
His enemies with strength, I have held my peace ; 
shall I always hold my peace? " '° 

23. But who is this that says that he has held 
his peace before, and will not hold his peace for 
ever? Surely it is He who was led as a sheep to 
the slaughter ; and as a lamb before its shearer 
is without voice, so He opened not His mouth. 
Surely it is He who did not cry, nor was His 
voice heard in the streets. Surely He who was 
not rebellious, neither contradicted, when He 
offered His back to stripes, and His cheeks to 
the palms of the hands ; neither turned away 
His face from the foulness of spitting. Surely 
it is He who, when He was accused by the 
priests and elders, answered nothing, and, to 
the wonder of Pilate, kept a most patient silence. 
This is He who, although He was silent in His 
passion, yet by and by will not be silent in 
His vengeance. This is our God, that is, not 
the God of all, but of the faithful and believing ; 
and He, when He shall come manifest in His 
second advent, will not be silent." For although 
He came first shrouded in humility, yet He shall 
come manifest in power. 

24. Let us wait for Him, beloved brethren, 
our judge and Avenger, who shall equally avenge 

'' Rev. vi. 9-11. 

7 Mai. iv. I. 

8 Ps. 1. 3-6. 

9 Isa. Ixvi. 15, 16. 
'° Isa. xlii. 13, 14. 
" [Ps. 1. 3.] 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

491 

with Himself the congregation of His Church, 
and the number of all the righteous from the 
beginning of the world. I,et him who hurries, 
and is too impatient for his revenge, consider 
that even He Himself is not yet avenged who is 
the Avenger. God the Father ordained His Son 
to be adored ; and the Apostle Paul, mindful of 
the divine command, lays it down, and says : 
" God hath exalted Him, and given Him a name 
which is above every name, that in the name of 
Jesus every knee should bow, of things heavenly, 
and things earthly, and things beneath." ' And 
in the Apocalypse the angel withstands John, 
who wishes to worship him,^ and says : " See 
thou do it not ; for I am thy fellow-servant, and 
of thy brethren. Worship Jesus the Lord." ^ 
How great is the Lord Jesus, and how great is 
His patience, that He who is adored in heaven 
is not yet avenged on earth ! Let us, beloved 
brethren, consider His patience in our persecu- 
tions and sufferings ; let us give an obedience 
full of expectation to His advent ; and let us 
not hasten, servants as we are, to be defended 
before our Lord with irreligious and immodest 
eagerness. Let us rather press onward and 
labour, and, watching with our whole heart, and 
stedfast to all endurance, let us keep the Lord's 
precepts ; so that when that day of anger and 
vengeance shall come, we may not be punished 
with the impious and sinners, but may be hon- 
oured with the righteous and those that fear God. 

TREATISE X.4 

ox JEALOUSY AND ENVY. 

ARGUMENT^ — AFTER POINTING OUT THAT JEAL- 
OUSY OR ENV\' IS A SIN ALL THE MORE HEINOUS 
IN PROPORTION AS ITS WICKEDNESS IS HIDDEN, 
AND THAT ITS ORIGIN IS TO BE TRACED TO THE 
DEVIL, HE GIVES ILLUSTRATIONS OF ENVY FROM 
THE OLD TESTAMENT, AND GATHERS, BY REFER- 
ENCE TO SPECIAL VICES, THAT ENVY IS THE 
ROOT OF ALL WICKEDNESS. THEREFORE WITH 
REASON WAS FR.ATERNAL HATRED FORBIDDEN 
NOT IN ONE PLACE ONLY, BUT BY CHRIST AND 
HIS APOSTLES. FINALLY, EXHORTING TO THE 
LOVE OF one's ENEMIES BY GOD'S EX.4MPLE, HE 
DISSUADES FROM THE SIN OF ENVY, BY URGING 
THE REWARDS SET BEFORE THE INDULGENCE OF 
LOVE. 

I. To be jealous of what you see to be good, 
and to be envious of those who are better 

' Phil. ii. 9, 10. 

2 [Origen, vol. iv. p. 544, this series.] 

3 Rev. xxii. 9: [also xix. 10. And compare Acts x. 26, and xiv. 
14, 15; also Col. ii. 18.] 

■* [This is numbered xii. in Oxford trans., and is assigned to a.d. 
256.] 

5 The deacon Pontius thus briefly suggests the purpose of this 
treatise in his Life of Cyprian: " Who was there to restrain the ill 
blood arising from the envenomed malignity of envy with the sweet- 
Bess of a wholesome remedy ? " 

than yourself, seems, beloved brethren, in the 
eyes of some people to be a slight and petty 
wrong ; and, being thought trifling and of small 
account, it is not feared ; not being feared, 
it is contemned ; being contemned, it is not 
easily shunned : and it thus becomes a dark and 
hidden mischief, which, as it is not perceived so 
as to be guarded against by the prudent, secretly 
distresses incautious minds. But, moreover, the 
Lord bade us be prudent, and charged us to 
watch with careful solicitude, lest the adversary, 
who is always on the watch and always lying in 
wait, should creep stealthily into our breast, 
and blow up a flame from the sparks, magnify- 
ing small things into the greatest ; and so, while 
soothing the unguarded and careless with a 
milder air and a softer breeze, should stir up 
storms and whirlwinds, and bring about the de- 
struction of faith and the shipwreck of salvation 
and of life. Therefore, beloved brethren, we 
must be on our guard, and strive with all our 
powers to repel, with solicitous and full watch- 
fulness, the enemy, raging and aiming his darts 
against every part of our body in which we can 
be stricken and wounded, in accordance with 
what the Apostle Peter, in his epistle, forewarns 
and teaches, saying, " Be sober, and watch ; 
because your adversary the devil, as a roaring 
lion, goeth about seeking any one to devour."^ 

2. He goeth about every one of us ; and even 
as an enemy besieging those who are shut up 
(in a city), he examines the walls, and tries 
whether there is any part of the walls ^ less firm 
and less trustworthy, by entrance through which 
he may penetrate to the inside. He presents to 
the eyes seductive forms and easy pleasures, 
that he may destroy chastity by the sight. He 
tempts the ears with harmonious music, that by 
the hearing of sweet sounds he may relax and 
enervate Christian vigour."* He provokes the 
tongue by reproaches \ he instigates the hand 
by exasperating wrongs to the wrecklessness of 
murder ; to make the cheat, he presents dishon- 
est gains ; to take captive the soul by money, he 
heaps together mischievous hoards ; he prom- 
ises earthly honours, that he may deprive of 
heavenly ones ; he makes a show of false things, 
that he may steal away the true \ and when he 
cannot hiddenly deceive, he threatens plainly 
and openly, holding forth the fear of turbulent 
persecution to vanquish God's servants — always 
restless, and always hostile, crafty in peace, and 
fierce in persecution. 

3. Wherefore, beloved brethren, against all 
the devil's deceiving snares or open threaten- 
ings, the mind ought to stand arrayed and armed, 

6 I Pet. V. 8. 

' According to some, " of our members." 

8 [The nude in art, the music of the opera, and sensual luxurj' of 
all sorts, are here condemned. And compare Clem. Alex., vol. ii. 
p. 249, note II, this series.] 

492 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

ever as ready to rei)el as the foe is ever ready to 
attack. And since those darts of his which 
creep on us in conceahiient are more frequent, 
and his more hidden and secret hurhng of them 
is the more severely and frequently effectual to 
our wounding, in proportion as it is the less per- 
ceived, let us also be watchful to understand and 
repel these, among which is the evil of jealousy 
and envy. And if any one closely look into 
this, he will find that nothing should be more 
guarded against by the Christian, nothing more 
carefully watched, than being taken captive by 
envy and malice, that none, entangled in the 
blind snares of a deceitful enemy, in that the 
brother is turned by envy to hatred of his brother, 
ohould himself be unwittingly destroyed by his 
own sword. That we may be able more fully to 
collect and more plainly to perceive this, let us 
recur to its fount and origin. Let us consider 
whence arises jealousy, and when and how it 
begins. For so misrhie\ous an evil will be more 
easily shunned by us, if both the source and the 
magnitude of that same evil be known.' 

4. From this source, even at the very begin- 
nings of the world, the devil was the first who 
both perished (himself) and destroyed (others). 
He who^ was sustained in angelic majesty, he 
who was accepted and beloved of God, when 
he beheld man made in the image of God, broke 
forth into jealousy with malevolent envy — not 
hurling down another by the instinct of his jeal- 
ousy before he himself was first hurled down by 
jealousy, captive before he takes captive, ruined 
before he ruins others. While, at the instigation 
of jealousy, he robs man of the grace of immor- 
tality conferred, he himself has lost that which 
he had previously been. How great an evil is 
that, beloved brethren, whereby an angel fell, 
whereby that lofty and illustrious grandeur could 
be defrauded and overthrown, whereby he who 
deceived was himself deceived ! Thenceforth 
envy rages on the earth, in that he who is about 
to perish by jealousy obeys the author of his 
ruin, imitating the devil in his jealousy ; as it is 
written, " But through envy of the devil death 
entered into the world." ^ Therefore they who 
are on his side imitate him.' 

5. Hence, in fine, began the primal hatreds 
of the new brotherhood, hence the abominable 
fratricides, in that the unrighteous Cain is jeal- 
ous of the righteous Abel, in that the wicked 
persecutes the good with envy and jealousy. So 
far prevailed the rage of envy to the consumma- 
tion of that deed of wickedness, that neither 
the love of his brother, nor the immensity of 
the crime, nor the fear of God, nor the penalty 

■ [Chrysostom, vol. iv. p. 473, ed. Migne. This close practic.il 
preaching is a lesson to the younger clergy of our days.] 

^ Some add " long ago.' 

' Wisd. ii. 24 [.So I^ctantius, Institutes, book ii. cap. ix. in 
vol. vii., this series.! 

of the sin, was considered.' He was unright- 
eously stricken who had been the first to show 
righteousness ; he endured hatred who had not 
known how to hate ; he was impiously slain, 
who, dying, did not resist. And that Ks:ui was 
hostile to his brother Jacob, arose from jealousy 
also. For because the latter had received his 
father's blessing, the former was inflamed to a 
persecuting hatred by the brands of jealousy. 
And that Joseph was sold by his brethren, the 
reason of their selling him proceeded from envy. 
When in simplicity, and as a brother to breth- 
ren, he set forth to them the prosperity which 
had been shown to him in \-isions, their malevo- 
lent disposition broke forth into envy. More- 
over, that Saul the king hated David, so as to 
seek by often repeated persecutions to kill him 
— innocent, merciful, gentle, patient in meek- 
ness — what else was the provocation save the 
spur of jealousy? Because, when Goliath was 
slain, and by the aid and condescension of God 
so great an enemy was routed, the wondering 
people burst forth with the suffrage of acclama- 
tion into praises of David, Saul through jealousy 
conceived the rage of enmity and persecution. 
And, not to go to the length of numbering each 
one, let us observe the destruction of a people 
that perished once for all. 5 Did not the Jews 
perish for this reason, that they chose rather to 
envy Christ ^ than to believe Him ? Disparaging 
those great works which He did, they were de- 
ceived by blinding jealousy, and could not open 
the eyes of their heart to the knowledge of 
divine things. 

6. Considering which things, beloved breth- 
ren, let us with vigilance and courage fortify our 
hearts dedicated to God against such a destruc- 
tiveness of evil. Let the death of others avail 
for our safety ; let the punishment of the un- 
wise confer health upon the prudent. Moreover, 
there is no ground for any one to suppose that 
evil of that kind is confined in one form, or 
restrained within brief limits in a narrow boun- 
dary. The mischief of jealousy, manifold and 
fruitful, extends widely. It is the root of all 
evils, the fountain of disasters, the nursery of 
crimes, the material of transgressions. Thence 
arises hatred, thence proceeds animosity. Jeal- 
ousy inflames avarice, in that one cannot be 
content with what is his own, while he sees 
another more wealthy. Jealousy stirs up ambi- 
tion, when one sees another more exalted in 
honours. 7 When jealousy darkens our percep- 
tions, and reduces the secret agencies of the 

* [Chrysostom, ut. sufirn.] 

- Variously " semel " or " siniul." 

*> [Matt .vxvi. i8.] 

" Or, with some editors, " more increased in honours." [To be 
pur.ied from a Christian's heart like a leprosy from the body. See 
Jer;;my I'lyl.ir. sermon xix , Apples oj SoJom. Quotation from 
./lili.Mi, vol. i. p. 717.1 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

493 

mind under its command, the fear of God is 
despised, the teaching of Christ is neglected, 
the day of judgment is not anticipated. Pride 
inflates, crueky embitters, faithlessness prevari- 
cates, impatience agitates, discord rages, anger 
grows hot ; nor can he who has become the sub- 
ject of a foreign authority any longer restrain or 
govern himself. By this the bond of the Lord's 
peace is broken ; by this is violated brotherly 
charity ; by this truth is adulterated, unity is 
divided ; men plunge into heresies and schisms 
when priests are disparaged, when bishops are 
envied, when a man complains that he himself 
was not rather ordained, or disdains to suffer 
that another should be put over him.' Hence 
the man who is haughty through jealousy, and 
perverse through envy, kicks, hence he revolts, 
in anger and malice the opponent, not of the 
man, but of the honour. 

7. But what a gnawing worm of the soul is it, 
what a plague-spot of our thoughts, what a rust 
of the heart, to be jealous of another, either in 
respect of his virtue or of his happiness ; that is, 
to hate in him either his own deservings or the 
divine benefits — to turn the advantages of others 
into one's own mischief — to be tormented by 
the prosperity of illustrious men — to make other 
people's glory one's own penalty, and, as it 
were, to apply a sort of executioner to one's 
own breast, to bring the tormentors to one's own 
thoughts and feelings, that they may tear us with 
intestine pangs, and may smite the secret re- 
cesses of the heart with the hoof of malevolence ! 
To such, no food is joyous, no drink can be 
cheerful. They are ever sighing, and groaning, 
and grieving ; and since envy is never put off 
by the envious, the possessed heart is rent with- 
out intermission day and night. Other ills have 
their limit ; and whatever wrong is done, is 
bounded by the completion of the crime. In 
the adulterer the offence ceases when the viola- 
tion is perpetrated ; in the case of the robber, 
the crime is at rest when the homicide is com- 
mitted ; and the possession of the booty puts 
an end to the rapacity of the thief; and the 
completed deception places a limit to the wrong 
of the cheat. Jealousy has no limit ; it is an 
evil continually enduring, and a sin without end. 
In proportion as he who is envied has the ad- 
vantage of a greater success, in that proportion 
the envious man burns with the fires of jealousy 
to an increased heat.^ 

8. Hence the threatening countenance, the 
lowering aspect, pallor in the face, trembling 
on the lips, gnashing of the teeth, mad words, 
unbridled revilings, a hand prompt for the vio- 
lence of slaughter ; even if for the time deprived 

' [The sin of Novatian and Arias. See p. 489, note 3, S7ipr-a.] 
^ [Another specimen of our author's pithy condensations of thought 
and extraordinary eloquence.] 

of a sword, yet armed with the hatred of an in- 
furiate mind. And accordingly the Holy Spirit 
says in the Psalms : " Be not jealous against him 
who walketh prosperously in his way." ^ And 
again : " The wicked shall obser\'e the righteous, 
and shall gnash upon him with his teeth. But 
God shall laugh at him ; for He seeth that his 
day is coming." •♦ The blessed Apostle Paul 
designates and points out these when he says, 
" The poison of asps is under their lips, and their 
mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. Their 
feet are swift to shed blood, destruction and 
misery are in their ways, who have not known 
the way of peace ; neither is the fear of God 
before their eyes." 5 

9. The mischief is much more trifling, and the 
danger less, when the limbs are wounded with a 
sword. The cure is easy where the wound is 
manifest ; and when the medicament is applied, 
the sore that^ is seen is quickly brought to 
health. The wounds of jealousy are hidden and 
secret ; nor do they admit the remedy of a heal- 
ing cure, since they have shut themselves in 
blind suffering within the lurking-places of the 
conscience. Whoever you are that are envious 
and malignant, observe how crafty, mischievous, 
and hateful you are to those whom you hate. 
Yet you are the enemy of no one's well-being 
more than your own. Whoever he is whom you 
persecute with jealousy, can evade and escape 
you. You cannot escape yourself.^ Wherever 
you may be, your adversary is with you ; your 
enemy is always in your own breast ; your mis- 
chief is shut up within ; you are tied and bound 
with the links of chains from which you cannot 
extricate yourself; you are captive under the 
tyranny of jealousy ; nor will any consolations 
help you. It is a persistent evil to persecute a 
man who belongs to the grace of God. It is a 
calamity without remedy to hate the happy. 

10. And therefore, beloved brethren, the Lord, 
taking thought for this risk, that none should fall 
into the snare of death through jealousy of his 
brother, when His disciples asked Him which 
among them should be the greatest, said, " Who- 
soever shall be least among you all, the same shall 
be great." '^ He cut off all envy by His reply.^ 
He plucked out and tore away every cause and 
matter of gnawing envy. A disciple of Christ 
must not be jealous, must not be envious. With 
us there can be no contest for exaltation ; from 

3 Ps. xxxvii. 7. 

* Ps. xxxvii. 12, 13. 

5 Rom. iii. 13-18. 

<> Erasmus and others give this reading. BaJiizius, Routh, and 
many codices, omit " vulnus," and thus read, " what is seen." 

7' [" It punishes the delinquent in the very act." Jer. Taylor, ut 
supra, p. 492, also Anselm, Opp., i 682, ed. Migne.] 

8 Luke ix. 48. [Elucidation IX.] 

9 [And all ground for a supremacy among brethren was here 
absolutely ejected from the Christian system. The last of the canoni- 
cal primates of Rome named himself Ser'.'us Ser-:>or>im Dei, to 
rebuke those who would make him " Universal Bishop."] 

494 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

humility we grow to the highest attainments ; 
we have learnt in what way we may l)e pleasing. 
And finally, the .Apostle Paul, instructing and 
warning, that we who, illuminated by the light 
of Christ, have escaped from the darkness of 
the conversation of night, should walk in the 
deeds and works of light, writes and says, " The 
night has passed over', and the day is approach- 
ing : let us tlierefore cast away the works of dark- 
ness, and let us put upon us the armour of light. 
Let us walk honestly, as in the day ; not in 
rioting and drunkenness, not in lusts and wanton- 
ness, not in strifes and jealousy." ' If the dark- 
ness has departed from your breast, if the night 
is scattered therefrom, if the gloom is chased 
away, if the brightness of day has illuminated 
your senses, if you have begun to be a man of 
light, do those things which are Christ's, because 
Christ is the Light and the Day. 

11. Why do you rush into the darkness of 
jealousy? why do you enfold yourself in the 
cloud of malice ? why do you quench all the light 
of peace and charity in the Ijlindness of envy? 
why do you return to the devil, whom you had 
renounced ? why do you stand like Cain ? For 
that he who is jealous of his brother, and has 
him in hatred, is boimd by the guilt of homicide, 
the Apostle John declares in his epistle, saying, 
" Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer ; 
and ye know that no murderer hath life abiding 
in him." ^ And again : " He that saith he is in 
the light, and hateth his brother, is in darkness 
even until now, and walketh in darkness, and 
knoweth not whither he goeth, because that dark- 
ness hath blinded his eyes." ■' Whosoever hates, 
says he, his brother, walketh in darkness, and 
knoweth not whither he goeth. For he goeth 
unconsciously to Gehenna, in ignorance and 
blindness ; he is hurrying into punishment, de- 
parting, that is, from the light of Christ, who 
warns and says, " I am the light of the world. 
He that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, 
but shali have the light of life."'' But he follows 
Christ who stands in His precepts, who walks in 
the way of His teaching, who follows His foot- 
steps and His ways, who imitates that which 
Christ both did and taught ; in accordance 
with what Peter also exhorts and warns, saying, 
" Christ suffered for us, leaving you an example 
that ye should follow His steps." 5 

12. We ought to remember by what name 
Christ calls His people, by what title He names 
His flock. He calls them sheep, that their 
Christian innocence may be like that of sheep ; 
He calls them lambs, that their simplicity of 
mind may imitate the simple nature of lambs. 

• Rom. xiii. 12, 13, 
2 1 John iii. 15. 

' I John ii. 9-1 1. 

* John Yiii. 12. 
5 I Pet. ii. 21. 

Why does the wolf lurk under the garb of sheep ? 
why does he who falsely asserts himself to be a 
Christian, dishonour the flock of Christ? To 
put on the name of Christ, and not to go in the 
way of Christ, what else is it but a mockery of 
the divine name, but a desertion of the way of 
salvation ; since He Himself teaches and says 
that he shall come unto life who keeps His com- 
mandments, and that he is wise who hears and 
does His words ; that he, moreover, is called the 
greatest doctor in the kingdom of heaven who 
thus does and teaches/' that, then, will be of 
advantage to the preacher what has been well 
and usefully preached, if what is uttered by his 
mouth is fulfilled by deeds following? But what 
did the Lord more frequently instil into His dis- 
ciples, what did He more charge to be guarded 
and observed among His saving counsels and 
heavenly precepts, than that with the same love 
wherewith He Himself loved the disciples, we 
also should love one another? And in what 
manner does he keep either the peace or the 
love of the Lord, who, when jealousy intrudes, 
can neither be peaceable nor loving? 

13. Thus also the Apostle Paul, when he was 
urging the merits of peace and charity, and when 
he was strongly asserting and teaching that 
neither faith nor alms, nor even the passion it- 
self of the confessor and the martyr,^ would 
avail him, unless he kept the reijuirements of 
charity entire and inviolate, added, and said : 
" Charity is magnanimous, charity is kind, charity 
envieth not ; " ^ teaching, doubtless, and showing 
that whoever is magnanimous, and kind, and 
averse from jealousy and rancour, such a one 
can maintain charity. Moreover, in another 
place, when he was advising that the man who 
has already become filled with the Holy Spirit, 
and a son of God by heavenly birth, should ob- 
serve nothing but spiritual and divine things, he 
lays it down, and says : " And I indeed, brethren, 
could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but 
as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. I 
have fed you with milk, not with meat : '^ for 
ye were not able hitherto ; moreover, neither 
now are ye able. For ye are yet carnal : for 
whereas there are still among you jealousy, and 
contention, and strifes, are ye not carnal, and 
walk as men?" '° 

14. Vices and carnal sins must be trampled 
down, beloved brethren, and the corrupting 
plague of the earthly body must be trodden under 
foot with spiritual vigour, lest, while we are turned 
back again to the conversation of the old man, 

6 [Matt. V. 19.] 

^ Or, according to ancient authority, " of confession and martyr- 
dom." [Note this clear conception of the root-principle of the true 
martyr, and compare Treatise xi. in/ra.] 

* I Cor. xiii. 4. 

9 Or, " I have given you milk to drink, not meat," is read by some. 

'° I Cor. iii. 1-3. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

495 

we be entangled in deadly snares, even as the 
apostle, with foresight and wholesomeness, fore- 
warned us of this very thing, and said : " There- 
fore, brethren, let us not live after the flesh ; for 
if ye live after the flesh, ye shall begin to die ; 
but if ye, through the Spirit, mortify the deeds 
of the flesh, ye shall live. For as many as are 
led by the Spirit of God they are the sons of 
God." ' If we are the sons of God, if we are 
already beginning to be His temples, if, having 
received the Holy Spirit, we are living holily and 
spiritually, if we have raised our eyes from earth 
to heaven, if we have lifted our hearts, filled with 
God and Christ, to things above and divine, let 
•us do nothing but what is worthy of God and 
Christ, even as the apostle arouses and exhorts 
us, saying : " If ye be risen with Christ, seek 
those things which are above, where Christ is 
sitting at the right hand of God ; occupy your 
minds with things that are above, not with things 
Avhich are upon the earth. For ye are dead, and 
your life is hid with Christ in God. But when 
Christ, who is your life, shall appear, then shall 
ye also appear with Him in glory." ^ Let us, 
then, who in baptism have both died and been 
buried in respect of the carnal sins of the old 
man, who have risen again with Christ in the 
heavenly regeneration, both think upon and do 
the things which are Christ's, even as the same 
apostle again teaches and counsels, saying : "The 
first man is of the dust of the earth ; the second 
man is from heaven. Such as he is from the 
earth, such also are they who are from the earth ; 
and such as He the heavenly is, such also are 
they who are heavenly. As we have borne the 
image of him who is of the earth, let us also bear 
the image of Him who is from heaven." ^ But 
we cannot bear the heavenly image, unless in 
that condition wherein we have already begun to 
be, we show forth the likeness of Christ. 

15. For this is to change what you had been, 
and to begin to be what you were not, that 
the divine birth might shine forth in you, that 
the godly discipline might respond to God, the 
Father, that in the honour and praise of living, 
God may be glorified in man ; as He Himself 
■exhorts, and warns, and promises to those who 
glorify Him a reward in their turn, saying, 
" Them that glorify me I will glorify, and he 
■who despiseth me shall be despised." ■♦ For 
which glorification the Lord, forming and prepar- 
ing us, and the Son of God instilling s the likeness 
of God the Father, says in His Gospel : " Ye have 
heard that it hath been said. Thou shalt love 
thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy. But I say 
unto you. Love your enemies, and pray for them 

■ Rom. viii. 12-14. 

^ Col. iii 1-4. 

3 1 Cor. XV. 47-49. 

■* I Sam. ii. 30. 

5 " And engendering in the sons of God." — Oxford ed. 

which persecute you ; that ye may be the chil- 
dren of your Father which is in heaven, who 
maketh His sun to rise on the good and on the 
evil, and sendeth rain upon the just and on the 
unjust."'^ If it is a source of joy and glory to 
men to have children like to themselves — and it 
is more agreeable to have begotten an offspring 
then when the remaining ^ progeny responds to 
the parent with like lineaments — how much 
greater is the gladness in God the Father, when 
any one is so spiritually born that in his acts 
and praises the divine eminence of race ^ is an- 
nounced ! Wliat a palm of righteousness is it, 
what a crown, to be such a one 9 as that the 
Lord should not say of you, " I have begotten 
and brought up children, but they have despised 
me ! " '° Let Christ rather applaud you, and in- 
vite you to the reward, saying, " Come, ye blessed 
of my Father, receive the kingdom which is pre- 
pared for you from the beginning of the world." " 

1 6. The mind must be strengthened, beloved 
brethren, by these meditations. By exercises of 
this kind it must be confirmed against all the 
darts of the devil. Let there be the divine read- 
ing in the hands,'- the Lord's thoughts in the 
mind ; let constant prayer never cease at all ; let 
saving labour persevere. Let us be always busied 
in spiritual actions, that so often as the enemy 
approaches, however often he may try to come 
near, he may find the breast closed and armed 
against him. For a Christian man's crown is 
not only that which is received in the time of 
persecution : peace '^ also has its crowns, where- 
with the victors, from a varied and manifold en- 
gagement, are crowned, when their adversary is 
prostrated and subdued. To have overcome lust 
is the palm of continency. To have resisted 
against anger, against injury, is the crown of 
patience. It is a triumph over avarice to despise 
money. It is the praise of faith, by trust in the 
future, to suff"er the adversity of the world. And 
he who is not haughty in prosperity, obtains glory 
for his humility ; and he who, is disposed to the 
mercifulness of cherishing the poor, obtains the 
retribution of a heavenly treasure ; and he who 
knows not to be jealous, and who with one heart 
and in meekness loves his brethren, is honoured 
with the recompense of love and peace. In this 
course of virtues we daily run ; to these palms 
and crowns of justice we attain without intermis- 
sion of time. 

17. To these rewards that you also may come 
who had been possessed with jealousy and ran- 

or, " that thou shouidst be 

6 Matt. V. 43-45. 

7 Or, " successive." 
* " ("lenerositas." 
9 Or, "that one should be such; 

such." 

10 Tsa. i. 2. 

" Matt. .\xv. 34. 

'- Pamelius, from four codices, reads, " Let there be the divuie 
reading before the eyes, good works in the hands." 

'J [" Habet et pax coronas suas." Comp. Milton, Sonnet xi.] 

496 

HE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

cour, cast away all that malice wherewith you ; 
were before held fast, and be reformed to the 
way of eternal life in the footsteps of salvation. 
Tear out from your breast thorns and thistles, 
that the Lord's seed may enrich you with a fer- 
tile produce, that the divine and spiritual corn- 
field may abound to the plentifulness of a fruitful 
harvest. Cast out the poison of gall, cast out 
the virus of discords. Let the mind which the 
malice ' of the serpent had infected be purged ; 
let all bitterness which had settled within be soft- 
ened by the sweetness of Christ. If you take 
both meat and drink from the sacrament of the 
cross, let the wood which at Mara ^ availed in a 
figure for sweetening the taste, avail to you in 
in reality for soothing your softened breast ; and 
you shall not strive for a medicine for your in- 
creasing health. Be cured by that whereby you 
had been wounded.^ Love those whom you pre- 
viously had hated ; favour those whom you en- 
vied with unjust disparagements. Imitate good 
men, if you are able to follow them ; but if you 
are not able to follow them, at least rejoice with 
them, and congratulate those who are better than 
you. Make yourself a sharer •♦ with them in 
united love ; make yourself their associate in the 
alliance of charity and the bond of brotherhood. 
Your debts shall be remitted to you when you 
yourself shall have forgiven. Your sacrifices shall 
be received when you shall come in peace to 
(iod. Your thoughts and deeds shall be directed 
from above, when you consider those things 
which are divine and righteous, as it is written : 
" Let the heart of a man consider righteous 
things, that his steps may be directed by the 
Lord." 5 

1 8. And you have many things to consider. 
Think of pai.i.dise, whither Cain does not enter,-' 
who by jealousy slew his brother. 'Hiink of the 
heavenly kingdom, to which the Lord does not 
a>.lmit any but those who are of one heart and 
mind. Consider that those alone can be called 
sons of God who are peacemakers, \vho in 
heavenly ^ birth and by the divine law are made 
one, and respond to the likeness of God the 
Father and of Christ. Consider that we are 
standing under the eyes of God. that we are pur- 
suing the course of our conversation and our 
life, with God Himself looking on and judging, 
that we may then at length be able to attain to 
the result of beholding Him, if we now delight 
Him who sees us, by our actions, if we show 
ourselves worthy of His favour and indulgence ; 

' The Oxford tr.inslator gives" blackness:" the original is " livor." 

* Or "myrrh," variously ^ven in originals as " myrrham " or 
" merrham." 

* [" Unde vnlneratiis fueras, indc curare." Lear, act ii. sc. 4.] 

* " A fellow-heir," according to Baluzius and Routh. 
5 Prov. XV. 1, LXX. 

* " Return " is a more common reading. 

' Routh omits the word " heavenly," on the authority of fourteen 
codices. 

if we, who are always to please Him in His 
kingdom, previously please Him in the world. 

TREATISE XI.8 

EXHORTATION TO MARTYRDOM, ADDRESSED 
TO FORTUNATUS, 

PREFACE. 

1 . You have desired, beloved Fortunatus,^ that, 
since the burden of persecutions and afflictions 
is lying heavy upon us, and in the ending and 
completion of the world the hateful time of Anti- 
christ is already beginning to draw near,'° I would 
collect from the sacred Scriptures some exhorta- 
tions for preparing and strengthening the minds 
of the brethren, whereby I might animate the 
soldiers of Christ for the heavenly and spiritual 
contest. I have been constrained to obey your 
so needful wish, so that as much as my limited 
powers, instructed by the aid of divine inspira- 
tion, are sufficient, some arms, as it were, and 
defences might be brought forth from the Lord's 
precepts for the brethren who are about to fight. 
For it is little to arouse God's people by the 
trumpet call of our voice, unless we confirm 
the faith of believers, and their valour dedicated 
and devoted to God, by the divine readings." 

2. But what more fitly or more fully agrees 
with my own care and solicitude, than to pre- 
pare the people divinely entrusted to me, and ari 
army established in the heavenly camp, by assidu- 
ous exhortations against the darts and weapons 
of the devil ? For he cannot be a soldier fitted 
for the war who has not first been exercised in 
the field ; nor will he who seeks to gain the 
crown of contest be rewarded on the racecourse, 
unless he first considers the use and skilfulness 
of his powers. It is an ancient adversary and an 
old enemy with whom we wage our battle : six 
thousand years are now nearly completed since 
the devil first attacked man.'^ All kinds of temp- 
tation, and arts, and snares for his overthrow, he 
has learned by the very practice of long years. 
If he finds Christ's soldier unprepared, if un- 
skilled, if not careful and watching with his 
whole heart ; he circumvents him if ignorant, he 
deceives him incautious, he cheats him inex- 
])erienced. But if a man, keeping the Lord's 
])recepts, and bravely adhering to Christ,'^ stands 
against him, he must needs be conquered, be- 
cause Christ, whom that man confesses, is un- 
concjuered. 

Assigned to a.d. 252 or 257.] 
thage, A.D. 256, a bishop of Ti 

ucca IS so 

8 (Oxford number, xiii. 

9 [In the Council of Carthage, 
named. ] 

'" I Hippol., p. 242, supra.'\ 

" (Compare, Oh the Glory pf iifnrtyrdont,lh\s volume, infra. 
This treatise seems a prescient admonition against the evils which 
soon after began to infect the Latin theology] 

'- [Note this chronological statement, and compare vol. ii. p. 334, 
note 5, and Elucidation XV. p. 346, same volume.] 

'^ Some read, " bravely abiding in the footsteps of Christ." 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

497 

3. And that I might not extend my discourse, 
beloved brother, to too great a length, and fatigue 
my hearer or reader by the abundance of a too 
diffuse style, I have made a compendium ; so 
that the titles being placed first, which every one 
ought both to know and to have in mind, I might 
subjoin sections of the Lord's word, and establish 
what I had proposed by the authority of the di- 
vine teaching, in such wise as that I might not 
appear to have sent you my own treatise so much, 
as to have suggested material for others to dis- 
course on ; a proceeding which will be of advan- 
tage to individuals with increased benefit. For 
if I were to give a man a garment finished and 
leady, it would be my garment that another was 
making use of, and probably the thing made for 
another would be found little fitting for his figure 
of stature and body. But novv I have sent you 
the very wool and the purple ' from the Lamb, 
by whom we were redeemed and quickened ; 
which, when you have received, you will make 
into a coat for yourself according to your own 
will, and the rather that you will rejoice in it as 
your own private and special garment. And you 
will exhibit to others also what we have sent, that 
they themselves may be able to finish it accord- 
ing to their will ; so that that old nakedness being 
covered, they may all bear the garments of Christ 
robed in the sanctification of heavenly grace. 

4. Moreover also, beloved brethren, I have 
considered it a useful and wholesome plan in an 
exhortation so needful as that which may make 
martyrs, to cut off all delays and tardiness in 
our words, and to put away the windings of hu- 
man discourse, and set down only those things 
which God speaks, wherewith Christ exhorts His 
servants to martyrdom. Those divine precepts 
themselves must be supplied, as it were, for arms 
for the combatants. Let them be the incite- 
ments of the warlike "rumpet ; let them be tlie 
clarion-blast for the warriors. Let the ears be 
roused by them ; let the minds be prepared by 
them ; let the powers both of soul and body be 
strengthened to all endurance of suffering. Let 
us only who, by the Lord's permission, have given 
the first baptism to believers, also prepare each 
one for the second ; urging and teaching that 
this is a baptism greater in grace, more lofty in 
power, more precious in honour — a baptism 
wherein angels baptize — a baptism in ?hich 
God and His Christ exult — a baptism after 
which no one sins any more^ — a baptism which 
completes the increase of our faith — a baptism 
which, as we withdraw from the world, immedi- 
ately associates us with God. In the baptism 
of water is received the remission of sins, in the 
baptism of blood the crown of virtues. This 

' [Compare the paradox of Rev. vii. 14.] 

' [" Baptisma' post quod nemo jam peccat." This gave "the 
baptism of blood " its grand advantage in the martyrs' eyes.] 

thing is to be embraced and desired, and to be 
asked for in all the entreaties of our petitions, 
that we who are God's servants should be alscv 
His friends. 

HE.\DS OF THE FOLLOWING BOOK. 

1. Therefore, in exhorting and preparing our 
brethren, and in arming them with firmness of 
virtue and faith for the heralding forth of the 
confession of the Lord, and for the battle of per- 
secution and suffering, we must declare, in the 
first place, that the idols which man makes for 
himself are not gods. For things which are made 
are not greater than their maker and fashioner ; 
nor can thc'se things protect and preserve any- 
body, which themselves perish out of their tem- 
ples, unless they are preserved by man. But 
neither are those elements to be worshipped^ 
which serve man according to the disposition and 
ordinance of God. 

2. The idols being destroyed, and the truth 
concerning the elements being manifested, we 
must show that God only is to be worshipped. 

3. Then we must add, what is God's threaten- 
ing against those who sacrifice to idols. 

4. Besides, we must teach that God does not 
easily pardon idolaters. 

5. And that God is so angry with idolatry,, 
that He has even commanded those to be slain 
who persuade others to sacrifice and serve- 
idols. 

6. After this we must subjoin, that being re- 
deemed and quickened by the blood of Christ, 
we ought to prefer nothing to Christ, because 
He preferred nothing to us, and on our account 
preferred evil things to good, poverty to riches, 
servitude to rule, death to immortality ; that we,, 
on the contrary, in our sufferings are preferring, 
the riches and delights of paradise to the pov- 
erty of the world, eternal dominion and kingdom 
to the slavery of time, immortality to death, 
God and Christ to the devil and Antichrist. 

7. We must urge also, that when snatched 
from the jaws of the devil, and freed from the 
snares of this world, if they begin to be in diffi- 
culty and trouble, they must not desire to return 
again to the world, and so lose the advantage of 
their withdrawal therefrom. 

8. That we must rather urge on and persevere 
in faith and virtue, and in completion of heav- 
enly and spiritual grace, that we may attain to- 
the palm and to the crown. 

9. For that afflictions and persecutions are 
brought about for this purpose, that we may be 
proved. 

10. Neither must we fear the injuries ana 
penalties of persecutions, because greater is the- 
Lord to protect than the devil to assault. 

3 The Oxford edition here adds, " in the place of gods." 

498 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

1 1 . And lest any one should be frightened j 
and troubled at the afflictions and persecutions 
which we suffer in this world, we must pro\e 
that it was before foretold that the world would 
hold us in hatred, and that it would arouse 
persecutions against us ; that from this very thing, 
that these things come to pass, is manifest the 
truth of the divine promise, in recompenses and 
rewards which shall afterwards follow ; that it is 
no new thing which happens to Christians, since 
from the beginning of the world the good have 
suffered, and have been oppressed and slain by 
the unrighteous. 

12. In the last place, it must be laid down 
what hope and what reward await the righteous 
and martyrs after the struggles and the sufferings 
of this time, and that we shall receive more in 
the reward of our suffering than what we suffer 
here in the passion itself. 

ON THE EXHORTATION TO MART\'RDOM. 

I. That idols are not gods, and that the ele- 
ments are not to be worshipped in the 
place of gods.' 

In the cxiiith Psalm it is shown that " the 
idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the 
work of men's hands. They have a mouth, and 
speak not ; eyes have they, and see not. They 
have ears, and hear not /neither is there any 
breath in their moutli. Let those that make 
them be made like unto them." - Also in the 
Wisdom of Solomon : " They counted all the 
idols of the nations to be gods, which neither 
have the use of eyes to see, nor noses to draw 
breath', nor ears to hear, nor fingers on their 
hands to handle ; and as for their feet, they are 
^low to go. For man made them, and he that 
borrowed his own spirit fashioned them ; but no 
man can make a god like unto himself. For, 
since he is mortal, he worketh a dead thing with 
wicked hands ; for he himself is better than the 
things which he worshippeth, since he indeed 
lived once, but they never." ^ In Exodus also : 
" Thou shalt not make to thee an idol, nor the 
likeness of anything." •» Moreover, in Solomon, 
concerning the elements : " Neither by consid- 
ering the works did they acknowledge who was 
the workmaster ; but deemed either fire, or wind, 
or the swift air, or the circle of the stars, or the 
violent water, or the sun, or the moon, to be 
gods. 5 On account of whose beauty, if they 

' [The astronomical Idols seem to have been the earliest adopted 
(Job xxxi. 27), and so the soul degraded Itself to lower forms and 
to mere fcticliisiii by a process over and over again repealed among 
men. Rom. i. 21, 23.] 

2 Ps. cxxxv. 15-18, cxv. 4-8. 

3 Wisd. XV. 15-17. 
* Ex. XX. 4. 

5 Pamellus and others read here, " the gods who rule over the 
■world." app.Trcntly taking the words from the thirteenth chapter of 
the book of WUdom, and from the Testimonies, iii. 59, below, where 
they are quoted. 

thought this, let them know how much mor* 
beautiful is the Lord than they. Or if they 
admired their powers and operations, let them 
understand by them, that He that made these 
mighty things is mightier than they." ^ 

2. That God alone must be worshipped. 

" As it is written. Thou shalt worship the Lord 
thy God, and Him only shalt thou ser\-e." ^ Also 
in Elxodus : "Thou shalt have none other gods 
beside me." * Also in Deuteronomy : " See ye. 
see ye that I am He, and that there is no God 
beside me. I will kill, and will make alive ; I 
will smite, and I will heal ; and there is none 
who can deliver out of mine hands." ^ In the 
Apocalypse, moreover : " And I saw another 
angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the 
everlasting Gospel to preach over the earth, and 
over all nations, and tribes, and tongues, and 
peoples, saying with a loud voice. Fear God 
rather, and give glory to Him : for the hour of 
His judgment is come ; and worship Him that 
made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all 
that therein is." '° So also the Lord, in His Gos- 
pel, makes mention of the first and second com- 
mandment, saying, " Hear, O Israel, The Lord 
thy God is one God ; " " and, "Thou shalt love 
thy Lord with all thy heart, and with all thy 
soul, and with all thy strength. This is the first ; 
and the second is like unto it. Thou shalt love 
thy neighbour as thyself. On these two com- 
mandments hang all the law and the prophets." '- 
And once more : " And this is life eternal, that 
they may know Thee, the only and true God, 
and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent." '^ 

3. What is God's threatening against those 

who sacrifice to idols? 

In Exodus": "He that sacrificeth unto any 
gods but the Lord only, shall be rooted out." '•♦ 
Also in Deuteronomy: "They sacrificed unto 
demons, and not to God." '5 In Isaiah also : 
" They worshipped those which their fingers have 
made ; and the mean man was bowed down, antl 
the great man was humbled : and I will not for- 
give them." ''' And again : " To them hast thou 
poured out drink-offerings, and to them thou 
hast offered sacrifices. For these, therefore, shall 
I not be angry, saith the Lord ? " '? In Jeremiah 
also : " Walk ye not after other gods, to serve 
them ; and worship them not, and provoke me 

6 Wisd. xiii. 1-4. 
^ Deut. vi. 13, x. 20. 

8 Ex. XX. 3. 

9 Deut. xxxii. 39. 
'° Rev. xlv. 6, 7. 
" Mark xii. 29-31. 
'= Matt. xxii. 37-40. 
'J John xvli. 3. 

'■* Ex. xxii. 20. 
'5 Deut. xxxii. 17. 
16 Isa. li 8, 9. 
'' Isa. Ivii. 6. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

499 

not in the works of your hands, to destroy you." ' 
In the Apocalypse too : " If any man worship 
the beast and his image, and receive his mark 
in his forehead or in his hand, he shall also drink 
'of the wine of the wrath of God, which is mixed 
in the cup of His wrath, and shall be punished 
with fire and brimstone before the eyes of the 
holy angels, and before the eyes of the Lamb : 
and the smoke of their torments shall ascend for 
ever and ever : and they shall have no rest day 
or night, whosoever worship the beast and his 

image. 

4. That God does not easily pardon idolaters. 

Moses in Exodus prays for the people, and 
does not obtain his prayer, saying : " I pray, O 
Lord, this people hath sinned a great sin. They 
have made them gods of gold. x'\nd now, if 
Thou forgivest them their sin, forgive it ; but 
if not, blot me out of the book which Thou hast 
written. And the Lord said unto Moses, If any 
one hath sinned against me, him will I blot out 
of my book." ^ Moreover, when Jeremiah be- 
sought for the people, the Lord speaks to him, 
saying : " And pray not thou for this people, and 
entreat not for them in prayer and supplication ; 
"because I will not hear in the time wherein they 
shall call upon me in the time of their afflic- | 
tion." ■♦ Ezekiel also denounces this same anger 
of God upon those who sin against God, and 
says : " And the word of the Lord came unto 
me, saying. Son of man, whatsoever land sinneth 
against me, by committing an offence, I will 
stretch forth mine hand upon it, and will crush 
the support of the bread thereof; and I will 
send into it famine, and I will take away from it 
man and beast. And though these three men 
were in the midst of it, Noah, Daniel, and Job, 
. they shall not deliver sons nor daughters ; they 
themselves only shall be delivered." 5 Likewise 
in the first book of Kings : " If a man sin by 
offending against another, they shall beseech the 
Lord for him ; but if a man sin against God, 
who shall entreat for him? " ^ 

5. That God is so angry against idolatry, that 

He has even enjoined those to be slain 
who persuade others to sacrifice and 
serve idols. 

In Deuteronomy : " But if thy brother, or thy 
■son, or thy daughter, or thy wife which is in thy 
bosom, or thy friend which is the fellow of thine 
own soul, should ask thee secretly, saying. Let us 
go and serve other gods, the gods of the nations. 

' Jer. vii. 6. 

- Rev. xiv. 9-11. 

3 Ex. xxxii. 31-33. 

■* Jer. vii. 16. 

5 Ezek. xiv. 12-14. 

* I Sam. ii. 25. 

thou shalt not consent unto him, and thou shalt 
not hearken unto him, neither shall thine eye 
spare him, neither shalt thou conceal him, declar- 
ing thou shalt declare concerning him. Thine 
hand shall be upon him first of all to put him to 
death, and afterwards the hand of all the people ; 
and they shall stone him, and he shall die, be- 
cause he hath sought to turn thee away from the 
Lord thy God." i And again the Lord speaks, 
and says, that neither must a city be spared, 
even though the whole city should consent to 
idolatry : " Or if thou shalt hear in one of the 
cities which the Lord thy God shall give thee, 
to dwell there, saying. Let us go and serve other 
gods, which thou hast not known,^ slaying thou 
shalt kill all who are in the city with the slaughter 
of the sword, and burn the city with fire, and it 
shall be without habitation for ever. Moreover, 
it shall no more be rebuilt, that the Lord may 
be turned from the indignation of His anger. 
And He will show thee mercy, and He will pity 
thee, and will multiply thee, if thou wilt heai- 
the voice of the Lord thy God, and wilt observe 
His precepts." 9 Remembering which precept 
and its force, Mattathias slew him who had ap- 
proached the altar to sacrifice. But if before 
the coming of Christ these precepts concerning 
the worship of God and the despising of idols 
were observed, how much more should they be 
regarded since Christ's advent ; since He, when 
He came, not only exhorted us with words, but 
with deeds also, but after all wrongs and contu- 
melies, suffered also, and was crucified, that He 
might teach us to suffer and to die by His ex- 
ample, that there might be no excuse for a man 
not to suffer for Him,'° since He suffered for us ; 
and that since He suffered for the sins of others, 
much rather ought each to suffer for his own 
sins. And therefore in the Gospel He threatens, 
and says : " Whosoever shall confess me before 
men, him will I also confess before my Father 
which is in heaven ; but whosoever shall deny 
me before men, him will I also deny before my 
Father which is in heaven." " The Apostle Paul 
also says : " For if we die with Him, we shall 
also live with Him ; if we suffer, we shall also 
reign with Him ; if we deny Him, He also will 
deny us." "^ John too : " Whosoever denieth the 
Son, the same hath not the Father ; he that ac- 
knowledgeth the Son, hath both the Son and 
the Father." '^ Whence the Lord exhorts and 
strengthens us to contempt of death, saying : 
" Fear not them which kill the body, but are 
not able to kill the soul ; but rather fear Him 

7 Deut. xiii. 6-10. 

8 The Oxford edition inserts here, " Thou shalt inquire diligently; 
and if thoa shalt find that that is certain which is said." 

9 Deut. xiii. 12-18. 

'° Or, " for a man who does not suffer." 
" Matt. y. 3''. 33. 
'-2 rim. ii. 11, 12. 
'^ I John ii. 23. 

500 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

which is able to kill soul and body in Gehenna." ' 
•\nd again : "He that loveth his life shall lose 
it ; and he who hateth his life in this world, shall 
keep it unto life eternal."^ 

6. That, being redeemed and quickened by 

the blood of Christ, we ought to prefer 
nothing to Christ. ^ 

In the Gospel the Lord speaks, and says : 
" He that loveth father or mother more than me, 
is not worthy of me ; and he that loveth son or 
daughter more than me, is not worthy of me ; 
and he that taketh not his cross and followeth 
me, is not worthy of me." ■* So also it is written 
in Deuteronomy : " They who say to their father 
and their mother, I have not known thee, and 
have not acknowledged their own children, these 
have kept Thy precepts, and have observed Thy 
covenant." 5 Moreover, the Apostle Paul says : 
" Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? 
shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or 
hunger, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? As 
it is written, Because for Thy sake we are killed 
all the day long, we are counted as sheep for the 
slaughter. Nay, in all these things we overcome 
on account of Him who hath loved us." ^ And 
again : " Ye are not your own, for ye are bought 
with a great price. Glorify and bear God in 
your body." ? And again : " Christ died for all, 
that both they which live may not henceforth 
live unto themselves, but unto Him which died 
for them, and rose again." ^ 

7. That those who are snatched from the jaws 

of the devil, and delivered from the 
snares of this world,^ ought not again 
to return to the world, lest they should 
lose the advantage of their withdrawal 
therefrom. 

In Exodus the Jewish people, prefigured as a 
shadow and image of us, when, with God for 
their guardian and avenger, they had escaped 
the most severe slavery of Pharaoh and of Egypt 
— that is, of the devil and the world — faithless 
and ungrateful in respect of God, murmur against 
Moses, looking back to the discomforts of the 
desert and of their labour ; and, not imderstand- 
ing the divine benefits of liberty and salvation, 
they seek to return to the slavery of Egypt — 
that is, of the world whence they had been 
drawn forth — when they ought rather to have 

' Matt. X. 28. 
^ John xii. 25. 

3 The Oxford edition adds, " because neither did He account of 
anything before us." 

* Matt. X. 37, 38. 
5 Deut. xxxiii. 9. 

•> Rom. viii. 3^-37. 
' I Cor. vi. 20. 

* 2 Cor. V, 15. 

9 The Oxford edition here interpolates, " if they find themselves 
in straits and tribulations." 

trusted and believed on God, since He who de- 
livers His people from the devil and the world, 
protects them also when delivered. "Wherefore 
hast thou thus done with us," say they, " in cast- 
ing us forth out of Egypt? It is better for us 
to serve the F^gyptians than to die in this wilder- 
ness.. And Moses said unto the people. Trust, 
and stand fast, and see the salvation which is 
from the Lord, which He shall do to you to-day. 
The Lord Himself shall fight for you, and ye 
shall hold your peace." '" The Lord, admonish- 
ing us of this in His (iospel, and teaching that 
we should not return again to the devil and to 
the world, which we have renounced, and whence 
we have escaped, says : " No man looking back, 
and putting his hand to the plough, is fit for the 
kingdom of God." " And again : "And let him 
that IS in the field not return back. Remember 
Lot's wife." '^ And lest any one should be re- 
tarded by any covetousness of wealth or attrac- 
tion of his own people from following Christ, He 
adds, and says : " He that forsaketh not all that 
he hath, cannot be my disciple." '^ 

8. That we must press on and persevere in 
faith and virtue, and in completion of 
heavenly and spiritual grace, that we may 
attain to the palm and the crown. 

In the book of Chronicles : " The Lord is 
with you so long as ye also are with Him ; but 
if ye forsake Him, He will forsake you." '•♦ In 
Ezekiel also : " The righteousness of the right- 
eous shall not deliver him in what day soever he 
may transgress." '5 Moreover, in the Gospel the 
Lord speaks, and says : " He that shall endure to 
the end, the same shall be saved." ''^ And again : 
" If ye shall abide in my word, ye shall be my 
disciples indeed ; and ye shall know the truth, 
and the truth shall make you free." '7 Moreover, 
forewarning us that we ought always to be ready, 
and to stand firmly equipped and armed, He 
adds, and says : " Let your loins be girded about, 
and your lamps burning, and ye yourselves like 
unto men that wait for their lord when he shall 
return from the wedding, that when he cometh 
and knocketh they may open unto him. Blessed 
are those servants whom their lord, when he 
cometh, shall find watching." ''^ Also the blessed 
Apostle Paul, that our fiiith may advance and 
grow, and attain to the highest point, exhorts us, 
saying : " Know ye not, that they which run in a 
race run all indeed, yet one receiveth the prize ? 

'° Ex. xiv. 11-14. 
" Luke ix. 62. 
'- I-iike xvii. 31, 32. 
'3 Luke xiv. 33. 
■< 2 Chron. xv. 2. 
'5 Ezek. xxxiii. 12. 
"' Matt. X. 22. 
'^ John viii. 31, 32. 
" Luke xii. 35-37. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

501 

So run, that ye may obtain.' And they, indeed, 
that they may receive a corruptible crown ; but 
ye an incorruptible." - And again : " No man 
that warreth for God binds himself to anxieties 
of this world, that he may be able to please Him 
to whom he hath approved himself. Moreover, 
also, if a man should contend, he will not be 
crowned unless he have fought lawfully." ^ And 
igain : " Now I beseech you, brethren, by the 
mercy of God, that ye constitute your bodies a 
hving sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God ; and 
be not conformed to this world, but be ye trans- 
formed in the renewing of your spirit, that ye 
may prove what is the will of God, good, and 
acceptable, and perfect."^ And again: "We 
are children of God : but if children, then heirs ; 
heirs indeed of God, but joint-heirs with Christ, 
if we suffer together, that we may also be glori- 
fied together." 5 And in the Apocalypse the 
same exhortation of divine preaching speaks, 
saying, " Hold fast that which thou hast, lest 
another take thy crown;"'' which example of 
perseverance and persistence is pointed out in 
Exodus, when Moses, for the overthrow of Ama- 
lek, who bore the type of the devil, raised up 
his open hands in the sign and sacrament of the 
cross, 7 and could not conquer his adversary un- 
less when he had stedfastly persevered in the 
sign with hands continually lifted up. "And 
at came to pass," says he, " when Moses raised 
up his hands, Israel prevailed ; but when he let 
down his hands, Amalek grew mighty. And they 
took a stone and placed it under him, and he 
sate thereon. And Aaron and Hur held up his 
hands on the one side and on the other side, and 
Moses' hands were made steady even to the going 
down of the sun. And Jesus routed Amalek and 
all his people. And the Lord said unto Moses, 
^Vrite this, and let it be a memorial in a book, 
and tell it in the ears of Jesus ; because in de- 
stroying I will destroy the remembrance of Ama- 
lek from under heaven." ^ 

9. That afflictions and persecutions arise for 
the sake of our being proved. 

In Deuteronomy, " The Lord your God prov- 
eth you, that He may know if ye love the Lord 
your God with all your heart, and with all your 
soul, and with all your strength." '^ And again, 
in Solomon : " The furnace proveth the potter's 
vessel, and righteous men the trial of tribula- 
tion." '° Paul also testifies similar things, and 

' Oxford editicm: " For every one that striveth for the mastery is 
temperate in all things." 

- I Cor- ix. 24, 25. 
3 2 Tim. ii. 4, 5. 

* Rom. xii. i. 2. 

- Rom. viii. 16, 17. 

* Rev. iii. 11. 

' [Vol. i., Justin, pp. 242, 244; Barnabas, zii'd., pp. 144, 14s.] 
^ Ex. xvii. 11-14. 
9 Deut. xiii. 3. 
'° Ecolus. KKvii. 5. 

speaks, saying : " We glory in the hope of the 
glory of God. And not only so, but we glory in 
tribulations also ; knowing that tribulation work- 
eth patience, and patience experience, and ex- 
perience hope ; and hope maketh not ashamed, 
because the love of God is shed abroad in our 
hearts by the Holy Spirit who is given unto us." " 
And Peter, in his epistle, lays it down, and says : 
" Beloved, be not surprised at the fiery heat 
which falleth upon you, which happens for your 
trial ; and fail not, as if some new thing were 
happening unto you. But as often as ye com- 
municate with the sufferings of Christ, rejoice in 
all things, that also in the revelation made of 
His glory you may rejoice with gladness. If ye 
be reproached in the name of Christ, happy are 
ye ; because the name of the majesty and power 
of the Lord resteth upon you ; which indeed 
according to them is blasphemed, but according 
to us is honoured." '^ 

10. That injuries and penalties of persecutions 
are not to be feared by us, because 
greater is the Lord to protect than the 
devil to assault. 

John, in his epistle, proves this, saying : 
" Greater is He who is in you than he that is in 
the world." '^ Also in the cxviith Psalm : " I will 
not fear what man can do unto me ; the Lord is 
my helper." '^ And again : " These in chariots, 
and those in horses ; but we will glory in the 
name of the Lord our God. They themselves 
are bound, '5 and they have fallen ; but we have 
risen up, and stand upright." '^ And even more 
strongly the Holy Spirit, teaching and showing 
that the army of the devil is not to be feared, 
and that, if the foe should declare war against 
us, our hope consists rather in that war itself; 
and that by that conflict the righteous attain to 
the reward of the divine abode and eternal sal- 
vation,— lays down in the twenty-sixth Psalm, 
and says : " Though an host should be arrayed 
against me, my heart shall not fear ; though war 
should rise up against me, in that will I put my 
hope. One hope have I sought of the Lord, 
this will I require ; that I may dwell in the 
house of the Lord all the days of my life." '^ 
Also in Exodus, the Holy Scripture declares that 
we are rather multiplied and increased by afflic- 
tions, saying : " And the more they afflicted 
them, so much the more they became greater, 
and waxed stronger." '^ And in the Apocalypse, 
divine protection is promised to our sufferings. 
" Fear nothing of these things," it says, " which 

" Rom. V. 2-5. 

'2 I Pet. iv. 12-14. 

'3 I John iv. 4. 

'•• Ps. cxviii. 6. [The text adopts the old Latin numbering.] 

'S The Oxford editor reads, " Their feet are bound." 

'6 Ps. XX. 7, 8. 

'7 Ps. xxvii. 3, 4. [The text is numbered by the old Latin.] 

'8 Ex. i. 12. 

502 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

thou shalt suffer." ' Nor does any one else 
jjromise to us security and protection, than He 
who also speaks by Isaiah the prophet, saying : 
" Fear not ; for I have redeemed thee, and 
called thee by thy name : thou art mine. And 
if thou passest through the water, I am with 
thee, and the rivers shall not overflow thee. 
And if thou passest through the fire, thou shalt 
not be burned, and - the flame shall not burn 
thee ; for I, the Lord thy God, the Holy One of 
Israel, am He who maketh thee safe." ^ Who 
also promises in the Gospel that divine help 
shall not be wanting to God's servants in perse- 
cutions, saying : " But when they shall deliver 
you up, take no thought how or what ye shall 
speak. For it shall be given you in that hour ' 
what ye shall speak. For it is not ye who speak, 
but the Spirit of your Father who speaketh in 
you." ■♦ And again : " Settle it in your hearts 
not to meditate before how to answer. For 1 1 
will give you a mouth and wisdom, which your i 
adversaries shall not be able to resist." s As in 
P2xodus God speaks to Moses when he delayed 
and trembled to go to the people, saying : "Who 
hath given a mouth to man ? and who hath ' 
made the stammerer? and who the deaf man? 
and who the seeing, and the blind man? Have 
not I, the Lord God? And now go, and I will 
open thy mouth, and will instruct thee what thou 
shalt say."^ Nor is it difficult for God to open 
the mouth of a man devoted to Himself, and 
to inspire constancy and confidence in speech to 
His confessor ; since in the book of Numbers 
He made even a she-ass to speak against the 
prophet Balaam. 7 Wherefore in persecutions 
let no one think what danger the devil is bring- 
ing in, but let him indeed consider what help 
God affords; nor let human mischief overpower 
the mind, but let divine protection strengthen 
the faith ; since every one, according to the 
Lord's promises and the deservings of his faith, 
receives so much from God's help as he thinks 
that he receives. Nor is there anything which 
the Almighty is not able to grant, unless the fail- 
ing faith of the receiver be deficient and give 
way. 

II. That it was before predicted that the 
world would hold us in abhorrence, 
and that it would stir up persecutions 
against us, and that no new thing is 
happening to the Christians, since from 
the beginning of the world the good 

' Rev. ii. lo. 

2 The common reading is, " through the fire, the flame," etc. 

3 Isa. xliii. 1-3. 

* Matt. X. 19, 20. 

5 Luke xxi. 14, 15. 

*> Ex. vi. II, 12. 

' [Confirmed in the New Testament, as if on purpose to silence un- 
belief (2 Pet. ii. 16). Cyprian is one of the few divines who note the 
light thrown on Balaam's inspiration by the fact thai even a dumb 
beast might be made to speak words, not of his own will.] 

have suffered, and the righteous have 
been oppressed and slain by the un- 
righteous. 

The Lord in the Gospel forewarns and fore- 
tells, saying : " If the world hates you, know that 
it first hated me. If ye were of the world, the 
world would love what is its own : but because 
ye are not of the world, and I have chosen you 
out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. 
Remember the word that I spoke unto you. The 
servant is not greater than his master. If they 
have persecuted me, they will persecute you 
also." ** And again : " The hour will come, that 
every one that killeth you will think that he 
doeth God service ; but they will do this because 
they have not known the Father nor me. But 
these things have I told you, that when the hour 
shall come ye may remember them, because I 
told you."'^ And again: "Verily, verily, I say 
unto you. That ye shall weep and lament, but 
the world shall rejoice ; ye shall be sorrowful, 
but your sorrow shall be turned into joy." '"^ 
And again : " These things have I spoken unto 
you, that in me ye may have peace ; but in the 
world ye shall have tribulation : but be of good 
confidence, for I have overcome the world."" 
And when He was interrogated by His disciples 
concerning the sign of His coming, and of the 
consummation of the world, He answered and 
said : " Take care lest any deceive you : for 
many shall come in my name, saying, I am 
Christ ; and shall deceive many. And ye shall 
begin to hear of wars, and rumours of wars ; see 
that ye be not troubled : for these things must 
needs come to pass, but the end is not yet. 
For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom 
against kingdom : and there shall be famines, 
and earthtpiakes, and ])estilences, in every place. 
But all these things are the beginnings of trav- 
ailings. Then they shall deliver you up into 
affliction, and shall kill you : and ye shall be 
hatefiil to all nations for my name's sake. And 
then shall many be offended, and shall betray 
one another, and shall hate one another. And 
many false prophets shall arise, and shall seduce 
many ; and because wickedness shall abound, 
the love of many shall wax cold. But he who 
shall endure to the end, the same shall be saved. 
And this Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached 
through all the world, for a testimony to all 
nations ; and then shall come the end. When, 
therefore, ye shall see the abomination of deso- 
lation which is spoken of by Daniel the prophet, 
standing in the holy place (let him who readeth 
understand), then let them which are in Judea 
flee to the mountains ; and let him which is on 

8 John XV. 18-20. 

9 John xvi. 2-4. 
'0 John xvi. 20. 
" John xvi. 33. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

503 

the house-roof not go down to take anything 
from the house ; and let him who is in the field 
not return back to carry away his clothes. But 
woe to them that are pregnant, and to those that 
are giving suck in those days ! But pray ye 
that your flight be not in the winter, nor on the 
Sabbath-day : for there shall be great tribulation, 
such as has not arisen from the beginning of the 
world until now, neither shall arise. And unless 
those days should be shortened, no flesh should 
be saved ; but for the elect's sake those days 
shall be shortened. Then if any one shall say 
unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or, Lo, there ; be- 
lieve him not. For there shall arise false Christs, 
and false prophets, and shall show great signs 
and wonders, to cause error, if it be possible, 
even to the elect. But take ye heed : behold, 
I have foretold you all things. If, therefore, 
they shall say to you, Lo, he is in the desert ; 
go not forth : lo, he is in the sleeping chambers ; 
believe it not. For as the flashing of lightning 
goeth forth from the east, and appeareth even 
to the west, so also shall the coming of the Son 
of man be. Wheresoever the carcase shall be, 
there shall the eagles be gathered together. 
But immediately after the affliction of those 
days the sun shall be darkened, and the moon 
shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall 
from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be 
moved : and then shall appear the sign of the 
Son of man in heaven : and all the tribes of 
the earth shall lament, and shall see the Son 
of man coming in the clouds of heaven with 
great power and glory. And He shall send His 
angels with a great trumpet, and they shall gather 
together His elect from the four winds, from the 
heights of heaven, even into the farthest bounds 
thereof." ' And these are not new or sudden 
things which are now happening to Christians ; 
since the good and righteous, and those who 
are devoted to God in the law of innocence and 
the fear of true religion, advance always through 
afflictions, and wrongs, and the severe and mani- 
fold penalties of troubles, in the hardship of a 
narrow path. Thus, at the very beginning of 
the world, the righteous Abel was the first to be 
slain by his brother ; and Jacob was driven into 
exile, and Joseph was sold, and king Saul per- 
secuted the merciful David ; and king Ahab 
endeavoured to oppress Elias, who firmly and 
bravely asserted the majesty of God. Zacharias 
the priest was slain between the temple and the 
altar, that himself might there become a sacri- 
fice where he was accustomed to offer sacrifices 
to God. So many martyrdoms of the righteous 
have, in fact, often been celebrated ; so many 
examples of faith and virtue have been set forth 
to future generations. The three youths, Ananias, 

' Matt. xxiv. 4-31. 

Azarias, and Misael, equal in age, agreeing in 
love, stedfast in faith, constant in virtue, stronger 
than the flames and penalties that urged them, 
proclaim that they only obey God, that they 
know Him alone, that they worship Him alone, 
saying : " O king Nebuchodonosor, there is no 
need for us to answer thee in this matter. For 
the God whom we serve is able to deliver us out 
of the furnace of burning fire ; and He will 
deliver us from thy hands, O king. And if not, 
be it known unto thee, that we do not serve thy 
gods, and we do not adore the golden image 
which thou hast set up." ^ And Daniel, devoted 
to God, and filled with the Holy Spirit, exclaims 
and says : "1 worship nothing but the Lord my 
God, who founded the heaven and the earth." ^ 
Tobias also, although under a royal and tyran- 
nical slavery, yet in feeling and spirit free, main- 
tains his confession to God, and sublimely 
announces both the divine power and majesty, 
saying : " In the land of my captivity I confess 
to Him, and I show forth His power in a sinful 
nation." •♦ What, indeed, do we find in the 
Maccabees of seven brethren, equals alike in 
their lot of birth and virtues, filling up the num- 
ber seven in the sacrament of a perfected com- 
pletion? Seven brethren were thus associating 
in martyrdom. As the first seven days in the 
divine arrangement containing seven thousand 
of years, 5 as the seven spirits and seven angels 
which stand and go in and out before the face ■ 
of God, and the seven-branched lamp in the 
tabernacle of witness, and the seven golden 
candlesticks in the Apocalypse, and the seven 
columns in Solomon upon which Wisdom built 
her house ; so here also the number seven of 
the brethren, embracing, in the quantity of their 
number, the seven churches, as likewise in the 
first book of Kings we read that the barren hath 
borne seven. And in Isaiah seven women lay 
hold on one man, whose name they ask to be 
called upon them. And the Apostle Paul, who 
refers to this lawful and certain number, writes 
to the seven churches. And in the Apocalypse 
the Lord directs His divine and heavenly pre- 
cepts to the seven churches and their angels, 
which number is now found in this case, in the 
seven brethren, that a lawful consummation may 
be completed. With the seven children is mani- 
festly associated also the mother, their origin 
and root, who subsequently begat seven churches, 
she herself having been first, and alone founded 
upon a rock^ by the voice of the Lord. 7 Nor 
is it of no account that in their sufferings the 

2 Dan. iii. 16-18. 

3 Bel and Dragon, ver. 5. 
< Tob. xiii. 6. 

5 [Irenfeus, vol. i. p. 557; also p. 551, and Barnabas, ib., p. 146.] 
f" " Petrum" is the reading of \Iigne; but by far the more au- 
thoritative reading is " Petram," " a rock." 

7 [The seven churches were none of them founded by St. Peter. 
The mother here referred to is therefore the Ecclesia Cathoiicn.^ 

504 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

mother alone is with her children. For martyrs 
-who witness themselves as the sons of God in 
suffering are now no more counted as of any 
father but God, as in the Gospel the Lord 
teaches, saying, " Call no man your father upon 
earth ; for one is your Father, which is in 
heaven." ' But what utterances of confessions 
■did they herald forth I how illustrious, how great 
proofs of faith did they afford 1 The king An- 
tiochus, their enemy — yea, in Antiochus Anti- 
•christ was set forth — sought to pollute the 
mouths of martyrs, glorious and unconquered in 
the spirit of confession, with the contagion of 
swine's flesh ; and when he had severely beaten 
them with whips, and could prevail nothing, 
■commanded iron plates to be heated, which 
being heated and made to glow, he commanded 
him who had first spoken, and had more pro- 
voked the king with the constancy of his virtue 
and faith, to be brought up and roasted, his 
tongue having first been pulled out and cut off, ] 
which had confessed God ; and this happened ; 
the more gloriously to the martyr. For the 
tongue which had confessed the name of God, 
ought itself first to go to God. Then in the 
second, sharper pains having been devised, be- 
fore he tortured the other limbs, he tore off the 
skin of his head with the hair, doubtless with a 
purpose in his hatred. For since Christ is the 
head of the man, and God is the head of Christ, 
he who tore the head in the martyr was perse- 
•cuting (iod antl Christ in that head. But he, 
trusting in liis martyrdom, and promising to him- 
self fro:n tlie retribution of God the reward of 
resurrection, exclaimed and said, "Thou indeed 
impotently destroyest us out of this present life ; 
but the King of the world will raise us uj), who 
■die for His laws, unto the eternal resurrection 
■of life."- The third being challenged, (piickly 
put forth Iiis tongue ; for he had learned from 
his brother to despise the punisliment of cutting 
•off the tongue. Moreover, he firmly held forth 
his hands to be cut off, greatly happy in such a 
mode of punishment, since it was his lot to 
imitate, by stretching forth his hands, the form 
•of his Lord's passion. And also the fourth, with 
like virtue, despising the tortures, and answering, 
to restrain the king, witli a heavenly voice ex- 
claimed, and said, " It is better that those who 
are given to death by men should wait for hope 
from God, to be raised up by Him again to 
eternal life.^ For to thee there shall be no 
resurrection to life." * The fifth, besides tread- 
ing under foot the torments of the king, and his 
severe and various tortures, by the strength of 
faith, animated to prescience also and knowl- 

' Matt, xxiil. 9. 

* 2 Mace. vii. 9. [Heb. xi. 35.] 

3 " To eternal life " is omitted m the Oxford edition. 

* a Mace. vii. 14. 

edge of future events by the Spirit of divinity, 
foretold to the king the wrath of God, and the 
vengeance that should swiftly follow. " Having 
power," said he, "among men, though thou art 
corruptible, thou doest what thou wilt. But 
think not that our race is forsaken of God. 
Abide, and see His great power, how He will 
torment thee and thy seed." 5 What alleviation 
was that to the martyr ! '' how substantial a com- 
fort in his sufferings, not to consider his own 
torments, but to predict the penalties of his 
tormentor ! But in the sixth, not his bravery 
only, but also his humility, is to be set forth ; 
that the martyr claimed nothing to himself, nor 
even made an account of the honour of his own 
confession with proud words, but rather ascribed 
it to his sins that he was suffering persecution 
from the king, while he attributed to God that 
afterwards he should be avenged. He taught 
that martyrs are modest, that they were confi- 
dent of vengeance, and boasted nothing in their 
suffering. " Do not," said he, " needlessly err ; 
for we on our own account suffer these things, 
as sinning against our God. But think not thou 
that thou shalt be unpunished, who darest to fight 
against God." ^ Also the admirable mother, 
who, neither broken down by the weakness of 
her sex, nor moved by her manifold bereave- 
ment, looked upon her dying children with 
cheerfulness, and did not reckon those things 
punishments of her darlings, but glories, giving 
as great a witness to God by the virtue of her 
eyes, as her children had given by the tortures 
and suffering of their limbs ; when, after the 
punishment and slaying of six, there remained 
one of the brethren, to whom the king promised 
riches, and power, and many things, that his 
cruelty and ferocity might be soothed by the 
satisfaction of even one being subdued, and 
asked that the mother would entreat that her 
son might be cast down with herself; she en- 
treated, but it was as became a mother of mar- 
tyrs — as became one who was mindful of the 
law and of God — as became one who loved her 
sons not delicately, but bravely. For she en- 
treated, but it was that he would confess God. 
She entreated that the brother would not be 
separated from his brothers in the alliance of 
praise and glory ; then only considering herself 
the mother of seven sons, if it should happen to 
her to have brought forth seven sons, not to the 
world, but to God. Therefore arming him, and 
strengthening him, and so bearing her son by a 
more blessed birth, she said, " O son, pity me 
that bare thee ten '^ months in the womb, and 
gave thee milk for three years, and nourished 

5 2 Mace. vii. i6. 

6 ■' How great " is added in some editions. 
^ 2 Mace. vii. i8. 

* Otherwise " nine." 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

505 

thee and brought thee up to this age ; I pray 
thee, O son, look upon the heaven and the 
earth ; and having considered all the things 
which are in them, understand that out of noth- 
ing God made these things and the human race. 
Therefore, O son,' do not fear diat executioner ; 
l>ut being made worthy of thy brethren, receive 
death, that in the same mercy I may receive 
thee with thy brethren." ^ The mother's praise 
was great in her exhortation to virtue, but greater 
in the fear of God and in the truth of faith, that 
she promised nothing to herself or her son from 
the honour of the six martyrs, nor believed that 
the prayer of the brothers would avail ^ for the 
salvation of one who should deny, but rather 
persuaded him to become a sharer in their suf- 
fering, that in the day of judgment he might be 
found with his brethren. After this the mother 
also dies with her children ; for neither was any- 
thing else becoming, than that she who had 
borne and made martyrs, should be joined in 
the fellowship of glory with them, and that she 
herself should follow those whom she had sent 
before to God. And lest any, when the oppor- 
tunity either of a certificate or of any such matter 
is offered to him whereby he may deceive, should 
embrace the wicked part of deceivers, let us not 
be silent, moreover, about Eleazar, who, when 
an opportunity was offered him by the ministers 
of the king, that having received the flesh which 
it was allowable for him to partake of, he might 
pretend, for the misguiding of the king, that he 
ate those things which were forced upon him 
from the sacrifices and unlawful meats, would 
not consent to this deception, saying that it was 
fitting neither for his age nor nobility to feign 
that, whereby others would be scandalized and 
led into error ; if they should think that Eleazar, 
being ninety years old, had left and betrayed 
the law of God, and had gone over to the man- 
ner of aliens ; and that it was not of so much 
consequence to gain the short moments of life, 
and so incur eternal punishment from an offended 
God. And he having been long tortured, and 
now at length reduced to extremity, while he 
was dying in the midst of stripes and tortures, 
groaned and said, " O Lord, that hast the holy 
knowledge, it is manifest that although I might 
be delivered from death, I suffer the severest 
pains of body, being beaten with scourges ; but 
with my mind, on acconnt of Thy fear, I will- 
ingly suffer these things." •* Assuredly his faith 
was sincere and his virtue sound, and abundantly 
pure, not to have regarded king Antiochus, but 
God the Judge, and to have known that it could 
not avail him for salvation if he should mock 

■ " Thus it shall turn out that you," etc., is the Oxford reading. 

2 2 Mace. vil. 27. 

3 [This is noteworthy, for obvious reasons.] 
* 2 M.1CC. vi. ^o. 

and deceive man, when God, who is the judge 
of our conscience, and who only is to be feared, 
cannot at all be mocked nor deceived. If, 
therefore, we also live as dedicated and devoted 
to God — if we make our way over the ancient 
and sacred footsteps of the righteous, let us go 
through the same proofs of sufferings, the same 
testimonies of passions, considering the glory of 
our time the greater on this account, that while 
ancient examples may be numbered, yet that 
subsequently, when the abundance of virtue and 
faith was in excess, the Christian martyrs cannot 
be numbered, as the Apocalypse testifies and 
says : " After these things I beheld a great mul- 
titude, which no man could number, of every 
nation, and of every tribe, and people, and lan- 
guage, standing in the sight of the throne and 
of the Lamb ; and they were clothed in white 
robes, and palms were in their hands ; and they 
said with a loud voice. Salvation to our God, 
who sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb ! 
And one of the elders answered and said unto 
me, Who are those which are arrayed in white 
robes, and whence come they? And I said 
unto him. My lord, thou knowest. And he 
said unto me. These are they who have come 
out of great tribulation, and have washed their 
robes, and made them white in the blood of the 
Lamb. Therefore are they before the throne of 
God, and serve Him day and night in His tem- 
ple." 5 But if the assembly of the Christian 
martyrs is shown and proved to be so great, 
let no one think it a hard or a difficult thing to 
become a martyr, when he sees that the crowd 
of martyrs cannot be numbered. 

12. What hope and reward remains for the 
righteous and for martyrs after the con- 
flicts and sufferings of this present time. 

The Holy Spirit shows and predicts by 
Solomon, saying : " And although in the sight 
of men they suffered torments, yet their hope is 
full of immortality. And having been troubled 
in a few things, they shall be in many happily 
ordered, because God has tried them, and has 
found them worthy of Himself. As gold in the 
furnace, He hath tried them ; and as whole burnt- 
offerings of sacrifice, He hath received them, 
and in its season there will be respect of them. 
They will shine and run about as sparks in a place 
set with reeds.*^ They shall judge the nations, 
and have dominion over the peoples ; and their 
Lord shall reign for ever." ^ In the same also 
our vengeance is described, and the repentance 
of those who persecute and molest us is an- 
nounced. " Then," saith he, " shall the righteous 
stand in great constancy before such as have 

5 Rev. vii. 9-15. 

^ In many editions this clause is wanting. 

7 Wisd. iii. 4-8. 

5o6 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

afflicted them, and who have taken away their 
labours ; when they see it, they shall be troubled 
with a horrible fear : and they shall marvel at 
the suddenness of their unexpected salvation, 
baying among themselves, repenting and groan- 
ing for anguish of spirit. These are they whom 
we had sometime in derision and as a proverb 
of reproach. We fools counted their life mad- 
ness, and their end to be without honour. How 
are they numbered among the children of God, 
and their lot is among the saints ! Therefore 
have we erred from the way of truth, and the 
light of righteousness hath not shined unto us, 
and the sun hath not risen upon us. We have 
been wearied in the way of unrighteousness and 
perdition, and have walked through hard deserts, 
but have not known the way of the Lord. What 
hath pride profited us, or what hath the boasting 
of riches brought to us? All these things have 
passed away like a shadow." Likewise in the 
cxvth Psalm is shown the price and the reward 
of suffering : " Precious," it says, " in the sight of 
the Lord is the death of His saints." ' In the 
cxxvth Psalm also is expressed the sadness of 
the struggle, and the joy of the retribution : 
" They who sow," it says, " in tears, shall reap 
in joy. As they walked, they walked and wept, 
casting their seeds ; but as they come again, they 
shall come in exultation, bearing their sheaves." - 
And again, in the cxviiith Psalm : " Blessed are 
those that are undefiled in the way, who walk in 
the law of the Lord. Blessed are they who 
search His testimonies, and seek Him out with 
their whole heart." ^ Moreover, the Lord in 
the Gospel, Himself the avenger of our persecu- 
tion and the rewarder of our suffering, says : 
" Blessed are they who suffer persecution for right- 
eousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of 
heaven." ^ And again : " Blessed shall ye be 
when men shall hate you, and shall separate you, 
and shall expel you, and shall revile your name 
as evil, for the Son of man's sake. Rejoice ye 
in that day, and leap for joy ; for, behold, your 
reward is great in heaven." s And once more : 
" Whosoever shall lose his life for my sake, the 
same shall save it." ^ Nor do the rewards of 
the divine promise attend those alone who are 
reproached and slain ; but if the passion itself 
be wanting to the faithful, while their faith has 
remained sound and unconquered, and having 
forsaken and contemned all his possessions, the 
Christian has shown that he is following Christ, 
even he also is honoured by Christ among the 
martyrs, as He Himself promises and says : 
" There is no man that leaveth house, or land, 

■ Ps. cxvi. 15. 
^ Ps. cxxvi. 5, 6. 
3 Ps. cxix. I, 2. 
* Matt. V. 10. 
5 Luke vi. 22, 23. 
•> Luke ix. 24. 

or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children, for 
the kingdom of God's sake, but shall receive 
seven times as much in this present time, and in 
the world to come eternal life." ^ In the Apoc- 
alypse also He says the same thing : " And I 
saw," saith he, " the souls of them that were 
slain for the name of Jesus and the word of 
God." And when he had placed those who were 
slain in the first place, he added, saying : " And 
whosoever had not worshipped the image of the 
beast, neither had received his mark upon their 
forehead or in their hand ; " all these he joins 
together, as seen by him at one time in the same 
place, and says, " And they lived and reigned 
with Christ."^ He says that all live and reign 
with Christ, not only who have been slain ; but 
even whosoever, standing in firmness of the faith 
and in the fear of God, have not worshipped the 
image of the beast, and have not consented to 
his deadly and sacrilegious edicts. 

13. That we receive more as the reward of 
our suffering than what we endure here 
in the suffering itself, 

The blessed Apostle Paul proves ; who by the 
divine condescension, being caught up into the 
third heaven and into paradise, testifies that he 
heard unspeakable words, who boasts that 
he saw Jesus Christ by the faith of sight, w'-'o 
professes that which he both learnt and saw witn 
the greater truth of consciousness, and says : 
" The sufferings of this present time are not 
worthy to be compared with the coming glory 
which shall be revealed in us." ^ Who, then, 
does not with all his powers labour to attain to 
such a glory that he may become the friend of 
God, that he may at once rejoice with Christy 
that after earthly tortures and punishments he 
may receive divine rewards ? If to soldiers of 
this world it is glorious to return in triumph to 
their country when the foe is vanquished, how 
much more excellent and greater is the glory, 
when the devil is overcome, to return in triumph 
to paradise, and to bring back victorious trophies 
to that place whence Adam was ejected as a 
sinner, after casting down him who formerly had 
cast him down ; to offer to God the most accept- 
able gift — an uncorrupted faith, and an un- 
yielding virtue of mind, an illustrious praise of 
devotion ; to accompany Him when He shall 
come to receive vengeance from His enemies, to 
stand at His side when He shall sit to judge, to 
become co-heir of Christ, to be made equal 
to the angels ; with the patriarchs, with the 
apostles, with the prophets, to rejoice in the 
possession of the heavenly kingdom ! Such 
thoughts as these, what persecution can conquer, 

7 Luke xviii. 29, 30. 

8 Rev. XX. 4, 5 

9 Rom. viii. 18. 

^ 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

507 

what tortures can overcome ? The brave and 
stedfast mind, founded in religious meditations, 
endures ; and the spirit abides unmoved against 
all the terrors of the devil and the threats of the 
world, when it is strengthened by the sure and 
solid faith of things to come. In persecutions, 
earth is shut up,' but heaven is opened ; Anti- 
christ is threatening, but Christ is protecting ; 
death is brought in, but immortality follows ; the 
world is taken away from him that is slain, but 
paradise is set forth to him restored ; the life 
of time is extinguished, but the life of eternity 
is realized. What a dignity it is, and what a 
security, to go gladly from hence, to depart 
gloriously in the midst of afflictions and tribula- 
tions ; in a moment to close the eyes with which 
men and the world are looked upon, and at once 
to open them to look upon God and Christ ! 
Of such a blessed departure how great is the 
swiftness ' You shall be suddenly taken away 
from earth, to be placed in the heavenly king- 
doms. It behoves us to embrace these things 
in our mind and consideration, to meditate on 
these things day and night. If persecution 
should fall upon such a soldier of God, his virtue, 
prompt for battle, will not be able to be over- 
come. Or if his call should come to him before, 
his faith shall not be without reward, seeing it 
was prepared for martyrdom ; without loss of 
time, the reward is rendered by the judgment 
of God. In persecution, the warfare, — in 
peace, the purity of conscience, is crowned.^ 

TREATISE XII.3 

THREE BOOKS OF TESTIMONIES AGAINST 
THE JEWS. 

Cyprian to his son Quirinus, greeting. It was 
necessary, ray beloved son, that I should obey 
your spiritual desire, which asked with most 
■urgent petition for those divine teachings where- 
with the Lord has condescended to teach and 
instruct us by the Holy Scriptures, that, being led 
away from the darkness of error, and enlightened 
by His pure and shining light, we may keep the 
way of life through the saving sacraments. And 
indeed, as you have asked,, so has this discourse 
been arranged by me ; and this treatise has been 
ordered in an abridged compendium, so that I 
should not scatter what was written in too diffuse 
■ an abundance, but, as far as my poor memory 
suggested, might collect all that was necessary 
in selected and connected heads, under which 
I may seem, not so much to have treated the 
subject, as to have afforded material for others 

I ' 

tions 

The eyes of the eanh are closed " is the reading of other edi- 

^ [It is hard for us to retain the fact that for three hundred years 
to be a Christian was to be a martyr, at least in spirit and in daily 
liability, i Cor. xv. 31; 1 Pet. iv. 12. J 

J [Addressed to Quirinus, and dated .^.d. 248.] 

to treat it. Moreover, to readers also, brevity 
of the same kind is of very great advantage, in 
that a treatise of too great length dissipates the 
understanding and perception of the reader, 
while a tenacious memory keeps that which is 
read in a more exact compendium. But I have 
comprised in my undertaking two books of 
equally moderate length : one wherein I have 
endeavoured to show that the Jews, according 
to what had before been foretold, had departed 
from God, and had lost God's favour, which had 
been given them in past time, and had been 
promised them for the future ; while the Chris- 
tians had succeeded to their place, deserving 
well of the Lord by faith, and coming out of all 
nations and from the whole world. The 'iecond 
book likewise contains the sacrament of Christ, 
that He has come who was announced accord- , 
ing to the Scriptures, and has done and perfected ' 
all those things whereby He was foretold as being 
able to be perceived and known.'* And these 
things may l3e of advantage to you meanwhile, 
as you read, for forming the first lineaments of 
your faith. More strength will be given you, 
and the intelligence of the heart will be effected 
more and more, as you examine more fully the 
Scriptures, old and new, and read through the 
complete volumes of the spiritual books. 5 For 
now we have filled a small measure from the 
divine fountains, which in the meantime we would 
send to you. You will be able to drink more 
plentifully, and to be more abundantly satisfied, 
if you also will approach to drink together with 
us at the same springs of the divine fulness.^ I 
bid you, beloved son, always heartily farewell. 

FIRST BOOK. 
HEADS. 

1. That the Jews have fallen under the heavy 
wrath of God, because they have departed from 
the Lord, and have followed idols. 

2. Also because they did not believe the 
prophets, and put them to death. 

3. That it was previously foretold that they 
would neither know the Lord, nor understand 
nor receive Him. 

4. That the Jews would not understand the 
Holy Scriptures, but that they would be intelli- 
gible in the last times, after Christ had come. 

5. That the Jews could understand nothing 
of the Scriptures unless they first believed on 
Christ. 

6. That they would lose Jerusalem, and leave 
the land which they had received. 

■* This sentence is otherwise read, " whereby it may be perceived 
and known that it is He Himself who was foretold." 

s [p. 227, note 3, supra. I cannot but note repeatedly how abso- 
lutely the primitive Fathers relied on the Holy Sc'ptures, and com- 
mended a Kerean use of them. Acts xvii. ii.J 

f> The canon assumed to be universally known. 1 

;o8 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

7. That they would also lose the Light of the 
Lord. 

8. That the first circumcision of the flesh was 
made void, and a second circumcision of the 
spirit was promised instead. 

9. That the former law, which was given by 
Moses, was about to cease. 

10. That a new law was to be given. 

11. That another dispensation and a new 
covenant was to be given. 

12. That the old baptism was to cease, and a 
new one was to begin. 

13. That the old yoke was to be made void, 
and a new yoke was to be given. 

14. That the old pastors were to cease, and 
new ones to begin. 

15. That Christ should be God's house and 
temple, and that the old temple should pass 
away, and a new one should begin. 

16. That the old sacrifice should be made 
void, and a new one should be celebrated. 

I 7. That the old priesthood should cease, and 
a new priest should come who should be for ever. 

18. That another prophet, such as Moses, was 
promised, to wit, who should give a new testa- 
ment, and who w^as rather to be listened to. 

19. That two peoples were foretold, the elder 
and the younger ; that is, the ancient people of 
the Jews, and the new one which should be of us. 

20. That the Church, which had previously 
been barren, should have more sons from among 
the Gentiles than the synagogue had had before. 

21. That the Gentiles should rather believe in 
Christ. 

22. That the Jews should lose the bread and 
the cup of Christ, and all His grace ; while we 
should receive them, and that the new name of 
Christians should be blessed in the earth. 

23. That rather the Gentiles than the Jews 
should attain to the kingdom of heaven. 

24. That by this alone the Jews could obtain 
pardon of their sins, if they wash away the blood 
of Christ slain in His baptism, and, passing over 
into the Church, should obey His precepts.' 

TESTIMONIES. 

I. That the Jews have fallen under the heavy 
wrath of God because they have forsaken 
the Lord, and have followed idols. 

In Exodus the people said to Aaron : "Arise, 
and make us gods which shall go before us : be- 
cause as for this man Moses, who brought us out 
of Egypt, we know not what has become of him." - 
In the same place also Moses says to the Lord : 
" O Lord, I pray thee, this people have sinned 

' [These twenty-four propositions are specially worthy of the 
consideration of the young theologian who would cle.irly comprehend 
the (lid Law and the New as St. Paul has expounded them in his 
Kpistle to the Romans, and elsewhere.] 

- £x. xxxii. I. 

a great sin. They have made to themselves gods 
of gold and silver. And now, if thou wilt forgive 
them their sin, forgive ; but if not, blot me out 
of the book which Thou hast written. And the 
Lord said unto Moses, If any one hath sinned 
against me, him will I blot out of my book." ^ 
Likewise in Deuteronomy : "They sacrificed unto 
demons, and not unto God." •♦ In the book of 
Judges too : " And the children of Israel did 
evil in the sight of the Lord God of their fathers, 
who brought them out of the land of Egy])t, and 
followed the gods of the peoples that were round 
about them, and offended the Lord, and forsook 
God, and ser\'ed Baal." s Also in the same place : 
" And the children of Israel added again to do 
evil -' in the sight of the Lord, and served Baal 
and the gods of the strangers, and forsook the 
Lord, and served Him not." ^ In Malachi : 
" Judah is forsaken, and has become an abomi- 
nation in Israel and in Jerusalem, because Judah 
has profaned the holiness of the Lord in those 
things wherein He hath loved, and courted strange 
gods. The Lord will cut off the man who doeth 
this, and he shall be made base in the tabernacles 
of Jacob." 8 

2. Also because they did not believe the 
prophets, and put them to death. 

In Jeremiah the Lord says : " I have sent unto 
you my servants the prophets. Before the day- 
light I sent them (and ye heard me not, and did 
not listen with your ears), saying, Let every one 
of you be converted from his evil way, and from 
your most wicked desires ; and ye shall dwell in 
that land which I have given you and your fathers 
for ever and ever." ^ And again : '° " Go not 
after other gods, to serve them, and do not wor- 
ship them ; and i:»rovoke me not to anger in the 
works of your hands to scatter you abroad ; and 
ye have not hearkened unto me." " Also in 
the third book of the Kings, Elias saith unto the 
Lord : " In being jealous I have been jealous for 
the Lord God Almighty ; because the children 
of Israel have forsaken Thee, have demolished 
Thine altars, and ha\c slain Thy prophets with 
the sword ; and I have remained solitary, and 
they seek my life, to take it away from me." '^ 
In Ezra also : " They have fallen away from 
Thee, and have cast Thy law behind their backs, 
and have killed Thy prophets which testified 
against them that they should return to Thee." '^ 

3 Ex. xxxii. 31-33. 

* Dcut. xxxii. 17. 

5 Judg. ii 11-13. 

*> " And again they did evil." 

7 Judg. iv. I. 

8 Mai. ii. II. 

9 Jer. vii. 25, xxv. 4. 

'° The words " and again " are sometimes omitted: and sometimes 
read " Moreover, in the same place." 
" Jer xxv. 6, 7. 
'-' I Kings xix. 10. 
'J Neh. ix. 26. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

509 

3. That it was previously foretold that they 
would neither know the Lord, nor under- 
stand, nor receive Him. 

In Isaiah : " Hear, O heaven, and give ear, O 
earth : for the Lord hath spoken ; I have be- 
gotten and brought up children, but they have 
rejected me. The ox knoweth his owner, and 
the ass his master's crib : but Israel hath not 
known me, and my people hath not perceived 
me. Ah sinful nation, a people filled with sins, 
a wicked seed, corrupting children : ye have 
forsaken the Lord, and have sent that Holy One 
of Israel into anger." ' In the same also the 
Lord says : " Go and tell this people, Ye shall 
hear with the ear, and shall not understand ; and 
seeing, ye shall see, and shall not perceive. For 
the heart of this people hath waxed gross, and 
they hardly hear with their ears, and they have 
shut up their eyes, lest haply they should see with 
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and under- 
stand with their heart, and should return, and I 
should heal them." - Also in Jeremiah the Lord 
says : " They have forsaken me, the fountain of 
living water, and have dug for themselves worn- 
out cisterns, which could not hold water." ^ 
Moreover, in the same : " Behold, the word of 
the Lord has become unto them a reproach, and 
they do not wish for it." •* Again in the same 
the Lord says : " The kite knoweth his time, the 
turtle, and the swallow ; 5 the sparrows of the 
field keep the time of their coming in ; but my 
people doth not know the judgment of the Lord. 
How say ye. We are wise, and the law of the 
Lord is with us ? The false measurement ^ has 
been made vain ; the scribes are confounded ; 
the wise men have trembled, and been taken, be- 
cause they have rejected the word of the Lord." 7 
In Solomon also : " Evil men seek me, and shall 
not find mc ; for they held wisdom in hatred, 
and did not receive the word of the Lord," " 
Also in the twenty-seventh Psalm : " Render to 
them their deserving, because they have not per- 
ceived in the works of the Lord." ^ Also in the 
eighty-first Psalm : " They have not known, 
neither have they understood ; they shall walk on 
in darkness." '° In the Gospel, too, according to 
John : " He came unto His own, and His own 
received Him not. As many as received Him, 
to them gave He power to become the sons of 
God who believe on His name." " 

' Isa. i. 2-4. 

- Isa vi. g, lo. 

3 Jer. ii. 13. 

■* Jer. vi. 10. 

5 According to the Oxford edition: " The turtle and the swallow 
knoweth its time," etc. 

'' Six ancient authorities have " your measurement." 

'' Jer. viii. 7-9. 

^ Prov. i. 28, 29. 

9 Ps. xxviii. 4, 5. 
"^ Ps Ixxxii. 5. 
^' John i. II, 12. 

4. That the Jews would not understand the 

Holy Scriptures, but that they would be 
.intelligible in the last times, after that 
Christ had come. 

In Isaiah : "And all these words shall be unto 
you as the words of a book that is sealed, which, 
if you shall give to a man that knoweth letters 
to read, he shall say, I cannot read, for it is 
sealed. But in that day the deaf shall hear the 
words of the book, and they who are in darkness 
and in a cloud ; the eyes of the blind shall see." '^ 
Also in Jeremiah : " In the last of the days ye 
shall know those things." '^ In Daniel, moreover : 
" Secure the words, and seal the book until the 
time of consummation, until many learn, and 
knowledge is fulfilled, because when there shall 
be a dispersion they shall know all these things." "* 
Likewise in the first Epistle of Paul to the Cor- 
inthians : " Brethren, I would not that ye should 
be ignorant, that all our fathers were under the 
cloud." '5 Also in the second Epistle to the Cor- 
inthians : " Their minds are blinded even unto 
this day, by this same veil which is taken away 
in Christ, while this same veil remains in the 
reading of the Old Testament, which is not un- 
veiled, because it is made void in Christ ; and 
even to this day, if at any time Moses is read, 
the veil is upon their heart. But by and by, 
when they shall be turned unto the Lord, the 
veil shall be taken away." '^ In the Gospel, the 
Lord after His resurrection says : " These are 
the words which I spake unto you while I was 
yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled 
which are written in the law of Moses, and in 
the prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning me. 
Then opened He their understanding, that they 
might understand the Scriptures ; and said unto 
them, That thus it is written, and thus it behoved 
Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead 
the third day ; and that repentance and remis- 
sion of sins should be preached in His name 
even among all nations." '7 

5. That the Jews could understand nothing of 

the Scriptures unless they first believed 
in Christ. 

In Isaiah : " And if ye will not believe, neither 
will ye understand." '*^ Also the Lord in the 
Gospel : " For if ye believe not that I am He, 
ye shall die in your sins." '^ Moreover, that 
righteousness should subsist by faith, and that in 
it was life, was predicted in Habakkuk :' " Now 

'^ Isa. xxix. II- 18. 
'3 Jer. xxiii. 20. 
'< Dan. xii. 4-7. 
'5 I Cor. X. I. 

'* 2 Cor. iii. 14-16. There is a singular confuson in the reading 
of this quotation. The translator has followed Migne's text. 
'7 Luke xxiv. 44-47. 
'^ Isa. vii, 9. 
'9 John viii. 24. 

5IO 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

the jvist shall live by faith of me." ' Hence 
Abraham, the father of the nations, believed ; in 
Genesis : " Abraham believed in God, and it 
was counted unto him for righteousness." ^ In 
like manner, Paul to the Galatians : " Abraham 
l)elicved in (iod, and it was counted unto him 
for righteousness. Ye know, therefore, that they 
which are of faith, the same are children of Abra- 
ham. But the Scripture, foreseeing that God 
justifieth the heathens by faith, foretold to Abra- . 
ham that all nations should be blessed in him. 
Therefore they who are of faith are blessed ^ 
with faithful Abraham." * 

6. That the Jews should lose Jerusalem, and 

should leave the land which they had 
received. 

In Isaiah : " Your country is desolate, your 
cities are burned with fire : your land, strangers 
shall devour it in your sight ; and the daughter 
of Zion shall be left deserted, and overthrown 
by foreign peoples, as a cottage in a vineyard, 
and as a keeper's lodge in a garden of cucum- 
bers, as a city which is besieged. And unless 
the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a seed, we should 
have been as Sodoma, and we should have been 
like unto Gomorrah." s Also in the Gospel the 
Lord says : " Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest 
the prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto 
thee, how often would I have gathered thy chil- 
dren as a hen gathereth her chickens under her 
wings, and thou wouldst not ! Behold, your 
house shall be left unto you desolate."^ 

7. Also that they should lose the Light of the 

Lord. 

In Isaiah : " Come ye, and let us walk in the 
light of the Lord. For He hath sent away His 
people, the house of Israel." 7 In His (iospel 
also, according to John : " That was the true 
light which lighteth every man that cometh into 
this world. He was in this world, and the world 
was made by Him, and the world knew Him 
not." ^ Moreover, in the same place : " He that 
believeth not is judged already, because he hath 
not believed in the name of the only begotten 
Son of God. And this is the judgment, that 
light is come into the world, and men loved 
darkness rather than light." '^ 

8. That the first circumcision of the flesh is 

made void, and the second circumcision 
of the spirit is promised instead. 

' Hab. ii. 4. 

^ Gen. XV. 6. 

3 The Burgundian codex reads, " are justified." 

* Gal. iii. 6-9. 
s Isa. i. 7-9. 

6 Matt xxiii. 37, 38. 

7 Isa. ii. 5, 6. 

* John i. 9, 10. 

9 John iii. 18, 19. 

In Jeremiah: "Thus saith the Lord to the 
men of Judah, and to them who inhabit Jerusa- 
lem, Renew newness among you, and do not 
sow among thorns : circumcise yourselves to 
your God, and circumcise the foreskin of your 
heart ; lest my anger go forth like fire, and burn 
you up, and there be none to extinguish it." '° 
Also Moses says : " In the last days God will 
circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, 
to love the Lord thy God." " Also in Jesus the 
son of Nave : " And the Lord said unto Jesus, 
Make thee small knives of stone, very sharp, and 
set about to circumcise the children of Israel 
for the second time." '^ Paul also, to the Colos- 
sians : " Ye are circumcised with the circumcis- 
ion not made with hands in the putting off of 
the flesh, but with the circumcision of Christ." '^ 
Also, because Adam was first made by God 
uncircumcised, and righteous Abel, and Enoch, 
who pleased God and was translated ; and Noah, 
who, when the world and men were perishing 
on account of transgressions, was chosen alone, 
that in him the human race might be preserved ; 
and Melchizedek, the priest according to whose 
order Christ was promised. Then, because that 
sign did not avail women, '+ but all are sealed by 
the sign of the Lord. 

9. That the former law which was given by 

Moses was to cease. 

In Isaiah : " Then shall they be manifest who 
seal the law, that they may not learn ; and he 
shall say, I wait upon the Lord, who turneth 
away His face from the house of Jacob, and I 
shall trust in Him." •= In the Gospel also : "All 
the prophets and the law prophesied until 
John." "^ 

10. That a new law was to be given. 

In Micah : " For the law shall go forth out 
of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusa- 
lem. And He shall judge among many peoples, 
and He shall subdue and uncover strong na- 
tions." '7 Also in Isaiah : " For from Sion shall 
go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from 
Jerusalem ; and He shall judge among the na- 
tions." '^ Likewise in the Gospel according to 
Matthew : " And behold a voice out of the cloud, 
saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am 
well pleased ; hear ye Him. " '^ 

'° Jer. iv. 3, 4. 
" Deut. xxx. 6. 
'- Josh. V. 2. 
'3 Col. ii. II. 

'■» This appears to be the natural reading, but it rests on slight au- 
thority; the better accredited reading being " ^""-'•"'•■^ " f'^' " <"»'";r,,c " 
'5 Lsa. viii. 16, 17. 
'6 Matt, xi 13. 
'7 Mic. iv. 2, 3. 
'3 Isa. ii. 3, 4. 
19 Matt. xvii. 5. 

' seminis " for " feminis." 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

511 

11. That another dispensation and a new cov- 

enant was to be gi\'en. 

In Jeremiah : " Behold, the days come, saith 
the Lord, and I will complete for the house of 
Israel, and for the house of Judah, a new testa- 
ment, not according to the testament which I 
ordered with their fathers in that day in which 
I took hold of their hands to bring them out of 
the land of Egypt, because they remained not 
in my testament, and I disregarded them, saith 
the Lord : Because this is the testament which I 
will establish with the house of Israel after those 
days, saith the Lord : I will give them my laws, 
and into their minds I will write them ; and I 
will be to them for a God, and they shall be to 
ine for a people ; and they shall not teach every 
man his brother, saying. Know the Lord : for all 
shall know me, from the least even to the greatest 
of them : for I will be merciful to their iniquities, 
and will no more be mindful of their sins." ' 

12. That the old baptism should cease, and a 

new one should begin. 

In Isaiah : " Therefore remember ye not the 
former things, neither reconsider the ancient 
things. Behold, I make new the things which 
shall now arise, and ye shall know it ; and I will 
make in the desert a way, and rivers in a dry 
place, to give drink to my chosen race, my peo- 
ple whom I acquired, that they should show 
forth my praises." ^ In the same also : " If they 
thirst, He will lead them through the deserts ; 
He will bring forth water from the rock ; the 
rock shall be cloven, and the water shall flow : 
and my people shall drink." ^ Moreover, in the 
Gospel according to Matthew, John says : " I 
indeed baptize you with water unto repentance : 
but He that cometh after me is mightier than I, 
whose shoes I am not worthy to bear ; He shall 
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire." ■♦ 
Also according to John : " Except a man be 
born of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot 
enter into the kingdom of God. For that which 
is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is 
born of the Spirit is spirit." 5 

13. That the old yoke should be made void, 

and a new yoke should be given. 

In the second Psalm : " For what purpose 
have the heathen raged, and the people ima- 
gined vain things? The kings of the earth stood 
up, and the rulers have gathered together against 
the Lord, and against His Christ. Let us break 
their bonds asunder, and cast away their yoke 
from us." ^ Likewise m the Gospel according 

' Ter. x.vxi. ^1-34. 
- Isa. xliii. 18-21 
■5 Isa. xlvUi. 21. 
* Matt. iii. ii. 
5 John iii. 5, 6. 
^ "P*. ii. 1-3. 

to Matthew, the Lord says : " Come unto me, 
all ye that labour and are burdened, and I will 
cause you to rest. Take my yoke upon you, 
and learn of me ; for I am meek and lowly in 
heart : and ye shall find rest unto your souls. 
For my yoke is excellent, and my burden is 
light." 7 In Jeremiah : " In that day I will shat- 
ter the yoke from their neck, and will burst their 
fetters ; and they shall not labour for others, but 
they shall labour for the Lord God ; and I will 
raise up David a king unto them." ^ 

14. That the old pastors should cease and 
new ones begin. 

In Ezekiel : " Wherefore thus saith the Lord, 
Behold, I am above the shepherds ; and I will 
require my sheep from their hands, and I will 
turn them away from feeding my sheep ; and 
they shall feed them no more, and I will deliver 
my sheep from their mouth, and I will feed 
them with judgment." ^ In Jeremiah the Lord 
says : "And I will give you shepherds according 
to my own heart, and they shall feed you with 
the food of discipline." '° In Jeremiah, more- 
over : " Hear the word of the Lord, ye nations, 
and tell it to the islands which are afar off. Say, 
He that scattereth Israel will gather him, and 
will keep him as a shepherd his flock : for the 
Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and taken him ou*: 
from the hand of him that was stronger than 
he." " 

15- 

In 

That Christ should be the house and tem- 
ple of God, and that the old temple 
should cease, and the new one should 
begin. 

the second book of Kings : " And the 
word of the Lord came to Nathan, saying. Go 
and tell my servant David, Thus saith the Lord, 
Thou shalt not build me an house to dwell in ; 
but it shall be, when thy days shall be fulfilled, 
and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I will raise 
up thy seed after thee, w"hich shall come from 
thy bowels, and I wall make ready his kingdom. 
He shall build me an house in my name, and I 
will raise up his throne for ever ; and I will be to 
him for a father, and he shall be to me for a son : 
and his house shall obtain confidence, and his 
kingdom for evermore in my sight." '^ Also in 
the Gospel the Lord says : " There shall not be 
left in the temple one stone upon another that 
shall not be thrown do-«Ti." '^ And " After three 
days another shall be raised up without hands." '+ 

" Matt. xi. 28-30. 

^ Jer. XXX. 8, 9. 

9 Ezek. xxxiv. 10-16. 
'° Jer. iii. 15. 
" Jer. xxxi. 10, 11. 
'- 2 Sam. vii. 4, 5, 12-16. 
'3 Matt. xxiv. 2. 
'* John ii. ly; Mark xiv. 58, 

512 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

1 6. That the ancient sacrifice should be made 

void, and a new one should be cele- 
brated. 

In Isaiah : " For what purpose to me is the 
inultitude of your sacrifices? saith the Lord: I 
am full ; I will not have the burnt sacrifices of 
rams, and fat of lambs, and blood of bulls and 
goats. For who hath required these things from 
your hands? " ' Also in the forty-ninth Psalm : 
•• I will not eat the flesh of bulls, nor drink the 
blood of goats. Offer to God the sacrifice of 
praise, and pay your vows to the Most High. 
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will 
deliver thee : and thou shalt glorify me." ^ In 
the same Psalm, moreover : " The sacrifice of 
praise shall glorify me : therein is the way in 
which I will show him the salvation of (iod."^ 
In the fourth Psalm too : " Sacrifice the sacri- 
fice of righteousness, and hope in the Lord." •* 
Likewise in Malachi : "I have no pleasure con- 
cerning you, saith the Lord, and I will not have 
an accepted offering from your hands. Because 
from the rising of the sun, even unto the going 
down of the same, my name is glorified among 
the Gentiles ; and in every place odours of 
incense are offered to my name, and a pure sac- 
rifice, because great is my name among the 
nations, saith the Lord." s 

1 7. That the old priesthood should cease, and 

a new priest should come, who should 
be for ever. 

In the cixth Psalm : " Before the morning 
star I begat thee. The Lord hath sworn, and 
He will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever> 
after the order of Melchizedek." ^ Also in the 
first book of Kings, God says to the priest Eli : 
" And I will raise up to me a faithful priest, who 
shall do all things which are in my heart : and I 
will build him a sure house ; and he shall pass in 
the presence of my anointed ones for all days. 
And it shall be, whosoever shall remain in thine 
house, shall come to worship for an obolus of 
money, and for one loaf of bread." ' 

18. That another Prophet such as Moses was 

promised, to wit, one who should give 
a new testament, and who rather ought 
to be heard. 

In Deuteronomy God said to Moses : " And 
the Lord said to me, A Prophet will I raise up 
to them from among their brethren, such as 

' Isa. i. II, 12. 
a Ps. 1. n-15. 

3 Ps. 1. 23. 

* Ps iv. 5 
5 Mai. i. 10, II 
chizedck. Oen. xiv 

fP. 251, note I, supra. The oblation of Mel- 
18. The Oxford translator adds, " with the in- 
cense of pious prayers." See Justin, vol. i. p. 215, cap. xli., and 
Irenaeus, vol. i. p. 484. j 
* Ps. ex. 3. 
' I Sam li. 35, 36. 

thee, and I will give my word in His mouth \ and 
He shall speak unto them that which I shall 
command Him. And whosoever shall not hear 
whatsoever thmgs that Prophet shall speak in 
my name, I will avenge it." ^ Concerning 
whom also Christ says in the Gospel according 
to John : " Search the Scriptures, in which ye 
think ye have eternal life. These are they 
which set forth testimony concerning me ; and 
ye will not come to me, that ye might have life. 
Do not think that I accuse you to the Father : 
there is one that accuseth you, even Moses, on 
whom ye hope. For if ye had believed Moses,, 
ye would also believe me : for he wrote of me. 
But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye 
believe my words? " ^ 

19. That two peoples were foretold, the elder 

and the younger ; that is, the old peo- 
ple of the Jews, and the new one which 
should consist of us. 

In Genesis : " And the Lord said Tinto Re- 
bekah, Two nations are in thy womb, and two 
peoples shall be separated from thy belly ; and 
the one people shall overcome the other people ; 
and the elder shall serve the younger." '" Also 
in Hosea : " I will call them my people that are 
not my people, and her beloved that was not 
beloved. For it shall be, in that place in which 
it shall be called not my people, they shall be 
called the sons of the living God." " 

20. That the Church which before had been- 

barren should have more children from 
among the Gentiles than what the syn- 
agogue had had before. 

In Isaiah : " Rejoice, thou barren, that bar- 
est not ; and break forth and cry, thou that 
travailest not : because many more are the chil- 
dren of the desolate one than of her who hath 
an husband. For the Lord hath said. Enlarge 
the place of thy tabernacle, and of thy curtains, 
and fasten them : spare not, make long thy 
measures, and strengthen thy stakes : stretch 
forth yet to thy right hand and to thy left hand ; 
and thy seed shall possess the nations, and shall 
inhabit the deserted cities. Fear not ; because 
thou shalt overcome : nor be afraid because 
thou art cursed ; for thou shalt forget thy eternal 
confusion."'- Thus also to Abraham, when his 
former son was born of a bond-woman, Sarah 
remained long barren ; and late in old age bare 
her son Isaac, of promise, who was the type of 
Christ. Thus also Jacob received two wives : 
the elder Leah, with weak eyes, a type of the 

8 Deut. xviii. 18, 19. 

9 John V. 39, 40, 45-47- 
■° (len. XXV. 23. 

" Hos. ii. 23, I. 10. 
*- Isa. liv. i-A. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

513 

synagogue ; the younger the beautiful Rachel, 
a type of the Church, who also remained long 
barren, and afterwards brought forth Joseph, 
who also was himself a type of Christ. And in 
the first of Kings it is said that Elkanah had 
two wives : Peninnah, with her sons ; and Han- 
nah, barren, from whom is born Samuel, not 
according to the order of generation, but accord- 
ing to the mercy and promise of God, when she 
had prayed in the temple ; and Samuel being 
born, was a type of Christ. Also in the first 
book of Kings : " The barren hath borne seven ; 
and she that had many children has grown 
weak." ' But the seven children are the seven 
churches. Whence also Paul wrote to seven 
churches ; and the Apocalypse sets forth seven 
churches, that the number seven may be pre- 
served ; as the seven days in which God made 
the world ; as the seven angels who stand and 
go in and out before the face of God, as Raphael 
the angel says in Tobit ; and the sevenfold lamp 
in the tabernacle of witness ; and the seven 
eyes of God, which keep watch over the world ; 
and the stone with seven eyes, as Zechariah says ; 
and the seven spirits ; and the seven candlesticks 
in the Apocalypse ; and the seven pillars upon 
which Wisdom hath builded her house in Solo- 
mon. 

21. That the Gentiles should rather believe 
in Christ. 

In Genesis : " And the Lord God said unto 
Abraham, Go out from thy country, and from 
thy kindred, and from thy father's house, and go 
into that land which I shall show thee : and I 
will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless 
thee, and I will magnify thy name ; and thou 
shalt be blessed : .ind I will bless him that bless- 
eth thee, and I will curse hiui that curseth thee : 
and in thee shall all the tribes of the earth be 
blessed."^ On this same point in Genesis: 
" And Isaac blessed Jacob.^ Behold, the smell 
of my son is as the smell of a plentiful field 
which the Lord hath blessed : and God give 
thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fertility 
of the earth, abundance of corn, and wine, and 
oil : and peoples shall obey thee, and princes 
shall worship thee : and thou shalt be lord over 
thy brother, and the sons of thy father shall 
worship thee : and he that curseth thee shall be 
cursed, and he that blesseth thee shall be 
blessed." ■♦ On this matter too in Genesis : 
" But when Joseph saw that his father placed his 
right hand on the head of Ephraim, it seemed 
displeasing to him : and Joseph laid hold of his 
father's hand, to lift it from the head of Ephraim 

' I Sam. ii. 5. [Compare Treatise .\i. p. 503, su/>ra.] 
~ Oen. xi. 1-3. 

3 The quotation in the Oxford edition begins from this point. 
* (jen. xxvii. 27-29. 

on to the head of Manasseh. Moreover, Joseph 
said unto his father, Not so, my father : this is 
my first-born ; place thy right hand upon his 
head. But he would not, and said, I know it, 
my son, I know it : and he also shall be a peo- 
ple, and he shall be exalted ; but his younger 
brother shall be greater than he, and his seed 
shall become a multitude of nations." 5 More- 
over in Genesis : " Judah, thy brethren shall 
praise thee : thine hand shall be upon the back 
of thine enemies ; the sons of thy father shall 
worship thee. Judah is a lion's whelp : from 
the slender twig,^ my son, thou hast ascended : 
thou layedst down and sleepedst as a lion, and 
as a lion's whelp. Who shall stir him up ? There 
shalt not fail a prince from Judah, and a leader 
from his loins, until those things entrusted to 
him shall come ; and he is the hope of the na- 
tions : binding his foal unto the vine, and his 
ass's colt unto the branch of the vine ; ^ he shall 
wash his garments in wine, and his clothing in 
the blood of the grape : terrible are his eyes 
with wine, and his teeth are whiter than milk." ^ 
Hence in Numbers it is written concerning our 
people : " Behold, the people shall rise up as a 
lion-like people." ^ In Deuteronomy : " Ye 
Gentiles shall be for the head ; but this unbe- 
lieving people shall be for the tail." '° Also in 
Jeremiah : " Hear the sound of the trumpet. 
And they said. We will not hear : for this cause 
the nations shall hear, and they who shall feed 
their cattle among them." " In the seventeenth 
Psalm : " Thou shalt establish me the head of 
the nations : a people whom I have not known 
have ser\'ed me : at the hearing of the ear they 
have obeyed me." '^ Concerning this very thing 
the Lord says in Jeremiah : " Before I formed 
thee in the belly, I knew thee ; and before thou 
wentest forth from the womb, I sanctified thee, 
and established thee as a prophet among the 
nations." '^ Also in Isaiah : " Behold, I have 
manifested him for a witness to the nations, a 
prince and a commander to the peoples." '■♦ 
Also in the same : " Nations which have not 
known Thee shall call upon Thee ; and peoples 
which were ignorant of Thee shall flee to 
Thee." 's In the same, moreover : " And in that 

5 Gen. xlviii. 17-19. The whole of this quotation is wanting in 
more than one codex. 

6 " Frutice." The Oxford translator has here, without any 
authority as it appears, from the text, adopted the reading of the 
Vulgate, " ad praedam." Cyprian has used the LXX., reading 
apparently, €k ^Aatrxou. The Hebrew HTtSO gives a colour to 

either reading. See Gesenius, Lejr. />i voce ^"^0. [Elucidation X.] 

7 Original, "ad cilicium;" LXX. rrj eAiici, " the tendril of the 
vine; " Oxford trans. " the choice vine." 

^ Gen. xlix. 8-12. 

9 Num. xxiii. 14. ^ 

1° Deut. xxviii. 44. 

I' Jer. vi. 18. 

12 Ps. xviii. 43, 44. 

" Jer. i. 5. 

'< Isa. Iv. 4. 

IS Isa. Iv. 5. 

514 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall 
rise to rule in all the nations ; in Him shall the 
(ientiles hope : and His rest shall be honour." ' 
In the same again : " The land of Zebulon, and 
the land of Nephtalim, by the way of the sea, 
and ye others who inhabit the maritime places, 
and beyond Jordan- of the nations. People 
that walk in darkness, behold ye a great light ; 
ye who dwell in the region of the shadow of 
death, the light shall shine upon you." ^ .'\lso 
in the same: "Thus saith the Lord (iod to 
Christ my Lord, whose right hand I hold, that 
the nations may hear Him ; ami I will break 
asunder the strength of kings, I will open before 
Him gates ; and cities shall not be shut." ■♦ Also 
in the same : " I come to gather together all na- 
tions and tongues ; and they shall come, and see 
my glory. .\nd I will send out over them a 
standard, and I will send those that are pre- 
served among them to the nations which are 
afar off, which have not heard my name nor seen 
my glory ; and they shall declare my glory to 
the nations." 5 Also in the same : " x\nd in all 
these things they are not converted ; therefore 
He shall lift up a standard to the nations which 
are afar, and He will draw them from the end of 
the earth." '' Also in the same : " Those who 
had not been told of Him shall see, and they 
who ha.ve not heard shall understand." ^ Also 
in the same : " I have been made manifest to 
those who seek me not : I have been found of 
those who asked not after me. I said, Lo, here 
am I, to a nation that has not called upon my 
name." ^ Of this same thing, in the Acts of the 
Apostles, Paul says : *' It was necessary that the 
word of God should first be shown to you ; but 
since ye put it from you, and judged yourselves 
unworthy of eternal life, lo, we turn to the Gen- 
tiles : for thus said the Lord by the Scriptures, 
Behold, I have set Thee a light among the 
nations, that Thou shouldest be for salvation 
even to the ends of the earth." '' 

22. That the Jews would lose while we should 
receive the bread and the cup of Christ 
and all His grace, and that the new 
name of (Christians should be blessed 
in the earth. 

In Isaiah : " Thus saith the Lord, Behold, 
they who serve me shall eat, but ye shall be 
hungry : behold, they who serve me shall drink, 
but ye shall be thirsty : '° behold, they who serve 

I 

2 

Isa. xi. lo. 

Oxford edition adds ' 

' Galilee. 

„ 

3 

Isa. 

IX. I, 2. 

4 

Isa. 

xlv. I. 

5 
6 

Isa. 
Isa 

Ixvi. i8, 
V. 25, 26 

19. 

7 

Isa. 

Hi 15. 

B 

9 

10 

etc., 

Isa. Ixv. I. 
Acts xiii. 46 
This second 
is wantiiig in 

47- 
clause, " Behold, 
.so;nc editions. 

they 

who 

serve 

me 

shall d 

rink," 

me shall rejoice, but ye shall be confounded ; 
the Lord shall slay you. But to those who serve 
me a new name shall be named, which shall be 
blessed in the earth." " Also in the same place : 
" Therefore shall He lift up an ensign to the 
nations which are afar off, and He will draw 
them from the end of the earth ; and, behold, 
they shall come swiftly with lightness ; they shall 
not hunger nor thirst." '^ Also in the same 
place : " Behold, therefore, the Ruler, the Lord 
of Sabaoth, shall take away from Judah and from 
Jerusalem the healthy man and the strong man, 
the strength of bread and the strength of water." '^ 
Likewise in the thirty-third Psalm : " O taste 
and see how sweet is the Lord. Blessed is the 
man that hopeth in Him. Fear the Lord God, 
all ye His saints : for there is no want to them 
that fear Him. Rich men have wanted and 
have hungered ; but they who seek the Lord 
shall never want any good thing." '■♦ Moreover, 
in the Gospel according to John, the Lord says : 
" I am the bread of life : he that cometh to me 
shall not hunger, and he that trusteth in me shall 
never thirst." '5 Likewise He saith in that place : 
" If any one thirst, let him come and drink. 
He that believeth on me, as the Scripture saith, 
out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water." "^ 
Moreover, He says in the same place : " Except 
ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink 
His blood, ye shall have no life in you." '7 

23. That the Gentiles rather than the Jews 

attain to the kingdom of heaven. 

In the Gospel the Lord says : " Many shall 
come from the east and from the west, and shall 
lie down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, 
in the kingdom of heaven ; but the children of 
the kingdom shall go out into outer darkness : 
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." '** 

24. That by this alone the Jews can receive 

pardon of their sins, if they wash away 
the blood of Christ slain, in His baj)- 
tism, and, j)assing over into His Church, 
obey His precepts. 

In Isaiah the Lord says : " Now I will not re- 
lease your sins. When ye stretch forth youi 
hands, I will turn away m)- face from you ; and 
if ye multiply prayers, I will not hear you : for 
your hands are full of blood. Wash you, make 
you clean ; take away the wickedness from your 
souls from the sight of mine eyes ; cease from 
your wickedness ; learn to do good ; seek judg- 

" Isa. Ixv. 13-15. 

' - Isa. V. 26, 27. 

'^ Isa. iii. I, 2. 

'* Ps. xxxiv. 8-1O. 

'5 John vi. 35. 

't' John vii. 37, 38. 

'" John vi. S3- 

■2 Matt. viii. 11, !■?, 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

515 

meiit ; keep him who suffers wrong ; judge for 
th.e orphan, and justify the widow. And come, 
let us reason together, saith the Lord : and al- 
though your sins be as scarlet, I will whiten ' 
them as snow ; and although they were as crim- 
son, I will whiten - them as wool. And if ye be 
willing and listen to me, ye shall eat of the good 
of the land ; but if ye be unwilling, and will not 
hear me, the sword shall consume you ; for the 
mouth of the Lord hath spoken these things." ^ 

SECOND BOOK'. 
HEADS. 

1. That Christ is the First-born, and that He 
is the Wisdom of God, by whom all things were 
made. 

2. That Christ is the Wisdom of God; and 
about the sacrament of His incarnation, and 
passion, and cup, and altar, and the apostles who 
were sent and preached. 

3. That Christ also is Himself the Word of 
God. 

4. That the same Christ is God's hand and 
arm. 

5. That the same is Angel and God. 

6. That Christ is God. 

7. That Christ our God should come as the 
Illuminator and Saviour of the human race. 

8. That although from the beginning He had 
been Son of God, He had yet to be begotten 
again according to the flesh. 

9. That this should be the sign of His nativity, 
that He should be born of a virgin — man and 
God — Son of man and of God. 

10. That Christ is man and God, compounded 
of either nature, that He might be a mediator 
between us and the Father. 

11. That He was to be born of the seed of 
David after the flesh. 

12. That He should be born in Bethlehem. 

13. That He should come in lowly condition 
on His first advent. 

14. That He was the righteous One whom the 
Jews should put to death. 

1 5 . That He was called a Sheep and a Lamb 
who would have to be slain, and concerning the 
sacrament of the passion, 

16. That He is also called a Stone. 

17. That subsequently that stone should be- 
come a mountain, and should fill the whole 
earth. 

18. That in the last times the same mountain 
should be manifested, upon which the Gentiles 
should come, and on which the righteous should 
go up. 

19. That He is the Bridegroom, having the 

' " Exalbabo." 
2 " Inalbabn." 
2 Lsa. i i5-2a 

Church as His bride, from whom children should 
be spiritually born. 

20. That the Jews should fasten Him to the 
cross. 

21. That in the passion and the sign of the 
cross is all virtue and power. 

22. That in this sign of the cross is salvation 
for all who are marked on their foreheads. 

23. That at mid-day, during His passion, there 
should be darkness. 

24. That He should not be overcome of 
death, nor should remain in hell. 

25. That He should rise again from hell on 
the third day. 

26. That when He had risen. He should re- 
ceive from His Father all power, and His power 
should be eternal. 

27. That it is impossible to attain to God the 
Father, except through the Son Jesus Christ. 

28. That He is to come as a Judge. 

29. That He is to reign as a King for ever. 

30. That He is both Judge and King. 

TESTIMONIES. 

I. That Christ is the First-born, and that He 
is the Wisdom of God, by whom all 
things were made. 

In Solomon in the Proverbs : " The Lord es- 
tablished + me in the beginning of His ways, into 
His works : before the world He founded me. 
In the beginning, before He made the earth, 
and before He appointed the abysses, before 
the fountains of waters gushed forth, before the 
mountains were settled, before all the hills, the 
Lord begot me. He made the countries, and 
the uninhabitable places, and the uninhabitable 
bounds under heaven. When He prepared the 
heaven, I was present with Llim ; and when He 
set apart His seat. When He made the strong 
clouds above the winds, and when He placed 
the strengthened fountains under heaven, when 
He made the mighty foundations of the earth, 
I was by His side, ordering them : I was He in 
whom He delighted : moreover, I daily rejoiced 
before His face in all time, when He rejoiced 
in the perfected earth." 5 Also in the same in 
Ecclesiasticus : " I went forth out of the mouth 
of the Most High, first-born before every crea- 
ture : I made the unwearying light to rise in 
the heavens, and I covered the whole earth with 
a cloud : I dwelt in the high places, and my 
throne in the pillar of the cloud : I compassed 
the circle of heaven, and I penetrated into the 
depth of the abyss, and I walked on the waves 
of the sea, and I stood in all the earth ; and in 

■• [Condidit. Bull, Opp., v. p. 515. e/cTijo-aro, Jerome: eKxio-f, 
alii. See Justin, vol. i. p. 264; Athenagoras, vol. ii. p. 133; Clement, 
ib., p. 194; and see note, Oxford translation. See Irenacus, vol. i. 
p. 4S8.] 

5 Prov. viii. 22-31. 

5i6 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

every people and in every nation I had the pre- 
eminence, and by my own strength I have trod- 
den the hearts of all the excellent and the 
humble : in me is all hope of life and virtue : 
pass over to me, all ye who desire me." ' Also 
in the eighty-eighth Psalm : " And I will estab- 
lish Him as my first-born, the highest among 
the kings of the earth. I will keep my mercy 
for Him for ever, and my faithful covenant for 
Him ; and I will establish his seed for ever and 
ever. If his children forsake my law, and walk 
not in my judgments ; if they profane my judg- 
ments, and do not observe my precepts, I will 
visit their wickednesses with a rod, and their 
sins with scourges ; but my mercy will I not 
scatter away from them." ^ Also in the Gospel 
according to John, the Lord says : " And this is 
life eternal, that they should know Thee, the 
only and true God, and Jesus Christ, whom 
Thou hast sent. I have glorified Thee on the 
earth : I have finished the work which Thou 
gavest me to do. And now, do Thou glorify 
me with Thyself, with the glory which I had with 
Thee before the world was made." ^ .'Mso Paul 
to the Colossians : " Who is the image of the 
invisible God, and the first-born of every crea- 
ture." "^ Also in the same place: "The first- 
born from the dead, that He might in all things 
become the holder of the pre-eminence." s In 
the Apocalypse too : "I am Alpha and Omega, 
the beginning and the end. I will give unto 
Him that is thirsting from the fountain of the 
water of life freely." ^ That He also is both 
the wisdom and the power of God, Paul proves in 
his first Epistle to the Corinthians. " Because 
the Jews recjuire a sign, and the Greeks seek 
after wisdom : but we preach Christ crucified, 
to the Jews indeed a stumbling-l)lock, and to 
the Gentiles foolishness ; but to them that are 
called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power 
of God and the wisdom of God." ? 

2. That Christ is the Wisdom of God ; and 
concerning the sacrament of His incar- 
nation and of His passion, and cup and 
altar ; and of the apostles who were sent, 
and preached. 

In Solomon in the Proverbs : " Wisdom hath 
Duilded herself an house, and she has placed 
under it seven pillars ; she has slain her victims ; 
she hath mingled her wine in the goblet, and 
hath made ready her table,^ and hath sent her 

' Ecclus. xxiv. 3-7. 
- Ps. Ixxxix. 27-33. 
3 John xvii. 3-5. 

* Col. i. 15. 
5 Col. i. 18. 

*> Rev. xxi. 6. 
' 1 Cor. i. 22-24. 

* [The house = the Church; the seven pillars = Isa. xi. 2, 3; her 
table = the Lord's table; her cup = the sacrament of the Hlood; her 

loaves = of the Body. 
thors.J 

Then her servants = preachers. So old au- 

servants, calling with a loud announcement to 
the cup, saying. Let him who is foolish turn to 
me : and to them that want understanding she 
has said. Come, eat of my loaves, and drink the 
wine which I have mingled for you. Forsake 
foolishness, and seek wisdom, and correct knowl- 
edge by understanding." ^ 

3. That the same Christ is the Word of God. 

In the forty-fourth Psalm : " My heart hath 
breathed out a good Word. I tell my works to 
the King." '° Also in the thirty-second Psalm : 
" By the Word of God were the heavens made 
fast ; and all their strength by the breath of His 
; mouth." " Also in Isaiah : "A Word completing 
and shortening in righteousness, because a short- 
ened word will God make in the whole earth." '^ 
Also in the cvith Psalm : " He sent His Word, 
and healed them." '3 Moreover, in the Gospel 
according to John : " In the beginning was the 
Word, and the A\'ord was with God, and God 
was the Word. The same was in the beginning 
with Ciod. All things were made by Him, and 
without Him was nothing made that was made. 
In Him was life ; and the life was the light of 
men. And the light shineth in darkness ; and 
the darkness comprehended it not," '•* Also in 
the Apocalypse : " And I saw the heaven opened, 
and lo, a white horse ; and he who sate upon 
him was called Faithful and True, judging rightly 
and justly ; and He made war. And He was 
covered with a garment sprinkicd with blood ; 
and His name is called the Word of God." '5 

4. That Christ is the Hand and Arm of God.'^ 

In Isaiah : " Is God's Hand not strong to 
save ? or has He made His ear heavy, that He 
cannot hear? But your sins separate between 
you and God ; and on account of your sins He 
turns His face away from you, that He may not 
pity. For your hands are defiled with blood, 
and your fingers with sins. Moreover, your lips 
have spoken wickedness, and your tongue medi- 
tates unrighteousness. No one speaketh truth, 
nor is there true judgment : they trust in vanity, 
and speak emptiness, who conceive sorrow, and 
bring forth wickedness." '^ Also in the same 
place : " Lord, who hath believed our report ? 
and to whom is the Arm of God revealed?" '^ 
Also in the same : "Thus saith the Lord, Heaven 
is my throne, and the earth is the support of my 

9 Prov. Ix. 1-6. 
10 Ps. xlv. I. r^l'D "IST. Hebrew. Aoydc, Seft. Verbun^ 

T T 

Vulg. Matter, Etig. and Angl. Psalter. ^ 
" Ps. xxxiii. 6. 
'^ Isa. X. 23. 
'^ Ps! cvii. 20. 
'■* John i. 1-5. 
" Rev. xix. 11-13. 

'^ f Hence the Spirit, " the finger of God." Lulte xi. 20 ] 
'^ Isa. lix. 1-4. 
'■' Isa. liii. I. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

517 

feet. V/hat house will ye build unto me? or 
what is the place for my rest? For all these 
things hath mine hand made." ' Also in the 
same : " O Lord God, Thine Arm is high, and 
they knew it not ; but when they know it, they 
shall be confounded." ^ Also in the same : 
" The Lord hath revealed His Arm, that holy 
Arm, in the sight of all nations ; all nations, even 
the ends of the earth, shall see salvation from 
God." 3 Also in the same place: "Behold, I 
have made thee as the wheels of a thrashing 
chariot, new and turned back upon them- 
selves ; " ■* and thou shalt thrash the mountains, 
and shalt beat the hills small, and shalt make 
them as chaff, and shalt winnow them ; and the 
wind shall seize them, and the whirlwind shall 
scatter them : but thou shalt rejoice in the saints 
of Israel ; and the poor and needy shall exult. 
For they shall seek water, and there shall be 
none. For their tongue shall be dry for thirst. 
I the Lord God, I the God of Israel, will hear 
them, and will not forsake them ; but I will open 
rivers in the mountains, and fountains in the 
midst of the fields. I will make the wildernesses 
watery groves, and a thirsty land into water- 
courses. I will establish in the land of drought 
the cedar-tree and the box-tree, and the myrtle 
and the cypress, and the elm 5 and the poplar, 
that they may see and acknowledge, and know 
and believe together, that the Hand of the Lord 
hath done these things, and the Holy One of 
Israel hath shown them."^ 

5. That Christ is at once Angel and God.^ 

In Genesis, to Abraham : " And the x\ngel of 
the Lord called him from heaven, and said unto 
him, Abraham, Abraham ! xAnd he said. Here 
am I. And He said, Lay not thine hand upon 
the lad, neither do thou anything unto him. 
For now I know that thou fearest thy God, and 
hast not spared thy son, thy beloved son, for my 
sake." ^ Also in the same place, to Jacob : 
" And the Angel of the Lord spake unto me in 
dreams, I am God, whom thou sawest in the 
place of God ^ where thou anointedst me a pil- 
lar of stone, and vowedst to me a vow." '° Also 
in Exodus : " But God went before them by day 
indeed in a pillar of cloud, to show them the 
way; and by night in a pillar of fire." " And 

' Isa. Ixvi. I, 2. 

2 Isa. xxvi. II. 

3 Isa. Hi. 10. 

* Original : " Rotas vehiculi triturantis novas in se retornatas." 
The Oxford edition reads the three last words, " in serras formatas: " 
and the translator gives, " the wheels of a thrashing instrument made 
with new teeth." 

5 Some editions omit " and the elm." 

^ Isa. xli. 15-20. [Irenaeus, vol. i. p. 487. "Word and Wisdom 
= hands."] 

7 [i.e., the Jehovah-Angel. See TertuUian, vol. iii. p. 335.] 

* Gen. xxii. 11, 12, 

9 Sell. " Beth-el," " the house of God." 
'° Gen. xxxi. 13. 
^' Ex. xiii. 21. 

afterwards, in the same place : " And the Angel 
of God moved forward, which went before the 
army of the children of Israel." '^ Also in the 
same place : " Lo, I send my Angel before thy 
face, to keep thee in the way, that He may lead 
thee into the land which I have prepared for 
thee. Observe Him, and obey Him, and be 
not disobedient to Him, and He will not be 
wanting to thee. For my Name is in Him." '^ 
Whence He Himself says in the Gospel : " I 
came in the name of my Father, and ye received 
me not. When another shall come in his own 
name, him ye will receive." '* And again in the 
cxviith Psalm : " Blessed is He who cometh in 
the name of the Lord." '5 Also in Malachi : 
" My covenant of life and peace was with Levi ; "^ 
and I gave him fear, that he should fear me, 
that he should go from the face of my same. 
The law of truth was in his mouth, and unright- 
eousness was not found in his lips. In the 
peace of the tongue correcting, he walked with 
us, and turned many away from unrighteousness. 
Because the lips of the priests shall keep knowl- 
edge, and they shall seek the law at His mouth ; 
for He is the Angel of the Almighty." '7 

6. That Christ is God. 

In Genesis : " And God said unto Jacob, Arise, 
and go up to the place of Bethel, and dwell there ; 
and make there an altar to that God who ap- 
peared unto thee when thou fleddest from the 
face of thy brother Esau." '^ Also in Isaiah : 
" Thus saith the Lord, the God of Sabaoth, 
Egypt is wearied ; and the merchandise of the 
Ethiopians, and the tall men of the Sabeans, 
shall pass over unto Thee, and shall be Thy ser- 
vants ; and shall walk after Thee bound with 
' chains ; and shall worship Thee, and shall pray 
to Thee, because God is in Thee, and there is 
no other God beside Thee. For Thou art God, 
and we knew it not, O God of Israel, our Sav- 
iour. They shall all be confounded and fear who 
oppose Thee, and shall fall into confusion." "^ 
Likewise in the same : " The voice of one cr)-^- 
ing in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the 
Lord, make straight the paths of our God. Every 
channel shall be filled up, and every mountain 
and hill shall be made low, and all crooked places 
shall be made straight, and rough places plain ; 
and the glory of the Lord shall be seen, and all 
flesh shall see the salvation of God, because the 
Lord hath spoken it." ^° Moreover, in Jeremiah : 

■2 Ex. xiv. 19. 

'3 Ex. xxiii. 20, 21. [See TertuUian, vol. iii. p. 335, a valuable 
passage. De Maistre has something to say on this, quite to the 
purpose. See Bull /rtij/w .• e.g., vol. v. pp. 21-26, 33, 40; 743-760.I 

'■» John V. 43. 

'5 Ps. cxviii. 26. 

'* Otherwise, " My covenant was with life and peace." ' 

'" Mai. ii. 5-7. 

'8 Gen. XXXV. i. 

'9 Isa. xlv. 14-16. 

-° Isa. xl. 3-5. 

=^18 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

This is our (iod, and no other shall be esteemed 
beside Him, who hath found all the way of 
knowledge, and hath given it to Jacob His son, 
and to Israel His beloved. After this He was 
seen upon earth, and He conversed with men." ' 
Also in Zechariah God says : " And they shall 
cross over through the narrow sea, and they shall 
smite the waves in the sea, and they shall dry up 
all the depths of the rivers ; and all the haughti- 
ness of the Assyrians shall be confounded, and 
the sceptre of Egypt shall be taken away. And 
I will strengthen them in the Lord their God, 
and in His name shall they glory, saith the 
Lord." 2 Moreover, in Hosea the Lord saith : 
" I will not do according to the anger of mine 
indignation, I will not allow Ephraim to be de- 
stroyed : for I am God, and there is not a holy 
man in thee : and I will not enter into the city ; 
I will go after God." ^ Also in the forty-fourth 
Psalm : '" Thy throne, O God, is for ever and 
ever : the sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre 
of Thy kingdom. Thou hast loved righteousness, 
and hated iniquity : wherefore God, Thy God, 
hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above 
Thy fellows." ■♦ So, too, in the forty-fifth Psalm : 
"Be still, and know that I am (lod. I will be 
exalted among the nations, and I will be exalted 
in the earth." 5 Also in the eighty-first Psalm: 
" They have not known, neither have tliey un- 
derstood : they will walk on in darkness." ^ Also 
in the sixty-seventh Psalm : " Sing unto God, sing 
]>raises unto His name : make a way for Him who 
goeth up into the west : God is His name." 7 
Also in the Gospel according to John : "In the 
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with 
God, and God was the Word." ^ Also in the 
same : " The Lord said to Thomas, Reach hither 
thy finger, and behold my hands : and be not 
faithless, but believing. Thomas answered and 
said unto Him, My Lord and my God. Jesus 
saith unto him. Because thou hast seen me, thou 
hast believed : blessed are they who have not 
seen, and yet have believed." ^ Also Paul to 
the Romans : " I could wish that I myself were 
accursed from Christ for my brethren and my 
kindred according to the flesh : who are Israel- 
ites : whose are the adoption, and the glory, and 
the covenant, and the appointment of the law, 
and the serviice (of God), and the promises; 
whose are the fathers, of whom, according to the 
flesh, Christ came, who is God over all, blessed 
for evermore." '° Also in the Apocalypse : " I am 
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end : 

' Baruch iii, 35-37. 
" Zech. X. II, 12. 
3 Hos. xi. 9, 10. 
* Ps. xlv. 6, 7. 
5 Ps. xlv. 10. 
^ Ps. Ixxxii. 5. 
^ Ps. Ixviii. 4. 
** John i I. 
9 John XX. 27-39. 
'° Rom. ix. 3-5. 

I will give to him that is athirst, of the fountain 
of living water freely. He that overcometh shall 
possess these things, and their inheritance ; and 
I will be his God, and he shall be my son." " 
Also in the eighty-first Psalm : " God stood in 
the congregation of gods, and judging gods in 
the midst." '^ And again in the same place : " I 
have said. Ye are gods ; and ye are all the chil- 
dren of the Highest : but ye shall die like men." '^ 
But if they who have been righteous, and have 
obeyed the divine precepts, may be called gods, 
how much more is Christ, the Son of God, God ! 
Thus He Himself says in the Gospel according 
to John : " Is it not written in the law, that I 
said. Ye are gods? If He called them gods to 
whom the word of God was given, and the Scrip- 
ture cannot be relaxed, do ye say to Him whom 
the Father hath sanctified and sent into the 
world, that thou blasphemest, because I said, I 
am the Son of God ? But if I do not the works 
of my Father, believe me not ; but if I do, and 
ye will not believe me, beheve the works, and 
know that the Father is in me, and I in Him." '•* 
Also in the Gospel according to Matthew : " And 
ye shall call His name Emmanuel, which is, being 
interpreted, God with us." '5 

7. That Christ our God should come, the En- 
lightener and Saviour of the human race. 

In Isaiah : " Be comforted, ye weakened 
hands ; and ye weak knees, be strengthened. 
Ye who are of a timorous heart, fear not. Our 
God will recompense judgment, He Himself will 
come, and will save us. Then shall be opened 
the eyes of the blind, and the ears of the deaf 
shall hear. Then the lame man shall leap as a 
stag, and the tongue of the dumb shall be intel- 
ligible ; because in the wilderness the water is 
broken forth, and the stream in the thirsty land." '^ 
Also in that place : " Not an elder nor an angel, 
but the Lord Himself shall deliver them ; because 
He shall love them, and shall spare them, and 
He Himself shall redeem them."'^ Also in the 
same place : " I the Lord God have called Thee 
in righteousness, that I may hold Thine hand, 
and I will comfort Thee ; and I have given Thee 
for a covenant of my people, for a light of the 
nations ; to open the eyes of the blind, to bring 
forth them that are bound from chains, and those 
who sit in darkness from the prison-house. I 
am the Lord God, that is my name. I will not 
give my glory to another, nor my powers to 
graven images." '^ Also in the twenty-fourth 
Psalm : " Show me Thy ways, O Lord, and teach 

" Rev. xxi. 6, 7. 
'- Ps. Ixxxii. I. 
'3 Ps. Ixxxii. 6, 7. 
'* John X. 34-38. 
IS Malt. i. 23. 
'6 Isa. XXXV. 3-6. 
'" Isa. Ixiii. 9. 
•li Isa. xhi. 6-8. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

519 

me Thy paths, and lead me unto Thy truth, and 
teach me ; for Thou art the God of my sah'a- 
tion." ' Whence, in the Gospel according to 
John, the Lord says : " I am the light of the 
world. He that will follow me shall not walk in 
darkness, but shall have the light of life." ^ 
Moreover, in that according to Matthew, the 
angel Gabriel says to Joseph : " Joseph, thou son 
of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy 
wife. For that which shall be born to her is of 
the Holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth a 
son, and thou shalt call His name Jesus ; for 
He shall save His people from their sins."-'' Also 
in that according to Luke : " And Zacharias was 
filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied, say- 
ing, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who 
hath foreseen redemption for His people, and 
hath raised up an horn of salvation for us in the 
house of His servant David." ■♦ Also in the same 
place, the angel said to the shepherds : " Fear 
not ; for, behold, I bring you tidings that unto 
you is born this day in the city of David a Sav- 
iour, which is Christ Jesus." 5 

8. That although from the beginning He had 

been the Son of Ciod, yet He had to be 
begotten again according to the flesh. 

In the second Psalm : " The Lord said unto 
me. Thou art my Son ; this day have I begotten 
Thee. Ask of me, and I will give Thee the 
nations for Thine inheritance, and the bounds 
of the earth for Thy possession." ^ Also in the 
Gospel according to Luke : " And it came to 
pass, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of 
Mary, the babe leaped in her womb ; and she 
was filled with the Holy Ghost, and she cried 
out with a loud voice, and said. Blessed art thou 
among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy 
womb. And whence does this happen to me, 
that the mother of my Lord should come to 
me ? " 7 Also Paul to the Galatians : " But when 
the fulness of the time was come, God sent His 
Son, born of a woman." '^ Also in the Epistle of 
John : " Every spirit which confesses that Jesus 
Christ is come in the flesh is of God. But who- 
soever denies that He is come in the flesh is 
not of God, but is of the spirit of Antichrist." ^ 

9. That this should be the sign of His nativity, 

that He should be born of a virgin — 

man and God — a son of man and a Son 

of God. 

In Isaiah : " And the Lord went on to speak 

to Ahaz, saying. Ask thee a sign from the Lord 

' Ps. XXV. 4, 5. 
" John viii. 12. 
J Matt. i. 20, 21. 

* Luke i. 67-69. 
J Luke ii. 10, 11. 

* Ps. ii. 7, 8. 

^ Luke i. 41-43. 

' Gal. iv. 4. 

9 I John iv. 2, 3. 

thy God, in the height above and in the depth 
below. And Ahaz said, I will not ask, and I 
will not tempt the Lord my God. And He said, 
Hear ye, therefore, O house of David : it is no 
trifling contest unto you with men, since God 
supplies the struggle. On this account God 
Himself will give you a sign. Behold, a virgin 
shall conceive, and shall bear a son, and ye shall 
call His name Emmanuel. Butter and honey 
shall He eat ; before that He knows to prefer 
the evil. He shall exchange the good." '° This 
seed God had foretold would proceed from the 
woman that should trample on the head of 
the devil. In Genesis : " Then God said unto 
the serpent. Because thou hast done this, cursed 
art thou from every kind of the beasts of the 
earth. Upon thy breast and thy belly shalt thou 
crawl, and earth shall be thy food all the days 
of thy life. And I will place enmity between 
thee and the woman and her seed. He shall 
regard thy head, and thou shalt watch his heel." " 

10. That Christ is both man and God, com- 
pounded of both natures, that He might 
be a Mediator between us and the 
Father. 

In Jeremiah : "And He is man, and who shall 
know Him ? " '- Also in Numbers : "A Star shall 
arise out of Jacob, and a man shall rise up from 
Israel." '^ Also in the same place : " A Man shall 
go forth out of his seed,'+ and shall rule over 
many nations ; and His kingdom shall be exalted 
as Gog,'5 and His kingdom shall be increased ; 
and God brought Him forth out of Egypt. His 
glory is as of the unicorn, and He shall eat the 
nations of His enemies, and shall take out the 
marrow of their fatnesses, and will pierce Hia 
enemy with His arrows. He couched and lay 
down as a lion, and as a lion's whelp. Who 
shall raise Him up ? Blessed are they who bless 
Thee, and cursed are they who curse Thee." '^ 
Also in Isaiah : " The Spirit of the Lord is upon 
me ; on account whereof He hath anointed me : 
He hath sent me to tell good tidings to the poor ; 
to heal the bruised in heart, to preach deliverance 
to the captives, and sight to the blind, to proclaim 
the acceptable year 'of the Lord, and the day of 
retribution." '7 Whence, in the Gospel accord- 
ing to Luke, Gabriel says to Mary : " And the 
angel, answering, said to her, The Holy Ghost 

'° Isa. vii. 10-15. The ordinary reading here is, "before He 
knows, to refuse the evil and to choose the good." The reading in 
the text, however, is more authentic. 

'' Gen. iii. 14, 15. 

'^ Jer. xvii. g. 

■3 Num. xxiv. 17. 

'■• [Here the English {q. v.) gives the more literal reading, which, 
the Septuagint treats as a proverb, unfolding its sense. " Water from, 
the bucket " seems to have signified the .same as our low proverb " a 
chip from the block," hence = a Son from the Father. Num. xxiv. 7 ], 

'5 The Oxford translator follows the English version, and reads, 
" over Agag." 

"' Num. xxiv. 7-9. 

■7 Isa. Ixi. I, 2. 

520 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

shall come upon thee, and the power of the 
Highest shall overshadow thee. Wherefore that 
holy thing which is born of thee shall be called 
the Son of God." ' Also in the first Epistle 
of Paul to the Corinthians : " The first man is of 
the mud ^ of the earth ; the second man is from 
heaven. .\s was he from the soil, such are they 
also that are of the earth ; and as is the heav- 
enly, such also are the heavenly. As we have 
borne the image of him who is of the earth, 
let us also bear the image of Him who is from 
heaven." ^ 

II. That Christ was to be born of the seed 
of David, according to the flesh. 

In the second of Kings : " And the word of 
the Lord came to Nathan, saying. Go and tell 
my servant David, Thus saith the Lord, Thou 
shalt not build me an house to dwell in ; but it 
shall come to pass, when thy days shall be ful- 
filled, and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I 
will raise up thy seed after thee who shall come 
from thy loins, and I will establish His kingdom. 
He shall build me a house in my name, and 1 
will set up His throne for ever ; and I will be to 
Him a Father, and He shall be to me a Son ; 
and His house shall obtain confidence, and His 
kingdom for ever in my sight." ^ Also in Isaiah : 
*' And a rod shall go forth of the root of Jesse, 
and a flower shall go up from his root ; and the 
Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon Him, the spirit 
of wisdom and of understanding, the spirit of 
counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and 
piety ; and the spirit of the fear of the Lord 
shall fill Him." s Also in the cxxxist Psalm : 
" God hath sworn the truth unto David himself, 
-and He has not repudiated it ; of the fruit of thy 
belly will I set upon my throne." ^' Also in the 
Gospel according to Luke : " And the angel said 
unto her, Fear not, Mary. For thou hast found 
favour before God. Behold, thou shalt conceive, 
and shalt bring forth a son, and shalt call His 
name Jesus. The same shall be great, and He 
shall be called the Son of the Highest ; and the 
Lord God shall give Him the throne of His 
father David, and He shall reign over the house 
■of Jacob for ever, and of His kingdom there 
shall be no end." ? Also in the Apocalypse : 
" And I saw in the right hand of God, who sate 
on the throne, a book written within, and on the 
back sealed with seven seals ; and I saw a strong 
angel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is 
worthy to receive the book, and to open its 
seals? Nor was there any one either in heaven 

Luke i. 35. 
" Liino." 

1 Cor. XV. 47-49. 

2 Sam. vii. 5, 12-16. 
Is.i. xi. 1-3. 

Ps. cxxxii. II. 
Luke i. 30-33. 

or upon the earth, or under the earth, who was 
able to open the book, nor even to look into it. 
And I wept much because nobody was found 
worthy to open the book, nor to look into it. 
And one of the elders said unto me, Weep not ; 
behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root 
of David, hath prevailed to open the book, and 
to loose its seven seals." ^ 

12. That Christ should be born in Bethlehem. 

In Micah : " And thou, Bethlehem, house of 
Ephrata, art not little, that thou shouldst be 
appointed among the thousands of Judah. Out 
of thee shall He come forth to me, that He may 
be a prince in Israel, and His goings forth from 
the beginning from the days of old." 9 Also in 
the Gospel : " And when Jesus was born in Beth- 
lehem of Judah, in the days of Herod the king, 
behold. Magi came from the east to Jerusalem, 
saying. Where is He that is born King of the 
Jews? For we have seen His star in the east, 
and we have come with gifts to worship Him." '^ 

13. That Christ was to come in low estate in 

His first advent. 

In Isaiah : " Lord, who hath believed our 
report, and to whom is the Arm of the Lord 
revealed ? We have declared in His presence 
as children, as a root in a thirsty ground. There 
is no form nor glory in Him ; and we saw Him, 
and He had no form nor beauty ; but His form 
was without honour, and lacking beyond other 
men. He was a man set in a plague, and know- 
ing how to bear weakness ; because His face 
was turned away. He was dishonoured, and was 
not accounted of. He bears our sins, and grieves 
for us ; and we thought that He was in grief, and 
in wounding, and in affliction ; but He was 
wounded for our transgressions, and He was 
weakened " for our sins. The discipline of our 
peace was upon Him, and with His bruise we 
are healed. We all like sheep have gone astray ; 
man has gone out of his way. And God has 
delivered Him for our sins ; and He, because 
He was afflicted, opened not His mouth." '^ Also 
in the same : " I am not rebellious, nor do I 
contradict. I gave my back to the stripes, and 
my cheeks to the palms of the hands. More- 
over, I did not turn away my face from the foul- 
ness of spitting, and God was my helper." '^ 
Also in the same : " He shall not cry, nor will 
any one hear His voice in the streets. He shall 
not break a bruised reed, and a smoking flax He 
shall not extinguish ; but He shall bring forth 

' Rev. V. 1-5. 
9 Mic. V. 2 
"^ Matt. ii. I, 2. 
" " Infirmatus: 
'-' Isa. liii. 1-7. 
" Isa. 1. 5-7. 

' Oxford transl. " bruised." 
[See p. 516, supra.] 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

521 

judgment in truth. He shall shine forth, and 
shall not be shaken, until He set judgment in 
the earth, and in His name shall the nations 
trust." ' Also in the twenty-first Psalm : " But 
I am a worm, and no man ; the accursed of 
man, and the casting away of the people. All 
they who saw me despised me, and spoke with- 
in their lips, and moved their head. He hoped 
in the Lord, let Him deliver him ; let Him 
save him, since he will have Him." ^ Also in 
that place : " My strength is dried up like a 
potsherd, and my tongue is glued to my jaws." ^ 
Also in Zechariah : "And the Lord showed me 
Jesus, that great priest, standing before the face 
of the Angel of the Lord, and the devil was 
standing at his right hand to oppose him. And 
Jesus was clothed in filthy garments, and he 
stood before the face of the Angel Himself ; and 
He answered and said to them who were stand- 
ing before His face, saying. Take away his filthy 
garments from him. And he said to him. Be- 
hold, I have taken away thine iniquities. And 
put upon him a priestly garment,^ and set a fair 
mitre 5 upon his head."*" Also Paul to the 
Philippians : " Who, being established in the 
form of God, thought it not robbery that He 
was equal with God, but emptied Himself, taking 
the form of a servant, and was made in the like- 
ness of men ; and being found in fashion as a 
man, He humbled Himself, becoming obedient 
even unto death, even the death of the cross. 
Wherefore also God exalted Him, and gave Him 
a name which is above every name, that in the 
name '' of Jesus every knee should bow, of things 
in heaven, of things in earth, and of infernal 
things, and every tongue should confess that 
Jesus Christ is Lord in the glory of God the 
Father." « 

14. That He is the righteous One whom the 
Jews should put to death. 

In the Wisdom of Solomon : " Let us lay hold 
of the righteous, because He is disagreeable to 
us, and is contrary to our works, and reproacheth 
us with our transgressions of the law.9 He pro- 
fesseth that He has the knowledge of God, and 
calls Himself the Son of God ; He has become 
to us an exposure of our thoughts ; He is griev- 
ous unto us even to look upon, because His life 
is unlike to others, and His ways are changed. 

' Isa xlii. 2-4. 

2 Ps xxii. 6-8. 

3 Ps. xxii. 15. 

f " Poderem," " a long priestly robe reaching to the heels " 
(Migne's Lexicon). The Oxford translation gives the meaning " an 
alb," which also is given in Migne. 

5 Cidarim, the head-dress for the Jewish high priest. 

* Zech. iii. i, 3, 5. 

^ " In nomine; " Oxford translator, " at the name," following the 
Eng. ver. But see the Greek, c^ tio oro/uLan. 

8 Phil, ii 6-II. 

9 The Oxford translation here inserts from the Apocrypha, without 
authority even for its text, " and objecteth to us the transgressions of 
the law." 

We are esteemed by Him as frivolous, and He 

^ restraineth Himself from our ways, as if from 

I uncleanness ; and He extols the last end of the 

I righteous, and boasts that He has God for His 

Father. Let us see, then, if His words are true, 

' and let us try what will come to Him. Let us 

interrogate Him with reproach and torture, that 

we may know His reverence and prove His 

patience. Let us condemn Him with a most 

shameful death. These things they considered, 

and erred. For their maliciousness hath blinded 

I them, and they knew not the sacraments of 

God." '° Also in Isaiah : " See ye how the 

righteous perisheth, and no man understandeth ; 

and righteous men are taken away, and no man 

regardeth. For the righteous man is taken away 

from the face of unrighteousness, and his burial 

shall be in peace." " Concerning this very thing 

it was before foretold in Exodus : " Thou shalt 

not slay the innocent and the righteous." '^ Also 

in the Gospel : " Judas, led by penitence, said 

to the priests and elders, I have sinned, in that 

I have betrayed the innocent blood." '^ 

15. That Christ is called a sheep and a lamb 
who was to be slain, and concerning 
the sacrament (mystery) of the passion. 

In Isaiah : " He was led as a sheep to the 
slaughter, and as a lamb before his shearer is 
dumb, so He opened not His mouth. In His 
humiliation His judgment was taken away : who 
shall relate His nativity? Because His life shall 
be taken away from the earth. By the trans- 
gressions of my people He was led to death ; 
and I will give the wicked for His burial, and the 
rich themselves for His death ; because He did 
no wickedness, nor deceits with His mouth. 
Wherefore He shall gain many, and shall divide 
the spoils of the strong ; because His soul was 
delivered up to death, and He was counted 
among transgressors. And He bare the sins of 
many, and was delivered for their offences." '* 
Also in Jeremiah : " Lord, give me knowledge, 
and I shall know it : then I saw their medita- 
tions. I was led like a lamb without malice to 
the slaughter ; against me they devised a device, 
saying. Come, let us cast the tree into His 
bread, '5 and let us erase His life from the earth, 
and His name shall no more be a remem- 
brance." '^ Also in Exodus God said to Moses : 
" Let them take to themselves each man a sheep, 
through the houses of the tribes, a sheep without 
blemish, perfect, male, of a year old it shall be 
to you. Ye shall take it from the lambs and 

'° Wisd. ii. 12-22. 

" Isa. Ivii. I, 2. [Justin, vol. i. 203.] 

'2 Ex. xxiii. 7. 

'3 Matt, xxvii. 3, 4. 

'■t Isa. liii. 7-Q, 12. 

'5 [Tertull., iii. p. 166. Note also " the viystery of the passion."'J 
'^ Jer. xi. iS, 19. 

;22 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

from the goats, and all the congregation of the 
synagogue of the children of Israel shall kill it 
in the evening ; and they shall take of its blood, 
and shall place it upon the two posts,' and upon 
the threshold in the houses, in the very houses 
in which they shall eat it. And they shall eat 
the flesh on the same night, roasted with fire ; 
and they shall eat unleavened bread with bitter 
herbs. 2 Ye shall not eat of them raw nor 
dressed in water, but roasted with fire ; the 
head with the feet and the inward parts. Ye 
shall leave nothing of them to the morning ; and 
ye shall not break a bone of it. But what of it 
shall be left to the morning shall be burnt with 
fire. But thus ye shall eat it ; your loins girt, 
and your sandals on your feet, and your staff in 
your hands ; and ye shall eat it in haste : for it 
is the Lord's passover."^ Also in the Apoca- 
lypse : " And I saw in the midst of the throne, 
and of the four living creatures, and in the midst 
of the elders, a Lamb standing as if slain, having 
seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven 
spirits of God sent forth throughout all the earth. 
And He came and took the book from the right 
hand of God, who sate on the throne. And 
when He had taken the book, the four living 
creatures and the four and twenty elders cast 
themselves before the Lamb, having every one of 
them harps and golden cups ■♦ full of odours of 
supplications, which are the prayers of the saints ; 
and they sang a new song, saying, Worthy art 
Thou, O Lord, to take the book, and to open its 
seals : for Thou wast slain, and hast redeemed 
us with Thy blood from every tribe, and tongue, 
and people, and nation ; and Thou hast made 
us a kingdom unto our God, and hast made us 
priests, and they shall reign upon the earth." s 
Also in the Gospel : " On the next day John saw 
Jesus coming to him, and saith. Behold the Lamb 
of God, and behold Him that taketh away the 
sins of the world ! " ^ 

16. That Christ also is called a Stone. 

In Isaiah: "Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I 
])lace on the foundations of Sion a precious stone, 
elect, chief, a corner stone, honourable ; and he 
who trusteth in Him shall not be confounded." ^ 
Also in the cxviith Psalm : "The stone which the 
builders rejected, the same is become the head 
of the corner. This is done by the Lord, and 
it is wonderful in our eyes. This is the day 

' Migne's reading differs considerably from this, and is as follows: 
" They shall take from the Iambs and the goats of its blood, and shall 
place It upon the two posts," etc. 

- Erasmus reads for " picridibus," " lactucis agrestibus," wild 
lettuces. 

^ Ex. xii. 3-12. 

■* " Pateras." 

S Rev. V. 6-10. 

•> John i. 2g. 

'' Isa. xxviii. 16. [See Tertull., " stumbling-stone," vol. iii. p. 165.] 

which the Lord hath made ; let us rejoice and 
be glad in it. O Lord, save therefore, O Lord, 
direct therefore. Blessed is He who cometh in 
the name of the Lord." * Also in Zechariah : 
" Behold, I bring forth my servant. The Orient 
is hig name, because the stone which I have placed 
before the face of Jesus ; upon that one stone are 
seven eyes." 9 Also in Deuteronomy : " And 
thou shalt write upon the stone all this law, very 
plainly." '° Also in Jesus the son of Nave : "And 
he took a great stone, and placed it there before 
the Lord ; and Jesus said unto the people. Be- 
hold, this stone shall be to you for a testimony, 
because it hath heard all the things which were 
spoken by the Lord, which He hath spoken to 
you to-day ; and it shall be for a testimony to 
you in the last of the days, when ye shall have 
departed from your God." " Also in the Acts of 
the Apostles, Peter : " Ye princes of the people, 
and elders of Israel, hearken : Behold, we are 
this day interrogated by you about the good deed 
done to the impotent man, by means of which 
he is made whole. Be it known unto you all, 
and to all the people of Israel, that in the name 
of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye have cru- 
cified, whom God hath raised up from the dead, 
by Him he stands whole in your presence, but by 
none other. This is the stone which was de- 
spised by you builders, which has become the 
head of the corner. For there is no other name 
given to men under heaven in which we must be 
saved." '^ This is the stone in Genesis, which 
Jacob places at his head, because the head of 
the man is Christ ; and as he slept he saw a lad- 
der reaching to heaven, on which the Lord was 
placed, and angels were ascending and descend- 
ing. "^ And this stone he designating Christ con- 
secrated and anointed with the sacrament of 
unction. This is the stone in Exodus upon 
which Moses sate on the top of a hill when 
Jesus the son of Nave fought against Amalek ; 
and by the sacrament of the stone, and the 
stedfastness of his sitting, Amalek was over- 
come by Jesus, that is, the devil was overcome 
by Christ. This is the great stone in the first 
book of Kings, upon which was placed the ark 
of the covenant when the oxen brought it back 
in the cart, sent back and returned by the 
strangers. Also, this is the stone in the first 
book of Kings, with which David smote the 
forehead of Goliath and slew him ; signifying 
that the devil and his servants are thereby 
thrown down — that part of the head, namely. 

8 Ps. cxviii. 21-26. 

9 Zech. iii. 8, g. 
'° Deut. .\xvii. 8. 

" Josh. xxiv. 26, 27. 

12 Acts iv. 8-12. 

•3 [The anointing of this stone gave it the name of Messiah in 
our author's account; and this interpretation gives great dignity to 
Jacob's dying reference to Him, Gen. xlix. 24.] The Oxford edition 
omits " and descending." 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

523 

being conquered ' which they have not had 
sealed. And by this seal we also are always safe 
and live. This is the stone which, when Israel 
had conquered the aliens, Samuel set up and 
called its name Ebenezer ; that is, the stone 
that helpeth. 

17- 

That afterwards this Stone should become 
a mountain, and should fill the whole 
earth. 

In Daniel : " And behold a very great image ; 
and the aspect of this image was fearful, and it 
stood erect before thee ; whose head was of fine 
gold, its breast and arms were silver, its belly 
and thighs were of brass, and its feet were partly 
indeed of iron, and partly of clay, until that a 
stone was cut - out of the mountain, without the 
hands of those that should cut it, and struck 
the image upon the feet of iron and clay, and 
brake them into small fragments. And the iron, 
and the clay, and the brass, and the silver, and 
the gold, was made altogether ; and they became 
small as chaff, or dust in the threshing-floor in 
summer ; and the wind blew them away, so that 
nothing remained of them. And the stone which 
struck the image became a great mountain, and 
filled the whole earth." ^ 

18. That in the last times the same mountain 
should be manifested, and upon it the 
Gentiles should come, and on it all the 
righteous should go up. 

In Isaiah : " In the last times the mountain 
of the Lord shall be revealed, and the house of 
God upon the tops of the mountains ; and it 
shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations 
shall come upon it, and many shall walk and 
say, Come, and let us go up into the mountain 
of the Lord, and into the house of the God of 
Jacob ; and He will tell us His way, and we wvU 
walk in it. For from Sion shall proceed the law, 
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem ; and 
He shall judge among the nations, and shall 
rebuke much people ; and they shall beat their 
swords into ploughshares, and their spears into 
pruning-hooks, and they shall no more learn to 
fight."-* Also in the twenty-third Psalm : "Who 
shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, or who 
shall stand in His holy place ? He that is in- 
nocent in his hands, and of a clean heart ; who 
hath not received his life in vanity,- and hath not 
sworn craftily to his neighbour. He shall receive 
the blessing from the Lord, and mercy 5 from the 
God that saveth him. This is the generation of 

• The Oxford edition reads, " conquered, that is, in that part of 
the head." 

- [Hippolytus, p. 209, S2ipra.^ 
3 Dan. ii. 31-35. 

* I«a. ii. 2-4. 

i " Misericordiam." 

those who seek Him, that seek the face of the 
God of Jacob." ^ 

19. That Christ is the Bridegroom, having the 
Church as His bride, from which spirit- 
ual children were to be born. 

In Joel : " Blow with the trumpet in Sion ; 
sanctify a fast, and call a healing ; assemble the 
people, sanctify the Church, gather the elders, 
collect the little ones that suck the breast ; let 
the Bridegroom go forth of His chamber, and 
the bride out of her closet." 7 Also in Jeremiah : 
" And I will take away from the cities of Judah, 
and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of 
the joyous, and the voice of the glad ; the voice 
of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride." ^ 
Also in the eighteenth Psalm : " And he is as a 
bridegroom going forth from his chamber ; he 
exulted as a giant to run his course. From the 
height of heaven is his going forth, and his cir- 
cuit even to the end of it ; and there is nothing 
which is hid from his heat." ^ Also in the Apoca- 
lypse : " Come, I will show thee the new bride, 
the Lamb's wife. And he took me in the Spirit 
to a great mountain, and he showed me the holy 
city Jerusalem descending out of heaven from 
God, having the glory of God." '° Also in the 
Gospel according to John : " Ye are my wit- 
nesses, that I said to them who were sent from 
Jerusalem to me, that I am not the Christ, but 
that I am sent before Him. For he who has the 
bride is the bridegroom ; but the friend of the 
bridegroom is he who standeth and heareth him 
with joy, and rejoiceth because of the voice of 
the bridegroom." " The mystery of this matter 
was shown in Jesus the son of Nave, when he 
was bidden to put his shoes from off him, doubt- 
less because he himself was not the bridegroom. 
For it was in the law, that whoever should refuse 
marriage should put off his shoe, but that he 
should be shod who was to be the bridegroom : 
" And it happened, when Jesus was in Jericho, 
he looked around with his eyes, and saw a man 
standing before his face, and holding a javelin '^ 
in his hand, and said, Art thou for us or for our 
enemies ? And he said, I am the leader of the 
host of the Lord ; now draw near. And Jesus 
fell on his face to the earth, and said to him, 
Lord, what dost Thoif command unto Thy ser- 
vant. And the leader of the Lord's host said, 
Loose thy shoe from thy feet, for the place 
whereon thou standest is holy ground." '^ Also, 
in Exodus, Moses is bidden to put off his shoe, 

6 Ps. xxiv. 3-6. 

7 Joel ii. 15, 16. 
* Jer. xvi. g. 

9 Ps. xix. 5, 6. 
1° Rev. xxi. 9-11. 
" John iii. 28, 29. 
'- Frameam. 
'J Josh. V. 13-15. 

524 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

because he, too, was not the bridegroom : " And 
there appeared unto him the angel of the Lord 
in a flame of fire out of a bush ; and he saw 
that the bush burned with fire, but the bush was 
not consumed. And Moses said, I will pass over 
and see this great sight, why the bush is not con- 
sumed. But when He saw that he drew near to 
see, the Lord (iod called him from the bush, 
saying, Moses. Moses. And he said. What is 
it? And He said. Draw not nigh hither, unless 
thou hast loosed thy shoe from off thy feet ; for 
the place on which thou standest is holy ground. 
And He said unto him, I am the (".od of thy 
father, the Clod of Abraham, and the God of 
Isaac, and the God of Jacob." ' This was also 
made plain in the Gospel according to John : 
" And John answered them, I indeed bai)tize 
with water, Init there standeth One in the midst 
of you whom ye know not : He it is of whom 
I said, The man that cometh after me is made 
before me, the latchet of whose shoe I am not 
worthy to unloose."^ Also according to Luke : 
" Let your loins be girt, and your lamps burning, 
and ye like to men that wait for their master 
when he shall come from the wedding, that when 
he cometh and knocketh, they may open unto 
him. Blessed are those ser\ants whom their 
Lord, when He cometh, shall find watching." ^ 
Also in the Apocalypse : " The Lord God om- 
nipotent reigneth : let us be glad and rejoice, 
and let us give to Him the honour of glory ; for 
the marriage of the Lamb is come, and His wife 
hath made herself ready." •* 

20. That the Jews would fasten Christ to the 
cross. 

In Isaiah : " I have spread out my hands all 
day to a people disobedient and contradicting 
me, who walk in ways that are not good, but after 
their own sins." 5 Also in Jeremiali : " Come, 
let us cast the tree into His bread, and let us 
blot out His life from the earth." '^ Also in 
Deuteronomy: "And Thy life shall be hanging 
(in doubt) before Thine eyes; and Thou shalt 
fear day and night, and shalt not trust to Thy 
life." 7 Also in the twenty-first Psalm : " They 
tore my hands and my feet ; '* they nimibered 
all my bones. And they gazed upon me, and 
saw me, and divided my garments among them, 
and upon my vesture they cast a lot. But Thou, 
O Lord, remove not Thy help far from me ; at- 
tend unto my help. Deliver my soul from the 

' Ex. iii. 2-6. 

* John i. a6, 27. 

J Luke xii. 35-37. 

* Rev. xix. 6, 7. 

5 Isa. Ixv. 2. [So Justin, vol, i. pp. t79 and 206. Tiut compare 
Isa. XXV. u, a remarkable simile.] 

6 Jer. xi. 19. 

' Deut. xxviii. 66 

8 [This is one of the passages corrupted by the Jews since the 
crucifixion. See Pe.^rson, On the Creed, p. 534. All his notes on 
" crucified " are most precious.] 

sword, and my only one from the paw '> of the. 
dog. Save me from the mouth of the lion, and 
my lowliness from the horns of the unicorns. I 
will declare Thy name unto my brethren ; in the 
midst of the Church I will praise Thee." '° Also 
in the cxviiith Psalm : " Pierce my flesh with 
nails through fear of Thee." " Also in the c.xlth 
Psalm : " The lifting up of my hands is an even- 
ing sacrifice." '^ Of which sacrifice Sophonias 
said : " Fear from the presence of the Lord (iod, 
since His day is near, because the Lord hath 
prepared His sacrifice, He hath sanctified His 
elect."'-' Also in Zechariah : "And they shall 
look upon me, whom they have pierced." '■♦ Also 
in the eighty-seventh Psalm : " I have called unto 
Thee, O Lord, the whole day ; I have stretched 
out my hands unto Thee." '5 Also in Numbers : 
" Not as a man is God suspended, nor as the 
son of man does He suffer threats." '^ Whence 
in the Gospel the Lord says : " As Moses lifted 
up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must 
the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever be- 
lieveth in the Son may have life eternal." '^ 

21. That in the passion and the sign of the 
cross is all virtue and power. 

In Habakkuk : " His virtue covered the heav- 
ens, and the earth is full of His praise, and His 
splendour shall be as the light ; there shall be 
horns in His hands. And there the virtue of 
His glory was established, and He founded His 
strong love. Before His face shall go the Word, 
and shall go forth unto the plains according to 
His steps." '* In Isaiah also : " Behold, unto us 
a child is born, and to us a Son is given, upon 
whose shoulders shall be government; and His 
name shall be called the Messenger of a mighty 
thought." '9 By this sign of the cross also Ama- 
lek was conquered by Jesus through Moses. In 
Exodus Moses said to Jesus : " Choose thee out 
men, and go forth, and order yourselves with 
Amalek until the morrow. Behold. I will stand 
on the top of the hill, and the rod of God in 
mine hancl. And it came to pass, when Moses 
lifted up his hands, Israel prevailed ; but when 
Moses had let down his hands, Amalek waxed 
strong. But the hands of Moses were heavy ; 
and they took a stone, and placed it under him. 
and he sate upon it ; and Aaron and Hur held 
up his hands, on the one side and on the othei 
side ; and the hands of Moses were made stead '■ 
even to the setting of the sun. And Jesus routed 

9 " Manu." 

'° Ps. xxii. i6-22. 

" Ps. cxix. I20. 

■^ Ps. cxli. 2. 

•3 Zeph. i. 7. 

'* Zech. xii. lo. 

'5 Ps. Ixxxviii. 9. 

'6 Num. xxiii. 19. 

'7 John iii. 14, 15. 

" Hab. iii. 3-5. 
'9 Isa. ix. 6. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

525 

Amalek and all his people. And the Lord said 
unto Moses, Write this, that it may be a memo- 
rial in a book, and tell it unto the ears of Jesus, 
that I may utterly destroy the memory of Ama- 
lek from under heaven." ' 

22. That in this sign of the Cross is salvation 

for all people who are marked on their 
foreheads.^ 

In Ezekiel the Lord says : " Pass through the 
midst of Jerusalem, and thou shalt mark the sign 
upon the men's foreheads, who groan and grieve 
for the iniquities which are done in the midst 
of them." ^ Also in the same place : " Go and 
smite, and do not spare your eyes. Have no 
pity on the old man, and the youth, and the 
virgin, and slay little children and women, that 
they may be utterly destroyed. But ye shall 
not touch any one upon whom the sign is written, 
and begin with my holy places themselves." -f 
Also in Exodus God says to Moses : " And there 
shall be blood for a sign to you upon the houses 
wherein ye shall be ; and I will look on the 
blood, and will protect you. And there shall 
not be in you the plague of wasting when I shall 
smite the land of Egypt." s Also in the Apoc- 
alypse : " And I saw ^ a Lamb standing on 
Mount Sion, and with Him a hundred and forty 
and four thousand ; and they had His name and 
the name of His Father written on their fore- 
heads." 7 Also in the same place : " I am Alpha 
and Omega, the first and the last, the beginning 
and the end. Blessed are they that do His 
commandments, that they may have power over 
the tree of life." ^ 

23. That at mid-day in His passion there 

should be darkness. 

In Amos : " And it shall come to pass in that 
day, saith the Lord, the sun shall set at noonday, 
and the day of light shall be darkened ; and I 
will turn your feast-days into grief, and all your 
songs into lamentation." ^ Also in Jeremiah: 
" She is frightened that hath borne children, and 
her soul hath grown weary. Her sun hath gone 
down while as yet it was mid-day ; she hath been 
confounded and accursed : I will give the rest 
of them to the sword in the sight of their ene- 
mies." '° Also in the Gospel : " Now from the 
sixth hour there was darkness over all the earth 
even to the ninth hour." " 

' Ex. xvii. 9-14. 

^ [i.e., baptized; but probably after immersion this symbolic cere- 
mony was already in use.] 

3 Ezek. ix. 4. 

* Ezek. ix. 4-6. 

5 Ex. xii. 13. 

*> *' And behold," Oxford text. 

7 Rev. xiv. I. 

^ Rev. xxii. 13, 14. 

9 Amos viii. 9, 10 [l.ardner, Crciiifi., vol. vii. pp. 107-124.] 

■° Jer. XV. 9. [I admire Lardner's caution: possibly he carries it 
too far ] 

'' Matt, xxvii. 45. [See vol. iii. p. 5S.] 

24. That He was not to be overcome of death, 

nor should remain in Hades. 

In the twenty-ninth Psalm : " O Lord, Thou 
hast brought back my soul from hell." '^ Also 
in the fifteenth Psalm : " Thou wilt not leave 
my soul in hell, neither wilt Thou suffer Thine 
Holy One to see corruption." '^ Also in the 
third Psalm : "I laid me down and slept, and 
rose up again, because the Lord helped me." '* 
Also according to John : " No man taketh away 
my life from me ; but I lay it down of myself. 
I have the power of laying it down, and I have 
the power of taking it again. For this command- 
ment I have received from my Father." 's 

25. That He should rise again from the dead 

on the third day. 

In Hosea : " After two days He will revive us ; 
we shall rise again on the third day." "^ Also in 
Exodus : " And the Lord said unto Moses, Go 
down and testify to the people, and sanctify 
them to-day and to-morrow ; and let them wash 
their garments, and let them be prepared against 
the day after to-morrow. For on the third day 
the Lord will come down on Mount Sinai." '? 
Also in the Gospel : " A wicked and adulterous 
generation seeketh after a sign ; and there shall 
no sign be given unto it but the sign of the 
prophet Jonas : for as Jonas was in the whale's 
belly three days and three nights, so shall the 
Son of man be three days and three nights in 
the heart of the earth," "^ 

26. That after He had risen again He should 

receive from His Father all power, and 
His power should be everlasting. 

In Daniel : " I saw in a vision by night, and 
behold as it were the Son of man, coming in the 
clouds of heaven, came even to the Ancient of 
days, and stood in His sight. And they who 
stood beside Him brought Him before Him : 
and to Him was given a royal power, and all the 
kings of the earth by their generation, and all 
glory obeying Him : and His power is eternal, 
which shall not be taken away, and His kingdom 
shall not be destroyed." '9 Also in Isaiah : " Now 
will I arise, saith the Lord ; now will I be glori- 
fied, now will I be exalted, now ye shall see, now 
ye shall understand, now ye shall be confounded. 
Vain will be the strength of your spirit : the fire 
shall consume you." ^° Also in the cixth Psalm : 
" The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on my 

■2 Ps. XXX. 3. 

'3 Ps. xvi. 10. 

u Ps. iii. 5. 

'5 John X. 18. 

'^ Hos. vi. 2. 

" Ex. xix. 10, II. 

'8 Matt. xii. 39, 40. 

"^ Dan. vii. 13, 14. 

-° Isa. xxxiii. 10, 11. 

526 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

right hand, until I make Thine enemies the foot- 
stool of Thy feet. God will send the rod of Thy 
power out of Sion, and 'I'hou shalt rule in the 
midst of Thine enemies." ' Also in the Apoca- 
lypse : " And I turned and looked to see the 
voice which spake with me. And I saw seven 
golden candlesticks, and in the midst of the 
candlesticks one like unto the Son of man, clothed 
with a long garment,- and He was girt about the 
paps with a golden girdle. And His head and 
His hairs were white as wool or snow, and His 
eyes as a flame of fire, and His feet like to fine 
brass from a furnace of fire, and His voice like 
the sound of many waters. And He had in His 
right hand seven stars ; and out of His mouth 
went a sharp two-edged sword ; and His face 
shone as the sun in his might. And when I saw 
Him, I fell at His feet as dead. And He laid 
His right hand upon me, and said, Fear not ; I 
am the first and the last, and He that liveth and 
was dead ; and, lo, I am living for evermore,^ 
and I have the keys of death and of hell."'* 
Likewise in the Gospel, the Lord after His 
resurrection says to His disciples : " All power 
is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go 
therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them 
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and 
of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all 
things whatsoever I have commanded you." 5 

27. That it is impossible to attain to God the 
Father, except by His Son Jesus Christ. 

In the Gospel : " I am the way, and the truth, 
and the life : no one cometh to the Father but 
by me." ^ Also in the same place : " I am the 
door : by me if any man shall enter in, he shall 
be saved." ^ Also in the same place : " Many 
prophets and righteous men have desired to see 
the things which ye see, and have not seen them ; 
and to hear those things which ye hear, and have 
not heard them."^ Also in the same place: 
" He that believeth on the Son hath eternal life : 
he that is not obedient in word to the Son hath 
not life ; but the wrath of God shall abide upon 
him." '^ Also Paul to the Ephesians : "And when 
He had come. He preached peace to you, to 
those which are afar off, and peace to those 
which are near, because through Him we both 
have access in one Spirit unto the Father." '° 
Also to the Romans : " For all have sinned, and 
fail of the glory of God ; but they are justified 
by His gift and grace, through the redemption 

' Ps. ex. I, 2. 

2 " Podere." 

3 One codex reads here, " living in the assembly of the saints." 

* Rev. i. i2-t8. 

5 Matt, xxviii. 18-20. 
^ John xiv. 6. 
^ John X. q. 

* Matt. xiii. 17. 
9 John ill. 36. 

'° Eph. ii. 17, 18. 

which is in Christ Jesus." " Also in the Epistle 
of Peter the apostle : " Christ hath died once 
for our sins, the just for the unjust, that He 
might present us to God." '^ Also in the same 
place : " For in this also was it preached to them 
that are dead, that they might be raised again." 'J 
Also in the Epistle of John : " Whosoever de- 
nieth the Son, the same also hath not the Father. 
He that confesseth the Son, hath both the Son 
and the Father." '+ 

28. That Jesus Christ shall come as a Judge. 

In Malachi : " Behold, the day of the Lord 
cometh, burning as an oven ; and all the aliens 
and all the wicked shall be as stubble ; and the 
day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the 
Lord." '5 Also in the forty-ninth (or fiftieth) 
Psalm : " God the Lord of gods hath spoken, 
and called the earth. From the rising of the 
sun even to the going down thereof, out of Sion 
is the beauty of His glory. God shall come 
manifestly, our God, and shall not keep silence. 
A fire shall burn before Him, and round about 
Him shall be a great storm. He hath called 
the heaven above, and the earth, that He may 
separate His people. Gather together His saints 
unto Him, those who arrange His covenant with 
sacrifices. And the heavens shall announce His 
righteousness, for God is the judge." '^ Also in 
Isaiah : " The Lord God of strength shall go 
forth, and shall break war in pieces : He shall 
stir up contest, and shall cry over His enemies 
with strength. I have been silent ; shall I al- 
ways be silent?" '7 Also in the sixty-seventh 
Psalm : " Let God arise, and let His enemies be 
scattered : and let those who hate Him flee 
from His face. As smoke vanisheth, let them 
vanish : as wax melteth from the face of fire, 
thus let the sinners perish from the face of God. 
And let the righteous be glad and rejoice in the 
sight of God : and let them be glad with joyful- 
ness. Sing unto God, sing praises unto His 
name : make a way to Him who goeth up into 
the west. God is His name. They shall he put 
to confusion from the face of Him who is the 
Father of the orjihans, and the Judge of the 
widows. God is in His holy place : God, who 
maketh men to dwell with one mind in an house, 
bringing forth them that are bound with might, 
and equally those who provoke unto anger, who 
dwell in the sepulchres : God, when Thou went- 
est forth in the sight of Thy people, in pass- 
ing into the desert." '^ Also in the eighty-first 

" Rom. iii. 23, 24. 
12 I Pet. iii. 18. 
» I Pet. iy. 6. 
'* I John ii. 23. 
'5 Mai. iv. I. 
•6 Ps. 1. 1-6. 
■7 Isa. xlii. 13, 14. 
" Ps. Ixviii. 1-7. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

527 

Psalm: "Arise, O God; judge the earth: for 
Thou wilt exterminate among all nations." ' 
Also . in the Gospel according to Matthew : 
*' What have we to do with Thee, Thou Son of 
David ? why art Thou come hither to punish us 
before the time ?" ^ Likewise according to John : 
*'The Father judgeth nothing, but hath given 
all judgment to the Son, that all may honour 
the Son as they honour the Father. He that 
honoureth not the Son, honoureth not the 
Father who hath sent Him." ^ So too in the 
second Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians : "We 
must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, 
that every one may bear the things proper to his 
body, according to those things which he hath 
done, whether they be good or evil." •♦ 

29. That He will reign as a King for ever. 

In Zechariah : " Tell ye the daughter of Zion, 
Behold, thy King cometh unto thee : just, and 
having salvation ; meek, sitting upon an ass that 
hath not been tamed." 5 Also in Isaiah : "Who 
will declare to you that eternal place ? He that 
walketh in righteousness, and holdeth back his 
hands from gifts ; stopping his ears, that he may 
not hear the judgment of blood ; and closing 
his eyes, that he may not see unrighteousness : 
this man shall dwell in the lofty cavern of the 
strong rock ; bread shall be given him, and his 
water shall be sure. Ye shall see the Kmg with 
glory." '^ Likewise in Malachi : "I am a great 
King, saith the Lord, and my name is illustrious 
among the nations." ^ Also in the second 
Psalm : " But I am established as a King by 
Him upon His holy hill of Zion, announcing 
His empire." ^ Also in the twenty-first Psalm: 
*' All the ends of the world shall be reminded, 
and shall turn to the Lord : and all the countries 
of the nations shall worship in Thy sight. For 
the kingdom is the Lord's : and He shall rule 
over all nations.'"' Also in the twenty-third 
Psalm : " Lift up your gates, ye princes ; and be 
ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors ; and the King 
of glory shall come in. Who is this King of 
glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord 
strong in battle. Lift up your gates, O ye 
princes ; and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting 
doors ; and the King of glory shall come in. 
Who is this King of glory ? The Lord of hosts. 
He is the King of glory." '° Also in the forty- 
fourth Psalm : " My heart hath breathed forth a 
good discourse : " I tell my works to the king : 

' Ps. Ixxxii. S. 

2 Matt. viii. 29. 

3 John V. 22, 2-5. 

* 2 Cor. V. 10. 
^ Zech. ix. (3. 

* Isa. xxxiii. 14-17. 

7 Mai. i. 14. 

8 Ps. ii. 6. 

9 Ps. xxii. 27, 28. 
'° Ps. xxiv. 7-10. 

'' [i e., rather '" a good WorJ." See p. 516, su/ra.] 

my tongue is the pen of a writer intelligently 
writing. Thou art lovely in beauty above the 
children of men : grace is shed forth on Thy 
lips, because God hath blessed Thee for ever. 
Be girt with Thy sword on Thy thigh, O most 
mighty. To Thy honour and to Thy beauty 
both attend, and direct Thyself, and reign, be- 
cause of truth, and meekness, and righteous- 
ness." '- Also in the fifth Psalm : " My King, 
and my God, because unto Thee will I pray. O 
Lord, in the morning Thou shalt hear my voice ; 
in the morning I will stand before Thee, and 
will contemplate Thee." '^ Also in the ninety- 
sixth Psalm : " The Lord hath reigned ; let the 
earth rejoice ; let the many isles be glad." '* 
Moreover, in the forty-fourth Psalm : " The 
queen stood at thy right hand in a golden gar- 
ment ; she is clothed in many colours. Hear, 

0 daughter, and see, and incline thine ear, and 
forget thy people and thy father's house ; for 
the King hath desired thy beauty, for He is thy 
Lord God." '5 Also in the seventy-third Psalm : 
*' But God is our King before the world ; He 
hath wrought salvation in the midst of the 
earth." ''' Also in the Gospel according to 
Matthew : " And when Jesus was born in Beth- 
lehem of Judah in the days of Herod the king, 
behold, Magi from the east came to Jerusalem, 
saying, Where is He who is born King of the 
Jews ? for we have seen His star in the east, and 
have come to worship Him." '7 Also, according 
to John, Jesus said : " My kingdom is not of 
this world. If my kingdom were of this world, 
my servants would be in trouble, that I should 
not be delivered to the Jews ; but now is my 
kingdom not from hence. Pilate said. Art thou 
a king, then ? Jesus answered. Thou sayest that 

1 am a king. For this cause I was born, and 
for this cause I am come into the world, that I 
might bear testimony to the truth. Every one 
that is of the truth heareth my voice." '^ 

30. That He Himself is both Judge and King. 

In the seventy-first Psalm : "O God, giveTh}' 
judgment to the king, and Thy righteousness to 
the king's son, to judge Thy people in righteous- 
ness." '9 Also in the Apocalypse : " And I saw 
the heaven opened, and behold a white horse ; 
and He who sate upon him was called Faithful 
and True ; and He judgeth justice and right- 
eousness, and maketh war. And His eyes were. 
as it were, a flame of fire, and upon His head 
were many crowns ; and He bare a name writ- 
ten that was known to none other than Himself: 

1= Ps. xlv. 1-4. 

" Ps V. 2, 3. 

^* Ps. xcvii. I. 

'5 Ps. .xlv. 9-1 1. 

■6 Ps. Ixxiv. 12. 

'^ iMatt. ii. I, 2. 

'^ John i. 36, 37. 

19 Ps. Ix.-.ii. I, 2. 

528 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

md He was clothed with a garment sprinkled 
vith blood, and His name is called the Word of 
God. And the armies which are in heaven fol- 
lowed Him on white horses, clothed in linen, 
fvhite and clean. And out of His mouth went 
forth a sword with two edges, that with it He 
should smite the nations, which He shall shep- 
herd ' with a rod of iron ; and He shall tread 
the winepress of the wrath of God Almighty. 
Also He has on His garment and on His thigh 
the name written. King of kings, and Lord of 
lords." ^ Likewise in the Gospel : " When the 
Son of man shall come in His glory, and all the 
angels with Him, then He shall sit in the throne 
of His glory ; and all nations shall be gathered 
together before Him, and He shall separate 
them one from another, even as a shepherd 
separates the sheep from the goats ; and He 
shall place the sheep at His right hand, but the 
goats at His left hand. Then shall the King 
say unto them who shall be at His right hand. 
Come, ye blessed of my Father, receive the 
kingdom which is prepared for you from the 
beginning of the world : for I was hungry, and 
ye gave me to eat : I was thirsty, and ye gave 
me to drink : I was a stranger, and ye received 
me : naked, and ye clothed me : sick, and ye 
visited me : I was in prison, and ye came unto 
me. Then shall the righteous answer, and say 
unto Him, Lord, when saw we Thee hungry, and 
fed Thee? thirsty, and gave Thee to drink? 
And when saw we Thee a stranger, and received 
Thee? naked, and clothed Thee? And when 
saw we Thee sick, and in prison, and came unto 
Thee ? And the King, answering, shall say unto 
them. Verily I say unto you. In as far as ye have 
done it to the least of these my brethren, ye have 
done it unto me. Then shall He say unto them 
who shall be on His left hand. Depart from me, 
ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which my Father 
hath prepared 3 for the devil and his angels : for 
I have been hungry, and ye gave me not to eat : 
I have been thirsty, and ye gave me not to 
drink : I was a stranger, and ye received me 
not : naked, and ye clothed me not : sick, and 
in prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall 
they also answer and say, Lord, when saw we 
Thee hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, 
or sick, or in prison, and have not ministered 
unto Thee? And He shall answer unto them. 
Verily I say unto you. Inasmuch as ye have not 
done it to one of the least of these, ye have not 
done it unto me. And these shall go away into 
everlasting burning, but the righteous into life 
eternal." * 

' The words " which He shall fted," or " shepherd," are wanting 
in the Apocalypse; and they are not found in many authorities. 

^ Rev. xix. 11-16. • 

3 [Said to be in the old Itala, as in some Greek mss. So Irenseus, 
vol. i. p. 524.] 

"* Matt. XXV. 31-46. 

THIRD BOOK. 

Cyprian to his son Quirinus,? greeting. Of 
your faith and devotion which you manifest to 
the Lord God, beloved son, you asked me to 
gather out for your instruction from the Holy 
Scriptures some heads bearing upon the religious 
teaching of our school ; 5 seeking for a succinct 
course of sacred reading, so that your mind, 
surrendered to God, might not be wearied with 
long or numerous volumes of books, but, in- 
stmcted with a summary of heavenly precepts, 
might have a wholesome and large compendium 
for nourishing its memory. And because I owe 
you a plentiful and loving obedience, I have 
done what you wished. I have laboured for 
once, that you might not always labour.^ There- 
fore, as much as my small ability could embrace. 
I have collected certain precepts of the Lord, 
and divine teachings, which may be easy a...-' 
useful to the readers, in that a few things digested 
into a short space are both quickly read through, 
and are frequently repeated. I bid you, beloved 
son, ever heartily farewell. 

HEADS.7 

1. On the benefit of good works and mercy. 

2. In works and alms, even if by smallness 
of power less be done, that the will itself is 
enough. 

3. That charity and brotherly love must be 
religiously and stedfastly practised. 

4. That we must boast in nothing, since noth- 
ing is our own. 

5 . That humility and quietness is to be main- 
tained in all things. 

6. That all good and righteous men suffer 
more, but ought to endure because they are 
proved. 

7. That we must not grieve the Holy Spirit 
whom we have received. 

8. That anger must be overcome, lest it con- 
strain us to sin. 

9. That brethren ought to sustain one another. 

10. That we must trust in God only, and in 
Him we must glory. 

11. That he who has attained to faith, having 
put off the former man, ought to regard only 
celestial and spiritual things, and to give no heed 
to the world which he has already renounced. 

12. That we must not swear. 

13. That we are not to curse. 

14. That we must never murmur, but bless 
God concerning all things that happen. 

15. That men are tried by God for this pur- 
pose, that they may be proved. 

5 [Whom he had probably baptized. Elucidation XL] 
*> [May the American editor of these volumes venture to trust 
that he has in some degree lightened the labours of those who come 
after him: " laboravi semel ne tu semper laborares."] 

7 [Six-score precepts to be compared with the heathen maxims and 
morals with which they so generally conflict. See Elucidation XII.) 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

529 

16. Of the benefit of martyrdom. 

1 7. That what we suffer in this world is of less 
account than is the reward which is promised. 

18. That nothing must be preferred to the 
love of God and of Christ. 

19. That we must not obey our own will, but 
that of God. 

20. That the foundation and strength of hope 
and faith is fear. 

21. That we must not rashly judge of an- 
other. 

22. That when we have received a wrong, we 
must remit and forgive it. 

23. That evil is not to be returned for evil. 

24. That it is impossible to attain to the 
Father but by Christ. 

25. That unless a man have been baptized 
and born again, he cannot attain to the kingdom 
of God. 

26. That it is of small account to be baptized 
and to receive the Eucharist, unless one profits 
by it both in deeds and works. 

2 7. That even a baptized person loses the grace 
which he has attained, unless he keep innocency. 

28. That remission cannot in the Church be 
granted unto him who has sinned against God. 

29. That it was before predicted concerning 
the hatred of the Name. 

30. That what any one has vowed to God, he 
must quickly pay. 

31. That he who does not believe is judged 
already. 

32. Of the benefit of virginity and of conti- 
nency. 

;^^. That the Father judgeth nothing, but the 
Son ; and the Father is not honoured by him by 
whom the Son is not honoured. 

34. That the believer ought not to live like 
the Gentiles. 

35. That God is patient for this end, that we 
may repent of our sin and be reformed. 

36. That a woman ought not to be adorned 
in a worldly manner. 

37. That the believer ought not to be pun- 
ished for other offences but for the name he 
bears only. 

38. That the servant of God ought to be in- 
nocent, lest he fall into secular punishment. 

39. That the example of living is given to us 
in Christ. 

40. That we must not labour boastfully or 
-loisily. 

41. That we must not speak foolishly and of- 
fensively. 

42. That faith is of advantage altogether, and 
^hat we can do as much as we believe. 

43. That he who truly believes can immedi- 
ately obtain. 

44. That the believers who differ among them- 
selves ought not to refer to a Cientile judge. 

45. That hope is of future things, and there- 
fore that faith concerning those things which 
are promised ought to be patient. 

46. That a woman ought to be silent in the 
church. 

47. That it arises from our fault and our de- 
sert that we suffer, and do not perceive God's 
help in everything. 

48. That we must not take usury. 

49. That even our enemies are to l)e loved. 

50. That the sacrament of the faith must not 
be profaned. 

5 1 . That no one should l)e uplifted in his 
doing. 

52. That the liberty of believing or of not 
believing is placed in free choice. 

53. That the secrets of (iod cannot be seen 
through, and therefore that our faith ought to 
be simple, 

54. That none is without filth and without sin.. 

55. That we must not please men, but God. 

56. That nothing that is done is hidden from 
God. 

57. That the believer is amended and re- 
j served. 

I 58. That no one should be made sad by 
; death, since in living is laboiu" and peril, in 
dying peace and the certainty of resurrection. 

59. Of the idols which the Gentiles think 
gods. 

60. That too great lust of food is not to be 
desired. 

61. That the lust of possessing, and money,, 
are not to be desired. 

62. That marriage is not to be contracted 
with Gentiles. 

63. That the sin of fornication is grievous. 

64. What are those carnal things which beget, 
death, and what are the spiritual things which 
lead to life. 

65. That all sins are put away in baptism. 

66. That the discipline of God is to be ob- 
served in Church precepts. 

67. That it was foretold that men would de- 
spise sound discipline. 

68. That we must depart from him who lives 
irregularly and contrary to discipline. 

69. That the kingdom of God is not in the 
wisdom of the world, nor in eloquence, but in 
the faith of the cross and in virtue of conversa- 
tion. 

70. That we must obey parents. 

71. And that fathers ought not to be bitter 
against their children. 

72. That ser\ants, when they believe, ought 
the more to be obedient to their fleshly masters. 

73. Likewise that masters ought to be more 
gentle. 

74. That every widow that is approved ought 
to be honoured. 

530 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

75. That every person ought to have care 
rather of his own people, and especially of 
believers. 

76. That one who is older must not rashly be 
accused. 

77. That the sinner is to be publicly reproved. 

78. That we must not speak, with heretics. 

79. That innocency asks with confidence, 
and obtains. 

80. That the devil has no power against man 
unless God have allowed it. 

8 1 . That wages be quickly jjaitl to the hireling. 

82. That divination must not be used. 

83. That a tuft of hair ' is i:ot to be worn on 
the head. 

84. That the beard must not be plucked. 

85. That we must rise when a bishop or a 
presbyter comes. 

86. That a schism must not be made, even 
although he who withdraws should remain in one 
faith and in the same tradition. 

87. That believers ought to be simple with 
prudence. 

88. That a brother must not be deceived. 

89. That the end of the world comes sud- 
denly. 

90. That a wife must not depart from her 
husband ; or if she departs, she must remain 
immarried. 

9 1 . That every one is tempted so much as he 
is able to bear. 

92. That not everything is to be done which 
is lawful. 

93. That it was foretold that heresies would 
arise. 

94. That the Eucharist is to be received with 
fear and honour. 

95. That we are to live with the good, but to 
avoid the evil. 

96. That we must labour with deeds, not with 
words. 

97. That we must hasten to faith and to 
attainment.^ 

98. That the catechumen ought to sin no 
more. 

99. That judgment will be in accordance with 
the terms, before the law, of equity ; after 
Moses, of the law. 

100. That the grace of God ought to be gra- 
tuitous. 

loi. That the Holy Spirit has often appeared 
in fire. 

102. That all good men ought willingly to 
hear rebuke. 

103. That we must abstain from much speak- 

ing. 

' " Cirrum in capite non habendum." " Cirnis " means " a luft 
•f hair," or a curl or lovelock. [Hut compare Clement, vol. ii. p. 
a86 (and note 9, on the chri.sm), for the more probable meaning.] 

2 Scii. " of baptism," Oxford transl. 

104. That we must not lie. 

105. That they are frequently to be corrected 
who do wrong in domestic service. 

106. That when a wrong is received, patience 
is to be maintained, and that vengeance is to be 
left to God. 

107. That we must not use detraction. 

108. That we must not lay snares against our 
neighbour. 

109. That the sick are to be visited, 
no. That tale-bearers are accursed. 

111. That the sacrifices of evil men are not 
acceptable. 

112. That those are more severely judged 
who in this world have more power. 

113. That widows and orphans ought to be 
protected. 

114. That while one is in the flesh, he ought 
to make confession. 

115. That flattery is pernicious. 

116. That God is more loved by him who 
has had many sins forgiven in baptism. 

117. That there is a strong conflict to be 
waged against the devil, and that therefore we 
ought to stand bravely, that we may be able to 
conquer. 

118. Of Antichrist, that he will come as a 
man. 

119. That the yoke of the law was heavy, 
which is cast off by us ; and that the Lord's 
yoke is light, which is taken up by us. 

120. That we are to be urgent in prayers. 

TESTIMONIES. 

I . Of the benefit of good works and mercy. 

In Isaiah : " Cry aloud," saith He, " and 
spare not ; lift up thy voice like a trumpet ; tell 
my people their sins, and the house of Jacob 
their wickednesses. They seek me from day to 
day, and desire to know my ways, as a people 
which did righteousness, and did not forsake 
the judgment of God. They ask of me now a 
righteous judgment, and desire to approach to 
God, saying. What ! because we have fasted, 
and Thou hast not seen : we have humiliated 
our souls, and Thou hast not known. For in 
the days of fasting are found your own wills ; 
for either ye torment those w^ho are subjected to 
you, or ye fast for strifes and judgments, or ye 
strike your neighbours with fists. For what do 
you fast unto me, that to-day your voice should 
be heard in clamour? This fast I have not 
chosen, save that a man should humble his soul. 
And if thou shalt bend thy neck like a ring, and 
spread under thee sackcloth and ashes, neither 
thus shall it be called an acceptable fast. Not 
such a fast have I chosen, saith the Lord ; but 
loose every knot of unrighteousness, let go the 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

•chokings of impotent engagements.' Send away 
the harassed into rest, and scatter every un- 
righteous contract. Break thy bread to the 
hungry, and bring the houseless poor into thy 
dwelh'ng. If thou seest the naked, clothe him ; 
and despise not them of thy own seed in thy 
house. Then shall thy seasonable light break 
forth, and thy garments shall quickly arise ; and 
righteousness shall go before thee : and the 
glory of God shall surround thee. Then thou 
shalt cry out, and God shall hear thee ; while 
thou art yet speaking, He shall say, Here I am."^ 
Concerning this same thing in Job : " I have 
preserved the needy from the hand of the 
mighty ; and I have helped the orphan, to 
•whom there was no helper. The mouth of the 
•widow blessed me, since I was the eye of the 
blind ; I was also the foot of the lame, and 
the father of the weak." ^ Of this same matter 
sn Tobit : " And I said to Tobias, My son, go 
and bring whatever poor man thou shalt find 
out of our brethren, who still has God in mind 
with his whole heart. Bring him hither, and he 
shall eat my dinner together with me. Behold, 
I attend thee, my son, until thou come." + Also 
in the same place : " All the days of thy life, 
my son, keep God in mind, and transgress not 
His precepts. Do justice all the days of thy 
life, and do not walk in the way of unrighteous- 
ness ; because if thou act truly, there v/ill be 
respect of thy works. Give alms of thy sub- 
stance, and turn not thy face from any poor 
man. So shall it come to pass that the face of 
God shall not be turned away from thee. Even 
as thou hast, my son, so do : if thou hast abun- 
dant substance, give the more alms therefrom ; 
if thou haijt little, communicate even of that 
little. And do not fear when thou givest alms : 
thou layest up for thyself a good reward against 
the day of need ; because alms delivereth from 
death, and does not suffer to go into darkness. 
Alms is a good office for all who do it in the 
sight of the most high God." 5 On this same 
subject in Solomon in Proverbs : " He that hath 
pity on the poor lendeth unto the Lord." ^ 
Also in the same place : " He that giveth to the 
poor shall never want ; but he who turns away 
his eye shall be in much penury." ^ Also in the 
same place : " Sins are purged away by alms- 
giving and faith." ^ Again, in the same place : 
" If thine enemy hunger, feed him ; and if he 
thirst, give him to drink : for by doing this thou 
shalt scatter live coals upon his head." '^ Again, 

' " Impotentiura commerciorum." 

^ Isa. Iviii. 1-9. 

3 Job xxix. 12, 13, 15, 16. 

•* Tob. ii. 2. 

5 Tob. iv. 5-1 1. 

* Prov. xix. 17. 

7 Prov. xxviii. 27. 

8 Prov. xvi. 6. 

9 Prov. x,\v. 21. 

in the same place : " As water extinguishes fire, 
so alms-giving extinguishes sin." '° In the same 
in Proverbs : " Say not. Go away, and return, 
to-morrow I will give ; when you can do good 
immediately. For thou knowest not what may 
happen on the coming day." " Also in the same 
place : " He who stoppeth his ears that he may 
not hear the weak, shall himself call upon God, 
and there shall be none to hear him." '^ Also in 
the same place : " He who has his conversation 
without reproach in righteousness, leaves blessed 
children." '^ In the same in Ecclesiasticus : 
" My son, if thou hast, do good by thyself, and 
present worthy offerings to God ; remember that 
death delayeth not." '■* Also in the same place : 
" Shut up alms in the heart of the poor, and this 
will entreat for thee from all evil." '5 Concern- 
ing this thing in the thirty-sixth Psalm, that 
mercy is beneficial also to one's posterity : " I 
have been young, and I have also grown old ; 
and I have not seen the righteous forsaken, nor 
his seed begging their bread. The whole day he 
is merciful, and lendeth ; and his seed is in bless- 
ing." '^ Of this same thing in the fortieth Psalm : 
" Blessed is he who considereth over the poor 
and needy : in the evil day God will deliver 
him." '7 Also in the cxith Psalm : " He hath 
distributed, he hath given to the poor ; his 
righteousness shall remain from generation to 
generation." '^ Of this same thing in Hosea : 
" I desire mercy rather than sacrifice, and the 
knowledge of God more than whole burnt-offer- 
ings." ''^ Of this same thing also in the Gospel 
according to Matthew : " Blessed are they who 
hunger and thirst after righteousness : for they 
shall be satisfied." ^° Also in the same place : 
" Blessed are the merciful : for they shall obtain 
mercy." -' Also in the same place : " Lay up 
for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither 
moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves 
do not dig through and steal : for where your 
treasure is, there will your heart be also." ^^ 
Also in the same place : " The kingdom of 
heaven is like unto a merchant-man seeking 
goodly pearls : and when he hath found a 
precious pearl, he went away and sold all that 
he had, and bought it."^^ That even a small 
work is of advantage, also in the same place : 
" And whoever shall give to drink to one of the 
least of these a cup of cold water in the name 

■° Ecclus. iii. 30. 
" Prov. iii. 28. 
'- Prov. xxi. 13. 
'3 Prov. XX. 7. 
** Ecclus. xiv. II. 
■S Ecclus. xxix. 12. 
"> Ps. xxxvii. 25, 26. 
17 Ps. xli. I. 
■^ Ps. cxii. 9. 
"9 Hos. vi. 6. 

20 Matt. V. 6. 

21 Matt. V. 7. 

22 Matt. vi. 2c. ST. 
=3 Mutt. xiii. 45, /_■ 

532 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

of a disciple, verily I say unto you, His reward 
shall not perish." ' That alms are to be denied 
to none, also in the same place : " Give to every 
one that askelh thee ; antl from him who would 
wish to borrow, be not turned away." ^ Also in 
the same place : " If thou wilt enter into life, 
keep the commandments. He saith, \Vhich ? 
Jesus saith unto him. Thou shalt not kill, Thou 
shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not bear 
false witness. Honour thy father and mother : 
and. Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. 
The young man saith unto Him, .All these things 
have I obser\'ed : what lack I yet ? Jesus saith 
unto him. If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell all 
that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou 
shalt have treasure in heaven ; and come, follow 
me."-* Also in the same j)lace : "When the 
Son of man shall come in His majesty, and all 
the angels with Him, then He shall sit on the 
throne of His glory : and all nations shall be 
gathered together before Him ; and He shall 
separate them one from another, even as a 
shepherd separates the sheep from the goats : 
and He shall place the sheep on the right hand, 
but the goats on the left hand. Then shall the 
King say unto them that are on His right hand, 
Come, ye blessed of my Father, receive the 
kingdom prepared for you from the beginning 
of the world. For I was hungry, and ye gave 
me to eat : I was thirsty, and ye gave me to 
drink : I was a stranger, and ye took me in : 
naked, and ye clothed me : I was sick, and ye 
visited me : I was in prison, and ye came unto 
me. Then shall the righteous answer Him, and 
say. Lord, when saw we Thee •♦ a stranger, and took 
Thee in : naked, and clothed Thee? And when 
saw we Thee sick, and in prison, and came to 
Thee ? And the King, answering, shall say unto 
them, Verily I say unto you. Inasmuch as ye 
did it to one of the least of these my brethren, 
ye did it unto me. Then shall He say unto 
them who are on His left hand. Depart from me, 
ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which my Father 
hath prepared for the devil and his angels : for 
I was hungry, and ye gave me not to eat : I was 
thirsty, and ye gave me not to drink : I was a 
stranger, and ye took me not in : I was naked, 
and ye clothed me not : sick, and in prison, and 
ye visited me not. Then shall they also answer, 
and say. Lord, when saw we Thee hungry, or 
thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in 
prison, and did not minister unto Thee? And 
He shall answer them, Verily I say unto you. 
Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of 
these, ye did it not unto me. .And these shall 

' Matt. X. 42. 

- Malt. V. 42. 
5 Malt. .\ix. 17-21. 

* The Oxford edition inserts here, " an hungered, and fed Thee: 
thirsty, and gave Thc« drink? when saw we Tl.< e - " 

go away into everlasting burning : but the right- 
eous into life eternal." 5 Concerning this same 
' matter in the Oospel according to Luke : " Sell 
your possessions, and give alms." '^ Also in the 
same place : "He who made that which is 
within, made that which is without also. But 
give alms, and, behold, all things are pure unto 
you." 7 Also in the same place : " Behold, the 
half of my substance 1 give to the poor ; and if 
I have defrauded any one of anything, I restore 
him fourfold.- .Xnd Jesus said unto him, that 
•salvation has this day been wrought for this 
house, since he also is a son of Abraham." ^ 
Of this same thing also in the second Fpistle to 
the Corinthians : " Let your abundance supply 
their want, that their abundance also may be the 
supplement of your want, that there may be 
equality : as it is written, He who had much 
had not excess ; and he who had little had no 
lack."'^ Also in the same place: "He who 
soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly ; and 
he who soweth in blessing shall reap also of 
blessing. But let every one do as he has pro- 
posed in his heart : not as if sorrowfully, or of 
necessity : for God loveth a cheerful giver." '° 
Also in the same place : "As it is written. He 
hath dispersed abroad ; he hath given to the 
poor: his righteousness remaineth for ev-er." " 
Likewise in the same place : " Now he who 
ministereth seed to the sower, shall both supjjly 
bread to be eaten, and shall multiply your seed, 
and shall increase the growth of the fruits of 
your righteousness : that in all things ye may be 
made rich." '^ Also in the same place : " The 
administration of this service has not only sup- 
plied that which is lacking to the saints, but has 
abounded by much giving of thanks unto God." '^ 
Of this same matter in the Epistle of John : 
" Whoso hath this world's substance, and seeth 
his brother desiring, and shutteth up his bowels 
from him, how dwelleth the love of God in 
him?"'-* Of this same thing in the Gospel 
according to Luke : " When thou makest a 
dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, nor 
brethren, nor neighbours, nor the rich ; lest haply 
they also invite thee again, and a recompense 
be made thee. But when thou makest a ban- 
quet, call the poor, the weak, the blind, and 
lame : antl thou shalt be blessed ; because they 
have not the means of rewarding thee : but thou 
shalt be recompensed in the resurrection of the 

just." '5 

5 Matt. XXV. 31-46. 

* Luke xii. 33. 

' Luke xi. 40, 41. 

* Luke xix. 8, 9. 

9 2 Cor. viii. 14, 15. 
'° 2 Cor. ix. 6, 7. 
" 2 Cor. ix. 9. 
'- 2 Cor. ix. 10, II. 
" 2 Cor. ix. 12. 
'■• I John iii. 17. 
'^ Luke xiv. 12-14. 

THK TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

53, 

2. In works and alms, even if by smallness of 

power less be done, that the will itself is 
sufficient. 

In the second Epistle of Paul to the Corinthi- 
ans : " If there be a ready will, it is acceptable 
according to what a man hath, not according to 
that which he hath not ; nor let there be to 
others a mitigation, but to you a burdening.' 

3. That charity and brotherly affection are to 

be religiously and stedfastly practised. 

In Malachi : " Hath not one God created us ? 
Is there not one Father of us all ? Why have ye 
certainly deserted every one his brother? " ^ Of 
this same thing according to John : " Peace I 
leave with you, my peace I give unto you." ^ 
Also in the same place : "This is my command- 
ment, That ye love one another, even as I have 
loved you. Greater love than this has no man, 
than that one should lay down his life for his 
friends." •* Also in the same place : " Blessed 
are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the 
sons of God." 5 Also in the same place : "Ver- 
ily I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree 
on earth concerning everything, whatever you shall 
ask it shall be given you from my Father which is 
in heaven. For wherever two or three are gath- 
ered together in my name, I am with them." ^ 
Of this same thing in the first Epistle to the 
Corinthians : " And I indeed, brethren, could 
not speak unto you as to spiritual, but as to car- 
nal, as to babes in Christ. I have given you 
milk for drink, not meat : for while ye were yet 
little ye were not able to bear it, neither now are 
ye able. For ye are still carnal : for where there 
are in you emulation, and strife, and dissensions, 
are ye not carnal, and walk after man? " ^ Like- 
wise in the same place : " And if I should have 
all faith, so that I can remove mountains, but 
have not charity, I am nothing. And if I should 
distribute all my goods for food, and if I should 
deliver up my body to be burned, but have not 
charity, I avail nothing. Charity is great-souled ; 
charity is kind ; charity envieth not ; charity 
dealefh not falsely ; is not puffed up ; is not irri- 
tated ; thinketh not evil ; rejoiceth not in injus- 
tice, but rejoiceth in the truth. It loveth all 
things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, 
beareth all things. Charity shall never fail."^ 
Of this same thing to the Galatians : " Thou 
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. But if ye 
bite and accuse one another, see that ye be not 
consumed one of another." 9 Of this same thing 

' 2 Cor. viii. 12, 13. 

2 Mai. ii. 10. 

3 John xiv. 27. 

■* John XV. 12, 13. 
5 "Matt. V. g. 
*> Matt xviii. 19, 20. 
^ I Cor. iii. 1-3. 

8 I Cor xiii. 2-3. 

9 Gal. V. 14, 15. 

in the Epistle of John : " In this appear the 
children of God and the children of the devil. 
Whosoever is not righteous is not of God, and 
he who loveth not his brother. For he who 
hateth his brother is a murderer ; and ye know 
that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in 
him." '° Also in the same place : " If any one 
shall say that he loves God, and hates his brother, 
he is a liar : for he who loveth not his brother 
whom he seeth, how can he love God whom he 
seeth not?" " Of this same thing in the Acts 
of the Apostles : " But the multitude of them 
that had believed acted with one soul and mind : 
nor was there among them any distinction, neither 
did they esteem as their own anything of the 
possessions that they had ; but all things were 
common to them." '- Of this same thing in the 
Gospel according to Matthew : If thou wouldest 
offer thy gift at the altar, and there rememberest 
that thy brother hath ought against thee ; leave 
thou thy gift before the altar, and go ; first be 
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and 
offer thy gift at the altar." '^ Also in the Epistle 
of John : " God is love ; and he that dwelleth 
in love dwelleth in God, and God in him." '* 
Also in the same place : " He who saith he is in 
the light, and hateth his brother, is a liar, and 
walketh in darkness even until now." '5 

4. That we must boast in nothing, since noth- 
ing is our own. 

In the Gospel according to John : " No one 
can receive anything, except it were given him 
from heaven." '^ Also in the first Epistle of Paul 
to the Corinthians : " For what hast thou that 
thou hast not received? But if thou hast re- 
ceived it, why boastest thou, as if thou hadst 
not received it?" '^ Also in the first of Kings : 
" Boast not, neither speak lofty things, and let 
not great speeches proceed out of your mouth, 
for the Lord is a God of knowledge." '^ Also in 
the same place : " The bow of the mighty men 
has been made weak, and the weak are girt 
about with strength." '^ Of this same thing in 
the Maccabees : " It is just to be subjected to 
God, and that a mortal should not think things 
equal to God." '^ Also in the same place : " And 
fear not the words of a man that is a sinner, 
because his glory shall be filth and worms. To- 
day he shall be lifted up, and to-morrow he shall 
not be found ; because he is turned into his 

earth, and his thought has perished." -" 

— 

'o I John iii. lo, 15. 

" I John iv. 20. 

'2 Acts. iv. 32. ■ , TT L — t 

" Matt. V. 23, 24. [I think this harmonizes with Heb. xiu. lo.j 

'* I John IV. 16. 
'5 I John ii. 9. 
'5 John iii. 27. 
'' I Cor. iv. 7. 
'3 I Sam. ii. 3, 4. 
'9 2 M.icc. ix. 13. 
-'^ I Mace. ii. 62, 63. 

534 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

5. That humility and qi^ietness are to be 
maintained in all things. 

In Isaiah : " Thus saith the Lord God, The 
heaven is my throne, and the earth is the stool 
of my feet. What seat will ye build for me, or 
what is the place for my rest? For all those 
things hath my hand made, and all those things 
are mine. And upon whom else will I look, 
except upon the lowly and quiet man, and him 
that trembleth at my words?"' On this same 
thing in the Gospel according to Matthew : 
" Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the 
earth." - Of this same thing, too, according to 
Luke : " He that shall be least among you all, 
the same shall be great." ^ Also in the same 
place : " Whosoever exalteth himself shall be 
made low, and whosoever abaseth himself shall 
be exalted." ■* Of this same thing to the Ro- 
mans : " Be not high-minded, but fear ; for if 
God spared not the natural branches, (take 
heed) lest He also spare not thee." s Of this 
same thing in the thirty-third Psalm : "And He 
shall save the lowly in spirit."^ Also to the 
Romans : " Render to all what is due : tribute 
to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, 
fear to whom fear, honour to whom honour ; 
owe no man anything, except to love another." 7 
Also in the Gospel according to Matthew : "They 
love the first place of reclining at feasts, and the 
chief seat in the synagogues, and salutations in 
the market, and to be called of men Rabbi. 
But call not ye Rabbi, for One is your Master." ^ 
Also in the Gospel according to John : " The 
servant is not greater than his lord, nor the 
apostle greater than He that sent himself. If 
ye know these things, blessed shall ye be if ye 
shall do them." '^ Also in the eighty-first Psalm : 
" Do justice to the poor and lowly." '° 

6. That all good and righteous men suffer 
more, but ought to endure because they 
are proved. 

In Solomon : " The furnace proveth the ves- 
sels of the i^otter, and the trial of tribulation 
righteous men." " Also in the fiftieth Psalm : 
" The sacrifice to God is a contrite spirit ; a 
contrite and humbled heart God will not de- 
spise." '^ Also in the thirty-third Psalm : " God 
is nearest to them that are contrite in heart, and 

' Isa. Ixvi. I, 2. 

2 Matt. V. 5. 

3 Luke ix. 48. 

* Luke xiv. ii. 

5 Rom. xi. 20, 21. 

* Ps. xxxiv. 18. 

7 Rom. xiii. 7, 8. 

* Matt, xxiii. 6-8. 
9 lohn xiii. 16, 17. 

'° Ps. Ixxxii. 3. 
" Ecclus. xxvii. 5. 
'2 Ps. 11. 17. 

He will save the lowly in spirit." '^ Also in 
the same place : " Many are the afflictions of the 
righteous, but out of them all the Lord will 
deliver them." '+ Of this same matter in Job : 
" Naked came I out of my mother's womb, naked 
also shall I go under the earth : the Lord gave, 
and the Lord hath taken away : as it hath pleased 
the Lord, so it is done ; blessed be the name 
of the Lord. In all these things which happened 
to him Job sinned in nothing with his lips in 
the sight of the Lord." 's Concerning this same 
thing in the Gospel according to Matthew : 
" Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be 
comforted." '^ Also according to John : "These 
things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye 

, may have peace. But in,the world ye shall ha\e 
affliction ; but have confidence, for I have over- 
come the world." '7 Concerning this same thing 
in the second Epistle to the Corinthians : "There 
was given to me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger 
of Satan to buffet me, that I should not be ex- 
alted. For which thing I thrice besought the 
Lord, that it should depart from me. And He 
said unto me. My grace is sufficient for thee ; 
for strength is perfected in weakness." '^ Con- 

; cerning this same thing to the Romans : " ^V'e 
glory in hope of the glory of God. And not 
only so, but we also glory in afflictions : knowing 
that affliction worketh patience ; and patience, 
experience ; and experience, hope : and hope 
does not confound ; because the love of God is 
infused in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, which 
is given unto us." '^ On this same subject, ac- 
cording to Matthew : " How broad and spacious 
is the way which leadeth unto death, and many 
there are who go in thereby : how straight and 
narrow is the way that leadeth to life, and few 
there are that find it ! " ^° Of this same thing in 
Tobias: "Where are thy righteousnesses? be- 
hold what thou sufferest." ^' Also in the Wisdom 
of Solomon : " In the places of the wicked the 
righteous groan ; but at their ruin the righteous 
will abound." ^^ 

7. That we must not grieve the Holy Spirit, 
whom we have received. 

Paul the apostle to the Ephesians : " Grieve 
not the Holy Spirit of God, in which ye were 
sealed in the day of redemption. Let all bitter- 
ness, and wrath, and indignation, and clamour, 
and blasphemy, be taken away from you." ^^ 

'3 Ps. xxxiv. 18. 
'* Ps. xxxiv. 19. 

'5 Job i. 21, 22. 
'<> Matt. V. 4. 
'7 John xvi. 33. 
'8 2 Cor. xii. 7-9. 
'9 Rom. V. 2-5. 
-" Matt. vii. 13, 14. 
21 Tob. ii. 14. 
=2 Prov. xxviii. 28. 
=3 Eph. iv. 30, 31. 

[For the sealing, see Acts xix. 6, Heb. vi. 2.} 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

53.S 

S. That anger must be overcome, lest it con- 
strain us to sin. 

In Solomon in the Proverbs : " Better is a 
patient man than a strong man ; for he who re- 
strains his anger is better than he who taketh a 
city." ' Also in the same place : " The impru- 
dent man declareth his anger on the same day, 
l)ut the crafty man hideth away his dishonour." - 
Of this same thing to the Ephesians : " Be ye 
angry, and sin not. Let not the sun set upon 
your wrath." ^ Also in the Gospel according to 
Matthew : " Ye have heard that it was said by 
the ancients, Thou shalt not kill ; and whoever 
shall kill shall be guilty of the judgment. But 
I say unto you, That every one who is angry 
with his brother without cause shall be guilty of 
the judgment." ■♦ 

9. That brethren ought to support one an- 

other. 

To the Galatians .- •' Each one having others 
in consideration, lest ye also should be tempted. 
Bear ye one another's burdens, and so ye shall 
fulfil the law of Christ." s 

10. That we must trust in God only, and in 

Him we must glory. 

In Jeremiah : " Let not the wise man glory 
m his wisdom, neither let the strong man glory in 
his strength, nor let the rich man glory in his 
riches ; but let him that glorieth glory in this, 
that he understands and knows that I am the 
Lord, who do mercy, and judgment, and right- 
eousness upon the earth, because in them is my 
pleasure, saith the Lord." ^ Of the same thing 
in the fifty-fourth Psalm : • " In the Lord have I 
hoped ; I will not fear what man can do unto 
me." 7 Also in the same place : " To none but 
God alone is my soul subjected." ^ Also in the 
cxviith Psalm : " I will not fear what man can 
do unto me ; the Lord is my helper." 9 Also in 
the same place : " It is good to trust in the 
Lord rather than to trust in man ; it is good 
to hope in the Lord rather than to hope in 
princes 

r. " 10 

Of this same thing in Daniel : 
But Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego an- 
swered and said to king Nebuchadnezzar, O 
king, there is no need to answer thee concern- 
ing_ this word. For God, whom we serve, is 
able to deliver us from the furnace of burning 
fire ; and He will deliver us from thine hand, O 

king. And if not, be it known unto thee that 
we serve not thy gods, and we adore not the 
golden image which thou hast set up." " Like- 
wise in Jeremiah : " Cursed is the man who hath 
hope in man ; and blessed is the man who 
trusts in the Lord, and his hope shall be in 
God." '^ Concerning this same thing in Deuter- 
onomy : " Thou shalt worship the Lord thy 
God, and Him only shalt thou serve." '^ Of 
this same thing to the Romans : " And they 
worshipped and serv^ed the creature, forsaking the 
Creator. Wherefore also Ciod gave them up to 
ignominious passions." "» Of this thing also in 
John : " Greater is He who is in you than he 
who is in this world." '5 

II. That he who has attained to trust, having 
put off the former man, ought to re- 
gard only celestial and spiritual things, 
and to give no heed to the world which 
he has already renounced. 

In Isaiah : " Seek ye the Lord ; and when ye 
have found Him, call upon Him. But when He 
hath come near unto you, let the wicked forsake 
his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts : 
and let him be turned unto the Lord, and he 
shall obtain mercy, because He will plentifully 
pardon your sins." '^ Of this same thing in Solo- 
mon : " I have seen all the works which are 
done under the sun ; and, lo, all are vanity." '7 
Of this same thing in Exodus : " But thus shall 
ye eat it ; your loins girt, and your shoes on your 
feet, and your staves in your hands : and ye shall 
eat it in haste, for it is the Lord's passover." '* 
Of this same thing in the Gospel according to 
Matthew : " Take no thought, saying, What shall 
we eat ? or. What shall we drink ? or. Wherewith 
shall we be clothed ? for these things the nations 
seek after. But your Father knoweth that ye 
have need of all these things. Seek first the 
kingdom of God, and His righteousness ; and 
all these things shall be added unto you." '^ 
Likewise in the same place : " Think not for 
the morrow, for the morrow shall take thought 
for itself. Sufficient unto the day is its own 
evil." ^° Likewise in the same place : " No one 
looking back, and putting his hands to the 
plough, is fit for the kingdom of God." ^' Also 
in the same place : " Behold the fowls of the 
heaven : for they sow not, nor reap, nor gather 
into barns; and your heavenly Father feedeth 

■ Prov. xvi. 32. 

2 Prov. xii. 16. 

3 Eph. iv. 26. 

* Matt. V. 21, 22. 
■^ Gal. vi. I, 2. 
' Jer. ix. 23, 24. 
^ Ps, Ivi. II. 

8 Ps. Ixii. I. 

9 Ps. cxviii. 6. 
•o Ps. cxviii. 8. 

" Dan. iii. 16-18. 
'2 Jer. xvii. 5-7. 
'3 Deut. vi. 13. 
'< Rom. i. 25, 26. 
'S I John iv. 4. 
■ti Isa. Iv. 6, 7. 
'7 Eccles. i. 14. 
18 Ex. xii. II. 
'9 Matt. vi. 31-33. 
20 Matt. vi. 34. 
-' Luke ix. I2. 

536 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

them. Are not ye of more value than they?" ' 
Concerning this same thing, according to Luke : 
" Let your loins be girded, and your lamps 
burning ; and ye like unto men that wait for 
their lord, when he cometh from the wedding ; 
that, when he cometh and knocketh, they may 
open to him. Blessed are those servants, whom 
their lord, when he cometh, shall find watch- 
ing." ^ Of this same thing in Matthew : " The 
foxes have holes, and the birds of the heaven 
have nests ; but the Son of man hath not where 
He may lay His head."^ Also in the same 
place : " Whoso forsaketh not all that he hath, 
■cannot be my disciple." ■♦ Of this same thing in 
the first to the Corinthians : " Ye are not your 
own, for ye are bought with a great price. 
Glorify and bear God in your body." s Also in 
the same place : " The time is limited. It re- 
jiiaineth, therefore, that both they who have 
wives be as though they have them not, and they 
who lament as they that lament not, and they that 
rejoice as they that rejoice not, and they who 
buy as they that buy not, and they who possess 
as they who possess not, and they who use this 
world as they that use it not ; for the fashion of 
this world passeth away." ^ Also in the same 
place : " The first man is of the clay of the earth, 
the second man from heaven. As he is of the 
clay, such also are they who are of the clay ; 
and as is the heavenly, such also are the heavenly. 
Even as we have borne the image of him who 
is of the clay, let us bear His image also who is 
from heaven." ^ Of this same matter to the 
Philippians : " All seek their own, and not those 
things which are Christ's ; whose end is destruc- 
tion, whose god is their belly, and their glory is 
to their confusion, who mind earthly things. 
For our conversation is in heaven, whence also 
we expect the Saviour, our Lord Jesus Christ, 
who shall transform the body of our humiliation 
conformed to the body of His glory." ^ Of this 
very matter to Galatians : " But be it far from 
me to boast, except in the cross of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified 
unto me, and I unto the world." ^ Concerning 
this same thing to Timothy : " No man that 
warreth for God bindeth himself with worldly 
annoyances, that he may please Him to whom 
he hath approved himself. But and if a man 
should contend, he will not be crowned unless 
he fight lawfully." '° Of this same thing to the 
Colossians : " If ye be dead with Christ from 
the elements of the world, why still, as if living 

' Matt. vi. 26. 
- Luke xii. 35-37. 
3 Matt. viii. 20. 
■* Luke xiv. 33. 
S I Cor. vi. 19, 20. 
* I Cor. vii. 29-31. 
" I Cor. .\v. 47-49. 
' Phil. ii. 21, lii. 19-21. 
9 Gal. vi. 14. 
'^ 2 Tim. ii. 4, 5. 

in the world, do ye follow vain things? " " Also 
concerning this same thing : " If ye have risen 
together with Christ, seek those things which are 
above, where Christ is sitting on the right hand 
of God. Give heed to the things that are above, 
not to those things which are on the earth ; for 
ye are dead, and your life is hidden with Christ 
in God. But when Christ your life shall appear, 
then shall ye also appear with Him in glory." '^ 
Of this same thing to the Ephesians : " Put off 
the old man of the former conversation, who is 
corrupted, according to the lusts of deceit. But 
be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind, and 
put on the new man, him who according to God 
is ordained in righteousness, and holiness, and 
truth." '3 Of this same thing in the Epistle of 
Peter : " As strangers and pilgrims, abstain from 
fleshly lusts, which war against the soul ; but 
having a good conversation among the Gentiles, 
that while they detract from you as if from evil- 
doers, yet, beholding your good works, they may 
magnify God." '■* Of this same thing in the 
Epistle of John : " He who saith he abideth in 
Christ, ought himself also to walk even as He 
walked." '5 Also in the same place : " Love not 
the world, neither the things that are in the 
world. If any man loveth the world, the love 
of the Father is not in him. Because everytning 
which is in the world is lust of the flesh, and 
lust of the eyes, and the ambition of this world, 
which is not of the Father, but of the lust of this 
world. And the world shall pass away with its 
lust. But he that doeth the will of God abideth 
for ever, even as God abideth for ever." '^ Also 
in the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians : 
" Purge out the old leaven, that ye may be a new 
dough, as ye are unleavened. For also Christ 
our passover is sacrificed. Therefore let us cele- 
brate the feast, not in the old leaven, nor in the 
leaven of malice and wickedness, but in the un- 
leavened bread of sincerity and truth." '7 

12. That we must not swear. 

In Solomon : " A man that sweareth much 
shall be filled with iniquity, and the plague shall 
not depart from his house ; and if he swear 
vainly, he shall not be justified." '^ Of this same 
matter, according to Matthew : " (Again, ye have 
heard that it was said to them of old. Thou shalt 
not swear falsely, but shalt perform unto the Lord 
thine oaths.) I say unto you, Swear not at all : 
(neither by heaven, because it is God's throne ; 
nor by the earth, because it is His footstool ; nor 

'* Col. ii. BO. 

'2 Col. iii. 1-4. 

'3 Eph. iv. 22-24. 

'* 2 Pet. ii. II, 12. 

'5 I John ii. 6. 

'* I John ii. 15-17. 

'7 I Cor V. 7, 8. 

'8 Ecclus. xxiii. ii. From some ancient text the Oxford edition 
adds here, " Et si frustra juraverit dupliciter punietur " — " and if he 
swear with no purpose, he shall be punished doubly." 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

537 

by Jerusalem, because it is the city of the great 
King ; neither shalt thou swear by thy head, 
because thou canst not make one hair white or 
black.) But let your discourse be, Yea, yea; 
Nay, nay : (for whatever is fuller than these is 
of evil.")' Of this same thing in Exodus: 
*' Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy 
God in vain." - 

13. That we must not curse. 

In Exodus : " Thou shalt not curse nor speak 
ill of the ruler of thy people." ^ Also in the 
thirty-third Psalm : " Who is the man who de- 
sires life, and loveth to see good days ? Restrain 
thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak 
no guile." + Of this same thing in Leviticus : 
■" And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying, Bring 
forth him who hath cursed abroatl outside the 
camp ; and all who heard him shall place their 
hands upon his head, and all the assembly of the 
children of Israel shall stone him." 5 Of this 
same thing in Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians : 
" Let no evil discourse proceed out of your 
mouth, but that which is good for the edification 
of faith, that it may give grace to the hearers." ^ 
Of this same thing to the Romans : " Blessing, 
and not cursing." 7 Of this same thing in the 
Gospel according to Matthew : "He who shall 
say to his brother. Thou fool ! shall be liable to 
the Gehenna of fire." ^ Of this same matter, 
according to the same Matthew : " But I say 
unto you, That every idle word which men shall 
speak, they shall give account for it in the day 
of judgment. For by thy words thou shalt be 
justified, and by thy words thou shalt be con- 
demned."'^ 

14. That we must never murmur, but bless 

God concerning all things that happen. 

In Job : " Say some word against the Lord, 
and die. But he, looking upon her, said, Thou 
speakest as one of the foolish women. If we 
have received good things from the Lord's hand, 
why shall we not endure evil things? In all 
these things which happened unto him. Job 
sinned not with his lips in the sight of the Lord." '° 
Also in the same place : " Hast thou regarded 
my servant Job ? for there is none like unto him 
in the earth : a man without complaint : a true 
worshipper of God, restraining himself from all 
evil." " Of the same thing in the thirty-third 

■ Matt. V. 34-37. All these passages are wanting in the Oxford 
text; [also in ed. Paris, 1574]. 

2 Ex. XX. 7. [Compare old Paris ed. on this section.] 

3 Ex. xxii. 28. 

* Ps. xxxiv. 12, 13. 
5 Lev. xxiv. 13, 14. 

* Eph. iv. 2g. 

^ Rom. xii. 14. 

* Matt. V. 22. 

9 Matt. xii. 36, 37. 
'° Job ii. 9, 10. 
" Job i. 3. 

Psalm . " I will bless the Lord at all times : His 
praise shall ever be in my mouth." '^ Of this 
same thing in Numbers : " Let their murmuring 
cease from me, and they shall not die." '^ Of 
thig same thing in the Acts of the Apostles : " But 
about the middle of the night Paul and Silas 
prayed and gave thanks to God, and the prison- 
ers heard them." '■♦ Also in the Epistle of Paul 
to the Philippians : " But doing all things for 
love, without murmurings and revilings,'^ that 
ye may be without complaint, and spotless sons 
of God." '" 

15. That men are tried by God for this pur- 

pose, that they may be proved. 

In Genesis : " And God tempted Abraham, 
and said to him, Take thy only son whom thou 
lovest, Isaac, and go into the high land, and 
offer him there as a burnt-offering on one of the 
mountains of \vhich I will tell thee." '^ Of this 
same thing in Deuteronomy : " The Lord your 
God proveth }ou, that He may know if ye love 
the Lord your God with all your heart, and with 
all your soul." '^ Of this same thing in the Wis- 
dom of Solomon : " Although in the sight of 
men they suffered torments, their hope is full 
of immortality ; and having been in few things 
distressed, yet in many things they shall be hap- 
l^ily ordered, because God tried them, and found 
them worthy of Himself As gold in the furnace 
He proved them, and as a burnt-offering He re- 
ceived them. And in their time there shall be 
respect of them ; they shall judge the nations, 
and shall rule over the people ; and their Lord 
shall reign for ever." "^ Of this same thing in the 
Maccabees : " Was not Abraham found faithful 
in temptation, and it was accounted unto him for 
righteousness ? " ^° 

16. Of the benefits of martyrdom. 

In the Proverbs of Solomon : " The faithful 
martyr delivers his soul from evils." ^' Also in 
the same place : " Then shall the righteous stand 
in great boldness against them who have afflicted 
them, and who took away their labours. When 
they see them, they shall be disturbed with a 
i horrible fear ; and they shall wonder at the sud- 
denness of their unhoped-for salvation, saying 
among themselves, repenting and groaning with 
distress of spirit. These are they whom some 
time we had in derision, and in the likeness of 
a proverb ; we fools counted their life madnesSj 

'^ Ps xxxiv. I. 

'3 Num. xvii. 10. 

'< Acts xvi. 25. 

's Reputationibus; possibly " complainings." 

16 Phil. ii. 14, 15. 

'^ Gen. xxii. i, 2. 

'3 Deut. xiii. 3. 

'9 Wisd. iii. 4-8. 

"° I Mace ii. 52. 

2' Prov. xiv. 25. 

538 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

and their end without honour. How are they i 
reckoned among the children of God, and their 
lot among the saints I Therefore we have wan- 
<lered from the way of truth, and the light of 
righteousness has not shined upon us, and the 
sun has not risen upon us. We have been [ 
wearied in the way of iniquity and of perdition, 
and we have walked through difficult solitudes ; 
but we have not known the way of the Lord. 
What hath i)ride profited us? or what hath the 
boasting of riches brought to us? All these 
things have passed away as a shadow." ' Of this 
same thing in the cxvth Psalm : " Precious in the 
sight of the Lord is the death of His saints." - 
Also in the cxxvth Psalm : " They who sow in 
tears shall reap in joy. Walking they walked, 
and wept as they cast their seeds ; but coming 
they shall come in joy, raising up their laps." ^ 
Of this same thing in the Gospel according to 
John : " He who loveth his life shall lose it ; and 
he that hateth his life in this world shall find it 
to life eternal." ■♦ Also in the same place : " But 
when they shall deliver you up, take no thouglit 
what ye shall speak ; for it is not ye who speak, 
but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in 
you." 5 Also in the same place : " The hour 
shall come, that every one that killeth you shall 
think he doeth service to (iod ; but they shall 
do this also because they have not known the 
Father nor me."'' Of this same matter, accord- 
ing to Matthew : " Blessed are they which shall 
suffer persecution for righteousness' sake ; for 
theirs is the kingdom of heaven." 7 Also in the 
same place : " Fear not them which kill the body, 
but are not able to kill the soul ; but rather fear 
Him which is able to kill the soul and body in 
Gehenna." ^ Also in the same place : "Whoso- 
ever shall confess me before men, him also will 
I confess before my Father which is in heaven ; 
but he who shall deny me before men, him also 
will I deny before my Father which is in heaven. 
.■\nd he that shall endure to the end, the same 
shall be saved." 9 Of this same thing, according 
to Luke : " Blessed shall ye be when men shall 
hate you, and shall separate you (from their 
company), and shall drive you out, and shall 
speak evil of your name, as wicked, for the Son 
of man's sake. Rejoice in that day, and exult ; 
for, lo, your reward is great in heaven." '° Also 
in the same place : " Verily I say unto you. 
There is no man that leaveth house, or parents, 
or brethren, or wife, or children, for the sake of 
the kingdom of God, and does not receive seven 

■ Wisd. V. i-g. 
' Ps. cxvi. 5. 
3 Ps. cxxvi. 5, 6. 

* John xii. 25. 

5 Matt. X. 19, 20. 

* John xvi. 2, 3. 
7 M.itt. V. 10. 

^ Matt. X. 28. 
9 Matt. X. 32, 33. 
'-■ Luke vi. 22, 23. 

times as much in this present time, but in the 
world to come life everlasting." " Of this same 
thing in the .Apocalypse : " And when he had 
opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar of 
God the souls of them that were slain on ac- 
count of the word of God and His testimony. 
.And they cried with a loud voice, saying. How 
long, O Lord, holy and true, dost Hiou not 
judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell 
on the earth? .And unto every one of them 
were given white robes ; and it was said to them, 
that they should rest still for a short time, until 
the number of their fellow-servants, and of their 
brethren, should be fulfilled, and they who shall 
afterwards be slain, after their example." '- .Also 
in the same place : " After these things I saw a 
great crowd, which no one among them could 
number, from every nation, and from every tribe, 
and from every people and tongue, standing be- 
fore the throne and before the Lamb ; and they 
were clothed with white robes, and palms were 
in their hands. And they said with a loud voice. 
Salvation to our God, that sitteth upon the throne, 
and to the Lamb. And one of the elders an- 
swered and said to me. What are these which 
are clothed with white robes ? who are they, and 
whence have they come ? And I said unto him. 
My lord, thou knowest. And he said unto me. 
These are they who have come out of great 
tribulation, and have washed their robes, and 
made them white in the blood of the Lamb. 
Therefore they are before the throne of God, and 
serve Him day and night in His temple ; and 
He who sitteth upon the throne shall dwell 
among them. They shall neither hunger nor 
thirst ever ; and neither shall the sun fall upon 
them, nor shall they suffer any heat : for the 
Lamb who Is in the midst of the throne shall pro- 
tect them, and shall lead them to the fountains 
of the waters of life ; and God shall wipe away 
every tear from their eyes." '^ Also in the same 
place : " He who shall overcome I will give him 
to eat of the tree of life, which is in the paradise 
of my God." '^ Also in the same place : " Be 
thou faithful even unto death, and I will give 
thee a crown of life." '5 Also in the same place : 
" Blessed shall they be who shall watch, and 
shall keep their garments, lest they walk naked, 
and they see their shame." '*' Of this same thing, 
Paul in the second Epistle to Timothy : " I am 
now offered up, and the time of my assumption 
is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have 
finished my course, I have kept the faith. There 
now remains for me a crown of righteousness, 
which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give 

" Luke xviii. 29, 30. 

'- Rev. vi. 9-11. 

'3 Rev. vii. 9-17. 

>•> Rev. ii. 7. 

'- Rev. ii. lo. 

"> Rev. xvi. 15. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

539 

me in that day ; and not only to me, but to all 
also who love His appearing." ■ Of this same 
thing to the Romans : " We are the sons of (lod : 
but if sons and heirs of God, we are also joint- 
heirs with Christ ; if we suffer together, that we 
may also be magnified together." ~ Of this same 
thing in the cxviiith Psalm : " Blessed are they 
who are undefiled in the way, and walk in the 
law of the Lord. Blessed are they who search 
into His testimonies." ^ 

17. That what we suffer in this world is of 

less account than is the reward which 
is promised. 

In the Epistle of Paul to the Romans : " The 
sufferings of this present time are not worthy of 
comparison with the glory that is to come after, 
which shall be revealed in us."-* Of this same 
thing in the Maccabees : " O Lord, who hast 
the holy knowledge, it is manifest that while I 
might be delivered from death, I am suffering 
most cruel pains of body, being beaten with 
whips ; yet in spirit I suffer these things willingly, 
because of the fear of thine own self." s Also 
in the same place : " Thou indeed, being power- 
less, destroyest us out of this present life ; but 
the King of the world shall raise us up who have 
died for His laws into the eternal resurrection of 
life." ^ Also in the same place : " It is better 
that, given up to death by men, we should ex- 
pect hope from God to be raised again by Him. 
For there shall be no resurrection to life for 
thee." 7 Also in the same place : " Having power 
among men, although thou art corruptible, thou 
doest what thou wilt. But think not that our 
race is forsaken of God. Sustain, and see how 
His great power will torment thee and thy seed." ^ 
Also in the same place : " Do not err without 
cause ; for we suffer these things on our own 
accounts, as sinners against our God. But think 
not thou that thou shalt be unpunished, having 
undertaken to fight against God." 9 

18. That nothing is to be preferred to the 

love of God and Christ. 

In Deuteronomy : " Thou shalt love the Lord 
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, 
and with all thy might." '° Also in the Gospel 
according to Matthew : " He that loveth father 
or mother above me, is not worthy of me ; and 
he that loveth son or daughter above me, is not 
worthy of me ; and he that taketh not up his 

' 2 Tim. iv. 6-8. 
- Rom. viii. 16, 17. 
3 Ps. cxix. I, 2. 

* Rom. viii. 18. 

s 2 Mace. vi. 30. 

•> 2 Mace. vii. g. 

' 2 Mace. vii. 14. 

* 2 Mace. vii. 16, 17. 
9 2 Mace vii. 18, 19. 

10 Deut. vi. 5. 

cross and followeth me, is not my disciple." " 
Also in the Llpisde of Paul to the Romans : 
"Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? 
shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or 
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword ? As it 
is written. Because for thy sake we are killed all 
the day long, we are counted as sheep for the 
slaughter. But in all these things we are more 
than conquerors for His sake who loved us." '- 

19. That we are not to obey our own will, but 

the will of God. 

In the Gospel according to John : " I came 
not down from heaven to do mine own will, but 
the will of Him that sent me." '^ Of this same 
matter, according to Matthew : " Father, if it be 
possible, let this cu]) pass from me ; neverthe- 
less, not what I will, but what Thou wilt." '•♦ Also 
in the daily prayer : *' Thy will be done, as in 
heaven, so in earth." '5 Also according to Mat- 
thew : " Not every one who saith unto me, Lord, 
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven ; 
but he who doeth the will of my Father which 
is in heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of 
heaven." '^ Also according to Luke : " But that 
servant which knoweth his Lord's will, and obeyed 
not His will, shall be beaten with many stripes." '? 
In the Epistle of John : " But he that doeth the 
will of God abideth for ever, even as He Him- 
self also abideth for ever." '** 

20. That the foundation and strength of hope 

and faith is fear. 

In the cxth Psalm : " The fear of the Lord is 
the beginning of wisdom." '^ Of the same thing 
in the Wisdom of Solomon : " The beginning of 
wisdom is to fear God." ^° Also in the Proverbs 
of the same : " Blessed is the man who rever- 
ences all things with fear." ^' Of the same thing 
in Isaiah : " And upon whom else will I look, 
except upon him that is lowly and peaceful, and 
that trembleth at my words ?"^^ Of this same 
thing in Genesis : " And the angel of the Lord 
called him from heaven, and said unto him, 
Abraham, Abraham : and he said, Here am I. 
And he said. Lay not thine hand upon the lad, 
neither do anything unto him : for now I know 
that thou fearest thy God, and hast not spared 
thy beloved son for my sake."^^ Also in the 
second Psalm : " Serve the Lord in fear, and 

" Matt. X. 37, 38. 

'2 Rom. viii. 35-37. 

'3 John vi. 38. 

'■i Matt. xxvi. 39. 

'5 Matt. vi. 10. 

•^ Matt. vii. 21. 

'7 Luke xii. 47. 

'8 I John ii. 17. 

'9 Ps. cxi. 10. [Tertull., vol. iii. 264.] 

^° Eeclus. i. 14. 

-' Prov. XX viii. 14. 

2- Isa. Ixvi. 2. 

-^ Gen. xxii. 11, 12. 

540 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

rejoice unto Him in trembling." ' Also in Deu- 
teronomy, the word of God to Moses : " Call 
the people together to me, and let them hear 
my words, that they may learn to fear me all the 
days that they themselves shall live upon the 
earth." ^ Also in Jeremiah : " Behold, the days 
come, saith the Lord, that I will perfect upon 
the house of Israel, and in the house of Judah, 
a new covenant : not according to the covenant 
that I had ordered with their fathers in the day 
when I laid hold of their hand to bring them 
out of the land of Kgypt ; because they have 
not abode in my covenant, and I have been un- 
mindful of them, saith the Lord ; because this 
is the covenant which I will ordain for the house 
of Israel ; After those days, saith the Lord, I 
will give my law, and will write it in their mind ; 
and I will be to them for a God, and they shall 
be to me for a i)eople. And they shall not teach 
every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord : 
because all shall know me, from the least even 
to the greatest of them : because I will be favour- 
able to their iniquities, and their sins I will not 
remember anv more. If the heaven should be 
lifted up on high, saith the Lord, and if the earth 
should be made low from beneath, yet I will not 
cist away the people of Israel, saith the Lord, 
for all the things which they have done. Behold, 
I will gather them together from every land in 
which I have scattered them in anger, and in my 
fury, and in great indignation ; and I will grind 
them down into that place, and I will leave them 
in fear ; and they shall be to me for a people, 
and I will be to them for a God : and I will give 
them another way, and another heart, that they 
may fear me all their days in prosperity with 
their children : and I will perfect for them an 
everlasting covenant, which I will not turn away 
after them ; and I will put my fear into their 
heart, that they may not depart from me : and I 
will visit upon them to do them good, and to 
plant them in their land in faith, and with all the 
heart, and with all the mind." •' Also in the 
Ajjocalypse : " And the four and twenty elders 
which sit on their thrones in the sight (of God), 
fell upon their faces, and worshipped God, saying. 
We give Thee thanks, O Lord God omnipotent, 
which art and which wast ; because Thou hast 
taken Thy great power, and hast reigned. And 
the nations were angry, and Thy wrath is come, 
and the time in which it should be jutlged con- 
cerning the dead, and the reward should be 
given to Thy servants the prophets, and the saints 
that fear Thy name, small and great ; and to 
disperse those who have corrupted the earth." •» 

' Ps. ii. II. The whole of the remainder of this section, except 
the two concluding quotations from the Psalms, is wanting in many 
editions. 

- Deut. iv. ID. 

^ Jer. xxxi. 31-41. 

* Rev. xi. 16, 17. 

Also in the same place : " And I saw another 
angel flying through the midst of the heaven, 
having the everlasting Gospel to preach to those 
who dwell upon the earth, and to all the nations, 
and tribes, and tongues, and peoples, saying with 
a loud voice. Fear God, and give Him honour, 
because the hour of. His judgment is come ; and 
adore Him who made the heaven, and the earth, 
and the sea, and the fountains of waters." 5 
Also in the same place : " And I saw as it were 
a sea of glass mingled with fire ; and the beasts 
were feeding with His lambs /' and the number 
of His name a hundred and forty and four, 
standing upon the sea of glass, having the harps 
of God : and they sing the song of Moses, the 
servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, say- 
ing. Great and marvellous are Thy works, O Lord 
God Almighty ; just and true are Thy ways. 
Thou King of the nations. Who would not fear 
Thee, and give honour to Thy name ? for Thou 
only art holy : and because all nations shall come 
and worship in Thy sight, because Thy right- 
eousnesses have been made manifest." ? Also ui 
Daniel : " There was a man dwelling in Babylon 
whose name was Joachim ; and he took a wife 
by name Susanna, the daughter of Helchias, a 
very beautiful woman, and one that feared the 
Lord. And her parents were righteous, and 
taught their daughter according to the law of 
Moses." '^ Moreover, in Daniel: " And we are 
lowly this day in all the earth because of our 
sins, and there is not at this time any prince, or 
prophet, or leader, or burnt-offering, or oblation, 
or sacrifice, or incense, or place to sacrifice be- 
fore Thee, and to find mercy from Thee. And 
yet in the soul and spirit of lowliness let us be 
accepted as the burnt-offerings of rams and bulls, 
and as it were many thousands of lambs which 
are fattest. If our offering may be made in Thy 
presence this day, their power shall be consumed, 
for they shall not be ashamed who put their trust 
in Thee. And now we follow with our whole 
heart, and we fear and seek Thy face. Give us 
not over unto reproach, but do with us accord- 
ing to Thy tranquillity, and according to the 
multitude of Thy mercy deliver us." 9 Also in 
the same place : " And the king exceedingly re- 
joiced, and commanded Daniel to be taken up 
out of the den of lions ; and the lions had done 
him no hurt, because he trusted and had believed 
in his God. And the king commanded, and 
they brought those men who had accused Daniel ; 
and they cast them in the den of lions, and their 
wives and their children. And before they had 

5 Rev. xiv. i6, 17. 

* There is considerable departure here from the Apocalyptic text, 
for which it is not easy to account. [Hut this is an interesting fact as 
bearing upon the question of an original African version made from 
a family of Mss. now extinct.] 

7 Rev. XV. 2-4. 

8 Hist, of Susannah, 1-3. 

9 Song of the Three Children, 14-19. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

541 

reached the pavement of the den they were 
seized by the Rons, and they brake all their 
bones in pieces. Then Darius the king wrote, 
To all peoples, tribes, and languages which are 
in my kingdom, peace be unto you from my 
iace. I decree and ordain that all those who 
are in my kingdom shall fear and tremble before 
the most high God whom Daniel serves, because 
He is the God who liveth and abideth for ever, 
and His kingdom shall not pass away, and His 
dominion goeth on for ever ; and He alone 
doeth signs, and prodigies, and marvellous things 
in the heaven and the earth, who snatched Daniel 
from the den of lions." ■ Also in Micah : 
"Wherewith shall I approach the Lord, and lay 
hold upon Him? in sacrifices, in burnt-offerings, 
in calves of a year old ? Does the Lord favour 
and receive me with thousands of fat goats? or 
shall I give my first-fruits of unrighteousness, the 
fruit of my belly, the sin of my soul ? It is told 
thee, O man, what is good ; or what else the 
Lord doth require, save that thou shouldst do 
judgment and justice, and love "mercy, and be 
ready to go with the Lord thy God. The voice 
of the Lord shall be invoked in the city, and He 
will save those who fear His name." - Also in 
Micah : " Feed Thy people with Thy rod, the 
sheep of Thine inheritance ; and pluck up those 
who dwell separately in the midst of Carmel. 
They shall prepare Bashan and Gilead according 
to the days of the age ; and according to the 
days of their going forth from the land of Egypt 
I will show them wonderful things. The nations 
shall see, and be confounded at all their might ; 
and they shall place their hand upon their mouth. 
Their ears shall be deafened, and they shall lick 
the dust as do serpents. Dragging the earth, 
they shall be disturbed, and they shall lick the 
dust : in their end they shall be afraid towards 
the Lord their God, and they shall fear because 
of Thee. Who is a God as Thou art, raising up 
unrighteousness, and passing over impiety? "^ 
And in Nahum : "The mountains were moved 
at Him, and the hills trembled ; and the earth 
was laid bare before His face, and all who dwell 
therein. From the face of His anger who shall 
bear it, and who withstandeth in the fury of His 
soul? His rage causes the beginnings to flow, 
and the rocks were melted by Him. The Lord 
is good to those who sustain Him in the day of 
affliction, and knoweth those who fear Him." •* 
Also in Haggai : " And Zerubbabel the son of 
Salathiel, of the tribe of Judah, and Jesus the 
son of Josedech, the high priest, and all who re- 
mained of the people, obeyed the voice of the 
Lord their God, because the Lord sent him to 

■ Dan. vi. 24-28. 
- Mic. vi. 6-9. 
3 Mic. vii. 14-18. 
■* Nah. i. 5-7. 

them, and the people feared from the face of 
God." 5 Also in Malachi : "The covenant was 
with life and peace ; and I gave to them the fear 
to fear me from the face of my name." ^ Also 
in the thirty-third Psalm : " Fear the Lord, all ye 
His saints : for there is no want to them that fear 
Him." 7 Also in the eighteenth Psalm : " The 
fear of the Lord is chaste, abiding for ever." ** 

2 1 . That we must not rashly judge of another. 

In the Gospel according to Luke : " Judge 
not, that ye be not judged : condemn not, that 
ye be not condemned." '-' Of this same subject 
to the Romans : " Who art thou that judgest 
another man's servant? to his own mastel- he 
standeth or falleth. But he shall stand ; for 
God is able to make him stand." '" And again : 
" Wherefore thou art without excuse, O every 
man that judgest : for in that in which thou 
judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for 
thou doest the same things which thou judgest. 
But dost thou hope, who judgest those who do 
evil, and doest the same, that thou thyself shalt 
escape the judgment of God?"" Also in the 
first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians : " And 
let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest 
he fall." '^ And again : " If any man thinketh 
that he knoweth anything, he knoweth not yet 
in what manner he ought to know." '^ 

22. That when we have received a wrong, we 

must remit and forgive it. 

In the Gospel, in the daily prayer : " Forgive 
us our debts, even as we forgive our debtors." "'* 
Also according to Mark : " And when ye stand 
for prayer, forgive, if ye have ought against any 
.one ; that also your Father who is in heaven 
may forgive you your sins. But if ye do not 
forgive, neither will your Father which is in 
heaven forgive you your sins." '5 Also in the 
same place : " In what measure ye mete, in that 
shall it be measured to you again." '^ 

23. That evil is not to be returned for evil. 

In the Epistle of Paul to the Romans : " Ren- 
dering to no man evil for evil." '7 Also in the 
same place : " Not to be overcome of evil, but 
overcome evil with good." ^^ Of this same thing 
in the Apocalypse : " And He said unto me, 

5 Hag. i. 12. 

6 Mai. ii. 5. 

7 Ps. xxxiv. 9. 

8 Ps. xix. 9. 

9 Luke vi. 37. 
'° Rom. .viv. 4. 
" Rom. ii. 1-3. 
'2 I Cor. X. 12. 
'3 I Cor. viii. 2. 
'< Matt. vi. 12. 

'5 Matt. xi. 25, 26. 
'^ Mark iv. 24. 
'^ Rom. xii. 17. 
'5 Rom. xii. a. 

542 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

Seal not the words of the prophecy of this book ; 
because now the time is at hand. And let those 
who persist in hurting, hurt : and let him who is 
filthy, be filthy still : but let the righteous do 
still more righteousness : and in like manner, let 
him that is holy do still more holiness. Behold, 
I come quickly ; and my reward is with me, to 
render to every man according to his deeds." ' 

24. That it is impossible to attain to the 

Father but by His Son Jesus Christ. 

In the Gospel according to John : " I am the 
way, the truth, and the life : no man cometh 
unto the Father, but by me." - Also in the 
same' place : " I am the door : by me if any 
man enter in, he shall be saved." ^ 

25. That unless a man have been baptized 

and born again, he cannot attain unto 
the kingdom of God. 

In the Gospel according to John : " Except a 
man be born again of water and the Spirit, he 
cannot enter into the kingdom of God. For 
that which is born of the flesh is flesh ; and that 
which is born of the Spirit is spirit."-* Also in 
the same place : " Unless ye eat the flesh of the 
Son of man, and drink His blood, ye shall not 
have life in you." 5 

26. That it is of small account to be baptized 

and to receive the Eucharist, unless one 
profit by it both in deeds and works. 

In the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians : 
" Know ye not, that they which run in a race run 
indeed all, although one receiveth the prize ? So 
run, that ye may obtain. And those indeed that 
they may receive a corruptible crown, but we an 
incorruptible." ^ In the Gospel according to 
Matthew : " Every tree that bringeth not forth 
good fruit shall be cut down, and cast into the 
fire." 7 Also in the same place : " Many shall 
say unto me in that day. Lord, Lord, have we 
not prophesied in Thy name, and in Thy name 
have cast out devils, and in Thy name have done 
great works? And then shall I say to them, I 
never knew you ; depart from me, ye who work 
ini(}uity." ** Also in the same place : "Let your 
light shine before men, that they may see your 
good works, and glorify your Father which is in 
heaven." 9 Also Paul to the Philippians : "Shine 
as lights in the world." '° 

' Rev. xxii. 10-12. 
^ John xiv. 6. 
3 John X. 9. 

* John iii. 5, 6. 
■' John VI. 53. 

<* 1 Cor. ix. 24, 25. 
7 Matt. iii. 10. 

* Matt. vii. 22, 23. 
9 Matt. V. 16. 

»o Phil. ii. 15. 

27. That even a baptized person loses the 

grace that he has attained, unless he 
keep innocency. 

In the Gospel according to John : " Lo, thou 
art made whole : sin no more, lest a worse thing 
happen unto thee." " Also in the first Epistle 
of Paul to the Corinthians : " Know ye not that 
ye are the temple of God, and the Spirit of God 
abideth in you ? If any one violate the temple 
of God, him will God destroy." '^ Of this same 
thing in the Chronicles : " God is with you, while 
ye are with Him : if ye forsake Him, He will 
forsake you." '^ 

28. That remission cannot in the Church be 

granted unto him who has sinned 
against God (i.e., the Holy Ghost). 

In the Gospel according to Matthew : " Who- 
soever shall say a, word against the Son of man, 
it shall be forgiven him ; but whosoever shall 
speak against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be 
forgiven him, neither in this world nor in the 
world to come." '•♦ Also according to Mark : 
" All sins shall be forgiven, and blasphemies, to 
the sons of men ; but whoever shall blaspheme 
against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven 
him, but he shall be guilty of eternal sin." 's Of 
this same thing in the first book of Kings : " If 
a man sin by offending against a man, they shall 
pray the Lord for him ; but if a man sin against 
God, who shall pray for him? " '^ 

29. That it was before predicted, concerning 

the hatred of the Name, 

In the Gospel according to Luke : " And ye 
shall be hated of all men for my name's sake." "^ 
Also according to John : " If the world hate you, 
know ye that it first hated me. If ye were of 
the world, the world would love what would be 
its own : but because ye are not of the world, and 
I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the 
world hateth you. Remember the word which I 
said unto you, The servant is not greater than his 
lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also 
persecute you." ''^ Also in Baruch : "^ " For the 
time shall come, and ye shall seek me, both ye 
and those who shall be after you, to hear the 
word of wisdom and of understanding ; and ye 
shall not find me. But the nations shall desire to 

'" John V. 14. 

■- I Cor. iii. 16, 17. 

'3 2 Chron. xv. 2. 

■•« Matt. xii. 32. 

'S Mark iii. 28, 29. 

'6 I Sam. ii. 25. [i.e. 
preceding words of Christ. 

'7 Luke xxi. 17. 

'5 John .w. 18-20. 

'9 Tlie whole of this quotation, as it is called, from Baruch, is 
wanting in all codices but two. It is remarkable, as finding no place 
in any text of Scripture, nor in any translation, whether Greek or 
Latin. 

he regards this text as expounded by the 
Compare i John v. 16.] 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

54: 

see the wise man, and it shall not happen to them ; 
not because the wisdom of this world shall be 
wanting, or shall fail to the earth ; but neither 
shall the word of the law be wanting to the world. 
For wisdom shall be in a few who watch, and 
are silent and quiet, and who hold converse with 
one another ; because some shall dread them, 
and shall fear them as evil. But some do not 
believe the word of the law of the Highest. But 
some who are amazed in their countenance will 
not believe ; and they also who contradict will 
believe, and will be contrary to and hindering 
the spirit of truth. Moreover, others will be wise 
to the spirit of error, and declaring the edicts, as 
if of the Highest and the Strong One. More- 
over, others are possessors of faiths Others are 
mighty and strong in the faith of the Highest, 
and hateful to the stranger." 

30. That what any one has vowed to God, he 

must quickly repay. 

In Solomon : " According as thou hast vowed 
a vow to God, delay not to pay it." ^ Concern- 
ing this same thing in Deuteronomy : "' But if 
thou hast vowed a vow to the Lord thy God, 
thou shalt not delay to pay it : because the Lord 
thy God inquiring shall seek it of thee ; and it 
shall be for a sin. Thou shalt observe those 
things that shall go forth out of thy lips, and 
shalt perform the gift which thou hast spoken 
with thy mouth." ^ Of this same matter in the 
forty-ninth Psalm : " Sacrifice to God the sacri- 
fice of praise, and pay thy vows to the Most 
High. Call upon me in the day of trouble, and 
\ will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me." + 
Of this same thing in the Acts of the Apostles : 
•" Why hath Satan filled thine heart, that thou 
shouldst lie to the Holy Ghost, when thy estate 
was in thine own power? Thou hast not lied 
■imto men, but unto God." 5 Also in Jeremiah : 
^' Cursed is he who doeth the work of God 
negligently." '' 

31. That he who does not beUeve is judged 

already. 

In the Gospel according to John : " He that 
believeth not is already judged, because he hath 
not believed in the name of the only ^ Son of 
(lod. And this is the judgment, that light has 
come into the world, and men have loved dark- 
ness rather than light." ^ Of this also in the 
first Psalm : " Therefore the ungodly shall not 

rise up in judgment, nor sinners in the council 

' Personales fidei. This, like many other expressions in this 
strange passage, gives no cUie to a meaning. 
- Eccles. V. 4. 

Deut. xxiii. 21-23. 

I's. 1 14, 15. 

Acts V. 3, 4. 

Jer. xlviii. 10. 

Unice ; but some read utiigeniti, " only-begotten." 

John iii. iS, 19. 

of the righteous." 9 

32. Of the benefit of virginity and of con- 
tinency.'" 

In Genesis : " Multiplying I will multiply thy 
sorrows and thy groanings, and in sorrow shalt 
thou bring forth children ; and thy turning shall 
be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee." " 
Of this same thing in the Gospel according to 
Matthew : " All men do not receive the word, 
but they to whom it is given : for there are 
some eunuchs who were born so from their 
mother's womb, and there are eunuchs who have 
been constrained by men, and there are eunuchs 
who have made themselves eunuchs for the 
kingdom of heaven's sake. He who can re- 
ceive it, let him receive it." '^ Also according to 
Luke : " The children of this world beget, and 
are begotten. But they who have been consid- 
ered worthy of that world, and the resurrection 
from the dead, do not marry, nor are married : 
for neither shall they begin to die : for they are 
equal to the angels of God, since they arc the 
children of the resurrection. But, that the dead 
rise again, Moses intimates when he says in the 
bush, The Lord, the God of Abraham, and the 
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. He is 
not the God of the dead, but of the living : for 
all live unto Him." '^ Also in the first Epistle 
of Paul to the Corinthians : " It is good for a 
man not to touch a woman. But, on account 
of fornication, let every man have his own wife, 
and every woman have her own husband. Let 
the husband render what is due to the wife, and 
similarly the wife to the husband. The wife 
hath not power over her own body, but the hus- 
band. And in like manner, the husband hath 
not power over his own body, but the wife. 
Defraud not one the other, except by agreement 
for a time, that ye may have leisure for prayer ; 
and again return to the same point, lest Satan 
tempt you on account of your incontinency. 
This I say by way of allowance, not by way of 
command. But I wish that all men should be 
even as I am. But every one has his proper 
gift from God ; one in one way, but another in 
another way." '■♦ Also in the same place : " An 
unmarried man thinks of those things which are 
the Lord's, in what way he may please God ; 
but he who has contracted marriage thinks of 
those things that are of this world, in what way 
he may please his wife. Thus also, both the 
woman and the unmarried virgin thinketh of 

9 Ps i 5. 

'=> [ This section is confined to Scripture, and goes not beyond the 
word of the Divine Wisdom, as do some of the Fathers. ] 
" (!en. iii. i6. 
'- Matt, xix. II, 12. 
t3 Luke XX. 34-38. 
'■* I Cor. vii. 1-7. 

544 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

those things which are the Lord's, that she may 
be holy both in l)0(ly and in spirit ; but she that 
hath married thinks of those things which are of 
this world, in what way she may please her hus- 
band." ' Also in Exodus, when the Lord had 
commanded Moses that he should sanctify the 
])eople for the third day, he sanctified them, and 
added : "Be ye ready, for three days ye shall 
not approach to women." ^ Also in the first 
l)ook of Kings: ''.And the priest answered to 
David, and said. There are no profane loaves in 
my hand, except one sacred loaf. If the young 
men have been kept back from women, they 
shall eat." ^ .Also in the Apocalypse : " These 
are they who have not defiled themselves with 
women, for they have continued virgins ; these 
are they who follow the Lamb whithersoever He 
shall go." ■< 

^;^. That the Father judgeth nothing, but the 
Son ; and that the Father is not glori- 
fied by him by whom the Son is not 
glorified. 

In the Gospel according to John : " The 
Father judgeth nothing, but hath given all judg- 
ment unto the Son, that all may honour the Son 
as they honour the Father. He who honoureth 
not the Son, honoureth not the Father who hath 
sent Him." 5 Also in the seventy-first Psalm : 
" O God, give the king Thy judgment, and Thy 
righteousness to the king's son, to judge Thy 
jjeople in righteousness."^ Also in Genesis: 
" Antl the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomor- 
rah sulphur, and fire from heaven from the 
Lord." 7 

34. That the believer ought not to live like 
the Gentile. 

In Jeremiah : " Thus saith the Lord, Walk ye 
not according to the way of the (lentiles."^ 
Of this same thing, that one ought to separate 
himself from the Gentiles, lest he should be a 
companion of their sin, and become a partaker 
of their j)enalty, in the Apocalypse: ".And I 
heard another voice from heaven, saying, Go 
forth from her, my people, lest thou be partaker 
of her crimes, and lest thou be stricken with her 
l)lagues ; because her crimes have reached even 
to heaven, and the Lord (iod hath remembered 
her inicjuities. Therefore He hath returned unto 
her double, and in the cup which she hath mixed 
>louble is mingled for her ; and in how much 
she hath glorified herself and possessed of de- 

' I Cor. vii. 32-34. 
'^ Ex. xix. 15. 
3 1 Sam. xxi. 4. 
* Rev. xiv. 4. 
-^ John V. 22, 23. 
'' Ps. Ixxii. 1, 2. 
^ (icn. xix. 24. 
" Jer. X. 2. 

lights, in so much is given unto her both torment 
and grief. For in her heart she says, I am a 
queen, and cannot be a widow, nor shall I see 
sorrow. Therefore in one hour her plagues shall 
come'On her, death, grief, and famine; and she 
shall be burned with fire, because the Lord God 
is strong who shall judge her. And the kings of 
the earth shall weep and lament themselves for 
her, who have committed fornication with her, 
and have been conversant in her sins." 9 Also 
in Isaiah : " Go forth from the midst of them, ye 
who bear the vessels of the Lord." '° 

35. That God is patient for this end, that we 

may repent of our sin, and be reformed. 

In Solomon, in Ecclesiasticus : " Say not, I 
have sinned, and what sorrow hath happened to 
me? For the Highest is a patient repayer." " 
Also Paul to the Romans : '• Or despisest thou 
the riches of His goodness, and forbearance, 
and patience, not knowing that the goodness of 
God leadeth thee to repentance ? But, accord- 
ing to thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou 
treasures! up to thyself wrath in the day of 
wrath and of revelation of the just judgment 
of God, who will render to every man according 
to his deeds." '^ 

36. That a woman ought not to be adorned 

in a worldly fashion. 

In the Apocalypse : " And there came one of 
the seven angels having vials, and approached 
me, saying. Come, I will show thee the condem- 
nation of the great whore, who sitteth upon many 
waters, with whom the kings of the earth have 
committed fornication. And I saw a woman 
who sate upon a beast. .And that w'oman was 
clothed with a purple and scarlet robe ; and she 
was adorned with gold, and precious stones, and 
pearls, holding a golden cup in her hand full of 
curses, and impurity, and fornication of the whole 
earth." '^ Also to Timothy : " Let your women be 
such as adorn themselves with shamefacedness 
and modesty, not with twisted hair, nor with gold, 
nor with pearls, or precious garments, but as be- 
cometh women professing chastity, with a good 
conversation." '■♦ Of this same thing in the E])istle 
of Peter to the people at Pontus : " Let there be 
in a woman not the outward adorning of orna- 
ment, or of gold, or of apparel, but the adorning 
of the heart." "-'' Also in Genesis : " Thamar cov- 
ered herself with a cloak, and adorned herself; 

9 Rev. xviii. 4-9. The Oxford text reads " deliciis " instead of 
" delictis," — making the last clause, "and have walked in delica- 
cies." 

'° Isa. Hi. II. 

" Ecclus. v. 4. 

'^ Rom. ii. 4-6. 

'3 Rev. xvii. 1-4. 

'< I Tim. ii. 9, 10. 

■5 I Pet. iii. 4. [This limitation to " Pontus" is curious.] 

THE TREATISES OF CYVRIAN. 

545 

and when Judah beheld her, she appeared to him 
to be a harlot." ' 

37. That the believer ought not to be pun- 
ished for other offences, except for the 
name he bears. 

In the Epistle of Peter to them of Pontus : 
" Nor let any of you suffer as a thief, or a mur- 
derer, or as an evil-doer, or as a minder of other 
people's business,- but as a Christian. ^ 

^8. That the servant of God ought to be 
innocent, lest he fall into secular pun- 
ishment. 

In the Episde of Paul to the Romans : " Wilt 
thou not be afraid of the power? Do that which 
is good, and thou shalt have praise of it." •* 

39. That there is given to us an example of 

living in Christ. 

In the Epistle of Peter to them of Pontus : 
" For Christ suffered for us, leaving you an ex- 
ample, that ye may follow His steps ; who did 
no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth ; 
who, when He was reviled, reviled not again ; 
when He suffered, threatened not, but gave 
Himself up to him that judgeth unrighteously." 5 
Also Paul to the Philippians : " Who, being ap- 
pointed in the figure of God, thought it not 
robbery that He was equal with God ; but emp- 
tied Himself, taking the form of a servant. He 
was made in the likeness of man, and was found 
in fashion as a man. He humbled Himself, 
becoming obedient even unto death, and the 
death of the cross. For which cause also God 
hath exalted Him, and hath given Him a name, 
that it may be above every name, that in the 
name of Jesus every knee should be bowed, of 
things heavenly, and earthly, and infernal ; and 
that every tongue should confess that the Lord 
Jesus Christ is in glory of God the Father."'' 
Of this same thing in the Gospel according to 
John : " If I have washed your feet, being your 
Master and Lord, ye also ought to wash the feet 
of others. For I have given you an example, 
that as I have done, ye also should do to 
others." 7 

40. That we must not labour noisily nor 

boastfully. 

In the Gospel according to Matthew : " Let 
not thy left hand know what thy right hand 

' Gen. xxxviii. 14, 15. 

2 [Gr. u)9 aAAoTpioeTritTKOTTO?; a Strange expression. This is St. 
Paul's canon (Greek) of jurisdiction, which he expounds, 2 Cor. x. 13, 
14. Comp. Gal. ii. 9. Showing, by the way, the limits of Peter's juris- 
diction, " measure," or txtrpov To£r xat'bi'os. Note 15, p. 544, jw/ra.] 

3 I Pet. iv. 15, 16. 
* Rom. xiii. 3. 

5 I Pet. ii. 21-23. 
<> Phil. ii. 6-11. 
' John xiii. 14, re. 

doeth, that thine alms may be in secret ; and 
thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall render 
to thee." ^ Also in the same place : " When 
thou doest an alms, do not sound a trumpet 
before thee, as the hypocrites do in the streets 
and in the synagogues, that they may be glori- 
fied of men. Verily I say unto you. They have 
fulfilled their reward." ^ 

41. That we must not speak foolishly and 

offensively. 

In Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians : " Foolish 
speaking and scurrility, which are not fitting for 
the occasion, let them not be even named among 

you." '" 

42. That faith is of advantage altogether, and 

that we can do as m;)ch as we believe. 

In Genesis : " And Abraham believed God, 
and it was counted unto him for righteousness." " 
Also in Isaiah : "And if ye do not believe, neither 
shall ye understand." '^ Also in the Gospel 
according to Matthew : " O thou of little faith, 
wherefore didst thou doubt?" '^ Also in the 
same place : " If you have faith as a grain of 
mustard seed, ye shall say to this mountain. Pass 
over from here to that place, and it shall pass 
over ; and nothing shall be impossible unto 
you." '•♦ Also according to Mark : " All things 
whatsoever ye pray and ask for, believe that ye 
shall receive them, and they shall be yours." '5 
Also in the same place : "All things are possible 
to him that believeth." '^ In Habakkuk : " But 
the righteous liveth by my faith." '7 Also in 
Daniel : " Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, trusting 
in God, were delivered from the fiery flame." 

43. That he who believes can immediately 

obtain (i.e., pardon and peace). 

In the Acts of the Apostles : " Lo, here is 
water ; what is there which hinders me from 
being baptized ? Then said Philip, If thou be- 
lievest with all thine heart, thou mayest." '** 

44. That believers who differ among them- 

selves ought not to refer to a Gentile 
judge. '9 

In the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians : 
" Dares any of you, having a matter against an- 

* Matt. vi. 3,4. 
9 Matt. vi. 2. 

10 Eph. V. 4. 

" Gen. XV. 6. 

'2 Isa. vii. 9. 

■^ Matt. xiv. 31. 

'< Matt. xvii. 20. 

'5 Mark xi. 24. 

"> Mark ix. 22. 

17 Hab. ii 4. 

'8 Acts viii. 36, 37. ■ _ _ 

'9 [The oath on the Bible in our courts, and other Christian forms, 
are important in Christian morals, as bearing upon our right to seek 
redress at the law, while it is Christian law.] 

546 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

other, to discuss it among the unrighteous, and 
not among the saints ? Know ye not that the 
saints shall judge this world?"' And again: 
" Now indeed there is altogether a fault among 
you, because ye have judgments one against an- 
other. Wherefore do ye not rather suffer injury ? 
or wherefore are ye not rather defrauded? But 
ye do wrong, and defraud, and this your breth- 
ren. Know ye not that the imrighteous shall 
not obtain the kingdom of God? " ^ 

45. That hope is of future things, and there- 

fore that our faith concerning those 
things which are promised ought to be 
patient. 

In the Epistle of Paul to the Romans : " We 
are saved by hope. But hope that is seen is not 
hope ; for what a man seeth, why doth he hope 
for? But if we hope for what we see not, we 
hope ^ for it in patience." •♦ 

46. That a woman ought to be silent in the 

church. 

In the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians : 
•" Let women be silent in the church. But if 
any wish to learn anything, let them ask their 
husbands at home." s Also to Timothy : " Let 
a woman learn with silence, in all subjection. 
But I permit not a woman to teach, nor to be 
set over the man, but to be in silence. For 
Adam was first formed, then Eve ; and Adam 
was not seduced, but the woman was seduced." ^ 

47. That it arises from our fault and our de- 

sert that we suffer, and do not perceive 
God's help in everything. 

In Hosea : " Hear ye the word of the Lord, 
ye children of Israel : because judgment is from 
the Lord against the inhabitants of the earth, 
because there is neither mercy nor truth, nor 
acknowledgment of God upon the earth ; but 
cursing, and lying, and slaughter, and theft, and 
adultery is scattered abroad upon the earth : they 
mingle blood to blood. Therefore the land shall 
mourn, with all its inhabitants, with the beasts 
of the field, with the creeping things of the earth, 
with the birds of heaven ; and tlie fishes of the 
sea shall fail : so that no man may judge, no 
man may refute." ^ Of this same thing in Isaiah : 
■" Is not the Lord's hand strong to save, or has 
He weighed down His ear that He may not hear? 

' I Cor. vi. I, 2. 

^ I Cor. vi. 7-9. 

^ Some read " exspectamus," " we wait for it." 

* Rom. viii 24, 25. 

5 I Cor. xiv, 34, 35. [Women might have spiritu.il gifts, like the 
daughters of Philip, Acts xxi. g; but even such are here forbidden to 
use them in the public worship of the Church.] 

^ ! Tim. ii. 11-14. 

' Hos. iv. 1-4. 

But your sins separate between you and God ; 
and on account of your iniquities He turns away 
His face from you, lest He should pity. For 
your hands are polluted with blood, and your 
fingers with sins ; and your lips have spoken 
wickedness, and your tongue devises unright- 
eousness. No one speaks true things, neither is 
judgment true. They trust in vanity, and speak 
emptiness, who conceive sorrow, and bring forth 
wickedness." ^ Also in Zephaniah : " In failing, 
let it fail from the face of the earth, saith the 
Lord. Let man fail, and cattle ; let the birds 
of heaven fail, and the fishes of the sea ; and I 
will take away the unrighteous from the face of 
the earth." 9 

48. That we must not take usury. 

In the thirteenth Psalm : '° " He that hath not 
given his money upon usury, and has not received 
gifts concerning the innocent. He who doeth 
these things shall not be moved for ever." " Also 
in Ezekiel : " But the man who will be righteous, 
shall not oppress a man, and shall return the 
pledge of the debtor, and shall not commit 
rapine, and shall give his bread to the hungry, 
and shall cover the naked, and shall not give 
his money for usury." '^ Also in Deuteronomy : 
" Thou shalt not lend to thy brother with usury 
of money, and with usury of victuals." '^ 

49. That even our enemies must be loved. 

In the Gospel according to Luke : " If ye love 
those who love you, what thank have ye ? For 
even sinners love those who love them." '* Also 
according to Matthew : " Love your enemies, 
and pray for those who persecute you, that ye 
may be the children of your Father who is in 
heaven, who maketh His sun to rise upon the 
good and the evil, and giveth rain upon the 
righteous and the unrighteous." '5 

50. That the sacrament of faith must not, be 

profaned. 

In Solomon, in the Proverbs : " Say not any- 
thing in the ears of a foolish man ; lest, when 
he hears it, he may mock at thy wise words." '*^ 
Also in the Gospel according to Matthew : " Give 
not that which is holy to dogs ; neither cast ye 
your pearls before the swine, lest perchance they 
trample them down with their feet, and turn 
again and crush you." '7 

8 Tsa. lix. 1-4. 

9 Zeph. i. 2, 3. 

'o The Oxford edition has ' 

' the fourteenth." 

[Elucidation XIII.] 

" Ps. XV. 6. 

'- F.zek. xviii. 7, 8. 

'i Pent, xxiii. 19. 

'* T-uke vi. 32. 

'5 Matt. v. 44, 45. 

■'> Prov. xxiii. 9. 

'■■■ Matt. vii. 6. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

547 

51. That no one should be upUfted in his 

labour.' 

In Solomon, in Ecclesiasticus : " Extol not 
thyself in doing thy work." - Also in the Gospel 
according to Luke : " Which of you, having a 
servant ploughing, or a shepherd, says to him 
when he cometh from the field, Pass forward and 
recline? But he says to him, Make ready some- 
what that I may sup, and gird thyself, and min- 
ister to me, until I eat and drink ; and afterwards 
thou shalt eat and drink? Does he thank that 
servant because he has done what was com- 
manded him ? So also ye, when ye shall have 
■done that which is commanded you, say. We 
are unprofitable servants ; we have done what 
we had to do." ^ 

52. That the liberty of bsJieving or of not be- 

lieving is placed in free choice. 

In Deuteronomy : " Lo, I have set before thy 
face life and death, good and evil. Choose for 
thyself life, that thou mayest live." + Also in 
Isaiah : " And if ye be willing, and hear me, ye 
shall eat the good of the land. But if ye be 
unwilling, and will not hear me, the sword shall 
consume you. For the mouth of the Lord hath 
spoken these things." 5 Also in the Gospel ac- 
cording to Luke : " The kingdom of God is 
within you.'' ^ "^ 

53. That he secrets of God cannot be seen 

through, and therefore that our faith 
ought to be simple.7 

In the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians : 
" We see now through the glass in an enigma, 
but then with face to face. Now I know partly ; 
but then I shall know even as also I am known." ^ 
Also in Solomon, in Wisdom : " And in simpli- 
city of heart seek Him." *? Also in the same : 
'' He who vvalketh with simplicity, walketh trust- 
fully." '° Also in the same : " Seek not things 
higher than thyself, and look not into things 
stronger than thyself." " Also in Solomon : "Be 
not excessively righteous, and do not reason 
more than is required." '^ Also in Isaiah : "Woe 
unto them who are convicted in themselves." '^ 
Also in the Maccabees : " Daniel in his simpli- 
city was delivered from the mouth of the lions." '-♦ 

Also in the Epistle of Paul to the Romans : "Oh 
the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowl- 
edge of God ! How incomprehensible are His 
judgments, and how unsearchable are His ways ! 
For who has known the mind of the Lord ? or 
who has been His counsellor ? or who has first 
given to Him, and it shall be recompensed to him 
again? Because from Him, and through Him, 
and in Him, are all things : to Him be glory for 
ever and ever." '5 Also to Timothy : " But fool- 
ish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that 
they generate strifes. But the servant of God 
ought not to strive, but to be gentle towards all 

• [Hab. i. 16; Ps. cxxxi. i.] 

2 Ecclus. X. 26. 

3 Luke xvii. 7-10. 
•• Deut. xiii. 19. 

5 Isa. i. 19. 

^ Luke xvii. 21. 

7 [The aphoristic force of these " heads " is often striking in the 
original; e.g., " Dei arcana perspici non posse, et ideo fidem nostram 
simplicem esse debere."] 

^ I Cor. xiii. 12. 

9 Wisd. i. I. 
'o Prov. X. 9. 
" Eccles. iii. 2t. 
'- Ecclus. vii. 17. 
'3 Isa. xxix. 15. 
1* I Mace. ii. 60. 

men 

>' i6 

54. That no one is without filth and without 

sin. 

In Job : " For who is pure from filth? Not 
one ; even if his life be of one day on the earth." '^ 
Also in the fiftieth Psalm : " Behold, I was con- 
ceived in iniquities, and in sins hath my mother 
conceived me." '^ Also in the Epistle of John : 
" If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our- 
selves, and the truth is not in us." "^ 

55. That we must not please men, but God. 

In the fifty-second Psalm : " They that please 
men are confounded, because God hath made 
them nothing." -° Also in the Epistle of Paul to 
the Galatians : " If I wished to please men, I 
should not be the servant of Christ." ^' 

56. That nothing that is done is hidden from 

God. 

In the Wisdom of Solomon : " In every place 
the eyes of God look upon the good and evil."" 
Also in Jeremiah : " I am a God at hand, and 
not a God afar off. If a man should be hidden 
in the secret place, shall I not therefore see him ? 
Do not I fill heaven and earth ? saith the Lord." ^^ 
Also in the first of Kings : " Man looketh on the 
face, but God on the heart." ^* Also in the Apoc- 
alypse : " And all the churches shall know that 
I am the searcher of the reins and heart ; and 
I will give to every one of you according to his 
works." ^5 Also in the eighteenth Psalm : " Who 
understands his faults ? Cleanse Thou me from 
my secret sins, O Lord." -^ Also in the second 
Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians : " We must 
all be manifested before the tribunal of Christ, 

'S Rom. xi. 33-36. 
'^ 2 Tim. ii. 23, 24. 
'^ Job xiv. 4, 5. , 
18 Ps. Ii. 5. 
'9 I John i. 8. 
20 Ps. liii. 5. 
= 1 Gal. i. 10. 
^- Prov. XV. 3. 
-3 Jer. xxiii. 23, 24. 
-* I Sam. xvi. 7. 

25 Rev. ii. 23. 

26 Ps. xix. l'2. 

i48 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

that every one may bear again the things which 
belong to his own body, according to what he 
hath done, whether good or evil." ' 

57. That the behever is amended and re- 
served. 

In the cxviith Psahii : "The Lord amending 
hath amended me, and hath not dehvered me 
to death." ^ Also in the eighty-eighth Psalm : 
" I wiii visit their transgressions with a rod, and 
their sins with scourges. But my mercy will I 
not scatter away from them." 3 Also in Mal- 
achi : " And He shall sit melting and purifying, 
as it were, gold and silver; and He shall purify 
the sons of Levi." •« Also in the Gospel : " Thou 
shalt not go out thence until thou pay the utter- 
most farthing." s 

58. That no one should be made sad by death ; 
since in living is labour and peril, in 
dying peace and the certainty of resur- 
rection. 

In Genesis : " Then said the Lord to Adam, 
Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of 
thy wife, and hast eaten of that tree of which 
alone I commanded thee that thou shouldest 
not eat, cursed shall be the ground in all thy 
works ; in sadness and groaning shalt thou eat 
of it all the days of thy life : thorns and thistles 
shall it cast forth to thee ; and thou shalt eat 
the herb of the field in the sweat of thy brow. 
Thou shalt eat thy bread until thou return unto 
the earth from which also thou wast taken ; l)e- 
cause earth thou art, and to earth thou shalt 
go." (' Also in the same place : " And Enoch 
pleased (iod, and was not found afterwards ; 
because God translated him." 7 And in Isaiah : 
"All flesh is grass, and all the glory of it as 
the flower of grass. The grass withered, and the 
flower hath fallen away ; but the word of the Lord 
abidcth for ever." ^ In Ezekiel : " They say. Our 
l)ones are become dry, our hope hath perished : 
we have expired. Therefore prophesy, and say. 
Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I open your mon- 
uments, and I will bring you forth from your 
monuments, and I will bring you into the land 
of Israel ; and I will put my Spirit upon you, 
and ye shall live ; and I will place you into your 
land : and ye shall know that I the Lord have 
spoken, and will do it, saith the Lord." '> Also in 
the Wisdom of Solomon : " He was taken away, 
lest wickedness should change his understand- 

ing ; for his soul was pleasing to God." ■° Also 
in the eighty-third Psalm : " How beloved '■ are 
thy dwellings. Thou Lord of hosts? My soul 
desires and hastes to the courts of God." '^ And. 
in the P:pisde of Paul to the Thessalonians : 
" But we would not that you should be ignorant, 
brethren, concerning those who sleep, that ye 
sorrow not as others which have no hope. For 
if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, so 
also them which have fallen asleep in Jesus will 
God bring with Him." '3 Also in the first Epistle 
to the Corinthians : " Thou fool, that which thou 
sowest is not quickened except it have first 
died." -4 And again : " Star differeth from star 
in glory : so also the resurrection. The body is 
sown in corruption, it rises without corruption ; 
it is sown in ignominy, it rises again in glory ; it 
is sown in weakness, it rises again in power ; it 
is sown an animal body, it rises again a spiritual 

j body." '5 And again : " For this corrupdble must 
put on incorruption, and this mortal p'ut on im- 
mortality. But when this corruptible shall have 
put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have 
put on immortality, then shall come to pass the 
word that is written. Death is absorbed mto 
striving. Where, O death, is thy sting? Where, 

I O death, is thy striving? " '^ Also in the Gospel 

j according to John • " Father, I will that those 
whom Thou hast given me be with me where I 
shall be, and may see my glory which Thou hast 

; given me before the foundation of the world." "7 
Also according to Luke : " Now lettest Thou 

; Thy servant depart in peace, O Lord, according 
to the word ; for mine eyes have seen Thy salva- 

: tion." '*' Also according to John : " If ye loved 
me, ye would rejoice because! go to the Father ; 
for the Father is greater than I." '9 

' 2 Cor. V 10. 

'' Ps. cxviii. 18. 

] f,s- '"x"'-^. 32,33- 

* Mai. 111. 3. 
5 Matt. V. 26. 

* Gen. iii. 17-19. 
' Oeii. V. 24. 

* Isa. xl. 6, 7. 

9 Kzek. xxxvii. 11-14. 

59. Of the idols which the Gentiles think to 
be gods. 

In the Wisdom of Solomon : " All the idols 
I of the nations they counted gods, which neither 
have the use of their eyes for seeing, nor their 
nostrils to receive breath, nor their ears for hear- 
ing, nor the fingers on their hands for handling ; 
but their feet also are slow to walk. For man 
made them ; and he who has borrowed his breath, 
he fashioned them. But no man will be able to 
fashion a god like to himself. For since he is 
mortal, he fashioneth a dead thing with wicked 
hands. But he himself is better than they 
whom he worships, since he indeed lived, but 

'° Wisd. iv. II, 14. 

" Some re.id " amabiles," " amiable." 

'^ Ps. Ixxxiv. I, 2. 

'3 I Thess. iv. 13, 14. 

'■* I Cor. XV. 36. 

'-' I Cor. XV. 41-44. 

'^ I Cor. XV. 53-55. 

''' John. xvii. 24. 

" I.uke ii, 29, 30. 

'9 John .\lv. 28. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

549 

they never." ' On this same matter : " Neither 
ha\e they who ha\e regarded the works known 
who was the artificer, but have thought that either 
fire, or wind, or the rapid air, or the circle of 
the stars, or the abundant water, or the sun and 
moon, were the gods that rule over the world ; 
and if, on account of the beauty of these, they 
have thought thus, let them know how much hiore 
beautiful than these is the Lord ; or if they have 
admired their powers and operations, let them 
perceive from these very things that He who has 
■established these mighty things is stronger than 
they." - Also in the cxxxivth Psalm : " The 
idols of the nations are silver and gold, the work 
of men's hands. They have a mouth, and speak 
not ; they have eyes, and see not ; they have 
ears, and hear not ; and neither is there any 
breath in their mouth. Let them who make 
them become like unto them, and all those who 
trust in them." ^ Also in the ninety-fifth Psalm : 
" All the gods of the nations are demons, but 
the Lord made the heavens." ■♦ Also in Exodus : 
" Ye shall not make unto yourselves gods of silver 
nor of gold." 5 And again : " Thou shalt not 
make to thyself an idol, nor the likeness of any 
thing." ^ Also in Jeremiah : " Thus saith the 
Lord, Walk not according to the ways of the 
heathen ; for they fear those things in their own 
persons, because the lawful things of the heathen 
are vain. Wood cut out from the forest is made 
the work of the carpenter, and melted silver and 
gold are beautifully arranged : they strengthen 
them with hammers and nails, and they shall not 
be moved, for they are fixed. The silver is 
brought from Tharsis, the gold comes from Moab. 
All things are the works of the artificers ; they will 
clothe it with blue and purple ; lifting them, they 
will carry them, because they will not go forward. 
Be not afraid of them, because they do no evil, 
neither is there good in them. Say thus, The 
gods that have not made the heaven and the 
earth perish from the earth, and from under this 
heaven. The heaven hath trembled at this, and 
hath shuddered much more vehemently, saith the 
Lord. These evil things hath my people done. 
They have forsaken the fountain of living water, 
and have dug out for themselves worn-out wells, 
which could not hold water. Thy love hath 
smitten thee, and thy wickedness shall accuse 
thee. And know and see that it shall be a bitter 
thing for thee that thou hast forsaken me, saith 
the Lord thy God, and thou hast not hoped in 
me, saith thy Lord. Because of old time thou 
hast resented my yoke, and hast broken thy bonds, 

' Wisd. XV. 15-17. 

2 Wisd. xiii. 1-4. 

3 Ps. cxxxv. 16-18. 

* Ps. xcvi. 5. 
5 Ex. XX. 23. 

* Ex. XX. 4. This section closes here, according to the Oxford 
text. The Leipzic edition continues as in the above reading. 

and hast said, I will not serve, but I will go 
upon every lofty mountain, and upon every high 
hill, and upon every shady tree : there I will be 
confounded with fornication. To the wood and 
to the stone they have said. Thou art my father ; 
and to the stone, Thou hast begotten me : and 
they turned to me their back, and not their 
face." 7 In Isaiah : " The dragon hath fallen or 
is dissolved ; their carved works have become as 
beasts and cattle. Labouring and hungry, and 
without strength, ye shall bear them bound upon 
your neck as a heavy burden." ^ And again : 
" Gathered together, they shall not be able to 
be saved from war ; but they themselves have 
been led captive with thee." ^ And again : " To 
whom have ye likened me ? See and understand 
that ye err in your heart, who lavish gold out of 
the bag, and weigh silver in the balance, bringing 
it up to the weight. The workmen have made 
with their hand the things made ; and, bowing 
themsehes, they have adored it, and have raised 
it on their shoulders : and thus they walked. 
But if they should place them down, they will 
abide in their place, and will not be moved ; 
and they will not hear those who cry unto them : 
they will not save them from evils." '° Also in ' 
Jeremiah : " The Lord, who made heaven and 
earth, in strength hath ordered the world, in His 
wisdom hath stretched forth the heaven, and the 
multitude of the waters in the heaven. He hath 
brought out the clouds from the end of the earth, 
the lightnings in the clouds ; and He hath 
brought forth the winds from His treasures. 
Every man is made foolish by his knowledge, 
every artificer is confounded by his graven 
images ; because he hath molten a falsehood : 
there is no breath in them. The works shut up 
in them are made vain ; in the time of their 
consideration they shall perish." " And in the 
Apocalypse : " And the sixth angel sounded with 
his trumpet. And I heard one of the four cor- 
ners of the golden ark, which is in the presence 
of God, saying to the sixth angel who had the 
trumpet. Loose the four angels which are bound 
upon the great river Euphrates. And the four 
angels were loosed, which were prepar'^d for an 
hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, to 
slay the third part of men ; and the number of 
the army of the horsemen was two hundred 
thousand of thousand : I heard the number of 
them. And then I saw the horses in the vision, 
and those that sate upon them, having breast- 
plates of fire, and of hyacinth, and of sulphur : 
and the heads of the horses (as the heads of 
lions) ; and out of their mouth went fire, and 

^ Jer. X. 2-5, 9, II, ii. 12, 13, 19, 20, 27. 
^ Isa. xlvi. I, 2, 5. 

9 Migne refers this to Jer. li. 15-18, but there is nothing corre- 
sponding to it in the passage 
'° Isa. xlvi. 6, 7. 
" Jer. Ii. i6-iq. 

550 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

smoke, and sulphur. By these tliree plagues 
the third part of men was slain, by the fire, and the 
smoke, and the sul]>hur which went forth from 
their mouth, and is in their tails ; for their tails 
were like unto eels ; for they had heads, and 
with them they do mischief. .A^nd the rest of 
the men who were not slain by these plagues, 
nor repented of the works of the deeds of their 
hands, that they should not worship demons and 
idols, that is, inic'vges of gold, and of silver, and 
of brass, and of stone, and of wood, which can 
neither see nor walk, repented not also of their 
murders." ' Also in the same place : " And the 
third angel followed them, saying with a loud 
voice, If any man worship the beast and his 
image, and hath received his mark in his fore- 
liead or upon his hand, the same shall drink of 
the wine of His wrath, and shall be punished 
with fire and sulphur, under the eyes of the holy 
angels, and under the eyes of the Lamb ; and 
the smoke of their torments shall ascend up 
for ever and ever." ^ 

60. That too great lust of food is not to be 

desired. 

In Isaiah : " Let us eat and drink, for to-mor- 
row we shall die. This sin shall not be remitted 
to you even until ye die." ^ Also in Exodus : 
'• ,\nd the people sate down to eat and drink, 
and rose up to play." •♦ Paul, in the first to the 
Corinthians : " Meat commendeth us not to 
( iod ; neither if we eat shall we abound, nor 
if we eat not shall we want." =. And again : 
" When ye come together to eat, wait one for 
another. If any is hungry, let him eat at home, 
that ye may not come together for judgment." ^ 
Also to the Romans : " The kingdom of God is 
not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, 
and joy in the Holy Cihost." ^ In the (iospel 
according to John : *' I have meat which ye 
know not of. My meat is, that I should do His 
will who sent me, and should finish H's work." ^ 

61. That the lust of possessing, and money, 

are not to be sought for. 

In Solomon, in Ecclesiasticus : " He that 
loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver." 9 
Also in Proverbs : " He who holdeth back the 
corn is cursed among the people ; but blessing 
IS on the head of him that communicateth it." '^ 
Also in Isaiah : " Woe unto them who join house 
to house, and lay field to field, that they may 

• Rev. ix. T, 13-21. 
^ Rev. xiv. 9-11. 
3 Isa. xxii. 13, 14. 
■♦ Ex. xxxii. 6. 
5 I Cor viii. 8. 
*" I Cor. xi. 33. 
' Rom. xiv. 17. 

8 John iv. 32, 34. 

9 Eccles. V. 10. 
'" Prov. xi. 26. 

take away something from their neighbour. Will 
ye dwell alone upon the earth?"" -Also in 
Zephaniah : " They shall build houses, and shall 
not dwell in them ; and they shall appoint vine- 
yards, and shall not drink the wine of them, be- 
cause the day of the Lord is near." '^ Also in 
the Gospel according to Luke : " For what does 
it profit a man to make a gain of the whole 
world, but that he should lose himself? " '3 And 
again : " But the Lord said unto him, Thou 
fool, this night thy soul is required of thee. 
Whose, then, shall those things be which thou 
hast provided ? " '■♦ And again : " Remember that 
thou hast received thy good things in this life, 
and likewise Lazarus evil things. But now he is 
besought, and thou grievest." 's And in the Acts 
of the Apostles : " But Peter said unto him, Silver 
and gold indeed I have not ; but what I ha\e I 
give unto you : In the name of Jesus Christ of 
Nazareth, rise up and walk. And, taking hold 
of his right hand, he lifted him up." '^ Also in 
the first to Timothy : " We brought nothing inta 
this world, but neither can we take anything 
away. Therefore, having maintenance and cloth- 
ing, let us with these be content. But they who 
will become rich fall into temptation and a snare, 
and many and hurtful lusts, which drown man in 
perdition and destruction. For the root of all 
evils is covetousness, which some coveting, have 
made shipwreck from the faith, and have plunged 
themselves in many sorrows." '^ 

62. That marriage is not to be contracted with 
Gentiles. 

In Tobias : " Take a wife from the seed of 
thy parents, and take not a strange woman wha 
is not of the tribe of thy parents." '^ Also in 
Genesis, Abraham sends his servant to take from 
his seed Rebecca, for his son Isaac. Also in Es- 
dras, it was not sufficient for God when the Jews 
were laid waste, unless they forsook their foreign 
wives, with the children also whom they had 
begotten of them. Also in the first Epistle of 
Paul to the Corinthians : *' The woman is bound 
so long as her husband liveth ; but if he die, she 
is freed to marry whom she will, only in the 
Lord. But she will be happier if she abide 
thus." '9 And again : " Know ye not that your 
bodies are the members of Christ ? Shall I take 
the members of Christ, and make them the 
members of an harlot? Far be it from me. 
Or know ye not that he who is joined together 
with an harlot is one body? for two shall be in 

" Isa. V. 8. 

'- Zeph. i. 13, 14. 

'3 Luke ix. 25. 

'^ Luke xii. 20. 

'S Luke xvi. 25. 

"" Acts iii. 6. 

" X Tim. vi. 7-10. 

'8 Tob. iv. 12. 

'9 1 Cor. vii. 39, 40. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

55^ 

one flesh. But he who is joined to the Lord is 

one spirit. 

Also in the second to the Corin- 

thians : " Be not joined together with unbeUev- 
ers. For what participation is there between 
righteousness and unrighteousness? or what com- 
munication hath hght with darkness?"- Also 
concerning Solorhon in the third book of Kings : 
" And foreign wives turned away his heart after 
their gods." ^ 

63. That the sin of fornication is grievous. 

In the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians : 
■' Every sin whatsoever a man doeth is outside 
the body ; but he who committeth fornication 
sinneth against his own body. Ye are not your 
own, for ye are bought with a great price. Glo- 
rify and bear the Lord in your body." ■* 

64. What are those carnal things which beget 

death, and what are the spiritual things 
which lead to life. 

Paul to the Galatians : "The flesh lusteth 
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the 
flesh : for these are contrary the one to the 
other, that ye cannot do even those things which' 
ye wish. But the deeds of the flesh are mani- 
fest, which are : adulteries, fornications, impu- 
rities, filthiness, idolatries, sorceries, murders, 
hatreds, strifes, emulations, animosities, provo- 
cations, hatreds, dissensions, heresies, envyings, 
drunkenness, revellings, and such like : with 
respect to which I declare, that they who do 
such things shall not possess the kingdom of 
God. But. the fruit of the Spirit is charity, joy, 
peace, magnanimity, goodness, faith, gentleness, 
continency, chastity. For they who are Christ's 
have crucified their flesh, with its vices and 
lusts." s 

65. That all sins are put away in baptism. 

In the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians : 
" Neither fornicators, nor those who serve idols, 
nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor the lusters 
after mankind, nor thieves, nor cheaters, nor 
drunkards, nor revilers, nor robbers, shall obtain 
the kingdom of God. And these things indeed 
ye were : but ye are washed, but ye are sancti- 
fied in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
in the Spirit of our God." '^ 

66. That the discipline of God is to be ob- 

served in Church precepts. 

In Jeremiah : " And I will give to you shep- 
herds according to my own heart ; and they 

■ I Cor. vi. 15-17. 

- 2 Cor. vi. 14. 

3 I Kings xi. 4. [Surely this principle is important in teaching 
fathers and mothers how to guard the social relations of children.] 

* I Cor. vi. 18-20. 

5 Gal. V. 17-24. 

*> I Cor. vi. 9-1 1. 

shall feed the sheep, feeding them with disci- 
pline." 7 Also in Solomon, in the Proverbs : 
" My son, neglect not the discipline of God, nor 
fail when rebuked by Him. For whom God 
loveth. He rebuketh." '^ Also in the second 
Psalm : " Keep discipline, lest perchance the 
Lord should be angry, and ye perish from the 
right way, when His anger shall bqrn up quickly 
against you. Blessed are all they who trust in 
Him." 9 Also in the forty-ninth Psalm: "But 
to the sinner saith God, For what dost thou set 
forth my judgments, and takest my covenant 
into thy mouth? But thou hatest discipline, and 
hast cast my words behind thee." '° A,lso in the 
Wisdom of Solomon : " He who casteth away 
discipline is miserable." " 

67. That it was foretold that men should de- 

spise sound discipline. 

Paul, in the second to Timothy : " There 
will be a time when they will not endure sound 
doctrine ; but according to their own lusts will 
heap to themselves teachers itching in hearing, 
tickling their ears ; and shall turn away their 
hearing indeed from the truth, but they shall be 
converted unto fables." '^ 

68. That we must depart from him who lives 

irregularly and contrary to discipline. 

Paul to the Thessalonians : " But we have 
commanded you, in the name of Jesus Christ,, 
that ye depart from all brethren who walk disor- 
derly, and not according to the tradition which 
they have received from us." '^ Also in the forty- 
ninth Psalm : " If thou sawest a thief, at once 
thou rannest with him, and placedst thy portion 
with the adulterers." "> 

69. That the kingdom of God is not in the 

wisdom of the world, nor in eloquence,, 
but in the faith of the cross, and in vir- 
tue of conversation. 

In the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians : 
" Christ sent me to preach, not in wisdom of 
discourse, lest the cross of Christ should be- 
come of no effect. For the word of the cross 
is foolishness to those who perish ; but to those 
who are saved it is the power of God. For it is 
written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, 
and I will reprove the prudence of the prudent. 
Where is the wise ? where is the scribe ? where 
is the disputer of this world ? Hath not God 

7 Jer. iii. 15. 

* Prov. iii. 11, 12. 

9 Ps. ii. 12. 

•o Ps. 1. 16. 

" Wisd. iii. 11. 

'2 2 Tim. iv. 3, 4. 

'3 2 Thess. iii. 6. [A very noteworthy safeguard of apostolic or- 
dinances; but mark the charity with which it is softened, 2 Thess.. 
iii. 14, 15. Compare also cap. ii. 15.] 

»* Ps. 1. 18. 

552 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

made foolish the wisdom of this world ? Since 
indeed, in the wisdom of God, the world by wis- 
dom knew not God, it pleased God by the fool- 
ishness of preaching to save them that believe. 
Because the Jews desire signs, and the Greeks 
seek for wisdom : but we preach Christ crucified, 
to the Jews indeed a stumbling-block, and to 
the Gentiles foolishness ; but to them that are 
called, Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of 
God, and the wisdom of (iod." ' And again : 
" Let no man deceive himself. If any man 
think that he is wise among you, let him become 
a fool to this world, that he may be wise. For 
the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. 
For it is written. Thou shalt rebuke the wise in 
their own craftiness." - And again : "The Lord 
knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they are 
foolish." 3 

70. That we must obey parents. 

In the Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians : 
"Children, be obedient to your parents : for this 
is right. Honour thy father and thy mother 
(which is the first command with promise), that 
it may be well with thee, and thou mayest be 
long-lived on the earth." ■♦ 

71. And that fathers also should not be harsh 

in respect of their children. 

Also in the same place : " And, ye fathers, 
drive not your children to wrath : but nourish 
them in the discipline and rebuke of the Lord." 5 

72. That servants, when they have believed, 

ought to serve their carnal masters the 
better. 

In the Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians : 
" Servants, obey your fleshly masters with fear 
and trembling, and in simplicity of your heart, 
as to Christ ; not serving for the eye, as if you 
were pleasing men ; but as servants of God." '^ 

73. Moreover, that masters should be the 

more gentle. 

Also in the same place : " And, ye masters, 
<io the same things to them, forbearing anger : 
knowing that both your Master and theirs is in 
heaven ; and there is no choice of persons with 
Him." 7 

74. That all widows that are approved are to 

be held in honour. 

In the first Epistle of Paul to Timothy : 
" Honour widows which are truly widows. But 

' I Cor. i. 17-24. 
^ I Cor. iii. 18-20. 
3 Ps. xciii. n. 

* Eph. vi. 1-3. 
' Eph. vi. 4. 

* Eph. vi. 5, 5. 
' Eph. vi. 9. 

the widow that is wanton, is dead while she 
liveth."*^ And again : "But the younger widows 
pass by : for when they shall be wanton in 
Christ, they wish to marry ; having judgment, 
because they have cast off their first faith." ^ 

75. That every person ought to have care 

rather of his own people, and especially 
of believers. 

The apostle in his first Epistle to Timothy : 
" But if any take not care of his own, and espe- 
cially of those of his own household, he denies 
the faith, and is worse than an infidel." ■" Of this 
same thing in Isaiah : "If thou shalt see the 
naked, clothe him ; and despise not those who 
are of the household of thine own seed." " Of 
which members of the household it is said in 
the Gospel : " If they have called the master of 
the house Beelzebub, how much rather them 
of his household ! " '^ 

76. That an elder must not be rashly accused. 

In the first to Timothy : " Against an elder 
.receive not an accusation." '^ 

77. That the sinner must be publicly reproved. 

In the first Epistle of Paul to Timothy : " Re- 
buke them that sin in the presence of all, that 
others also may be afraid." '•♦ 

78. That we must not speak with heretics. 

To Titus : " A man that is an heretic, after 
one rebuke avoid ; knowing that one of such 
sort is perverted, and sinneth, and is by his own 
self condemned." '5 Of this same thing in the 
Epistle of John : " They went out from among 
us, but they were not of us ; for if they had 
been of us, they would doubtless have remained 
with us." '•' Also in the second to Timothy : 
" Their word doth creep as a canker." '^ 

79. That innocency asks with confidence, and 

obtains. 

In the Epistle of John : " If our heart blame 
us not, we have confidence towards God ; and 
whatever we ask, we shall receive from Him." '*' 
Also in the Gospel according to Matthew : 
" Blessed are they of a pure heart, for they shall 
see God." '^ Also in the twenty-third Psalm : 
"Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? 

8 I Tim. V. 3, 6. 

9 I Tim. V. II, 12. 
•o I Tim. V. 8. 

" Isa. Iviii. 7. 
" Matt. X. 25. 
'^ I Tim. V. 19. 
'•• I Tim. V. 20. 
" Tit. iii. 10, II. 
"> I John ii. 19. 
'^ 2 Tim. ii. 17. 
" I John ii. 21, 22. 
'9 Matt. V. 3. 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

55: 

or who shall stand in His holy place? The 
innocent in hands and of a pure heart." ' 

80. That the devil has no power against man 

unless God have allowed it. 

In the Gospel according to John : " Jesus said, 
Thou couldest have no power against me, unless 
it were given thee from above." ^ Also in the 
third of Kings : " And God stirred up Satan 
against Solomon himself." ^ Also in Job, first 
of all God permitted, and then it was allowed 
to the devil ; and in the Gospel, the Lord first 
permitted, by saying to Judas, " What thou doest, 
do quickly." ■♦ Also in Solomon, in the Proverbs : 
*' The heart of the king is in God's hand." 5 

8 1 . That wages be quickly paid to the hireling. 

In Leviticus : " The \vages of thy hireling shall 
not sleep with thee until the morning." ^ 

82. That divination must not be used. 

In Deuteronomy : " Do not use omens nor 
auguries." ^ 

8^. That a tuft of hair is not to be worn on 
the head. 

In Leviticus : " Ye shall not make a tuft from 
the hair of your head." ^ 

84. That the beard must not be plucked. 
"Ye shall not deface the figure of your beard."'' 

85. That we must rise when a bishop or a 

presbyter comes. 

In Leviticus : " Thou shalt rise up before the 
face of the elder, and shalt honour the person 
of the presbyter." '° 

86. That a schism must not be made, even 

although he who withdraws should re- 
main in one faith, and in the same tra- 
dition. 

In Ecclesiasticus, in Solomon : " He that 
cleaveth firewood shall be endangered by it if 
the iron shall fall off." " Also in Exodus : " In 
one house shall it be eaten : ye shall not cast 
forth the flesh abroad out of the house." '^ Also 
in the cxxxiid Psalm: "Behold how good and 
how pleasant a thing it is that brethren should 

' Ps. xxiv. 3, 4. 

- John xix. II. 

3 I Kings xi. 23. 

* John xiii. 27. 

5 Prov. xxi. I. 

'^ Lev. xix. 13. 

^ Deut. xviii 10. 

' Lev. ,vix. 27. ['^ee p 530, sitfira, the note and reference.] 

9 Lev. xix. 27. LCompare Clement, vol. ii. p. 280, this series.] 
10 Lev. xix. 32. 
^' Eccles. x. 9. 
"- Ex. xii. 4. 

dwell in unity ! " '^ Also in the Gospel according 
to Matthew : " He that is not with me is against 
me ; and he that gathereth not with me scatter- 
eth." '•♦ Also in the first Epistle of Paul to the 
Corinthians : " But I beseech you, brethren, by 
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all 
say the same thing, and that there be no schisms 
among you ; but that ye be all joined together 
in the same mind and in the same opinion." '5 
Also in the sixty-seventh Psalm : " God, who 
maketh men to dwell with one mind in a house." '^ 

87. That believers ought to be simple, with 

prudence. 

In the Gospel according to Matthew : " Be 
ye prudent as serpents, and simple as doves." '' 
And again : " Ye are the salt of the earth. But 
if the salt have lost his savour, in what shall it 
be salted? It is good for nothing, but to be 
cast out abroad, and to be trodden under foot 
of men." '^ 

88. That a brother must not be deceived. 

In the first Epistle of Paul to the Thessalo- 
nians : " That a man do not deceive his brother 
in a matter, because God is the avenger for all 
these." "9 

89. That the end of the world comes suddenly. 

The apostle says : "The day of the Lord shall 
so come as a thief in the night. When they 
shall say. Peace and security, then on them shall 
come sudden destruction." ^° Also in the Acts 
of the Apostles : " No one can know the times 
or the seasons which the Father has placed in 
His own power." ^' 

90. That a wife must not depart from her 

husband ; or if she should depart, she 
must remain unmarried. 

In the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians : 
" But to them that are married I command, yet 
not I, but the Lord, that the wife should not 
be separated from her husband ; but if she 
should depart, that she remain unmarried or be 
reconciled to her husband : >and that the hus- 
band should not put away his wife." ^^ 

91. That every one is tempted so much as 

he is able to bear. 

In the first Epistle of Paul to the Corinthi- 
ans : " No temptation shall take you, except 

" Ps. cxx.xiii. I. 

'* Matt. xii. 30. 

'5 T Cor. i. 10. 

'6 Ps. Ixviii 6. [So Vulgate and Anglican Psalter.] 

"' Matt x. 16. 

18 Matt. v. 13. 

'■^ I Thess. iv. 6. 

2° I Thess. v. 2, 3. 

21 Acts i. 7. 

-- I Cor. vii. 10, II. 

554 

THE TREATISES OF CYPRIAN. 

such is human. But God is faithful, who will 
not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are 
able ; but will with the temptation also make a 
way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it." ' 

92. That not everything is to be done which 

is lawful. 

Paul, in the first Epistle to the Corinthians : 
" All things are lawful, but all things are not 
expedient : all things are lawful, but all things 
edify not." ^ 

93. That it was foretold that heresies would 

arise. 

In the first epistle of Paul to the Corinthians : 
" Heresies must needs be, in order that they 
which are approved may be made manifest 
among you." ^ 

94. That the Eucharist is to be received with 

fear and honour.'* 

In Leviticus : " But whatever soul shall eat of 
the flesh of the sacrifice of salvation, which is the 
Lord's, and his uncleanness is still upon him, that 
soul shall perish from his people." s Also in the 
first to the Corinthians : " Whosoever shall eat the 
bread or drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, 
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the 
Lord." ^ 

95. That we are to live with the good, but to 

avoid the evil. 

In Solomon, in the Proverbs : " Bring not the 
impious man into the habitation of the right- 
eous." 7 Also in the same, in Ecclesiasticus : 
" Let righteous men be thy guests." ^ And 
again : " The faithful friend is a medicine of Ufe 
and of immortality."'' Also in the same place : 
" Be thou far from the man who has the power 
to slay, and thou shalt not suspect fear." '° Also 
in the same place, : " Blessed is he who findeth 
a true friend, and who speaketh righteousness to 
the listening ear." " Also in the same place : 
" Hedge thine ears with thorns, and hear not 
a wicked tongue." '^ Also in the seventeenth 
Psalm : " With the righteous Thou shalt be jus- 
tified ; and with the innocent man Thou shalt 
l)e innocent ; and with the froward man Thou 
shalt be froward." '^ Also in the first Epistle of 

' 1 Cor. X. 13. 
- I Cor. X. 23. 
■' I Cor. xi. 19. 

* [Note, not to be worshipped, but received.] 
5 Lev. vii. 20. 

'■ I Cor. xi. 27. 
7 Prov. xxiv. 15. 

* Ecclus. ix. 16. 
9 Ecclue. vi. 16. 

'° Ecclus. ix. 13. 
" Ecclus. XXV. 9. 
'- Ecclus. xxviii. 24. 
'3 Ps. xviii. 25, 26. 

Paul to the Corinthians : " Evil communica- 
tions corrupt good dispositions." '"^ 

96. That we must labour not with words, but 

with deeds. 

In Solomon, in Ecclesiasticus : " Be not 
hasty in thy tongue, and in thy deeds useless 
and remiss." '5 And Paul, in the first to the Cor- 
inthians : " The kingdom of God is not in word, 
but in power." '^ Also to the Romans : " Not 
the hearers of the law are righteous before God, 
but the doers of the law shall be justified." '7 
Also in the Gospel according to Matthew : " He 
who shall do and teach so, shall be called great- 
est in the kingdom of heaven." ''^ Also in the 
same place : " Every one who heareth my words, 
and doeth them, I will liken him to a wise man 
who built his house upon a rock. The rain de- 
scended, the floods came, the winds blew, and 
beat upon that house, and it fell not : for it was 
founded upon a rock. And every one who 
heareth my words, and doeth them not, I will 
liken him to the foolish man, who built his house 
upon the sand. The rain descended, the floods 
came, the winds blew, and beat upon that house ; 
and it fell : and its ruin became great." "^ 

97. That we must hasten to faith and to at- 

tainment. 

In Solomon, in Ecclesiasticus : " Delay not to 
be converted to God, and do not put off from 
day to day ; for His anger cometh suddenly." ^° 

98. That the catechumen ought now no longer 

to sin.^' 

In the Epistle of Paul to the Romans : " Let 
us do evil until the good things come ; whose 
condemnation is just." ^^ 

99. That judgment will be according to the 

times, either of equity before the law, 
or of law after Moses. 

Paul to the Romans : " As many as have 
sinned without law, shall perish without law ; 
and as many as have sinned in the law, shall be 
judged also by the law." ^3 

100. That the grace of God ought to be with- 

out price. 

In the Acts of the Apostles: "Thy money 
be in perdition with thyself, because thou hast 

'< I Cor. XV. 33. 
'5 Ecclus. iv. 29. 
'^ 1 Cor. iv. 20. 
'7 Rom. ii. 13. 
'8 Matt. V. 19. 
'9 Matt. vii. 24-27. 
-° Ecclus. V. 7. 

2' [Converts preparing for baptism. Apostolical Constitutions, and 
Bunsen's Hipfiolytiis, vol. iii. pp. 3-24.] 
22 Rom. iii. 8. 
-3 Rom. ii. 12. 

THE TREATISES OE CYPRIAN. 

555 

thought that the grace of God is possessed by 
money." ' Also in the Gospel : " Freely ye 
have received, freely give." - Also in the same 
])lace : " Ye have made my Father's house a 
house of merchandise ; and ye liave made the 
house of prayer a den of thieves."'' Also in 
Isaiah : " Ye who thirst, go to the water, and as 
many as have not money : go, and buy, and 
drink without money."-* Also in the Apoca- 
lypse : " I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning 
and the end. I will give to him that thirsteth 
from the fountain of the water of life freely. He 
who shall overcome shall possess these things, 
and their inheritance ; and I will be his God, 
and he shall be my son." s 

loi. That the Holy Spirit has frequently ap- 
peared in fire. 

In Exodus : '• And the whole of Mount Sinai 
smoked, because God had come down upon it 
in fire."^ Also in the Acts of the Apostles.: 
" And suddenly there was made a sound from 
heaven, as if a vehement blast were borne along, 
and it filled the whole of that place in which 
they were sitting. .And there appeared to them 
cloven tongues as if of fire, which also settled 
upon each of them ; and they were all filled 
•vith the Holv Ghost." ^ .Also in the sacrifices, 
/hatsoever God accounted accepted, fire de- 
scended from heaven, which consumed what 
was sacrificed. In Exodus : " The angel of the 
Lord appeared in a flame of fire from the 
bush." « 

1 02. That all good men ought willingly to 

hear rebuke. 

In Solomon, in the Proverbs : " He who re- 
])roveth a wicked man shall be hated by him. 
Rebuke a wise man, and he will love you." 9 

103. That we must abstain from much speak- 

ing. 

In Solomon : " Out of much speaking thou 
shalt not escape sin ; but sparing thy lips, thou 
shall be wise." '° 

104. That we must not lie. 

'' Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord." " 

' Acts viii. 20. 
= Matt. X 8. 

3 Malt. xxi. 13. The latter clause of this quotation is omitted by 
the Oxford editor. 

* Isa. Iv I. 

5 Rev. xxi. 6, 7. 

6 Ex. xix. 18. 

7 Acts, ii. 2-4. 

* Ex. iii. 2. 

9 Prov. ix. 8. 
'° Prov. X. 19 
'' Prov. xii. 22, 

105. That they are frequently to be corrected 
who do wrong in domestic duty. 

In Solomon : " He who spare th the rod, hat- 
eth his son." '- .And again : " Do not cease from 
correcting the child." '^ 

106. That when a wrong is received, patience 

is to be maintained, and vengeance 
to be left to God. 

Say not, I will avenge me of mine enemy ; but 
wait for the Lord, that He may be thy help." '•* 
Also elsewhere : " To me belongeth vengeance ; 
I will repay, saith the Lord." 's Also in Zepha- 
niah : " Wait on me, saith the Lord, in the day 
of my rising again to witness ; because my judg- 
ment is to the congregations of the Gentiles, 
that I may take kings, and pour out upon them 
my anger." '^ 

107. That we must not use detraction. 

In Solomon, in the Proverbs : " Love not to 
detract, lest thou be taken away." '7 Also in 
the forty-ninth Psalm : " Thou sattest, and spak- 
est against thy brother ; and against the son of 
thy mother thou placedst a stumbling-block." '^ 
Also in the Epistle of Paul to the Colossians : "? 
" To speak ill of no man, nor to be litigious." ^° 

108. That we must not lay snares against our 

neighbour. 

In Solomon, in the Proverbs : " He who dig- 
geth a pit for his neighbour, himself shall fall 
into it." ^' 

109. That the sick are to be visited.^^ 

In Solomon, in Ecclesiasticus : " Be not slack 
to visit the sick man ; for from these things thou 
shalt be strengthened in love." ^^ Also in the 
Gospel : " I was sick, and ye visited me ; I was 
in prison, and ye came unto me." ^* 

no. That tale-bearers are accursed. 

In Ecclesiasticus, in Solomon : " The tale- 
bearer and the double-tongued is accursed ; for 
he will disturb many who have peace." ^s 

'- Prov. xiii. 24. 

'3 Prov. xix. 18. 

'* Lev. xix. 18. 

'5 Deut. xxxii. 35. 

'«■ Zeph. iii 8. 

■7 Prov. XX. 13 (LXX.). 

" Ps. 1. 20. 

■9 Oxford edition, " to Titus." 

^° Tit. iii. 2. 

^' Prov. xxvi. 27. 

'- [Elucidation XII. See p. 528, su/nt.^ 

^3 Ecclus. vii. 39. 

-* Matt. XXV. 36. 

-5 Ecclus. xxviii. 15. 

556 

THE tri:atisp:s of cyprian. 

III. 

That the sacrifices of the wicked are not 

acceptable. 

In the same : " The Highest approveth not 
the gifts of the unrighteous." ' 

112. That those are more 
who in this world 
power. 

severely judged, 
have had more 

In Solomon : " The hardest judgment shall be 
made on those who govern. For to a mean man 
mercy is granted ; but the powerful shall suffer 
torments mightily." ^ Also in the second Psalm : 
" And now, ye kings, understand ; be amended, 
ye who judge the earth." ^ 

113. That the widow and orphans ought to be 

protected. 

In Solomon : " Be merciful to the orphans as 
a father, and as a husband to their mother ; and 
thou shalt be the son of the Highest if thou 
shalt obey." •♦ Also in Exodus : " Ye shall not 
afflict any widow and orphan. But if ye afflict 
them, and they cry out and call unto me, I will 
hear their cryings, and will be angry in mind 
against you ; and I will destroy you with the 
sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your 
children orphans." 5 Also in Isaiah : "Judge for 
the fatherless, and justify the widow ; and come, 
let us reason, saith the Lord." ^ Also in Job : " I 
have preserved the poor man from the hand of 
the mighty, and I have helped the fatherless, 
who had no helper : the mouth of the widow 
hath blessed me." ^ Also in the sixty-seventh 
Psalm : " The Father of the orphans, and the 
Judge of the widows." * 

114. That one ought to make confession while 

he is in the flesh. 

In the fifth Psalm : " But in the grave who will 
confess unto Thee?"^ Also in the twenty-ninth 
Psalm : " Shall the dust make confession to 
Thee?"'° Also elsewhere that confession is to 
be made : " I would rather have the repentance 
of the sinner than his death."" Also in Jere- 
miah: "Thus saith the Lord, Shall not he that 
falleth arise ? or shall not he that is turned away 
be converted?" '^ 

' Eccliis. .\xxiv. 19. 
2 Wisd vi. 6. 
^ Ps. ii. 10. 
^ Ecclus. iv. 10. 
5 Ex. xxii. 22-24. 

* Isa. i. 17, 18. 

^ Job xxix. 12, 13. 

* Ps. Ixviii. 5. 

9 Ps. vi. 5. [Here, as often, the grave is represented as enjoying 
a temporary victory', for the flesh is no longer capable of worship. Not 
till the whole man is restored comes i Cor. xv. 54, 55.] 

'° Ps. XXX. 9. 

" Ezek. xxxiii. n. 
^' Jor. viii. 4. 

115. That flattery is pernicious. 

In Isaiah : " They who call you blessed, lead 
you into error, and trouble the paths of your 
feet." '3 

116. That God is more loved by him who has 

had many sins forgiven in baptism. 

In the Gospel according to Luke : " To whom 
much is forgiven, he loveth much ; and to whom 
little is forgiven, the same loveth little." '■» 

117. 

That there is a strong conflict to be 
waged against the devil, and that 
therefore we ought to stand bravely, 
that we may be able to conquer. 

In the Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians : 
"Our wrestle is not against flesh and blood, but 
against the powers and princes of this world, and 
of this darkness ; against the spiritual things of 
wickedness in the heavenly places. Because 
of this, put on the whole armour of God, that ye 
may be able to resist in the most evil day ; that 
when ye have accomplished all, ye may stand, 
having your loins girt in the truth of the Gospel, 
putting on the breastplate of righteousness, and 
having your feet shod with the preparation of 
the Gospel of peace ; in all things taking the 
shield of faith, in which ye may extinguish all 
the fiery darts of the most wicked one ; and 
take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of 
the Spirit, which is the word of God." '5 

1 1 8. Also of Antichrist, that he will come as 
a man. 

In Isaiah : " This is the man who arouseth 
the earth, who disturbeth kings, who maketh the 
whole earth a desert." '^ 

119. 

That the yoke of the law was heavy, 
which is cast off" by us, and that the 
Lord's yoke is easy, which is taken uj) 
by us. 

In the second Psalm : " Wlierefore have the 
heathen been in tumult, and the peoples medi- 
tated vain things? The kings of the earth have 
stood up, and their princes have been gathered 
together against the Lord, and against His Christ. 
Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away 
from us their yoke." '7 Also in the Gospel ac- 
cording to Matthew : "Come unto me, ye who 
labour and are burdened, and I will make you 
to rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of 

" Tsa. iii. 12. 

'< Luke v'ii. 47. 

■S Eph. vi. 12-17. 

"i Isa. xiv. 16. 

" Ps. ii. 1-3. 

ELUCIDATIONS. 557 

me : for I am meek and lowly of heart,' and ye 
shall find rest for your souls. For my yoke • is 
good, and my burden is light." - Also in the 
Acts of the Apostles : " It seemed good to the 
Holy Ghost, and to us, to impose upon you no 
other burden than those things which are of 
necessity, that you should abstain from idola- 
tries, from shedding of blood, and from fornica- 
tion. And whatsoever you would not to be 
done unto you, do not to others." ^ 

' In one codex, from this point all the rest is wanting. 

2 Matt. xi. 28-30. 

3 Acts XV. 28, 29. 

120. That we are to be urgent in prayers. 

In the Epistle of Paul to the Colossians : " Be 
instant in prayer, and watch therein." ■♦ Also 
in the first Psalm : " But in the law of the Lord 
is his will, and in His law will he meditate day 
and night." s 

* Col. iv. 2. 

5 Ps. i. 2. The Oxford edition continues: " Likewise In Solomon ; 
' Be not hindered from praying ever, and delay not unto death to be 
justified; for the repayment of the Lord abideth for ever.'" [In a 
day when there were few Bibles, and no printed books, no concord- 
ances, and no published collections of this sort, reflect on the value 
of this treatise to a young believer, and on the labour of his pastor 
in making it.] 

ELUCIDATIONS. 

(On the unity of the Church, p. 421.) 

The epistles have already been elucidated as the best exposition of this treatise. Little need 
be added. But, to illustrate the bearings of this treatise upon the history of Christian unity, we 
need only refer to the manner in which the subject was treated as soon as the papacy was created 
by Nicholas 1. Thus, he astounded the Greeks by his consummate audacity (a.d. 860) in the 
matter of the disputed succession in Constantinople.' " // is our will,'" he says, " that Ignatius 
should appear before our envoys," etc. He declares it the rule of the Fathers, that, " without the 
consent of the Roman See and the Roman pontiff, nothing should be decided." Also, he affirms, 
" The Creator of all things has established the Princedom of the Divine Power, which He granted 
to His chosen apostles. He has firmly established it os the firm faith of the Prince of the 
Apostles, — that is to say, Peter, — to whom he pre-eminently granted the first See," etc. He was 
now speaking on the strength of the forged Decretals, to which he appeals, and which he succeeded 
in making law for the West. He thus created the lasting schism with the Easterns, who had 
never heard the like before his time. 

Obviously, therefore, had Cyprian entertained such ideas, his treatise could never have been 
written ; for it is a masterly exposition of a curious point, viz., the fact that ( i ) the Apostle Peter 
received the first grant alone, and yet (2) all the apostles received precisely the same ; while (i) 
Peter had thus a primacy of honour, but (2) in no respect any power or authority over his breth- 
ren. On these admitted facts he constructs his theory of unity, expounding by it the actual state 
of the Church's constitution. Peter's memory he honours, but without any less reverence for 
all the apostolic Sees, which over and over again he maintains to be of equal authority and sanctity. 
That the Church was founded on Stephen any more than on the Bishop of Carthage, he never 
imagines ; for it is one thing to allow that a bishop has succeeded an apostle at the place of his 
last labours, and quite another to assume that therefore such a bishop is virtually the apostle 
himself. Yet this assumption is the ground of all Roman doctrine on this point.- 

Had such been Cyprian's idea, his Treatise on Unity xnwii have proceeded thus: (i) "Our 
Lord said to Peter only, I will give unto thee the keys; (2) to the rest of the aposdes He gave 
only an inferior and subject authority ; (3) to the successor of Peter, therefore, at Rome, all other 

' For the Ultramontane side, -consult the Histoire de Photius, etc., par M. I'Abbe Jager, p. 41, ed. Paris, 1854. For the Greeks, 
La Papauie Schistnatiqite, etc., par M. I'Abbe Guettec (pp. 286, 288, etc.), Paris, 1863. 

^ " Whatever is said in commendation of St. Peter is at once transferred to the occupant of the papacy, as if pasce oves nieas had been 
said to Pius IX." Burgon, Letters /rom Rome, p. 411, ed. 1862. 

558 

ELUCIDATIONS. 

bishops and churches must be subject ; for (4) in this subjection the law of unity consists ; and 
(5) if even all the other apostles were alive to this day, they would be subject to Stephen, as 
Prince of the Apostles, or would be rebels against Christ." 

Compare this treatise of Cyprian, then, with any authorized treatise on the subject proceeding 
from modern Rome, and it will be seen that the two systems are irreconcilable. Thus, in few 
words, says the Confession' of Pius IV.: "I acknowledge the Holy Catholic Apostolic Roman 
Church for the mother and mistress of all churches ; and I promise true obedience to the Bishop 
of Rome, successor to St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ." This is the 
voice of Italy in the ninth century ; but Cyprian speaks for CEcumenical Christendom in the third, 
and the two systems are as contrary as darkness and light. 

II. 

(Falsifying of the text, p. 422.) 

Cyprian is often innocently quoted by Romanist controvertists against the very principles of 
Cyprian himself, of his life and his writings. This is due to the fact that they have in their hands 
vitiated and interpolated copies. Thus, take a famous passage as follows : — 

CYPRIAN. 

Loquitur Dominus ad Petrum, Ego tibi dico 
Tu es Petrus, etc.(=») 

Super unum (^^ sedificat ecclesiam. 

Hoc erant utique et caeteri apostoli quod fuit 
Petrus, qui consortio praediti et honoris et potes- 
tatis, sed exordium ab unitate proficisitur,^^) 
ut (<!) Christi ecclesia (^) una monstretur.(f^ 

Qui Ecclesise resistitur et resistit,Cg) in ecclesia 
.se esse confidit? 

INTERPOLATED, 

(^) Et iterum eidem, post resurrectionem suam 
dicit, Pasce oves meas. 

(^^ Super //////;/ unum . . . et illi pascendas 
mandat oves suas. 

(*=) Et primatus Petro datur. 

(d) Una. 

(e) Et cathedra. 

(•^ Et pastores sunt omnes et grex unus osten- 
ditur, qui ab apostolis omnibus, unanimi consen- 
sione pascatur, etc. 

(g)Qui cathedram Petri, super quem fundata 
est ecclesia deserit, etc. 

This is but a specimen of the way in which Cyprian has been " doctored," in order to bring 
him into a shape capable of being misinterpreted. But you will say where is the proof of such 
interpolations? The greatly celebrated Benedictine edition reads as the interpolated column 
does, and who would not credit Baluzius? Now note, Baluzius rejected these interpolations and 
others; but, dying (a.d. 17 18) with his work unfinished, the completion of the task was assigned 
to a nameless monk, who confesses that he corrupted the work of Baluzius, or rather glories in 
the exploit.^ " Nay, further," he says, " it was necessary to alter not a few things in the notes of 
Baluzius ; and more would have been altered if // could have been done cofwenientfy.'" Yet the 
edition came forth, and passes as the genuine work of the erudite Baluzius himself. 

An edition of this treatise, with valuable annotations, appeared (a.d. 1852) from the press of 
Burlington, N.J., under the very creditable editorship of Professor Hyde, who was soon after 
called to depart this life. It exhibits the interpolations, and gives a useful catalogue of codices 
and of editions. Though its typographical execution is imperfect, I know not where so much 
condensed information on the subject is to be had at so little cost.^ I am grateful for the real 
advantage I derived from it on its first appearance. 

* Compendium Ritualis Romani, etc., Baltimori, 1842, p. 195. 

* Burgon, Letters from Rome, p. 417. 

^ Th. C. Cypriani cie Unitate Ecclesice ad optimorum librorum fidem expressa, cum vartis lectionibus, ad notationibus Fellii, BaluziL 
etc., instructa. Curante M. F. Hyde, M.A., etc., Burlingtoniae, MDCCCLII. 

ELUCIDATIONS. 559 

III. 

(If ye do not forgive, etc., p. 454.) 

The Jewish liturgies contained the petitions of the Lord's Prayer essentially ; but our divine 
Lord framed this comprehensive and sublime compend, and gave it to His children for ever, with 
His own seal upon it in the exceptional petition which imparts to it the impress of His own cross 
and passion. In the Gospel of St. Matthew ' we find our Master commenting on the fifth peti- 
tion in a very striking manner, as if it were the essence of the whole prayer ; and, indeed, it is so, 
regarded as its evangelical feature, i.e., something added to the law in the spirit of the Atonement. 
As such, it surprised the apostles ; and He who knew their thoughts instantly anticipated their 
inquiries : " For if ye forgive men," etc. 

From the criticism of a very able editorial hand,^ I feel it a privilege to insert the following 
valuable comments : — 

"The petitions of the Lord's Prayer, as is well known, are to be found for the most part in the Talmud 
and Jewish liturgies. In the latter we have frequently the phrases, ' our Father, our King,' ' our Father, Father 
of mercies,' and 'our Father that art in heaven.' The third petition in the Sliemone t-jr^ is, ' Let us hallow 
the Name in the world as it is hallowed in the high heaven. We will hallow Thee, and Thy praise, O God, 
shall not leave our mouth for ever and ever; since Thou, O God, art a great and holy King. Praised be Thou, 
O Lord, thou holy God. Thou art holy, and Thy name is holy, and holy men praise Thee everlastingly every 
day.' The ineffable name of God represented all His attributes, and is consequently frequently substituted for 
Him. The end of the first petition in the Kaddish prayer runs 'thus : ' May He extend His kingdom in your days, 
and in those of the whole house of Israel very soon.' In Berakhoth (29 b) we have, ' What is a short prayer .-' 
Rabbi Eliezer said, "Thy will be done in heaven, and peace of heart be unto those who fear Thee on earth."' 
The same tract gives another prayer : ' The needs of Thy people Israel are many, but its discernment is small. 
Do Thou, O everlasting One, our God, give to each man what he needs for his support, and what his body wants ; 
but do what seemeth Thee good.' In the Mekiiilta we read that Rabbi Eliezer of Modin, near Jerusalem, said : 
* Whosoever has enough for the day to eat, and says, What shall I eat to-morrow .' is of little faith.' This pas- 
sage seems to illustrate the meaning of the Greek fTvtovaiov. The third petition in the Shemone esre runs • " For- 
give us, O our Father, for we have sinned ; forgive us, O our King, for we have transgressed : since Thou art 
He that forgiveth and pardoneth.' In reference to this the Midrash Shemoth (par. 31) states, 'There is no crea- 
ture who does not owe thanks to the Lord ; but He is pitiful and long-suffering, and remitteth old debts.' The 
daily morning prayer of the Jews contains this petition : * Lead us not into the power of sin, of transgression and 
crime, of temptation and shame. Let not passion have domi-iion over us, and keep us far from wicked men and 
evil company.' In one of the prayers composed in Aramaic for the rabbis and leading men of the Jewish com- 
munity, the passage occurs, ' Defend and deliver them from all evil, and from all evil hap,' which may be com- 
pared with the petition, 'Deliver us from evil.' The Doxology at the end of the Lord's Prayer has equally 
Jewish parallels. Thus, one of the daily evening prayers concludes with the words, ' For Thine is the kingdom ; ' 
I.e., God alone is ruler of the world. The words 'the power and the glory' seem to come from i Chron. xxix. 11, 
which is quoted in the Talmud; and the Mishna Berakhoth (ix. 5) states, 'In the temple all blessings did not end 
with " Amen," but with the words "for ever and ever." ' When the heretics multiplied, however, there was only 
one world ; so the concluding formula became ' from everlasting to everlasting.' " 

IV. 

(Lift up your hearts, p. 455.) 

It is demonstrated by Sir William Palmer that the Sursum Corda is of a date to which no 
history runneth contrary, and is to be found in all the primitive liturgies of whatever family. 
For a very early example of its use, I must refer to the Alexandrian liturg)' cited by Bunsen ; ^ 
and, in short, I beg to refer the reader to all the resources of the fourth volume of his Hippolytus. 
Little as I can approve of the magisterial air with which Dr. Bunsen undertakes to decide all 

' Cap. vi. 14. 2 i\'ew-York [ndependent, April 25, 1873. 3 Hippolytus, vol. iv. p. 161. 

56o ELUCIDATIONS. 

questions, and little as I sympathize with his abnormal religion, which seems to coincide with 
that of no existing church or sect in the world, I feel grateful for his industry in collecting 
materials, and am always interested in the ingenuity with which he works them into his theories. 
Although he possesses some touchstone unknown to the rest of mankind, by which he reaches 
and utters pontifical decisions as to what is genuine and what is corrupt, I must record my doubts 
as to many of his facts, and my dissent from most of his inferences. But, unwilling to refer to 
Anglican authorities on points so much disputed, I cordially turn to the learned Chevalier, and 
to the treasures he has collected. See the Greek forms on p. 335 of his fourth volume, followed 
by the preface on p. 336, and the Tersanctus on p. 337 : ''Ayto?, uytos, ayios, Kupic ^a/iawO, k.t-X. 

(To pray and give thanks, p. 457.) 

Here comes into view that reference of the apostle ' to the usages of the primitive assemblies : 
" How shall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned say A>fien at thy giving of thanks." 
Though Cyprian omits the final Amen from his express commentary, it is to be noted that our 
Lord makes it virtually part of this prayer, by His precept (St. John xvi, 23, 24), to ask in His 
name. Now, He makes this word Amen one of His own names ^ in the Apocalypse; throwing 
back a new character upon His frequent use of it, especially in St. John's Gospel, and giving it as 
a sort of appropriation of 2 Cor. i. 20, when He calls Himself "The Amen, the faithful and true 
Witness." He thus makes it infinitely dear to Christians.^ As in the Jewish usages,-* with which 
the disciples were familiar, it was a matter of course, we may suppose they added Amen in recit- 
ing this prayer, but not with their subsequent knowledge that it implies the merits, and claims the 
mediation, of the Great Intercessor. Rev. v. 8, viii. 3, 4 ; St. John xvii. 8. 

Tertullian 5 refers to the responsive " Hallelujah " as " enriched prayer," and the Amen usually 
accompanied this ejaculation. 

VL 

(Its failing estate, p. 458.) 

Hippolytus * foresaw the democratic age into which the feudal era of iron should pass, cor- 
roding in the toes by contact with the miry clay of the despised plebs, " the seed of men." No 
lasting strength was to be imparted to imperialism by i\\Q plebiscite (Dan. ii. 43) ; and the prophet 
might almost be supposed to have the epoch of dynamite in his sight, as he speaks of the imwil- 
lingness of the people to cleave to the effete system of empire. Now, then, if " the failing 
estate " of the world was apparent in the days of Philip and Decius, how much more in our own ! 
Sixteen human lives span the gulf of time between us and them, for we have many centenarians 
among us ; and with the Lord " a thousand years are as one day." Compare 2 Pet. iii. 9. And,, 
putting such Scriptures together, is it not clear that " the last time " (i.e., the last of the seven 
times of the Gentiles) is drawing to its close? The three and a half times of Daniel extend to 
the convulsive epoch of Mohammed ; the second moiety (of the seven) to our own age. See 
Vaber, Sacred Calendar ^ vol. i. cap. iii. pp. 308, 309, etc. 

' I Cor. -xiv. 16. 

^ Rev. iii. 14 

3 Note a striking use of it, as a name of Christ, by Commodian, vol. iv. 43, p. 211. 

< Num. v. 22; Deut. xxvii. 15: i Kings i. 36; i Cliron. xvi. 36; Jer. xxviii. 6; in the Psalms /<jj«*>«(. 

S Vol. iii. cap. xxvii. p. 690, this series. 

* P. J-.8. 

7 A most instructive work, though I by no means accept his theories in full. 

ELUCIDATIONS. 561 

VII. 

(Peter, upon whom, etc., p. 486.) 

Launoi, the eminent Gallican, found but seve?iteen of the Fathers and Doctors of the Church 
(among whom he reckons " Fathers " down to the twelfth century) who understand St. Peter to 
he "the rock," and he cites /<?/•/)' of the contrary opinion." Yet of the "seventeen," most of 
them speak only rhetorically, and with justifiable freedom. I have often done the same myself^ 
on the principle which the same apostle applies to a// Christians : "Ye also as lively stones"^ etc. 
But it is quite noteworthy that the Council of Trent itself momentarily adopts the prevailing 
patristic and therefore the Catholic interpretation, speaking of the Nicene Creed : 3 "In quo 
omnes qui fidem Christi profitentur neccssario conveniunt, ac fi/ndajfietifum firmum et unicum, 
contra quod portse inferi nunquam prsevalebunt (Matt. xvi. 18)." Thus, the faith of Peter is con- 
fessed the only foundation, in a direct exposition of the text so often quoted with another intent. 
In spite of all this, the Creed of Pius IV. was enjoined as soon as that council closed ; and every 
member of the late Vatican Council was made to profess the same verbally before any other 
business was undertaken. Now, even this spurious creed forced them to swear concerning the 
Holy Scriptures, " I will never take and interpret them otherwise than according to the imanimoiis 
consent of the Fathers." Obviously, according to this rule, there is no Catholic doctrine on the 
subject ; much less any Catholic teaching to the effect that the modern bishops of Rome are 
" the rock," as really as St. Peter himself. 

VIII. 
(The Eucharist carried in it, p. 488.) 

The modem usage of the Latin churches is for the priest to put the wafer into the communi- 
cant's mouth, an ordinance dating no farther back than a.d. 880. A new doctrine having been 
forged, and faith in the corporal presence of Christ being forced upon the conscience, a change 
of ceremonial followed, which indicates the novelty of the idea. Contrast the teaching of St. 
Cyril of Jerusalem,'* informing his catechumens how they should receive, as follows : — 

" Approaching, therefore, come not with thy wrists extended, or thy fingers open ; but make 
thy left hand a sort of cushion for thy right, which is about to receive the King. And having 
hollowed thy palm, receive the Body of Christ, saying after it, Atnen.'' ^^ Not discerning the 
Lord's body," etc., is the language of Scripture ; but, had the apostles taught transubstantiation, 
this could not be said, for everybody can discern the host when it is uplifted. The Lord's Body 
is therefore discerned by faith, and so taken and received. 

ES. 

(Which should be greatest, p. 493.) 

How differently our Lord must have settled this inquiry had He given the supremacy to one 
of the Apostles, or had He designed the supremacy of any single pastor to be perpetual in His 
Church! "Who should be greatest?" ask this question of any Romanist theologian, and he 
answers, in the words of the Creed of Pius IV., " the Bishop of Rome, successor to St. Peter, 
Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of Christ." But why was no such answer given by our Lord? 
And why does St. Peter know nothing of it when he says, " The elders who are among you I 

' Guett^e, p. 143, ed. New York. 

* Compare Peshito Syriac, where Cephas is the very word applied to all believers. Ed. Trostii, 1621. 
3 Richter, Cauones et Decreia, etc., p. 10, ed. Lipsia;, 1853. 

* A.D. 348. 

562 ELUCIDATIONS. 

exhort, who am also an elder . . . feed the flock of God, taking the oversight . . . not as being 
lords over God's heritage," etc. So also in the Council of Jerusalem, how humbly he sits under 
the i:)residency of James,' and again how cheerfully he permits the apostles to send him forth, and 
"give him mission " to Samaria !^ -St. Paul, moreover, who \vas " not a whit behind the chiefest 
of the Apostles," ^ overrules him, and reforms his judgment.'* 

If I have forborne in these notes to refer frequently to the Treatise of Bishop Sage, who often 
elucidates our author in a very learned manner, it is because he is almost wholly a controvertist, 
and therefore not to my purpose in this work. For his Cyprian,^ however, I entertain a sincere 
respect ; and, as it might seem otherwise should I omit all reference to that work, I place its title 
in the footnote. Profoundly do I feel what another Scottish Doctor ^ has beautifully said, " It is a 
loss, even to those that oppose errors and divisions, that they are forced to be busied that way." 

X. 

(From the slender twig, my son, thou hast ascended, p. 513.) 

The text of Cyprian ^ is : " Catulus leonis Juda, de frittice fili mi ascendisti, recubans ob- 
•dormisti velut leo, et velut catulus leonis." Now, with this compare the comment of Calmet, 
citing the Septuagint {Ik (SXaa-rov = e germine), and rendering by metaphrase, '' e medio planfa- 
rum, sive herbarum germinantium, ascendisti." 

Here, then, we have the idea precisely equivalent to Jer. xlix. 19 : " Ecce quasi ko ascendef 
de superbia Jordanis." The lion is recumbent among the sprouting twigs {frutice, or foliage) 
of the Jordan's banks in the springtime. The swelling of the river, which the melting of snows 
from Lebanon causes to overflow, rouses the reposing creature ; and he goes up into the moun- 
tains. But Cyprian had in hand the old African,^ which seems to follow the LXX., and St. 
Jerome's Vulgate did not ; and this woxA frutice animates Cyprian's poetic genius. Its spring- 
tide imagery corresponding with Easter,'^ he reads into it all the New Testament fulfilment : " Thou 
layedst down and sleepedst as a lion, and as a lion's whelp — but, from the shooting of the first 
verdure in spring, thou hast gone upon high — thou hast ascended." " Quis excitabit ilium" 
is separated from this in the Paris text, and in the Septuagint, which the Old Latin followed, 
and so I have pointed it, though the Edinburgh reads : " and as a lion's whelp ; who shall stir 
him up ? " 

XL 

(Third Book . . . religious teaching of our school, p. 528.) 

Quirinus, Cyprian's " son " in the Gospel, seems to me to have been a catechumen of the 
competent class, i.e., preparing for baptism at Easter ; or possibly of the higher sort, preparing for 
the first communion. Many tokens lead me to surmise that he may have been of Jewish birth ; 
and, if so, he was probably baptized Quirinus after St. Luke ii. 2, as St. Paul borrowed his Roman 
name from Sergius Paulus.'" The use of the word secta, here rendered "school," suggests to me 
that the Vulgate got it (and so our English version) out of the old African Latin in Acts xxviii. 22. 

' Acts XV. 13. 
' Acts viii. 14. 
3 See Barrow, JVorks, vol. iti. p. 95, ed. New York, 1845. 

* Gal. ii. 11-14. 

5 The Friticiples of the Cyprianic Age, etc., a.d. 1695. Reprinted, Edinburgh, 1846. 

6 Leighton, On St. Peter, i. 2, Works, i. p. 30, London, 1870. 
' Ed. Paris, 1574. ' 

* Scrivener, Introduction, etc., p. 302, ed. 1874. 

9 Jordan overflows its banks at the time of the passover. Josh. iti. 15, v. 10, ll. 
'o Acts xiii. 7-9. 

ELUCIDATIONS. 563 

If Quirinus was a Hebrew, there is a playful irony in Cyprian's use of the word in expounding 
the pure morality of " the sect'' everywhere spoken against. 

Origen's treatise Against Celsics shows how cunningly the adversaries of the Gospel could 
assume a Jewish position against it ; ' and the first two books of that work are designed to establish 
a perfect harmony between the Old Testament and the New, proving Christ to be the substance 
and sum of both. Cyprian may have foreseen the perils menacing the Church from the school 
of Plotinus, already rising, and which soon sent forth the venomous Porphyry. He was but a 
presbyter when he wrote this excellent defence of the faith ; and his earnest pastoral care for his 
pupil is shown by his addition of a third book, entirely practical. The catechetical system of 
St. Luke's day 2 had become a developed feature of the Church (St. Cyril's lectures in the suc- 
ceeding century show how it was further expanded), and it also illustrates the purity of her moral 
teaching. Our author harmonizes faith and works, and presents her simple scriptural precepts in 
marked contrast with the putrid casuistry ^ which Pascal exposes, and which grew up in the West 
with the enforcement of auricular confession by Innocent III., a.d. 12 15. The theory of tran- 
substantiation was also made a dogma at the same time, and operated, with the other, to the total 
extinguishment of the primitive discipline and worship. The withholding of the chalice in th':' 
Holy Communion followed, a.d. 1415. 

XIL 

(Good works and mercy, p. 528.) 

Clement was able to remind the heathen, half a century before,'* that Christ had " already 
made the universe an ocean of blessings." Here we have the moral canons of Christianity reflect- 
ing the Light of the World, and they show us how practically it operated. As I have noted, the 
first Christian hospital was founded (a.d. 350) by Ephraem Syrus. His example was followed by 
St. Basil, who also founded another for lepers. The founding of hostels as refuges for travellers 
was an institution of the Nicene period. " In the time of Chrysostom," says one not too well 
disposed towards the Gospel, 5 " the church of Antioch supported three thousand widows and 
virgins, besides strangers and sick. Legacies for the poor became common ; and it was not infre- 
quent for men and women who desired to live a life of especial sanctity, and especially for priests 
who attained the episcopacy, as a first act, to bestow their properties in charity. A Christian, it 
was maintained, should devote at least one-tenth of his profits to the poor. A priest named 
Thalasius collected blind beggars in an asylum on the banks of the Euphrates. A merchant 
named ApoUinus founded on Mount Nitria a gratuitous dispensary." 

So here our author's canons enforce (i) works of mercy ; (2) almsdeeds ; (3) brotherly love ; 
(4) mutual support; (5) forgiveness of injuries; (6) the example of Christ's holy living; (7) 
forbearance; (8) suppression of idle talk; (9) love of enemies ; (10) abhorrence of usury, (11) 
and avarice, (12) and carnal impurity: also, (13) obedience to parents; (14) parental love; 
(15) consideration of servants ; (16) respect for the aged; (17) moderation, even in use of 
things lawful; (18) control of the tongue; (19) abstinence from detraction; (20) to visit the 
sick; (21) care of widows and orphans ; (22) not to flatter; (23) to practise the Golden Rule ; 
and (24) to abstain from bloodshed. In short, we have here the outgrowth of the Sermon on 
the Mount, and of St, Paul's epitome, "Whatsoever things are true," etc.'' 

* Vol. iv. p. 462. 
- Luke i. 4. Greek. 

3 See that very useful little publication of the S. P. C. K., Dr. Littledale's Plain Reasons against Joining the Church of Rome, 
pp. 18 and 205. 

^ See vol. ii. p. 202, note 5. 

5 Lecky, History 0/ European Morals, vol. ii. p. 86, ed. New York, 1872. See vol. ii. p. 202, note 5. 

6 Phil. iv. 8. 

564 ELUCIDATIONS. 

XIII. 

(In the thirteenth Psalm, p. 546.) 

The note says that the Oxford edition gives it as the fourteenth, while in our English Bibles 
it is the fifteentli. As 1 find that some of the readers of these works are puzzled by such con- 
fusions, I note retrospectively, as well as for future reference, the origin of such apparent blunders. 

1. Our English version follows the Hebrew numbering, which is reputed the most accurate. 
By that a psalm is cited in the New Testament as if the numbering itself were important, and the 
product of inspired wisdom.' 

2. But the Cireek Psalter differs from the Hebrew ; Psalms ix. and x. being made into one, 
as confessedly their material suggests. The Seventy joined also Psalms cxiv. and cxv. But they 
divided Psalm cxvi., and also Psalm cxlvii. 

3. The Vulgate Latin follows the LXX. ; and our Ante-Nicene Fathers usually quote the 
Septuagint, or else the Old Latin, by which the Vulgate was probably governed. In the Vulgate, 
alsO; the Hebrew prefaces are often numbered as if they were verses, which is another source of 
confusion. 

4. By the fusion of Psalms ix. and x., our Psalm xv. becomes the xiv., and so the Vulgate gives 
it ; and the Oxford translators follow that. 

5. But our text says " Psalm xiii.," and for this it is not easy to account. The Oxford editors 
regard it as a mere corruption of the text, and change it accordingly. 

* Acts xiii. 33. 

THE SEVENTH COUNCIL OF CARTHAGE UNDER 

CYPRIAN.' 

CONCERNING THE BAPTISM OF HERETICS. 

THE JUDGMENT OF EIGHTY-SEVEN BISHOPS 
ON THE BAPTISM OF HERETICS. 

PROCEMIUM. WHEN STEPHEN, BISHOP OF ROME, 

HAD BY HIS LETTERS CONDEMNED THE DE- 
CREES OF THE AFRICAN COUNCIL ON THE BAP- 
TISM OF HERETICS, CYPRIAN LOST NO TIME IN 
HOLDING ANOTHER COUNCIL AT CARTHAGE WITH 
A GREATER NUMBER OF BISHOPS. HAVING 
THEREFORE SUMMONED EIGHTY-SEVEN BISHOPS 
FROM AFRICA, NUMIDIA, AND ftUURITANIA, WHO 
ASSEMBLED AT CARTHAGE IN THE KALENDS OF 
SEPTEMBER, A.D. 258, THIS THIRD COUNCIL ON 
THE SAME MATTER OF BAPTISM WAS THEN CELE- 
BR.'^TED ; AT THE BEGINNING OF WHICH, AFTER 
THE LETTERS ON EITHER SIDE HAD BEEN READ, 
CYPRIAN, BY IMPLICATION, CONDEMNS THE AS- 
SUMPTION OF STEPHEN.^ 

When, in the kalends of September, a great 
many bishops from the provinces of Africa, Nu- 
midia, and Mauritania, had met together at 
Carthage, together with the presbyters and dea- 
cons, and a considerable part of the congrega- 
tion who were also present ; and when the letter 
of Jubaianus written to Cyprian had been read, 
as also the reply of Cyprian to Jubaianus, about 
baptizing heretics, and what the same Jubaianus 
had subsequendy rejoined to Cyprian, — Cyprian 
said : You have heard, my dearly beloved col- 
leagues, what Jubaianus our co-bishop has written 
to me, taking counsel of my poor intelligence 
concerning the unlawful and profane baptism of 
heretics, as well as what I wrote in answer to 
him, decreeing, to wit, what we have once and 
again and frequently determined, that heretics 
who come to the Church must be baptized and 

■ [On councils, see Oxford trans., pp. 232, 240.] 
^ Of this council there exists no further memorials than such as 
have been here collected from Cyprian, and from St. Augustine, De 
Baptismo contra Donatistas, book iii. ch. iv., v., and vi., and book 
vn. ch. i. ; and in these nothing else is contained than the judgments 
of the eighty-seven bishops on the nullity of baptism administered 
by heretics. If any one desires to see these judgments impugned, 
let him consult Augustine as above. The results of this council are 
given in Ep. Ixxi. p. 378, supra. 

sanctified by the baptism of the Church. More- 
over, another letter of Jubaianus has also been 
read to you, wherein, replying, in accordance 
with his sincere and religious devotion, to my 
letter, he not only acquiesced in what I had 
said, but, confessing that he had been instructed 
thereby, he returned thanks for it. It remains, 
that upon this same matter each of us should 
bring forward what we think, judging no man, 
nor rejecting any one from the right of commun- 
ion, if he should think differently from us. For 
neither does any of us set himself up as a bishop 
of bishops,^ nor by tyrannical terror does any 
compel his colleague to the necessity of obedi- 
ence ; since every bishop, according to the allow- 
ance of his liberty and power, has his own 
proper right of judgment, and can no more be 
judged by another than he himself can judge 
another.^ But let us all wait for the judgment 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the only one 
that has the power both of preferring us in the 
government of His Church, and of judging us 
in our conduct there. 

Caecilius of Bilta 5 said : I know only one bap- 
tism in the Church, and none out of the Church. 
This one will be here, where there is the true 
hope and the certain faith. For thus it is 
written : " One faith, one hope, one baptism ; " ^ 
not among heretics, where there is no hope, and 
the faith is false, where all things are carried on 
by lying ; where a demoniac exorcises ; where 
one ' whose mouth and words send forth a can- 
cer puts the sacramental interrogation ; ^ the 
faithless gives faith ; the wicked bestows pardon 
of sins ; and Antichrist baptizes in the name of 

3 Of course this implies a rebuke to the assumption of Stephen, 
[" their brother," and forcibly contrasts the spirit of Cyprian with 
that of his intolerant compeer]. 

■* [This, then, is the primitive idea of the relations existing, 
mutually, among bishops as brethren.] 

5 Sell, of Mauritania; possibly, says the Oxford translator, Bidi!, 
Bita, or " urbs Abitensis." 

'' Eph. iv. 5. 

" According to some editions, " the sacrilegious man," etc 

* " Sacramentum interrogat." 

565 

566 

THE SEVENTH^ COUNCIL OF 

(" 

ARTHAGE. 

Christ ; he who is cursed of God blesses ; he 
who is dead promises Hfe ; he who is unpeaceful 
gives peace ; the blasphemer calls upon God ; 
the j)rofane person administers the othce of the 
priesthood ; the sacrilegious person establishes 
an altar. In addition to all these things, there 
is also this evil, that the priests of the devil dare 
to celebrate the Eucharist ; or else let those who 
stand by them say that all these things concern- 
ing heretics are false. Behold to what kind of 
things the Church is compelled ' to consent, and 
is constrained without baptism, without pardon 
of sins, to hold communion. And this thing, 
brethren, we ought to flee from and avoid, and 
to separate ourselves from so great a wickedness, 
and to hold one baptism, which is granted by the 
Lx)rd to the Church alone. 

Primus of Misgirpa- said : I decide, that every 
man who comes to us from heresy must be bap- 
tized. For in vain does he think that he has 
been baptized there, seeing that there is no bap- 
tism save the one and true baptism in the Church ; 
because not only is God one, but the faith is one, 
and the Church is one, wherein stands the one 
baptism, and holiness, and the rest. F"or what- 
ever is done without, has no effect of salvation. 

Polycarp from Adrumetum ^ said : They who 
approve the baptism of heretics make void our i 
baptism. j 

Novatus of Thamugada-* said: Although we 
know that all the Scriptures give witness concern- 1 
ing the saving baptism, still we ought to declare \ 
our faith, that heretics and schismatics who come ■ 
to the Church, and appear to have been falsely 
baptized, ought to be baptized in the everlasting 
fountain ; and therefore, according to the tes- 
timony of the Scriptures, and according to the 
decree of our colleagues, men of most holy 
memory, that all schismatics and heretics who 
are converted to the Church must be baptized ; 
and moreover, that those who appeared to have 
been ordained must be received among lay 
people. 

Nemesianus of Thubunre s said : That the bap- 
tism which heretics and schismatics bestow is not 
the true one, is everywhere declared in the Holy 
Scriptures, since their very leading men are false 
Christs and false prophets, as the Lord says by 
Solomon : " He who trusteth in that which is 
false, he feedeth the winds ; and the very same, 
moreover, followeth the flight of birds. For 
he forsaketh the ways of his own vineyard, he 
has wandered from the paths of his own little 
field. But he walketh through pathless places, 

' By the despotism of Stephen. 

* A city of Zeugitan.i. Augustine calls this bishop Felix, and 
speaks of him as they?rj/ of that name who spoke. — Feli. 

3 This is the Polycarp referred to in Ep- xliv. p. 322, siifirn. Adru- 
metum was a colony on the coast, about eighty-five miles from Car- 
thage. 

■* In Numidia. 

' In Mauritania Csesariensis. 

and dry, and a land destined for thirst ; moreover, 
he gathereth together fruitless things in his. 
hands." ^ And again : " Abstain from strange 
water, and from the fountain of another do not 
drink, that you may live a long time ; also that 
the years of life may be added to thee." ^ And 
in the Gospel our Lord Jesus Christ spoke with 
His divine voice, saying, " Except a man be 
born again of water and the Spirit, he cannot 
enter the kingdom of God." ^ This is the Spirit 
which from the beginning was borne over the 
waters ; for neither can the Spirit operate with- 
out the water, nor the water without the Spirit. 
Certain people therefore interpret for themselves 
ill, when they say that by imposition of the hand 
they receive the Holy Ghost, and are thus re- 
ceived, when it is manifest that they ought to be 
born again in the Catholic Church by both sac- 
raments. Then indeed they will be able to be 
sons of God, as says the apostle : " Taking care 
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of 
peace. There is one body, and one Spirit, as ye 
have been called in one hope of your calling ; 
one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God." 9 
All these things speaks the Catholic Church. '° 
And again, in the (jospel the Lord says : " That 
which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which 
is born of the Spirit is spirit ; because God is a 
Spirit, and he is born of God."" Therefore, 
whatsoever things all heretics and schismatics do 
are carnal, as the apostle says : " For the works 
of the flesh are manifest, which are, fornications, 
uncleannesses, incest, idolatries, witchcrafts, ha- 
treds, contentions, jealousy, anger, divisions, here- 
sies, and the like to these ; concerning which I 
have told you before, as I also foretell you now, 
that whoever do such things shall not inherit the 
kingdom of God." '^ And thus the apostle con- 
demns, with all the wicked, those also who cause 
division, that is, schismatics and heretics. Unless 
therefore they receive saving baptism in the 
Catholic Church, which is one, they cannot be 
saved, but will be condemned with the carnal in 
the judgment of the Lord Christ. 

Januarius of Lambesis '^ said : According to the 
authority '^ of the Holy Scriptures, I decree that 
all heretics must be baptized, and so admitted 
into the holy Church. 

Lucius of Castra Galbae's said : Since the Lord 
in His (iospel said, "Ye are the salt of the earth : 
but if the salt should have lost its savour, where- 
with shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good 

* Prov. ix. 12, LXX. 

7 Prov. ix. 19. 

^ John iii. 5. 

9 Eph. iv. 3-6. 

'° [He has no idea that this voice proceeds from any one bishop.] 
■■ John iii. 6. 
'- Gal. V. 19-21. 
■3 In Numidia. 

■< [This appeal to Scripture against Stephen must be noted, what 
ever we mav think of his conclusions.] 
»5 Or Gilba. 

THE SEVENTH COUNCH. OF CARTHAGE. 

i67 

for nothing, but to be cast out of doors, and to 
l)e trodden under foot of men." ' And again, 
after His resurrection, sending His apostles. He 
gave them charge, saying, " All power is given 
unto me, in heaven and in earth. Go and teach 
all nations, baptizing them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." ^ 
Since, therefore, it is manifest that heretics — 
that is, the enemies of Christ — have not the 
sound confession of the sacrament ; moreover, 
that schismatics cannot season others with spirit- 
ual wisdom, since they themselves, by departing 
from the Church, which is one, having lost the 
savour, have become contrary to it, — let it be 
done as it is written, " The house of those that 
are contrary to the law owes a cleansing." 3 And 
it is a consequence that those who, having been 
baptized by people who are contrary to the 
Church, are polluted, must first be cleansed, and 
then at length be baptized. 

Crescens of Cirta ■* said : In such an assembly 
of most holy fellow-priests, as the letters of our 
most beloved Cyprian to Jubaianus and also to 
Stephen have been read, containing in them so 
much of the holy testimonies which descend 
from the divinely made Scriptures, that with 
reason we ought, all being made one by the 
grace of God, to consent to them ; I judge that 
all heretics and schismatics who wish to come 
to the Catholic Church, shall not be allowed to 
enter without they have first been exorcised and 
baptized ; with the exception of those indeed 
who may previously have been baptized in the 
Catholic Church, and these in such a way that 
they may be reconciled to the penitence of the 
Church by the imposition of hands. 

Nicomedes of Segermae 5 said : My opinion is 
this, that heretics coming to the Church should 
be baptized, for the reason that among sinners 
without they can obtain no remission of sins. 

Munnulus ^ of Girba ^ said : The truth of our 
Mother* the Catholic Church, brethren, hath 
always remained and still remains with us, and 
even especially in the Trinity of baptism, as our 
Lord says, " Go ye and baptize the nations, in 
the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the 
Holy Spirit." ^ Since, then, we manifesdy know 
that heretics have not either Father, or Son, or 
Holy Spirit, they ought, when they come to the 
Church our Mother, truly to be born again and 
to be baptized ; that the cancer which they had, 

' Matt. V. 13. 
- Matt, xxviii. i8, 19. 
3 Prov. xiv. g, LXX. 
■< Cirta Julia in Numidia. 
5 In Numidia. 

* Ep. liii. p. 336, supra. Munnulus is mentioned as one of the 
bishops who write with Cyprian to Cornelius. He is there called 
'■ Monulus." 

^ Gerra. 

* [Testimony to the meaning of the Holy Catholic Church in the 
Nicene Creed.] 

9 Matt, xxviii. 19. 

and the anger of damnation, and the witchery 
of error, may be sanctified by the holy and 
heavenly laver. 

Secundinus of Cedias '° said : Since our Lord 
Christ says, " He who is not with me is against 
me;"" anti John the aposde calls those who 
depart from the Church Antichrists — undoubt- 
edly enemies of Christ — any such as are called 
Antichrists cannot minister the grace of saving 
baptism. And therefore I think that those who 
flee from the snares of the heretics to the Church 
must be baptized by us, who are called friends 
of God, of His condescension. 

Felix of Bagai '- said : As, when the blind 
leads the blind, they fall together into the ditch ; 
so, when the heretic baptizes a heretic, they fall 
together into death. And therefore a heretic 
must be baptized and made alive, lest we who 
are alive should hold communion with the dead. 

Polianus of Mileum '^ said : It is right that a 
heretic be baptized in the holy Church. 

Theogenes of Hippo Regius "•* said : Accord- 
ing to the sacrament of God's heavenly grace 
which we have received, we believe one baptism 
which is in the holy Church. 

Dativus of Badis '5 said : We, as far as in us 
lies, do not hold communion with heretics, unless 
they have been baptized in the Church, and have 
received remission of their sins. 

Successus of Abbir Germaniciana "" said : Her- 
etics can either do nothing, or they can do all. 
If they can baptize, they can also bestow the 
Holy Spirit. But if they cannot give the Holy 
Spirit, because they have not the Holy Spirit, 
neither can they spiritually baptize. Therefore 
we judge that heretics must be baptized. 

Fortunatus of Tuccaboris '^ said : Jesus Christ 
our Lord and God, Son of God the Father and 
Creator, built His Church upon a rock,'* not upon 
heresy ; and gave the power of baptizing to 
bishops, not to heretics. Wherefore they who 
are without the Church, and, standing in oppo- 
sition to Christ, disperse His sheep and flock, 
cannot baptize, being without. 

Sedatus of Tuburbo '^ said : In the degree in 
which water sanctified in the Church by the 
prayer of the priest, washes away sins ; in that 
degree, if infected with heretical discourse as 
with a cancer, it heaps up sins. Wherefore we 
must endeavour with all peaceful powers, that 
no one infected and stained with heretical error 

'° Perhaps Quidias in Mauritania Caesariensis. 

'I Matt. xii. 30. 

12 In Numidia. Here was held the Donatist " Concilium Bagai- 
ense" of 310 bishops (Oxford ed.). 

'3 In Numidia. 

i< The See of St. Augustine in Numidia, 218 miles from Carthage, 
and 160 miles from Hippo Diarrhytus. See p. 571, infra. 

'5 Badea, or Badel, in Numidia. 

"> In Zeugitana. 

■'■ Tucca-terebinthina in Zeugitana. 

'8 [Evidently he never suspects that Stephen is the rock.] 

'9 Thuburbo, or Thuburbis, in Zeugitana. 

568 

THE SEVENTH COUNCIL OF CARTHAGE. 

refuse to receive the single and true baptism of 
the Church, by which whosoever is not baptized, 
■shall become an alien from the kingdom of 
heaven. 

Privatianus of Sufetula ' said : Let him who 
says that heretics have the power of baptizing, 
5ay first who founded heresy. For if heresy is 
of God, it also may have the divine indulgence. 
But if it is not from God, how can it either have 
the grace of God, or confer it upon any one ? 

Privatus of Sufes- said : He who approves the 
baptism of heretics, what else does he do than 
■communicate with heretics? 

Hortensianus of Lares ^ said : Let either these 
presumptuous ones,** or those who favour here- 
tics, consider how many baptisms there are. 
We claim for the Church one baptism, which we 
know not except in the Church. Or how can 
they baptize any one in the name of Christ, 
whom Christ Himself declares to be His adver- 
■saries? 

Cassius of Macomadse ' said : Since there 
cannot be two baptisms, he who yields baptism 
to the heretics takes it away from himself. I 
judge therefore that heretics, lamentable and 
corrupt, must be baptized when they begin to 
come to the Church ; and that when washed by 
the sacred and divine washing, and illuminated 
by the light of life, they may be received into 
the Church, not as enemies, but as made peace- 
ful ; not as foreigners, but as of the household 
of the faith of the Lord ; not as children of 
adultery, but as sons of God ; not of error, but 
of salvation ; except those who once faithful 
have been supplanted, and have passed over 
from the Church to the darkness of heresy, but 
that these must be restored by the imposition 
•of hands. 

Another Januarius of Vicus C^saris ^ said : If 
error does not obey truth, much more truth does 
not consent to error ; and therefore we stand by 
the Church in which we preside, that, claiming 
her baptism for herself alone, we should baptize 
those whom the Church has not baptized. 

Another Secundinus of Carpi ^ said : Are here- 
tics Christians or not? If they are Christians, 
•why are they not in the Church of God? If 
they are not Christians, how come they to make 
Christians? Or whither will tend the Lord's 
discourse, when He says, " He that is not with 
me is against me, and he who gathereth not 
with me scattereth ? " '^ Whence it appears plain 
that upon strange children, and on the offspring 
of Antichrist, the Holy Ghost cannot descend 

' A city of Numidia Byzacenae. 

2 In Byzacena. 

3 A city of Numidia Ptolemais. 

< [Stephen and those who accept his ideas.] 

5 Or Macodama in Numidia. 

*> Perhaps Nova C.xsaris in Numidia. 

7 In Zeueitana, on the borders of Tunis. 

' Matt. xii. 30. 

only by imposition of hands, since it is manifest 
that heretics have not baptism. 

Victoricus of Thabraca'' said : If heretics are 
allowed to baptize and to give remission of sins, 
wherefore do we brand them with infamy and 
call them heretics? 

Another Felix of Uthina '" said : Nobody 
doubts, most holy fellow-priests, that human 
presumption is not able to do so much as the 
adorable and venerable majesty of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. Therefore, remembering the dan- 
ger, we ought not only to obser\e this also, but 
moreover to confirm it by the voice of all of us, 
that all heretics who come to the bosom of 
Mother Church should be baptized, that thus 
the heretical mind that has been polluted by a 
long decay, purged by the sanctification of the 
laver, may be reformed for the better. 
X. Quietus of Baruch ' ' said : We who live by 
faith ought to obey with careful observance those 
things which before have been foretold for our 
instruction. For it is written in Solomon : " He 
that is baptized from the dead, (and again touch- 
eth the dead, '^) what availeth his washing?" '' 
which certainly speaks of those who are washed 
by heretics, and of those that wash them. For 
if those who are baptized among them obtain 
by remission of their sins life eternal, why do 
they come to the Church ? But if from a dead 
person no salvation is received, and therefore, 
acknowledging their previous error, they return 
to the truth with penitence, they ought to be 
sanctified with the one vital baptism which is in 
the Catholic Church. 

Castus of Sicca '^ said : He who with con- 
tempt of the truth presumes to follow custom, 
is either envious and malignant in respect of his 
brethren to whom the truth is revealed, or is un- 
grateful in respect of God, by whose inspiration 
His Church is instructed. 

I Euchratius of Thense 's said : God and our 
Lord Jesus Christ, teaching the apostles with 
His own mouth, has entirely completed our 
faith, and the grace of baptism, and the rule of 
the ecclesiastical law, saying : " Go ye and 
teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of 
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost." ■'' Thus the false and wicked baptism 
of heretics must be rejected by us, and refuted 
with all detestation, from whose mouth is ex- 
pressed poison, not life, not celestial grace, but 
blasphemy of the Trinity. '? And therefore it is 

9 A colony variously called Tabraca or Tabathra. 

10 OOStra in Zeugitana. 

" Or Buruch, probably Bourka in Numidia. 

'- This clause is omitted in the larger number of editions. 

'3 Ecclus. xxxiv. 25. 

'* Sicca V'eneria, a city of Zeugitana. 

'5 A city of Byzacena. 

'* Matt, xxviii. 18. 

'" " Let the reader observe here, as elsewhere, that the word 
' Trinity ' is simply used for the persons of the Godhead " (Oxford 
edit.). 

THE SEVENTH COUNCIL OF CARTHAGE. 

569 

manifest that heretics who come to the Church 
ought to be baptized with the sound and Catho- 
lic baptism, in order that, being purified from 
the blasphemy of their presumption, they may 
be reformed by the grace of the Holy Spirit. 

Libosus of Vaga ' said : In the Gospel the' 
Lord says, " I am the truth." - He said not, " 1 
am the custom." Therefore the truth being 
manifest, let custom yield to truth ; so that, 
although for the past any one was not in the 
habit of baptizing heretics in the Church, let 
him now begin to baptize them.^ 

Lucius of Thebeste • said : I determine that 
blasphemous and unrighteous heretics, who with 
various words tear asunder the holy and adora- 
ble words of the Scriptures, are to be accursed, 
and therefore that they must be exorcised and 
baptized. 

Eugenius of Ammedera ' said : And I deter- 
mine the same — that heretics must be baptized. 

Also another Felix of Amaccora •♦ said : And 
I myself, following the authority of the divine 
Scriptures,^ judge that heretics must be bap- 
tized ; and, moreover, those also who contend 
that they have been baptized among the schis- 
matics. For if, according to Christ's warning, 
our font is private to us, let all the adversaries 
of our Church understand that it cannot be for 
another. Nor can He who is the Shepherd of 
the one flock give the saving water to two peoples. 
And therefore it is plain that neither heretics 
nor schismatics can receive anything heavenly, 
seeing that they dare to receive from men who 
are sinners, and from those who are external to 
the Church. When there is no place for the 
giver, assuredly there is no profit for the re- 
ceiver. 

Also another Januarius of Muzzuli ^ said : I 
am surprised, since all confess that there is one 
baptism, that all do not perceive the unity of 
the same baptism. For the Church and heresy 
are two things, and different things. If heretics 
have baptism, we have it not ; but if we have it, 
heretics cannot have it. But there is no doubt 
that the Church alone possesses the baptism of 
Christ, since she alone possesses both the grace 
and the truth of Christ. 

Adelphius of Thasvalte ^ said : Certain persons 
■without reason impugn the truth by false and 
envious words, in saying that we rebaptize, when 
the Church does not rebaptize heretics, but bap- 
tizes them. 

' A city of Numidia. 
- John xiv. 6. 

■5 [Here is a concession that at least the !oca/ custom could be 
p\eaded by Stephen.] 

■* " Damatcore," or " Vamaccore," in Numidia. 

5 [Here we may think as we choose as to this conclusion, but 
the appeal to Holy Scripture proves that this is the only infallible 
authority.] 

6 Mazula in Numidia. 
^ A city of Byzacena. 

Demetrius of Leptiminus ^ said : We maintain 
one baptism, because we demand for the Church 
Catholic alone her own property. But they 
who say that heretics truly and legitimately bap- 
tize, are themselves the people who make not 
one, but many baptisms. For since heresies 
are many, according to their number will be 
reckoned baptisms. 

Vincentius of Thibaris '^ said : We know that 
heretics are worse than Gentiles. If, therefore, 
being converted, they should wish to come to 
the Lord, we have assuredly the rule of truth 
which the Lord by His divine precept com- 
manded to His apostles, saying, "Go ye, lay on 
hands in my name, expel demons." '° And in 
another place : " Go ye and teach the nations, 
baptizing them in the name of the Father, of 
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." " Therefore 
first of all by imposition of hands in exorcism, 
secondly by the regeneration of . baptism, they 
may then come to the promise of Christ. Other- 
wise I think it ought not to be done. 

Marcus of Mactaris '- said : It is not to be 
wondered at if heretics, enemies, and impugners 
of the truth claim to themselves a matter in the 
power and condescension of others. But it is 
to be wondered at, that some of us, prevaricators 
of the truth, support heretics and oppose them- 
selves to Christians. Therefore we decree that 
heretics must be baptized. 

Sattius of Sicilibba '^ said : If to heretics in 
baptism their sins are remitted, they come to 
the Church without reason. For since, in the 
day of judgment, they are sins which are pun- 
ished, there is nothing which the heretics can 
fear from Christ's judgment, if they have already 
obtained remission of their sins. 

Victor of Gor '+ said : Since sins are not re- 
mitted '5 save in the baptism of the Church, he 
who admits a heretic to communion without bap- 
tism does two things against reason : he does not 
cleanse the heretics, and he befouls the Christians. 

Aurelius of Utica "^ said : Since the apostle 
says that we are not to communicate with other 
people's sins, what else does he do but com- 
municate with other people's sins, who holds 
communion with heretics without the Church's 
baptism? And therefore I judge that heretics 
must be baptized, that they may receive forgive- 
ness of their sins ; and thus communion may be 
had with them. 

^ .VeTTTty fxiKpa — a city of Byzacena. 

9 Tabora, a city of Mauritania Caesariensis. 

^° Apparently in reference to Mark xvi. 17,18. , 

" Matt, x.wiii. 19. 

^- A city of Byzacena. 

'3 A city of Zeugitana — " Sicilibra," thirty-four miles from Car- 
thage. 

'•» Probably " Garra," a city of Mauritania Caesariensis, or " Gar- 
riana," a city of Byzacena. 

'5 [Referring to Acts xxii. 16 and John xx. 23.] 

'* A city of Zeugitana, famous as being the place of Cato's death, 
now called Byzerta. 

570 

THE SEVENTH COUNCIL OF CARTHAGE. 

Iambus of Germaniciana ' said : They who ap- 
prove of the baptism of heretics, disapprove of 
ours, in denying that they who are, I will not say 
washed, but befouled, outside the Church, ought 
to be baptized in the Church. 

Lucianus of Rucuma^ said : It is written, "And 
God saw the light, that it was good, and divided 
between the light and the darkness." •' If there 
can be agreement between light and darkness, 
there may be something in common between us 
and heretics. Therefore I determine that here- 
tics must be baptized. 

Pelagianus of Luperciana ■* said : It is written, 
" Either the Lord is God, or Baal is God." 5 
Therefore in the present case also, either the 
Church is the Church, or heresy is the Church. 
On the other hand, if heresy is not the Church, 
how can the Church's baptism be among here- 
tics? 

Jader of Midila ■' said : We know that there is 
but one baptism in the Catholic Church, and 
therefore we ought not to receive a heretic unless 
he has been baptized among us ; lest he should 
think that he has been baptized out of the Catho- 
lic Church. 

Also another Felix of Marazana ^ said : There 
is one faith, one baptism, but of the Catholic 
Church, which alone has the right to baptize. 

Paulus of Obba ^ said : It does not disturb me 
if any man does not assert the faith and truth of 
the Church, since the apostle says, "For what if 
some of them have fallen away from the faith ? 
Has their unbelief made the faith of God of no 
effect? By no means. For God is true, but 
every man a liar." ^ But if God is true, how can 
the truth of baptism be among the heretics, 
among whom God is not ? 

Pomponius of Dionysiana^ said : It is evident 
that heretics cannot baptize and give remission 
of sins, seeing that they have not power to be 
able to loose or to bind anything on earth. 

Venantius of Timisa^ said : If a husband, going 
into foreign parts, had commended his wife to 
the guardianship of his friend, that friend would 
take care of her who was commended to him 
with all possible diligence, that her chastity and 
holiness should not be corrupted by any one. 
Christ the Lord and our God, going to His 
Father, has commended to us His i)ride. Shall 
we guard her incorrupt and inviolate, or shall we 
betray her integrity and chastity to adulterers and 
corrupters? For he who makes the Church's 

' .Vr//. " urbs," a city of Byzacena. The epithet refers to its being 
a place frequented by the veterans of German cohorts, and distin- 
guishes it irom " Abbiritana." 

- A city of Zeiigitana. 

3 Gen. i. 4. 

< Possibly " I.ubertina." 

5 I Kings xviii. 21. 

<> A city of Numidia. 

' A city of Byzacena. 

* (Hherwise " Bobba," a city of Mauritania. 

9 Rom. iii. 3, ^. 

baptism common to heretics, betrays the spouse 
of Christ to adulterers. 

Ahymnus of .A.usvaga '° said : We have received 
one baptism, and that same we maintain and 
practise. But he who says that; heretics also may 
lawfully baptize, makes two baptisms. 

Saturninus of Victoriana ^ said : If heretics 
may baptize, they wh6 do unlawful things are 
excused and defended ; nor do I see why either 
Christ should have called them adversaries, 
or the apostle should have called them Anti- 
christs. 

Saturninus" of Thucca^ said: The Gentiles, 
although they worship idols, do yet know and 
confess a suj^reme God '^ as Father and Creator. 
Against Him Marcion blasphemes, and some 
persons do not blush to approve the baptism of 
Marcion. How do such priests either observe 
or vindicate God's priesthood, who do not bap- 
tize God's enemies, and hold communion with 
them as they are ! 

Marcellus of Zama '^ said : Since sins are not 
remitted '•♦ save in the baptism of the Church, he 
who does not baptize a heretic holds communion 
with a sinner. ^ 

Irengeus of Ululi '5 said : If the Church does 
not baptize a heretic, for the reason that he is 
said to be already baptized, it is the greater 
heresy. 

Donatus of Cibaliana '^ said : I know one 
Church and her one baptism. If there is any 
who says that the grace of baptism is with here- 
tics, he must first show and prove that the 
Church is among them. 

Zosimus of Tharassa ^ said : When a revela- 
tion of the truth is made, let error give place to 
truth ; because Peter also, who previously cir- 
cumcised, yielded to Paul when he preached 
the truth.' 7 

Julianus of Telepte '^ said : It is written, " No 
man can receive anything unless it have been 
given him from heaven." "^ If heresy is from 
heaven, it can also give baptism. 

Faustus of Timida Regia ^° said : Let not them 
who are in favour of heretics flatter themselves. 
He who interferes with the baptism of the Church 
on behalf of heretics, makes them Christians,, 
and us heretics. 

■° This seems to be " Ausana" or " Ausagga." 

" The Oxford reads " Another Saturninus." 

'- Manifestly, says the Oxford editor, this expression refers ta 
"Jupiter the father of gods and men." 

'3 A city of Numidia ; the scene of Hannibal's overthrow by Scipio. 

^* [The Nicene Creed is emphatic in the article based on this 
idea; and it proves that the primitive discipline of penitence was not 
in those days a " Sacrament of absolution," to which all were 
compelled to submit. Private confessions seem to have been un- 
known.] 

'5 " Usilla," a city of Byzacena. 

"> Possibly " Cerbaliana " in Byzacena. 

'^ [']"he bearings of this simple statement upon the later claims of 
Stephen's See must not be overlooked.] 

"* A city of Numidia Byzacena;, 

'9 John iii 27. 

-° A city of Zeugitana; some read " Tumida." 

THE SEVENTH COUNCIL OF CARTHAGE. 

571 

Geminius of Furni ' said : Some of our col- 
leagues may prefer heretics to themselves, they 
cannot to us : and therefore what we have once 
determined we maintain — that we baptize those 
who come to us from the heretics. 

Rogatianus of Nova- said: Christ instituted 
the Church ; the devil, heresy. How can the 
synagogue of Satan have the baptism of Christ ? 

Therapius of Bulla ^ said : He who concedes 
and betrays the Church's baptism to heretics, 
what else has he been to the spouse of Christ 
than a Judas ? 

Also another Lucius of Membresa ■» said : It 
is written, " God heareth not a sinner." s How 
can a heretic who is a sinner be heard in bap- 
tism ? 

Also another Felix of Bussacene ^ said : Li 
the matter of receiving heretics without the bap- 
tism of the Church, let no one prefer custom to 
reason and truth, because reason and truth 
always exclude custom. ^ 

Another Saturninus of Avitini ^ said : If Anti- 
christ can give to any one the grace of Christ, 
heretics also are able to baptize, for they are 
called antichrists. 

Quintus of Aggya : 9 He can give something 
who has something. But what can heretics give, 
who, it is plain, have nothing? 

Another Julianus of Marcelliana '° said : If a 
man can serve two masters-, God and mammon, 
baptism also can serve two masters, the Chris- 
tian and the heretic. 

Tenax of Horrea Cselise " said: Baptism is 
one, but it is the Church's. Where the Church 
is not there, there can be no baptism. 

Another Victor of Assuri ' said : It is written, 
that " God is one, and Christ is one, and the 
Church is one, and baptism is one." '^ How, 
therefore, can any one be baptized there, where 
God, and Christ, and the one Church is not? 

Donatulus of Capse '^ said : And I also have 
always thought this, that heretics, who can ob- 
tain nothing without the Church, when they are 
converted to the Church, must be baptized. 

Verulus '■♦ of Rusiccada '5 said : A man who is 

' A city of Zeugitana. 

2 A city of Mauritania Csesariensis. Fell observes that in Nu- 
niidia are many cities of the name of " Nova " or " Noba." 

3 A city of Zeugitana. There were two cities of the name — 
BovWapia, or Bulla Regia, and BouAAofiiVcra, or Bulla Minor. The 
latter is probably referred to. 

* Otherwise " Memosita," a city of Zeugitana. It is also written 
" Membrosa." 
5 John ix. 31. 
*> Probably " Byzacene." 

7 [Custom, then, was elsewhere established: and it ultimately 
prevailed; whether against truth or not, need not here be discussed.] 

8 This is supposed to be " Autenti," a city of Byzacene. 

9 Supposed to be Aggiva. 

'° Mention of the Bishop of Marcelliana is found m Notiiia E/>is- 
copatus A/ricue. 

" A village belonging to Byzacene, seventy-five miles from Car- 
thage. 

'- Eph. iv. 5. 

'3 A city of Byzacene. 

'* Called in some editions " a martyr from the schismatics." 

15 A city of Nuinidia. 

a heretic cannot give what he has not ; much 
more a schismatic, who has lost what he once 
had. 

Pudentianus of Cuiculis '5 said : The novelty 
of my episcopal office, "" beloved brethren, has 
caused me to await what my elders should judge. 
For it is manifest that heresies have nothing, nor 
can have any thing. And thus, if any one comes 
from them, it is most justly decreed that they 
must be baptized. 

Peter of Hippo Diarrhytus'7 said : Since there 
is one baptism in the Catholic Church, it is 
manifest that one cannot be baptized outside 
the Church. And therefore I judge that those 
who have been dipped in heresy or in schism, 
when they come to the Church, should be bap- 
tized. 

Also another Lucius of Ausafa '^ said : Ac- 
cording to the direction of my mind, and of the 
Holy Spirit, as there is one God and Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, and one Christ, and one 
hope, and one Spirit, and one Church, there ought 
also to be one baptism. And therefore I say, 
that if any thing had been set on foot or accom- 
plished by heretics, it ought to be rescinded, and 
that those who come thence must be baptized 
in the Church. 

Also another Felix of Gurgites '^ said : I judge 
that, according to the precepts of the holy 
Scriptures, he who is unlawfully baptized by 
heretics outside the Church, when he wishes to 
take refuge in the Church, should obtam the 
grace of baptism where it is lawfully given. 

Pusillus of Lamasba '^ said : I believe that 
there is no saving baptism except in the Catholic 
Church. Whatsoever is apart from the Catholic 
Church is a pretence. 

Salvianus of Gazaufala ^° said : It is certain 
that heretics have nothing, and therefore they 
come to us that they may receive what they 
have not. 

Honoratus of Thucca ^' said : Since Christ is 
the Truth, we ought rather to follow truth than 
custom ; so that we should sanctify heretics with 
the Church's baptism, seeing that they come to 
us for the reason that they could receive nothing 
without. 

Victor of Octavum ^^ said : As yourselves 
also know, I have not long been appointed a 
bishop, and I therefore waited for the decision '^ 

'6 [Noteworthy examples of episcopal modesty. In the colleges of 
bishops, however, it is now usual to call upon juniors first, that, if 
they should think differently from older brethren, their free opinion 
need not be restrained by deference] 

"' A city of Zeugitana, called Diarrhytus because of the number 
of the streams that water it. The name is otherwise read " Hippo 
Diarrhytorum." 

'8 A city of Zeugitana, sometimes written " Assapha." 

'9 " Lambesa," a city of Numidia. 

-° A city of Numidia, otherwise Vavao.<i)ya (Ptol.) and Ta^d^uAa 
(Procop ) 

-■ There are four cities in .\frica of this name. 

22 A city of Numidia, otherwi.se called " Octabum." 

3/ 

ELUCIDATION. 

of my predecessors. I therefore think this, that 
as many as come from heres)- should undoubt- 
edly be baptized. 

Ciarus of Mascula ' said : The sentence of our 
Ix)rd Jesus Christ is plain, when He sent His 
apostles, and accorded to them alone the power 
given to Him by His Father ; and to them we 
have succeeded, governing the Lord's Church 
with the same puwer,^ and baptizing the faith of 
believers. And therefore heretics, who neither 
have i)ower without, nor have the Church of 
Christ, are able to baptize no one with His 
baptism. 

Secundianus of Thamliei •'' said : We ought 
not to deceive heretics l)y our i)resumption ; so 
that they who have not been baptized in the 
Church of our Lord Jesus Christ, and have not 
obtained by this means remissions of their sins, 
when the day of judgment shall come, should 
imi)ute to us that through us they were not bap- 
tized, and did not obtain the indulgence of 
divine grace. On which account, since there is 
one Church and one baptism, wlien they are con- 
verted to us they should obtain, together with 
the Church, the Church's baptism also. 

Also another .Aurelius of ChuUabi -* said : John 
the apostle laid it down in his epistle, saying : 
*' If any one come unto you, and have not the 
doctrine of Christ, receive him not into your 
house, and say not to him. Hail. P'or he that 
saith to him, Hail, partakes with his evil deeds. "s 
How can such be rashly admitted into God's 

• A city of Niiniidia. 

^ (This, is Cyprian's theory of the origin of llie episcopate. 
Elucidation ii//'m/] 

•5 A city of Byzacena. 

* 'I'his is otherwise called " Cliluli," a city of Byzacena. 
S 2 John ID, 1 1. 

house, who are prohibited from being admitted 
into our private dwelling? Or how can we hold 
communion with them without the Church's bap- 
tism, to whom, if we should only say Hail, we 
are partakers of their evil deeds? 

Litteus^of Ciemelli 7 said: If the blind lead 
the blind, both fall into the ditch. Since, then, 
it is manifest that heretics cannot give light to 
any, as being themselves blind, their baptism 
does not avail. 

Xatalis of Oea ^ said : As well I who am pres- 
ent, as Pompey9 of Sabrata,^ as also Dioga of 
Leptis Magna '° — who, absent indeed in body, 
l)ut present in spirit, have given me charge — 
judge the same as our colleagues, that heretics 
cannot hold communion with us, unless they 
(Shall be baptized with ecclesiastical baptism. 

Junius of Neapolis'^ said : From the judgment 
which we once determined on I do not recede, 
that we should baptize heretics who come to 
the Church. 

Cyprian of Carthage said : The letter which 
was written to our colleague Jubaianus very fully 
expresses my opinion, that, according to evan- 
gelical and apostolic testimony, heretics, who are 
called adversaries of Christ and .Antichrists, when 
they come to the Church, must be baptized with 
the one bai)tism of the Church, that they may be 
made of adversaries, friends, and of Antichrists, 
Christians." 

'^ This Litteus is mentioned in Ep. Ixxvi. p. 402, suf>ra. 

' A city of N'limidia. A Roman colony was planted there imder 
the Emperor Hadrian. 

^ A city of Tripolis. 

9 Probably the same to whom Ep. Ixxiii. (p. 386, supra) was 
written. 

■° A- city of 'I'ripolis, thus distinguished from Leptis parva. 

" [Here Cyprian sums up, and gives the sentence of the council, 
after the example of St. James, who presided in the Council of Jeru- 
salem, XcXi XV. 13, 19.] 

ELUCIDATION. 

(To them we have succeeded, p 572.) 

The theory of Cyprian is thus recognised in full council, by his colleagues, with respect to the 
unity of the Church Catholic. They have never heard of any counter theory, and they state it 
as a matter of course. Fortunatus of " Tuccaboris " had shortly before referred to the Church as 
" built upon a rock" with evident reference to the faitli, for he adds, " not upon heresy." Of a 
perpetuated constrtictwn, of which any one bishop was the \)'e.x\>t\.wxX.*tiS. foundatio7i, nobody as yet 
seems to have dreamed. " Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid," says St. Paul ; 
viz., "Christ." On Him, "the Stone, Elect, precious," St. Peter and all the apostles (the 
prophets as well) are built as foundation-stones; and we also, as "lively stones," are built upon 
that foundation,' into a holy temple. 

This Council of Carthage sustains Cyprian also in his judgment concerning the question of 
baptism, and it is a mistake to say that it was ever overruled. Compare St. Basil, Ad Amphilochium 
{Epist. Canonica prima, p. 19, vol. iii., ed. Paris, 1638), where he refers to Cyprian and Firmilian 
(" our Firmilian ") as " ancient men," and treats the question as still an open one. 

' See p. 52a, sec. 16, supra. All this interprets the Petra, not " Petrus." 

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN ON QUESTIONABLE AUTHORITY. 

The treatises which follow are usually classed under the doubtful works of Cyprian. Baluzius, 
however, gives the two first, On the Public SIiows, and On the Glory of Martyrdom, among the 
genuine Opi/scula, and says : " I have not thought it fit to prejudice any one amid the diversity 
of opinions on the subject, but have refrained from separating the following from the genuine 
works of the blessed martyr, especially since many have observed that there is no such difference 
of style in these writings as to justify the denial of their authorship to Cyprian." 

Of course the question is one almost entirely of criticism, and the translator leaves the dis- 
cussion of it to abler hands. He ventures, however, to record his impression, that the style of 
the following writings throughout is more pretentious and laboured, and far more wordy and 
mvolved, than that of Cyprian's undoubted works. With a more copious vocabulary, there is 
manifested less skill in the use of words , and if the text be not in some places most elaborately 
and unintelligibly corrupt, the accumulation of epithets, as well as their collocation, seems the 
very wantonness of rhetoric. The text, however, is undoubtedly far less to be depended upon 
than in the case of the genuine works. 

The treatises On the Discipline and Benefit of Chastity and the Exhortation to Repentanci; 
are generally placed under the Opuscula dubia. The former was first edited by Baluzius, with 
the title " Epistle of an Unknown Author." Its Cyprianic authorship was maintained by Bellar- 
min, Pamelius, and others ; while Erasmus, Tillemont, and others have rejected it as spurious. 
The second treatise was first published by Joannes Chrysostomus Trombellius (in 1 751), who 
regarded it as a genuine work of Cyprian's. And indeed, as far as internal evidence goes, 
the treatise, consisting merely of a collection of quotations from Scripture, in the manner of 
the Testimonies against the Jews, may probably be attributed to him with as much reason as the 
Testimonies. 

It is, however, right to add, that Professor Blunt quotes from the Treatise on the Glory of 
Martyrdom as being Cyprian's, without referring to any doubts on the subject.' 

' [A strong testimony in its favour. It is quite possible that the less worthy portions are corrupt interpolations.] 

573 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN ON 
QUESTIONABLE AUTHORITY. 

ON THE PUBLIC SHOWS.- 

iRGUMEXT.- — THE WRITER FIRST OF ALL TREATS 
AGAINST THOSE WHO ENDEAVOURED TO DEFEND 
THE PUBLIC EXHIBITIONS OF THE HEATHENS BY 
SCRIPTURAL AUTHORITY ; AND HE PROVES THAT, 
ALTHOUGH THEY ARE NEVER PROHIBITED BY THE 
EXPRESS WORDS OF SCRIPTURE, YET THAT THEY 
ARE CONDEMNED IN THE SCRIPTURAL PROHIBI- 
TION OF IDOLATRY, FROM THE FACT THAT THERE 
IS NO KIND OF PUBLIC SHOW WHICH IS NOT CON- 
SECR.\TED TO IDOLS. ^ 

I. Cyprian to the congregation who stand 
fast in the Gospel, sends greeting. As it greatly 
saddens me, and deeply afflicts my soul, when 
no opportunity of writing to you is presented to 
me, for it is my loss not to hold converse with 
you ; SO nothing restores to me such joyfulness 
and hilarity, as when that opportunity is once 
more afforded me. I think that I am with you 
when I am speaking to you by letter. Although, 
therefore, I know that you are satisfied that 
what I tell you is even as I say, and that you 
have no doubt of the truth of my words, never- 
theless an actual proof will also attest the reality 
of the matter. For my affection (for you) is 
proved, when absolutely no opportunity (of 
writing) is passed over. However certain I may 
be, then, that you are no less respectable in the 
conduct of your life than faithfuf in respect of 
your sacramental vow ; ^ still, since there are not 
wanting smooth-tongued advocates of vice, and 
indulgent patrons who afford authority to vices, 
and, what is worse, convert the rebuke of the 
heavenly Scriptures into an advocacy of crimes ; 
as if the pleasure derived from the public exhi- 

' [See Ben Jonson, Volpone, Ep. Dedicatory.] 

= Obviously imitating TertuUian's treatise De SpeciacuUs. [See 
vol iii. p. 7g.] 

' He then prosecutes the subject, by going through the several 
kinds of public exhibitions, and sets forth, a little more diffusely 
than in the Epistle to Donatus, what risks are incurred by the spec- 
tators, and especially in respect of those exhibitions wherein, as he 
says, " representations of lust convey instruction in obscenity." I 
Finally, he briefly enumerates such exhibitions as are worthy of the 
interest of a Christian man, and in which he ought rigiufuUy to find 
pleasure. [For EpisCe to Donatus, .see p. 275, sHpra.\ 

* " In Sacramento." 

bitions might be sought after as being innocent, 
by way of a mental relaxation ; — for thereby the 
vigour of ecclesiastical discipline is so relaxed, 
and is so deteriorated by all the languor of vice 
that it is no longer apology, but authority, that is 
given for wickedness, — it seemed good in a 
few words not now to instruct you, but to ad- 
monish you who are instructed, lest, because the 
wounds are badly bound up, they should break 
through the cicatrix of their closed soundness. 
For no mischief is put an end to with so much 
difficulty but that its recurrence is easy, so long 
as it is both maintained by the consent, and 
caressed by the excuses s of the multitude. 

2. Believers, and men who claim for them- 
selves the authority of the Christian name, are 
not ashamed — are not, I repeat, ashamed to 
find a defence in the heavenly Scriptures for the 
vain superstitions associated with the public ex- 
hibitions of the heathens, and thus to attribute 
divine authority to idolatry. For how is it, that 
what is done by the heathens in honour of any 
idol is resorted to in a public show by faithful 
Christians, and the heathen idolatry is main- 
tained, and the true and divine religion is tram- 
pled upon in contempt of God? Shame binds 
me to relate their pretexts and defences in this 
behalf " Where," say they, " are there such 
Scriptures? where are these things prohibited? 
On the contrary, both Elias is the charioteer of 
Israel, and David himself danced before the ark. 
We read of psalteries, horns,'' trumpets, drums, 
pipes, harps, and choral dances. Moreover, the 
apostle, in his struggle, puts before us the con- 
test of the Caestus, and of our wrestle against 
the spiritual things of wickedness. Again, when 
he borrows his illustrations from the racecourse, 
he also proposes the prize of the crown. Why, 
then, may not a faithful Christian man gaze upon 
that which the divine pen might write about ? " 
At this point I might not unreasonably say that 

5 Elucidation I. 
t- "Nabla." 

575 

5/ 

76 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

it would have been far lietter for them not to 
know any writings at all, than thus to read the 
Scriptures.' For words and illustrations which 
are recorded by way of exhortation to evangel- 
ical virtue, are translated by them into pleas for 
vice ; because those things are written of, not 
that they should be gazed upon, but that a 
greater eagerness might be aroused in our minds 
in respect of things that will benefit us, seeing 
that among the heathens there is manifest so 
much eagerness in respect of things which will 
be of no advantage. 

3. These are therefore an argument to stimu- 
late virtue, not a permission or a liberty to look 
upon heathen error, that by this consideration 
the mind may be more inflamed to Gospel virtue 
for the sake of the divine rewards, since through 
the suffering of all these labours and pains it is 
granted to attain to eternal benefits. For that 
Elias is the charioteer of Israel is no defence for 
gazing upon the public games ; for he ran his 
race in no circus. And that David in the pres- 
ence of God led the dances, is no sanction for 
faithful Christians to occupy seats in the public 
theatre ; for David did not twist his limbs al)Out 
in obscene movements, to represent in his dan- 
cing the story of Grecian lust. Psalteries, horns, 
pipes, drums, harps, were used in the service of 
the Lord, and not of idols. Let it not on this 
account be objected that unlawful things may be 
gazed upon ; for by the artifice of the devil these 
are changed from things holy to things unlawful. 
Then let shame demur to these things, even if 
the Holy Scriptures cannot. For there are cer- 
tain things wherein the Scripture is more careful 
in giving instruction. Acquiescing in the claim 
of modesty, it has forbidden more where it has 
been silent. The truth, if it descended low 
enough to deal with such things, would think 
very badly of its faithful votaries. For very 
often, in matters of precept, some things are 
advantageously said nothing about ; they often 
remind when they are expressly forbidden. So 
also there is an implied silence even in the writ- 
ings of the Scripture ; and severity speaks in the 
place of precepts ; and reason teaches where 
Scripture has held its peace. Let every man 
only take counsel with himself, and let him speak 
consistently with the character of his profession,^ 
and then he will never do any of these things. ^ 
For that conscience will have more weight which 
shall be indebted to none other than itself. 

4. What has Scripture interdicted? Certainly 
it has forbidden gazing upon what it forbids to 
be done. It condemned, I say, all those kinds 
of exhibitions when it abrogated idolatry — the 

' [In Edin. trans, needlessly " the writings of the Scriptures."'\ 

^ " Cum persona professionis sua; loquatur." 

3 Baluzius reads with less probability " indecorum," " anything 
unbecoming " The reading adopted in the text is, according to Kell, 
*' indt corum." 

mother of all jjublic amusements,-' whence these 
jjrodigies of vanity and lightness came. For 
what public exhibition is without an idol? what 
amusement without a sacrifice? what contest is 
not consecrated to some dead person? And 
what does a faithful Christian do in the midst of 
such things as these? If he avoids idolatry, 
wh\' does he 5 who is now sacred take pleasure 
in things which are worthy of reproach ? Why 
does he approve of superstitions which are op- 
posed to God, and which he loves while he gazes 
upon them? Besides, let him be aware that ah 
these things are the inventions of demons, not 
of God. He is shameless who in the church 
exorcises demons while he praises their delights 
in public shows ; and although, once for all 
renouncing him, he has put away everything in 
baptism, when he goes to the devil's exhibition 
after (receiving) Christ, he renounces Christ as 
much as (he had done) the devil. Idolatry, as 
I have already said, is the mother of all the pub- 
lic amusements ; and this, in order that faithful 
Christians may come under its influence, entices 
them by the delight of the eyes and the ears. 
Romulus was the first who consecrated the 
games of the circus to Consus as the god of 
counsel, in reference to the rape of the Sabine 
women. But the rest of the scenic amusements 
were provided to distract the attention of the 
people while famine invaded the city, and were 
subsequently dedicated to Ceres and Bacchus, 
and to the rest of the idols and dead men. 
Those Grecian contests, whether in poems, or 
in instrumental music, or in words, or in per- 
sonal prowess, have as their guardians various 
demons ; and whatever else there is which either 
attracts the eyes or allures the ears of the spec- 
tators, if it be investigated in reference to its 
origin and institution, presents as its reason 
either an idol, or a demon, or a dead man. 
Thus the devil, who is their original contriver, 
because he knew that naked idolatry would by 
itself excite repugnance, associated it with pub- 
lic exhibitions, that for the sake of their attrac- 
tion it might be loved. 

5. What is the need of prosecuting the sub- 
ject further, or of describing the unnatural kinds 
of sacrifices in the public shows, among which 
sometimes even a man becomes the victim by 
the fraud of the priest, when the gore, yet hot 
from the throat, is received in the foaming cup 
while it still steams, and, as if it were thrown 
into the face of the thirsting idol, is brutally 
drunk in pledge to it ; and in the midst of the 
])leasures of the spectators the death of some is 
eagerly besought, so that by means of a bloody 
exhibition men may learn fierceness, as if a 

* / 'id. Ovid's Fasti, lib. v. 
5 The Oxford text here has the reading, 
it? why does he," etc. 

' ^\'hy does he soeak of 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

577 

man's own private frenzy were of little account to 
him unless he should learn it also in pubhc? 
For the punishment of a man, a rabid wild 
beast is nourished with delicacies, that he may 
become the more cruelly ferocious under the 
eyes of the spectators. The skilful trainer in- 
structs the brute, which perhaps might have 
been more merciful had not its more brutal 
master taught it cruelty. Then, to say nothing 
of whatever idolatry more generally recommends, 
how idle are the contests themselves ; strifes in 
colours, contentions in races, acclamations in 
mere questions of honour ; rejoicing because a 
horse has been more fleet, grieving because it 
was more sluggish, reckoning up the years of 
cattle, knowing the consuls tinder whom they 
ran, learning their age, tracing their breed, re- 
cording their very grandsires and great-grand- 
sires ! How unprofitable a matter is all this ; 
nay, how disgraceful and ignominious ! This 
very man, I say, who can compute by memory 
the whole family of his equine race, and can 
relate it with great quickness without interfering 
with the exhibition — were you to inquire of 
this man who were the parents of Christ, he 
cannot tell, or he is the more unfortunate if he 
can. But if, again, I should ask him by what 
road he has come to that exhibition, he will con- 
fess (that he has come) by the naked bodies of 
prostitutes and of profligate women, by (scenes 
of) public lust, by public disgrace, by vulgar 
lasciviousness, by the common contempt of all 
men. And, not to object to him what perchance 
he has done, still he has seen what was not fit 
to be done, and he has trained his eyes to the 
exhibition of idolatry by lust : he would have 
dared, had he been able, to take that which is 
holy into the brothel with him ; since, as he 
hastens to the spectacle when dismissed from 
the Lord's tahk, and still bearing within him, as 
often occurs, the Eucharist, that unfaithful man 
has carried about the holy body of Christ among 
the filthy bodies of harlots, and has deserved a 
deeper condemnation for the way by which he 
has gone 'hither, than for the pleasure he has 
received frjni the exhibition. 

6. But now to pass from this to the shame- 
less corruption of the stage. I am ashamed to 
tell what things are said ; I am even ashamed to 
denounce the things that are done — the tricks 
of arguments, the cheatings of adulterers, the 
immodesties of women, the scurrile jokes, the 
sordid parasites, even the toga'd fathers of fami- 
lies themselves, sometimes stupid, sometimes 
obscene, but in all cases dull, in all cases im- 
modest. And though no individual, or family, 
or profession, is spared by the discourse ' of 

' [It is painfnl to recognise, in the general licence of the press in 
our country, this very feature of a corrupt civilization, — a delight 
in scandal, and in the invasion of homes and private affairs, for the 
gratification of the popular appetite.] 

these reprobates, yet every one flocks to the 
play. The general infamy is delightful to see or 
to recognise ; it is a pleasure, nay, even to learn 
it. People flock thither to the pubhc disgrace 
of the brothel for the teaching of obscenity, 
that nothing less may be done in secret than 
what is learnt in public ; and in the midst of 
the laws themselves is taught everything that the 
laws forbid. What does a faithful Christian do 
among these things, since he may not even think 
upon wickedness ? Why does he find pleasure 
in the representations of lust, so as among them 
to lay aside his modesty and become more dar- 
ing in crimes? He is learning to do, vvhile he 
is becoming accustomed to see. Nevertheless, 
those women whom their misfortune has intro- 
duced and degraded to this slavery, conceal 
their public wantonness, and find consolation 
for their' disgrace in their concealment. Even 
they who have sold their modesty blush to ap- 
pear to have done so. But that public prodigy 
is transacted in the sight of all, and the obscenity 
of prostitutes is surpassed. A method is sought 
to commit adultery with the eyes. To this in- 
famy an infamy fully worthy of it is superadded : 
a human being broken down in every limb, a 
man melted to something beneath the effemi- 
nacy of a woman, has found the art to supply 
language with his hands ; and on behalf of one 

— I know not what, but neither man nor woman 

— the whole city is in a state of commotion, 
that the fabulous debaucheries of antiquity may 
be represented in a ballet. Whatever is not 
lawful is so beloved, that what had even been 
lost sight of by the lapse of time is brought 
back again into the recollection of the eyes. 

7. It is not sufficient for lust to make use of 
its present means of mischief, unless by the ex- 
hibition it makes its own that in which a former 
age had also gone wrong. It is not lawful, I say, 
for faithful Christians to be present ; it is not 
lawful, I say, at all, even for those whom for the 
delight of their ears Greece sends everywhere to 
all who are instructed in her vain arts.- One 
imitates the hoarse; warlike clangours of the trum- 
pet ; another with his breath blowing into a pipe 
regulates its mournful sounds ; another with 
dances, and with the musical voice of a man, 
strives with his breath, which by an effort he 
had drawn from his bowels into the upper parts 
of his body, to play upon the stops of pipes ; now 
letting forth the sound, and now closing it up 
inside, and forcing it into the air by certain 
openings of the stops ; now breaking the sound 
in measure, he endeavours to speak with his fin- 
gers, ungrateful to the Artificer who gave him a 
tongue. Why should I speak of comic and use- 
less efforts? Why of those great tragic vocal 

- [Compare Cler^-ct. vol. ii. p. 248, note 5, an(' p. 249, notes 2, 11.' 

5/8 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

ravings ? Why of strings set vibrating with noise ? 
These things, even if they were not dedicated to 
idols," ought not to be approached and gazed 
upon by faithful Cliristians ; because, even if they 
were not criminal, they are characterized by a 
worthlessness which is extreme, and which is 
little suited to believers. 

8. Now that other folly of others is an obvious 
source of advantage to idle men ; and the first 
victory is for the belly to be able to crave food ' 
beyond the human limit, — a flagitious traffic for , 
the claim to the crown of gluttony : the wretched j 
face is hired out to bear wounding blows, that 
the more wretched belly may be gorged. How 
disgusting, besides, are those struggles ! Man | 
lying below man is enfolded in abominable em- 
braces and twinings. In such a contest, whether 
a man looks on or conquers, still his modesty is 
conquered. Behold, one naked man bounds 
forth towards you ; another with straining powers 
tosses a brazen ball into the air. This is not 
glory, but folly. In fine, take away the spec- 
tator, and you will have shown its emptiness. 
Such things as these should be avoided by faith- 
ful Christians, as I have frequently said already ; 
spectacles so vain, so mischievous, so sacrile- 
gious, from which both our eyes and our ears 
should be guarded. We quickly get accustomed 
to what we hear and what we see. For since 
man's mind is itself drawn towards vice, what 
will it do if it should have inducements of a 
bodily nature as well as a downward tendency 
in its slippery will ? What will it do if it should 
be impelled /;■<?;// without ? ^ Therefore the mind 
must be called away from such things as these. 

9. The Christian has nobler exhibitions, if he 
wishes for them. He has true and profitable 
pleasures, if he will recollect himself. And to 
say nothing of those which he cannot yet con- 
template, he has that beauty of the world to look 
upon and admire.' He may gaze upon the sun's 
rising, and again on its setting, as it brings round 
in their mutual changes days and nights ; the 
moon's orb, designating in its waxings and wan- 
ings the courses of the seasons ; the troops of 
shining stars, and those which glitter from on 
high with extreme mobility, — their members 
divided through the changes of the entire year, 
and the days themselves with the nights dis- 
tributed into hourly periods ; the heavy mass of 
the earth balanced by the mountains, and the 
flowing rivers with their sources ; the expanse of 
seas, with tlieir waves and shores ; and mean- 
while, the air, subsisting ecjually everywhere in 

' [This touches a point important to the modern question. It is 
said, 'Oh! but these Fathers denounced only those heathen spec- 
tacles of which idolatry was part," etc. The reply is sufficiently 
made by our author. | 

^ There is much confusion in the readina; of this passage, which 
in the oritjinal runs, according to Rnluzius: " Nam cum mens hominis 
ad vitia ips.i ducatur, quid faciei, si h.ibuerit exenipla natura; corporis 
lubrica qua; sponte corruit? Quid faciet si fuerit impulsa? " 

* [Compare Clement, vol. ii. p. 256, and note i.J 

perfect harmony, expanded in the midst of all, 
and in concordant bonds animating all things 
with its delicate life, now scattering showers from 
the contracted clouds, now recalling the serenity 
of the sky with its refreshed purity ; and in all 
these spheres their appropriate tenants — in the 
air the birds, in the waters the fishes, on the 
earth man. Let these, I say, and other divine 
works, be the exhibitions for faithful Christians. 
What theatre built by human hands could ever 
be compared to such works as these ? Although 
it may be reared with immense piles of stones, 
the mountain crests are loftier ; and although 
the fretted roofs glitter with gold, they will be 
surpassed by the brightness of the starry firma- 
ment.'* Never will any one admire the works of 
man, if he has recognised himself as the son of 
God. He degrades himself from the height of his 
nobility, who can admire anything but the Lord. 

10. Let the faithful Christian, I say, devote 
himself to the sacred Scriptures, 5 and there he 
shall find worthy exhibitions for his faith. He 
will see God establishing His world, and making 
not only the other animals, but that marvellous 
and better fabric of man. He will gaze upon 
the world in its delightfulness, righteous ship- 
wrecks, the rewards of the good, and the pun- 
ishments of the impious, seas drained dry by a 
people, and again from the rock seas spread out 
by a people. He will behold harvests descend- 
ing from heaven, not pressed in by the plough ; 
rivers with their hosts of waters bridled in, ex- 
hibiting dry crossings. He will behold in some 
cases faith struggling with the flame, wild beasts 
overcome by devotion and soothed into gentle- 
ness. He will look also upon souls brought 
back even from death. Moreover, he will con- 
sider the marvellous souls brought back to the 
life of bodies which themselves were already 
consumed. And in all these things he will see 
a still greater exhibition — that devil who had 
triumphed over the whole world lying prostrate 
under the feet of Christ. How honourable is this 
exhibition, brethren ! how delightful, how needful 
ever to gaze upon one's hope, and to open our 
eyes to one's salvation ! This is a spectacle which 
is beheld even when sight is lost. 'Lhis is an exhi- 
bition which is given by neither praetor nor consul, 
but by Him who is alone and above all things, and 
before all things, yea, and of whom are all things, 
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be 
glory and honour for ever and ever. I bid you, 
brethren, ever heartily farewell. Amen.*" 

■i [De Maistre, who is a Christian, with all his hereditary prejii- 
dice and enslavement, has a fine passage in the opening of his 
Soirees de St. Petersbourg, which the reader will enjoy. It con- 
cludes with this saying: " Les coeurs pervers n'ont jamais de belles 
nuits ni de beaux jours." P. 7. vol. i. See vol. iv. p. 173, this series.] 

-' I Always the sacred Scriptures are held up as capable of yield- 
ing delight as well as profit to the believer. The works of God and 
His word go together. Col. iii. 16.] 

'' [There is much in the above treatise which is not unworthy of 
Cyprian .\s to questions of authenticity, however, experts alone 
should venture upon an opinion. Non nobis tantas componere lites.} 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

579 

ON THE GLORY OF MARTYRDOM.' 

ARGUMENT. — THE GLORY OF MARTV'RDOM, — 
NAMELY, WHAT MARTYRDOM IS, HOW GREAT IT 
IS, AND OF WHAT ADVANTAGE IT IS. BY SI- 
MILITUDES, AND BY ARGUMENT DEDUCED FROM 
THE DAILY DEATHS, THE AUTHOR EXHORTS TO 
A JOYOUS SUBMISSION TO DEATH FOR CHRIST'S 
SAKE.^ AMONG THE BENEFITS OF MARTYRDOM 
HE MAINTAINS THAT WITHOUT EXPERIENCE OF 
THE UNIVERSAL SUFFERING THAT PREVAILS, THE 
PROPITIATION OF CHRIST CROWNS MARTYRS IN 
SUCH A WAY THAT HIS SAYING ABOUT THE VERY 
LAST FARTHING IS NOT APPLICABLE TO THEM. 

I. Although, beloved brethren, it is unfitting, 
while my speaking to you receives this indul- 
gence, to profess any trepidation, and it very 
little becomes me to diminish the glory of so 
great a devotion by the confession of an incipi- 
ent doubt ; yet at the same time I say that my 
mind is divided by that very deliberation, being 
influenced by the desire of describing the glory, 
and restrained from speaking by the magnitude 
of the virtue (to be described) ; since it is either 
not becoming to be silent, or it is perilous to say 
too little, save that to one who is tossing in doubt 
this consideration alone is helpful, that it would 
appear easy for him to be pardoned who has not 
feared to dare. Wherefore, beloved brethren, 
although my mental capacity is burdened by the 
importance of the subject in such a way, that in 
proportion as it puts itself forth in declaring the 
dignity of martyrdom, in that degree it is over- 
whelmed by the very weight of the glory, and' 
by its estimation of all those things concerning 
which, when it speaks most, it fails, by its ad- 
dress being weakened, and broken, and self- 
entangled, and does not with free and loosened 
reins display the might of such glory in the 
liberal eloquence of discourse ; yet, if I am not 
mistaken, some power there will be in my utter- 
ance, which, when fortified by the appeal of the 
work itself, may here and there pour forth what 
the unequal consciousness of my ability withheld 
from my words. Since, therefore, beloved breth- 
ren, involved as we are in affairs so many and 
important, we are endeavouring with all eager- 
ness and labour to confirm the excellent and 

' [Erasmus doubts as to the authorship, judging from the style. 
Pamelius is sure it is Cyprian's.] 

- In place of reward, he sets before them not only security from 
the fear of Gehenna, but also the attainment of everlasting life, de- 
scribing both alternatives briefly in a poetical manner. He points 
out, that to some, martyrdom serves as a crown, while to others who 
are baptized in their own blood, it serves as redemption. Finally, 
when from the Scriptures he has stirred up his readers to confession 
ot the name of Christ, he asks them to remember him when the Lord 
begins to honour martyrdom in them, since the Lord is known not to 
deny such as they when they ask Him for anything. 

most beautiful issues of salvation, I do not fear 
being so deterred by any slothful dread as to be 
withheld or rendered powerless; since, if any 
one should desire to look into that of which 
we are considering, the hope of devotion being 
taken into account, and the very magnitude of 
the thing being weighed, he would rather wonder 
that I could have dared at all, in a matter wherein 
both the vastness of the subject oppressed me, 
and the earnestness of its own desire drove my 
mind, confused with its joy, into mental difficul- 
ties. For who is there whom such a subject 
would not alarm ? who is there whom it would 
not overthrow with the fear of its own wonder ! 

2. For there is indeed, unless I am mistaken, 
even in the very power of conscience, a marvel- 
lous fear which at once disturbs and inflames us ; 
whose power, the more closely you look into, 
the more the dreadful sense of its obligation 
is gathered from its very aspect of venerable 
majesty. For assuredly you ought to consider 
what glory there is in expiating any kind of de- 
filement of life, and the foulness of a polluted 
body, and the contagions gathered from the long 
putrefaction of vices, and the worldly guilt in- 
curred by so great a lapse of time, by the reme- 
dial agency of one stroke, whereby both reward 
may be increased, and guilt may be excluded. 
Whence every perfection and condition of life 
is included in martyrdom. This is the founda- 
tion of life and faith, this is the safeguard of 
salvation, this is the bond of liberty and honour ; 
and although there are also other means whereby 
the light may be attained, yet we more easily 
arrive at nearness to the promised reward, by 
help of these punishments, which sustain us. 

3. For consider what glory it is to set aside 
the lusts of this life, and to oppose a mind with- 
drawn from all commerce with nature and the 
world, to all the opposition of the adversary, and 
to have no dread of the cruelty of the torturer ; 
that a man should be animated by the suffering 
whereby he might be believed to be destroyed, 
and should take to himself, as an enhancement 
of his strength, that which the punisher thinks 
will aggravate his torments. For although the 
hook, springing forth from the stiffening ribs, is 
put back again into the wound, and with the re- 
peated strokes of the whip the returning lash 3 is 
drawn away with the rent portions of the flesh ; 
still he stands immoveable, the stronger for his 
sufferings, revolving only this in his mind, that 

■5 '■ Habena; " but according to Baluzius " avena," "an oat- 
straw. " 

^8o 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

in that brutality of the executioners Christ Him- j 
self is suffering' more in proportion to what he 
suffers. For since, if he should deny the Lord, 
he would incur guilt on His behalf for whom he 
ought to have overcome, it is essential that He 
should be seen to bear all things to whom the 
victory is due, even in the suffering. 

4. Therefore, since martyrdom is the chief j 
thing, there are three points arising out of it on 
which we have proposed to ourselves to speak : 
What it is, how great it is, and of what advantage 
it is. What, then, is martyrdom? It is the end 
of sins, the limit of dangers, the guide of salva- 
tion, the teacher of patience, the home of life, 
on the journey to which those things moreover 
befall which in the coming crisis might be con- 
sidered torments. By this also testimony is 
borne to the Name, and the majesty of the 
Name is greatly enhanced : not that in itself 
tliat majesty can be diminished, or its magni- 
tude detracted from, by the guilt of one who de- 
nies it ; but that it redounds to the increase of 
its glory, when the terror of the populace that 
howls around is giving to suffering, fearless minds, 
and by the threats of snarling hatred is adding 
to the title whereby Christ has desired to crown 
the man, that in proportion as he has thought 
that he conquered, in that proportion his courage 
has grown in the struggle. It is then, therefore, 
that all the vigour of faith is brought to bear, 
then facility of belief is approved, when you en- 
counter the speeches and the reproaches of the 
rabble,^ and when you strengthen yourself by a 
religious mind against those madnesses of the 
people, — overcoming, that is, and repelling 
whatever their blasphemous speech may have 
uttered to wrong Christ in your person ; as when 
the resisting breakwater repels the adverse sea, 
although the waves dash and the rolling water 
again and again beats upon it, yet its immoveable 
strength abides firm, and does not yield even 
when covered over by the waves that foam 
around, until its force is scattered over the rocks 
and loses itself, and the conquered billow lying 
upon the rocks retires forth into the open spaces 
of the shore, 

5. For what is there in these speeches other 
*han empty discourse, and senseless talk, and a 
depraved pleasure in meaningless words ? As it 
is written : " They have eyes, and they see not ; 
ears have they, and they hear not." ^ " Their 
foolish heart is made sluggish, lest at any time 
they should be converted, and I should heal 

• [Acts ix. 5. The principle is recognised in the words, " Ye did 
it unto me," where Christ identities Himself with members of His 
body. Oh, the condescension! Heb. ii. 11.] 

- [Ps. Ijiiv. 3. The revilings of the multitude are reckoned by 
the I'salmist among the most cruel tortures of Christ; and we cannot 
doubt that the early Christians found the like cruelty of the heathen 
a daily martyrdom, before they came to their crowning passion. 
Compare TertuUian, vol. iii. p. 712.] 

■5 Ps. c.\iii. 13. 

them." ^ For there is no doubt but that He 
said this of all whose hardened mind and obsti- 
nate brutality of heart is always driven away and 
repugnates from a vital devotion, folly leading 
them, madness dragging them, in fine, every 
kind of ferocity enraging them, whereby they are 
instigated as well as carried away, so that in their 
case their own deeds would be sufficient for their 
punishment, their guilt would burden the very 
penalty of the persecution inflicted. 

6. The whole of this tends to the praise of 
martyrdom, the whole illuminates the glory of 
suffering wherein the hope of time future is be- 
held, wherein Christ Himself is engaged, of 
whom are given the examples that we seek, and 
whose is the strength by which we resist. .-\nd 
that in this behalf something is supplied to us to 
present, is surely a lofty and marvellous conde- 
scension, and such as we are able neither men- 
tally to conceive nor fully to express in words. 
For what could He with His liberal affection 
bestow upon us more, than that He should be 
the first to show forth in Himself what He 
would reward with a crown in others? He be- 
came mortal that we might be immortal, and 
He underwent the issue of human destiny, by 
whom things human are governed ; and that 
He might appear to have given to us the benefit 
of His having suffered. He gave us confession. 
He suggested martyrdoms ; finally. He, by the 
merits of His nativity, imputed all those things 
whereby the light (of life) may be quenched, to 
a saving remedy, by His excellent humility, by 
His divine strength. \\'hoever have deser\'ed to 
be worthy of this have been without death, have 
overcome all the foulest stains of the world, 
having subdued the condition of death. 

7. For there is no doubt how much they ob- 
tain from the Lord, who have preferred God's 
name to their own safety, so that. in that judg- 
ment-day their blood-shedding would make 
them better, and the blood spilt would show 
them to be spotless. Because death makes life 
more complete, death rather leads to glory. 
Thus, whenever on the rejoicing wheat-stalks 
the ears of corn distended by rains grow full, 
the abundant harvests are forced s by the sum- 
mer ; thus, as often as the vine is pruned by the 
knife from the tendrils that break forth upon it, 
the bunch of grapes is more liberally clothed. 
For whatever is of advantage by its injury turns 
out for the increase of the time to come ; just as 
it has often been of avail to the fields to let 
loose the flames, that l)y the heat of the wander- 
ing conflagration the blind breathing-holes of 
the earth might be relaxed. It has been useful 
to parch the light stalks with the crackling fire, 
that the pregnant corn-field might raise itself 

* Isa. vi. TO. 

5 " Coguntur," or " coquuntur," — "are matured." 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

581 

higher, and a more abundant grain might flour- 
ish on the breeding stems. Therefore such also 
is first of all the calamity, and by and by the 
fruit of martyrdom, that it so contemns death, 
that it may preserve life in death. 

8. For what is so illustrious and sublime, as by 
a robust devotion to preserve all the vigour of 
faith in the midst of so many weapons of execu- 
tioners ? What so great and honourable, as in 
the midst of so many swords of the surrounding 
guards, again and again to profess in repeated 
words the Lord of one's liberty and the author 
of one's salvation? — and especially if you set 
before your eyes that there is nothing more 
detestable than dishonour, nothing baser than 
slavery, that now you ought to seek nothing else, 
to ask for nothing else, than that you should 
be snatched from the slaughters of the world, be 
delivered from the ills of the world, and be en- ' 
gaged only as an alien from the contagion ofi 
earth, among the ruins of a globe that is speedily I 
to perish ? For what have you to do with this | 
light, if you have the promise of an eternal 
light? What interest have you in this commerce 
of life and nature, if the amplitude of heaven is 
awaiting you? Doubtless let that lust of life 
keep hold, but let it be of those whom for una- 
toned sin the raging fire will torture with eternal 
vengeance for their crimes. Let that lust of life 
keep hold, but let it be of those to w^hom it is 
both a punishment to die, and a torment to en- 
dure (after death). But to you both the world 
itself "is subjected, and the earth yields, if, when 
all are dying, you are reserved for this fate of 
being a martyr. Do we not behold daily dyings ? 
We behold new kinds of death of the body long 
worn out with raging diseases, the miserable re- 
sults of some plague hitherto unexperienced ; 
and we behold the destruction of wasted cities, 
and hence we may acknowledge how great is to 
be considered the dignity of martyrdom, to the 
attainment of the glory of which even, the pesti- 
lence is beginning to compel us.' 

9. Moreover, beloved brethren, regard, I be- 
seech you, this consideration more fully ; for in 
it both salvation is involved, and sublimity ac- 
counted of, although I am not unaware that you 
abundantly know that we are supported by the 
judgments of all who stand fast, and that you 
are not ignorant that this is the teaching handed 
down to us, that we should maintain the power 
of so great a Name without any dread of the 
warfare ; because we whom once the desire of 
an everlasting remembrance has withheld from 
the longing for this light, and whom the antici- 
pations of the future have wrenched away, and 
whom the society of Christ so longed for has 

* [The heathen attributed this pestilence to the " atheism " of 
Christians, and hence persecuted them the more fiercely ; and, as it 
was better to die by martyrdom than by the pestilence, he thus 
speaks. Death an advantage. Shales., Hen. I'., act. iv. sc. i.J 

kept aloof from all wickedness, shrink from 
offering our soul to death except it be in the 
way of yielding to a mischief, and that those 
benefits of God must no longer be retained and 
clung to by us, since beyond the burning up of 
these things the reward is so great as that human 
infirmity can hardly attain sufficiently to speak 
of it. Heaven lies open to our blood ; the 
dwelling-place of Gehenna gives way to our 
blood ; and among all the attainments of glory, 
the title of blood is sealed as the fairest, and its 
crown is designated as most complete. 

10. Thus, whenever the soldier returns from 
the enemy laden with triumphant spoils, he re- 
joices in his wounds. Thus, whenever the sailor, 
long harassed with tempests, arrives at safe 
shores, he reckons his happiness by the dangers 
that he has suffered. For, unless I am mistaken, 
that is assuredly a joyous labour whereby safety 
is found. Therefore all things must be suffered, 
all things must be endured ; nor should we desire 
the means of rejoicing for a brief period, and 
being punished with a perpetual burning. For 
you ought to remember that you are bound, as 
it were, by a certain federal paction, out of 
which arises the just condition either of obtain- 
ing salvation, or the merited fearfulness of pun- 
ishment. You stand equally among adverse 
things and prosperous, in the midst of arms and 
darts ; and on the one hand, worldly ambition, 
on the other heavenly greatness, incites you. 

11. If you fear to lose salvation, know that 
you can die ; and, moreover, death should be 
contemned by you, for whom Christ was slain. 
Let the examples of the Lord's passion, I 
beseech you, pass before your eyes ; let the 
offerings, and the rewards, and the distinctions 
prepared come together before you, and look 
carefully at both events, how great a difficulty 
they have between them. For you will not be 
able to confess unless you know what a great 
mischief you do if you deny. Martyrs rejoice 
in heaven ; the fire will consume those who are 
enemies of the truth. The paradise of God 
blooms for the witnesses ; Gehenna will enfold 
the deniers, and eternal fire will burn them up. 
And, to say nothing of other matters, this assur- 
edly ought rather to urge us, that the confession 
of one word is maintained by the everlasting 
confession of Christ ; as it is written, " Whoso- • 
ever shall confess me on earth before men, him 
also will I confess before my Father, and before 
His angels." ^ To this are added, by way of an 
enhancement of glory, the adornments of virtue ; 
for He says, "The righteous shall shine as sparks 
that run to and fro among the stubble ; they 
shall judge the nations, and shall have dominion 
over the peoples." ^ 

^ Luke xxii. £ 
3 Wisd. iii. 7. 

582 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

12. For it is a great glory, beloved brethren, 
to adorn the life of eternal salvation with the 
dignity of suffering : it is a great sublimity before 
the face of the Lord, and under the gaze of 
Christ, to contemn without a shudder the tor- 
ments inflicted by human power. Thus Daniel, 
by the constancy of his faith, overcame the 
threats of the king and the fury of raging lions, 
in that he believed that none else than God vvas 
to be adored. Thus, when the young men were 
thrown into the furnace, the fire raged against 
itself, because, being righteous, they endured 
the flames, and guarded against those of Gehen- 
na, by believing in God, whence also they re- 
ceived things worthy of them : they were not 
delayed to a future time : they were not reserv^ed 
for the reward of eternal salvation. God saw 
their faith ; that what they had promised to 
themselves to see after their death, they merited 
to see in their body. For how great a reward 
was given them in the present tribulation could 
not be estimated. If there was cruelty, it gave 
way ; if there was flame, it stood still. For there 
was one mind to all of them, which neither 
violence could break down nor wrath could sub- 
vert ; nor could the fear of death restrain them 
from the obedience of devotion. Whence by the 
Lord's grace it happened, that in this manner 
the king himself appeared rather to be punished 
in those men (who were slain), whilst they es- 
cape whom he had thought to slay. 

13. And now, beloved brethren, I shall come 
to that point whence I shall very easily be able 
to show you how highly the virtue of martyrdom 
is esteemed, which, although it is well known to 
all, and is to be desired on account of the in- 
signia of its inborn glory, yet in the desire of 
its enjoyment has received more enhancement 
from the necessity of the times. Because if any 
one be crowned at that season in which he 
supposes himself to be crowned, if perchance 
he should die, he is greatly rewarded. There- 
fore, sublime and illustrious as martyrdom is, it 
is the more needful now, when the world itself 
is turned upside down, and, while the globe is 
partially shattered, failing nature is giving evi- 
dence of the tokens of its final destruction. 
For the rain-cloud hangs over us in the sky, and 
the very air stretches forth the mournful rain- 
.( curtain) ; and as often as the black tempest 
threatens the raging sea, the glittering lightning- 
flashes glow terribly in the midst of the opening 
darkness of the clouds. Moreover, when the 
deep is lashed into immense billows, by degrees 
the wave is lifted up, and by degrees the foam 
whitens, until at length you behold it rush in 
such a manner, that on those rocks on which it 
is hurled, it throws its foam higher than the 
wave that was vomited forth by the swelling sea. 
You read that it is written, that we must pay 

even the uttermost farthing. But the martyrs 
alone are relieved of this obligation ; because 
they who trust to their desires for eternal sal- 
vation, and have overcome their longings for 
this life, have been made by the Lord's precepts 
free from the universal suffering.' Therefore 
from this especially, beloved brethren, we shall 
be able to set forth what great things the virtue 
of martyrdom is able to fulfil. 

14. And, to pass over everything else, we 
ought to remember what a glory it is to come 
immaculate to Christ — to be a sharer in His 
suffering, and to reign in a perpetual eternity 
with the Lord — to be free from the threaten- 
ing destruction of the world, and not to be 
mixed up with the bloody carnage of wasting 
diseases in a common lot with others ; and, not 
to speak of the crown itself, if, being situated in 
the midst of these critical evils of nature, you 
had the promise of an escape from this life, 
would you not rejoice with all your heart ? If, 
I say, while tossing amid the tempests of this 
world, a near repose should invite you, would 
you not consider death in the light of a remedy ? 
Thus, surrounded as you are with the knives of 
the executioners, and the instruments of testing 
tortures, stand sublime and strong, considering 
how great is the penalty of denying, in a time 
when you are unable to enjoy, the world for the 
sake of which you would deny, because indeed 
the Lord knew that cruel torments and mis- 
chievous acts of punishment would be armed 
against us for our destruction, in order that He 
might make us strong to endure them all. " My 
son," says He, " if thou come to serve God, 
stand fast in righteousness, and fear, and pre- 
pare thy soul for temptation." ^ Moreover, also, 
the blessed Apostle Paul exclaimed, and said, 
"To me 'to live is Christ, and to die is gain." ^ 

15. Wherefore, beloved brethren, with a firm 
faith, with a robust devotion, with a virtue op- 
posed to the fierce threatenings of the world, 
and the savage murmurs of the attending crowds, 
we must resist and not fear, seeing that ours is 
the hope of eternity and heavenly life, and that 
our ardour is inflamed with the longing for the 
light, and our salvation rejoices in the promise 
of immortality. But the fact that our hands are 
bound with tightened bonds, and that heavy 
links fastened round our necks oppress us with 
their solid weight, or that our body strained on 
the rack hisses on the red-hot plates, is not for 
the sake of seeking our blood, but for the sake 
of trying us.'' For in what manner should we 

' [The sufferings of this life are here supposed to be retribu- 
tive in the case of those who must be weaned from the world. Mar- 
tyrs have weaned themselves, and go gladly to their rest.] 

2 Ecclus. ii. I. 

3 Phil. i. 21. 

■* [The terrible pictures in S. Stefano Rotondo (see p. 288, supra) 
might seem to have been taken from this graphic treatise. Can oul 
faith and luve be compared with that of these sufferers?] 

TREATISES AT7RIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

583 

be able to recognise even the dignity of martyr- 
dom, if we were not constrained to desire it, even 
at the price of the sacrifice of our body? I 
mdeed have known it, and I am not deceived 
in the truth of what I say, when the cruel hands 
of the persecutors were wrenching asunder the 
martyr's limbs, and the furious torturer was 
ploughing up his lacerated muscles, and still 
could not overcome him. I have known it by 
\he words of those who stood around.' "This 
s a great matter. Assuredly I know not what 
It is — that he is not subdued by suffering, that 
he is not broken down by wearing torments." 
Moreover, there were other words of those who 
spoke : " And yet I believe he has children : for 
he has a wife associated with him in his house ; 
and yet he does not give way to the bond of his 
offspring, nor is he withdrawn by the claim of 
his family affection from his stedfast purpose. 
This matter must be known, and this strength 
must be investigated, even to the very heart ; 
for that is no trifling confession, whatever it may 
be, for which a man suffers, even so as to be able 
to die." 

16. Moreover, beloved brethren, so great is 
the virtue of martyrdom, that by its means even 
he who has wished to slay you is constrained to 
believe. It is written, and we read : " Endure 
in suffering, and in thy humiliation have patience, 
because gold and silver are tried by the fire." ^ 
Since, therefore, the Lord proves us by earthly 
temptations, and Christ the Judge weighs us by 
these worldly ills, we must congratulate ourselves, 
and rejoice that He does not reserve us for 
those eternal destructions, but rejoices over us 
as purged from all contagion. But from those 
whom He adopts as partners of His inheritance, 
and is willing to receive into the kingdom of 
heaven, what else indeed does He ask than a 
walk in integrity ? He Himself has said that all 
things are His, both those things which are dis- 
played upon the level plains, and which lift 
themselves up into sloping hills ; and moreover, 
whatever the greatness of heaven surrounds, and 
what the gliding water embraces in the circum- 
fluent ocean. But if all things are within His 
ken, and He does not require of us anything but 
sincere actions, we ought, as He Himself has 
said, to be like to gold. Because, when you 
behold in the glistening ore ^ the gold glittering 
under the tremulous light, and melting into a 
liquid form by the roaring flames (for this also 
is generally the care of the workmen), whenever 
from the panting furnaces is vomited forth the 
glowing fire, the rich flame is drawn away from 
the access of the earth in a narrow channel, and 

' [To me, these dramatic narrations of what was going on among 
the crowds that gazed upon the tortures of Christ's witnesses, are 
very suggestive of the whole scene. Compare pp. 295-296, su/ra.] 

- Ecclus. ii. 4 

3 Or, " earth." 

is kept back by sand from the refluent masses 
of earth. Whence it is necessary to suffer all 
things, that we may be free from all wickedness, 
as He has said by His prophet : " And though 
in the sight of men they have suffered torments, 
yet is their hope full of immortality ; and being 
vexed in a few things, they shall be well reward- 
ed in many things, because God has tried them, 
and has found them worthy of Himself, and 
has received them as a sacrifice of burnt- 
ofiering." ■♦ 

17. But if ambitious dignity deter you, and 
the amount of your money heaped up in your 
stores influence you — a cause which ever dis- 
tracts the intentions of a virtuous heart, and 
assails the soul devoted to its Lord with a fearful 
trembling — I beg that you would again refer to 
the heavenly words. For it is the very voice of 
Christ who speaks, and says, "Whosoever shall 
lose his l,ife for my name's sake, shall receive in 
this world a hundred fold, and in the world to- 
come shall possess eternal life." 5 And we ought 
assuredly to reckon nothing greater, nothing 
more advantageous, than this. For although in 
the nature of your costly garments the purple 
dye flows into figures, and in the slackening 
threads the gold strays into a pattern, and the 
weighty metals to which you devote yourselves 
are not wanting in your excavated treasures ; 
still, unless I am mistaken, those things will be 
esteemed vain and purposeless, if, while all 
things else are added to you, salvation alone is 
found to be wanting ; even as the Holy Spirit 
declares that we can give nothing in exchange 
for our soul. For He says, " If you should gain 
the whole world, and lose your own soul, what 
shall it profit you, or what exchange shall a man 
give for his soul? " ^ For all those things which 
we behold are worthless, and such as resting on 
weak foundations, are unable to sustain the 
weight of their own mass. For whatever is re- 
ceived from the world is made of no account by 
the antiquity of time. Whence, that nothing 
should be sweet or dear that mght be preferred 
to the desires of eternal life, things which are of 
personal right and individual law are cut off by 
the Lord's precepts ; so that in the undergoing 
of tortures, for instance, the son should not 
soften the suffering father, and private affection 
should not change the heart that was previously 
pledged to enduring strength, into another dis- 
position. Christ of His own right ordained that 
truth and salvation alone must be embraced in 
the midst of great sufferings, under which wife, 
and children, and grandchildren, under which 
all the offspring of one's bowels, must be for- 
saken, and the victory be claimed. 

* Wisd. iii. 4. 
5 Matt. X. 39. 

* Matt. XV. a6. 

584 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

i8. For Abraham also thus pleased God,- in 
that he, when tried by God, spared not even his 
own son, in behalf of whom perhaps he might 
have been pardoned had he hesitated to slay 
him. A religious devotion armed his hands ; 
and his paternal love, at the command of the 
Lord who bade it, set aside all the feelings of 
affection. Neither did it shock him that he was 
to shed the blood of his son, nor did he tremble 
at the word ; nevertheless for him Christ had 
not yet been slain. For what is dearer than 
He who, that you might not sustain anything un- 
willingly in the present day, first of all Himself 
suffered that which He taught o fliers to suffer? 
What is sweeter than He who, although He is 
our God and Lord, nevertheless makes the man 
who suffers for His sake His fellow-heir in the 
kingdom of heaven ? Oh grand — I know not 
what ! — whether that reason scarcely bears to 
receive that consciousness, although it always 
marvels at the greatness of the rewards ; or that 
the majesty of God is so abundant, that to all 
who trust in it, it even offers those things which, 
while we were considering what we have done, 
it had been sin to desire. Moreover, if only 
eternal salvation should be given, for that very 
perpetuity of living we should be thankful. But 
now, when heaven and the power of judging 
concerning others is bestowed in the eternal 
world, what is there wherein man's mediocrity 
may not find itself equal to all these trials? If 
you are assailed with injuries. He was first so 
assailed. If you are oppressed with reproaches, 
you are imitating the experience of God. Whence 
also it is but a little matter whatever you undergo 
for Him, seeing that you can do nothing more, 
imless that in this consists the whole of salvation, 
that He has promised the whole to martyrdom. 
Finally, the apostle, to whom all things were 
always dear, while he deeply marvelled at the 
greatness of the promised benefits, said, " I 
reckon that the sufferings of this present time 
are not worthy to be compared to the glory that 
is to follow, which shall be revealed in us." ' 
Because he was musing in his own mind how 
great would be the reward, that to him to whom 
it would be enough to be free from death, should 
be given not only the prerogative of salvation, 
but also to ascend to heaven : to heaven which 
is not constrained into darkness, even when light 
is expelled from it, and the day does not unfold 
into light by alternate changes ; but the serene 
temperature of the liquid air unfolds a pure 
brightness through a clearness that reddens with 
a fiery glow, 

19. It now remains, beloved brethren, that we 
are bound to show what is the advantage of mar- 
tyrdom, and that we should teach that especially, 

' Rom. viii. i3. 

SO that the fear of the future may stimulate us 
to this glorious title. Because those to whom 
great things are promised, seem to have greater 
things which they are bound to fear. For the 
soldier does not arouse himself to arms before 
the enemy have brandished their hostile weap- 
ons ; nor does a man withdraw his ship in an 
anchorage, unless the fear of the deep have 
checked his courage. Moreover also, while 
eager for his wealth, the considerate husband- 
man does not stir up the earth with a fortunate 
ploughshare, before the crumbling glebe is loos- 
ened into dust by the rain that it has received. 
Thus this is the natural practice of every man, to 
be ignorant of what is of advantage, unless you 
recognise what has been mischievous, ^^'hence 
also a reward is given to all the saints, in that 
the punishment of their deeds is inflicted on 
the unrighteous. Therefore what the Lord has 
promised to His people is doubtful to none, 
however ignorant he is ; but neither is there any 
doubt what punitive fires He threatens. And 
since my discourse has led me thus to argue 
about both these classes of things in a few words, 
as I have already spoken of both, I will briefly 
explain them. 

20. A horrible place, of which the name is 
Gehenna, with an awful murmuring and groan- 
ing of souls bewailing, and with flames belching 
forth through the horrid darkness of thick night, 
is always breathing out the raging fires of a 
smoking furnace, ivhile the confined mass of 
flames is restrained or relaxed for the various 
purposes of punishment, llien there are very 
many degrees of its violence, as it gathers into 
itself whatever tortures the consuming fire of 
the heat emitted can supply. Those by whom 
the voice of the Lord has been rejected, and 
His control contemned, it punishes with differ- 
ent dooms ; and in proportion to the different 
degree of deserving of the forfeited salvation it 
applies its power, while a portion assigns its due 
distinction to crime. And some, for example, 
are bowed down by an intolerable load, some 
are hurried by a merciless force over the abrupt 
descent of a precipitous path, and the heavy 
weight of clanking chains bends over them its 
bondage. Some there are, also, whom a wheel 
is closely turning, and an unwearied dizziness 
tormenti}^^ ; and others whom, bound to one 
another with tenacious closeness, body clinging 
to body compresses : so that both fire is devour- 
ing, and the load of iron is weighing down, and 
the uproar of many is torturing. 

21. But those by whom God has always been 
sought or known, have never lost the position 
which Christ has given them, where grace is 
found, where in the verdant fields the luxuriant 
earth clothes itself with tender grass, and is pas- 
tured witli the scent of flowers ; where the groves 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

58s 

are carried up to the lofty hill-top, and where 
the tree clothes with a thicker foliage whatever 
spot the canopy, expanded by its curving branches, 
may have shaded. There is no excess of cold or 
of heat, nor is it needed that in autumn the fields 
should rest, or, again in the young spring, that 
the fruitful earth should bring forth. All things 
are of one season : fruits are borne of a con- 
tinued summer, since there neither does the 
moon serve the purpose of her months, nor does 
the sun run his course along the moments of 
the hours, nor does the banishment of the light 
make way for night. A joyous repose possesses 
the people, a calm home shelters them, where a 
gushing fountain in the midst issues from the 
bosom of a broken hollow, and flows in sinuous 
mazes by a course deep-sounding, at intervals to 
be divided among the sources of rivers springing 
from it. Here there is the great praise of mar- 
tyrs, here is the noble crown of the victors, who 
have the promise of greater things than those 
whose rewards are more abundant. And that 
either their body is thrown to wild beasts, or 
the threatening sword is not feared, is shown as 
the reason of their dignity, is manifested as the 
ground of their election. Because it would have 
been inconsistent, that he who had been judged 
equal to such a duty, should be kept among 
earthly vices and corruptions. 

22. For you deserve, O excellent martyrs, that 
nothing should be denied to you who are nour- 
ished with the hope of eternity and of light ; 
whose absolute devotion, and whose mind dedi- 
cated to the service of heaven, is evidently seen. 
Deservedly, I say deservedly, nothing to you is 
forbidden to wish for, since by your soul this 
world is looked down upon, and the alienated 
appearance of the time has made you to shudder, 
as if it were a confused blindness of darkness ; 
to whom this world is always regarded in the 
light of a dungeon, its dwellings for restraints, in 
a life which has always been esteemed by you as 
a period of delay on a journey. Thus, indeed, 
in the triumph of victory he is snatched from 
these evils, whom no vain ambition with pompous 
step has subdued, nor popular greatness has 
elated, but whom, burning with heavenly desire, 
Christ has added to His kingdom. 

23. There is nothing, then, so great and ven- 
erable as the deliverance from death, and the 
causing to live, and the giving to reign for ever. 
This is fitting for the saints, needful for the 
wretched, pleasing to all, in which the good 
rejoice, the abject are lifted up, the elect are 
crowned. Assuredly God, who cares for all, 
gave to life a. certain medicine as it were in mar- 
tyrdom, when to some He assigned it on account 
of their desen'ing, to others He gave it on ac- 
count of His mercy. We have assuredly seen 
very many distinguished by their faith, come to 

claim this illustrious name, that death might 
ennoble the obedience of their devotion. More- 
over, also, we have frequently beheld others 
stand undismayed, that they might redeem their 
sins committed, and be regarded as washed in 
their gore by His blood ; and so being slain they 
might live again, who when alive were counted 
slain. Death assuredly makes life more com- 
plete, death finds the glory that was lost. For 
in this the hope once lost is regained, in this all 
salvation is restored. Thus, when the seed-times 
shall fail on the withering plains, and the earth 
shall be parched with its dying grass, the river 
has delighted to spring forth from the sloping 
hills, and to soothe the thirsty fields with its 
gushing streams, so that the vanquished poverty 
of the land might be dissolved into fruitful wheat- 
stems, and the corn-field might bristle up the 
thicker for the counterfeited showers of rain. 

24. What then, beloved brethren, shall I chiefly 
relate, or what shall I say ? When all dignified 
titles thus combine in one, the mind is confused, 
the perception is misled ; and in the very at- 
tempt to speak with brilliancy, my unworthy 
discourse vanishes away. For what is there to 
be said which can be sufiicient, when, if you 
should express the power of eternal salvation, 
its attending glories come in your way ; if you 
would speak of its surroundings, its greatness 
prevents you ? The things at the same time are 
both in agreement and in opposition, and there 
is nothing which appears worthy to be uttered. 
Thus the instances of martyrdom have held in 
check the impulses of daring speech, as if en- 
tangled and ensnared by an opponent. What 
voice, what lungs, what strength, can undertake 
to sustain the form of such a dignity? At the 
confession of one voice, adverse things give way, 
joyous things appear, kingdoms are opened, em- 

j pires are prepared, suffering is overcome, death 
is subdued, life is preferred, and the resisting 
weapons of a mischievous enemy are broken up. 
If there is sin, it perishes ; if there is crime, it 
is left behind. Wherefore I beseech you, weigh 
this in your minds, and from my address receive 
so much as you know that you can feel. 

25. Let it present itself to your eyes, what a 
day that is, when, with the people looking on, 
and all men watching, an undismayed devotion 
is struggling against earthly crosses and the 
threats of the world ; how the minds in suspense, 
and hearts anxious about the tremblings of doubt, 
are agitated by the dread of the timid fearfulness 
of those who are congratulating them ! What 
an anxiety is there, what a prayerful entreaty, 
what desires are recorded, when, witli the victory 
still wavering, and the crown of conquest hang- 
ing in doubt over the head while the results are 
still uncertain, and when that pestilent and rav- 
ing confession is inflamed by passion, is kindled 

586 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

by madness, and finally, is heated by the fury of 
the heart, and by gnashing threats ! For who 
is ignorant how great a matter this is, that our, 
as it were, despised frailty, and the unexpected 
boldness of human strength, should not yield to 
the pangs of wounds, nor to the blows of tor- 
tures,— that a man should stand fast and not 
be moved, should be tortured and still not be 
overcome, but should rather be armed by the 
very suffering whereby he is tormented ? 

26. Consider what it is, beloved brethren : 
set before your perceptions and your minds all 
the endurance of martyrdom. Behold, indeed, 
in the passion of any one you will, they who are 
called martyrs rejoice as being already sum- 
moned out of the world ; they rejoice as being 
messengers of all good men ; they rejoice in 
hke manner as elected. Thus the Lord rejoices 
in His soldier,' Christ rejoices in the witness to 
His name. It is a small matter that I am speak- 
ing of, beloved brethren ; it is a small matter, 
so great a subject in this kind of address, and so 
marvellous a difficulty has been undertaken by 
me ; but let the gravity of the issue, I beseech 
you, not be wanting for my own purpose, know- 
ing that as much can be said of martyrdom as 
could be appreciated. Whence also this alone 
has been the reason of my describing its glory, 
not that I judged myself equal and fitted for its 
praise, but that I saw that there was such a 
virtue in it, that however little I might say about 
it, I should profess that I had said as much as 
possible. For although the custody of faith may 
be preferred to the benefit of righteousness, and 
an immaculate virginity may recognise itself as 
better than the praises of all ; yet it is necessary 
that even it should give place to the claim of 
blood, and be made second to a gory death. 
The former have chosen what is good, the latter 
have imitated Christ. 

27. But now, beloved brethren, lest any one 
should think that I have placed all salvation in 
no other condition than in martyrdom, let him 
first of all look especially at this, that it is not I 
who seem to speak, that am of so great impor- 
tance, nor is the order of things so arranged that 
the promised hope of immortality should depend 
on the strength of a partial advocacy. But 
since the Lord has testified with His own mouth, 
that in the Father's possession are many dwell- 
ings, I have believed that there is nothing greater 
than that glory whereby those men arc proved 
who are unworthy of this worldly life. There- 
fore, l)eloved brethren, striving with a religious 
rivalry, as if stirred up with some incentive of 
reward, let us submit to all the abundance and 
the endurance of strength. For things passing 

■ [The adnptinn of " the sign of the cross," after the immersion of 
baptism, is referable to this martyr-age. It was meant to impress the 
idea of soldiership ] 

away ought not to move us, seeing that they are 
always being pressed forward to their own over- 
throw, not only by the law proposed to them, 
but even by the very end of time. John ex- 
claims, and says, " Now is the axe laid to the 
root of the tree ; " ^ showing, to wit, and point- 
ing out that it is the last old age of all things. 
Moreover, also, the Lord Himself says, " Walk 
while ye have the light, lest the darkness lay 
hold upon you." 3 But if He has foretold that 
we must walk in that time, certainly He shows 
that we must at any rate walk. 

28. And to return to the praise of martyrdom, 
there is a word of the blessed Paul, who says : 
" Know ye not that they who run in a race strive 
many, but one receiveth the prize ? But do ye 
so run, that all of you may obtain." ■♦ More- 
over also elsewhere, that he may exhort us to 
martyrdom, he has called us fellow-heirs with 
Christ ; nay, that he might omit nothing, he says, 
" If ye are dead with Christ, why, as if living in 
the world, do ye make distinctions ? " 5 Because, 
dearest brethren, we who bear the rewards of 
resurrection, who seek for the day of judgment, 
who, in fine, are trusting that we shall reign with 
Christ, ought to be dead to the world. For you 
can neither desire martyrdom till you have first 
hated the world, nor attain to God's reward un- 
less you have loved Christ. And he who loves 
Christ does not love the world. For Christ was 
given up by the world, even as the world also 
was given up by Christ ; as it is written, " The 
world is crucified unto me, and I unto the 
world." '' The world has been an object of 
affection to none whom the Lord has not pre- 
viously condemned ; nor could he enjoy eternal 
salvation who has gloried in the life of the world. 
That is the very voice of Christ, who says : " He 
that loveth his life in this world, shall lose it in 
the world to come ; but he that hateth his life 
in this world, shall find it in the world to come." 7 
Moreover, also, the Apostle Paul says : " Be ye 
imitators of me, as I also am of Christ." * And 
the same elsewhere says : " I wish that all of 
you, if it were possible, should be imitators of 
me." 9 

29. He said this who suffered, and who suf- 
fered for this cause, that he might imitate the 
Lord ; and assuredly he wished us also to suffer 
for this cause, that through him we might imitate 
Christ. If thou art righteous, and believest in 
God, why fearest thou to shed thy blood for Him 
whom thou knowest to have so often suffered for 
thee ? In Isaiah He was sawn asunder, in Abel 

2 Matt. iii. lo. 

3 John xii. 35. 

* I Cor. i.\. 24. 
^ Col. ii. 20; " 

* Gal. vi. 14. 
7 Matt. X. ^g. 
" I Cor. VI. 4. 
9 I Cor. vii. 7 

[Elucidation II.] 

decernitis." 

[Compare Ep. xxv. p. 303, supra.\ 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

587 

He was slain, in Isaac He was offered up, in 
Joseph He was sold into slavery, in man He was 
crucified. And I say nothing of other matters, 
such as neither my discourse is able to tell nor 
my mind to bear. My consciousness is overcome 
by the example of His humility ; and when it 
considers what things befell when He suffered, 
it marvels that He should suffer on whose behalf 
all things quaked. The day fled into the night ; 
the light gave up all things into darkness ; and, 
its mass being inclined backwards and forwards, 
the whole earth was jarred, and burst open ; the 
dead ' were disturbed, the graves were laid 
bare, and as the tombs gaped open into the 
rent of the earth, bodies returning to the light 
were restored ; the world trembled at the flow- 
ing of His blood ; and the veil which hung from 
the opening of the temple was rent, and all the 
temple uttered a groan. For which cause it is 
a great matter to imitate Him who, in dying, 
convicted the world. Therefore when, after the 
example of the Lord's passion, and after all the 
testimony of Christ, you lay down your life, and 
fear not to shed your blood, everything must 
absolutely give way to martyrdom. Inestimable 
is the glory of martyrdom, infinite its measure, 
immaculate its victory, invaluable its title, im- 
mense its triumph ; because he who is presented 
to Him with the special glory of a confessor, is 
adorned with the kindred blood of Christ. 

30. Therefore, beloved brethren, although 
this is altogether of the Lord's promise and 
gift, and although it is given from on high, and 
is not received except by His will, and more- 
over, can neither be expressed in words nor 
described by speech, nor can be satisfied by any 

» Or, " Manes." 

kind of powers of eloquence, still such will be 
your benevolence, such will be your charity and 
love, as to be mindful of me when the Lord shall 
begin to glorify martyrdom in your experience. 
That holy altar - encloses you within itself, that 
great dwelling-place of the venerable Name 
encloses you within itself, as if in the folds of a 
heart's embrace : the powers of the everlasting 
age sustain you, and that by which you shall 
ever reign and shall ever conquer. O blessed 
ones ! and such as truly have your sins remitted, 
if, however, you who are Christ's peers ever have 
sinned ! ^ O blessed ones ! whom the blood 
of the Lord has dyed from the beginning of the 
world, and whom such a brightness of snowy 
clothing has deservedly invested, and the white- 
ness of the enfolding robe has adorned ! Final- 
ly, I myself seem to myself to behold already, 
and, as far as is possible to the mind of man,' 
that divine and illustrious thing occurs to my 
eyes and view. I seem, I say to myself, already 
to behold, that that truly noble army accompa- 
nies the glory and the path of their Christ. The 
blessed band of victors will go before His face ; 
and as the crowds become denser, the whole 
army, illuminated as it were by the rising of the 
sun, will ascribe to Him the power. And would 
that it might be the lot of such a poor creature 
as myself to see that sight ! But the Lord can 
do what He is believed not to deny to youi 
petitions."* 

2 [Rev. vi. 9; also vol. i. p. 486, note 10, this series.] 

3 [" Si tamen qui Christi compares estis aliquando peccastis; " 
not very happily translated, but extravagant at best.] 

* [Think, I say again, of three hundred years of such " fiery 
trial," so marvellously sustained, and we shall gain new views of 
Christ's power to perfect His own strength in human weakness. The 
life of these Christians was a conscious daily warfare against " the 
world, the flesh, and the devil; " and we must recognise this in all 
judgments of their discipline and their modes of thought.] 

OF THE DISCIPLINE AND ADVANTAGE OF CHASTITY.' 

I. I do not conceive that I have exceeded 
any portions of my duty, in always striving as 
much as possible, by daily discussions of the 
Gospels, to afford to you from time to time the 
means of growth, by the Lord's help, in faith 
and knowledge. For what else can be effected 
in the Lord's Church with greater advantage, 
Avhat can be found more suitable to the office of 
a bishop, than that, by the teaching of the divine 
words, recommended and commented on by 
Him, believers should be enabled to attain to the 
promised kingdom of heaven? This assuredly, 
as the desired result day by day of my work as 

^ [Not reckoned by Erasmus as worthy of Cyprian. Pamelius 
thinks otherwise.] 

well as of my office, I endeavour, notwithstand- 
ing my absence, to accomplish ; and by my 
letters I try to make myself present to you, 
addressing you in faith, in my usual manner, by 
the exhortations that I send you. I call upon 
you, therefore, to be established in the power of 
the Root ^ of the Gospel, and to stand always 
armed against all the assaults of the devil. I 
shall not believe myself to be absent from you, 
if I shall be sure of you. Nevertheless, every- 
thing which is advantageously set forth, and 
which either defines or promises the condition 
of eternal life to those who are investigating it, 
is then only profitable, if it be aided in attaining 

2 [This illustrates pp. 322 and 389, note 7.] 

588 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

the reward of the effort by the power of the 
divine mercy. We not only set forth words 
which come from the sacred fountains of the 
Scriptures, but with these very words we associ- 
ate prayers to the Lord, and wishes, that, as 
well to us as to you. He would not only unfold 
the treasures of His sacraments, but would be- 
stow strength for the carrying into act of what 
we know. For the danger is all the greater it 
we know the Lord's will, and loiter in the work 
of the will of God. | 

2. Although, therefofe, I exhort you always, 
as you are aware, to many things, and to the 
precepts of the Lord's admonition — for what i 
else can be desirable or more important to me, ' 
than that in all things you should stand perfect i 
in the Lord ? — yet I admonish you, that you : 
should before all things maintain the barriers of i 
chastity, as also you do : knowing that you are 
the temple of the Lord, the members of Christ, ' 
the habitation of the Holy Spirit, elected to 
hope, consecrated to faith, destined to salvation, 
sons of God, brethren of Christ, associates of the 
Holy Spirit, owing nothing any longer to the 
flesh, as born again of water, that the chastity, 
over and above the will, which we should always 
desire to be ours, may be afforded to us also, on 
account of the redemption, that that which has 
been consecrated by Christ might not be cor- 
rupted. For if the apostle declares the Church 
to be the spouse of Christ, I beseech you con- 
sider what chastity is required, where the Church 
is given in marriage as a betrothed virgin. And 
I ind-eed, except that I have proposed to ad- 
monish you witfc brevity, think the most diffuse 
praises due, and could set forth abundant lauda- 
tions of chastity ; but I have thought it super- 
fluous to praise it at greater length among those 
who practise it. For you adorn it while you 
exhibit it ; and in its exercise you set forth its 
riiore abundant praises, being made its ornament, 
while it also is yours, each lending and borrow- 
ing honour from the other. It adds to you the 
discipline of good morals ; you confer upon it 
the ministry of saintly works. For how much 
and what it can effect has on the one hand been 
manifest by your means, and on the other it has 
shown and taught what you are wishing for, — 
the two advantages of precepts and practice be- 
ing combined into one, that nothing should 
appear maimed, as would be the case if either 
principles were wanting to service, or service to 
principles. 

3. Chastity is the dignity of the body, the or- 
nament of morality, the sacredness of the sexes, 
the bond of modesty, the source of purity, the 
peacefulness of home, the crown of concord.' 

« [" So dear 
Comus, 455.] 

to Heaven is saintly Chastity, etc." — Milton', 

Chastity is not careful whom it pleases but itself. 
Chastity is always modest, being the mother of 
innocency ; chastity is ever adorned with mod- 
esty alone, then rightly conscious of its own 
beauty if it is displeasing to the wicked. Chas- 
tity seeks nothing in the way of adornments : it is 
its own glory. It is this which commends us to 
the Lord, unites us with Christ ; it is this which 
drives out from our members all the illicit con- 
flicts of desire, instils peace into our bodies : 
blessed itself, and making those blessed, who- 
ever they are, in whom it condescends to dwell. 
It is that which even they who possess it not can 
never accuse ; it is even venerable to its enemies, 
since they admire it much more because they 
are unable to capture it. Moreover, as mature, 
it is both always excellent in men, and to be ear- 
nestly desired by women ; so its enemy, unchas- 
tity, is always detestable, making an obscene sport 
for its servants, sparing neither bodies nor souls. 
For, their own proper character being overcome, 
it sends the entire man under its yoke of lust, 
alluring at first, that it may do the more mischief 
by its attraction, — the foe of continency, ex- 
hausting both means and modesty ; the perilous 
madness of lust frequently attaining to the blood, 
the destruction of a good conscience, the mother 
of impenitence, the ruin of a more virtuous age, 
the disgrace of one's race, driving away all con- 
fidence in blood and family, intruding one's own 
children upon the affections of strangers, inter- 
polating the offspring of an unknown and cor- 
rupted stock into the testaments of others. And 
this also, very frequently burning without refer- 
ence to sex, and not restraining itself within the 
permitted limits, thinks it little satisfaction to it- 
self, unless even in the bodies of men it seeks, not 
a new pleasure, but goes in quest of extraor- 
dinary and revolting extravagances, contrarj' to 
nature itself, of men with men. 

4. But chastity maintains the first rank in vir- 
gins, the second in those who are continent, the 
third in the case of wedlock. Yet in all it is 
glorious, with all its degrees. For even to main- 
tain the marriage-faith is a matter of praise in 
the midst of so many bodily strifes ; and to ha\e 
determined on a limit in marriage defined by 
continency is more virtuous still, because herein 
even lawful things are refused.^ Assuredly to 
have guarded one's purity from the womb, and 
to have kept oneself an infant even to old age 
throughout the whole of life, is certainly the part 
of an admirable virtue ; only that //"never to have 
known the body's seductive capacities is the 
greater blessedness, to have overcome them when 
once known is the greater virtue ; yet still in such 
a sort that that virtue comes of God's gift, al- 

"■ I Holy men have generally recognised this rule as ennobling the 
estate of matii;nony. See Jeremy Taylor, Holy Living, cap. ii. 

sec. J ' 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

589 

though it manifests itself to men in their mem- 
bers. 

5. The precepts of chastity, brethren, are an- 
cient. Wherefore do I say ancient? Because 
they were ordained at the same time as men 
themselves. For both her own husband belongs 
to the woman, for the reason that besides him 
she may know no other ; and the woman is given 
to the man for the purpose that, when that which 
had been his own had been yielded to him, he 
should seek for nothing belonging to another.' 
And in such wise it is said, " Two shall be in 
one flesh," ^ that what had been made one should 
return together, that a separation without return 
should not afford any occasion to a stranger. 
Thence also the apostle declares that the man is 
the head of the woman, that he might commend 
chastity in the conjunction of the two. For as 
the head cannot be suited to the limbs of another, 
so also one's limbs cannot be suited to the head 
of another : for one's head matches one's limbs, 
and one's limbs one's head ; and both of them 
are associated by a natural link in mutual con- 
cord, lest, by any discord arising from the sepa- 
ration of the members, the compact of the divine 
covenant should be broken. Yet he adds, and 
says : " Because he who loves his wife, loves him- 
self. For no one hates his own flesh ; but nour- 
ishes and cherishes it, even as Christ the Church." 3 
From this passage there is great authority for 
charity with chastity, if wives are to be loved by 
their husbands even as Christ loved the Church, 
and wives ought so to love their husbands also as 
the Church loves Christ. 

6. Christ gave this judgment when, being 
inquired of. He said that a wife must not be put 
away, save for the cause of adultery ; such hon- 
our did He put upon chastity. Hence arose 
the decree : " Ye shall not suffer adulteresses to 
live." ■* Hence the apostle says : " This is the 
will of God, that ye abstain from fornication." s 
Hence also he says the same thing : " That the 
members of Christ must not be joined with the 
members of an harlot." ^ Hence the man is 
delivered over unto Satan for the destruction 
of the flesh, who, treading under foot the law of 
chastity, practises the vices of the flesh. Hence 
with reason adulterers do not attain the kingdom 
of heaven. Hence it is that every sin is without 
the body, but that the adulterer alone sins against 
his own body. Hence other authoritative utter- 
ances of the instructor, all of which it is not 
necessary at this time to collect, especially among 
you, who for the most part know and do them ; 

' [This natural law, renewed in Christ, is part of the honour which 
He has restored to womanhood; honouring His mother therein as 
the second Eve. Matt. .\ix. 8; Gen. ii. 24.] 

- Matt. xix. 5. 

3 Eph. V. 28, 29. 

* Lev. XX. 10. • 
5 1 Thess. iv. 3. 

* 1 Cor. vi. 15. 

and you cannot find cause for complaint con- 
cerning these things, even though they are not 
described. For the adulterer has not an excuse, 
nor could he have, because he might take a 
wife. 

7. But as laws are prescribed to matrons, who 
are so bound that they cannot thence be sepa- 
rated, while virginity and continency are beyond 
all law, there is nothing in the laws of matrimony 
which pertains to virginity ; for by its loftiness 
it transcends them all. If any evil undertakings 
of men endeavour to transcend laws, virginity 
places itself on an equality with angels ; more- 
over, if we investigate, it even excels them, 
because struggling in the flesh it gains the vic- 
tory even against a nature which angels have not. 
What else is virginity than the glorious prepara- 
tion for the future life? Virginity is of neither 
sex. Virginity is the continuance of infancy. 
Virginity is the triumph over pleasures. Virgin- 
ity has no children ; but what is more, it has 
contempt for offspring : it has not fruitfulness, 
but neither has it bereavement ; blessed that it 
is free from the pain of bringing forth, more 
blessed still that it is free from the calamity of 
the death of children. What else is virginity 
than the freedom of liberty ? It has no husband 
for a master. Virginity is freed from all affec- 
tions : it is not given up to marriage, nor to the 
world, nor to children. It cannot dread per- 
secution, since it cannot provoke it from its 
security. 

8. But since the precepts of chastity have 
thus briefly been set forth to us, let us now give 
an instance of chastity. For it is more profitable 
when we come in the very presence of the thing ; 
nor will there be any doubt about the virtue, 
when that which is prescribed is also designated 
by illustrations. The example of chastity begins 
with Joseph. A Hebrew youth, noble by his 
parentage, nobler by his innocence, on account 
of the envy excited by his revelations exposed 
for sale by his brethren to the Israelites, had 
attained to the household of a man of Egypt. 
By his obedience and his innocence, and by the 
entire faithfulness of his service, he had aroused 
in his favour the easy and kindly disposition of 
his master ; and his appearance had commended 
itself to all men, alike by his gracious speech as 
by his youthfulness. But that same nobility of 
manner was received by his master's wife in an- 
other manner than was becoming ; in a secret 
part of the house, and without witnesses, — a 
place high up, and fitted for deeds of wicked- 
ness, the unrestrained unchastity of the woman 
thought that it could overcome the youth's 
chastity, now by promises, now by threats. And 
when he was restrained from attempting flight 
by her holding his garments, shocked at the 
audacity of such a crime, tearing his very gar- 

590 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

ments, and able to appeal to the sincerity of his 
naked body as a witness of his innocence, the 
rash woman did not shrink from adding calum- 
ny to the crime of her unchastity. Dishevelled, 
and raging that her desire should be despised, 
she complained both to others and to her hus- 
band that the Hebrew youth had attempted 
to use that force to her which she herself had 
striven to exercise.' The husband's passion, 
unconscious of the truth, and terribly inflamed 
by his wife's accusation, is aroused ; and the 
modest youth, because he did not defile his con- 
science with the crime, is thrust into the lowest 
dungeon of the prison. But chastity is not 
alone in the dungeon ; for God is with Joseph, 
and the guilty are given into his charge, because ■ 
he had been guiltless. Moreover, he dissolves 
the obscurities of dreams, because his spirit was 
watchful in temptations, and he is freed from 
chains by the master of tlie prison. He who 
had been an inferior in the house with peril, was 
made lord of the palace without risk ; restored 
to his noble station, he received the reward of 
chastity and innocence by the judgment of God, 
from whom he had deserved it. 

9. But not less from a different direction arises 
to us another similar instance of chastity from 
the continence of women. Susanna, as we read, 
the daughter of Chelcias, the wife of Joachim, 
was exceedingly beautiful — more beautiful still 
in character. Her outward appearance added 
no charm to her, for she was simple : chastity 
had cultivated her; and in addition to chastity, 
nature alone. With her, two of the elders had 
begun to be madly in love, mindful of nothing, 
neither of the fear of God, nor even of their age, 
already withering with years. Thus the flame of 
resuscitated lust recalled them into the glowing 
heats of their bygone youth. Robbers of chas- 
tity, they profess love, while they really hate. They 
threaten her with calumnies when she resists ; 
the adulterers in wish declare themselves the 
accusers of adultery. And between these rocks 
of lust she sought help of the Lord, because she 
was not equal to prevailing against them by 
bodily strength. And the Lord heard from 
heaven chastity crying to Him ; and when she, 
overwhelmed with injustice, was being led to 
punishment, she was delivered, and saw her 
revenge upon her enemies. Twice victorious, 
and in her peril so often and so fatally hedged 
in, she escaped both the lust and death. It will 
be endless if I continue to produce more exam- 
ples ; I am content with these two, especially as 
in these cases chastity has been defended with 
all their might. 

10. The memory of noble descent could not 
enervate them, although to some this is a sug- 

' " Irrogare." 

gestive licence to lasciviousness ; nor the come- 
liness of their bodies, and the beauty of their 
well-ordered limbs, although for the most part 
this affords a hint, that being, as it were, the 
short-lived flower of an age that rapidly passes 
away, it should be fed with the offered opportu- 
nity of pleasure ; nor the first years of a green 
but mature age, although the blood, still inexpe- 
rienced, grows hot, and stimulates the natural 
fires, and the blind flames that stir in the mar- 
row, to seek a remedy, even if they should break 
forth at the risk of modesty ; nor any opportunity 
afforded by secrecy, or by freedom from wit- 
nesses, which to some seems to ensure safety, 
although this is the greatest temptation to the 
commission of crime, that there is no punish- 
ment for meditating it. Neither was a necessity 
laid upon them by the authority of those who 
bade them yield, and in the boldness of associa- 
tion and companionship, by which kind of temp- 
tations also righteous determinations are often 
overcome. Neither did the very rewards nor the 
kindliness, nor did the accusations, nor threats, 
nor punishments, nor death, move them ; noth- 
ing was counted so cruel, so hard, so distressing, 
as to have fallen from the lofty stand of chastity. 
They were worthy of such a reward of the Divine 
Judge, that one of them should be glorified on 
a throne almost regal ; that the other, endowed 
with her husband's sympathy, should be rescued 
by the death of her enemies. These, and such 
as these, are the examples ever to be placed 
before our eyes, the like of them to be medi- 
tated on day and night. 

II. Nothing so delights the faithful soul as 
the healthy consciousness of an unstained mod- 
esty.- To have vanquished pleasure is the great- 
est pleasure ; nor is there any greater victory 
than that which is gained over one's desires. 
He who has conquered an enemy has been 
stronger, but it was stronger than another ; he 
who has subdued lust has been stronger than 
himself. He who has overthrown an enemy has 
beaten a foreign foe ; he who has cast down 
desire has vanquished a domestic adversary. 
Every evil is more easily conquered than pleas- 
ure ; because, whatever it is, the former is repul- 
sive, the latter is attractive. Nothing is crushed 
with such difticulty as that which is armed by it. 
He who gets rid of desires has got rid of fears 
also ; for from desires come fears. He who 
overcomes desires, triumphs over sin ; he who 
overcomes desires, shows that the mischief of 
the human family lies prostrate under his feet ; 
he who has overcome desires, has given to him- 
self perpetual peace ; he who has overcome de- 
sires, restores to himself liberty, — a most diffi- 
cult matter even for noble natures. Therefore 

- [Turtullian, vol. iv. pp. 74, 97, etc.] 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

591 

we should always meditate, brethren, as these 
matters teach us, on chastity. That it may be 
the more easy, it is based upon no acquired 
skill. For the right will that is therein carried 
to perfection — which, were it not checked, is 
remote {scil. from our consciousness) — is still 
our will ; so that it is not a will to be acquired, 
but that which is our own is to be cherished.' 

12. For what is chastity but a virtuous mind 
added to watchfulness over the body ; so that 
modesty observed in respect of the sexual rela- 
tions, attested by strictness (of demeanour), 
should maintain honourable faith by an uncor- 
rupted offspring? Moreover, to chastity, breth- 
ren, are suited and are known first of all divine 
modesty, and the sacred meditation of the divine 
precepts, and a soul inclined to faith, and a mind 
.attuned to the sacredness of religion : then care- 
fulness that nothing in itself should be elaborated 
beyond measure, or extended beyond propriety ; 
that nothing should be made a show of, nothing 
artfully coloured ; that there should be nothing 
to pander to the excitement or the renewal of 
•wiles. She is not a modest woman who strives 
to stir up the fancy of another, even although 
her bodily chastity be preserved. Away with 
such as do not adorn, but prostitute their beauty. 
For anxiety about beauty is not only the wisdom 
of an evil mind, but belongs to deformity. Let 
the bodily nature be free, nor let any sort of 
force be intruded upon God's works. She is 
always wretched who is not satisfied to be such 
as she is. Wherefore is the colour of hair 
changed? Why are the edges of the eyes dark- 
ened ? Why is the face moulded by art into a 
different form ? Finally, why is the looking-glass 
consulted, unless from fear lest a woman should 
be herself? Moreover, the dress of a modest 
woman should be modest ; a believer should not 
be conscious of adultery even in the mixture of 
colours. To wear gold in one's garments is as 
if it were desirable to corrupt one's garments. 
What do rigid metals do among the delicate 
threads of the woven textures, except to press 
upon the enervated shoulders, and unhappily to 
show the extravagance of a boastful soul ? Why 
are the necks oppressed and hidden by outland- 
ish stones, the prices of which, without workman- 
ship, exceed the entire fortune - of many a one ? 

' This passage is allowed by all to be corrupt. If we were to 
punctuate differently, to insert "nisi" before " consummata," and 
change " longe est" into " non deesset," we get the following sense: 
" Therefore we should always meditate, brethren, on chastity, as cir- 
cumstances teach us, that it may be more easy for us. It depends on 
no arts; for what is it but perfected will, which, if it were not checked, 
■would certainly not fail to arise? And it is our own will, too: there- 
fore it has not to be acquired, but we have to cherish what is already 
our own." 

2 [" Kalendarium cujusvis excedunt." The kalendaria were 
tablets of monthly accounts, in which the monthly interest due, etc., 
were set down. " Exceed the entire monthly income" would be bet- 
ter. Tertullian uses the same word, "exhaust the kalendarium" 
rendered by our Edinburgh translator (vol. iv. p. 18), a "fortune." 
In this treatise Tertullian is constantly copied and quoted.] 

It is not the woman that is adorned, but the 
woman's vices that are manifested. What, when 
the fingers laden with so much gold can neither 
close nor open, is there any advantage sought 
for, or is it merely to show the empty parade of 
one's estate? It is a marvellous thing that 
women, tender in all things else, in bearing the 
burden of their vices are stronger than men. 

13. But to return to what I began with : chas- 
tity is ever to be cultivated by men and women ; 
it is to be kept with all watchfulness within its 
bounds. The bodily nature is quickly endan- 
gered in the body, when the flesh, which is al- 
ways falling, carries it away with itself. Because 
under the pretext of a nature which is always 
urging men to desires whereby the ruins of a 
decayed race are restored, deceiving with the 
enticement of pleasure, it does not lead its off- 
spring to the continence of legitimate inter- 
course, but hurls them into crime. Therefore, 
in opposition to these fleshly snares, by which 
the devil both obtrudes himself as a companion 
and makes himself a leader, we must struggle 
with every kind of strength. Let the aid of 
Christ be appropriated, according to the apostle, 
and let the mind be withdrawn as much as pos- 
sible from the association of the body ; let con- 
sent be withheld from the body ; let vices be 
always chastised, that they may be hated ; let 
that misshapen and degraded shame which 
belongs to sin be kept before our eyes. Re- 
pentance itself, with all its struggles, is a dis- 
creditable testimony to sins committed. Let 
not curiosity be indulged in scanning other 
people's countenances. Let one's speech be 
brief, and one's laughter moderate, for laughter 
is the sign of an easy and a negligent disposi- 
tion ; and let all contact, even that which is 
becoming, be avoided.^ Let no indulgence be 
permitted to the body, when bodily vice is to be 
avoided. Let it be considered how honourable 
it is to have conquered dishonour, how disgrace- 
ful to have been conquered by dishonour. 

14. It must be said, moreover, that adultery 
is not pleasure, but mutual contempt ; nor can 
it delight, because it kills both the soul and 
modesty. Let the soul restrain the provocations 
of the flesh ; let it bridle the impulses of the 
body. For it has received this power, that the 
limbs should be subservient to its command ; 
and as a lawful and accomplished charioteer, it 
should turn about the fleshly impulses when they 
lift themselves above the allowed limits of the 
body, by the reins of the heavenly precepts, lest 
that chariot of the body, carried away beyond 
its limits, should hurry into its own peril the 
charioteer himself as well as it. But in the 
midst of these things, nay,' before these things, 

3 [Laughter, vol. ii. p. 245, and contact p. 291.] 

592 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

in opposition to disturbances and all vices, help 
must be sought for from the divine camp ; for 
Clod alone, who has condescended to make men, 
is powerful also to afford sufficient help to men. 
I have composed a few words, because I did 
not propose to write a volume, but to send you 

an address. Look ye to the Scriptures ; seek 
out for yourselves from those precepts greater 
illustrations of this matter.' Beloved brethren, 
farewell. 

' [Everything in antiquity breathes this spirit of " searching the 
Scriptures." Compare Hippol., p. 219, note 4, supra.] 

EXHORTATION TO REPENTANCE.' 

That all sins may be forgiven him who has 
turned to God with his whole heart. 

In the eighty-eighth Psalm : " If his children 
forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments, 
and keep not my commandments, I will visit 
their iniquities with a rod, and their sins with 
stripes ; nevertheless my loving-kindness will I 
not scatter away from them." ^ 

Also in Isaiah : " Thus saith the Lord, the 
Holy One of Israel, When thou shalt turn and 
mourn, then thou shalt be saved, and shalt know 
where thou wast." ^ 

Also in the same place : " Woe unto you, 
children of desertion, saith the Lord ! ye have 
made counsel not by me, and my covenant not 
by my Spirit, to add sin to sin." •♦ 

Also in Jeremiah : " Withdraw thy foot from 
a rough way, and thy face from thirst. But she 
said, I will be comforted, I am willing ; for she 
loved strangers, and went after them." s 

Also in Isaiah : " Be ye converted, because 
ye devise a deep and wicked counsel."^ 

Also in the same place : " I am He, I am He 
that blotteth out thy iniquities, and will not re- 
member them ; but do thou remember them, 
and let us be judged together ; do thou first tell 
thine unrighteousnesses." ? 

Also in the same : " Seek the Lord ; and when 
ye shall have found Him, call upon Him. But 
when He has drawn near to you, let the wicked 
forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his 
thoughts ; and let him be converted to the Lord, 
and mercy shall be prepared for him, because 
He does not much ^ forgive your sins." '' 

Also in the same : " Remember these things, 

0 J-acob and Israel, because thou art my servant. 

1 have calletl thee my servant ; and thou, Israel, 
forget me not. Lo, I have washed away thy 

. , and thy sins as a rain- 

unrighteousness as 

' [Almost wholly made up of Scripture, and useful in any ape to 
all Christians. Whatever its origin, it breathes a truly primitive 
spirit. Compare Tertullian, vol. iii. p. 657.] 

^ Ps. Ixxxix. 30. 

3 Isa. XXX. 15, LXX. 

* Isa. XXX. 1, LXX. 
5 Jer. ii. 25, LXX. 

«> Isa. xxxi. 6, LXX. 
7 Isa. xliii. 25, LXX. 

* Non miiltum remittit — probably a misprint for " permultum." 
9 Ita. Iv. 6, 7, LXX. 

cloud. Be converted to me, and I will redeem 
thee." '° 

Also in the same : " Have these things in 
mind, and groan. Repent, ye that have been 
seduced ; be converted in heart unto me, and 
have in mind the former ages, because I am 
God."" 

Also in the same : " For a very little season I 
have forsaken thee, and with great mercy I will 
pity thee. In a very little wrath I turned away 
my face from thee ; in everlasting mercy I will 
pity thee." '- 

Also in the same : "Thus said the Most High, 
who dwelleth on high, for ever Holy in the 
holies. His name is the Lord, the Most High, 
resting in the holy places, and giving calmness 
of mind to the faint-hearted, and giving life to 
those that are broken-hearted : I am not angry 
with you for ever, neither will I be avenged in 
all things on you : for my Spirit shall go forth 
from me, and I have made all inspiration ; and 
on account of a very little sin I have grieved 
him, and have turned away my face from him ; 
and he has suffered the vile man, and has gone 
away sadly in his ways. I have seen his ways, 
and have healed him, and I have comforted 
him, and I have given to him the true consola- 
tion, and peace upon peace to those who are 
afar off, and to those that are near. And the 
Lord said, I have healed them ; but the unright- 
eous, as a troubled sea, are thus tossed about 
and cannot rest. There is no joy to the wicked, 
saith the Lord." "^ 

Also in Jeremiah,: " Shall a bride forget her 
adornment, or '■♦ a virgin the girdle of her breast ? 
But my people has forgotten my days,'5 whereof 
there is no number." ''' 

Also in the same : " For a decree, I will speak 
upon the nation or upon the kingdom, or I will 
take them away and destroy them. And if the 
nation should be converted from its evils, I will 

'° Isa. xliv. 21,22, LXX. 
" Isa. xlvi. 8, LXX. 
'= Isa. liy. 7, 8, LXX. 
'3 Isa. Ivii. 15 et seq., LXX. 

■< It is taken for granted that the " ut " of the original is a mis- 
print for " aut." 

'5 Otherwise, " has forgotten me days without number." 
•fa Jcr. ii. 32, LXX. 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

593 

repent of the ills which ' I have thought to do 
unto them. And I will speak the decree upon 
the nation or the people, that I should rebuild 
it and plant it ; and they will do evil before me, 
that they should not hearken to my voice, and I 
will repent of the good things which I spoke of 
doing to them." ^ 

Also in the same : " Return to me, O dwelling 
of Israel, saith the Lord, and I will not harden 
my face upon you ; because I am merciful, saith 
the Lord, and I will not be angry against you for 
ever." ^ 

Also in the same : " Be converted, ye children 
that have departed, saith the Lord ; because I 
will rule over you, and will take you one of a 
city, and two of a family, and I will bring you 
into Sion : and I will give you shepherds after 
my heart, and they shall feed you, feeding you 
with discipline." ■♦ 

Also in the same : " Be converted, ye children 
who are turning, and I will heal your affliction." 5 

Also in the same : *' Wash thine heart from 
wickedness, O Jerusalem, that thou mayest be 
healed : how long shall there be in thee thoughts 
of thy sorrows? " ^ 

.\lso in the same : " Thus saith the Lord, 
Does not he that falleth arise ? or he that turns 
away, shall he not be turned back? Because 
this people hath turned itself away by a shame- 
less vision, and they have persisted in their pre- 
sumption, and would not be converted." ^ 

Also in the same : " There is no man that 
repenteth of his iniquity, saying. What have I 
done ? The runner has failed from his course, 
as the sweating horse in his neighing." *^ 

.A.lso in the same : " Therefore let every one 
of you turn from his evil way, and make your 
desires better. And they said, We will be com- 
forted, because we will go after your ^ inventions, 
and every one of us will do the sins which please 
his own heart." "° 

Also in the same : " Pour down as a torrent 
tears, day and night give thyself no rest, let not 
the pupil of thine eye be silent." " 

Also in the same : " Let us search out our ways, 
and be turned to the Lord. Let us purge our 
hearts with our hands, and let us look unto the 
Lord who dwelleth in the heavens. We have 
sinned, and we have provoked Thee, and Thou 
hast not been propitiated." '^ 

Also in the same : " And the Lord said to me 

' Here also the emendation of " quae " for " quod " is obviously 
necessary. 

^ Jer. xviii. 7. 

3 Jer. iii. 12, LXX. 

■• Jer. iii. 14, LXX. 

5 Jer. iii. 22, LXX. 

6 Jer. iv. 14, LXX. 
^ Jer. viii. 4, LXX. 
« Jer. viii. 6, LXX. 
9 Otherwise " our." 

'" Jer. xviii. 12, LXX. 
" I^m. ii 18, LXX. 
■' Lam. iii. 40. 

in the days of Josias the king. Thou hast seen 
what the dwelling of the house,'^ the house of 
Israel, has done to me. It has gone away upon 
every lofty mountain, and has gone under every 
shady "» tree, and has committed fornication there; 
and I said, after she had committed all these for- 
nications. Return unto me, and she has not re- 
turned." '5 

Also in the same : " The Lord will not reject 
for ever ; and when He has made low, He will 
have pity according to the multitude of His 
mercy. Because He will not bring low from His 
whole heart, neither will He reject the children 
of men." '^ 

Also in Ezekiel : " And the righteous shall not 
be able to be saved in the day of transgression. 
When I shall say to the righteous. Thou shalt 
surely live ; but '^ he will trust to his own right- 
eousness, and will do iniquity : all his righteous- 
nesses shall not be remembered ; in his iniquity 
which he has done, in that he shall die. And 
when I shall say to the wicked. Thou shalt surely 
die, and he turns himself from his sin, and doeth 
righteousness and judgment, and restoreth to 
the debtor his pledge, and giveth back his rob- 
bery, and walketh in the precepts of life, that he 
may do no iniquity, he shall surely live, and shall 
not die ; none of his sins which he hath sinned 
shall be stirred up against him : because he hath 
done justice and judgment, he shall live in 
them." '** 

Also in the same : *' I am the Lord, because 
I bring low the high tree, and exalt the low tree, 
and dry up the green tree, and cause the dry 
tree to flourish." '^ 

Also in the same : " And thou, son of man, 
say unto the house of Israel, Even as ye have 
spoken, saying, Our errors and our iniquities are 
in us, and we waste away in them, and how shall 
we live ? Say unto them, I live, saith the Lord : 
if I will the death of a sinner, only let him turn 
from his way, and he shall live." ^° 

Also in the same : " I the Lord have built up 
the ruined places, and have planted the wasted 
places."^' 

Also in the same : " And the wicked man, if 
he turn himself from all his iniquities that he has 
done, and keep all my commandments, and do 
judgment, and justice, and mercy, shall surely 
live, and shall not die. None of his sins which 
he has committed shall be in remembrance ; in 
his righteousness which he hath done he shall 

'3 There is evident confusion here, and no place can be found for 
the word " vocem." 

'< It has been taken for granted that " numerosum " is a misprint 
for " nemorosum." 

»5 Jer. iii. 6, LXX. 

«> J>am. iii. 31, LXX. 

'7 Trombellius suggests " if" instead of "but." 

■^ Ezek. x.xxii. 12, etc., LXX. 

'9 Ezek. xvii. 24, LXX. 

-° Ezek. xxxiii. 10, LXX. 

^' Ezek. xxxvi. 36, LXX. 

594 

TREATISES ATTRIBUTED TO CYPRIAN. 

live. Do I willingly desire the death of the un- 
righteous man, saith Adonai the Lord, rather 
than that he should turn him from his evil way, 
that he should live?" ' 

Also in the same : " Be ye converted, and 
turn you from all your wickedneses, and they 
shall not be to you for a punishment. Cast away 
from you all your iniiiuities which ye have 
wickedly committed against me, and make to 
vourselves a new heart and a new spirit ; and 
why will ye die, O house of Israel ? For I de- 
sire not the death of him that dieth, saith Adonai 
the Lord." ^ 

Also in Daniel : " And after the end of the 
days, I Nabuchodonosor lifted up my eyes to 
heaven, and my sense returned to me, and I 
praised the Most High, and blessed the King of 
heaven, and praised Him that liveth for ever ; 
because His power is eternal. His kingdom is 
for generations, 5 and all who inhabit the earth 
are as nothing." •* 

Also in Micah : " Alas for me, O my soul, be- 
cause truth has perished from the earth, and 
among all there is none that correcteth ; all 
judge in blood. Every one treadeth down his 
neighbour with tribulation ; they prepare their 
hands for evil." 5 

Also in the same : " Rejoice not against me, 
O mine enemy, because I have fallen, but I shall 
arise ; because although I shall sit in darkness, 
the Lord will give me light : I will bear the 
Lord's anger, because I have sinned against 
Him, until He justify my cause." *" 

A4so in Zephaniah : " Come ye together and 
pray, O undisciplined people ; before ye be made 
as a flower that passeth away, before the anger of 
the Lord come upon you, before the day of the 
Lord's fury come upon you, seek ye the Lord, all 
ye humble ones of the earth ; do judgment and 
seek justice, and seek for gentleness ; and answer 
ye to Him that ye may be protected in the day 
of the Lord's anger." ^ 

Also in Zechariah : " Be ye converted unto 
me, and I will be turned unto you." ** 

Also in Hosea : " Be thou converted, O Israel, 
to the Lord thy God, because thou art weakened 
by thine iniquities. Take many with you, and 
be converted to the Lord your God ; worship 
Him, and say. Thou art mighty to put away our 
sins ; that ye may not receive ini([uity, but that 
ye may receive good things." ^ 

Also in Ecclesiasticus : " Be thou turned to 
the Lord, and forsake thy sins, and exceedingly 

* Ezek. xviii. 2i, LXX. 

2 Ezek. xviii. 30, LXX. 

3 " In generatione." 

* Dan. iv. 34. 

5 Mic. vii. 1,2, 3, LXX. 

6 Mic. vii. 8, LXX. 

7 Zeph. ii. I, LXX. 

8 Zech. i. 3. 

9 Hos. xiv. 3. 

hate cursing, and know righteousness and God's 
judgments, and stand in the lot of the propitia- 
tion of the Most High : and go into the portion 
of life with the living, and those that make con- 
fession. Delay not in the error of the wicked. 
Confession perisheth from the dead man, as if 
it were nothing. Living and sound, thou shalt 
confess to the Lord, and thou shalt glory in His 
mercies ; for great is the mercy of the Lord, and 
His propitiation unto such as turn unto Him." '" 

Also in the same : " How good is it for a true 
heart to show forth repentance ! For thus shalt 
thou escape voluntary sin." " 

Also in the Acts of the Apostles : " But Peter 
saith unto him, thy money perish with thee, be- 
cause thou thinkest to be able to obtain the grace 
of God by money. Thou hast no part nor lot 
in this faith, for thy heart is not right with God. 
Therefore repent of this thy wickedness, and 
pray the Lord, if haply the thought of thy heart 
may be forgiven thee. For I see that thou art 
in the bond of iniquity, and in the bitterness of 
gall." " 

Also in the second Epistle of the blessed '^ 
Paul to the Corinthians : " For the sorrow which 
is according to God worketh a stedfast repent- 
ance unto salvation, but the sorrow of the world 
worketh death." '•♦ 

Also in the same place of this very matter : 
" But if ye have forgiven anything to any one, I 
also forgive him ; for I also forgave what I have 
forgiven for your sakes in the person of Christ, 
that we may not be circumvented by Satan, for 
we are not ignorant of his wiles." 'S 

Also in the same : " But I fear lest perchance, 
when I come to you, God may again humble 
me among you, and I shall bewail many of those 
who have sinned before, and have not repented, 
for that they have committed fornication and 
lasciviousness." '^ 

Also in the same : " I told you before, and 
foretell you as I sit present ; and absent now 
from those who before have sinned, and to all 
others ; as, if I shall come again, I will not spare." '^ 

Also in the second to Timothy : " But shun 
profane novelties of words, for they are of much 
advantage to impiety. And their word creeps 
as a cancer : of whom is Hymenaeus and Phile- 
tus, who have departed from the truth, saying 
that the resurrection has already happened, and 
hav^e subverted the faith of certain ones. But 
the foundation of God standeth firm, having this 
seal, God knoweth them that are His. And, 

■° Ecclus. xvii. 26. 
" Ecclus. XX. 3. 
'2 Acts viii. 20, etc. 

'3 The original has only " ben," which Trombellius reasonablj' 
assumes to be meant for " benedicti." 
■* 2 Cor. vii. 10. 
'S 2 Cor. ii. 10. 
'^ 2 Cor. xii. 21. 
'^ 2 Cor. xiii. a. 

ELUCIDATIONS. 

595 

Every one who nameth the name of the Lord 
shall depart from all iniquity. But in a great 
house there are not only vessels of gold and 
silver, but also of wood and of clay ; and some 
indeed for honour, and some for contempt. 
Therefore if any one shall amend ' himself from 
these things, he shall be a vessel sanctified for 
honour, and useful for the Lord, prepared for 
every good work. Moreover, flee youthful lusts : 
but foUoVv after righteousness, faith, charity, 
peace, with them that call upon the Lord from 
a pure heart. But avoid questions that are fool- 
ish and without learning, knowing that they be- 

■ " Emendaverit," probably a mistake for " emundaverit," " shall 
purge," as in the Vulg. ; sci'L iKKaOaptj, 

get Strifes. And the servant of the Lord oughf 
not to strive ; but to be gentle, docile to all men, 
patient with modesty, correcting those who re- 
sist, lest at any time God may give them repent- 
ance to the acknowledgment of the truth, and 
recover themselves from the snares of the devil, 
by whom they are held captive at his will." ^ 

Also in the Apocalypse : " Remember whence 
thou hast fallen, and repent ; but if not, I will 
come to thee quickly, and remove thy candle- 
stick out of its place." ^ 

- 2 Tim. ii. i6. [On true penitence see Epistle xxv. p. 304, 
supra.] 

3 Rev. ii. 5. [This selection of te.vts seems made on the same 
principle whicn dictated the compilation of texts against the Jews; 3 
bre^iiariiiin, the author calls it, — qitxdam utilia collecta et di- 
gesta, — to be read with readiness, and frequently referred to.] 

ELUCIDATIONS. 
I. 

(Maintained by consent, and caressed by excuses, p. 557.) 

The severer discipline of early Christianity must not be discarded by those who claim it foi 
the canon of Scripture ; for modes of baptism, confirmation, and other rites ; for Church polity, 
in short ; and for the Christian year. Let us note that the whole spirit of antiquity is opposed to 
worldliness. It reflects the precept, " Be not conformed to this world," and in nothing more 
emphatically than in hostility to theatrical amusements, which in our days are re-asserting the 
deadly influence over Christians which Cyprian and Tertullian and other Fathers so solemnly 
denounced. If they were " maintained by consent, and caressed by excuses," even in the martyr- 
age, no wonder that in our Laodicean period they baffle all exertions of faithful watchmen, who 
enforce the baptismal vow against "-pomps and vanities," always understood of theatrical shows, 
and hence part of that " world, the flesh, and the devil " which Christians have renounced. 

II. 

(Now is the a.xe laid to the root, p. 586.) 

Matt. iii. lo. " Securis ad radicem arboris posita est,'' says Cyprian, quoting the Old Latin, 
with which the Vulgate substantially a'grees.' A very diligent biblical scholar directs attention 
to the vulgar abuse of this saying,^ which turns upon a confusion of the active verb to lay, with the 
neuter verb to lie? It is quoted as if it read. Lay the axe to the root, and is " interpreted, popu- 
larly, as of felling a tree, an incumbrance or a nuisance. . . . Hence it often makes radical 
reformers in Church and State, and becomes the motto of many a reckless leader whose way has 
been to teach, not upward by elevating the ignoble, but downward by sinking the elevated. . . . 
There is something similar in Latin : jacio to hurl ; and jaceo, to lie, recline, or remain at rest. 
Beza follows the Vulgate (^posita est) ; but the original is clear, — KctTat,* is laid, or lieth. ... It 

■ It has arborz/w, however, instead of the singular. 

2 Theopneuston, by Samuel Hanson Cox, D.D., New York, 1842. 

3 Note, an extraordinary instance, Childe Harold, Canto iv. St. 180. 
* Lexicographers give (cet/u.ai = jaceo. 

596 ELUCIDATIONS. 

means, The axe is ready ; it lieth near the root, in mercy and in menace. . . . The long-suffering 
of God waiteth as in the days of Noah . . . waiteth, i.e., for good fruit." 

Compare Luke xiii. 9 : "If it bear fruit, well : and if not, then after that thou shalt cut it 
down." Such is the argument of Cyprian, in view of the approaching " end of time." 

III. 

(General Note.) 

Let me here call attention to the mischievous use of words common among modem Latins, 
even the best of them. Thus, Pellicia ' mentions Cyprian as referring his synodical judgment to 
" the supreme chair of the Church of Rome." No need to say that his reference proves nothing 
of the kind. " Supremacy," indeed ! Consult Bossuet and the Galileans on that point, even 
after Trent. The case cited is evidence of the very reverse. Cyprian and his Carthaginian 
colleagues wished, also, the conspicuous co-operation of their Italian brethren ; and so he writes 
to "Cornelius, oiir colleague''' who, "with very many comprovincial bishops, having held a council, 
concurred in the same opinion." It is an instance oi fraternal concurrence on grounds of entire 
equality ; and Cyprian's courteous invitation to his " colleague " Cornelius and his comprovincials 
to co-operate, is a striking illustration of the maxim, " Totus apellandus sit orbis, ubi totum orbem 
causa spectat." Compare St. Basil's letters to the Western bishops, in which he reminds them 
that the Gospel came to them from the East. This is a sort of primacy recognised by St. Paul 
himself,- as it was afterwards, when Jerusalem was recognised as "the mother of all the churches "J 
by a general council, writing to Damasus, bishop of Rome, himself. 

' Polity, etc., p 416 (translation). This valuable work, translated and edited by the Rev. J. C. Bellett, M.A. (London, 1883), is 
useful as to mediEeval usages, and as supplementing Bingham. But the learned editor has not been sufficiently prudent in noting his 
author's perpetual misconceptions of antiquity. 

^ I Cor. xiv. 36. 

3 Theodoret, book v. cap. ix. a.d. 382. The bishops say " last year" (a.d. 381), speaking of the council in session. 

CAIUS. 

^TRANSLATED BV THE REV. S. D. F. SALMOND, M.A.] 

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE 

TO 

CAIUS, PRESBYTER OF ROME 

[a.d. 180-217.] During the episcopate of Zephyrinus, Caius, one of his presbyters, acquired 
much credit by his refutation of Proclus, a Montanist. He became known as an eloquent and 
erudite doctor, and to him has often been ascribed the Philosophumena of Hippolytus, and also 
The Labyrinth. He wrote in Greek, and finally seems to have been promoted to an episcopal 
See, possibly among the Easterns.' To him also has been ascribed the celebrated " Muratorian 
Canon," which is therefore given in this volume, with other fragments less dubiously associated 
with his name. He has been supposed by some to have been a pupil of Irengeus, but of this 
there is no conclusive evidence. If his reputation suffers somewhat from his supposed rejection 
of the Apocalypse, it is apologized for by Wordsworth, in a paragraph that deserves to be quoted 
entire : " Let it be remembered that the church of Rome was not eminent for learning at that 
time. It was induced, by fear of erroneous consequences, to surrender another canonical book, 
— the Epistle to the Hebrews. The learning of the Church was then mainly in the East. It 
was by the influence of the East, in the West, that the church of Rome was enabled to recover 
that epistle. It was also the influence of the Apocalyptic churches of Asia that preserved the 
Apocalypse as an inspired work of St. John to the church of Rome." By the deference with 
which the author of the Refutation speaks of the Apocalypse, we are able, among other evidences, 
to decide that it is not the work of Caius. 

In an interesting chapter of his Hippolytus, Bishop Wordsworth considers the possibility of 
the authorship of that work as his, and discusses it with ability and learning. Nearly all that is 
known or conjectured concerning Caius is there condensed and elucidated. But Lardner devotes 
a yet more learned chapter to him ; and to that the inquirer is referred, as a sufficient elucidation 
of all that was known or conjectured about him before the present century. He is quoted by 
Eusebius ; ^ and the traveller is reminded, when he visits the gorgeous Church of St. Paul on the 
Ostian Road, that so early an author as Caius may be cited as evidence that it probably stands 
very near the spot where St. Paul fulfilled his prophecy, " I am now ready to be offered, and the 
time of my departure is at hand." We can only conjecture the time of his birth by the age he 
must have attained in the time of Zephyrinus ; but of his death, the secret is with the Master in 
whom he believed, as we may trust, until he fell asleep. 

Here follows, from the Edinburgh series, the learned editor's Introductory Notice : — 

Eusebius states that Caius lived in the time of Zephyrinus.' He speaks of him as a member 
of the Catholic Church,-* and as being most learned. And he mentions that a dialogue of his 

' The ingenious conjecture of Wordsworth, who surmises that Ka.\ €0v{ov l-niaKortov, in Photius, should be read icoi tixtSLvutv. Hif- 
fclytus, p. 30. Another conjecture is ' K0-r\vuiv. For the originals of these Fragments and learned notes, see Routh, Reliqu., ii. p. 127. 

- Eusebius quotes him in several places (book ii. cap. xxv., book iii. capp. xxviii. and xxxi.), and cites him in proof that Sl Peter 
suffered on the Vatican, and St. Paul on the Via Ostiensis. See Lardner, Credit., vol. ii. pp. 394, 410. 

^ Hist. Eccl., ii. 25, vi. 20. 

^ eKKArjiriaaTtKb? avr^p, 

599 

6oo INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. 

was extant in his time, in which he argued with Proclus, the leader of the Cataphrygian heresy ; 
and that Caius in this dialogue spoke of only thirteen epistles of the Apostle Paul, " not counting 
the Epistle to the Hebrews with the rest." ' 

Eusebius mentions no other work of Caius. He makes extracts from a work against the 
heresy of Artemon in the fifth book of his Ecclesiastical History, but he states distinctly that 
the work was anonymous. He evidently did not know who was the author. Theodoret and 
Nicephorus atifirm that the work from which Eusebius made these extracts bore the title of The 
Little Laby'tintk. Photius has the following notice of Caius : " Read the work of Josephus on 
the universe, bearing in some manuscripts the inscription On the Cause of the Universe, and in 
others, On the Substance of the Universe. . . . But I found that this treatise is not the work 
of Josephus, but of one Gaius a presbyter, who lived in Rome, who they say composed The 
Labyrinth also, and whose dialogue with Proclus, the champion of the Montanistic heresy, is in 
circulation. . . . They say also that he composed another treatise specially directed against the 
heresy of Artemon." ^ Photius here ascribes four works to Caius: i. On the Universe; 2. The 
Labyrinth; 3. The Dialogue between hi ?nself and Proclus ; 4. The Treatise against the Heresy 
of Artemon. He does not say that he read any of them but the first. This treatise is now 
assigned to Hippolytus. The information of Photius in regard to the other three, derived as it is 
from the statements of others, cannot be trusted. 

NOTE BY THE AMERICAN EDITOR. 

It is to be observed that the Fragment of Muratori proves that the Apocalypse was received 
in the church at Rome m the times of Pius, a.d. 160. It is quoted in Hennas freely. Also, 
see the Episde of Roman clergy to Cyprian (p. 303, note 5, supra), about a.d. 250. But the 
Fragment aforesaid is the earliest direct evidence on the subject. Note, that its author says, 
" IVe receive the Apocalypse," etc. ^^ Some atnongst us will not have," etc. (see p. 602, infra). 
Thus, the comprovincials have a voice, as in the cases cited by Hippolytus. See (pp. 157, 159, 
supra) Elucidations VI. and XI. The Bishop of Rome seems, by this Fragment, to have re- 
ceived the Apocalypse of Peter (Eusebius, H. E., book iii. cap. 25), but it was thrown out as 
spurious by the Church nevertheless. 

' Hist. Ecd., vi. so. 2 Cod. 48. 

FRAGMENTS OF CAIUS. 

S. — FROM A DIALOGUE OR DISPUTATION 
AGAINST PROCLUS.' 

I. 

(Preserved in Eusebius' Eccles. Hist., ii. 25.) 

And I can show the trophies of the apostles.^ 
For if you choose to go to the Vatican or to the 
Ostian Road,^ you will tiad the trophies of those 
who founded this church. 

II. 

(In the same, iii. 2S.) 

But Cerinthus, too, through revelations writ- 
ten, as he would have us believe, by a great 
apostle, brings before us marvellous things, which 
he pretends were shown him by angels ; alleging 
that after the resurrection the kingdom of Christ 
is to be on earth, and that the flesh-* dwelling 
in Jerusalem is again to be subject to desires 
and pleasures. And being an enemy to the 
Scriptures of God, wishing to deceive men, he 
says that there is to be a space of a thousand 
years for marriage festivals. 

III. 

(In the same, iii. 31.) 

And after this there were four prophetesses, 
daughters of Philip, at Hierapolis in Asia. Their 
tomb is there, and that, too, of their father.5 

II. — AGAINST THE HERESY OF ARTEMON.^ 

I. 

(In Eusebiiis' Eccl. Hist., v. 2S.) 

For they say that all those of the first age, and 
the apostles themselves, both received and taught 
those things which these men now maintain ; 

' A defender of the sect of the Cataphrygians. 

^ So Jerome, in the Epistle to Marcellus, says: "There, too, is 
a holy church; there are the trophies of the apostles and martyrs." 

3 The MSB. and the Chronicon of (leorgius Syncellus read I'asi- 
can, V>a.aiKav6v . The reference is to the Vatican as the traditional 
burial place of Peter, and to the Ostian Road as that of Paul. 

■* ly?'- '• pp- 35.1-352, 416.] 

5 This extract is taken from the Disputation of Caius, but the 
words are those of Proclus, as is shown by the citation in Eusebius. 

'' Two fragments of an anonymous work ascribed by some to 
Caius. Artemon and his loUowers maintained that Christ was mere 
(^uvoi) man. 

and that the truth of Gospel preaching was pre- 
served until the times of Victor, who was the 
thirteenth bishop in Rome from Peter, and that 
from his successor Zephyrinus the truth was fal- 
sified. And perhaps what they allege might be 
credible, did not the Holy Scriptures, in the first 
place, contradict them. And then, besides, there 
are writings of certain brethren older than the 
times of Victor, which they wrote against the 
heathen in defence of the truth, and against 
the heresies of their time : I mean Justin and Mil- 
tiades, and Tatian and Clement, and many others, 
in all which divinity is ascribed to Christ. For 
who is ignorant of the books of Irenaeus and 
Melito, and the rest, which declare Christ to be 
God and man ? All the psalms, too, and hymns ^ 
of brethren, which have been written from the 
beginning by the faithful, celebrate Christ the 
Word of God, ascribing divinity to Him. Since 
the doctrine of the Church, then, has been pro- 
claimed so many years ago, how is it possible 
that men have preached, up to the time of Vic- 
tor, in the manner asserted by these ? And how 
are they not ashamed to utter these calumnies 
against Victor, knowing well that Victor excom- 
municated Theodotus the tanner,** the leader 
and father of this God-denying apostasy, who 
first affirmed that Christ was a mere man ? For 
if, as they allege, Victor entertained the very 
opinions which their blasphemy teaches, how 
should he have cast off Theodotus, the author 
of this heresy ? 

11. 

(In Eusebius, as above.) 

I shall, at any rate, remind many of the breth- 
ren of an affair that took place in our own time, 
— an affair which, had it taken place in Sodom, 
might, I think, have been a warning even to 
them. There was a certain confessor, Natalius,'^ 

7 [Elucidation, I.] 

8 [See cap. x.xiii. p. 114, supra, and Euseb., iii. cap. 2S.] 

9 This jnay\ perhaps, lie the C^cilius Natalis who appears in the 
Octavius of Minucius P'elix, as maintaining the cause of paganism 
against Octavius Januarius, and becoming a convert to the truth 
through the discussion. Name, time, and profession at least suit. 
[A painful conjecture, and quite gratuitous. See the Octavius, cap. 
xvi. note 6, p. iSi, vol. iv., this series.] 

601 

602 

FRAGMENTS OF CAIUS. 

who lived not in distant times, but in our own 
day. He was deluded once by Asclepiodotus, 
and another Theodotus, a banker. And these 
were both disciples of Theodotus the tanner, the 
first who was cut off from communion on ac- 
count of this sentiment, or rather senselessness, 
by Victor, as I said, the bishop of the time." 
Now Natalius was persuaded by them to let 
himself be chosen- bishop of this heresy, on the 
understanding that he should receive from them 
a salary of a hundred and fifty denarii a month. 
Connecting himself, therefore, with them, he was 
on many occasions admonished by the Lord in 
visions. For our merciful God and Lord Jesus 
Christ was not willing that a witness of His 
own sufferings should perish, being without the 
Church. But as he gave little heed to the vis- 
ions, being ensnared by the dignity of presiding 
among them, and by that sordid lust of gain 
which ruins very many, he was at last scourged 
by holy angels, and severely beaten through a 
whole night, so that he rose early in the morn- 
ing, and threw himself, clothed with sackcloth 
and covered with ashes, before Zephyrinus the 
bishop, with great haste and many tears, rolling 
beneath the feet not only of the clergy, but even 
of the laity, and moving the pity of the compas- 
sionate Church of the merciful Christ by his 
weeping. And after trying many a prayer, and 
showing the weals left by the blows which he 
had received, he was at length with difificulty 
admitted to communion. 

III. 

(In Eusebius, as above.) 

The sacred Scriptures they have boldly falsi- 
fied, and the canons of the ancient faith ^ they 
have rejected, and Christ they have ignored, not 
inquiring what the sacred Scriptures say, but 
laboriously seeking to discover what form of syl- 
logism might be contrived to establish their im- 
piety.'' And should any one lay before them a 
word of divine Scripture, they examine whether 
it will make a connected or disjoined form of 
syllogism ; s and leaving the Holy Scriptures 
of God, they study geometry, as men who are of 
the earth, and speak of the earth, and are igno- 
rant of Him who cometh from above. Euclid, 

■ [toO Tore cTTKr/coTToi', " the then bishop." Text pf Routh.\ 
- There is another reading — named (icATjSiji'ai) instead of chosen 

or elected (icArjpiufliji'ai). 

3 I Thus early, primitive canons are recognised as in force.] 

* [Here we have an early foreshadowing of the schoolmen, whose 

rise was predicted by St. I'.ernard in his protest against Abelard. 

See Bernard, <^/'p., torn. i. p. 410, et nli/>i.'\ 

S I'he connected form here is the hyf>otlietical, as e.g., " If it is 

day, it is light." The disjoined is the disjunctive, as e.g., " It is 

either day or night." The words admit another rendering, viz., 

" Whether it, when connected or disjoined, will make the form of a 

syllogism." 

indeed, is laboriously measured^ by some of 
them, and Aristotle and Theophrastus are ad- 
mired ; and Galen, ^ forsooth, is perhaps even 
worshipped by some of them. But as to those 
men who abuse the arts of the unbelievers to 
establish their own heretical doctrine, and by 
the craft of the impious adulterate the simple 
faith of the divine Scriptures, what need is there 
to say that these are not near the faith ? For this 
reason is it they have boldly laid their hands 
upon the divine Scriptures, alleging that they 
have corrected them. And that I do not state 
this against them falsely, any one who pleases 
may ascertain. For if any one should choose to 
collect and compare all their copies together, he 
would find many discrepancies among them. 
The copies of Asclepiades,*^ at any rate, will be 
found at variance with those of Theodotus. And 
many such copies are to be had, because their 
disciples were very zealous in inserting the cor- 
rections, as they call them, i.e., the corruptions 
made by each of them. And again, the coi)ies 
of Hermophilus do not agree with these ; and 
as for those of Apollonius,"^ they are not consist- 
ent even with themselves. For one may com- 
pare those which were formerly prepared by 
them '° with those which have been afterwards 
corrupted with a special object, and many dis- 
crepancies will be found. And as to the great 
audacity implied in this offence, it is not likely 
that even they themselves can be ignorant of 
that. For either they do not believe that the 
divine Scriptures were dictated by the Holy 
Spirit, and are thus infidels ; or they think them- 
selves wiser than the Holy Spirit, and what are 
they then but demoniacs? Nor can they deny 
that the crime is theirs, when the copies have 
been written with their own hand ; nor" did they 
receive such copies of the Scriptures from those 
by whom they were first instructed in the faith 
and they cannot produce copies from which 
these were transcribed. And some of them did 
not even think it worth while to corrupt them , 
but simply denying the law and the prophets for 
the sake of their lawless and impious doctrine, 
under pretexts of grace, they sunk down to the 
lowest abyss of perdition. '- 

*■ There is a play in the original on the word geometry. 

7 Galen composed treatises on the figures of syllogisms, and on 
philosophy in general. This is also a notable testimony, as proceed- 
ing from a very ancient author, almost contemporary with Galen 
himself. And from a great number of other writers, as well as this, 
one, it is evident that CJalcn was ranked as the equal of Aristotle, 
Theophrastus, and even Plato. [Galen died circa a.d. 200.] 

8 In Nicephorus it is Asclepiodotus, which is also the reading of 
Riifinus. •• , N 

9 It appears from Theodoret {Heeret. Fab., book n. ch. v.), as- 
well as from Nicephorus and Rufinus, that wc should re.id Apolloni- 
des for Apollonius. 

'° There is another reading — by liitn. 

" This paragraph, down to the word " transcribed," is wanting in 
the Codex Regius. 

'2 [Note the care and jealousy with which the integrity of the 
codices was guarded. Comp. Uncan. and Apoc Scriptures, by 
Churton, London, 1884.] 

FRAGMENTS OF CAIUS. 

603 

111. — CANON MURATORIANUS.' 

(In Miiratori, ?'. C.Antiq. Ital.Med. (tv., vol. iii. col. S54.) 

I . . . . those things at which he was pres- 
ent he placed thus.^ The third book of the 
Oospel, that according to Luke, the well-known 
physician Luke wrote in his own name ^ in 
order after the ascension of Christ, and when 
Paul had associated him with himself •♦ as one 
studious of right. 5 Nor did he himself see the 
Lord in the flesh ; and he, according as he was 
able to accomplish it, began ''his narrative with 
the nativity of John. The fourth Gospel is that 
of John, one of the disciples. When his fellow- 
disciples and bishops entreated him, he said, 
" Fast ye now with me for the space of three 
days, and let us recount to each other whatever 
may be revealed to each of us." On the same 
night it was revealed to Andrew, one of the 
apostles, that John should narrate all things in 
his own name as they called them to mind.7 
And hence, although different points ** are taught 
us in the several books of the Gospels, there is 
no difference as regards the faith of believers, 
inasmuch as in all of them all things are related 
under one imperial Spirit,^ which concern the 
Lord's nativity. His passion, His resurrection. 
His conversation with His disciples, and His 
twofold advent, — the first in the humiliation of 
rejection, which is now past, and the second 
in the glory of royal power, which is yet in 
the future. What marvel is it, then, that John 
brings forward these several things '° so con- 
stantly in his epistles also, saying in his own 
person, " What we have seen with our eyes, and 
heard with our ears, and our hands have handled, 
that have we written." " For thus he professes 
himself to be not only the eye-witness, but also 
the hearer ; and besides that, the historian of 

' An acephalous fragment on the canon of the sacred Scriptures, 
ascribed by some to Caius. This very important fragment [vol. ii. 
pp. 4 and 56, this series] was discovered by Muiatori in the Ambrosian 
Library at Milan, and published by him in his Antiqnitates Italics 
in 1740. This manuscript belongs to the seventh or eighth century. 
Muratori ascribed it to Caius, Bunsen to Hegesippus; but there is 
no clue whatever to the authorship. From internal evidence the 
writer of the fragment is believed to belong to the latter half of the 
second century. The fragment has been much discussed. For a full 
account of it, see Westcott's General Sur'c'ey of tke History 0/ the 
Canon of the Neiv Testament, 2d ed. p. 184 ff. , and Tregelles' 
Cation Miiratorinniis ; [also Routh, Rel., i. pp. 394-434]. 

- The text is, " quibus tamen interfuit et ita posuit." Westcott 
omits the " et." Bunsen proposes " ifise non interfuit." The refer- 
ence probably is to the statement of Papias (Euseb., Histor Eccles., 
iii. 39) as to Mark's Gospel being a narrative not of what he himself 
witnessed, but of what he heard from Peter. 

3 The text gives " numine suo ex opinione concriset," for which 
we read " nomine suo ex ordine conscripsit " with Westcott. 

■• Reading " secum " for " secundum." 

5 The text gives " quasi ut juris studiosum," for which " quasi 
et virtutis studiosum," = " as one devoted to virtue," has been pro- 
posed. Bunsen reads " itineris socium " = " as his companion in the 
way." 

'' "-Incepit " for " incipet." 

7 Or as they revised them, recognoscentibns. 

' Frincipia. 

9 /'ri'nci/ia/i, leading. [Note this theory of inspiration.] 
'" Sing!<la. 
" I John i. I. 

all the wondrous facts concerning the Lord in 
their order. 

2. Moreover, the Acts of all the Apostles are 
comprised by Luke in one book, and addressed 
to the most excellent Theophilus, because these 
different events took place when he was present 
himself; and he shows this clearly — i.e., that the 
principle on which he wrote was, to give only 
what fell under his own notice — by the omission '^ 
of the passion of Peter, and also of the journey 
of Paul, when he went from the city — Rome — 
to Spain. 

3. As to the epistles '^ of Paul, again, to those 
who will understand the matter, they indicate of 
themselves what they are, and from what place 
or with what object they were directed. He 
wrote first of all, and at considerable length, to 
the Corinthians, to check the schism of heresy ; 
and then to the Galatians, to forbid circum- 
cision ; and then to the Romans on the rule of 
the O/d Testament Scriptures, and also to show 
them that Christ is the first object '■♦ in these ; — 
which it is needful for us to discuss severally,'^ as 
the blessed Apostle Paul, following the rule of his 
predecessor John, writes to no more than seven 
churches by name, in this order : the first to the 
Corinthians, the second to the Ephesians, the 
third to the Philippians, the fourth to the Colos- 
sians, the fifth to the Galatians, the sixth to the 
Thessalonians, the seventh to the Romans. 
Moreover, though he writes twice to the Cor- 
inthians and Thessalonians for their correction, 
it is yet shown — i.e., by this sevenfold writing — 
that there is one Church spread abroad through 
the whole world. And John too, indeed, in the 
Apocalypse, although he writes only to seven 
churches, yet addresses all. He wrote, besides 
these, one to Philemon, and one to Titus, and 
two to Timothy, in simple personal affection and 
love indeed ; but yet these are hallowed in the 
esteem of the Catholic Church, and in the regu- 
lation of ecclesiastical discipline. There are also 
in circulation one to the Laodiceans, and another 
to the Alexandrians, forged under the name of 
Paul, and addressed against the heresy of Mar- 
cion ; and there are also several others which 
cannot be received into the Catholic Church, for 
it is not suitable for gall to be mingled with honey. 

4. The Epistle of Jude, indeed,'^ and two be- 
longing to the above-named John — or bearing 
the name of John — are reckoned among the 
Catholic epist'/es.'^ And the book of Wisdom, 

'2 The text is, " semote passionem Petri," etc., for which West- 
cott reads " semota." [A noteworthy statement.] 

" Reading " epistolae " and " directae " instead of " epistola" and 
" directe," and " volentibus" for " voluntatibus." 

14 Principiian. 

's The text is, " de quibus singulis necesse est a nobis disputari 
cum," etc. Bunsen reads, " de quibus non necesse est a nobi^dispu- 
tari cur " = " on which we need not discuss the reason why." 

"> Sane. 

'7 The text is " in catholica," which may be "in the Catholic 
Church." Bunsen, Westcott, etc., read " in catholicis." 

6o4 

ELUCIDATIONS. 

written by the friends of Solomon in his honour. 
We receive also the Apocalyjise of John and 
that of Peter, though some amongst us will not 
have this latter read in the Church. The Pastor, 
moreover, did Hermas write very recently in our 
times in the city of Rome, while his brother 
bishop Pius sat in the chair of the Church of 
Rome. And therefore it also ought to be read ; 
but it cannot be made public ' in the Church to 

* Reading " sed publicari " for " se publicare." [Vol ii. p. 3.] 

the people, nor placed among the prophets, as 
their number is complete, nor among the apos- 
tles to the end of time. Of the writings of kx'A- 
nous, called also Valentinus, or of Miltiades, we 
receive nothing at all. Those are rejected too 
who wrote the new Book of Psalms for Marcion, 
together with Basilides and the founder of the 
Asian Cataphrygians.^ 

- [ For remarks of my own on the Muratorian Canon, see vol 
ii. p. 56, this series.) 

ELUCIDATIONS. 
I. 

(Psalms and hymns, p. 601.) 

I SUBJOIN' as an elucidation, to which I have sufifixed references of my own, a valuable note of 
the Edinburgh editor,' which is found on p. 156 of vol. ix. in that series : " From this it appears 
that it was a very ancient custom in the Church to compose hymns and psalms in honour of 
Christ. Pliny, in his letter to Trajan, also states that the Christians were accustomed to meet 
together and sing hymns to Christ.- Hippolytus also may be understood to refer to these hymns 
and psalms towards the close of his oration on the end of the world,^ where he says : ' Your 
mouth I made to give glory and praise, and to utter psalms and spiritual songs.' A hymn of 
this kind in honour of Jesus Christ, composed by Clement of Alexandria, is extant at the end of 
his books entitled Piedagogi." * 

II. 

(The Dialogue between himself and Proclus, p. 600.) 

I have been unable to get a copy of the work of John de Soynes on Montanism, which possi- 
bly throws some light upon the Dialogue with Proclus, attributed to him by Photius. It is 
praised by Adolf Harnack, and highly spoken of by English critics. It was a Hulsean prize 
essay, published Cambridge, 1878. 

• The Rev. S. D. F. Salmond, M..\. 

- " Soliti essent Chriatiani, stato die, ante lucem convenire, carmenqite Christo, quasi Deo, dicere stcum invicent. Compare 
(Greek) Eph. v. 19 and Col. iii. i6. Lardner gives Pliny's letter entire, vol. vii. p. aa. 
3 Sec. xlvi. p. 254, supra. 

* Vol. ii. p, 295, this series. 

NOVATIAN. 

[TRANSLATED BY THE REV. ROBERT ERNEST WALLIS.] 

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE 

TO 

NOVATIAN. A ROMAN PRESBYTER. 

[a.d. 210-280.] When we reflect upon the history of Solomon, and his marvellous contribu- 
tions to the sacred canon of Scripture, we must not be surprised to find a Tatian, a TertuUian, 
and a Novatian among the Fathers. We deplore the lapse of such characters, but after death 
they are not subject to human judgment. Let us cherish the gratitude we owe to them for their 
good works, and use their testimony so far as it was faithful ; covering their shame with the mantle 
of charity, and praying for grace never to imitate their faults. " If any teacher have wandered 
from the faith, it is permitted," says St. Vincent of Lerins,' " by Divine Providence /or our trial, 
whether we love God or not, with all our heart and with all our soul." 

We find Novatian apparently exercising jurisdiction, sede vacante, in Rome, with his co-pres- 
byters, and as vicar-general (to use a later term) corresponding with Cyprian. This was about 
A.D. 250, after the death of Fabian. His marked abilities and real services had fitted him to 
preside thus over the Roman presbytery, and to be their " secretary for foreign affairs." But he 
laboured under the impediment of clinic baptism, and had not an unblemished record, if we 
credit Eusebius,^ in his conduct during persecution. 

He was not called, therefore, to the episcopate. Cornelius was made bishop June 4, a.d. 251 ; 
and, apparently, disappointed ambition soon bore its thorny fruits. " Emulation of the episcopal 
office is the mother of schisms," said TertuUian ; ^ even in that period when to be a bishop was 
so often to be a martyr. And we find Novatian grasping a shadowy titular bishopric, which, wholly 
irregular and universally disowned, could have been to such a man the source of nothing but 
misery. I say, " to such a man," for, without hearing the other side, I cannot accept what was 
unquestionably supposed to be fact amid the excitements of the times. And Novatian was not a 
common or a vulgar character. The arguments of Lardner ■♦ teach us at least to be Christians, — 
to accept the facts, but " forbear to judge," seeing, as that writer observes, " we have not one 
remaining line of his in self-defence or against his adversaries." 

Now as to his orthodoxy, so far as his extant writings are concerned, I think any scholar, not 
anxious to make out a case, will abide by the candid judgment of Bull, who defends his reputa- 
tion against Petavius.s " By no means," he says, " should we tolerate that injustice of the Jesuit 
Petau towards the ancient writers, against their manifest mind and purpose ; twisting, as he every- 
where does, their sound and Catholic sayings into a sense alien and heretical." 

The work upon the Trinity, which is a most valuable contribution to ante-Nicene theology, is 
said by Cave to have been written about a.d. 257; and that upon the Jewish meats seems to 

' In his Com monitory, cap. xix. p. 57, ed. Baltimore, 1847. This useful edition contains the text, and a translation, with valuable 
notes, by the late Bishop Whittingham of Maryland. 

2 H. E., vi. 

3 Vol. iii. cap. 17, p. 677, this series. 

* His elaborate chapter (xlvii. and the note) must be read by all students who wish to understand the matter, or even to read Cyprian 
advantageously. 

5 Defctisio Fid. Niccen., Works, vol. v. p. 374, 

607 

6o8 INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. 

have been composed during the Decian persecution. His heresy, such as it was, turned upon 
unrelenting discipline, and was a sin against charity, which is greater than faith itself. It violated 
the " seventy times seven " maxim of our Lord, and the comprehensive precept, " Forgive, and ye 
shall be forgiven." It wounded Christian unity at a jjerilous period, and when every breach in 
:he wall of the fold was sure to let in the wolves. 

" He may have aspired to the papal chair" says a contemporary writer' of no mean repute, 
adding, " to which he had the best claim." Then he says, " Novatian was elected anti-pope by 
a minority, and consecrated by three Italian bishops." Is this history? What impression must 
it give to the young student ? The learned writer whom I quote shows clearly enough that there 
was no " papacy " in primitive times, as that word is universally understood. Why, then, put a 
face upon Antiquity so utterly misleading? Neither Novatian, nor his consecrators, nor Cornelius, 
against whom he rebelled, ever dreamed of anything more than of an episcopal chair ; venerable, 
indeed, for its succession of pastors from the times of SS. Peter and Paul, but as yet hardly felt in 
the Christian brotherhood ; which for two centuries had produced many pious but few eminent 
men, and in which Novatian himself was the earliest contributor to the " Latin Christianity," 
already founded and flourishing, not in Italy, but in Northern Africa. 

The following is the Introductory Notice of the Edinburgh translator, the Rev. Dr. 
Wallis, who, I am glad to observe, is tender towards our author's memory : — 

The biography of Novatian belongs to the ecclesiastical history of the third century. He 
was, or is reputed to have been, the founder of a sect which claimed for itself the name of 
"Puritan "2 (Ka^apoi). For a long time he was in determined opposition to Cornelius, bishop 
of Rome, in regard to the admission of the lapsed and penitent into the Church ; but the facts 
of the controversy and much of our information in regard to Novatian are to be got only from 
his enemies, the Roman bishop and his adherents. Accordingly, some have believed all the 
accusations that have been brought against him, while others have been inclined to doubt 
them all.^ 

It is not known where Novatian was born. Some have appealed to Philostorgius "♦ in behalf 
of the opinion that he was a Phrygian ; but others maintain that, supposing this to be a statement 
of the historian, it is a mere conjecture of his, based on the character of Novatian's teaching. It 
is also stated by Cyprian, that he was a Stoic before he passed over to the Christian Church ; but 
this also has been doubted. While amongst the catechumens, he was seized by a violent disease, 
attributed to demoniac agency ; and, being near death, he received baptism. He was ordained 
presbyter by Fabian, bishop of Rome, against the wishes of the rest of the clergy, who objected 
thereto because he had received clinic baptism. s The subsequent circumstances of his schism 
and his contest with Cornelius, are stated at length with no friendly spirit in a letter to Antonianus 
by Cyprian.'' Socrates ^ states that he suffered martyrdom ; but his authority, amid the silence of 
all others, is not sufficient to {guarantee the fact. 

Novatian composed many works. The following are extant : — 

I. De Trijiitate, formerly attributed by some to Tertullian, by others to Cyprian ; but now on 
all hands allowed to be the work of Novatian, to whom Jerome expressly assigns it.^ It was 
written after the heresy of Sabellius, which appeared 256 a.d. 

' Dr. SchafT, History of Christian Church, vol. ii. p. 851. 

^ [This is again pulling a fal.se face upon Antiquity. Purists, rather; i.e., in morals.] 

^ See the last portion of Section Second of Neander's Church History. 

* Hist. Eccl., lib. viii. c. 15. The text of Valesius has OOaToi', not Novatus or Novatian. 
5 [See p. 400, note 5, supra '\ 

* Ep. Ii. p. 327, siifyra (How could it be stated truly and yet seem friendly? The unfortunate man h.-id violated discipline, and broken 
his most sacred obligations to the Christian flock, at a time when the heathen persecutions made all such scandals little less than mutiny 
against Christ Himself Consult Matt, xviii. 7 and l.iike xvii. i. We owe to such discipline the sure canon of Scripture.] 

7 Hist. Eccl., lib. iv. c 28. 

* De viris Illustribus, c. 70. 

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE. 609 

II. De Cibis Judaicis : at first also attributed by some to Tertullian or Cyprian ; but now 
assigned to Novatian on the testimony of Jerome. It was written during the time of the Decian 
persecution, about 250 a.d. 

III. Novatian was the author of the letter' addressed by the Roman clergy to Cyprian. So 
Cyprian himself states.^ Some have also attributed to him Ep. xxix. without any authority. 

IV. Jerome attributes to him writings on Circumcision, on the Sabbath, on the Passover, on 
the Priesthood, on Prayer, on Attalus, on the Present Crisis, and Letters. 

The best editions of Novatian are by Welchman, Oxford, 172/); and by Jackson, iondon, 
1728. 

I Ep. XXX. p. 308, supra. ^ Ep. li. 5, p. 328, supra. [Also, see Ep. xli. 2, p. 320, supra.\ 

A TREATISE OF NOVATIAN CONCERNING 

THE TRINITY. 

PREFACE. 

Novatian's treatise concerning the Trinity is 
divided into thirty-one chapters. He first of all, 
from chapter first to the eighth, considers those 
words of the Rule of Truth or Faith,' which bid 
us believe on God the Father and Lord Almighty, 
the absolutely perfect Creator of all things. 
Wherein among the other divine attributes he 
moreover ascribes to Him, partly from reason 
and partly from the Holy Scriptures, immensity, 
eternity, unity, goodness, immutability, immor- 
tahty, spirituality ; and adds that neither pas- 
sions nor members can be attributed to God, 
and that these things are only asserted of God in 
Scripture anthropopathically.^ 

CHAP. I. ARGUMENT. — NOV.\TIAN, WITH THE VIEW 
OF TREATING OF THE TRINITY, SETS FORTH FROM 
THE RULE OF FAITH THAT WE SHOULD FIRST OF 
ALL BELIEVE IN GOD THE FATHER AND LORD 
OMNIPOTENT, THE ABSOLUTE FOUNDER OF ALL 
THINGS. THE WORKS OF CREATION ARE BEAU- 
TIFULLY DESCRIBED. MAN'S FREE-WILL IS AS- 
SERTED ; god's mercy in inflicting penalty 
ON man is SHOWN ; the condition after 

DEATH of the SOULS OF THE RIGHTEOUS AND 
UNRIGHTEOUS IS DETERMINED. 

The Rule of truth requires that we should first 
of all things believe on God the Father and Lord 
Omnipotent ; that is, the absolutely perfect 
Founder of all things, who has suspended the 
heavens in lofty sublimity, has established the 
earth with its lower mass, has diffused the seas 

' Which we call the Creed. 

- From the ninth chapter to the twenty-eighth he enters upon the 
diffuse explanation also of those words of our creed which commend 
to us faith in the Son of God, Jesus Christ, the Lord our God, the 
Christ promised in the Old Testament, and proves by the authority 
of the old and new covenant that He is very man and very God. In 
chapter eighteenth he refutes the error of the Sabellians, and by the 
authority of the sacred writings he establishes the distinction of the 
Father and of the Son, and replies to the objections of the above- 
named heresiarchs and others. In the twenty-ninth chapter he treats 
of faith in the Holy Spirit, saying that finally the authority of the 
faith admonishes us, after the Feather and the Son, to believe also on 
the Holy Spirit, whose operations he recounts and proves from the 
Scriptures. He then labours to associate the unity of God with the 
matters previously contended for, and at length sets forth the sum of 
the doctrines above explained. [Anthropopathy, see cap. v. p. 615.] 

with their fluent moisture, and has distributed 
all these things, both adorned and supplied with 
their appropriate and fitting 'instruments. For 
in the solid vault of heaven He has both awak- 
ened the light-bringing Sunrisings ; He has filled 
up the white globe of the moon in its monthly ^ 
waxings as a solace for the night ; He, moreover, 
kindles the starry rays with the varied splendours 
of glistening light ; and He has willed all these 
things in their legitimate tracks to circle the en- 
tire compass of the world, so as to cause days, 
months, years, signs, and seasons, and benefits 
of other kinds for the human race. On the 
earth, moreover. He has lifted up the loftiest 
mountains to a peak. He has thrown down val- 
leys into the depths, He has smoothly levelled 
the plains, He has ordained the animal herds 
usefully for the various services of men. He has 
also established the oak trees of the woods for 
the future benefit of human uses. He has devel- 
oped the harvests into food. He has unlocked 
the mouths of the springs, and has poured them 
into the flowing rivers. And after these things, 
lest He should not also provide for the very de- 
lights of the eyes, He has clothed all things with 
the various colours of the flowers for the pleas- 
ure of the beholders. Even in the sea itself, 
moreover, although it was in itself marvellous 
both for its extent and its utility. He has made- 
manifold creatures, sometimes of moderate, some- 
times of vast bodily size, testifying by the variety 
of His appointment to the intelligence of the 
Artificer. And, not content with these things, 
lest perchance the roaring and rushing waters 
should seize upon a foreign element at the ex- 
pense of its human possessor, He has enclosed 
its limits with shores ; ^ so that when the raving 
billow and the foaming water should come from 
its deep bosom, it should return again unto itself, 
and not transgress its concealed bounds, but 
keep its prescribed laws, so that man might the 
rather be careful to observe the divine laws, even 

s " Mensumis," or otherwise " menstniis." 
' * [Jer. V. 22. Compare this sublime page with paganism.] 

611 

6l2 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

as the elements themselves observed them. And ' 
after these things He also placed man at the head 
of the world, and man, too, made in the image | 
of God, to whom He imparted mind, and reason, 
and foresight, that he might imitate God ; and 
although the first elements of his body were | 
earthly, yet the substance was inspired by a 
heavenly and divine breathing. And when He 
had given him all things for his service, He willed 
that he alone should be free. And lest, again, I 
an unbounded freedom should fall into peril. He 
laid down a command, in which man was taught 
that there was no evil in the fruit of the tree ; 
but he was forewarned that evil would arise if 
perchance he should exercise his free will, in 
the contempt of the law that was given. For, 
on the one hand, it had behoved him to be free, 
lest the image of .God should unfittingly be in 
bontlage ; and on the other, the law was to be 
added, so that an unbridled liberty might not 
break forth even to a contempt of the Giver. So 
that he might receive as a consequence both 
worthy rewards and a deserved punishment, hav- 
ing in his own power that which he might choose 
to do, by the tendency of his mind in either 
direction : whence, therefore, by envy, mortality 
comes back upon him ; seeing that, although he 
might escape it by obedience, he rushes into it 
by hurrying to be God under the influence of 
perverse counsel. Still, nevertheless, God indul- i 
gently tempered his punishment by cursing, not j 
so much himself, as his labours upon earth. And, 
moreover, what is recjuired does not come with- 
out man's knowledge ; but He shows forth man's ' 
hope of future discovery ' and salvation in Christ. 
And that he is prevented from touching of the I 
wood of the tree of life, is not caused by the 
malignant poison of envy, but lest, living for ever 
without Christ's previous pardon of his sins, he|| 
should always bear about with him for his pun- 1 
ishment an immortality of guilt. Nevertheless | 
also, in higher regions ; that is, above even the 
firmament itself, regions which are not now dis- 
cernible by our eyes, He previously ordained 
angels, he arranged spiritual powers. He put in 
command thrones and powers, and founded many 
other infinite spaces of heavens, and unbounded 
works of His mysteries ; so that this world, im- 
mense as it is, might almost appear rather as the 
latest, than the only work of corporeal things. 
.\nd truly,- what lies beneath the earth is not 
itself void of distributed and arranged powers. 
For there is a place whither the souls of the just 
and the unjust are taken, conscious of the antici- 
pated dooms of future judgment; so that we 
might behold the overflowing greatness of God's 
works in all directions, not shut up within the 
bosom of this world, however capacious as we 

' " Inventionis." " Redemptionis " is a reasonable emendation. 
2 Or probably, " Neither indeed is," etc. [Vol. iii. p. 428.] 

have said, but might also be able to conceive of 
them beneath both the abysses and the depths 
of the world itself. And thus considering the 
greatness of the works, we should worthily admire 
the .Artificer of such a structure. 

CH.AP. II. ARGUMENT. — GOD IS ABOVE ALL THINGS, 
HIMSELF CONTAINING ALL THINGS, IMMENSE, 
ETERNAL, TRANSCENDING THE MIND OF MAN ; 
INEXPLICABLE IN DISCOURSE, LOFTIER THAN ALL 

SUBLIMITY. 

And over all these things He Himself, contain- 
ing all things, having nothing vacant beyond 
Himself, has left room for no superior God, such 
as some people conceive. Since, indeed, He 
Himself has included all things in the bosom 
of perfect greatness and power, He is always 
intent upon His own work, and pervading all 
things, and moving all things, and quickening 
all things, and beholding all things, and so link- 
ing together discordant materials into the con- 
cord of all elements, that out of these unlike 
principles one world is so established by a con- 
spiring union, that it can by no force be dissolved, 
save when He alone who made it commands it 
to be dissolved, for the purpose of bestowing 
other and greater things upon us. For we read 
that He contains all things, and therefore that 
there could have been nothing beyond Himself. 
Because, since He has not any beginning, so 
consequently He is not conscious of an ending ; 
unless perchance — and far from us be the 
thought — He at some time began to be, and is 
not above all things, but as He began to be after 
something else. He would be beneath that which 
was before Himself, and would so be found to 
be of less power, in that He is designated as 
subsequent even in time itself. For this reason, 
therefore. He is always unbounded, because 
nothing is greater than He ; always eternal, be- 
cause nothing is more ancient than He. For 
that which is without beginning can be preceded 
by none, in that He has no time. He is on that 
account immortal, that He does not come to an 
end by any ending of His completeness. And 
since everything that is without beginning is 
without law. He excludes the mode of time by 
feeling Himself debtor to none. Concerning 
Him, therefore, and concerning those things 
which are of Himself, and are in Him, neither 
can the mind of man worthily conceive what 
they are, how great they are, and what they are 
like ; nor does the eloquence of human dis- 
course set forth a power that approaches the 
level of His majesty. For to conceive and to 
speak of His majesty, as well all eloquence is 
with reason mute, as all mind poor. For He is 
greater than mind itself; nor can it be conceived 
how great He is, seeing that, if He could be 
conceived, He would l)e smaller than the human 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

6i 

mind wherein He could be conceived. He is 
greater, moreover, tlian all discourse, nor can 
He be declared ; for if He could be declared. 
He would be less than human discourse, whereby 
being declared, He can both be encompassed 
and contained. For whatever could be thought 
concerning Him must be less than Himself; 
and whatever could be declared must be less 
than He, when compared in respect of Himself. 
Moreover, we can in some degree be conscious 
■of Him in silence, but we cannot in discourse 
unfold Him as He is. For should you call Him 
Light, you would be speaking of His creature 
rather than of Himself — you would not declare 
Him ; or should you call Him Strength, you 
would rather be speaking of and bringing out 
His power than speaking of Himself; or should 
you call Him Majesty, you would rather be 
describing His honour than Himself. And why 
should I make a long business of going through 
His attributes one by one ? I will at once un- 
fold the whole. Whatever in any respect you 
might declare of Him, you would rather be 
unfolding some condition and power of His than 
Himself. For what can you fittingly either say 
■or think concerning Him who is greater than all 
discourses and thoughts? Except that in one 
manner — and how can we do this ? how can we 
by possibility conceive how we may grasp these 
very things ? — we shall mentally grasp what God 
is, if we shall consider that He is that which 
cannot be understood either in quality or quan- 
tity, nor, indeed, can come even into the thought 
itself. For if the keenness of our eyes grows 
dull on looking at the sun, so that the gaze, 
overcome by the brightness of the rays that 
meet it, cannot look upon the orb itself, the 
keenness of our mental perception suffers the 
same thing in all our thinking about God, and 
in proportion as we give our endeavours more 
directly to consider God, so much the more the 
mind itself is blinded by the light of its own 
thought. For — to repeat once more — what 
can you worthily say of Him, who is loftier than 
all sublimity, and higher than all height, and 
deeper than all depth, and clearer than all light, 
and brighter than all brightness, more brilliant 
than all splendour, stronger than all strength, 
more powerful ' than all power, and more mighty 
than all might, and greater than all majesty, and 
more potent than all potency, and richer than 
all riches, more wise than all wisdom, and more 
benignant than all kindness, better than all good- 
ness, juster than all justice, more merciful than 
all clemency? For all kinds of virtues must 
needs be less than Himself, who is both God 
and Parent of all virtues, so that it may truly 
be said that God is that, which is such that 

' Viritior. [See Robert Hall on French Atheism.\ 

nothing can be compared to Him. For He is 
above all that can be said. For He is a certain 
Mind generating and filling all things, which, 
without any beginning or end of time, controls, 
by the highest and most perfect reason, the 
naturally linked causes of things, so as to result 
in benefit to all. 

CHAP. III. ARGUMENT. — THAT GOD IS THE FOUND- 
ER OF ALL THINGS, THEIR LORD AND PARENT, 
IS PROVED FROM THE HOLY SCRIPTURES. 

Him, then, we acknowledge and know to be 
God, the Creator of all things — Lord on ac- 
count of His power. Parent on account of His 
discipline — Him, I say, who " spake, and all 
things were made ; " ^ He commanded, and all 
things went forth : of whom it is written, " Thou 
hast made all things in wisdom ; " ^ of whom 
Moses said, " God in heaven above, and in the 
earth beneath ; " ^ who, according to Isaiah, 
" hath meted out the heaven with a span, the 
earth with the hollow of His hand ; " 5 "who look- 
eth on the earth, and maketh it tremble ; who 
boundeth the circle of the earth, and those that 
dwell in it like locusts ; who hath weighed the 
mountains in a balance, and the groves in scales,"^ 
that is, by the sure test of divine arrangement ; 
and lest its greatness, lying unequally, should 
easily fall into ruins if it were not balanced with 
equal weights. He has poised this burden of the 
earthly mass with equity. Who says by the 
prophet, " I am God, and there is none beside 
me." 7 Who says by the same prophet, " Be- 
cause I will not give my majesty to another," * 
that He may exclude all heathens and heretics 
with their figments ; proving that that is not 
Ciod who is made by the hand of the workman, 
nor that which is feigned by the intellect of a 
heretic. For he is not God for whose existence 
the workman must be asked. And He has added 
hereto by the prophet, "The heaven is my throne, 
and the earth is my footstool : what house will 
ye build me, and where is the place of my rest ? " "* 
that He may show that He whom the world does 
not contain is much less contained in a temple ; 
and He says mese things not for boastfulness of 
Himself, but for our knowledge. For He does 
not desire from us the glory of His magnitude ; 
but He wishes to confer upon us, even as a 
father, a religious wisdom. And He, wishing 
moreover to attract to gentleness our minds, 
brutish, and swelling, and stubborn with cloddish 
ferocity, says, " And upon whom shall my Spirit 
rest, save upon him that is lowly, and quiet, and 

2 Ps. cxlviii. s. 

3 Ps. ciii. 24. 
< Deut. iv. 39. 

5 Ps ciii. 32. 

6 Isa. xl. 22, 13. 

7 Isa. xlv. 22. 

8 Isa. xlii. 3. 

9 Isa. Ixvi. I. 

[No portable or pocket god,] 

6i4 

TREATISE CONCERNING -THE TRINITY. 

that trembleth at my words ? " ' — so that in some 
degree one may recognise how great God is, 
in learning to fear Him by the Spirit given to 
him : Who, similarly wishing still more to come 
into our knowledge, and, by way of stirring up 
our minds to His worship, said, " I am the Lord, 
who made the light and created the darkness ; "^ 
that we might deem not that some Nature, — 
what I know iidt, — was the artificer of those 
vicissitudes whereby nights and days are con- 
trolled, but might rather, as is more true, rec- 
ogri^se God as their Creator. And since by 
the gaze of our eyes we cannot see Him, we 
lightly learn of Him from the greatness, and the 
power, and the majesty of His works. " For 
the invisible things of Him," says the Apostle 
Paul, " from the creation of the world, are clearly 
seen, being understood by those things which are 
made, even His eternal power and godhead ; " ^ 
so that the human mind, learning hidden things 
from those that are manifest, from the greatness 
of the works which it should behold, might with 
the eyes of the mind consider the greatness of 
the Architect. Of whom the same apostle, 
" Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisi- 
ble, the only God, be honour and glory." ■♦ For 
He has gone beyond the contemplation of the 
eyes who has surpassed the greatness of thought. 
" For," it is said, " of Him, and through Him, 
and in Him are all things." s For all things are 
by His command, because they are of Him; and 
are ordered by His word as being through Him ; 
and all things return to His judgment ; as in 
Him expecting liberty when corruption shall be 
done away, they appear to be recalled to Him. 

CHAP. IV. ARGUMENT. — MOREOVER, HE IS GOOD, 
ALWAYS THE SAME, IMMUTABLE, ONE AND ONLY, 
INFINITE ; AND HIS OWN NAME CAN NEVER BE 
DECLARED, AND HE IS INCORRUPTIBLE AND IM- 
MORTAL. 

Him alone the Lord rightly declares good, of 
whose goodness the whole world is witness ; 
which world He would not have ordained if He 
had not been good. For if " everything was 
very good," ^ consequently, and reasonably, both 
those things which were ordained have proved 
that He that ordained them is good, and those 
things which are the work of a good Ordainer 
cannot be other than good ; wherefore every 
evil is a departure from God. For it cannot 
happen that He should be the originator or 
architect of any evil work, who claims to Him- 
self the name of " the Perfect," both Parent and 
Judge, especially when He is the avenger and 

judge of every evil work ; because, moreover, 
evil does not occur to man from any other cause 
than by his departure from the good God. 
Moreover, this very thing is specified in man, 
not because it was necessary, but because he 
himself so willed it. Whence it manifestly ap- 
peared also what was evil ; and lest there should 
seem to be envy in God, it was evident whence 
evil had arisen. He, then, is always like to 
Himself; nor does He ever turn or change 
Himself into any forms, lest by change He 
should appear to be mortal. For the change 
implied in turning from one thing to another is 
comprehended as a portion of a certain death. 
Thus there is never in Him any accession or 
increase of any part or honour, lest anything 
should appear to have ever been wanting to His 
perfection, nor is any loss sustained in Him, lest 
a degree of mortality should appear to have been 
suffered by Him. But what He is, He always 
is ; and who He is. He is always Himself; and 
what character He has. He always has.^ For 
increasing argues beginning, as well as losses 
prove death and perishing. And therefore He 
says, " I am God, I change not ; "** in that, what 
is not born cannot suffer change, holding His 
condition always. For whatever it be in Him 
which constitutes Divinity, must necessarily exist 
always, maintaining itself by its own powers, so 
that He should always be God. And thus He 
says, " I am that I am."^ For what He is has 
this name, because it always maintains the same 
quality of Himself. For change takes away the 
force of that name " That I Am ; " for whatever, 
at any time, is changed, is shown to be mortal in 
that very particular which is changed. For it 
ceases to be that which it had been, and con- 
sequently begins to be what it was not ; and 
therefore, reasonably, there remains always in 
God His position, in that without any loss aris- 
ing from change, He is always like and equal 
to Himself. And what is not born cannot be 
changed : for only those things undergo change 
which are made, or which are begotten ; in that 
those things which had not been at one time,, 
learn to be by coming into being, and therefore 
to suffer change by being born. Moreover, those 
things which neither have nativity nor maker, 
have excluded from themselves the capacity of 
change, not having a beginning wherein is cause 
of change. And thus He is declared to be one, 
having no equal. For whatever can be God, 
must as God be of necessity the Highest. But 
whatever is the Highest, must certainly be the 
Highest in such sense as to be without any equal. 
And thus that must needs be alone and one on 

' Isa. Ixvi. 2. 
* Isa. xlv. 7. 
3 Rom. i. 20. 
< I Tim. i. 17. 
5 Rom. xi. 33. 
' Gen. i. 31. 

A lesson to our age. J 

[" So that they are without excuse."] 

7 In other words, God is always the same in essence, in personc 
ality, and in attributes. 
« Mai. iii. 0. 
9 E.\. ill. 14. [The ineffable name of the Self-Existent.J 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

615. 

which nothing can be conferred, having no peer ; 
because there cannot be two infinites, as the 
very nature of things dictates. And that is infi- 
nite which neither has any sort of beginning nor 
end. For whatever has occupied the whole 
excludes the beginning of another. Because if 
He does not contain all which is, whatever it is 
— seeing that what is found in that whereby it 
is contained is found to be less than that whereby 
it is contained — He will cease to be God ; be- 
ing reduced into the power of another, in whose 
greatness He, being smaller, shall have been 
included. And therefore what contained Him 
would then rather claim to be God. Whence it 
results that God's own name also cannot be 
declared, because He cannot be conceived. 
For that is contained in a name which is, in any 
way, comprehended from the condition of His 
nature. For the name is the signification of that 
thing which could be comprehended from a 
name. But when that which is treated of is 
such that it cannot be worthily gathered into 
one form by the very understanding itself, how 
shall it be set forth fittingly in the one word of 
an appellation, seeing that as it is beyond the 
intellect, it must also of necessity be above the 
significancy of the appellation ? As with reason 
when He applies and prefers from certain rea- 
sons and occasions His name of God, we know 
that it is not so much the legitimate propriety of 
the appellation that is set forth, as a certain sig- 
nificancy determined for it, to which, while men 
betake themselves, they seem to be able thereby 
to obtain God's mercy. He is therefore also 
both immortal and incorruptible, neither con- 
scious of any kind of loss nor ending. For 
because He is incorruptible, He is therefore 
immortal ; and because He is immortal. He is 
certainly also incorruptible, — each being in- 
volved by turns in the other, with itself and in 
itself, by a mutual connection, and prolonged 
by a vicarious concatenation to the condition of 
eternity ; immortality arising from incorruption, 
as well as incorruption coming from immortality. 

CHAP. V. ARGUMENT. — IF WE REGARD THE 
.ANfGER, AND INDIGNATION, AND HATRED OF GOD 
DESCRIBED IN THE SACRED PAGES, WE MUST RE- 
MEMBER THAT THEY ARE NOT TO BE UNDERSTOOD 
AS BEARING THE CHAR,4.CTER OF HUMAN VICES. 

Moreover, if we read of His wrath, and con- 
sider certain descriptions of His indignation, 
and learn that hatred is asserted of Him, yet 
we are not to understand these to be asserted of 
Him in the sense in which they are human vices. 
For all these things, although they may corrupt 
man, cannot at all corrupt the divine power. 
For such passions as these will rightly be said to 
be in men, and will not rightly be judged to be 

in God. For man may be corrupted by these 
things, because he can be corrupted ; God may 
not be corrupted by them, because He cannot 
be corrupted. These things, forsooth, have their 
force which they may exercise, but only where a 
j material capable of impression precedes them, 
j not where a substance that cannot be impressed 
I precedes them. For that God is angry, arises 
! from no vice in Him. But He is so for our 
: advantage ; for He is merciful even then when 
j He threatens, because by these threats men are 
recalled to rectitude. For fear is necessary for 
those who want the motive to a virtuous life, that 
they who have forsaken reason may at least be 
moved by terror. And thus all those, either 
angers of God or hatreds, or whatever they are 
of this kind, being displayed for our medicine, — 
as the case teaches, — have arisen of wisdom, 
not from vice, nor do they originate from frailty ;. 
wherefore also they cannot avail for the corrup- 
tion of God. For the diversity in us of the 
materials of which we consist, is accustomed to 
arouse the discord of anger which corrupts us ; 
but this, whether of nature or of defect, cannot 
subsist in God, seeing that He is known to be 
constructed assuredly of no associations of bod- 
ily parts. For He is simple and without any cor- 
poreal commixture, being wholly of that essence, 
which, whatever it be, — He alone knows, — 
constitutes His being, since He is called Spirit. 
And thus those things which in men are faulty and 
corrupting, since they arise from the corruptibil- 
ity of the body, and matter itself, in God cannot 
exert the force of corruptibility, since, as we have 
said, they have come, not of vice, but of reason. 

CHAP. VI. ARGUMENT. — AND THAT, ALTHOUGH 
SCRIPTURE OFTEN CHANGES THE DIVINE APPEAR- 
ANCE INTO A HUMAN FORM, YET THE MEASURE 
OF THE DIVINE MAJESTY IS NOT INCLUDED WITH- 
IN THESE LINEAMENTS OF OUR BODILY NATURE. 

And although the heavenly Scripture often turns 
the divine appearance into a human form, — as 
when it says, "The eyes of the Lord are over 
the righteous ; " ' or when it says, " The Lord 
God smelled the smell of a good savour; "^^ or 
when there are given to Moses the tables "written 
with the finger of God ; " 3 or when the people 
of the children of Israel are set free from the 
land of Egypt "with a mighty hand and with 
a stretched out arm;"'' or when it says, "The 
mouth of the Lord hath spoken these things ; "s- 
or when the earth is set forth as " God's foot- 
stool ; " ^ or when it says, " Incline thine ear, 

' Ps. xxxiv. 15. [Anthropopathy, p. 6ii.] 
- Gen. viii. 21. 
3 Ex. xxxi. 18. 
■< Ps. cxxxvi. 12. 
5 Isa. i. 20. 

* Isa. Ixvi. I. [Capp. v. and vi. are specimens of vigorous 
thought.] 

6i6 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

and hear," ' — we who say that the law is spiritual 
do not include within these lineaments of our 
bodily nature any mode or figure of the divine 
majesty, but diffuse that character of unbounded 
magnitude (so to speak) over its plains without 
any limit. For it is written, " If I shall ascend 
into heaven. Thou art there ; if I shall descend 
into hell. Thou art there also ; and if I shall take 
my wings, and go away across the sea, there Thy 
hand shall lay hold of me, and Thy right hand 
shall hold me." - For we recognise the plan of 
the divine Scripture according to the proportion 
of its arrangement. For the prophet then was 
still speaking about God in parables according 
to the period of the faith, not as God was, but 
as the people were able to receive Him. And 
thus, that such things as these should be said 
about Qi^dfy rfiust be imputed not to God, but 
rather to the people. Thus the people are per- 
mitted to erect a tabernacle, and yet God is not 
contained within the enclosure of a tabernacle. 
Thus a temple is reared, and yet God is not at 
all bounded within the restraints of a temple. 
It is not therefore God who is limited, but the 
perception of the people is limited ; nor is God 
straitened, but the understanding of the reason 
of the people is held to be straitened. Finally, 
in the Gospel the Lord said, " The hour shall 
come when neither in this mountain nor in Jeru- j 
salem shall ye worship the Father ; " ^ and gave I 
the reasons, saying, " God is a Spirit ; and those 1 
therefore who worship, must worship in spirit and 
in truth." ^ Thus the divine agencies are there^ 
exhibited by means of members ; it is not the 
appearance of God nor the bodily lineaments 
that are described. For when the eyes are spoken 
of, it is implied that He sees all things ; and 
when the ear, it is set forth that He hears all 
things ; and when the finger, a certain energy 
of His will is opened up ; and when the nostrils. 
His recognition of prayers is shown forth as of 
odours ; and when the hand, it is proved that 
He is the author of every creature ; and when 
the arm, it is announced that no nature can with- 
stand the power of His arm ; and when the feet, 
it is unfolded that He fills all things, and that 
there is not any place where God is not. For 
neither members nor the offices of members are i 
needful to Him to whose sole judgment, even 
une.xpressed, all things serve and are present. 
For why should He require eyes who is Himself 
the light ? or why should He ask for feet who is 
everywhere ? or why should He wish to go when 
there is nowhere where He can go beyond Him- 
self? or why should He seek for hands whose 
will is, even when silent, the architect for the 

■ 2 Chron. xix. i6. 
^ Ps. cxxxix. 8, 9, lo. 
^ John iv. 21. 

* John iv. 24. 

* jv. in the Old Testament. 

foundation of all things ? He needs no ears who 
knows the wills that are even unexpressed ; or 
for what reason should He need a tongue whose 
thought is a command? These members assur- 
edly were necessary to men, but not to God, 
because man's design would be ineffectual if the 
body did not fulfil the thought. Moreover, they 
are not needful to God, whose will the works 
attend not so much without any effort, as that 
the works themselves proceed simultaneously 
with the will. Moreover, He Himself is all eye, 
because He all sees ; and all ear, because He 
all hears ; and all hand, because He all works ; 
and all foot, because He all is everywhere. For 
He is the same, whatever it is. He is all equal, 
and all everywhere. For He has not in Him 
any diversity in Himself, being simple. For 
those are the things which are reduced to diver- 
sity of members, which arise from birth and go 
to dissolution. But things which are not concrete 
cannot be conscious of these things.^' And what 
is immortal, whatever it is, that very thing is one 
and simple, and for ev^er. And thus because it 
is one it cannot be dissolved ; since whatever is 
that \ery thing which is placed beyond the claim 
of dissolution, it is freed from the laws of death. 

CHAP. VII. ARGUMENT. — MOREOVER, TH.AT WHEN 
GOD IS CALLED A SPIRIT, BRIGHTNESS, AND 
LIGHT, GOD IS NOT SUFFICIENTLY EXPRESSED 
HY THOSE APPELLATIONS. 

But when the Lord says that God is a Spirit, I 
think that Christ spoke thus of the Father, as 
wishing that something still more should be un- 
derstood than merely that God is a Spirit. For 
although, in His Gospel, He is reasoning for the 
purpose of giving to men an increase of intelli- 
gence, nevertheless He Himself speaks to men 
concerning God, in such a way as they can as 
yet hear and receive ; although, as we have said. 
He is now endeavouring to give to His hearers 
religious additions to their knowledge of God. 
For we find it to be written that God is called 
Love, and yet from this the substance of God is 
not declared to be Love ; and that He is called 
Light, while in this is not the substance of God. 
But the whole that is thus said of God is as much 
as can be said, so that reasonably also, when He 
is called a Spirit, it is not all that He is which is 
so called ; but so that, while men's mind by un- 
derstanding makes progress even to the Spirit 
itself, being already changed in spirit, it may 
conjecture God to be something even greater 
through the Spirit. For that which is, accord- 
ing to what it is, can neither be declared by 
human discourse, nor received by human ears, 
nor gathered by human perceptions. For if 
" the things which God hath prepared for them 

*> Thai is to say, " of birth and dissolution." [He is the Now.] 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

617 

that love Him, neither eye hath seen, nor ear 
hath heard, nor the heart of man, nor even his 
mind has perceived ; " ' what and how great is 
He Himself who promises these things, in under- 
standing which both the mind and nature of man 
have failed ! Finally, if you receive the Spirit 
as the substance of God, you will make God a 
creature. For every spirit is a creature. And 
therefore, then, God will be made. In which 
manner also, if, according to Moses, you should 
receive God to be fire, in saying that He is a 
creature, you will have declared what is ordained, 
you will not have taught who is its ordainer. 
But these things are rather used as figures than 
as being so in fact. For as, in the Old Testa- 
ment,^ God is for this reason called Fire, that 
fear may be struck into the hearts of a sinful 
people, by suggesting to them a Judge ; so in the 
New Testament He is announced as Spirit, that, 
as the Renewer and Creator of those who are 
dead in their sins, He maybe attested by this 
goodness of mercy granted to those that believe. 

CHAP. VIII. ARGUMENT. — IT IS THIS GOD, THERE- 
FORE, THAT THE CHURCH HAS KNOWN AND 
ADORES ; AND TO HIM THE TESTIMONY OF 
THINGS AS WELL VISIBLE AS INVISIBLE IS GIVEN, 
BOTH AT ALL TIMES AND IN ALL FORMS, BY 
THE NATURE WHICH HIS PROVIDENCE RULES 
AND GOVERNS. 

This God, then, setting aside the fables and 
figments of heretics, the Church knows and wor- 
ships, to whom the universal and entire nature 
of things as well visible as invisible gives wit- 
ness ; whom angels adore, stars wonder at, seas 
bless, lands revere, and all things under the 
earth look up to ; whom the whole mind of man 
is conscious of, even if it does not express itself ; 
at whose command, all things are set in motion, 
springs gush forth, rivers flow, waves arise, all 
creatures bring forth their young, winds are 
compelled to blow, showers descend, seas are 
stirred up, all things everywhere diffuse their 
fruitfulness. Who ordained, peculiar to the 
protoplasts of eternal life, a certain beautiful 
paradise in the east ; He planted the tree of 
life, and similarly placed near it another tree 
of the knowledge of good and evil, gave a com- 
mand, and decreed a judgment against sin ; He 
preserved the most righteous Noe from the 
perils of the deluge, for the merit of His inno- 
cence and faith ; He translated Enoch : He 
elected Abraham into the society of his friend- 
ship ; He protected Isaac : He increased Jacob ; 
He gave Moses for a leader unto the people ; 
He delivered the groaning children of Israel 
from the yoke of slavery ; He wrote the law ; 

' I Cor. ii. 9. 

^ [Ex iii 2. Not can.surning. Heb. xii. 29, " consuming."] 

He brought the offspring of our fathers into the 
land of promise ; He instructed the prophets 
by His Spirit, and by all of them He promised 
His Son Christ ; and at the time at which He 
had covenanted that He would give Him, He 
sent Him, and through Him He desired to come 
into our knowledge, and shed forth upon us the 
liberal stores of His mercy, by conferring His 
abundant Spirit on the poor and abject. And, 
because He of His own free-will is both liberal 
and kind, lest the whole of this globe, being 
turned away from the streams of His grace, 
should wither. He willed the apostles, as found- 
ers of our family, to be sent by His Son into the ' 
whole world, that the condition of the human 
race might be conscious of its Founder ; and, if 
it should choose to follow Him, might have One 
whom even in its supplications it might now call 
Father instead of God.^ And His providence 
has had or has its course among men, not only 
individually, but also among cities themselves, 
and states whose destructions have been an- 
nounced by the words of prophets ; yea, even 
through the whole world itself; whose end, 
whose miseries, and wastings, and sufferings on 
account of unbelief He has allotted. And lest 
moreover any one should think that such an 
indefatigable providence of God does not reach 
to even the very least things, " One of two spar- 
rows," says the Lord, " shall not fall without the 
will of the Father ; but even the very hairs of 
your head are all numbered." ^ And His care 
and providence did not permit even the clothes 
of the Israelites to be worn out, nor even the 
vilest shoes on their feet to be wasted ; nor, 
moreover, finally, the very garments of the cap- 
tive young men to be burnt. And this is not 
without reason ; for if He embraces all things, 
and contains all things, — and all things, and the 
whole, consist of individuals, — His care will 
consequently extend even to every individual 
thing, since His providence reaches to the 
whole, whatever it is. Hence it is that He also 
sitteth above the Cherubim ; that is, He presides 
over the variety of His works, the living crea- 
tures which hold the control over the rest being 
subjected to His throne : s a crystal covering 
being thrown over all things ; that is, the heav- 
en covering all things, which at the command 
of God had been consolidated into a firma- 
ment ^ from the fluent material of the waters, 
that the strong hardness that divides the midst 
of the waters that covered the earth before, 

3 [Madame de Stael has beautifully remarked on the benefit con- 
ferred upon humanity by Him who authorized us to say, " Our Fa- 
ther." " Scientific " atheism gives nothing instead.] 

* Matt. X. 29, 30. 

5 [Ezek. i. 10 and Rev. iv. 7.] 

^ [The science of the third century had overruled the Pythago- 
rean system, and philosophers bound the Church and the human 
mind in the chains of false science for ages. The revival of true 
science was due to Copernicus, a Christian priest, and to Galileo, 
and other Christians. Let this be noted.] 

6i8 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

might sustain as if on its back the weight cf the 
superincumbent water, its strength being estab- 
hshed by the frost. And, moreover, wheels He 
below — that is to say, the seasons — whereby 
all the members of the world are always being 
rolled onwards; such feet being added by which 
those things do not stand still for ever, but pass 
onward. And, moreover, throughout all their 
limbs they are studded with eyes ; for the works 
of God must be contemplated with an ever 
watchful inspection : in tlie heart of which 
things, a fire of embers is in the midst, either 
because this world of ours is hastening to the 
fiery day of judgment ; or because all the works 
of God are fiery, and are not darksome, but 
flourish.' Or, moreover, lest, because those 
things had arisen from earthly beginnings, they 
should naturally be inactive, from the rigidity of 
their origin, the hot nature of an interior spirit 
was added to all things ; and that this nature 
concreted with the cold bodies might minister^ 
for the purpose of life equal measures for all.^ 
This, therefore, according to David, is God's 
chariot. " For the chariot of God," says he, 
" is multiplied ten thousand times ; " * that is, it 
is innumerable, infinite, immense. For, under 
the yoke of the natural law given to all things, 
some things are restrained, as if withheld by 
reins ; others, as if stimulated, are urged on 
with relaxed reins. For the world, 5 which is that 
chariot of God with all things, both the angels 
themselves and the stars guide ; and their move- 
ments, although various, yet bound by certain 
laws, we watch them guiding by the bounds of a 
time prescribed to themselves ; so that rightly 
we also are now disposed to exclaim with the 
apostle, as he admires both the Architect and 
His works : " Oh the depth of the riches of the 
wisdom and knowledge of God ! how inscruta- 
ble are His judgments, and His ways past find- 
ing out ! " And the rest.^ 

CHAP. IX. ARGUMENT. — FURTHER, THAT THE 
SAME RULE OF TRUTH TEACHES US TO BELIEVE, 
AFTER THE FATHER, ALSO IN THE SON OF GOD, 
JESUS CHRIST OUR LORD GOD, BEING THE SAME 
THAT WAS PROMISED IN THE OLD TESTAMENT, 
AND MANIFESTED IN THE NEW. 

The same rule of truth teaches us to believe, 
after the Father, also on the Son of God, Christ 
Jesus, the Lord our God, but the Son of God — 
of that God who is both one and alone, to wit 

' " Vigent," or otherwise " lucent." 

- " Ministrartt " seems to be preferable to " monstraret." 
3 [Our author's genius .ictually suggests a tlieor^', in this chapter, 
concerning the cc.i, or " living creatures," which anticipates all that 
IS truly demonstrated by the " evolutionists," and which harmonizes 
the variety of animated natures. Rev. v. 13, 14.] 

* Ps. Ixviii. 18. 

-^ [The universe is here intended, as in Milton, " this pendent 
world." Parad. Lost, book ii. 1052.] 

* Rom. xi. 33. " Note also the rest 0/ the text " is our author's 
additional comment. 

the Founder of all things^ as already has been 
expressed above. For this Jesus Christ, I will 
once more say, the Son of this God, we read of 
as having been promised in the Old Testament, 
and we observe to be manifested in the New,, 
fulfilling the shadows and figures of all the sacra- 
ments, with the presence of the truth embodied. 
For as well the ancient prophecies as the Gos- 
pels testify Him to be the son of Abraham and 
the son of David. Genesis itself anticipates 
Him, when it says : " To thee will I give it, and 
to thy seed." ^ He is spoken of when it shows 
how a man wrestled with Jacob ; He too, when 
it says : " There shall not fail a prince from 
Judah, nor a leader from between his thighs, 
until He shall come to whom it has been prom- 
ised ; and He shall be the expectation of the 
nations."** He is spoken of by Moses when he 
says : " Provide another whom thou mayestsend."* 
He is again spoken of by the same, when he 
testifies, saying : " A Prophet will God raise up 
to you from your brethren ; listen to Him as if 
to me." '° It is He, too, that he speaks of when 
he says : " Ye shall see your life hanging in 
doubt night and day, and ye shall not believe 
Him."" Him, too, Isaiah alludes to: "There 
shall go forth a rod from the root of Jesse, and 
a flower shall grow up from his root." '^ The 
same also when he says : " Behold, a virgin shall 
conceive, and bear a son." '^ Him he refers to 
when he enumerates the healings that were to 
proceed from Him, saying : " Then shall the 
eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the 
deaf shall hear : then shall the lame man leap as 
an hart, and the tongue of the dumb shall be 
eloquent." '•* Him also, when he sets forth the 
virtue of patience, saying : " His voice shall not 
be heard in the streets • a bruised reed shall He 
not destroy, and the smoking flax shall He not 
quench." '5 Him. too, when he described His 
Gospel : " And I will ordain for you an everlast- 
ing covenant, even the sure mercies of David." '^ 
Him, too, when he foretells that the nations 
should believe on Him : " Behold, I have given 
Him for a Chief and a Commander to the 
nations. Nations that knew not Thee shall call 
upon Thee, and peoples that knew Thee not 
shall flee unto Thee." '^ It is the same that he 
refers to when, concerning His passion, he ex- 
claims, saying : " As a sheep He is led to the 
slaughter ; and as a lamb before his shearer is 
dumb, so He opened not His mouth in His 

7 Gen. xvii. 8. 

8 CJen. xlix. 10. 

9 Ex. iv. 13. 

'° Deut. xviii. 15. 
" Deut. xxviii. 66. 
■2 Isa. xi. I. 
'3 Isa. vii. 13. 
'^ Isa. XXXV. 3-6. 
'5 Isa. xlii. 2, 3. 
'<> Isa. Iv. 3. 
" Isa. Iv. 4, 5. 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

619 

humility." ' Him, moreover, when he described 
the blows and stripes of His scourgings : " By 
His bruises we were healed."- Of His humilia- 
tion : " And we saw Him, and He had neither 
form nor comeliness, a man in suffering, and who 
knoweth how to bear infirmity." -^ Or that the 
people would not believe on Him: "All day 
long I have spread out my hands unto a people 
that believeth not." •♦ Or that He would rise 
again from the dead : " And in that day there 
shall be a root of Jesse, and one who shall rise 
to reign over the nations ; on Him shall the 
nations hope, and His rest shall be honour." 5 
Or when he speaks of the time of the resurrec- 
tion : " We shall find Him, as it were, prepared 
in the morning." ^ Or that He should sit at the 
right hand of the Father : " The Lord said unto 
my Lord, Sit Thou at my right hand, until I shall 
place Thine enemies as the stool of Thy feet." ^ 
Or when He is set forth as possessor of all 
things : " Ask of me, and I will give Thee the 
heathen for Thine inheritance, and the bounda- 
ries of the earth for Thy possession." '^ Or when 
He is siiown as Judge of all : " O God, give the 
King Thy judgment, and Thy righteousness to 
the King's Son."'-* And I shall not in this place 
pursue the subject fur.ther : the things which are 
announced of Christ are known to all heretics, 
but are even better known to those who hold 
the truth. 

CHAP. X. ARGUMENT. — THAT JESUS CHRIST IS 
THE SON OF GOD AND TRULY MAN, AS OPPOSED 
TO THE FANCIES OF HERETICS, WHO UEN^ THAT 
HE TOOK UPON HIM TRUE FLESH. 

But of this I remind you, that Christ was not 
to be expected in the Gospel in any other wise 
than as He was promised before by the Creator, 
in the Scriptures of the Old Testament ; espe- 
cially as the things that were predicted of Him 
were fulfilled, and those things that were fulfilled 
had been predicted. As with reason I might 
truly and constantly say to that fanciful — I 
know not what — of those heretics who reject 
the authority of the Old Testament, . as to a 
Christ feigned and coloured up from old wives' 
fables : " Who art thou ? Whence art thou ? By 
whom art thou sent? Wherefore hast thou now 
chosen to come? Why such as thou art? Or 
how hast thou been able to come ? Or where- 
fore hast thou not gone to thine own, except that 
thou hast proved that thou hast none of thine 
own, by coming to those of another? What hast 

' Isa. liii. 7. 

- Isa. liii. 5. 

3 Isa. liii. 2. 

* Isa. l.\v. 2. 

5 Isa. xi. 10. 

*■ Hos vi. 3. 

^ Ps. ex. I, 2. 

s Ps. ii. 8. 

9 Ps. Ixxii. 1. 

thou to do with the Creator's world? What 
hast thou to do with the Creator's man? What 
hast thou to do with the image of a body from 
which thou takest away the hope of resurrection ? 
Why comest thou to another man's servant, and 
desirest thou to solicit another man's son ? Why 
dost thou strive to take me away from the Lord ? 
Why dost thou compel me to Ijlaspheme, and to 
be impious to my Father? Or what shall I gain 
from thee in the resurrection, if I do not receive 
myself when I lose my body? If thou wishest 
to save, thou shouldest have made a man to 
whom to give salvation. If thou desirest to 
snatch from sin, thou shouldest have granted 
to me previously that I should not fall into sin. 
But what approbation of law dost thou carry 
about with thee? What testimony of the pro- 
phetic word hast thou? Or what substantial 
good can I promise myself from thee, when I 
see that thou hast come in a phantasm and not 
in a bodily substance ? What, then, hast thou to 
do with the form of a body, if thou hatest a 
body? Nay, thou wilt be refuted as to the 
hatred of bearing about the substance of a body, 
since thou hast been willing even to take up its 
form. For thou oughtest to have hated the 
imitation of a body, if thou hatedst the reality , 
because, if thou art something else, thou oughtest 
to have come as something else, lest thou shouldest 
be called the Son of the Creator if thou hadst 
even the likeness of flesh and body. Assuredly, 
if thou hatedst being born because thou hatedst 
' the Creator's marriage-union,' thou oughtest to 
refuse even the likeness of a man who is born 
by the ' marriage of the Creator.' " 

Neither, therefore, do we acknowledge that 
that is a Christ of the heretics who was — as i1 
is said — in appearance and not in reality ; for 
of those things which he did, he could have 
done nothing real, if he himself was a phantasm, 
and not reality. Nor him who wore nothing of 
our body in himself, seeing "he received nothing 
from Mary ; " neither did he come to us, since 
he appeared " as a vision, not in our substance." 
Nor do we acknowledge that to be Christ who 
chose an ethereal or starry flesh, as some here- 
tics have pretended. Nor can we perceive any 
salvation of ours in him, if /;/ ////// we do not 
even recognise the substance of our body ; nor, 
in short, any other who may have worn any other 
kind of fabulous body of heretical device. For 
all such fables as these are confuted as well by 
the nativity as by the death itself of our Lord. 
For John says : " The Word was made flesh, 
and dwelt among us ; " '° so that, reasonably, our 
body should be in Him, because indeed the 
Word took on Him our flesh. And for this rea- 
son blood flowed forth from His hands and feet, 

'° John i. 14. [Of fables and figments, see cap. viii. p. 617. 1 

620 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

and from His very side, so that He might be 
proved to be a sharer in our body by dying ac- i 
cording to the laws of our dissolution. And 
that He was raised again in the same bodily 
substance in which He died, is proved by the 
wounds of that very body, and thus He showed 
the laws of our resurrection in His flesh, in that 
He restored the same body in His resurrection 
which He hatl from us. For a law of resurrec- 
tion is established, in that Christ is raised up in 
the substance of the body as an example for the 
rest ; because, when it is written that " flesh and 
blood do not inherit the kingdom of God," ' 
it is not the substance of the flesh that is con- 
demned, which was built up by the divine hands 
that it should not perish, but only the guilt of 
the flesh is rightly rebuked, which by the \olun- 
tary daring of man rebelled against the claims 
of divine law. Because in baptism and in the 
dissolution of death the flesh is raised up and 
returns to salvation, by being recalled to the 
condition of innocency when the mortality of 
guilt is put aw^ay. 

CHAP. XI. — AND INDEED THAT CHRIST WAS NOT 
ONLY MAX, HUT GOD ALSO; THAT EVEN AS HE 
WAS THE SON OF MAN, SO ALSO HE WAS THE 
SON OF GOD. 

But lest, from the fact of asserting that our 
Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Creator, 
was manifested in the substance of the true body, 
we should seem either to have given assent to 
other heretics, who in this ])lace maintain that 
He is man only and alone, and therefore desire 
to prove that He was a man bare and solitary ; 
and lest we should seem to have afforded them 
any ground for objecting, we do not so express 
doctrine concerning the substance of His body, 
as to say that He is only and alone man, but so 
as to maintain, by the association of the divinity 
of the Word in that very materiality, that He was 
also God according to the Scriptures. For there 
is a great risk of saying that the Saviour of the 
human race was only man; that the Lord of all, 
and the Chief of the world, to whom all things 
were delivered, and all things were granted by 
His Father, by whom all things were ordained, 
all things were created, all things were arranged, 
the King of all ages and times, the Prince of all 
the angels, before whom there is none but the 
Father, was only man, and denying to Him di- 
vine authority in these things. For this con- 
tempt of the heretics will recoil also upon Ciod 
the Father, if God the Father could not beget 
God the Son. But, moreover, no blindness of 
the heretics shall prescribe to the truth. Nor, 
because they maintain one thing in Christ and 
do not maintain another, they see one side of 

' I Cor. xvi 50. [VoL iii. p. 521, this series.] 

Christ and do not see another, shall there be 
taken away from us that which they do not see 
for the sake of that which they do. For they 
regard the weaknesses in Him as if they were a 
man's weaknesses, but they do not count the 
powers as if they were a (iod's powers. They 
keep in mind the infirmities of the flesh, they 
exclude the powers of the divinity ; when if this 
argument from the infirmities of Christ is of avail 
to the result of proving Him to be man from His 
infirmities, the argument of divinity in Him 
gathered from His powers avails to the result 
also of asserting Him to be God from His works. 
For if His sufferings show in Him human frailty, 
why may not His works assert in Him divine 
power? For if this should not avail to assert 
Him to be God from His powers, neither can 
His sufferings avail to show Him to be man also 
from them. For whatever principle be adopted 
on one or the other side, will be found to be 
maintained.' F"or there will be a risk that He 
should not be shown to be man from His suffer- 
ings, if He could not also be approved as God 
by His powers. We must not then lean to one 
side and evade the other side, because any one 
who should exclude one portion of the truth will 
never hold the perfect truth. For Scripture as 
much announces Christ as also God, as it an- 
nounces God Himself as man. It has as much 
described Jesus Christ to be man, as moreover 
it has also described Christ the Lord to be God. 
Because it does not set forth Him to be the Son 
of God only, but also the Son of man ; nor does 
it only say, the Son of man, but it has also been 
accustomed to speak of Him as the Son of 
God. So that being of both, He is both, lest if 
He should be one only, He could not be the 
other. For as nature itself has prescribed that he 
must be believed to be a man who is of man, so 
the same nature prescribes also that He must 
be believed to be God who is of God ; but if he 
should not also be God when he is of God, 
no more should he be man although he should 
be of man. And thus both doctrines would be 
endangered in one and the other way, by one 
being convicted to have lost belief in the other. 
Let them, therefore, who read that Jesus Christ 
the Son of man is man, read also that this same 
Jesus is called also God and the Son of God. 
For in the manner that as man He is of Abraham, 
so also as God He is l^efore Abraham himself. 
And in the same manner as He is as man the 
" Son of David," ^ so as God He is proclaimed 
David's Lord. And in the same manner as He 
was made as man " under the law," ^ so as God 
J^e is declared to be " Lord of the Sabbath." s 

2 Sci'.. in its alternntive. 
5 Matt xxiii. 42 et seq. 
■* I la!, iv. 4. 
5 Luke vi. 5. 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

621 

< 

And in the same manner as He suffers, as man, 
the condemnation, so as God He is found to 
have all judgment of the quick and dead. And 
in the same manner as He is born as man sub- 
sequent to the world, so as God He is manifested 
to have been before the world. And in the same 
way as He was begotten as man of the seed of 
David, so also the world is said to have been 
ordained by Him as God. And in the same 
way as He was as man after many, so as God 
He was before all. And in the same manner as 
He was as man inferior to others, so as God He 
was greater than all. And in the same manner as 
He ascended as man into heaven, so as God He 
had first descended thence. And in the same 
manner as He goes as man to the Father, so as 
the Son in obedience to the Father He shall 
descend thence. So if imperfections in Him 
prove human frailty, majesties in Him affirm 
>^clivine power. For the risk is, in reading of 
Doth, to believe not both, but one of the two. 
Wherefore as both are read of in Christ, let both 
be believed ; that so finally the faith may be true, 
being also complete. For if of two principles 
one gives way in the faith, and the other, and 
that indeed which is of least importance, be 
taken up for belief, the rule of truth is thrown 
'into confusion ; and that boldness will not confer 
salvation, but instead of salvation will effect a 
great risk of death from the overthrow of the 
faith. 

CHAP. XII. ARGUMENT. — THAT CHRIST IS GOD, 
IS PROVED BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE OLD TES- 
TAMENT SCRIPTURES. 

Why, then, should we hesitate to say what 
Scripture does not shrink from declaring ? Why 
shall the truth of faith hesitate in that wherein 
the authority of Scripture has never hesitated ? 
For, behold, Hosea the prophet says in the per- 
son of the Father : " I will not now save them 
by bow, nor by horses, nor by horsemen ; but 
I will save them by the Lord their God." ' If 
Ciod says that He saves by God, still God does 
not save except by Christ. Why, then, should 
man hesitate to call Christ God, when he observes 
that He is declared to be God by the Father ac- 
cording to the Scriptures? Yea, if God the 
Father does not save except by God, no one 
can be saved by God the Father unless he shall 
have confessed Christ to be God, in whom and 
by whom the Father promises that He will give 
him salvation : so that, reasonably, whoever ac- 
knowledges Him to be God, may find salvation 
in Christ God ; whoever does not acknowledge 
Him to be God, would lose salvation which he 
could not find elsewhere than in Christ God. 
For in the same way as Isaiah says, " Behold, a 

I Hos. i. 7. 

virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and ye shall 
call His name Emmanuel, which is, interpreted, 
God with us ; " ^ so Christ Himself says, " Lo, 
I am with you, even to the consummation of the 
world." 3 Therefore He is " God with us ; " yea, 
and much rather, He is in us. Christ is with us, 
therefore it is He whose name is God with us, 
because He also is with us ; or is He not with 
us? How then does He say that He is with us? 
He, then, is with us. But because He is with 
us He was called Emmanuel, that is, God with 
us. God, therefore, because He is with us, was 
called God with us . The same prophet says : 
"Be ye strengthened, ye relaxed hands, and ye 
feeble knees ; be consoled, ye that are cowardly 
in heart ; be strong ; fear not. Lo, our God shall 
return judgment ; He Himself shall come, and 
shall save you : then shall the eyes of the blind 
be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall hear ; 
then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the 
tongue of the dumb shall be eloquent." •♦ Since 
the prophet says that at God's advent these should 
be the signs which come to pass ; let men ac- 
knowledge either that Christ is the Son of God, 
at whose advent and by whom these wonders of 
healings were performed ; or, overcome by the 
truth of Christ's divinity, let them rush into the 
other heresy, and refusing to confess Christ to 
be the Son of God, and God, let them declare 
Him to be the Father. For, being bound by the 
words of the prophets, they can no longer deny 
Christ to be God. What, then, do they reply 
when those signs are said to be about to take 
place on the advent of God, which were mani- 
fested on the advent of Christ? In what way do 
they receive Christ as God ? For now they can- 
not deny Him to be God. As God the Father, 
or as God the Son? If as the Son, why do they 
deny that the Son of God is God ? If as the 
Father, why do they not follow those who appear 
to maintain blasphemies of that kind ? unless be- 
cause in this contest against them concerning the 
truth, this is in the meantime sufficient for us, 
that, being convinced in any kind of way, they 
should confess Christ to be God, seeing they 
have even wished to deny that He is God. He 
says by Habakkuk the prophet : " God shall 
come from the south, and the Holy One from 
the dark and dense mountain." s Whom do 
they wish to represent as coming from the south ? 
If they say that it is the Almighty God the 
Father, then God the Father comes from a place, 
from which place, moreover. He is thus excluded, 
and He is bounded within the straitnesses of 
some abode ; and thus by such as these, as we 
have said, the sacrilegious heresy of Sabellius is 

- Isa. vii. 14. 

3 Matt, xxviii. 20. 

< Isa XXXV. 3, etc. 

5 Hab. iii. 3. [See English margin, and Robinson, i. p. 552.] 

622 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

embodied. Since Christ is believed to be not 
the Son, but the Father ; since by them He is 
asserted to be in strictness a l)are man, in a new 
manner, by those, again, Christ is proved to be 
God the Father Almighty. But if in Bethlehem, 
the region of which local division looks towards 
the southern portion of heaven, Christ is born, 
who by the Scriptures is also said to be God, 
this God is rightly described as coming from the 
south, because He was foreseen as about to 
come from Bethlehem. Let them, then, choose 
of the two alternatives, the one that they prefer, 
that He who came from the south is the Son, or 
the Father ; for God is said to be about to come 
from the south. If the Son, why do they shrink 
from calling Him Christ and God? For the 
Scripture says that God shall come. If the 
Father, why do they shrink from being associated 
with the boldness of Sabellius, who says that 
Christ is the Father? unless because, whether 
they call Him Father or Son, from his heresy, 
however unwillingly, they must needs withdraw 
if they are accustomed to say that Christ is 
merely man ; when compelled by the facts them- 
selves, they are on the eve of exalting Him as 
God, whether in wishing to call Him Father or 
in wishing to call Him Son. 

CHAP. XIII. ARGUMENT. — THAT THE SAME TRUTH 
IS PROVED FROM THE SACRED WRITINGS OF THE 
NEW COVENANT. 

And thus also John, describing the nativity of 
Christ, says : " The Word was made flesh, and 
dwelt among us, and we saw His glory, the glory 
as of the only begotten of the Father, full of 
grace and truth." ' For, moreover, " His name 
is called the Word of God,"^ and not without 
reason. " My heart has emitted a good word ; " -^ 
which word He subseciuently calls by the name 
of the King inferentially, " I will tell my works 
to the King." J For "by Him were made all the 
works, and without Him was nothing made." •* 
" Whether," says the apostle, " they be thrones, 
or dominations, or powers, or mights, visible 
things and invisible, all things subsist by Him." 5 
Moreover, this is that Word which " came unto 
His own, and His own received Him not. For 
the world was made by Him, and the world 
knew Him not." '' Moreover, this Word " was 
in the beginning with God, and God was the 
Word." 7 Who then can doubt, when in the last 
clause it is said, " The Word was made flesh, 
and dwelt among us," that Christ, whose is the 

' John i. 14. [For Sabellius, see p. 128, supra.\ 
^ Kev. xix. 13. 
3 Ps. xly. I. 

* John i. 3. 
5 Col. i. 16. 

* John i. 10, 11. 
7 John i. I. 

nativity, and because He was made flesh, is man ; 
and because He is the Word of God, who can 
shrink from declaring without hesitation that He 
is (iod, especially when he considers the evan- 
gelical Scripture, that it has associated both of 
these substantial natures into one concord of the 
nativity of Christ? For He it is who "as a bride- 
groom goeth forth from his bride-chamber ; He 
exulted as a giant to run his way. His going 
forth is from the end of the heaven, and His re- 
turn unto the ends of it." ^ Because, even to 
the highest, " not any one hath ascended into 
heaven save He who came down from heaven, 
the Son of man who is in heaven." ^ Repeating 
this same thing. He says : " Father, glorify me 
with that glory wherewith I was with Thee be- 
fore the world was."'° And if this Word came 
down from heaven as a bridegroom to the flesh, 
that by the assumption of flesh He might ascend 
thither as the Son of man, whence the Son of 
God had descended as the \\'ord, reasonably, 
while by the mutual connection both flesh wears 
the Word of God, and the Son of God assumes 
the frailty of the flesh ; when the flesh being 
espoused ascending thither, whence without the 
flesh it had descended, it at length receives that 
glory which in being shown to have had before 
the foundation of the world, it is most manifestly 
proved to be God. And, nevertheless, while the 
world itself is said to have been founded after 
Him, it is found to have been created by Him ; by 
that very divinity in Him whereby the world 
was made, both His glory and His authority are 
proved. Moreover, if, whereas it is the property 
of none but God to know the secrets of the heart, 
Christ beholds the secrets of the heart ; and if, 
whereas it belongs to none but God to remit sins, 
the same Christ remits sins ; and if, whereas it 
is the portion of no man to come from heaven, 
He descended by coming from heaven ; and if, 
whereas this word can be true of no man, " I 
and the Father are one," " Christ alone declared 
this word out of the consciousness of His divin- 
ity ; and if, finally, the Apostle Thomas, instructed 
in all the proofs and conditions of Christ's divin- 
ity, says in reply to Christ, " My Lord and my 
God ; " '^ and if, besides, the Apostle Paul says, 
" Whose are the fathers, and of whom Christ 
came according to the flesh, who is over all, God 
blessed for evermore," '^ writing in his epistles ; 
and if the same apostle declares that he was 
ordained " an apostle not by men, nor of man, 
but by Jesus Christ ; " '■♦ and if the same con- 
tends that he learned the Gospel not from men 

^ Ps. xix. 6, 7. 

9 John iii. 13. 

'° John xvii. 5. [Note this exposition.] 

" John X. 30. 

'^ John XX. 28. 

'3 Rom. ix. 5. 

'< Gal. i. I and 12. 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

623 

or by man, but received it from Jesus Christ, 
reasonably Christ is Ciod. Therefore, in this re- 
spect, one of two things must needs be estab- 
hshed. For since it is evident that all things 
were made by Christ, He is either before all 
things, since all things were by Him, and so 
He is justly God ; or because He is man He 
is subsequent to all things, and justly nothing 
was made by Him. But we cannot say that 
nothing was made by Him, when we observe it 
Avritten that all things were made by Him. He 
is not therefore subsequent to all things ; that 
is. He is not man only, who is subsequent to 
all things, but (iod also, since God is prior to all 
things. For He is before all things, because 
all things are by Him, while if He were only 
man, nothing would be by Him ; or if all things 
were by Him, He would not be man only, be- 
cause if He were only man, all thuigs would not 
be by Him ; nay, nothing woukl be by Him. 
AVhat, then, do they reply? That nothing is by 
Him, so that He is man only? How then are 
all things by Him? Therefore He is not man 
only, but God also, since all things are by Him ; 
so that we reasonably ought to understand that 
Christ is not man only, who is subsequent to all 
things, but God also, since by Him all things 
Avere made. For how can you say that He is 
man only, when you see Him also in the flesh, 
unless because when both aspects are considered, 
both truths are rightly believed ? 

CHAP. XIV. ARGUMENT. — THE AUTHOR PROSE- 
CUTES THE SAME ARGUMENT. 

And yet the heretic still shrinks from urging 
that Christ is God, whom he perceives to be 
proved God by so many words as well as facts. 
If Christ is only man, how, when He came into 
this world, did He come unto His .own, since a 
man could have made no world i If Christ was 
only man, how is the world said to have been 
made by Him, when the world was not by man, 
but man was ordained after the world? If 
■Christ was only man, how was it that Christ 
was not only of the seed of David ; but He was 
the Word made flesh and dwelt among us ? For 
although the Protoplast was not born of seed, 
yet neither was the Protoplast formed of the 
conjunction of the Word and the flesh. For 
He is not the Word made flesh, nor dwelt in us. 
If Christ was only man, how does He "who 
Cometh from heaven testify what He hath seen 
and heard," ' when it is plain that man cannot 
come from heaven, because he cannot be born 
there? If Christ be only man, how are "visible 
things and invisible, thrones, powers, and domin- 
ions," said to be created by Him and in Him ; 
when the heavenly powers could not have been 

' John iii. 31. 

made by man, since they must needs have been 
prior to man? If Christ is only man, how is 
He present wherever He is called upon ; when 
it is not the nature of man, but of Ciod, that it 
can be present in every place ? If Christ is only 
man, why is a man invoked in prayers as a Medi- 
ator, when the invocation of a man to afford sal- 
vation is condemned as ineffectual? If Christ 
is only man, w^hy is hope rested upon Him, when 
hope in man is declared to be accursed? If 
Christ is only man, why may not Christ be de- 
nied without destruction of the soul, when it is 
said that a sin committed against man may be 
forgiven? If Christ is only man, how comes 
John the Baptist to testify and say, " He who 
Cometh after me has become before me, because 
He was prior to me ; " - when, if Christ were 
only man, being born after John, He could not 
be before John, unless because He preceded 
him, in that He is God? If Christ is only man, 
how is it that " what things the Father doeth, 
these also doeth the Son likewise," ^ when man 
cannot do works like to the heavenly operations 
of God ? If Christ is only man, how is it that 
" even as the Father hath life in Himself, so hath 
He given to the Son to have life in Himself," "♦ 
when man cannot have life in him after the ex- 
ample of God the Father, because he is not 
glorious in eternity, but made with the materials 
of mortality? If Christ is only man, how does 
He say, " I am the bread of eternal life which 
came down from heaven," 5 when man can 
neither be the bread of life, he himself being 
mortal, nor could he have come down from 
heaven, since no perishable material is estab- 
lished in heaven ? If Christ is only man, how- 
does He say that " no man hath seen God at 
any time, save He which is of God ; He hath 
seen God ? " ^ Because if Christ is only man. 
He could not see God, because no man has 
seen God ; but if, being of God, He has seen 
God, He wishes it to be understood that He is 
more than man, in that He has seen God. If 
Christ is only man, why does He say, " What if 
ye shall see the Son of man ascending thither 
where He was before? "^ But He ascended 
into heaven, therefore He was there, in that He 
returned thither where He was before. But if 
He was sent from heaven by the Father, He cer- 
tainly is not man only ; for man, as we have 
said, could not come from heaven. Therefore 
as man He was not there before, but ascended 
thither where He was not. But the Word of 
God descended which was there, — the Word 
of God, I say, and God by whom all things were 

2 John i. 15. 

3 John V. 19. 

* John V. 26. 
S John vi. 51. 

* John VI. 46. 
' John vi. 62. 

624 

TREATISE CONXERNING THE TRINITY. 

made, and without whom nothing was made. It j He has taken upon Him. For man is joined 

^^.^j^ ^^^j^ ^^^ ^^^ .^ j.^j^^^ ^^.^j^ ^^^^ But on 

that account this Christ here laid more stress on 
the one asi)ect of His sole divinity, because the 
Jewish blindness contemplated in Christ the as- 
pect alone of the flesh ; and thence in the present 
passage He passed over in silence the frailty 
of the body, which is of the world, and spoke of 
His divinity alone, which is not of the world : so 

was not therefore man that thus caine thence 
from heaven, but the Word of God ; that is, 
(iod descended thence. 

CHAP. XV.' ARGUMENT. — AGAIN HE PROVES FROM 
THE GOSPEL THAT CHRIST IS GOD. 

If Christ is only man, how is it that He says, 
"Though 1 bear record of myself, yet my record 

is true : because I know whence I came, and ^^at in proportion as they had inclined to be- 
whither I go ; ye know not whence I came, and | ^'^'^'^ Him to be only man, in that proportion 
whither I go. Ye judge after the flesh? "^ Christ might draw them to consider His divinity. 

Behold, also He says, that He shall return 

so as to believe Him to be God, desirous to over- 

thither whence He bears witness that He came come their incredulity concerning His divinity 
before, as being sent, — to wit, from heaven. ! ^^Y omitting in the meantime any mention of 
He came down therefore from whence He came, { His human condition, and by setting before 
in the same manner as He goes thither from I tliem His divinity alone. If Christ is man only, 
whence He descended. Whence if Christ were how does He say, "I proceeded forth and came 
only man, He would not have come thence, and j ^'"O"^ God,"-* when it is evident that man was 
therefore would not depart thither, because He I "i^cle by God, and did not proceed forth from 
would not have come thence. Moreover, by [Him? But in the way in which as man He 
coming thence, whence as man He could not j proceeded not from God, thus the Word of God 
have come, He shows Himself to have come as ! proceeded, of whom it is said, " My heart hath 
God. For the Jews, ignorant and untaught in I "ttered forth a good Word ; " s which, because 
the matter of this very descent of His, made | ^^ '^ from God, is with reason also with God. 
these heretics their successors, seeing that to I ^"^ this, too, since it was not uttered without 
them it is said, " Ye know not whence I come, \ effect, reasonably makes all things : " For all 
and whither I go : ye judge after the flesh." I things were made by Him, and withotit Him 

As much they as the Jews, holding that the car 
nal birth of Christ was the only one, believed 
that Christ was nothing else than man ; not con 

was nothing made."^ But this Word whereby 
all things were made (is God). "And God," says 
he, " was the Word." ^ Therefore God proceeded 

sidering this point, that as man could not come , ^''^m God, in that the Word which proceeded is 
from heaven, so as that he might return thither, i God, who proceeded forth from God. If Christ 

He who descended thence must be God, seeing 
that man could not come thence. If Christ is 
only man, how does He say, " Ye are from be- 
low, I am from above ; ye are of this world, I 
am not of this world ? " 3 But therefore if every 
jTian is of this world, and Christ is for that reason 
in this world, is He only man? God forbid! 
But consider what He says : " I am not of this 

is only man, how does He say, " If any man 
shall keep my word, he shall not see death for 
ever?"^ Not to see death for ever! what is 
this but immortality? But immortality is the 
associate of divinity, because both the divinity is 
immortal, and immortality is the fruit of divinity. 
For every man is mortal ; and immortality can- 
not be from that which is mortal. Therefore 

world." Does He then speak falsely when He I f^m Christ, as a mortal man, immortality can- 
says "of this world," if He is only man? Or if "ot arise. "But," says He, "whosoever keep- 
He does not speak falsely, He is not of this i eth my word, shall not see death for ever ; " 
world ;, He is therefore not man only, because ! therefore the word of Christ affords immortahty. 
He is not of this world. But that it should not ! ^"^ W immortality affords divinity. But al- 
be a secret who He was. He declared whence ' though it is not possible to maintain that one 
He was : " I," said He, " am from above," that j ^^^o is himself mortal can make another immor- 
is, from heaven, whence man cannot come, for tal, yet this word of Christ not only sets forth, 

he was not made in heaven. He is God, there- 
fore, who is from above, and therefore He is not 

but affords immortality : certainly He is not man 
only who gives immortality, which if He vrere 

of this world ; although, moreover, in a certain i only man He could not give ; but by giving 
manner He is of this world : wherefore Christ is I fiJvinity by immortality, He proves Himself to 

not God only, but man also. As reasonably in 
the way in which He is not of this world accord- 

be God by offering divinity, which if He were 
not God He could not give. If Christ was only 

ing to the divinity of the Word, so He is of this ' "^^") how did He say, " Before Abraham was, 
wodd according to the frailty of the body that 

' According to Pamelius, ch. xxiii. 
- John viii. 14, 15. 
^ John viii. 2j. 

< John viii. 42. 
5 Ps. xly. 1. 
'' John i. 3. 
' John i. I. 
^ John viii. 51. 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

625 

I Am ? " ' For no man can be before Him from 
whom he himself is ; nor can it be that any one 
should have been prior to him of whom he him- 
self has taken his origin. And yet Christ, al- 
though He is born of Abraham, says that He is 
l)efore Abraham. Either, therefore, He says 
what is not true, and deceives, if He was not 
before Abraham, seeing that He was of Abra- 
ham ; or He does not deceive, if He is also 
God, and was before Abraham. And if this 
were not so, it follows that, being of Abraham, 
He could not be before Abraham. If Christ 
was only man, how does He say, " And I know 
them, and my sheep follow me ; and I give unto 
them eternal life, and they shall never perish?" ^ 
And yet, since every man is bound by the laws 
of mortality, and therefore is unable to keep 
himself for ever, much more v/ill he be unable 
to keep another for ever. But Christ promises 
to give salvation for ever, which if He does not 
give. He is a deceiver ; if He gives. He is God. 
But He does not deceive, for He gives what He 
promises. Therefore He is God who proffers 
eternal salvation, which man, being unable to 
keep himself for ever, cannot be able to give to 
•mother. If Christ is only man, what is that 
tfhich He says, "I and the Father are one?"^ 
.'"or how can it be that " I and the Father are 
jiie," if He is not both God and the Son? — 
Ti^ho may therefore be called one, seeing that 
He is of Himself, being both His Son, and 
being born of Him, being declared to have pro- 
ceeded from Him, by which He is also God; 
which when the Jews thought to be hateful, and 
believed to be blasphemous, for that He had 
shown Himself in these discourses to be God, 
and therefore rushed at once to stoning, and set 
to work passionately to hurl stones. He strongly 
refuted His adversaries by the example and wit- 
ness of the Scriptures. " If," said He, " He 
called them gods to whom the words of God 
were given, and the Scriptures cannot be broken, 
ye say of Him whom rhe Father sanctified, and 
sent into this world. Thcu blasphemest, because 
I said, I am the Son of God." ■* By which words 
He did not deny Himself to be God, but rather 
He confirmed the assertion that He was God. 
For because, undoubtedly, they are said to be 
gods unto whom the words ot God were given, 
much more is He God who is found to be supe- 
rior to all these. And nevertheless He refuted 
the calumny of blasphemy in a fitting manner 
with lawful tact. 5 For He wishes that He should 
lie thus understood to be God, as the Son of 
God, and He would not wish to be understood 
to be the Father Himself. Thus He said that 

' John viii. 58. 

" John X. 27, 28. 

3 John X. 30. 

* John X. 35, 36. 

5 " Dispositionc," scil. o'lKOfOfiia. — Jackson 

He was se?i/, and showed them that He had 
manifested many good works from the Father ; 
whence He desired that He should not be under- 
stood to be the Father, but the Son. And in 
the latter portion of His defence He made 
mention of the Son, not the Father, when He 
said, "Ye say, Thou blasphemest, because I said, 
I am the Son of God." Thus, as far as pertains 
to the guilt of blasphemy, He calls Himself the 
Son, not the Father ; but as pertaining to His 
divinity, by saying, " I and the Father are one," 
He proved that He was the Son of God. He is 
God, therefore, but God in such a manner as to 
be the Son, not the Father. 

CHAP. XVI.^ ARGUMENT. — AGAIN FROM THE GOS- 
PEL HE PROVES CHRIST TO BE GOD. 

If Christ was only man, how is it that He 
Himself says, " And every one that believeth in 
me shall not die for evermore? " 7 And yet he 
who believes in man by himself alone is called 
accursed ; but he who believes on Christ is not 
accursed, but is said not to die for evermore. 
Whence, if on the one hand He is man only, as 
the heretics will have it, how shall not anybody 
who beheves in Him die eternally, since he who 
trusts in man is held to be accursed ? Or on the 
other, if he is not accursed, but rather, as it is 
read, destined for the attainment of everlasting 
life, Christ is not man only, but God also, in 
whom he who believes both lays aside all risk of 
curse, and attains to the fruit of righteousness. 
If Christ was only man, how does He say that 
the Paraclete " shall take of His, those things 
which He shall declare?"^ For neither does 
the Paraclete receive anything from man, but the 
Paraclete offers knowledge to man ; nor does 
the Paraclete learn things future from man, but 
instructs man concerning futurity. Therefore 
either the Paraclete has not received from Christ, 
as man, what He should declare, since man 
could give nothing to the Paraclete, seeing that 
from Him man himself ought to receive, and 
Christ in the present instance is both mistaken 
and deceives, in saying that the Paraclete shall 
receive from Him, being a man, the things which 
He may declare ; or He does not deceive us, — 
as in fact He does not, — and the Paraclete has 
received from Christ what He may declare. But 
if He has received from Christ what He may de- 
clare to us, Christ is greater than the Paraclete, 
because the Paraclete would not receive from 
Christ unless He were less than Christ. But the 
Paraclete being less than Christ, moreover, by 
this very fact proves Christ to be God, from 
whom He has received what He declares : so 
that the testimony of Christ's divinity is immense, 

^ According to Pamelius, ch. xxiv. 
" John xi. 26. 
* John xvi. I*. 

626 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY 

in the Paraclete being found to be /// this econo- 
my less than Christ, and taking from Him what j 
He gives to others ; seeing that if Christ were 
only man, Christ would receive from the Para- 
clete what He should say, not the Paraclete re- 1 
ceive from Christ what He should declare. If; 
Christ was only man, wherefore did He lay down : 
for us such a rule of believing as that in which 
He said, " And this is life eternal, that they j 
should know Thee, the only and true Cod, and 
Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent?"' Had He 
not wished that He also should be understood to 
be God, why did He add, " And Jesus Christ, 
whom Thou hast sent," except because He 
"wished to be received as God also? Because if 
He had not wished to be understood to be God, 
He would have added, " And the man Jesus 
■Christ, whom Thou hast sent ; " but, in fact. He 
neither added this, nor did Christ deliver Him- 
self to us as man only, but associated Himself 
with God, as He wished to be understood by 
this conjunction to be God also, as He is. We 
must therefore believe, according to the rule 
prescribed,^ on the I-ord, the one true God, and 
■consequendy on Him whom He has sent, Jesus 
Christ, who by no means, as we have said, would 
have linked Himself to the Father had He not 
wished to be understood to be God also : for 
He would have separated Himself from Him 
had He not wished to be understood to be God. 
He would have placed Himself among men only, 
had He known Himself to be only man ; nor 
would He have linked Himself with God had He 
not known Himself to be God also. But in this 
case He is silent about His being man, because 
no one doubts His being man, and with reason 
links Himself to God, that He might establish 
the forni'ila of His divinity- for those who should 
believe- if Christ was only man, how does He 
say, " And now glorify me with the glory which 
I had with Thee before the world was? "^ If, 
before the world was. He had glory with God, 
and maintained His glory with the Father, He 
existed before the world, for He would not have 
had the glory unless He Himself had existed 
before, so as to be able to keep the glory. For 
no one could possess anything, unless he him- 
self should first be in existence to keep anything. 
But now Christ has the glory before tlie founda- 
tion of the world ; therefore He Himself was 
before the foundation of the world. For unless 
He were before the foundation of the world, He 
could not have glory before the foundation of 
the world, since He Himself was not in existence. 
But indeed man could not have glory before the 
foundation of the world, seeing that he was after 

' John xvii. 3. 

2 JThat is, " the prescribed rule" of our Catholic orthodoxy re- 
flects the formula of our Lord's testimony concerning Himself. Here 
4s a reference to testimony of the early creeds and canons, j 

■* John xvii. 5. 

the world ; but Christ had — therefore He was 
before the world. Therefore He was not man 
only, seeing that He was before the world. He 
is therefore God, because He was before the 
world, and held His glory before the world. 
Neither let this be explained by predestination, 
since this is not so expressed, or let them add 
this who think so, but woe is denounced to them 
who add to, even as to those who take away 
from, that which is written. Therefore that may 
not be said, which may not be added. And 
thus, predestination being set aside, seeing it is 
not so laid down, Christ was in substance before 
the foundation of the world. For He is " the 
AVord by which all things were made, and with- 
out which nothing was made." Because even 
if He is said to be glorious in predestination, 
and that this predestination was before the foun- 
dation of the world, let order be maintained, and 
before Him a considerable number of men was 
destined to glory. For in respect of that desti- 
nation, Christ will be perceived to be less than 
others if He is designated subsequent to them. 
For if this glory was in predestination, Christ 
received that predestination to glory last of all ; 
for prior to Him Adam will be seen to have 
been predestinated, and Abel, and Enoch, and 
Noah, and Abraham, and many others. For 
since with God the order of all, both persons and 
things, is arranged, many will be said to have 
been predestinated before this predestination of 
Christ to glory. And on these terms Christ is dis- 
covered to be inferior to other men, although 
He is really found to be better and greater, and 
more ancient than the angels themselves. Either, 
then, let all these things be set on one side, that 
Christ's divinity may be destroyed ; or if these 
things cannot be set aside, let His proper divin- 
ity be attributed to Christ by the heretics. 

CHAP. XVII.4 ARGUMENT. — IT IS, MOREOVER, 
PROVED BY MOSES IN THE BEGINNING OF THE 
HOLY SCRIPTURES. 

What if Moses pursues this same rule of truth, 
and delivers to us in the beginning of his sacred 
writings, this principle by which we may learn 
that all things were created and founded by the 
Son of God, that is, by the Word of God ? For 
He says the same that John and the rest say ; 
nay, both John and the others are perceived to 
have received from Him what they say. For if 
John says, " All things were made by Him, and 
without Him was nothing made," 5 the prophet 
David too says, " I tell my works to the King." ^ 
Moses, moreover, introduces God commanding 
that there should be light at the first, that the 
heaven should be established, that the waters 

* According to Pamelius, ch. xxv. 
5 John i. 3. 
'i Ps. xlv. I. 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

627 

should be gathered into one place, that the dry 
land should appear, that the fruit should be i 
brought forth according to its seed, that the 
animals should be produced, that lights should 
be established in heaven, and stars. He shows 
that none other was then present to God — by 
Avhom these works were commanded that they 
should be made — than He by whom all things 
were made, and without whom nothing was 
made. And if He is the Word of God — " for 
my heart has uttered forth a good Word " ' — He 
shows that in the beginning the Word was, and 
that this Word was with the Father, and besides 
that the Word was God, and that all things were 
made by Him. Moreover, this "Word was made 
flesh and dwelt among us," ^ — to wit, Christ the 
Son of God ; whom both on receiving subse- ! 
quently as man according to the flesh, and see- 
ing before the foundation of the world to be the 
Word of God, and God, we reasonably, accord- 1 
ing to the instruction of the Old and New Testa- t 
ment, believe and hold to be as well God as j 
man, Christ Jesus. What if the same Moses 
introduces God saying, " Let us make man after 
our image and likeness ; " ^ and below,, " And | 
God made man ; in the image of God made \ 
He him, male and female made He them?"-*! 
If, as we have already shown, it is the Son of j 
God by whom all things were made, certainly it j 
was the Son of God by whom also man was j 
ordained, on whose account all things were | 
made. Moreover, when God commands that 
man should be made, He is said to be God who i 
makes man ; but the Son of God makes man, j 
that is to say, the Word of God, " by whom all i 
things were made, and without whom nothing j 
was made." x-\nd this Word was made flesh, j 
and dwelt among us : therefore Christ is God 
therefore man was made by Christ as by the Son 
of God. But God made man in the image of 
God ; He is therefore God who made man in the 
image of God ; therefore Christ is God : so that 
with reason neither does the testimony of the 
Old Testament waver concerning the person of 
Christ, being supported by the manifestation of 
the New Testament ; nor is the power of the 
New Testament detracted from, while its truth 
is resting on the roots of the same Old Testa- 
ment. Whence they who presume Christ the 
Son of God and man to be only man, and not 
God also, do so in opposition to both Old and 
New Testaments, in that they corrupt the au- 
thority and the truth both of the Old and New 
Testaments. What if the same Moses every- 
where introduces God the Father infinite and 

' Ps. xlv. I. [As understood by the Father ;#rti«w. See Justin, 
vol. i. p. 213; Theophilus, ii. 98; Tertullian, m. 365; Origen, iv. 
352, 421 ; and Cyprian, v. p. 516, supra.] 

^ John i. 14. 

3 Gen. i. 26. 

* Gen. i. 27. 

without end, not as being enclosed in any place, 
but as one who includes every place ; nor as one 
who is in a place, but rather one in whom every 
place is, containing all things and embracing 
all things, so that with reason He can neither 
descend nor ascend, because He Himself both 
contains and fills all things, and yet nevertheless 
introduces God descending to consider the 
tower which the sons of men were building, 
asking and saying, " Come ; " and then, " Let 
us go down and there confound their tongues, 
that each one may not understand the words of 
his neighbour.'' 5 Whom do they pretend here 
to have been the God who descended to that 
tower, and asking to visit those men at that 
time? God the Father? Then thus He is en- 
closed in a place ; and how does He embrace 
all things? Or does He say that it is an angel 
descending with angels, and saying, " Come ; " 
and subsequently, " Let us go down and there 
confound their tongues?" And yet in Deuter- 
onomy we observe that God told these things, 
and that God said, where it is written,' " When 
He scattered abroad the children of Adam, He 
determined the bounds of the nations according 
to the number of the angels of God." ^ Neither, 
therefore, did the Father descend, as the subject 
itself indicates ; nor did an angel command these 
things, as the fact shows. Then it remains that 
He must have descended, of whom the Apostle 
Paul says, " He who descended is the same who 
ascended above all the heavens, that He might 
fill all things," 7 that is, the Son of God, the 
Word of God. But the Word of God was made 
flesh, and dwelt among us. This must be Christ. 
Therefore Christ must be declared to be God. 

CH.4P. XVIII.^ ARGUMENT. — MOREGv^-ER ALSO, 
FROM THE FACT THAT HE WHO WA^ EEN OF 
ABRAHAM IS CALLED GOD ; WHICH vNOT BE 

UNDERSTOOD OF THE FATHER, V nVl NO MAN 
HATH SEEN AT ANY TIME ; BUT .■ THE SON IN 
THE LIKENESS OF AN ANGEL. 

Behold, the same Moses tells us in another 
place that " God was seen of .Abraham." ^ And 
yet the same Moses hears from God, that " no 
man can see God and live." '° If God cannot 
be seen, how was God seen? Or if He was 
seen, how is it that He cannot be seen? For 
John also says, " No man hath seen God at any 
time ;" " and the Apostle Paul, "Whom no man 
hath seen, nor can see." '^ But certainly the 
Scripture does not lie ; therefore, truly, God was 

5 Gen. xi. 7. _ . ... 

6 Deut. xxxii. 8. [e(TTr]crev bpia idviiv Kara. apiBfJUf ayyeKutr 
0eoG, Sept.] 

7 Eph. iv. ID. 

8 According to Paraelius, ch. xxvi. 

9 Gen. xii. 7. 

"^ Ex. xxxiii. 20. 
" I John IV. 12. 

Til 

i. 16. 

628 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

seen. Whence it may be understood that it was 
not the Father who was seen, seeing that He 
never was seen ; but the Son, who has both been 
accustomed to descend, and to be seen because 
He has descended. For He is the image of 
the invisible God, as the imperfection and fraihy 
of the human condition was accustomed some- 
times even then to see God the Father in the 
image of God, that is, in the Son of God. For 
gradually and by progression human frailty was 
to be strengthened by the image to that glory of 
being able one day to see Goei the Father. For 
the things that are great are dangerous if they 
are sudden. For even the sudden light of the 
sun after darkness, with its too great splendour, 
will not make manifest the hght of day to un- 
accustomed eyes, but will rather strike them with 
blindness. 

And lest this should occur to the injury of 
human eyes, the darkness is broken up and 
scattered by degrees ; and the rising of that lumi- 
nary, mounting by small and unperceived incre- 
ments, gently accustoms men's eyes to bear its 
full orb by the gentle increase of its rays. Thus, 
therefore, Christ also — that is, the image of 
God, and the Son of God — is looked upon by 
men, inasmuch as He could be seen. .And thus 
the weakness and imperfection of the human 
destiny is nourished, led up, and educated by 
Him ; so that, being accustomed to look upon 
the Son, it may one day be able to see God the 
Father Himself also as He is, that it may not be 
stricken by His sudden and intolerable bright- 
ness, and be hindered from being able to see 
(iod the Father, whom it has always desired.' 
Wherefore it is the Son who is seen ; but the 
Son of God is the Word of God : and the Word 
of God was made flesh, and dwelt among us ; 
and this is Christ. What in the world is the 
reason that we should hesitate to call Him God, 
who in so many ways is acknowledged to be 
proved God? .A.nd if, moreover, the angel 
meets with Hagar, Sarah's maid, driven from 
her home as well as turned away, near the foun- 
tain of water in the way to Shur ; asks and 
learns the reason of her flight, and after that 
offers her advice that she should humble herself; 
and, moreover, gives her the hope of the name 
of mother, and pledges and promises that from 
her womb there should be a numerous seed, and 
that she should have Ishmael to be born from 
her ; and with other things unfolds the place of 
his habitation, and describes his mode of life ; 
yet Scripture sets forth this angel as both Lord 
and God — for He would not have promised the 
blessing of seed unless the angel had also been 
(iod. Let them ask what the heretics can make 
of this present passage. Was that the Father 

' [This leading up and educating of humanity to " see God " is 
here admirably put. Heb. i. 3.] 

that was seen by Hagar or not? For He is- 
declared to be God. But far be it from us to 
call God the Father an angel, lest He should be 
subordinate to another whose angel He would 
be. But they will say that it was an angel. 
How then shall He be God if He was an an- 
gel? Since this name is nowhere conceded to 
angels, except that on either side the truth com- 
pels us into this opinion, that we ought to under- 
stand it to have been God the Son, who, because 
He is of God, is rightly called God, because He 
is the Son of God. But, because He is subjected ^ 
to the Father, and the Announcer af the Father's 
will, He is declared to be the .Angel of Great 
Counsel.- Therefore, although this passage 
neither is suited to the person of the Father, 
lest He should be called an angel, nor to the 
person of an angel, lest he should be called 
God ; yet it is suited to the person of Christ 
that He should be both God because He is the 
Son of God, and should be an angel because He 
is the Announcer of the Father's mind. .And 
the heretics ought to understand that they are 
setting themselves against the Scriptures, in that, 
while they say that they believe Christ to have 
been also an angel, they are unwilling to declare 
Him to have been also God, when they read in 
the Old Testament that He often came to visit 
the human race. To this, moreover, Moses 
added the instance of God seen of Abraham at 
the oak of Mamre, when he was sitting at the 
opening of his tent at noon-day. And never- 
theless, although he had beheld three men, note 
that he called one of them Lord ; and when he 
had washed their feet, he offers them bread 
baked on the ashes, with butter and abundance 
of milk itself, and urges them that, being de- 
tained as guests, they should eat. And after 
this he hears also that he should be a father, 
and learns that Sarah his wife should bring forth 
a son by him ; and acknowledges concerning 
the destruction of the people of Sodom, what 
they deserve to suffer ; and learns that God had 
come down on account of the cry of Sodom. 
In which place, if they will have it that the 
Father was seen at that time to have been re- 
ceived with hospitality in company with two 
angels, the heretics have believed the Father to 
be visible. But if an angel, although of the 
three angels one is called Lord, why, although 
it is not usual, is an angel called God ? Unless 
because, in order that His proper invisibility 
may be restored to the Father, and the proper 
inferiority ^ be remitted to the angel, it was only 
God the Son, who also is God, who was seen by 
Abraham, and was believed to have been re- 

^ [Isa. ix. 6, according to the Seventy. Ex. xxiii. 20. Sec Bull, 
Df/ensio, etc., vol. v. p. 30. Comp. Hippol., p. 225, supra ; Xova- 
tian, p. 632, in/rn.\ 

^ I De subordinntione, etc.: Bull, Defcnsio, etc., vol. v. pp. 767, 
685. The Nicenc doctrine includes the subordination of the Son.] 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

629 

belong to 

ceived with hospitality. For He anticipated him a great nation." s Why does this angel, if 
■sacramentally what He was hereafter to become. \ angel only, claim to himself this right of saying. 
He was made a guest of Abraham, being about j I will make of him a great nation, since assuredly 
to be among the sons of /\braham. And his j this kind of power belongs to God, and cannot 
children's feet, by way of proving what He was, 
He washed ; returning in the children the claim 
•of hospitality whicn formerly the Father had put 
out to interest to Him. Whence also, that there 
might be no doubt but that it was He who was 
the guest of Abraham on the destruction of the 
people of Sodom, it is declared : " Then the 
Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrha 

fire and 
heaven." ' 

brimstone 
For thus 

an angel? Whence also He is con- 
firmed to be God, since He is able to do this ; 
because, by way of proving this very point, it is 
immediately added by the Scripture : " And 
God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of 
running water ; and she went and filled the bot- 
tle from the well, and gave to the lad : and God 
was with the lad."^ If, then, this God was with 
from the Lord out of | the Lord, who opened the eyes of Hagar that 

also said the prophet in 

she 

might 

see the well of running water, and 

the person of God : " I have overthrown you, as \ might draw the water on account of the urgent 
the Lord overturned Sodom and Gomorrha."^ I need of //le lad's thirst, and this God who calls 
Therefore the Lord overturned Sodom, that is, j her from heaven is called an angel when, in pre- 
God overturned Sodom ; but in the overturning | viously hearing the voice of the lad crying, He 
of Sodom, the Lord rained fire from the Lord, j was rather God ; is not understood to be other 
And this Lord was the God seen by Abraham ; than angel, in like manner as He was God also. 

and this God was the guest of Abraham, cer 
tainly seen because He was also touched. But 
although the Father, being invisible, was as- 
suredly not at that time seen. He who was 
accustomed to be touched and seen was seen 

And since this cannot be applicable or fitting to 
the Father, who is God only, but may be appli- 
cable to Christ, who is declared to be not only 
God, but angel also,^ it manifestly appears that 
it was not the Father who thus spoke to Hagar, 

and received to hospitality. But this the Son of | but rather Christ, since He is God ; and to Him 

God, " The Lord rained from the Lord upon 
Sodom and Gomorrha brimstone and fire." And 
this is the Word of God. And the Word of God 
was made flesh, and dwelt among us ; and this 
is Christ. It was not the Father, then, who was 
a guest with Abraham, but Christ. Nor was it 
the Father who was seen then, but the Son ; and 
Christ was seen. Righdy, therefore, Christ is j 
both Lord and God, who was not otherwise I 
seen by Abraham, except that as God the Word 
He was begotten of God the Father before Abra- 
ham himself Moreover, says the Scripture, the 
same Angel and God visits and consoles the 
same Hagar when driven with her son from 
the dwelling of Abraham. For when in the 
desert she had exposed the infant, because the 
water had fallen short from the pitcher ; and 
when the "lad had cried out, and she had lifted 
up her weeping and lamentation, " God heard," 
says the Scripture, " the voice of the lad from 
the place where he was." ^ Having told that it 
was God who heard the voice of the infant, it 
adds : " And the angel of the Lord called Hagar 
herself out of heaven," saying that that was an 
angel •♦ whom it had called God, and pronoun- 
cing Him to be Lord whom it had set forth as an 
angel ; which Angel and God moreover promises 
to Hagar herself greater consolations, in saying, 
" Fear not ; for I have heard the voice of the 
lad from the place where he was. Arise, take 
lip the lad, and hold him ; for I will make of 

' Gen. xix. 24. 

2 Amos iv. II. 

3 Gen. XXI. 17, etc. 

* [See note 2, p. 023, sii/'ra.\ 

also is applied the name of angel, since He be- 
came the " angel of great counsel." ^ And He 
is the angel, in that He declares the bosom of 
the Father, as John sets forth. For if John 
himself says, that He Himself who sets forth the 
bosom of the Father, as the Word, became flesh 
I in order to declare the bosom of the Father, 
j assuredly Christ is not only man, but angel also ; 
j and not only angel, but He is shown by the 
Scriptures to be God also. And this is believed 
to be the case by us ; so that, if we will not 
consent to apprehend that it was Christ who 
then spoke to Hagar, we must either make an 
angel God, or we must reckon God the Father 
Almighty among the angels.^ 

CHAP. XIX.'° ARGUMENT. — THAT GOD ALSO AP- 

AS AN angel; namely, the 

PEARED 
SON OF 

TO J.A.COB 
GOD. 

What if in another place also we read in like 
manner that God was described as an angel? 
For when, to his wives Leah and Rachel, Jacob 
complained of the injustice of their father, and 
when he told them that he desired now to go 
and return into his own land, he moreover inter- 
posed the authority of his dream ; and at this 
time he says that the angel of God had said to 
him in a dream, "Jacob, Jacob. And I said," 

18. 

20. 

i. p. 

S Gen. xxi. 
* Gen. xxi. 

7 [See vol. 

8 Isa. ix. 6, LXX. 

9 [Among the apt>aritions are noted Gen. xxxii. 24, Ex. 
Num xxii. 21, Josh, v 13, i Kings xxviii. 11. J 

'•^ According to Pamelius, ch. xxvii. 

630 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

says he, "What is it? Lift up thine eyes, said 
He, and see, the he-goats and the rams leaping 
upon the sheep, and the she-goats are black 
and white, and many-coloured, and grizzled, and 
speckled : for I have seen all that Laban hath 
done to thee. I am (}od, who appeared to thee 
in the place of God, where thou anointedst for 
me there the standing stone, and there vowedst 
a vow unto me : now therefore arise, and go 
forth from this land, and go unto the land of 
thy nativity, and I will be with thee." ' If the 
Angel of Clod speaks thus to Jacob, and the 
Angel himself mentions and says, " I am God, 
who appeared unto thee in the house of God," 
we see without any hesitation that this is declared 
to be not only an angel, but God also ; because 
He speaks of the vow directed to Himself by 
Jacob in the place of God, and He does not 
say, in my place. It is then the place of God, 
and He also is God. Moreover, it is written 
simply in the place of God, for it is not said in 
the place of the angel and God, but only of 
God ; and He who promises those things is 
manifested to be both God and Angel, so that 
reasonably there must be a distinction between 
Him who is called God only, and Him who is 
declared to be not God simply, but Angel also. 
Whence if so great an authority cannot here be 
regarded as belonging to any other angel, that 
He should also avow Himself to be God, and 
should bear witness that a vow was made to 
Him, except to Christ alone, to whom not as 
angel only, but as to God, a vow can be vowed ; 
it is manifest that it is not to be received as the 
Father, but as the Son, God and Angel.* More- 
over, if this is Christ, as it is, he is in terrible 
risk who says that Christ is either man or angel 
alone, withholding from Him the power of the 
divine name, — an authority which He has con- 
stantly received on the faith of the heavenly 
Scriptures, which continually say that He is both 
Angel and God. To all these things, moreover, 
is added this, that in like manner as the divine 
Scripture has frequently declared Him botli 
.\ngel and God, so the same divine Scripture 
declares Him also both man and God, express- 
ing thereby what He should be, and depicting 
even then in figure what He was to be in the 
truth of His substance. " For," it says, "Jacob 
remained alone ; and there wrestled with him a 
man even till daybreak. And He saw that He 
did not prevail against him ; and He touched 
the broad part of Jacob's thigh while He was 
wrestling with him and he with Him, and said 
to him. Let me go, for the morning has dawned. 
And he said, I will not let Thee go, except Thou 
bless me. And He said, What is thy name? 

' Gen. xxxi. 11-13. 

' [Ecctes. V. 6. A striking text when compared with the " Angel 
«f the Covenant" {Angehts Testiu/tenti, Vulgate), Mai. iii. i.J 

And he said, Jacob, .^nd He said to him, Thy 
name shall no longer be called Jacob, but Israel 
shall be thy name ; because thou hast prevailed 
with God, and thou art powerful with men."^ 
And it adds, moreover: "And Jacob called the 
name of that place the Vision of God : for I 
have seen the Lord face to face, and my soul 
has been made safe. And the sun arose upon 
him. Afterwards he crossed over the Vision of 
God, but he halted upon his thigh." ^ A man, 
it says, wrestled with Jacob. If this was a mere 
man, who is he? Whence is he? Wherefore 
does he contend and wrestle with Jacob? What 
had intervened? What had happened? What 
was the cause of so great a dispute as that, and 
so great a struggle? Why, moreover, is Jacob, 
who is found to be strong enough to hold the 
man with whom he is wrestling, and asks for a 
blessing from Him whom he is holding, asserted 
to have asked therefore, except because this 
struggle was prefigured as that which should be 
between Christ and the sons of Jacob, which 
is said to be completed in the Gospel? For 
against this man Jacob's people struggled, in 
which struggle Jacob's people was found to be 
the more powerful, because against Christ it 
gained the victory of its iniquity : at which time, 
on account of the crime that it committed, hesi- 
tating and gi\'ing way, it began most sorely to 
halt in the walk of its own faith and salvation ; 
and although it was found the stronger, in respect 
of the condemnation of Christ, it still needs His 
mercy, still needs His blessing. But, moreover, 
tlie man who wrestled with Jacob says, " More- 
over, thy name shall no longer be called Jacob, 
but Israel shall be thy name ; " and if Israel is 
the man who sees God, the Lord was beautifully 
showing that it was not only a man who was then 
wrestling with Jacob, but God also. Certainly 
Jacob saw God, with whom he wrestled, although 
he was holding the man in his own struggle. 
And in order that there might still be no hesita- 
tion. He Himself laid down the interpretation 
by saying, " Because thou hast prevailed with 
God, and art powerful with men." For which 
reason the same Jacob, perceiving already the 
force of the Mystery, and apprehending the 
authority of Him with whom he had wrestled, 
called the name of that place in which he had 
wrestled, the Vision of God. He, moreover, 
superadded the reason for his interpretation be- 
ing offered of the Vision of God : " For I have 
seen," said he, " God face to face, and my soul 
has been saved." Moreover, he saw God, with 
whom he wrestled as with a man ; but still in- 
deed he held the man as a conqueror, though 
as an inferior he asked a blessing as from God. 
Thus he wrestled with God and with man ; and 

3 Gen. xxxii. 24-27. 
* Gen. xx.xii. 30, 31. 

[Vol. iv. 390, this series.] 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

631 

thus truly was that struggle prefigured, and in 
the Gospel was fulfilled, between Christ and the 
people of Jacob, wherein, although the people 
had the mastery, yet it j^roved to be inferior by 
being shown to be guilty. Who will hesitate to 
acknowledge that Christ, in whom this type of a 
wrestling was fulfilled, was not man only, but 
God also, since even that very type of a wrestling 
seems to have proved Him man and God ? And 
yet, even after this, the same divine Scripture 
justly does not cease to call the Angel God, and 
to pronounce God the Angel. For when this 
very Jacob was about to bless Manasseh and 
Ephraim, the sons of Joseph, with his hands 
placed across on the heads of the lads, he said, 
" The God which fed me from my youth even 
unto this day, the Angel who delivered me from 
all evils, bless these- lads." ' Even to such a 
point does he affirm the same Being to be an 
Angel, whom he had called God, as in the end 
of his discourse, to express the person of whom 
he was speaking as one, when he said - " bless 
these lads." For if he had meant the one to 
be understood as God, and the other as an angel, 
he would have comprised the two persons in the 
plural number ; but now he defined the singular 
number of one person in the blessing, whence 
he meant it to be understood that the same per- 
son is God and Angel. But yet He cannot be 
received as God the Father ; but as God and 
Angel, as Christ He can be received. And Him, 
as the author of this blessing, Jacob also signified 
by placing his hands crossed upon the lads, as 
if their father was Christ, and showing, from thus 
placing his hands, the figure and future form of 
the passion. 3 Let no one, therefore, who does 
not shrink from speaking of Christ as an Angel, 
thus shrink from pronouncing Him God also, 
when he perceives that He Himself was invoked 
in the blessing of these lads, by the sacrament of 
the passion, intimated in the type of the crossed 
hands, as both God and Angel, 

CHAP. XX."* ARGUMENT. — ITIS PROVED FROM 
THE SCRIPTURES THAT CHRIST WAS CALLED AN 
ANGEL. BUT YET IT IS SHOWN FROM OTHER PARTS 
OF HOLY SCRIPTURE THAT HE IS GOD ALSO. 

But if some heretic, obstinately struggling 
against the truth, should persist in all these in- 
stances either in understanding that Christ was 
properly an angel, or should contend that He 
must be so understood, he must in this respect 
also be subdued by the force of truth. For if, 
since all heavenly things, earthly things, and 
things under the earth, are subjected to Christ, 

' Gen. xlviii. 14, 15. 

2 Benedicat. 

3 [A very beautiful patristic idea of the dim vision of the cross to 
which the Fathers were admitted, but which they understood not, 
■"ven when they predicted it. 1 Pet. .x. 11. j 

* According to Pamelius, ch. xv. 

even the angels themselves, with all other crea- 
tures, as many as are subjected to Christ, are 
called gods,5 rightly also Christ is God. And if 
any angel at all subjected to Christ can be called 
God, and this, if it be said, is also professed 
without blasphemy, certainly much more can 
this be fitting for Christ, Himself the Son of 
God, for Him to be pronounced God. For if 
an angel who is subjected to Christ is exalted as 
God, much more, and more consistently, shall 
Christ, to whom all angels are subjected, be said 
to be God. For it is not suitable to nature, that 
what is conceded to the lesser should be denied 
to the greater. Thus, if an angel be inferior to 
Christ, and yet an angel is called god, rather by 
consequence is Christ said to be God, who is 
discovered to be both greater and better, not 
than one, but than all angels. And if " God. 
standeth in the assembly of the gods, and in the 
midst God distinguisheth between the gods," ^ 
and Christ stood at various times in the syna- 
gogue, then Christ stood in the synagogue as 
God, — judging, to wit, between the gods, to 
whom He says, " How long do ye accept the 
persons of men? " That is to say, coHsequently, 
charging the men of the synagogue with not 
practising just judgments. Further, if they who 
are reproved and blamed seem even for any rea- 
son to attain this name without blasphemy, that 
they should be called gods, assuredly much 
more shall He be esteemed God, who not only 
is said to have stood as God in the synagogue 
of the gods, but moreover is revealed by the 
same authority of the reading as distinguishing 
and judging between gods. But even if they 
who "fall like one of the princes" are still called 
gods, much rather shall He be said to be God, who 
not only does not fall like one of the princes, 
but even overcomes both the author and prince 
of wickedness himself. And what in the world 
is the reason, that although they say that this 
name was given even to Moses, since it is said, 
" I have made thee as a god to Pharaoh," ^ it 
should be denied to Christ, who is declared to 
be ordained ^ not to Pharaoh 07ily, but to every 
creature, as both Lord and God ? And in the 
former case indeed this name is given with re- 
serve, in the latter lavishly ; in the former by 
measure, in the latter above all kind of measure : 
" For," it is said, " the Father giveth not to the 
Son by measure, for the Father loveth the Son." 9 
In the former for the time, in the latter without 
reference to time ; '° for He received the power 
of the divine name, both above all things and for 
all time. But if he who has received the power 

5 [Ps. xcvii. 7; John x. 36; Hippol., p. 153, supra.^ 
*> Ps. Ixxxii. I, 2, etc. 
^ Ex. vii. I. 

8 [The full meaning of which only comes out in the Gospel and 
in 2 Pet. i. 4. The lie of Gen. iii. 5, is made true in Christ.] 

John iii. 34, 
[Rev. XI. 15 

35 

633 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

of one man, in respect to this limited power ; 
given him, still without hesitation attains that 
name of God, how much more shall He who has , 
power over Moses himself as well i)e believed to | 
have attained the authority of that name ? 1 

CHAP. X\I.' ARGUMENT. — THAT THE SAME ' 
DIVINE MAJESTV IS AGAIX CONFIRM EU IN CHRIST 
BY OTHER SCRIPTURES. | 

And indeed I could set forth the treatment 
of this subject by all heavenly Scriptures, and 
set in motion, so to speak, a perfect forest of texts 
concerning that manifestation of the divinity of | 
Christ, except that I have not so much under- i 
taken to speak against this special form of heresy, | 
as to expound the rule of truth concerning the \ 
person of Christ. Although, however, I must 
hasten to other matters, I do not think that I 
must pass over this point, that in the Gospel the 
Lord declared, by way of signifying His majesty, 
saying, " Destroy this temple, and in three days 
I will build it up again." ^ Or when, in another 
passage, and on another subject, He declares, " I 
have power to lay down my life, and again to 
take it up,; for this commandment I have re- 
ceived of my Feather." 3 Now who is it who says 
that He can lay down His life, or can Himself 
recover His life again, because He has received 
it of His Father? Or who says that He can 
again resuscitate and rebuild the destroyed tem- 
ple of His body, e.xcept because He is the Word 
who is from the Father, who is with the Father, 
" by whom all things were made, and without 
whom nothing was made ;"•* the imitator 5 of His 
F'ather's works and powers, "the image of the in- 
visible (iod ; '"' " who came down from heaven ; " ^ 
who testified what things he had seen and heard ; 
who " came not to do His own will, but rather to 
do the will of the Father," ^ by whom He had 
been sent for this very purpose, that being made 
the " Messenger of Great Counsel," 9 He might 
unfold to us the laws of the heavenly mysteries ; 
and who as the Word made flesh dwelt among 
us, of us this Christ is proved to be not man 
only, because He was the son of man, but also 
God, because He is the Son of God? And if 
by the a[)ostle Christ is called " the first-bom of 
every creature," '° how could He be the first-born 

* According to Pamelius, ch. xvi. 

2 John ii. 19. 

3 John X. 18. 
< John i. 3. 

5 [John V. ig The infirmities of lanj»uage are such that cunning 
men like Petavius can construct rtH//-Nicene doctrine out of Scrip- 
ture itself; and the marvel is, that the Christian Fathers before the 
Council of Nicaca generally use such precision of language, although 
they lacked the synodical definitions.] 

* Col. i, 15. 

' John iii. 31 , 32. 

' John IV. 38. 

9 Isa. ix. 6. 

'° Col. i. 15. [But not a creature, for the apostle immediately 
subjoins that He is the Creator and final Cause of the universe. 
Moreover, ihe first-/)i>rn here seems to mean tfie heir cX all crea- 
tion, for such IS the logical force of the verse following. So, Tipiuro- 
TOKfia (in the Seventy) = heirship. Gen. xxv. 31.] 

of every creature, unless because according to 
His divinity the Word proceeded from the Father 
before every creature? And unless the heretics 
receive it thus, they will be constrained to show 
that Christ the man was the first-born of every 
creature ; which they will not be able to do. 
Either, therefore, He is before every creature, 
that He may be the first-born of every creature, 
and He is not man only, because man is after 
every creature ; or He is man only, and He is 
after every cre-^ture. And how is He the first- 
born of every creature, except because being that 
Word which is before every creature ; and there- 
fore, the first-born of every creature, He becomes 
flesh and dwells in us, that is, assumes that man's 
nature which is after every creature, and so 
dwells with him and in him, in us, that neither 
is humanity taken away from Christ, nor His 
divinity denied ? For if He is only before every 
creature, humanity is taken away from Him ; 
but if He is only man, the divinity which is be- 
fore ever}^ creature is interfered with. Both of 
these, therefore, are leagued together in Christ, 
and both are conjoined, and both are linked 
with one another. .\nd rightly, as there is in 
Him something which excels the creature, the 
agreement of the divinity and the humanity 
seems to be pledged in Him : for which reason 
He who is declared as made the " Mediator be- 
tween God and man " " is revealed to have asso- 
ciated in Himself God and man. And , .he 
same apostle says of Christ, that " having put off 
the flesh. He spoiled powers, they being openly 
triumphed over in Himself," '^ he certainly did 
not without a meaning propound that the flesh 
was put off, unless because he wished it to be 
understood that it was again put on also at the 
resurrection. Who, therefore, is He that thus 
put off and put on the flesh ? Let the heretics 
seek out. For we know that the Word of God 
was invested with the substance of flesh, and 
that He again was divested of the same bodily 
material, which again He took up in the resur- 
rection and resumed as a garment. And yet 
Christ could neither have been divested of nor 
invested with manhood, had He been only man : 
for man is never either deprived of nor invested 
with himself. For that must be something else, 
whatever it may be, which by any other is either 
taken away or ])ut on. \\'hence, reasonably, it was 
the Word of God who put off the flesh, and again 
in the resurrection put it on, since He put it off 
because at His birth He had been invested with 
it. Therefore in Christ it is God who is invested, 
and moreover must be divested, because He who 
is invested must also likewise be He who is 
divested ; whereas, as man, He is invested with 
and divested of, as it were, a certain tunic of the 

" I Tim. ii. 5. 
■2 Col ii. 15. 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

^33 

compacted body.' .And therefore by conse- 
quence He was, as we have said, the Word of 
God, who is revealed to be at one time invested, 
at another time divested 0/ the flesh. For this, 
moreover. He before predicted in blessings : 
^' He shall wash His garment in wine, and His 
■clothing in the blood of the gra])e." - If the 
garment in Christ be the flesh, and the clothing 
itself be the body, let it be asked who is He 
whose body is clothing, and garment flesh ? For 
to us it is evident that the flesh is the garment, 
and the body the clothing of the Word ; and He 
Avashed His bodily substance, and purified the 
material of the flesh in blood, that is, in wine, by 
His passion, in the human character that He had 
xmdertaken. Whence, if indeed He is washed. 
He is man, because the garment which is washed 
is the flesh ; but He who washes is the Word of 
God, who, in order that He might wash the gar- 
ment, was made the taker-up of the garment. 
Rightly, from that substance which is taken that 
it might be washed, He is revealed as a man. 

even as from the authority of the Word 
washed it He is manifested to be God. 

who 

CHAP. XXII. 3 ARGUMENT. — THAT THE SAME DI- 
VINE MAJESTY IS IN CHRIST, HE ONCE MORE 
ASSERTS BY OTHER SCRIPTURES. 

But why, although we appear to hasten to 
another branch of the argument, should we pass 
over that passage in the apostle : " Who, al- 
though He was in the form of God, did not 
think it robbery that He should be equal with 
God ; but emptied Himself, taking up the form 
of a servant, being made in the likeness of men ; 
and found in fashion as a man, He humbled 
Himself, becoming obedient even unto death, 
even the death of the cross. Wherefore also 
God hath highly exalted Him, and hath given 
Him a name which is above every name ; that 
in the name of Jesus every knee should be bent, 
of things in heaven, and things in earth, and 
things under the earth ; and every tongue should 
confess that Jesus is Lord, in the glory of God 
the Father? " ^ " Who, although He was in the 
form of God," he says. If Christ had been 
only man, He would have been spoken of as in 
"' the image " of God, not " in the form " of 
God. For we know that man was made after 
the image or likeness, not after the form, of 
God. Who then is that angel who, as we have 
said, was made in the form of God ? But neither 
do we read of the form of God in angels, ex- 
cept because this one is chief and royal above 
all — the Son of God, the Word of God, the 

' Perhaps the emendation homine instead of homo is right. " He 
puts on and puts oft' humanity, as if it were a kind of tunic for a com- 
pacted body." 

^ Gen. xlix. ii. 

3 Accordmg to Pamelius, ch. xvii. 

■• Phil. ii. 6-11. 

imitator of all His Father's works, in that He 
Himself worketh even as His Father. He is — 
as we have declared — in the form of God the 
Father. And He is reasonably affirmed to be 
in the form of God, in that He Himself, being 
above all things, and having the divine power 
over e\'er}- creature, is also God after the exam- 
ple of the Father. Yet He obtained this from 
His own Father, that He should be both God 
of all and should be Lord, and be begotten and 
made known from Himself as God in the form 
of God the Father. He then, although He was 
in the form of God, thought it not robbery that 
He should be equal with God. For although 
He remembered that He was God from God the 
Father, He never either compared or associated 
Himself with God the Father, mindful that He 
was from His Father, and that He possessed 
that very thing that He is, because the Father 
had given it Him. 5 Thence, finally, both before 
the assumption of the flesh, and moreover after 
the assumption of the body, besides, after the 
resurrection itself. He yielded all obedience to 
the Father, and still yields it as ever. Whence 
it is proved that He thought that the claim of a 
certain divinity would be robbery, to wit, that of 
equalling Himself with God the Father; but, on 
the other hand, obedient and subject to all His 
rule and will, He even was contented to take on 
Him the form of a servant — that is, to become 
man ; and the substance of flesh and body which, 
as it came to Him from the bondage of His 
forefathers' sins according to His manhood, He 
undertook by being born, at which time more- 
over He emptied Himself, in that He did not 
refuse to take upon Him the frailty incident to 
humanity. Because if He had been bom man 
only, He would not have been emptied in re- 
spect of this ; for man, being born, is increased, 
not emptied. For in beginning to be that which 
He could' not possess, so long as He did not 
exist, as we have said. He is not emptied, but is 
rather increased and enriched. But if Christ is 
emptied in being born, in taking the form of a 
senant, how is He man only? Of whom it 
could more truly have been said that He was 
enriched, not emptied, at the time that He was 
born, except because the authority of the divine 
Word, reposing for awhile in taking upon itself 
humanity, and not exercising itself with its real 
strength, casts itself down, and puts itself off 
for the time, in bearing the humanity which it 
has undertaken? It empties itself in descend- 
ing to injuries and reproaches, in bearing abomi- 
nations, in experiencing things unworthy ; and 
yet of this humility there is present at once an 
eminent reward. For He has " received a name 
which is above every name," which assuredly we 

S [Not "a seipso Deus." See Bull, De/ens., vol. v. p. 685.] 

>34 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

understand to be none other than the name of 
God. For since it belongs to God alone to be 
above all things, it follows that the name which 
is that (jod's who is above all things, is above 
every name ; which name by consequence is 
certainly His who, although He was " in the form 
of God, thought it not robbery for Him to be 
equal with God." For neither, if Christ were not 
God, would every knee bend itself in His name, 
"of things in heaven, and things in earth, and 
things under the earth ; " nor would things visi- 
ble and invisible, even every creature of all 
things, be subjected or be placed under man, 
when they might remember that they were 
before man. Whence, since Christ is said to be 
in the form of God, and since it is shown that for 
His nativity according to the flesh He emptied 
Himself; and since it is declared that He re- 
ceived from the Father that name which is above 
every name; and since it is shown that in His 
name " every knee of things in heaven, and 
things in earth, and things under the earth, bend 
and bow " themselves ; and this very thing is 
asserted to be a furtherance of the glory of God 
the Father ; consequently He is not man only, 
from the fact that He became obedient to the 
Father, even to death, yea, the death of the 
cross ; but, moreover, from the proclamation by 
these higher matters of the divinity of Christ, 
C'hrist Jesus is shown to be Lord and God, 
which the heretics will not have. 

CHAP. XXIII.' ARGUMENT. — - AND THIS IS SO 
MANIFEST, THAT SOME HERETICS HAVE THOUGHT 
HIM TO BE GOD THE FATHER, OTHERS THAT HE 
WAS ONLY GOD WITHOUT THE FLESH. 

In this place I may be permitted also to col- 
lect arguments from the side of other heretics. 
It is a substantial kind of proof which is gathered 
even from an adversary, so as to prove the truth 
even from the very enemies of truth. For it is 
so far manifest that He is declared in the Scrip- 
tures to be God, that many heretics, moved by 
the magnitude and truth of this divinity, exagger- 
ating His honours above measure, have dared 
to announce or to think Him not the Son, but 
God the Father Himself.^ And this, although 
it is contrary to the truth of the Scriptures, is 
still a great and excellent argument for the divin- 
ity of Christ, who is so far Ciod, except as Son 
of God, born of God, that very many heretics — 
;is we have said — have so accepted Him as God, 
as to think that He must be ])ronounced not the 
Son, but the Father. Therefore let it be con- 
sidered whether He is God or not, since His 
authority has so affected some, that, as we have 
already said above, they have thought Him God 
the Father Himself, and have confessed the 

' Accordinc to Pameliiis, ch. xviii. 

2 n'hf Noeliaiis, Hippol., p. 148, stifra.\ 

divinity in Christ with such impetuosity and effu- 
sion — compelled to it by the manifest divinity 
in Christ — that they thought that He whom 
they read of as the Son, because they perceived 
Him to be God, must be the Father. Moreover, 
other heretics have so far embraced the mani- 
fest divinity of Christ, as to say that He was 
without flesh, and to withdraw from Him the 
whole humanity which He took upon Him, lest, 
by associating with Him a human nativity, as 
they conceived it, they should diminish in Him. 
the power of the divine name.^ This, however, 
we do not ajjprove ; but we quote it as an argu- 
ment to i)rove that Christ is God, to this extent, 
that some, taking away the manhood, have 
thought Him God only, and some have thought 
Him (iod the Father Himself; when reason and 
the proportion of the heavenly Scriptures show 
Christ to be God, but as the Son of God ; and 
the Son of man, having been taken up, more- 
over, by God, that He must be believed to be 
man also. Because if He came to man, that He 
might be Mediator of God and men, it behoved 
Him to be with man, and the Word to be made 
flesh, that in His own self He might link to- 
gether the agreement of earthly things with heav- 
enly things, by associating in Himself pledges of 
both natures, and uniting God to man and man 
to God ; so that reasonably the Son of God 
might be made by the assumption of flesh the 
Son of man, and the Son of man by the recep- 
tion of the Word of God the Son of God. This 
most profound and recondite mystery, destined 
before the worlds for the salvation of the human 
race, is found to be fulfilled in the Lord Jesus 
Christ, both God and man, that the human race 
might be placed within the reach of the enjoy- 
ment of eternal salvation. 

CHAP. XXIV. '* ARGUMENT. — THAT THESE HAVE 
THEREFORE ERRED, BY THINKING THAT THERE 
WAS- NO DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE SON OF 
GOD AND THE SON OF MAN; BECAUSE THEV 
HAVE ILL UNDERSTOOD THE SCRIPTURE. 

But the material of that heretical error has 
arisen, as I judge, from this, that they think that 
there is no distinction between the Son of God 
and the Son of man ; because if a distinction 
were made, Jesus Christ would easily be j^roved 
to be both man and God. For they will have 
it that the self-same that is man, the Son of man, 
ai)pears also as the Son of God ; that man and ' 
flesh and that same frail substance may be said 
to be also the Son of God Himself. Whence,! 
since no distinction is discerned between the 
Son of man and the Son of God. but the Son 
of man Himself is asserted to be the Son of 
God, the same Christ and the Son of God is 

3 [Irenseus, vol. i. p. 527.] 

* According to Pamelius, ch. xix. 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

635 

asserted to be man only ; by which they strive 
to exclude, " The \\'oid was made flesh, and 
dwelt among us." ' And ye shall call His name 
Emmanuel ; which is, interpreted, God with 
us." 2 For they propose and put fonvard what 
is told in the Gospel of Luke, whence they strive 
to maintain not what is the truth, but only what 
they want it to be : "' The Holy Spirit shall 
come upon thee, and the power of the Highest 
shall overshadow thee ; therefore also the Holy 
Thing which is born of thee shall be called the 
Son of God." 3 If, then, say they, the angel of 
God says to Mary, " that Holy Thing which is 
born of thee," the substance of flesh and body 
is of Mary ; but he has set forth that this sub- 
stance, that is, that Holy Thing which is born of 
her, is the Son of God. Man, say they, him- 
self, and that bodily flesh ; that which is called 
holy, itself is the Son of God. That also when 
the Scripture says that " Holy Thing," we should 
understand thereby Christ the man, the Son of 
man ; and when it places before us the Son of 
God, we ought to perceive, not man, but God. 
And yet the divine Scripture easily convicts 
and discloses the frauds and artifices of the 
heretics. For if it were thus only, " The Spirir! 
shall come upon thee, and the power of the 
Highest shall overshadow thee ; therefore that 
Holy Thing which is born of thee shall be called 

self, by His connection and mingling of associ- 
ation becomes responsible for and makes Him 
the Son of God, which by nature He was not, 
so that the original cause s of that name Son of 
God is in the Spirit of the Lord, who descended 
and came, and that there is only the continu- 
ance of the name in the case of the Son of 
man ; ^ and by consequence He reasonably be- 
came the Son of God, although originally He 
is not the Son of God. And therefore the angel, 
seeing that arrangement, and providing for that 
order of the mystery, did not confuse every 
thing in such a way as to leave no trace of a 
distinction, but established the distinction by 
saying, " Therefore a/so that Holy Thing which 
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of 
God ; " lest, had he not arranged that distribu- 
tion with his balances, but had left the matter all 
mixed up in confusion, it had really afforded 
occasion to heretics to declare that the Son of 
man, in that He is man, is the same as the Son 
of God and man. But now, explaining severally 
the ordinance and the reason of so great a mys- 
tery, he evidently set forth in saying, "And that 
Holy Thing Avhich shall be born of thee shall 
be called the Son of God ; " the proof that the 
Son of God descended, and that He, in taking 
up into Himself the Son of man, consequently 
made Him the Son of God, because the Son of 

the Son of God," perchance we should have^God associated and joined Him to Himself. So 
had to strive against them in another sort, and 
to have sought for other arguments, and to have 
taken up other weapons, with which to over- 
come both their snares and their wiles ; but 
since the Scripture itself, abounding in heavenly 
fulness, divests itself of the calumnies of these 
heretics, we easily depend upon that that is 
written, and overcome those errors without any 
hesitation. For it said, not as we have already 
stated, " Therefore the Holy Thing which shall 
be born of thee ; " but added the conjunction, 
for it says, " Therefore also that Holy Thing 
which shall be born of thee," so as to make it 
plain that that Holy Thing which is born of her 
— that is, that substance of flesh and body — 
is not the Son of God primarily, but conse- 
quently, and in the secondary place ; ■* but pri- 
marily, that the Son of God is the Word of God, 
incarnate by that Spirit of whom the angel says, 
" The Spirit shall come upon thee, and the 
power of the Highest shall overshadow thee." 
For He is the legitimate Son of God who is of 
God Himself; and He, while He assumes that 

Holy Thing, and links to Himself the Son of 
man, and draws Him and transfers Him to Him- 

■ John I. 14. 

- Matt. i. 23. 

3 Luke i. 35. 

* " The miraculous generati6n is here represented as the natural, 
but by no means as the only cause for which He who had no human 
father was to receive the name of (jod's Son." — OostilKZee, /« 
loco, on Luke. — Tk. 

that, while the Son of man cleaves in His nativ- 
ity to the Son of God, by that very mingling 
He holds that as pledged and derived which of 
His own nature He could not possess. And 
thus by the word' of the angel the distinction is 
made, against the desire of the heretics, between 
the Son of God and man ; yet with thfeir asso- 
ciation, by pressing them to understand that 
Christ the Son of man' is man, and also to 
receive the Son of God and man the Son of 
God ; that is, the Word of God as it is written 
as God ; and thus to acknowledge that Christ 
Jesus the Lord, connected on both sides, so to 
speak, is on both sides woven in and grown to- 
gether, and associated in the same agreement of 
both substances, by the binding to one another 
of a mutual alliance — man and God by the truth 
of the Scripture which declares this very thing. 

CHAP. XXV.7 ARGUMENT. AND THAT IT DOES 

NOT FOLLOW THENCE, THAT BECAUSE CHRIST 
DIED IT MUST AIJSO BE RECEIVED THAT GOD 
DIED ; FOR SCRIPTURE SETS FORTH THAT NOT 
ONLY WAS CHRIST GOD, BUT MAN ALSO. 

Therefore, say they, if Christ is not man only, 
but God also — and Scripture tells us that He 

5 Principalitas. 

6 The edition of Pamelius reads: ut sequela nominis in Filio 
Dei et hominis sit. The words Dei et were expelled by Welchman, 
whom we have followed. 

7 According to Pamelius, ch. xx. 

6.^,6 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY 

died for us, and was raised again — then Scrip- : 
ture teaches us to beUeve that God died; or if 
God does not die, and Christ is said to have 
died, then Christ will not be God, because God 
cannot be admitted to have died. If they ever : 
could understand or had understood what they , 
read, they would never speak after such a peril- ; 
ous fashion. But the folly of error is always '< 
hasty in its descent, and it is no new thing if| 
those who have forsaken the lawful faith descend | 
even to perilous results. P'or if Scripture were 
to set forth that Christ is God only, and that 
there was no association of human weakness 
mingled in His nature, this intricate argument 1 
of theirs might reasonably avail something. If' 
Christ is God, and Christ died, then God died. '; 
But when Scri[)ture determines, as we have fre- j 
quently shown, that He is not only God, but j 
man also, it follows that what is immortal may 
be held to have remaine<l uncorrupted. For 
who cannot understand that the divinity is im- 
passible, although the human weakness is liable 
to suffering? When, therefore, Christ is under- 
stood to be mingled and associated as well of 
that which (iod is, as of that which man is — 
for "the Word was made flesh, and dwelt in us" 
— who cannot easily apprehend of himself, with- 
out any teacher and interpreter, that it was not 
that in Christ that died which is (iod, but that 
in Him died which is man? For what if the 
divinity in Christ does not die, but the substance 
of the flesh only is destroyed, when in other men 
also, who are not flesh only, but flesh and soul, 
the flesh indeed alone suffers the inroads of 
wasting and death, while the soul is seen to be 
uncorrupted, and beyond the laws of destruction 
and death? For this also our Lord Himself 
said, exhorting us to martyrdom and to con- j 
tempt of all human power : " Fear not those who j 
slay the body, but cannot kill the soul." ' But ' 
if the immortal soul cannot be killed or slain in i 
any other, although the body and flesh by itself, 
can be slain, how much rather assuredly could i 
not the Word of God and Ciod in Christ be put 
to death at all, although the flesh alone and the 
body was slain ! For if in any man whatever, 
the soul has this excellence of immortality that 
it cannot be slain, much more has the nobility 
of the Word of Ciod this power of not being 
slain. For if the power of men fails to slay the 
sacred power of God, and if the cruelty of man 
fails to destroy the soul, much more ought it to 
fail to slay the Word of God. For as the soul 
itself, which was made by the Word of God, is 
not killed by men, certainly much rather will it 
be believed that the Word of God cannot be 
destroyed. .'\nd if the sanguinary cruelty of 
men cannot do more against men than only to 

• Malt. X. 28. 

slay the body, how much more certainly it will 
not have power against Christ beyond in the 
same way slaying the body ! So that, while 
from these considerations it is gathered that 
nothing but the human nature in Christ was j)ut 
to death, it appears that the Word in Him was 
not drawn down into mortality. For if Abraham, 
and Isaac, and Jacob, who, it is admitted, were 
only men, are manifested to be alive — for all 
thev,- savs He, " live unto God ; " and death in 
them does not destroy the soul, although it dis- 
solves the bodies themselves : for it could exer- 
cise its power on the bodies, it did not avail to 
exercise it on the souls : for the one in them 
was mortal, and therefore died ; the other in 
them was immortal, and therefore is understooil 
not to have been extinguished : for which reason 
they are affirmed and said to live unto God, — 
much rather death in (Christ could have power 
against the material of His body alone, while 
against the divinity of the Word it could not 
bring itself to bear. For the power of death is 
broken when the authority of immortality in- 
ter\-enes. 

CHAP. XXVI.3 ARGUMENT. — MOREOVER, .'^GAINSl 
THE SAI3ELLIAN'S HE PROVES THAT THE F.-VTHEl. 
IS ONE, THE SON ANOTHER. 

But from this occasion of Christ being provect 
from the sacred authority of the divine writings 
not man only, but God also, other heretics, break- 
ing forth, contrive to impair the religious posi- 
tion in Christ ; by this very fact wishing to show 
that Christ is God the Father, in that He is as- 
serted to be not man only, but also is declared 
to be God. For thus say they, If it is asserted 
that God is one, and Christ is God, then say they. 
If the Father and Christ be one God, Christ will 
be called the Father, ^^'herein they are proved 
to be in error, not knowing Christ, but following 
the sound of a name ; for they are not willing 
that He should be the second person after the 
Father, but the Father Himself. And since 
these things are easily answered, few words shall 
be said. For who does not acknowledge that 
the person of the Son is second after the Father, 
when he reads that it was said by the Father, 
consequently to the Son, " Let us make man in 
our image and our likeness ; " ■♦ and that after 
this it was related, " And God made man, in the 
image of God made He him?" Or when he 
holds in his hands : " The Lord rained upon 
Sodom and Gomorrha fire and brimstone from 
the Lord from heaven? "5 Or when he reads 

- [Luke \x. 38. A solemn admonition is found in the parallel 
Scripture, Matt. xxii. 29, which teaclies us how much we ought tn 
find beneath the surface of Holy Writ.) 

3 .According to Pamelius, ch. xxi. 

* (len. i. 26. 

5 Gen. xix. 24. 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

637 

' (as having been said) to Christ : "Thou art my 
' Son, this day have I begotten Thee. Ask of me, 
and I will give Thee the heathens for Thine in- 
heritance, and the ends of the earth for Thy 
possession ? " ' Or when also that beloved writer 
says : " The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou 
on ■ my right hand, until I shall make Thine 
enemies the stool of Thy feet?"- Or when, 
unfolding the prophecies of Isaiah, he finds it 
written thus : " Thus saith the Lord to Christ my 
Lord? "3 Or when he reads: "I came not 
down from heaven to do mine own will, but the 
will of Him that sent me? " '» Or when he finds 
it written : " Because He who sent me is greater 
than I? "5 Qr when he considers the passage : 
" I go to my Father, and your Fatlier ; to my 
God, and your God?"^ Or when he finds it 
placed side by side with others : " Moreover, in 
your law it is written that the witness of two is 
true. I bear witness of mvself, and the Father 
who sent me beareth witness of me ? " ^ Or 
when the voice from heaven is : "I have both 
glorified Him, and I will glorify Him again ? " ^ 
Or when by Peter it is answered and said : " Thou 
art the Son of the living God?"^ Qr when by 
the Lord Himself the sacrament of this revela- 
tion is approved, and He says : " Blessed art 
thou, Simon Barjona, because flesh and blood 
hath not revealed this ,to thee, but my Father 
which is in heaven ? " '° Or when by Christ Him- 
self it is expressed : " Father, glorify me with 
that glory with which I was with Thee before 
the world was made?"" Or when it was said 
by the same : " Father, I knew that Thou hear- 
est me always ; but on account of those who 
stand around I said it, that they may believe 
that Thou hast sent me? " '^ Or when the defi- 
nition of the rule is established by Christ Him- 
self, and it is said : " And this is life eternal, 
that they should know Thee, the only and true 
God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent. 
I have glorified Thee upon the earth, I have 
finished the work which Thou gavest me ? " '^ 
Or when, moreover, by the same it is asserted 
and said : " All. things are delivered to me by 
my Father? " '* Or when the session at the right 
hand of the Father is proved both by apostles 
and prophets? And I should have enough to 
do were I to endeavour to gather together all 

I — 

■ ?s. ii. 7, 8. 

2 Ps. ex. I. 

3 Isa. xlv. I. Some transcriber has written Kvoi-oi for Kvpu), 
*■ the Lord" for " Cyrus," and the mistake has been followed by the 
author. 

* John vi. 38. 

i John xiv. 28. 

* John XX. 17. 

' John viii 17, i8. 

* John xii. 20. 
9 Matt. xvi. 16. 

'° Matt. xvi. 17. 
" John xvii. 5 
'- John xi. 12. 
'3 John xvii. 3, 4. 
'* Luke X. 22. 

the passages '5 whatever on this side ; since the 
divine Scripture, not so much of the Old as also 
of the New Testament, everywhere shows Him 
to be born of the Father, by whom all things were 
made, and without whom nothing was made, 
who always has obeyed and obeys the Father ; 
that He always has power over all things, but 
as delivered, as granted, as by the Father Him- 
self permitted to Him. And what can be so 
evident proof that this is not the Father, but 
the Son ; as that He is set forth as being obedi- 
ent to God the Father, unless, if He be believed 
to be the Father, Christ may be said to be sub- 
jected to another God the Father? 

CHAP. XXVIL'^ ARGUMENT. — HE SKILFULLY RE- 
PLIES TO A PASSAGE WHICH THE HERETICS 
EMPLOYED IN DEFENCE OF THEIR OWN OPIN- 
ION. 

But since they frequently urge upon us the 
passage where it is said, " I and the Father are 
one," '7 in this also we shall overcome them with 
equal facility. For if, as the heretics think, Christ 
were the Father, He ought to have said, " I and 
the Father are one." '^ But when He says I, and 
afterwards introduces the Father by saying, " I 
and the Father," He severs and distinguishes the 
peculiarity of His, that is, the Son's person, from 
the paternal authority, not only in respect of the 
sound of the name, but moreover in respect of 
the order of the distribution of power, since He 
might have said, " I the Father," if He had had 
it in mind that He Himself was the Father. And 
since He said " one " thing, let the heretics under- 
stand that He did not say " one ''person. For one 
placed in the neuter, intimates the social con- 
cord, not the personal unity. He is said to be 
one neuter, not one masculine, because the 
expression is not referred to the number, but it 
is declared with reference to the association of 
another. Finally, He adds, and says, " We are," 
not " I am," so as to show, by the fact of His 
saying " I and the Father are," that they are two 
persons. Moreover, that He says one,"^^ has refer- 
ence to the agreement, and to the identity of 
judgment, and to the loving association itself, as 
reasonably the Father and Son are one in agree- 
ment, in love, and in affection ; and because He 
is of the Father, whatsoever He is, He is the 
Son ; the distinction however remaining, that 
He is not the Father who is the Son, because 
He is not the Son who is the Father. For He 
would not have added " We are'' if He had 
had it in mind that He, the only and sole Father, 
had become the Son. In fine, the Apostle Paul 

'5 [Cap. xxi. p. 632, SHpra.'\ 
"■ According to Pamelius, ch. xxii. 
'^ John x. 30; scil. " unum," Gr. eV. 
■8 Original, " unas." Scil. person. 
'9 Neuter. 

63S 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

also apprehended this agreement of unity, with ' 
the distinction of persons notwithstanding : for 
in writing to the Corinthians he said, " I have 
planted, ApoUos watered, but God gave the 
increase. Therefore neither is he that planteth 
anything, nor he that watereth, but Cod who 
gives the increase. Now he that planteth and 
he that watereth are one." " And who does not 
perceive that Apollos is one person and Paul 
another, and that Apollos and Paul are not one 
and the same person ? Moreover, also, the 
offices mentioned of each one of them are dif- 
ferent ; for one is he who plants, and another he 
who waters. The Apostle Paul, however, put 
forward these two not as being one person, but 
as being " one ; " so that although .\pollos indeed 
is one, and Paul another, so far as respects the j 
distinction of persons, yet as far as respects their i 
agreement both are " one." For when two per- 
sons have one judgment, one truth, one faith, ! 
one and the same religion, one fear of God also, 
they are one even although they are two persons : 
they are the same, in that they have the same 
mind. Since those whom the consideration of 
person divides from one another, these same 
again are brought together as one by the con- 
sideration of religion. And although they are 
not actually the self-same people, yet in feeling 
the same, they are the same ; and although they 
are two, are still one, as having an association in 
faith, even although they bear diversity in per- 
sons. Besides, when at these words of the Lord 
the Jewish ignorance had been aroused, so that 
hastily they ran to take up stones, and said, " For 
a good work we stone thee not, but for blas- 
phemy ; and because thou, being a man, makest 
thy.:elf God," ^ the Lord established the distinc- 
tion, in giving them the principle on which He 
had either said that He was God, or wished it 
to be understood, and says, " Say ye of Him, 
whom the Father sanctified, and sent into this 
world, Thou blasphemest ; because I said, I am 
the Son of God?"^ Even here also He said 
that He had the Father. He is therefore the 
Son, not the Father : for He would have con- 
fessed that He was the Father had He consid- 
ered Himself to be the Father ; and He declares 
that He was sanctified by His Father. In re- 
ceiving, then, sanctification from the Father, He 
is inferior to the Father. Now, consequently, He 
who is inferior to the Father, is 7iot the Father, 
but the Son ; for had He been the Father, He 
would have given, and not received, sanctifica- 
tion. Now, however, by declaring that He has 
received sanctification from the Father, by the 
very fact of proving Himself to be less than the 
Father, by receiving from Him sanctification, 

' I Cor. iii. 6, 7, 8 {scil. 
2 John X. 33. 
* John X. 36. 

i"). 

He has shown that He is the Son, and not the 
Father. Besides, He says that He is sent : so 
that by that obedience wherewith the Lord 
Christ came, being sent. He might be proved to 
be not the Father, but the Son, who assuredly 
would have sent had He been the Father ; but 
being sent, He was not the Father, lest the 
Feather should be proved, in being sent, to be 
subjected to another God. And still after this 
He added what might dissolve all ambiguity, 
and quench all the controversy of error : for He 
says, in the last portion of His discourse, " Ye 
say, Thou blasphemest, because I said I am the 
Son of God." Therefore if He plainly testifies 
that He is the Son of God, and not the Father, 
it is an instance of great temerity and excessive 
madness to stir up a controversy of divinity and 
religion, contrary to the testimony of the Lord 
Christ Himself, and to say that Christ Jesus is 
the Father, when it is observed that He has 
proved Himself to be, not the Father, but the 
Son. 

CHAP. XXVIII. ARGUMENT. — HE PROVES ALSO 
THAT THE WORDS SPOKEN TO PHILIP MAKE 
NOTHING FOR THE SABELLIANS. 

Hereto also I will add that view wherein the 
heretic, while he rejoices as if at the loss of some 
power of seeing special truth and light, acknowl- 
edges the total blindness of his error. For again 
and again, and frequently, he objects that it was 
said, " Have I been so long time with you, and 
do ye not know me, Philip ? He who hath seen 
me, hath seen the Father also."'* But let him 
learn what he does not understand. Philip is 
reproved, and rightly, and deservedly indeed, 
because he has said, " Lord, show us the Father, 
and it sufficeth us." s For when had he either 
heard from Christ, or learnt that Christ was the 
Father? although, on the other hand, he had 
frequently heard, and had often learned, rather 
that He was the Son, not that He was the Fa- 
ther. For what the Lord said, " If ye have 
known me, ye have known my Father also : and 
henceforth ye have known Him, and have seen 
Him,"^ He said not as wishing to be understood 
Himself to be the Father, but implying that he 
who thoroughly, and fully, and with all faith and 
all religiousness, drew near to the Son of God, 
by all means shall attain, through the Son Him- 
self, in whom he thus believes, to the Father, 
and shall see Him. " For no one," says He, 
" can come to the Father, but by me." ^ And 
therefore he shall not only come to God the 
Father, and shall know the Father Himself ; but, 
moreover, he ought thus to hold, and so to pre- 

* John xiv. 9. 
5 John xiv. 8. 
•> John xiv. 7. 
^ John xiv. 6. 

TI 

^EATISE 

CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

639 

sume in mind and heart, that he has henceforth 
not only known, but seen the Father. For often 
the divine Scripture announces things that are 
not yet done as being done, because thus they 
shall be ; and things which by all means have 
to happen, it does not predict as if they were 
future, but narrates as if they were done. And 
thus, although Christ had not been born as yet 
in the times of Isaiah the prophet, he said, " For 
unto us a child is born ; " ' and although Mary 
had not yet been approached, he said, " And I 
approached unto the prophetess ; and she con- 
ceived, and bare a son." ^ And when Christ had 
not yet made known the mind of the Father, 
it is said, ** And His name shall be called the 
Angel of Great Counsel." ^ And when He had 
not yet suffered, he declared, " He is as a sheep 
led to the slaughter." •* And although the cross 
had never yet existed. He said, " All day long 
have I stretched out my hands to an unbelieving 
people." 5 And although not yet had He been 
scornfully given to drink, the Scripture says, " In 
my thirst they gave nie vinegar to drink." ^ And 
although He had not yet been stripped, He said, 
*'■ Upon my vesture they did cast lots, and they 
numbered my bones : they pierced my hands 
and my feet." ^ For the divine Scripture, fore- 
seeing, speaks of things which it knows shall be 
as being already done, and speaks of things as 
perfected which it regards as future, but which 
shall come to pass without any doubt. And thus 
the Lord in the present passage said, " Hence- 
forth ye have known and have seen Him." 
Now He said that the Father should be seen by 
whomsoever had followed the Son, not as if the 
Son Himself should be the Father seen, but that 
Avhosoever was willing to follow Him, and be 
His disciple, should obtain the reward of being 
able to see the Father. For He also is the 
image of God the Father ; so that it is added, 
moreover, to these things, that " as the Father 
worketh, so also the Son worketh." ** And the 
Son is an imitator 9 of all the Father's works, so 
that every one may regard it just as if he saw the 
Father, when he sees Him who always imitates 
the invisible Father in all His works. But if 
Christ is the Father Himself, in what manner 
does He immediately add, and say, "Whosoever 
believeth in me, the works that 1 do he shall do 
also ; and greater works than these shall he do ; 
because I go to my Father? " '° And He further 
subjoins, "If ye love me, keep my command- 
ments ; and I will ask the Father, and He will 

' Isa. ix. 6. 

* Isa. viii. 3. 

3 Isa. i.\. 6, LXX. [See pp. 628, 632, supra.\ 

* Isa. iiii. 7. 
5 Isa. Ixv. 2. 

* Ps. Ixix. 21. 

^ Ps. xxii. 18, 17. 

* John V. 17. 

9 [Cap. xxi. note 5, 632, snpra.\ 
^° John xiv. 12. 

give you another Comforter." " After which also 
He adds this : " If any one loveth me, he shall 
keep my word : and my Father will love him ; and 
we will come unto him, and will make our abode 
with him." '- Moreover, also. He added this too : 
" But the Advocate, that Holy Spirit whom the 
Father will send. He will teach you, and bring 
all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I 
have said unto you." '^ He utters, further, that 
passage when He shows Himself to be the Son, 
and reasonably subjoins, and says, " If ye loved 
me, ye would rejoice because I go unto the Fa- 
ther : for the Father is greater than I." '^ But 
what shall we say when He also continues in 
these words : " I am the true vine, and my Fa- 
ther is the husbandman. Every branch in me 
that beareth not fruit He taketh away ; and every 
branch that beareth fruit He purgeth, that it 
may bring forth more fruit?" '5 Still He persists, 
and adds : " As the Father hath loved me, so 
also have I loved you : remain in my love. If 
ye have kept my commandments, ye shall remain 
in my love ; even as I have kept the Father's 
commandments, and remain in His love." '^ 
Further, He says in addition : " But I have called 
you friends ; for all things which I have heard 
of my Father I have made known unto you." '? 
Moreover, He adds to all this : " But all these 
things will they do unto you for my name's sake, 
because they know not Him that sent me." '** 
These things then, after the former, evidently 
attesting Him to be not the Father but the Son, 
the Lord would never have added, if He had had 
it in mind, either that He was the Father, or 
wished Himself to be understood as the Father, 
except that He might declare this, that every 
man ought henceforth to consider, in seeing the 
image of God the Father through the Son, that 
it was as if he saw the Father ; since every one 
believing on the Son may be exercised in the 
contemplation of the likeness, so that, being 
accustomed to seeing the divinity in likeness, he 
may go forward, and grow even to the perfect 
contemplation of God the Father Almighty. 
And since he who has imbibed this truth into 
his mind and soul, and has believed of all things 
that thus it shall be, he shall even now see, as it 
were, in some measure the Father whom he will 
see hereafter; and he may so regard it, as if he 
actually held, what he knows for certain that he 
shall one day hold. But if Christ Himself had 
been the Father, why did He promise as future, 
a reward which He had already granted and 
given ? For that He says, " Blessed are they of 

" John xiv. 15, 16. 
'- John xiv. 23. 
'^ John xiv. 26. 
'■• John xiv. 28. 
's John XV. I. 
'*• John XV. 9, 10. 
'7 John XV. 15. 
" John XV. 21. 

640 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

a pure heart, for they shall see God," ' it is 
jntlerstood to promise the contemplation and 
vision of the Father ; therefore He had not given 
this ; for why should He j)romise if He had al- 
ready given? For He had given if He was the 
Father : for He was seen, and He was touched. 
But since, when Christ Himself is seen and 
touched, He still promises, and says that he who 
's of a pure heart shall see God, He proves by 
this very saying that He who was then present 
was not the Father, seeing that He was seen, and 
yet promised that whoever should be of a jjure 
heart should see the Father. It was therefore 
not the Father, but the Son, who promised this, 
because He who was the Son promised that 
which had yet to be seen ; and His promise 
would have been superfluous unless He had been 
the Son. For why did He promise to the pure 
in heart that they should see the Father, if al- 
ready they who were then present saw Christ as 
the Father? But because He was the Son, not 
the Father, rightly also He was then seen as the 
Son, because He was the image of God ; and 
the Faiher, because He is invisible, is promised 
and pointed out as to be seen by the pure in 
heart. Let it then be enough to have suggested 
even these points against that heretic ; a few 
words about many things. For a field which is 
indeed both wide and expansive would be laid 
open if we should desire to discuss that heretic 
more fully ; seeing that bereaved, in these two 
particulars, as it were of his eyes plucked out, 
he is altogether overcome in the blindness of his 
doctrine. 

CHAP. XXIX. ARGUMENT. — HE NEXT TEACHES 
US THAT THE AUTHORITY OF THE FAITH ENJOINS, 
AFTER THE FATHER AND THE SON, TO BELIEVE 
ALSO ON THE HOLY SPIRIT, WHOSE OPERATIONS 
HE ENUMERATES FROM SCRIPTURE. 

Moreover, the order of reason, and the au- 
thority of the faith in the disposition of the 
words and in the Scriptures of the Lord, admon- 
ish us after these things to believe also on the 
Holy Spirit, once promised to the Church, and 
ill the appointed occasions of times given. For 
He was promised by Joel the prophet, but given 
by Christ. " In the last days," says the prophet, 
'• I will pour out of my Spirit upon my servants 
and my handmaids." ^ And the Lord said, 
" Receive ye the Holy Ghost : whose sins ye 
remit, they shall be remitted ; and whose ye re- 
nin, they shall be retained."^ But this Holy 
hpirlt the Lord Christ calls at one time " the 
Paraclete," at another ])ronounces to be the 
"Spirit of truth."'' And He is not new in 

' Matt. V. 8. 

^ Joel ii. 28; Acts ii. 17. 

^ John XX. 22, 2^. 

■* John xiv. 16, 17. 

the Gospel, nor yet even newly given ; for it way 
He Himself who accused the people in the 
prophets, and in the apostles g?ve them the 
appeal to the Gentiles. For the former deserved 
to be accused, because they had contemned the 
law ; and they of the Gentiles who believe de- 
serve to be aided by the defence of the Spirit, 
because they earnestly desire to attain to the 
Gospel law. .Assuredly in the Spirit there are 
different kinds of offices, because in the times 
there is a different order of occasions ; and yet. 
on this account. He who discharges these offices 
is not different, nor is He another in so acting, 
but He is one and the same, distributing His 
offices according to the times, and the occasions 
and impulses of things. Moreover, the Apostle 
Paul says, " Having the same Spirit ; as it is 
written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken ; 
we also believe, and therefore speak." 5 He is 
therefore one and the same Spirit who was in 
the prophets and apostles, except that in the 
former. He was occasional, in the latter always. 

! But in the former not as being always in them, 
in the latter as abiding always in them ; and in 

! the former distributed with reserve, in the latter 
all poured out ; in the former given sparingly, 
in the latter liberally bestowed ; not yet mani^ 
fested before the Lord's resurrection, but con- 

j ferred after the resurrection. For, said He, " I 
will pray the Father, and He will give you another 
Advocate, that He may be with you for ever, 
even the Spirit of truth." ^ And, " When He, 
the Advocate, shall come, whom I shall send 
unto you from my Father, the Spirit of truth 
who proceedeth from my Father." '' And, " If 
I go not away, that Advocate shall not come to 
you ; but if I go away, I will send Him to you."** 
And, " When the Spirit of truth shall come, He 
will direct you into all the truth." ^ And be- 
cause the Lord was about to depart to the 
heavens. He gave the Paraclete out of necessity 
to the disciples ; so as not to leave them in any 
degree orphans,'" which was little desirable, and 
forsake them without an advocate and some 
kind of protector. For thi-; is He who strengV 
ened their hearts and minds, who marked out 
the Gospel sacraments, who was in them the 
enlightener of divine things ; and they being 
strengthened, feared, for the sake of the Lord's 
name, neither dungeons nor chains, nay, eveiv 
trod under foot the very powers of the world 

; and its tortures, since they were henceforth 

' armed and strengthened by the same Spirit, hav- 
ing in themselves the gifts which this same Spirit 
distributes, and appropriates to the Church, the 

5 2 Cor. iv. 13. 
*> John xiv. 16, 17. 
' John XV. 20. 
* John XVI. 7. 
9 |ohn xvi. 13. 
'0 [John xiv. 18, Greek.\ 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

641 

spouse of Christ, as her ornaments. This is He 
who places prophets in the Church, instructs 
teachers, directs tongues, gives powers and heal- 
ings, does wonderful works, offers discrimination 
of spirits, affords powers of government, sug- 
gests counsels, and orders and arranges what- 
ever other gifts there are of charismata ; and 
thus make the Lord's Church everywhere, and 
in all, perfected and completed. This is He 
who, after the manner of a dove, when our Lord 
was baptized, came and abode upon Him, dwell- 
ing in Christ full and entire, and not maimed in 
aoy measure or portion ; but with His whole 
overflow copiously distributed and sent forth, so 
that from Him others might receive some enjoy- 
ment of His graces : the source of the entire 
Holy Spirit remaining in Christ, so that from 
Him might be drawn streams of gifts and works, 
while the Holy Spirit dwelt affluently in Christ. 
For truly Isaiah, prophesying this, said : " And 
the Spirit of wisdom and understanding shall 
rest upon Him, the Spirit of counsel and might, 
the Spirit of knowledge and piety ; and the 
Spirit of the fear of the Lord shall fill Him." ' 
This self-same thing also he said in the person 
of the Lord Himself, in another place : " The 
Spirit of the Lord is upon me ; because He has 
anointed me. He has sent me to preach the Gos- 
pel to the poor." ^ Similarly David : " W'here- 
fore God, even Thy God, hath anointed Thee 
with the oil of gladness above thy fellows." ^ Of 
Him the Apostle Paul says : " For he who hath 
not the Spirit of Christ is none of His." •♦ " And 
where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty." 5 
He it is who effects with water the second birth, 
as a certain seed of divine generation, and a 
consecration of a heavenly nativity, the pledge 
of a promised inheritance, and as it were a kind 
of handwriting of eternal salvation ; who can 
make us God's temple, and fit us for His house ; 
who solicits the divine hearing for us with groan- 
ings that caunot be uttered ; filling the offices 
of advocacy, and ma\i^festing the duties of our 
defence, — an inhabitant given for our bodies 
and an effector of their holiness. Who, work- 
ing in us for eternity, can also produce our 
bodies at the resurrection of immortality, accus- 
toming them to be associated in Himself with 
heavenly power, and to be allied with the divine 
eternity of the Holy Spirit. For our bodies 
are both trained in Him and by Him to advance 
to immortality, by learning to govern themselves 
with moderation according to His decrees. For 
this is He who " desireth against the flesh," 
because " the flesh resisteth against the Spirit." ^ 

' Isa. xi. 2, 3. 

- Isa. Ixi. I. 
3 Ps. xlv. 7. 

■* Rom. viii. 9. 

- 2 Cor. iii. 17. 
* Gal. V. 17. 

This is He who restrains insatiable desires, con- 
trols immoderate lusts, quenches unlawful fires, 
conquers reckless impulses, repels drunkenness, 
checks avarice, drives away luxurious revellings, 
links love, binds together affections, keeps down 
sects, orders the rule of truth, overcomes here- 
tics, turns out the wicked, guards the Gospel. 
Of this says the same apostle : " We have not 
received the spirit of the world, but the Spirit 
which is of God." 7 Concerning Him he ex- 
ultingly says : " And I think also that I have the 
Spirit of God." ^ Of Him he says : " The Spirit 
of the prophets is subject to the prophets." 9 
Of Him also he tells : " Now the Spirit speaketh 
plainly, that in the last times some shall depart 
from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, 
doctrines of demons, who speak lies in hypoc- 
risy, having their conscience cauterized." '° Es- 
tablished in this Spirit, " none ever calleth Jesus 
anathema ; " " no one has ever denied Christ to 
be the Son of God, or has rejected God the 
Creator ; no one utters any words of his own 
contrary to the Scriptures ; no one ordains other 
and sacrilegious decrees ; no one draws up dif- 
ferent laws.'^ Whosoever shall blaspheme against 
Him, " hath not forgiveness, not only in this 
world, but also not in the world to come." '^ This 
is He who in the apostles gives testimony to 
Christ ; in the martyrs shows forth the constant 
faithfulness of their religion ; in virgins restrains 
the admirable continency of their sealed chas- 
tity ; in others, guards the laws of the Lord's 
doctrine incorrupt and uncontaminated ; destroys 
heretics, corrects the perverse, condemns infi- 
dels, makes known pretenders ; moreover, re- 
bukes the wicked, keeps the Church uncorrupt 
and inviolate, in the sanctity of a perpetual vir- 
ginity and truth. 

CHAP. XXX. ARGUMENT. IN FINE, NOTWITH- 
STANDING THE SAID HERETICS HAVE GATHERED 
THE ORIGIN OF THEIR ERROR FROM CONSIDERA- 
TION OF WHAT IS WRITTEN : "» ALTHOUGH WE 
CALL CHRIST GOD, AND THE FATHER GOD, STILL 
SCRIPTURE DOES NOT SET FORTH TWO GODS, ANY 
MORE THAN TWO LORDS OR TWO TEACHERS. 

And now, indeed, concerning the Father, and 
the Son, and the Holy Spirit, let it be sufficient 
to have briefly said thus much, and to have laid 
down these points concisely, without carrying 
them out in a lengthened argument. For they 
could be presented more diffusely and continued 
in a more expanded disputation, since the whole 

' I Cor. ii. 12. 

^ 1 Cor. vii. 40. 

9 I Cor. xiv. 32. 
'° I Tim. iv. I. 
" I Cor. xii. 3. 

'2 [To commit any one of these errors, he thinks, is to prove one's 
self " sensual, having not the Spirit." Jude 19; Rom. viii. 7. ] 
'5 Matt. xii. 32. 
'^ " There is one God." 

642 

treatisp: concerning the trinity. 

of the Old and New Testaments might be ad- 
duced in testimony that thus the true faith 
stands. But because heretics, ever strugghng 
against the truth, are accustomed to prolong the 
•controversy of pure tradition and CathoHc faith, 
being offended against Christ ; because He is, 
moreover, asserted to be God by the Scriptures 
also, and this is believed to be so by us ; we 
must rightly — that every heretical calumny may 
be removed from our faith — contend, concern- 
ing the fact that Christ is God also, in such a 
-way as that it may not militate against the truth 
of Scripture ; nor yet against our faith, how there 
as declared to be one God by the Scriptures, and 
how it is held and believed by us. For as well 
they who say that Jesus Christ Himself is God 
the Father, as moreover they who would have 
Him to be only man, have gathered thence ' the 
sources and reasons of their error and pen'ersity ; 
because when they perceived that it was written - 
that " God is one," they thought that they could 
not otherwise hold such an opinion than by sup- 
posing that it must be believed either that Christ 
■was man only, or really God the Father. And 
they were accustomed in such a way to connect 
their sophistries as to endeavour to justify their 
own error. And thus they who say that Jesus 
("hrist is the Father argue as follows : — If God 
is one, and Christ is God, Christ is the Father, 
since God is one. If Christ be not the Father, 
because Christ is God the Son, there appear to 
be two Gods introduced, contrary to the Scrip- 
tures. And they who contend that Christ is 
man only, conclude on the other hand thus : — 
If the Father is one, and the Son another, but 
the Father is God and Christ is God, then there 
is not one God, but two Gods are at once intro- 
<luced, the Father and the Son ; and if God is 
one, by consetjuence Christ must be a man, so 
that rightly the Father may be one God. Thus 
indeed the Lord is, as it were, crucified between 
two thieves,3 even as He was formerly placed ; 
and thus from either side He receives the sacri- 
legious reproaches of such heretics as these. 
But neither the Holy Scriptures nor we suggest 
to them the reasons of their perdition and blind- 
ness, if they either will not, or cannot, see what 
is evidently written in the midst of the divine 
documents. For we both know, and read, and 
believe, and maintain that God is one, who made 
the heaven as well as the earth, since we neither 
know any other, nor shall we at any time know 
such, seeing that there is none. " I," says He, 
" am (iod, and there is none beside me, right- 
eous and a Saviour." ^ And in another place : 
" I am the first and the last, and beside me there 

' Scil. from Scripture- 
^ [Gal iii. 20; Deut. vi. 4] 

^ [" Non semper pendebit inter Intrones Christus: aliquando re- 
«irget Crucifixa Veritas." — Sebastian Castauo.J 
* Isa. xliii. ii- 

is no God who is as I." s And, " Who hath 
meted out heaven with a span, and the earth 
with a handful? Who has suspended the moun- 
tains in a balance, and the woods on scales?"'' 
And Hezekiah : " That all may know that Thou 
art God alone." ' Moreover, the Lord Himself: 
" Why askest thou me concerning that which is 
good? God alone is good."^ Moreover, the 
Apostle Paul says : " Who only hath immortality, 
and dwelleth in the light that no man can ap- 
proach unto, whom no man hath seen, nor can 
see." "^ And in another place : " But a mediator 
is not a mediator of one, but God is one." '° But 
even as we hold, and read, and believe this, thus 
we ought to pass over no portion of the heav- 
enly Scriptures, since indeed also we ought by 
no means to reject those marks of Christ's divin- 
ity which are laid down in the Scriptures, that 
we may not, by corrupting the authority of the 
Scriptures, be held to have corrupted the integ- 
rity of our holy faith. And let us therefore be- 
lieve this, since it is most faithful that Jesus 
Christ the Son of God is our Lord and God ; 
because " in the beginning was the Word, and 
the Word was with God, and God was the Word. 
The same was in the beginning with God," " 
And, " The Word was made flesh, and dwelt in 
us." '^ And, " My Lord and my God," "^ And, 
"Whose are the fathers, and of whom accord- 
ing to the flesh Christ came, who is over all, 
God blessed for evermore." '■♦ What, then, shall 
we say ? Does Scripture set before us two Gods ? 
How, then, does it say that " God is one? " Or 
is not Christ God also? How, then, is it said 
to Christ, " My Lord and my God?" Unless, 
therefore, we hold all this with fitting veneration 
and lawful argument, we shall reasonably be 
thought to have furnished a scandal to the here- 
tics, not assuredly by the fault of the heavenly 
Scriptures, which never deceive ; but by the 
presumption of human error, whereby they have 
chosen to be heretics. And in the first place, 
we must turn the attack against them who under- 
take to make against us the charge of saying that 
there are two Gods. It is written, and they can- 
not deny it, that " there is one Lord," '5 What, 
then, do they think of Christ? — that He is 
Lord, or that He is not Lord at all ? But they 
do not doubt absolutely that He is Lord ; there- 
fore, if their reasoning be true, here are already 
two Lords, How, then, is it true according to 
the Scriptures, there is one Lord? And Christ 

s Isa. xliv. 6, 7, 

* Isa. xl. 12. 

'' Isa. xxxvii. 20, 

8 Matt. xix. 17. 

9 I 'I'im. vi. 16, 
''' Gal. iii. 20. 

'' John i. 1,2. 
'- John i. 14. 
'J John XX. 28. 
'* Rom. ix. 5. 
'5 Deut. vi. 4, 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY. 

643 

f.s called the " one Master." ' Nevertheless we 
read that the Apostle Paul also is a master.^ 
Then, according to this, our Master is not one, 
for from these things we conclude that there are 
two masters. How, then, according to the 
Scriptures, is "one our Master, even Christ?" 
In the Scriptures there is one " called good, even 
God ; " but in the same Scriptures Christ is also [ 
asserted to be good. There is not, then, if they | 
rightly conclude, one good, but even two good. 
How, then, according to the scriptural faith, is 
there said to be only one good? But if they ^ 
do not think that it can by any means interfere | 
with the truth that there is one Lord, that Christ 
also is Lord, nor with the truth that one is our I 
Master, that Paul also is our master, or with the 
truth that one is good, that Christ also is called 
good ; on the same reasoning, let them under- 
stand that, from the fact that God is one, no 
obstruction arises to the truth that Christ also is 
declared to be God. 

CHAP. XXXI. ARGUMENT. BUT THAT GOD, THE 

SON OF GOD, BORN OF GOD THE FATHER FROM 
EVERLASTING, WHO WAS ALWAYS IN THE FATHER, 
IS THE SECOND PERSON TO THE FATHER, WHO 
DOES NOTHING WITHOUT HIS FATHER'S DECREE ; 
AND THAT HE IS LORD, AND THE ANGEL OF 
god's GREAT COUNSEL, TO WHOM THE FATHER'S 
GODHEAD IS GIVEN BY COMMUNITY OF SUB- 
STANCE. 

Thus God the Father, the Founder and Crea- 
tor of all things, who only knows no beginning, 
invisible, infinite, immortal, eternal, is one God ; 
to whose greatness, or majesty, or power, I would 
not say nothing can be preferred, but nothing 
can be compared ; of whom, when He willed it, 
the Son, the Word, was born, who is not re- 
ceived ^ in the sound of the stricken air, or in 
the tone of voice forced from the lungs, but is 
acknowledged in the substance of the power put 
forth by God, the mysteries of whose sacred and 
divine nativity neither an apostle has learnt, nor 
prophet has discovered, nor angel has known, 
nor creature has apprehended. To the Son 
alone they are known, who has known the 
secrets of the Father. He then, since He was 
begotten of the Father, is always in the Father. 
And I thus say always, that I may show Him not 
to be unborn, but born. But He who is before 
all time must be said to have been always in the 
Father ; for no time can be assigned to Him 
who is before all time. And He is always in the 
Father, unless the Father be not always Father, 
only that the Father also precedes Him, — in a 
certain sense, — since it is necessary — in some 
degree — that He should be before He is Father. 

' Matt, xxiii. 8-10. 

- 6i6a<T(caAo<:. 

3 As the Word formed. [He expounds Ps. xliv. (xlv.), Sept. 

Because it is essential that He who knows no 
beginning must go before Him who has a begin- 
ning ; ■♦ even as He is the less as knowing that 
He is in Him, having an origin because He is 
born, and of like nature with the Father in some 
measure by His nativity, although He has a be- 
ginning in that He is born, inasmuch as He is 
born of that Father who alone has no beginning. 
He, then, when the Father willed it, proceeded 
from the Father, and He who was in the Father 
came forth from the Father ; and He who was 
in the Father because He was of the Father, < 
was subsequently with the Father, because He 
came forth from the Father, — that is to say, 
that divine substance whose name is the Word, 
whereby all things were made, and without whom 
nothing was made. For all things are after Him, 
because they are by Him. And reasonably. He 
is before all things, but after the Father, since 
all things were made by Him, and He proceeded 
from Him of whose will all things were made. 
Assuredly God proceeding from God, causing a 
person second to the Father as being the Son, 
but not taking from the Father that characteris- 
tic that He is one God. For if He had not been 
born — compared with Him who was unborn, » 
an equality being manifested in both — He would 
make two unborn beings, and thus would make 
two Gods. If He had not been begotten — 
compared with Him who was not begotten, and 
as being found equal — they not being begotten, 
would have reasonably given two Gods, and 
thus Christ would have been the cause of two 
Gods. Had He been formed without beginning 
as the Father, and He Himself the beginning of 
all things as is the Father, this would have made 
two beginnings, and consequently would have 
shown to us two Gods also. Or if He also were 
not the Son, but the Father begetting from Him- 
self another Son, reasonably, as compared with 
the Father, and designated as great as He, He 
would have caused two Fathers, and thus also 
He would have proved the existence of two 
Gods. Had He been invisible, as compared 
with the Invisible, and declared equal. He would 
have shown forth two Invisibles, and thus also 
He would have proved them to be two Gods. 
If incomprehensible,5 if also whatever other attri- 
butes belong to the Father, reasonably we say, 
He would have given rise to the allegation of 
two Gods, as these people feign. But now, 
whatever He is, He is not of Himself, because 
He is not unborn ; but He is of the Father, be- 
cause He is begotten, whether as being the 
Word, whether as being the Power, or as being 
the Wisdom, or as being the Light, or as being 
the Son ; and whatever of these He is, in that 
He is not from any other source, as we have 

* [" In a sense: " i.e , in logic, not time.] 
5 [Compare the Athanasian Confession.^ 

644 

TREATISE CONCERNING THE TRINITY 

already said before, than from the Father, owing 
His origin to His Father, He could not make a 
'lisagreement in the divinity by the number of 
Uvo Gods, since He gathered His beginning by 
being born of Him who is one God. In which 
kind, being both as well only-begotten as first- 
begotten of Him who has no beginning, He is 
the only one, of all thing's both Source and Head. 
?\nd therefore He declared that God is one, in 
\hat He proved Him to be from no source nor 
beginning, but rather the beginning and source 
of all things. ?vIoreover, the Son docs nothing 
of His own will, nor does anything of His own 
determination ; nor does He come from Him- 
self, but obeys all His Father's commands and 
precepts ; so that, although birth proves Him to 
be a Son, yet obedience even to death declares 
Him the minister of the will of His Father, of 
whom He is. Thus making Himself obedient 
to His Father in all things, although He also is 
God, yet He shows the one God the Father by 
His obedience, from whom also He drew His 
beginning. And thus He could not make two 
Gods, because He did not make two beginnings, 
seeing that from Him who has no beginning He 
received the source of His nativity before all 
time.' For since that is the beginning to other 
creatures which is unborn, — which God the 
Father only is, being beyond a beginning of 
whom He is who was born, — while He who is 
born of Him reasonably comes from Him who 
has no beginning, proving that to be the begin- 
ning from which He Himself is, even although 
He is God who is born, yet He shows Him to 
be one God whom He who was born proved to 
be without a beginning. He therefore is God, 
but begotten for this special result, that He 
should be God. He is also the Lord, but born 
for this very purpose of the Father, that He 
might be Lord. He is also an Angel, but He 

• [As in the Athanasian Confession.] 

was destined of the Father as an Angel to an- 
nounce the Great Counsel of God. And His 
divinity is thus declared, that it may not appear 
by any dissonance or inequality of divinity to 
have caused two Gods. For all things being 
subjected to Him as the Son by the Father, 
while He Himself, with those things which are 
subjected to Him, is subjected to His Father, 
He is indeed proved to l)e Son of His Father ; 
but He is found to be both Lord and God of all 
else. Whence, while all things put under Him 
are delivered to Him who is God, and all things 
are subjected to Him, the Son refers all that He 
has received to the Father, remits again to the 
Father the whole authority of His divinity. The 
true and eternal Father is manifested as the one 
God, from whom alone this power of divinity is 
sent forth, and also given and directed upon the 
Son, and is again returned by the communion of 
substance to the Father. God indeed is shown 
as the Son, to whom the divinity is beheld to be 
given and extended. And still, nevertheless, the 
P'ather is proved to be one God ; while by de- 
grees in reciprocal transfer that majesty and 
divinity are again returned and reflected as sent 
by the Son Himself to the Father, who had given 
them ; so that reasonably God the Father is God 
of all, and the source also of His Son Himself 
whom He begot as Lord. Moreover, the Son is 
God of all else, because God the Father put be- 
fore all Him whom He begot. Thus the Medi- 
ator of God and men, Christ Jesus, having the 
power of every creature subjected to Him by 
His own Father, inasmuch as He is God ; with 
every creature subdued to Him, found at one 
with His Father God, has, by abiding in that 
condition that He moreover " was heard," ' 
briefly proved God His Father to be one and 
only and true God. 

2 There is apparently some indistinct reference here to the passage 
in Heb. v. 7, "and was heard in that He feared" — anb TJs euAa- 
fieiaf. [For the Angel of Great Counsel, see p. 629, supra.] 

TWO NOTES BY THE AMERICAN EDITOR. 

P. 609. The author's elucidation of the figure, anthropopaihy, is an enlargement of Clement's 
casual remarks in the Stromata (cap. xvi. vol. ii. p. 363, this series). Consult On the Figurative 
Language 0/ Holy Scripture, Jones of Nayland, Works, vol. iv. ed. 1801. 

P. 630, note 5. Compare Waterland, vol. ii. p. 210, ed. 1823 ; also Life of Bishop Bull, by 
Robert Nelson, p. 260. For the extraordinary history of Bull's work in France, see the said Life, 
pp. 327-333. For Petavius, Waterland, vol. ii. p. 277, and Bull's Life, p. 243. Petavius seems 
to have had a crafty design to sustain the Council of Trent by arguing that the Council of Nicsa 
also made nav dogmas. Bull jjroves that it only bore witness to the old. To the honour of the 
assembled bishops of the Gallican Church, they sustained Bull against the Jesuit. 

ON THE JEWISH MEATS.' 

CHAP. I. ARGUMENT. — NOVATIAN, A ROMAN PRES- 
BYTER, DURING HIS REIIREMENT AT THE TIME 
OF THE DECIAN PERSECUTION, BEING URGED 
BY VARIOUS LETTERS FROM HIS BRETHREN, HAD 
WRIITEN TWO EARLIER EPISTLES AGAINS'l' THE 
JEWS ON THE SUBJECTS OF CIRCUMCISION AND 
THE SABBATH, AND NOW WRITES THE PRESENT 
ONE ON THE JEWISH MEATS. 

Although, most holy brethren, the day in which 
I receive your letters and writings is most ardent- 
ly longed for by me, and to be reckoned among 
the chief and happiest — for what else is there 
now to make me more joyous?^ — still I think 
that the day is to be deemed not less notable, 
and among special days, wherein I return to you 
similar communications, with the affection of 
love that I owe you, and write you letters with 
a corresponding interest. For nothing, most 
holy brethren, holds me bound with such bonds, 
nothing stirs and arouses me with such a stimu- 
lus of care and anxiety, as the fear lest you should 
think that any disadvantage is suffered by you 
by reason of my absence ; and this I strive to 
remedy, in labouring to show myself present 
with you by frequent letters. Although, there- 
fore, the duty which I owe, and the charge I 
have undertaken, and the very ministerial office 
imposed upon me, require of me this necessity 
of writing letters, yet you still further enhance 
it, by stirring me up to write through means of 
your continual communications. And inclined 
although I am to those periodical expressions of 
love, you urge me the more by showing that you 
stand fast continually in the Gospel : whence it 
results, that by my letters I am not so much in- 
structing you who are already informed, as incit- 
ing you who are already prepared. For you, who 
not only hold the Gospel pure and purged from 
all staui of perverse doctrine, but also energeti- 
cally teach the same, seek not man for a master, 
since you show yourselves by these very things 
to be teachers. Therefore as you run, I exhort 
you ; and as you watch, I stir you up ; and as 
you contend against " the spiritual things of 

' Entitled " A Letter of Novatian, the Roman Presbyter." 
~ " Liberiorem," translated, accordins to a plausible emendation, 
as " hilariorem." 

wickedness," ^ I address you ; and as you press 
" in your course to the prize of your calling in 
Christ,"^ I urge you on, — that, treading under 
foot and rejecting as well the sacrilegious calum- 
nies of heretics as also the idle fables of Jews, 
you may hold the sole word 5 and teaching of 
Christ, so as worthily to claim for yourselves the 
authority of His name. But how perverse are 
the Jews, and remote from the understanding 
of their law, I have fully shown, as I beheve, in 
two former letters,^ wherein it was absolutely 
proved that they are ignorant of what is the true 
circumcision, and what the true Sabbath ; and 
their ever increasing blindness is confuted in 
this present epistle, wherein I have briefly dis- 
coursed concerning their meats, because that in 
them they consider that they only are holy, and 
that all others are defiled. ^ 

CHAP. IT. ARGUMENT. — HE FIRST OF ALL ASSERTS 
THAT THE LAW IS SPIRITUAL ; AND THENCE, AS 
man's first FOOD WAS ONLY THE FRUIT OF 
TREES, AND THE USE OF FLESH WAS ADDED, 
THAT THE LAW THAT FOLLOWED SUBSEQUENTLY'^ 
WAS TO BE UNDERSTOOD SPIRITUALLY.*^ 

Therefore, first of all, we must avail ourselves 
of that passage, " that the law is spiritual ; " '" 
and if they deny it to be spiritual, they assuredly 
blaspheme ; if, avoiding blasphemy, they confess 
it to be spiritual, let them read it spiritually. 
For divine things must be divinely received, and 
must assuredly be maintained as holy. But a 
grave fault is branded on those who attach earth- 
ly and human doctrine to sacred and spiritual 
words ; and this we must beware of doing. 

3 Eph. vi 12. 

4 Phil. iii. 14. 

5 Traditionem. 

6 These letters are not extant, but they are mentioned by Jerome, 
De vir. Illustr., ch. Ixx. 

^ [i Cor. vi. 13. A passage probably connected with the Jewish 
superstition. But see the Peshito-Syriac version on Mark vii. 19. 
Compare Murdock's version ad loc, ed. 1855.] 

8 Which, distinguishing between meats, granted certain animals as 
clean, and interdicted certain others as not clean, especially as all 
aramals were declared " very good," and even unclean animals were 
reserved for offspring in Noah's ark, although they otherwise might 
have been got rid of, if they ought to have been destroyed on account 
of their uncleanness. 

9 [The divers animals are also parables illustrating human pas- 
sions and appetites. See Jones of Nayland, vol. .\i. p. i.j 

"^ Rom. vii. 14. 

645 

646 

ON THE JEWISH MEATS. 

Moreover, we may beware, if any things enjoined 
by (iod be so treated as if they were assumed 
to diminish His authority, lest, in calhng some 
things impure and unclean, their institution should 
dishonour their ordainer. For in reprobating 
what He has made, He will appear to have con- 
demned His own works, which He had approved 
as good ; and He will be designated as seeming 
capricious in both cases, as the heretics indeed 
would have it ; either in having blessed things 
which were not clean, or in subsequently repro- 
bating as not good, creatures which He had 
blessed as both clean and good. And of this 
the enormity and contradiction will remain for 
ever if that Jewish doctrine is persisted in, which 
must be got rid of with all our ability ; so that 
whatever is irregularly delivered by them, may 
be taken away by us, and a suitable arrangement 
of His works, and an appropriate and spiritual 
ap|)lication of the divine law, may be restored. 
But to begin from the beginning of things, whence 
it behoves me to begin ; the only food for the 
first men was fruit and the produce of the trees. 
For afterwards, man's sin transferred his need 
from the fruit-trees to the produce of the earth, 
\vhen the very attitude of his body attested the 
condition of his conscience. For although in- 
nocency raised men up towards the heavens to 
pluck their food from the trees so long as they 
had a good conscience, yet sin, when committed, 
bent men down to the earth and to the ground 
to gather its grain. Moreover, afterwards the 
use of flesh was added, the divine favour supply- 
ing for human necessities the kinds of meats 
generally fitting for suitable occasions. For 
while a more tender meat was needed to nourish 
men who were both tender and unskilled, it was 
jtill a food not prepared without toil, doubtless 
for their advantage, lest they should again find 
.1 pleasure in sinning, if the labour imposed upon 
sin did not exhort innocence. And since now 
it was no more a paradise to be tended, but a 
vvhole world to be cultivated, the more robust 
food of flesh is offered to men, that for the ad- 
vantage of culture something more might be 
added to the vigour of the human body. All 
these things, as I have said, were by grace and 
by divine arrangement : so that either the most 
vigorous food should not be given in too small 
fjuantity for men's support, and they should be 
enfeebled for labour ; or that the more tender 
meat should not be too abundant, so that, op- 
pressed beyond the measure of their strength, 
they should not be able to bear it.' Rut the law 
which followed subsecjuently ordained - the flesh 
foods with distinction : for some animals it gave 

' This sentence is very unintelligible, but it is the nearest approach 
to a meaning that can be gathered from the original. 

* |Oen. ix. 3. The Noachic covenant was Catholic, and fore- 
shadowed Acts X. 15, although clean and imclean beasts were recog- 
nised as by natural classification. Gen. vii. 2. Argue as niGal. iii. 17. J 

and granted for use,^ as being clean ; some it 
interdicted as not clean, and conveying pollution, 
to those that eat them. Moreover, it gave this 
character to those that were clean, that those 
which chew the cud and divide the hoofs are 
clean ; those are unclean which do neither one 
nor other of these things. So, in fishes also, the 
law said that those indeed were clean which 
were covered with scales and supplied with fins, 
but that those which were otherwise were not 
clean. Moreover, it established a distinction 
among the fowls, and laid down what was to be 
judged either an abomination, or clean. Thus 
the law ordained t/ie exercise of very great sub- 
tlety in making a separation among those animals 
which the ancient appointment had gathered to- 
gether into one form of blessing. What, then, 
are we to say? Are the animals therefore un- 
clean? But v.'hat else is it to say that they are 
not clean, than that the law has separated"* them 
from the uses of food ? And what, moreover, is 
that that we have just now said? Then God is 
the ordainer of things which are not clean ; and 
the blame attached to things which are made will 
recoil upon their Maker, who did not produce 
them clean ; to say which is certainly character- 
istic of extreme and excessive folly : it is to ac- 
cuse God as having created unclean things, and 
to charge upon the divine majesty the guilt of 
having made things which are abomination, es- 
pecially when they were both pronounced " very 
good," •» and as being good have obtained the 
blessing from (iod Himself "that they should 
increase and multiply." Moreover also they w?re 
reserved by the command of the Creator in 
Noah's ark for the sake of their offspring, that so 
being kept they might be proved to be needful ; 
and being needful, they might be proved to be 
good, although even in that case also there is a 
distinction appended. But still, even then, the 
creation of those very creatures that were not 
clean might have been utterly abolished, if it had 
needed to be abolished on account of its own 
pollution, 

CHAP. III. ARGUMENT. — AND THUS UNCLEAN 
ANIMALS ARE NOT TO BE REPROACHED, LEST THE 
REPROACH BE THROWN UPON THEIR AUTHOR ; 
BUT WHEN AN IRRATIONAL ANIMAL IS REJECTED 
ON ANY ACCOUNT, IT IS RATHER THAT THAT VERY 
THING SHOULD BE CONDEMNED IN M.\N WHO IS 
RATIONAL; AND THEREFORE THAT IN ANIMALS 
THE CHARACTER, THE DOINGS, AND THE WILLS 
OF .MEN ARE DEPICTED. 

How far, then, must that law, which — as I 
have shown by the authority of the apostle — is 
spiritual, be spiritually received in order that the 

3 Or, as some read, " for eating," substituting " esum " for 
" usum." 

* Gen. 1. 31. 

ON THE JEWISH MEATS. 

647 

divine and sure idea of the law may be carried 
out? Firstly, we must believe that whatever 
was ordained by God is clean and purified by 
the very authority of His creation ; neither must 
it be reproached, lest the reproach should be 
thrown back upon its Author. Then too that 
the law was given to the children of Israel for 
this purpose, that they might profit by it, and 
return to those virtuous manners which, although 
they had received them from their fathers, they 
had corrupted in Egypt by reason of their inter- 
course with a barbarous people. Finally, also, 
those ten commandments on the tables teach 
nothing new, but remind them of what had been 
obliterated — that righteousness in them, which 
had been put to sleep, might revive again as it 
were by the afilatus of the law, after the manner 
of a sinoihered fire. But they could profit by 
the perception that those vices were especially 
to be avoided in men which the law had con- 
demned even in beasts.' For when an irrational 
animal is rejected on any acco'int, it is rather 
that very thing which is condemned in the man, 
who is rational. And if in it anything which it 
has by nature is characterized as a defilement, 
that same thing is most to be blamed when it is 
found in man opposed to his nature. Therefore, 
in order that men might be purified, the cattle 
were censured — to wit, that men also who had 
the same vices might be esteemed on a level 
with the brutes. Whence it results, that not 
only were the animals not condemned by their 
Creator because of His agency ; - but that men 
might be instructed in the brutes to return to 
the unspotted nature of their own creation. For 
we must consider how the Lord distinguishes 
clean and not clean. The creatures that are 
clean, it says, both chew the cud and divide the 
hoof; the unclean do neither, or only one of the 
two. .'^.ll these things were made by one Work- 
man, and He who made them Himself blessed 
them. Therefore I regard the creation of both 
as clean, because both He who created them is 
holy, and those things which were created are 
not in fault in being that which they were made. 
For it has never been customary for nature, but 
for a perverted will, to bear the blame of guilt. 
What, then, is the case ? In the animals it is the 
characters, and doings, and wills of men that are 
depicted.^ They are clean if they chew the cud ; 
that is, if they ever have in their mouth as food 
the divine precepts. They divide the hoof, if 
with the firm step of innocency they tread the 
ways of righteousness, and of every virtue of life. 
For of those creatures which divide the foot into 
two hoofs the walk is always vigorous ; the ten- 

■ pee chap. ii. p. 645, S7ipra, note 9.] 

^ bui culpa. 

3 [The moral uses of the animal creation are recognised in all 
languages: as when we say of men, a serpent, a fox, a hog, an ass, | 
etc; so otherwise, a lion, a iamb, an eagle, a dove, etc.] 1 

dency to slip of one part of the hoof being sus- 
tained by the firmness of the other, and so 
retained in the substantial footstep. Thus they 
who do neither are unclean, whose walk is neither 
firm in virtues ; nor do they digest the food of 
the divine precepts after the manner of that 
chewing of the cud. And they, too, who do one 
of these things are not themselves clean either,, 
inasmuch as they are maimed of the other, and 
not perfect in both. And these are they who 
do both, as believers, and are clean ; or one of 
the two, as Jews and heretics, and are blemished ; 
or neither, as the Gentiles, and are consequently 
unclean. Thus in the animals, by the law, as it 
were, a certain mirror of human life is estab- 
lished, wherein men may consider the images of 
penalties ; so that everything which is vicious iii 
men, as committed against nature, may be the 
more condemned, when even those things, al- 
though naturally ordained in brutes, are in them, 
blamed.-* For that in fishes the roughness of 
scales is regarded as constituting their cleanness ; 
rough, and rugged, and unpolished, and substan- 
tial, and grave manners are approved in men ;, 
while those that are without scales are unclean ; 
because trifling, and fickle, and faithless, and 
effeminate manners are disapproved. Moreover, 
what does the law mean when it says, " Thou 
shalt not eat the camel? "5 — except that by the 
example of that animal it condemns a life nerve- 
less^ and crooked with crimes. Or when it 
forbids the swine to be taken for food? It 
assuredly reproves a life filthy and dirty, and 
delighting in the garbage of vice, placing its 
supreme good not in generosity of mind, but in 
the flesh alone. Or when it forbids the hare ? 
It rebukes men deformed into women. And' 
who would use the body of the weasel for food ? 
But in this case it reproves theft. Who would 
eat the lizard? But it hates an aimless way- 
wardness of life. Who the eft? But it exe- 
crates mental stains. Who would eat the hawk,, 
who the kite, who the eagle? But it hates 
plunderers and violent people who live by crime. 
Who the vulture ? But it holds accursed those 
who seek for booty by the death of others. Or 
who the raven? But it holds accused crafty 
wills. Moreover, when it forbids the sparrow, it 
condemns intemperance ; when the owl, it hates 
those who fly from the light of truth ; when the 
swan, the proud with high neck ; when the sea- 
mew, too talkative an intemperance of tongue ; 
when the bat, those who seek the darkness of 
night as well as of error. These things, then, 
and the like to these, the law holds accursed in 
animals, which in them indeed are not blame- 
worthy, because they are born in this condition ; 

■* [Novatian was a keen analyst, and his allegorial renderings are 
logical generally, though sometimes fanciful.] 

5 Lev. xi. 4. [Jones of Nayland, vol. iii , Disquisition, ed. 1801.J 
^ " Enervem," but more probably " informem." 

648 

ON THE JEWISH MEATS. 

in man they are blamed, because they are sought 
for contrary to his nature, not by his creation, 
but by his error. 

CHAP. IV. ARGUMENT. — TO THESE THINGS ALSO 
WAS ADDED ANOTHER REASON FOR PROHIBITING 
MANY KINDS OF MEATS TO THE JEWS ; TO WIT, 
FOR IHE RESTR.\INT OF THE INTEMPERANCE OF 
THE PEOPLE, AND THAT THEY MIGHT SERVE 
THE ONE GOD. 

To these considerations, then, thus enumer- 
ated, were added also other reasons for which 
many kinds of meats were withheld from the 
Jews ; and that this might be so, many things 
were called unclean, not as being condemned in 
themselves, but that the Jews might be restrained 
to the service of one (iod ; because frugality and 
moderation in appetite were becoming to those 
who were chosen for this purpose. And such 
moderation is always found to be approximate 
to religion, nay, so to speak, rather related and 
akin to it ; for luxury is inimical to holiness. 
For how shall religion be spared by it, when 
modesty is not spared? Luxury does not enter- 
tain the fear of (iod ; since while pleasures hurry 
it on, it is carried forward to the sole daring of 
its desires : for the reins being loosened, it in- 
creases in the ap[)lication of expense without 
measure, as if it were its food, exceeding its 
])atrimony with its modesty ; or as a torrent 
rushing from the mountain-])eaks not only over- 
leaps what is opposed to it, but carries with it 
those very hindrances for the destruction of other 
things. Therefore these remedies were sought 
for to restrain the intemperance of the people, 
that in proportion as luxury was diminished, vir- 
tuous manners might be increased. For what 
else did they deserve, than that they should be 
restrained from using all the pleasures of divers 
meats, who dared to prefer the vilest meats of 
the Egy{)tians to the divine bancjuets of manna, 
preferring the juicy meats of their enemies and 
masters to their liberty? They were truly worthy 
that the slavery which they had coveted should 
pamper them, if the food that was more desira- 
ble and free was so ill pleasing to them. 

CHAP. V. ARGUMENT. — BLTT THERE WAS A LIMIT 
TO THE USE OF THESE SHADOWS OR FIGURES ; 
FOR AFTERWARDS, WHEN THE END OF THE 
LAW, CHRIST, CAME, ALL THINGS WERE SAID 
BY THE APOSTLE TO BE PURE TO THE PURE, 
AND THE TRUE AND HOLY MEAT WAS A RIGHT 
FAITH AND AN UNSPOTTED CONSCIENCE. 

And thus there was a certain ancient time, 
wherein those shadows or figures were to be 
used, that meats should be abstained from which 
had indeed lieen commended by their creation, 
ibut had been prohibited by the law. But now 

Christ, the end of the law, has come, disclosing 
all the obscurities of the law — all those things 
which antiquity had covered with the clouds of 
sacraments. For the illustrious Master, and the 
heavenly Teacher, and the ordainer of the per- 
fected truth, has come, under whom at length it 
is rightly said : " To the pure all things are pure ; 
but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving 
is nothing pure, but even their mind and con- 
science is defiled." ' Moreover, in another place : 
" For every creature of God is good, and nothing 
to be refused which is received with thanksgiv- 
ing ; for it is sanctified by the Word of God and 
prayer." - Again, in another place : " The Spirit 
expressly says that in the last days some shall 
depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing 
spirits, doctrines of demons, speaking lies in 
hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with a 
hot iron, forbidding to marry, and comviariding 
to abstain from meats which God hath created to 
be received with thanksgiving by them which 
believe and those who know God." •' Moreover, 
in another passage : " Everything that is sold in 
the market-place eat, asking ncthing."-» From 
these things it is plain that all those things are 
returned to their origina/ blessedness now that 
the law is finished, and that we must not revert 
to the special observances of meats, which ob- 
servances were ordained for a certain reason, but 
which evangelical liberty has now taken away, 
their discharge being given. The apostle cries 
out : " The kingdom of God is not meat and 
drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy." * 
Also elsewhere : " Meats for the belly, and the 
belly for meats : but God shall destroy both it 
and them. Now the body is not for fornication, 
but for the Lord ; and the Lord for the body." " 
God is not worshipped by the belly nor by 
meats, which the Lord says will perish, and are 
"purged" by natural law in the draught.'' For 
he who worships the Lord by meats, is merely 
as one who has his belly for his Lord. The 
meat, I say, true, and holy, and pure, is a true 
faith, an unspotted conscience, and an innocent 
soul. Whosoever is thus fed, feeds also with 
Christ. Such a banqueter is God's guest : these 
are the feasts that feed the angels, these are the 
tables which the martyrs make. Hence is that 
word of the law : " Man doth not live by bread 
alone, but by every word which proceedeth out 
of the mouth of God." '^ Hence, too, that saying 
of Christ : " My meat is to do the will of Him 
that sent me, and to finish His work."^ Hence, 

» Tit. i. 15. 

2 I Tim. IV. 4, 5. 

Tim. 

'V I, 2, 3. 

* I Cor. X. 25. 

5 Rom. xiv. 17. 

*> I Cor. vi. 13. 

7 (Or lower bowel, Mark vii. 19; Matt. xv. 17. See cap. i. note 7, 
p. 645, sti/>ra It throws off refuse, leaving food only to the system.] 
^ Deut. viii. 3. 
9 John iv. 34. 

ON THE JEWISH MEATS. 

649 

" Ye seek me not because ye saw the miracles, 
but because ye did eat of my loaves and were 
filled. But labour not for the meat which perish- 
eth, but for the meat which endureth to life eter- 
nal, which the Son of man will give you ; for 
Him hath the Father sealed." ' By righteous- 
ness, I say, and by continency, and by the rest 
of the virtues, God is worshipped. For Zecharias 
also tells us, saying : " If ye eat or drink, is it 
not ye that eat or drink? " - — declaring thereby 
that meat or drink attain not unto God, but unto 
man : for neither is God fleshly, so as to be 
pleased with flesh ; nor is He careful ^ for these 
pleasures, so as to rejoice in our food.-* God 
rejoices in our faith alone, in our innocency 
alone, in our truth alone, in our virtues alone. 
And these dwell not in our belly, but in our soul ; 
and these are acquired for us by divine awe and 
heavenly fear, and not by earthly food. And 
such the apostle fitly rebuked, as " obeying the 
superstitions of angels, puffed up by their fleshly 
mmd ; ncJt holding Christ the head, from whom 
all the body, joined together by links, and in- 
woven and grown together by mutual members 
in the bond of charity, increasethto God ; " 5 
but observing those things : " Touch not, taste 
not, handle not ; which indeed seem to have a 
form of religion, in that the body is not spared."^ 
Yet there is no advantage at all of righteousness, 
while we are recalled by a voluntary slavery to 
those elements to which by baptism we have 
died. 

CHAP. VI. ARGUMENT. — BUT, ON THE GROUND 
THAT LIBERTY IN MEATS IS GRANTED TO US, 
THERE IS NO PERMISSION OF LUXURY, THERE 
IS NO TAKING AWAY OF CONTINENCE AND FAST- 
ING : FOR THESE THINGS GREATLY BECOME THE 

FAITHFUL, TO WIT, THAT THEY SHOULD PRAY 

TO GOD, AND GIVE HIM THANKS, NOT ONLY BY 
DAY, BUT BY NIGHT. 

But from the fact that liberty of meats is 
granted to us, it does not of necessity follow 
that luxury is allowed us ; nor because the Gos- 
pel has dealt with us very liberally, has it taken 
away continency. By this, I say, the belly is 
not provided for, but the form of meats was 
shown : it was made manifest what was right, 
not that we might go into the gulf of desire, 
but to give a reason for the law. But nothing 
has so restrained intemperance as the Gospel ; 
nor has any one given such strict laws against 
gluttony as Christ, who is said to have pro- 

' John vi. 26, 27. 

2 Zech. vii. 6, LXX. 

3 " Attonitus" is assumed to be rightly read " attentus." 

■• [1 'lim. iv. 4, vi. 17. Against the Encratites (vol. i. p. 353), 
but not against moderation (vol. ii. p. 237, this series).] 
5 Col. ii. iS, 19. 
^ Col. ii. 21. 23. 

nounced even the poor blessed, and the hun- 
gering and thirsting happy, the rich miserable ; 
to whom, obeying the government of their belly 
and their palate, the material of their lusts could 
never be wanting, so that their servitude could 
not cease ; who think it an argument of their 
happiness to desire as much as they can, except 
that they are thus able to attain less than they 
desire. For, moreover, preferring Lazarus in 
his very hunger and in his sores themselves, and 
with the rich man's dogs, He restrained the 
destroyers of salvation, the belly and the palate, 
by examples. The apostle also, when he said, 
" Having food and raiment, we are therewith 
content," ^ laid down the law of frugality and 
continency ; and thinking that it would be of 
little advantage that he had written, he also gave 
himself as an example of what he had written, 
adding not without reason, that " avarice is the 
root of all evils j"*^ for it follows in the footsteps 
of luxury. Whatever the latter has wasted by 
vice, the former restores by crime ; the circle 
of crimes being re-trodden, that luxury may 
again take away whatever avarice had heaped 
together. Nor yet are there wanting, among 
such things, those who, although they have 
claimed to themselves the sound of the Chris- 
tian name, afford instances and teachings of in- 
temperance ; whose vices have come even to that 
pitch, that while fasting they drink in the early 
morning, not thinking it Christian to drink after 
meat, unless the wine poured into their empty 
and unoccupied veins should have gone down 
directly after sleep : for they seem to have less 
relish of what they drink if food be mingled with 
the wine. Thus you may see such in a new kind, 
still fasting and already drunk, not running to the 
tavern, but carrying the tavern about with them ; 
and if any one of them offers a salute, he gives 
not a kiss, but drinks a health. What can they 
do after meat, whom meat finds intoxicated? 
Or in what kind of state does the sun at his 
setting leave them, whom at his rising he looks 
upon as already stupid with \vine ? But things 
which are detestable are not to be taken as our 
examples. For those things only are to be taken 
by which our soul may be made better ; and 
although in the Gospel the use of meats is uni- 
versally given to us, yet it is understood to be 
given to us only with the law of frugality and 
continence. For these things are even greatly 
becoming to the faithful, — to wit, those who 
are about to pray to God and to give Him 
thanks, not only by day, but by night also ; 
which cannot be if the mind, stupefied by meat 
and wine, should not prevail to shake off heavy 
sleep and the load heaped upon the breast. 

7 I Tim. vi. 3. 
' I Tim. vi. to. 

650 

ON THE JEWISH MEATS. 

CHAP. VII. ARGUMENT. — MOREOVER, WE MUST 
BE CAREFUL THAT NO ONE SHOULD THINK THAT 
THIS LICENCE MAY BE CARRIED TO SUCH AN 
EXTENT AS THAT HE MAV APPROACH TO THINGS 
OFFERED TO IDOLS. 

But it must be very greatly guarded against in 
the use of food, and we must be warned lest any 
should think that liberty is permitted to that 
degree that even he may approach to what has 
been offered to idols. For, as far as pertains 
to God's creation, every creature is clean. But 
when it has been offered to demons, it is polluted 
so long as it is offered to the idols ; and as soon 
as this is done, it belongs no longer to (jod, but 
to the idol. And when this creature is taken for 

food, it nourishes the person who so takes it for 
the demon, not for God, by making him a fellow- 
guest with the idol, not with Christ, as rightly 
do the Jews also.' Aed the meaning of these 
meats being perceived, and the counsel of the 
law being considered, and the kindness of the 
Gospel grace being known, and the rigour of 
temperance being observed, and the pollution 
of things offered to idols being reiected, we who 
keep the rule of truth throughout all things, ough\ 
to give thanks to God through Jesus Christ, His 
Son, our Lord, to whom be praise, 4nd honour, 
and glory, for ever and ever. Amen. 

' Scil. abstain. [But see i Cor. viii. 4, etc.] 

A letter written to Cyprian by Novatian the Roman presbyter, in the name of the Roman clergy, 
will be found translated (Ep. xxx.) at p. 308, this volume. 

APPENDIX. 

# 

ACTS AND RECORDS OF THE FAMOUS CONTRO- 
VERSY ABOUT THE BAPTISM OF HERETICS. 

A ROMAN COUNCIL CELEBRATED UNDER 
STEPHEN. 

FROM THE SYNODAL ROLL. 

A DIVINE and sacred provincial synod, gath- 
ered together at Rome by Stephen, the blessed 
ma.nyr and/(7J/i(-r' which excommunicated those 
who in an African synod had, without reason, 
conceded that they who came to the Catholic 
Church from any heresy should be re-baptized.^ 

CARTHAGINIAN COUNCILS. 

THE THIRD CARTHAGINIAN COUNCIL UNDER CYP- 
RIAN, ON THE BAFflSM OF INFANTS ; HELD ANNO 
DOMINI 253. 

This document is translated at p. 353, Ep. Iviii. 

THE FOURTH CARTHAGINIAN COUNCIL UNDER CYP- 
RIAN ; HELD ANNO DOMINI 254. ABOUT BASILI- 
DES AND MARTIAL, BISHOPS OF SPAIN, WHO HAD 
RECEIVED CERTIFICATES. 

This document is translated at p. 369, Ep. 

'/xvii. 

' " Papa" [as applied to all bishops. See p. 154, supra.] 
2 Reference is made to this council in Epistles of Cyprian, No. 
Jjiniii., and at large in Epistles Ixix. to Ixxiv., pp. 375-396, supra. 

THE FIFTH CARTHAGINIAN COUNCIL UNDER CYP- 
RIAN, THE FIRST ABOUT BAPTISM ; HELD ANNO 
DOMINI 255, THE THIRD YEAR OF ST. STEPHEN'S 
EPISCOPATE. 

This will be found translated at p. 375, Ep. 
Ixix. 

THE SIXTH CARTHAGINIAN COUNCIL UNDER CYP- 
RIAN, THE SECOND ABOUT BAPTISM, FROM A 
PROVINCE OF AFRICA AND NUMIDIA ; HELD ANNO 
DOMINI 256, IN THE THIRD YEAR OF STEPHEN'S 
EPISCOPATE. 

This will be found translated at p. 378, Ep. 
Ixxi. 

THE SEVENTH CARTHAGINIAN COUNCIL UNDER CYP- 
RIAN, THE THIRD ABOUT BAPTISM, FROM THREE 
PROVINCES OF AFRICA ; HELD ANNO DOMINI 256, 
IN THE THIRD YEAR OF STEPHEN'S EPISCO- 
PATE. 

This will be found translated and given in full 
on p. 565 of the present volume. 

655 

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE' 

TO AN 

ANONYMOUS TREATISE AGAINST THE HERETIC NOVATIAN. 

The WTiter of the following treatise was undoubtedly a contemporary of Cyprian, and wrote 
in the early part of the reign of Valerian (254-256), during an interval of peace to the Church, 
This much may be collected from the fact that he names one, and only one, persecution after 
that of Decius — namely, that of Gallus and Volusianus — and speaks of those who had lapsed 
under the former, as having been stedfast and victorious in the latter.^ He is generally believed 
to have been an African, and Tillemont is only withheld from attributing the work to Cyprian 
himself by what he judges to be a difference oi' style. But although from the exordium it may be 
concluded that the writer was a oishop, yet, from his manifest uncertainty as to the fitting way to 
treat those who had lapsed, it is evident that Cyprian cannot have been the author ; for that prel- 
ate, when the persecution of Gallus and Volusianus was just threatening, had already decided 
upon receiving to communion the penitents who had yielded to temptation under Decius.^ 

Ceillier* says that this treatise was written about the year 255, while Novatian was still alive,5 
and when the schism of Felicissimus was all but extinct. 

Erasmus first published it among the known works of Cyprian in the year 1520. 

* [By Dr. Wallis, editor of vol. xiii., Edinb. series.] 3 Epistles, liii. p. 336, supra. 

2 Ch. (or sec.) 6, p. 659, infra, ■< Hist. Gen. des Autenrs, torn. lii. ch. i. art. 4, sec. 2, note 4. 

5 Ch. (or sec.) i, p. 657, infra. 

NOTE. 

The American editor subjoins as follows : Cyprian, and Cornelius afterward, had decided, with 
their councils, that the lapsed should be classed, and dealt with accordingly, as ( i ) Libellatici, 
those who had compounded with the heathen, and bought off ixox^ offering sacrifice; and (2) 
Sacrificati, those who had actually offered sacrifice to idols. Different degrees of discipline were 
awarded, but all were admitted to pardon finally. 

655 

A TREATISE AGAINST THE HERETIC NOVATIAN 
BY AN ANONYMOUS BISHOP. 

THAT THE HOPE OF PARDON SHOULD NOT BE DE- 
NIED TO THE LAPSED. 

I. While I was meditating and impatiently 
tossing in my mind what I ought to do concern- 
ing those pitiable brethren who, wounded, not of 
their own will, but by the onset of a raging devil, 
have lived until now, that is, through a long 
course of time, in the endurance of their punish- 
ment ; lo, there appeared opposed to me another 
enemy, and the adversary of his own paternal 
affection — the heretic Novatian — who not only, 
as it is signified in the Gospel, passed by the 
i;) rostrate wounded man, as did the priest or the 
Levite, but by an ingenious and novel cruelty 
rather would slay the wounded man, by taking 
away the hope of salvation, by denying the mercy 
of his Father, by rejecting the repentance of his 
brother. Marvellous, how bitter, how harsh, 
how perverse are many things ! But one more 
easily perceives the straw in another's eye than 
the beam in one's own. Let not the abrupt 
madness of that perfidious heretic move or dis- 
turb us however, beloved brethren, who, although 
he is placed in such great guilt of dissension and 
schism, and is separatetl from the Church, with 
sacrilegious temerity does not shrink from hurl- 
ing back his charges upon us : for although he 
is now by himself made unclean, defiled with the 
filth of sacrilege, he contends that we are so. 
And although it is written that the dogs should 
remain without, and the apostle has taught that 
these same dogs must be shunned, as we read, 
for he says, " Beware of dogs, beware of evil 
workers," ' he does not cease stirring up his 
frenzy with barkings, after the manner of wolves 
seeking the gloomy darkness, where with his 
brutal cruelty he may easily rend in his dark 
caves the sheep snatched away from the Shep- 
herd. Certainly he declares that he and his 
friends whom he collects are gold. Nor do we 
doubt but that deserters of the Church who have 
become apostates could now easily be converted 
into gold, but it must be that gold in which the 

' Phil. iii. 2. 

first sins of the people of Israel were designated. 
But the gold and silver vessels which were wrested 
from the Egyptians continue in the Lord's power, 
that is, in Christ's Church ; in which house if 
thou hadst continued, Novatian, thou hadst per- 
chance been also a precious vessel ; but now 
thou neither perceivest nor complainest that thou 
art changed into chaff and straw. 

2. Why, therefore, shouldst thou be lifted up 
with vain things? Thou wilt gain loss rather 
than profit. Why, from the very fact that thou 
art become poorer, believest thou thyself rich?' 
Hear in the Apocalypse the Lord's voice rebuk- 
ing thee with righteous reproaches : " Thou say- 
est," says He, " I am rich, and increased with 
goods, and have need of nothing ; and knowesi 
not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and 
blind, and poor, and naked." ^ Let him think 
for certain that he possesses these riches of 
poverty, whoever he may be, that, forsaking the 
Church of Christ, with his darkened reason does, 
not shrink from being turned to those rash lead- 
ers of schisms and authors of dissension, whom 
John calls antichrists, whom the Evangelist 
likens to chaff, whom the Lord Christ charac- 
terizes as thieves and robbers, as He Himself 
declares in the Gospel, saying that " he who 
entereth not by the door into the sheep-fold, 
but goeth down by some other way, the same is. 
a thief and a robber." ^ Moreover, in the same 
He also says, " All who have come are thieves 
and robbers." ■* Who are such but the desert- 
ers of the faith, and the transgressors of God's 
Church, who strive against God's ordinance ; — 
whom the Holy Spirit rightly rebukes by the 
prophet, saying, " Ye have taken counsel, but 
not by me ; and have tnade a confederacy, but 
not by my Spirit, to add sin to sin." s What 
now can those most perverse friends of Nova- 
tian, even now the most unhappy ^ few, reply to 

2 Rev. iii. 17. 

3 John X. I. 
■♦ John X. 8. 

5 Isa. XXX. I. 

*> Infelicissimi. This is supposed to be a play upon the name ot 
Felicissimus, referred to in Cyprian's letter, [xlviii. p. 325, supra], 

657 

6s8 

A TREATISE AGAINST THE HERETIC NOVATIAN. 

these things, who have broken forth to such a 
folly of madness as to have no reverence either 
for God or man? Among them, shamelessly, 
and without any law of ordination, the episco- 
pate is sought after ; but among us in its own 
Sees, and in those of the throne delivered to it 
by God, it is renounced.' There the Truth says, 
*' They reject me, that they may sacrifice to me ; 
nor do they offer the holy oblations of the chil- 
dren of Israel, nor do they approach to offer the 
holy of holies, but they shall receive their igno- 
miny in 'the error wherein they have erred." ^ 
Let it be enough in a few words to have proved 
what they are. Hear, therefore, O Novatians, 
among whom the heavenly Scriptures are read 
rather than understood ; well, if they are not 
interpolated.' For your ears are closed, and 
your hearts darkened, seeing that ye admit no 
light from sj)iritual and saving warnings ; as 
Isaiah says, " The servants of God are blinded." ■♦ 
And deservedly blinded, because the desire of 
schismatics is not in the law ; which law points 
out to us the one and only Church in that ark, 
to wit, which was fashioned, by the providence 
of God, under Noah before the deluge, in which 
— to answer you cjuickly, O Novatian — we find 
that there were shut up not only clean animals, 
but also unclean ; which ark was saved alone, 
with those who were in it, whereas the other 
things which were not found therein perished in 
the deluge. From that ark there were loosed 
two birds, a raven and a dove ; and this raven 
truly bore the figure or type of impure men, and 
men who would be in perpetual tlarkness through 
the world's broad road, and of apostates who 
shoiild arise, feeding on unclean things, and not 
turning themselves eventually to the Church ; 
and as we read, we find that it was sent forth, 
and n-'turned no more. Whoever should be 
found to resemble this bird, then, that is, the 
impure spirit, will no more be able to return 
to the Church, seeing that the Lord will forbid 
them, even if they should wish it, as He com- 
manded Moses, saying, " Everything leprous 5 
and impure, cast abroad outside the camp."** 
But the dove sent forth that returned, is signi- 
fied l)y the man who does not delay, because he 
would have no rest for his feet. And Noah re- 
ceived it into the ark ; and when it was sent 
forth again on the seventh day, received it, 
bearing in its mouth an olive leaf. 

3. And I, beloved brethren, — as I not heed- 
lessly meditate these things, and not in harmony 
with human wisdom, but as it is permitted to 
our minds by the condescension of the heavenly 

' [Ep. xl. p. 319, supra: et alibi.\ 

* tzek. xliv. 10-13. 

^ [See p. 6o2, note 12, supra.\ 

* Isa. xlii. 19. 
5 Varium. 

' Num. V. 2. 

Lord, needfully and pertinently to conceive, — 
say that that dove signifies to us of itself a 
double type. Formerly, that is, from the begin- 
ning of the divine administration, it suggests its 
own figure, the first indeed and chief — that is, 
the figure of the Spirit. And' by its mouth the 
sacrament of baptism wliich is provided for 
the salvation of the human race, and that b)' 
the heavenly plan it is celebrated in the Churcl. 
only.7 Moreover, three times sent forth from the 
ark, flying about through the air over the water, 
it already signified the sacraments of our Church. 
Whence also the Lord Christ charges upon 
Peter, and moreover also upon the rest of His 
disciples, " Go ye and preach the Gospel to the 
nations, baptizing them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost." ^ That is, that that same Trinity which 
operated figuratively in Noah's days through the 
dove, now operates in the Church spiritually 
through the disciples. 

4. Let us now take the second character also 
of the dove sent forth from the ark, that is to say, 
in the time of the deluge, when all the abysses 
broke forth ; when the cataracts of heaven were 
opened upon the earth, on account of the wick- 
edness of men which they daily practised before 
the Lord ; as said Moses, " And the Lord God 
saw that the wickednesses of men were overflow- 
ing upon the earth, and that all of them were 
remembering for evil from the beginning of their 
days ; and He said, I will destroy man whom I 
have made from off the face of the earth, from 
man even unto cattle, and from the creeping 
thing even unto the fowls of the air." ^ There- 
fore in the time of the flood the dove is sent 
forth from the ark, when the waters were vio- 
lently rushing with all their force upon the earth. 

5. That ark bore the figure of the Church, as 
we have said above, which was stricken hither 
and thither to such a degree by the tumultuous 
waters. Therefore that deluge which happened 
under Noah showed forth the figure of the per- 
secution which now lately was poured forth over 
the whole world. Moreover, by the waters, the 
cataracts broken forth meeting together on all 
sides, and growing, were signified the i)eoples 
which grew up for the desolation of the Church ; 
as the Apocalypse teaches, saying, " The waters 
which thou sawest are peoples, and nations, and 
kingdoms." '° Moreover, the dove which coukl 
not find rest for its feet, bore the likeness of the 
lapsed, who fell forgetful of the divine announce- 
ments, either ignorant in simplicity, or feigning 
in audacity. Of whom the Lord had intimated 
the future destruction in the Gospel in these 

7 This passage is altogether corrupt and unintelligible; some force 
is necessary even to give it an appearance of meaning. 

* Matt, xxviii. 19. [For the next sentence see Acts ii. 3;?.] 
9 Gen. vi. 5-7. 
'° Rev. xvii. 15. 

A TREATISE AGAINST THE HERETIC NOVATIAN. 

659 

words, saying, " He who heareth my words and 
doeth them not, I will liken him to a foolish 
man, who built his house upon the sand : the 
tempests came and beat upon that house, and it 
fell; and great was its destruction." ' And lest 
we should seem to have made the comparison 
inconsiderately of that dove bearing the image 
of the lapsed, the prophet rebukes the city as a 
dove, that is, the character of jthe lapsed, saying, 
" The dove hearkens not to the voice ; that is, 
the illustrious and redeemed city receives not 
teaching, and trusted not in the Lord." ^ 

6. Moreover, that that dove could not find 
rest for her feet, as we have said above, this 
signified the footsteps of those who deny ; that 
is, those, wounded by the poison of the shining 
serpent, who sacrifice, turned towards their fall ; 
which could not any further step upon the asp 
and the basilisk, and tread upon the dragon and 
the lion. For this power the Lord gave to His 
disciples, as He says in the Gospel : " Lo, I 
give unto you power to tread on all the power 
of the enemy, and upon serpents and scorpions ; 
and they shall not harm you." ^ When, there- 
fore, these so many and such malignant spirits 
are attacking and bestirring themselves for the 
destruction of the lapsed, a way of salvation is 
provided for the wounded, that with whatever 
strength they have they may drag themselves 
with their whole body, and betake themsel/es to 
their camp, wherein being received, they may 
heal their wounds with spiritual medicaments. 
Thus the dove received, after the intervention 
of a few days, is again sent forth from the ark ; 
and returning, not only shows its firm footsteps, 
but moreover the signs of its peace and victory, 
in those olive leaves which it bore in its mouth. 
Therefore that twofold sending forth shows to 
us a twofold trial of persecution : the first, in 
which they who have lapsed have fallen con- 
quered ; the second, in which they who have 
fallen have come out conquerors. For to none 
of us is it doubtful or uncertain, beloved breth- 
ren, that they who in the first struggle — that is, 
in the Decian persecution — were wounded; 
afterwards, that is in the second encounter, per- 
severed so bravely, that, despising the edicts of 
the princes of the world,-' they maintained that 
unconquered ; in that they did not fear, after 
the example of the good Shepherd, to give up 
their fife, and to shed their blood, and not to 
shrink from any barbarity of the raging tyrant. 

7. Behold how glorious, how dear to the Lord, 
are the people whom these schismatics do not 
shrink from calling " wood, hay, stubble ; " s the 
equals of whom, that is, those who are even still 

■ Matt. vii. 26, 27. 

2 Zeph. iii. i, 2, 3, LXX. 

3 Luke X. 19. 

* Sct7. Gallus and Volusianus (Pamel.). 
S I Cor. iii. 12. 

placed in the same guilt of their lapse, they 
presume must not be admitted to repentance. 
T/ii's they judge from that utterance of the Lord, 
where He says, " Whosoever shall deny me 
before men, him will I deny before my Father 
which is in heaven." ^ Oh grief ! why do they 
strive against the Lord's precepts, that this off- 
spring of Novatian, following the example of 
his father the devil, should now endeavour to 
put in force those things which Christ will do in 
the time of His judgment ? that is, when Scrip- 
ture says, "Vengeance is mine ; and I will repay, 
saith the Lord." ^ 

8. We will answer them as to that utterance 
of the Lord, which they ill understand, and ill 
explain to themselves. For that He says, "Who- 
soever shall deny me before men, him will I also 
deny before my Father which is in heaven," its 
meaning is assuredly with respect to future time 
— to the time at which the Lord shall begin to 
judge the secrets of men — to the time at which 
we must all stand before the judgment-seat of 
Christ — to the time at which many shall begin to 
say, " Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in Thy 
name, and in Thy name cast out devils, and in 
Thy name done many wonderful works ? " ^ And 
yet they shall hear the voice of the Lord saying, 
" Depart from me, all ye that have worked 
iniquity : I know you not." ^ Then shall it be 
fulfilled that He says, " I also will deny them." 
But whom will the Lord Christ chiefly deny, if 
not all of you heretics, and schismatics, and 
strangers to His name? For ye who were some 
time Christians, but now are Novatians, no longer 
Christians, have changed your first faith by a 
subsequent perfidy in the calling of your name. 
I should wish you to reply to your own propo- 
sition. Read and teach : whom of those who 
had failed or denied Him, while He was still 
with them, did our Lord deny? Yet also to the 
others of the disciples who had remained with 
Him He saith, "Will ye also go away? " 9 Even 
Peter, whom He had previously foretold as about 
to deny Him, when he had denied Him, He 
did not deny, but sustained ; and He Himself 
soothed him when subsequently bitterly bewail- 
ing his denial. 

9. What sort of folly is thine, Novatian, only 
to read what tends to the destruction of salva- 
tion, and to pass by what tends to mercy, when 
Scripture cries, and says, " Repent, ye who err ; 
be converted in heart ; " '° and when the same 
prophet also exhorts, and says, " Be converted 
unto me with all your heart, in fasting, and 
weeping, and mourning ; and rend your hearts, 
and not your garments ; be ye converted to the 

6 Matt. X. -(3. 
^ Heb. x. 30. 
8 Matt vii 22, 23. 
") John vi. 67. 
'° E/ek. xviii. 30. 

66o 

A TREATISE AGAINST THE HERETIC NOVATIAN. 

Lord your God : for He is merciful, and one 
who pities with great compassion?" ' 

10. Thus we have heard that the Lord is of 
great compassion. Let us hear what the Holy 
Spirit testifies by David : " If his children for- 
sake my law, and walk not in my command- 
ments ; if they should profane my righteousness, 
and should not keej) my precepts ; I will visit 
their crimes with a rod, and their sms with 
stripes. But my mercy will I not utterly dis- 
perse from them." - Words like to these we 
read that the Lord said also by Ezekiel : " Son 
of man, the house of Israel has dwelt on its own 
land, and they have defiled it by their crimes : 
their uncleanness has become like that of a men- 
struous woman before my face, I have poured 
out my anger upon them, and I have scattered 
them among the nations ; and I have judged 
them according to their sins, because they have 
defiled my holy name ; and because it was said 
of them, This is the people of the Lord, I have 
spared them, because of my holy name, which 
the house of Israel despised among the na- 
tions." ^ And in conjunction with this he says, 
" Therefore say to the people of Israel, Thus 
saith the Lord, I si)are you not, O house of 
Israel ; but I will spare you on account of my 
holy name, which ye have defiled among the 
nations : and ye shall know that I am the Lord, 
when I shall be sanctified in you." .Also the 
Lord to the same : " Son of man, say unto the 
people of Israel, Wherefore have ye spoken, say- 
ing. We are pining away in our sins, and how 
shall we be able to be saved? Say unto them, 
I live, saith the Lord : for I do not desire the 
death of the sinner ; but I desire that the sinner 
should turn from his evil way, and live : there- 
fore return ye from your evil way : why do ye give 
yourselves over to death, O house of Israel ?"■♦ 
.So, too, by Isaiah the prophet : " I will not be 
angry with you for ever, nor will I abstain from 
defending you always." 5 And because Jeremiah 
the prophet, in the person of the sinful ])eople, 
prays to the Lord, saying, " Amend us, (3 Lord, 
but in judgment, and not in anger, lest Thou 
make us few ; " ^ Isaiah also added, and said, 
" For his sin I have slightly afflicted him ; and 
I have stricken him, and have turned away my 
face from him : and he was afflicted, and went 
away saiUy in his ways." ^ .And because he 
labours, he adtled and said, " I have seen his 
ways, and I have healed him ; and I have given 
him a true exhortation, peace upon peace ; " ** 
that to those who repent, and pray, and labour, 

' Joel ii. 12, 13. 

- Ps. Ixxxi.x. 30 et scq. 

3 Ezek. xxxvi. 17-23. 

* Kzek. xxxiii. 10, 11. 
■'• Isa. Ivii. :6. 

* Jer. X. 24. 

' Isa. Ivii. 17. 
^ Isa. Ivii. 19. 

restoration is possible, because they would mis- 
erably perish, and because they would dechne 
from Christ. 

11. Moreover, this is proved in the Gospel, 
where is described that woman who was a sin- 
ner, who came to the house of a certain Phari- 
see whither the Lord had been bidden with His 
disciples, and she brought a vessel of ointment, 
and stood at the Lord's feet, and washed His 
feet with her tears, and wiped them with her 
hair, and pressed kisses upon them ; so that 
that Pharisee was provoked, and said, " If this 
man were a prophet, he would know who and 
what sort of a woman this is who touches him ; 
for she is a sinner."*^ Whence immediately the 
Lord, the remitter of sins and the receiver of 
the penitent, says, " Simon, I have somewhat to 
say unto thee. And he answered, saying, Mas- 
ter, say on. And the Lord, There was a certain 
creditor which had two debtors ; one who had " 
five hundred pence, and the other fifty. When 
they had nothing to pay, he forgave both. .And 
He asked. Which of these loved most? And 
Simon ansv/ered. Assuredly he to whom he for- 
gave most. And He added, saying, Seest thou 
that woman? I entered into thy house, thou 
gavest me no kiss ; but she hath not ceased to 
kiss my feet ; thou washedst not my feet, but 
she has washed them with her tears, and wiped 
them with her hair ; thou didst not anoint my 
feet with oil, but she hath anointed them. 
Wherefore I say unto thee, Simon, that her 
sins are forgiven her." Behold, the Lord grants 
the debt with His liberal kindness to both debt- 
ors ; behold Him who pardons sins ; behold 
the woman who was a sinner, j^enitent, weeping, 
praying, and receiving remission of her sins ! 

12. And now blush if thou canst, Novatian ; 
cease to deceive the unwary with thy impious- 
arguments ; cease to frighten them with the 
subtlety of one particular. We read, and adore, 
and do not pass over the heavenly judgment of 
the Lord, where he says that He will deny him 
who denies Him. But does this mean the pen- 
itent? And wny should I be taking pains so 
long to prove individual cases of mercies? since 
the mercy of (iod is not indeed denied to the 
Ninevites, although strangers, and placed apart 
from the law of the Lord, when they beseech it 
on account of the overthrow announced to their 
city. Nor to Pharaoh himself, resisting with sac- 
rilegious boldness, when formerly he was stricken 
with plagues from heaven, and, turning to Moses 
and to his brother, said, " Pray to the Lord for 
me, for I have sinned." " .At once the anger of 
God was suspended from him. And yet thou. 
O Novatian, judgest and declares! that the lapsed 

9 I.uke vii. 39 et seq. 

'° " H.-ibebai," but probably " debebat" — owed. 
" Ex. ix. 28. 

A treatisp: against the heretic novatian. 

661 

have no hope of peace and mercy, nor inclinest 
thine ear to the rebuke of the apostle, when he 
says, " Who art thou, who judgest another man's 
servant ? To his own master he standeth or fall- 
eth. Yea, he shall stand. God is mighty to 
establish him." ' Whence pertinently and need- 
fully the Holy Spirit, in the person of those same 
lapsed people, rebukes you when He says, 
" Rejoice not over me, O mine enemy : because 
if I have fallen, I shall also rise again ; and if 
I shall walk in darkness, the Lord is my light. I 
will bear the indignation of the Lord, because 
I have sinned against Him, until He justify my 
cause, and execute judgment and justice, and bring 

me forth to the light. 

I shall behold His right- 

eousness ; and she that is mine enemy shall see 
me, and shall cover herself with confusion." ^ 

13. I beseech thee, hast thou not read, " Boast 
not, and speak not loftily, and let not arrogancy 
proceed out of your mouth : for the Lord lifteth 
the poor from the earth ; He raiseth up the 
beggar from the dunghill, and maketh him to sit 
with the mighty ones of the people?"^ Hast 
thou not read, that " the Lord resisteth the 
proud, and giveth grace to the humble ? " ■♦ Hast 
thou not read, " Whoso exalteth himself shall be 
humbled?" 5 Hast thou not read, that "God 
destroys the remembrance of the proud, and does 
not forsake the memory of the lowly?" Hast 
thou not read, that " with what judgment a man 
shall judge he must be judged?"*' Hast thou 
not read, that " he who hateth his brother is in 
darkness, and walketh in darkness, and knoweth 
not whither he goeth, because the darkness hath 
blinded his eyes?" 7 Whence, then, this Nova- 
tian has become both so wicked and so lost, so 
mad with rage of discord, I cannot discover, since 
he always in one household — that is, the Church 
of Christ — would have bewailed the sins of his 
neighbours as his own ; ** would have borne the 
burthens of his brethren, as the apostle exhorts ; 
would have strengthened the faltering in the 
faith with heavenly counsel. But now, from the 
time when he began to practise that heresy of 
Cain which only delights in slaying, he does not 
even of late spare himself. But if he had read, 
that " the righteousness of the righteous shall 
not deliver him in the day on which he shall have 
erred, and the wickedness of the wicked shall not 
harm him from the day in which he shall have been 
converted," ^ he would long ago have repented in 
ashes, who is always opposed to penitents ; who 
labours more readily in the destruction of those 

' Rom. xiv. 4. 

2 Mic. vii. 8-10. 

3 I Sam. ii. 3-S. 
* Jas. iv. 6. 

5 Matt, xxiii. 12. 

6 Matt. vii. 2. 

7 I John ii. II. 

^ This refers to Novatian's letter in the name of the Roman peo- 
ple. [See p. 308. Compare p. 320, note 6.] 
9 Ezek. xxxiii. 12. 

things which are built and standing, than in the 
building up of those which are prostrate ; who 
has once more made heathens of many most 
wretched brethren of ours, terrified by his false 
oppositions, by saying that the repentance of the 
lapsed is vain, and cannot avail them for sal- 
vation, although the Scripture cries aloud and 
says, " Remember whence thou hast fallen, and 
repent, or else I will come to thee except thou 
repent." '° And indeed, writing to the seven 
churches, rebuking each one of them with its 
own crimes and sins, it said. Repent. To whom 
but to them, doubtless, whom He had redeemed 
at the great price of His blood ? 

14. O impious and wicked as thou art, thou 
heretic Novatian ! who after so many and great 
crimes which in past times thou hadst known to 
be voluntarily committed in the Church, and be- 
fore thou thyself wast an apostate in the family 
of God, hadst certainly taught that these might be 
abolished from memory if well-doing followed ; 
according to the faith of the Scripture which 
says, " But if the wicked will turn from all his 
sins which he hath committed, and will do right- 
eousness, he shall live in eternal life, and shall 
not die in his wickedness." " For the sins which 
he has committed shall be abolished from mem- 
ory by the good deeds which succeed. Thou 
reconsiderest now, whether the wounds of the 
lapsed who have fallen, stripped bare by the devil, 
ought to be cured ; dashed doiun, as they are, 
by the " violence of the flood which the serpent 
sent forth from his mouth after the woman." '^ 
But " What shall I say? " says the apostle. " Do 
I praise you ? In this I praise you not ; that ye 
come together not for the better, but for the 
worse." '3 For where there are " rivalries and dis- 
sensions among you, are ye not carnal, and walk 
according to man?"''* Nor indeed ought we 
to wonder why this Novatian should dare now to 
practise such wicked, such severe things against 
the person of the lapsed, since we have previous 
examples of this kind of prevarication. Saul, that 
once good^'^ man, besides other things, is subse- 
quently overthrown by envy, and strives to do 
everything that is harsh and hostile against David. 
That Judas, who was chosen among the apostles, 
who was always of one mind and faithful in the 
house of God, himself subsequently betrayed 
God.'^ 

And indeed the Lord had foretold that many 
should come as ravening wolves in the skins of 
sheep. Who are those ravening wolves but such 
as conspire with treacherous intent to waste the 

'0 Rev. ii. 5. 

" Ezek. xviii. 21. 

'2 Rev. xii. 15. 

'^ 1 Cor. xi. 17. 

'* I Cor. iii. 3. 

'5 I Sam. ix. 2. 

'6 [ A misconception of Judas, who seems to have been hypocritical 

from the first. John vi. 64. 1 

662 

A treatisp: against the heretic novatian. 

flock of Christ? As we read it written in Zecha- 
riah : " Lo, I raise up a shepherd in the land, 
who shall not visit that which is turned away, 
and will eat the flesh of the chosen, and tear 
their claws in pieces." ' Similarly also in P2ze- 
kiel he rebukes shepherds of this kind, to wit, 
robbers and butchers (I will speak as he had 
thought =), saying, "O shepherds, wherefore do 
ye drink the milk, and eat up the curdled milk, 
and have brought that which is strong to noth- 
ing, and have not visited the weak, have not 
healed the halting, and have not recalled the 
wandering, and have permitted my people to 
wander among thorns and briers ? For these 
things, says the Lord, lo, I will come against the 
shepherds, and I will recjuire my sheep of their 
hands ; and I will drive them away, that they 
may not feed my sheep ; and my sheep shall no 
more be for them to devour, and I will seek them , 
out as a shepherd his flock in the day in which 
there shall be darkness and cloud. Thus I will 
seek out my sheep, and I will seek them out in , 
every place wherever they are scattered ; and I 
will seek out what had perished, and I will recall 1 
what had wandered, and what had halted I will j 
heal, and what is weak I will watch over ; and I 
will feed my sheep with judgment." ^ 

15. Who is it that says these thmgs? Cer- 
tainly He who, having left the ninety and nine 
sheep, went to seek that one which had wan- 
dered from His flock ; as David says, " I have 
gone astray like a sheep which was lost," •♦ which 
being found Christ brings back, bearing on His 
shoulder the tender sinful one ; and He, rejoi- 
cmg and exulting, having called His friends and 
domestics, says, " Rejoice with me ; for my sheep 
which was lost is found. I say," says He, " unto 
you, that there will be such joy in heaven over 
one sinner that repenteth." s And in continua- 
tion, He says : " Or what woman, having ten 
denarii, if she should lose one of the denarii, 
does not light a lamp, anci all the day long clean 
out her house, seeking till she finds it? And 
when she has found it, she calls together her 
friends and neighbours, saying, Rejoice with me ; 
for I have found the denarius that I had lost. 
I say unto you, that such joy shall be in the sight 
of the angels of God over one sinner that re- 
penteth." 5 But, on the other hand, they who do 
not repent of their wickedness, let them know 
from the answer of the Lord Himself what re- 
maineth for them ; for we read in the Gospel, 
that " certain men came from the Galileans 
to the Lord, telling Him of those whose blood 
Pilate mingled with their sacrifices ; to whom 

■ Zech. xi. 16. 

- This p.irenthesis is unintelligible, [i.e., not shepherds, but 
' butchers," in the prophet's thought, who speaks as follows, etc.] 
'- Ezek. xxxiv. 
* Ps. cxix. 176. 
i Luke XV. 6-10. 

the Lord answered, saying. Think ye that those 
(Galileans had been sinners above other Galileans, 
because they suffered such things ? No ; for I 
say unto you, unless ye repent, ye shall all like- 
wise perish. Or those eighteen upon whom the 
tower in Siloam fell, think ye that they were 
debtors to death above all men who dwell in 
Jerusalem ? No ; I say unto you," said He, " that 
unless ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish." '^ 

16. Let us then arouse ourselves as much as 
we can, beloved brethren ; and breaking away 
from the slumber of indolence and security, let 
us be watchful for the observance of the Lord's 
precepts. Let us with all our hearts seek for 
what we have lost, that we may be able to find ; 
because " to him that seeketh," says the Scrip- 
ture, " it shall be given, and to him that knock- 
eth it shall be opened." ^ Let us cleanse our 
house with spiritual cleanliness, that every secret 
and hidden place of our breast, truly enlightened 
by the light of the Gospel, may say, " Against 
Thee only have I sinned, and done this great 
evil in Thy sight." ^ Because the death of sin- 
ners is evil, and in hell there is no repentance. 
Let us have in contemplation especially the day 
of judgment and retribution, and what must be 
believed by all of us, and firmly maintained, that 
"there is no acceptance of persons with God ; "^ 
since He commanded in Deuteronomy, that the 
person must not be accepted in judgment : 
"Thou shalt not accept," says He, "'the person, 
neither shalt thou judge according to the least 
nor according to the greatest." '° Like words to 
the.se He also said by Ezekiel : " .*\11 souls," said 
He, " are mine ; as the soul of the father, so is 
the soul of the son : the soul that hath sinned, it 
shall die." " It is then He who must be revered 
by us ; He must be held fast ; He must be pro- 
pitiated by our fiill and worthy confession, " who 
has the power of sending soul and body to the 
Gehenna of fire," '^ — as it is written, "Behold, 
He Cometh with many thousands of His messen- 
gers, to execute judgment upon all, and to de- 
stroy all the wicked, and to condemn all flesh, 
for all the deeds of the wicked which they have 
wickedly done, and for all the impious words 
which sinners have spoken about God." '^ 

17. Like things to these also says Daniel : " I 
beheld a throne placed, and the Ancient of days 
sat upon it, and His clothing was as it were 
snow, and the hairs of His head as it were white 
wool : His throne was a flame of fire, its wheels 
were burning fire, A river of fire came forth 
before Him : thousand thousands ministered to 

* Luke xiii. 1-5. 

7 Luke xi. 10. 

8 Ps. li. 4. 

9 Rom. ii. II. 
'° Deut. i. 17. 

" Ezek. xviii. 4, 
1= Matt. X. 28. 
» Jude 14, 15. 

A TREATISE AGAINST THE HERETIC NOVATIAN. 

66 

Him, and thousand thousands stood before 
Him : He sat to judgment, and the books were 
opened." ' And John still more plainly declares, 
both about the day of judgment and the con- 
summation of the world, saying, " And when," 
said he, " He had opened the sixth seal, lo, 
there was a great earthquake ; and the sun be- 
came black as sackcloth of hair, and the whole 
moon became as of blood ; and the stars fell to 
the earth, even as a fig-tree, shaken by a mighty 
wind, casteth her unripe figs. And the heaven 
departed as a book when it is rolled up, and 
every mountain and island were moved from 
their places. And the kings of the earth, and 
all the great men, and the tribunes, and the rich 
men, and the strong men, and every slave, and 
every free man, hid themselves in the caves and 
in the caverns of the mountains ; saying to the 
mountains and to the rocks. Fall upon us, and 
hide us from the sight of the Father that sitteth 
upon the throne, and from the wrath of the 
Lamb : because the day of destruction cometh ; 
and who shall be able to stand?"- Also in the 
same Apocalypse John says that this too was 
revealed to him. " I saw," says he, " a great 
throne, and one in white who sat upon it, from 
whose face the heaven and the earth fled away ; 
and their place was not found. And I saw the 
dead, great and small, standing before the sight 
of the Lord's throne : and the books were 
opened ; and another book was opened, which 
is (the book) of life : and every one was judged 
according to those things that were written in the 
book, according to their own works." ^ More- 
over, too, the apostle, giving good advice, thus 
exhorts us, saying, " Let no one deceive you with 
vain words : for because of these things the 
wrath of God cometh upon the children of dis- 
obedience. Be not partakers with them." •* 

1 Dan. vii. 9, 10. 
^ Rev. vi. 12-17. 
3 Rev. XX. 11-13. 
* Eph. V. 6, 7. 

18. Let us, then, with the whole strength of 
our faith, give praise to God ; let us give our full 
confession, since the powers of heaven rejoice 
over our repentance, all the angels rejoice, and 
Christ also rejoices, who once again with full 
and merciful moderation exhorts us, laden with 
sins, overwhelmed with crimes, to cease from 
wickedness, saying, " Turn ye, and return from 
your impieties, and your iniquities shall not be 
to you for a punishment. Cast away from you 
all your impieties which ye have committed 
against me ; and make to yourselves a new heart 
and a new spirit. And why do ye deliver your- 
selves over to death, O house of Israel? For I 
do not desire the death of the sinner." 5 "I am 
He, I am He who blot out thy crimes, and I will 
not remember them. But do thou have in mind, 
and let us judge ; tell thou thy wickednesses first, 
that thou mayest be justified."*' While the way 
of mercy, brethren, is open,'' let us entreat God 
with full atonements ; let us humble ourselves, 
that we may be exalted ; let us acquiesce in the 
divine exhortation, whereby we may escape the 
day of the Lord and His anger. For thus He 
says : " Look, my son, upon the nations of men, 
and know who hath hoped in the Lord, and has 
been confounded ; or has remained in His com- 
mandments, and has been forsaken ; or has 
called upon Him, and He has despised him. 
For the Lord is loving and merciful, and forgiv- 
ing in time of tribulation their sins to all those 
that seek after Him in truth." ^ Therefore He 
says, " First tell thou thy sins, that thou mayest 
be justified." Let there be first in your hand 
that prayer full of confession.^ 

5 Ezek. xviii. 30-32. 
*> Isa. xliii. 25, 26. 

7 [A virtual refutation of the dogma of purgatory, and all the trad- 
ing in Masses which it involves. The pious Hirscher, in his Kirch- 
lichen Znstande der Gegenivart (TUbingen, 1849; a translation of 
which, by the American editor of this series, was published, Oxford, 
1852), bewails the corrupting influences of this system, though he died 
in the Papal communion.] 

8 Ecclus. ii. 10, II. 

9 [The Lord's prayer; p. 454, note i, supra.'\ 

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE' 

TO 

ANONYMOUS TREATISE ON RE-BAPTISM. 

The following treatise on Re-baptism has been attributed by some authorities to the pen of 
one Ursinus,' a monk, who is said to have written in the fourth century. But internal evidence 
seems to point to a bishop as having been the writer ; ^ and it seems very probable that it was 
written while the baptismal controversy was still agitating the Church, from the manner in which 
he refers to it. Moreover, the bitter attack contained in the first chapter was probably levelled 
against Cyprian, as the leader of the party in favour of the re-baptism of heretics. And this 
would hardly have been the case, at least the attack would not have been characterized by the 
same rancour, if Cyprian had already suffered martyrdom, and the controversy had lost its acri- 
mony and intensity. 

Rigaltius, who first edited the treatise, among his notes to the works of Cyprian, judged that 
it was written about the time of that Father. And Fell, Cave, Tillemont, and Galland, are of the 
same opinion. The two latter, indeed, conjecture that it was actually intended against Cyprian. 

The difiiculty arising to the translator from a loose and rambling style, and very involved argu- 
ment, has been enhanced by a text singularly uncertain ; but he ventures to think that there are 
points in the treatment of the subject which will not be without interest to the theological student 
of the present day, although its immediate purpose has passed away. 

• [By Dr. Wallis, as before, p. 655.] 2 Gennadius, de Script. Eccles., cap. xxvii. 3 Sec. x. 

665 

A TREATISE ON RE-BAPTISM BY AN 
ANONYMOUS WRITER. 

ARGUMENT. — THAT THEY WHO HAVE ONCE 
BEEN WASHED IN THE NAME OF THE LORD 
JESUS CHRIST, OUGHT NOT TO BE RE-BAP- 
TIZED. 

I. I OBSERVE that it has been asked among 
the brethren what course ought specially to be 
adopted towards the persons of those who, 
although baptized in heresy, have yet been bap- 
tized in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,' 
and subsequently departing from their heresy, 
and fleeing as supplicants to the Church of God, 
should repent with their whole hearts, and only 
now perceiving the condemnation of their error, 
implore from the Church the help of salvation. 
The point is whether, according to the most 
ancient custom and ecclesiastical tradition, it 
would suffice, after that baptism which they 
have received outside the Church indeed, but 
still in the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, that 
only hands should be laid upon them by the 
bishop for their reception of the Holy Spirit, 
and this imposition of hands would afford them 
the renewed and perfected seal of faith ; or 
whether, indeed, a repetition of baptism would 
be necessary for them, as if they should receive 
nothing if they had not obtained baptism afresh, 
just as if they were never baptized in the name 
of Jesus Christ. And therefore some things 
were talked about as having been written and 
replied on this new question, wherein both sides 
endeavoured with the greatest eagerness to de- 
molish what had been written by their antago- 
nists. In which kind of debate, as it appears 
to me, no controversy or discussion could have 
arisen at all if each one of us had been content 
with the venerable authority of all the churches,^ 
and with becoming humility had desired to in- 
novate nothing, as observing no kind of room 
for contradiction. For everything which is both 
doubtful and ambiguous, and is established in 
opinions differing atnong those of prudent and 

' [" In the name," etc., implies as Jesus Christ commanded, St. 
Matt, xxviii. 19.] 

- [This was assumed by the Westerns to be the general rule, 
whereas it was only local. See p. 408, note 7, suj>ra.\ 

faithful men, if it is judged to be against the 
ancient and memorable and most solemn observ- 
ance of all those holy and faithful men who 
have deserved well, ought assuredly to be con- 
demned ; since in a matter once arranged and 
ordained, whatever that is which is brought for- 
ward against the quiet and peace of the Church, 
will result in nothing but discords, and strifes, 
and schisms. And in this no other fruit can be 
found but this alone ; that one man, whoever he 
is, should be vaingloriously declared among cer- 
tain fickle men to be of great prudence and 
constancy : and, being gifted with the arrogance 
of heretics, whose only consolation in destruc- 
tion is the not appearing to sin alone, should be 
renowned among those that are most similar and 
agreeable to himself, as having corrected the 
errors and vices of all the churches. For this 
is the desire and purpose of all heretics, to 
frame as many calumnies of this kind as possible 
against our most holy mother the Church, and 
to deem it a great glory to have discovered any- 
thing that can be imputed to her as a crime, or 
even as a folly. And since it becomes no faith- 
ful man of sound mind to dare to hold such a 
view, especially no one who is ordained in any 
clerical office at all, and much more in the epis- 
copal order, it is like a prodigy for bishops them- 
selves to devise such scandals, and not to fear to 
unfold too irreverently against the precept of 
the law and of all the Scriptures, with their 
own disgrace and risk, the disgrace of their 
mother the Church — if they think that there is 
any disgrace in this matter ; although the Church 
has no disgrace in this instance, save in the 
error of such men as these themselves. There- 
fore it is the more grievous sin in men of this 
kind, if that which is blamed by them in the 
most ancient observance, as if it were not rightly 
done, is manifestly and forcibly shown as well to 
have been rightly observed by those who were 
before us, as to be rightly observed also by us , 
so that even if we should engage in the contro- 
versy with equal arguments on both sides, yet, 
since that which was innovated could not be 

56* 

668 

A TREATISE ON RE-BAPTISM. 

established without dissension among the breth- 
ren and mischief to the Church, assuredly it 
ought not, — right or wrong, as they say, that is, 
contrary to what is good and proper — rashly 
to be flung like a stain upon our mother the 
Church ; and the ignominy of this audacity and 
impiety ought with reason to be attached to 
those who should attempt this. But since it is 
not in our power, according to the apostle's pre- 
cept, " to speak the same thing, that there be 
not schisms among us ; " ' yet, as far as we can, 
we strive to demonstrate the true condition of 
this argument, and to persuade turbulent men, 
even now, to mind their own business, as we 
shall even attain a great deal if they will at 
length acquiesce in this sound advice.^ And 
therefore we shall, as is needful, collect into one 
, mass whatever passages of the Holy Scriptures 
are pertinent to this subject. And we shall 
manifestly harmonize, as far as possible, those 
which seem to be differing or of various mean- 
ing ; and we shall to the extent of our poor ability 
examine both the utility and advantage of each 
method, that we may recommend to all the 
brethren, that the most wholesome form and 
peaceful custom be adopted in the Church. 

2. To such, then, as approach to a discussion 
of saving and modern, that is, of spiritual and 
evangelical baptism, there occurs first of all the 
announcement universally well known, made and 
begun by John the Kaj^tist, who, somewhat de- 
parting from the law, that is, from the most an- 
cient baptism of Moses, and preparing the way 
of the new and true grace, both preoccupied the 
ears of the Jews gradually by the baptism of 
water and of repentance which for the time he 
jjractised, and took possession of them with the 
announcement of a spiritual baptism that was 
to come, exhorting them, and saying, " He that 
cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoe's 
latchet I am not worthy to unloose : He shall 
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with 
fire ; " ' and for this reason we also ought to 
make a beginning of this discourse from this 
point. For in the Acts of the Apostles, the 
Lord after His resurrection, confirming this same 
word of John, " commanded them that they 
should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for 
that promise of the Father which, saith He, ye 
have heard from me ; for John truly baptized 
with water, but ye shall be baptized with the 
Holy Ghost not many days hence." ^ And Peter 
also related these same words of the Lord, when 
he gave an account of himself to the apostles, 
saying : " And as I began to speak, the Holy 

■ I Cor. i. to. 

2 [The bitterness with which Vincent follows up the assumption 
that there was a general custom of all the churches, shows how 
sadly this controversy became envenomed in the West. Cap. vi. is a 
blemish on his Cotntnonitory.\ 

i Matt. iii. ii. 

■♦ Acts i. 4, 5. 

Ghost fell upon them as on us at the beginning ; 
and I remembered the word of the Lord, how 
that He said, John indeed baptized with water, 
but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. 
If, therefore. He gave them a like gift as to us, 
who believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, who was 
I, that I could withstand the Lord?"5 And 
again : " Men and brethren, ye know how from 
ancient days God made choice among us, that 
the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word 
of the Gospel, and believe. And God, who 
knoweth the hearts, bare them witness, giving 
them the Holy Spirit, even as He did unto us.'"' 
And on this account we ought to consider what 
is the force and power of this saying. For the 
Lord says to them who would have to be subse- 
quently baptized because they should believe, 
that they must be baptized not in like manner 
as by Him in water, unto repentance, but in the 
Holy Ghost. And of this announcement, as 
assuredly none of us can doubt it, it is plain on 
what principle men were baptized in the Holy 
Spirit. For it was peculiarly in the Holy Spirit 
Himself alone that they who believed were bap- 
tized. For John distinguished, and said that he 
indeed baptized in water, but that one should 
come who would baptize in the Holy Ghost, by 
the grace and power of God ; and they are so 
by the Spirit's bestowal and operation of hidden 
results. Moreover, they are so no less in the 
baptism of the Spirit and of water. They are 
so, besides, also in the baptism of every one in 
his own proper blood. ^ Even as the Holy Scrip- 
tures declare to us, from which we shall adduce 
evident proofs throughout each individual in- 
stance of those things which we shall narrate. 

3. x\nd to these things thou perchance, who 
art bringing in some novelty, mayest immediately 
and impatiently reply, as thou art wont, that the 
Lord said in the Gospel : " Except a man be 
born again of water and of the Spirit, he cannot 
enter into the kingdom of heaven." ^ Whence 
it manifestly appears that that baptism alone is 
profitable wherein also the Holy Spirit can dwell ; 
for that upon the Lord Himself, when He was 
baptized, the Holy Spirit descended, and that 
His deed and word are quite in harmony, and 
that such a mystery can consist with no other 
principle. To which reply none of us is found 
either so senseless or so stubborn as to dare, con- 
trary to right or contrary to truth, to object, for 
instance, so to the doing of things in their integ- 
rity, and by all means in the Church, and the 
observation of them according to the order of 
discipline perpetually by us. But if, in the same 
New Testament, those things which in that mat- 

5 Acts xi. 15-17. 

* Acts XV. 7,8. 

7 There is something needed to make the connection of this pas- 
sage complete. 

* John iii. 3, 5. 

A TREATISE ON RE-BAPTISM. 

669 

ter we come upon as associated, be sometimes 
found in some sort divided, and separated, and 
arranged, and ordered just as if they were by 
themselves ; let us see whether these solitary 
instances by themselves may not sometimes be 
such as are not imperfect, but, as it were, entire 
and complete. For when by imposition of the 
bishop's hands the Holy Spirit is given to every 
one that believes, as in the case of the Samaritans, 
after Philip's baptism, the apostles did to them 
l)y laying on of hands ; in this manner also they 
conferred on them the Holy Spirit. And that 
this might be the case, they themselves prayed 
for them, for as yet the Holy Spirit had not 
descended upon any of them, but they had only 
been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. 
Moreover, our Lord after His resurrection, when 
He had breathed upon His apostles, and had 
said to them, " Receive ye the Holy Ghost," ' 
thus and thus only bestowed upon them the Spirit. 
4. And this being found to be so, what think- 
est thou, my brother? If a man be not baptized 
by a bishop, so as even at once to have the 
imposition of hands, and should yet die before 
having received the Holy Spirit, should you 
judge him to have received salvation or not? 
Because, indeed, both the apostles themselves 
and the disciples, who also baptized others, and 
were themselves baptized by the Lord, did not 
at once receive the Holy Spirit, for He had not 
as yet been given, because that Jesus had not as 
yet been glorified. And after His resurrection 
no small interval of time elapsed before that took 
place, — even as also the Samaritans, when they 
were baptized by Philip, did not receive the gift 
until the apostles invited from Jerusalem to 
Samaria went down to them to lay hands upon 
them, and conferred on them the Holy Spirit 
l)y the imposition of hands. Because in that 
interval of time any one of them who had not 
attained the Holy Spirit, might have been cut 
off by death, and die defrauded of the grace of 
the Holy Spirit. And it cannot be doubted also, 
that in the present day this sort of thing is usual, 
and happens frequently, that many after baptism 
depart from this life without imposition of the 
bishop's hands, and yet are esteemed perfected 
believers. Just as the Ethiopian eunuch, when 
he was returning from Jerusalem and reading the 
prophet Isaiah, and was in doubt, having at the 
Spirit's suggestion heard the truth from Philip 
the deacon, believed and was baptized ; and 
when he had gone up out of the water, the 
Spirit of the Lord took away Philip, and the 
eunuch saw him no more. For he went on his 
way rejoicing, although, as thou observest, hands 
were not laid on him by the bishop, that he 
might receive the Holy Spirit. But if thou ad- 

' John XX. 22. 

mittest this, and believest it to be saving, and 
dost not gainsay the opinion of all the faithful, 
thou must needs confess this, that even as this 
principle proceeds to be more largely discussed, 
that other also can be more broadly established ; 
that is, that by the imposition of hands alone of 
the bishop — because baptism in the name of our 
Lord Jesus Christ has gone before it — may the 
Holy Spirit also be given to another man who 
repents and believes. Because the Holy Scrip- 
ture has alarmed that they who should believe 
in Christ, must needs be baptized in the Spirit ; 
so that these also may not seem to have anything 
less than those who are perfectly Christians ; lest 
it should be needful to ask what sort of a thing 
was that ba])tism which they have attained in 
the name of Jesus Christ. Unless, perchance, 
in that former discussion also, about those who 
should only have been baptized in the name of 
Jesus Christ, thou shouldst decide that they can 
be saved even without the Holy Spirit, or that 
the Holy Spirit is not accustomed to be bestowed 
in this manner only, but by the imposition of the 
bishop's hands ; or even shouldst say that it is 
not the bishop alone who can bestow the Holy 
Spirit. 

5. And if this be so, and the occurrence of 
any of these things cannot deprive a man who 
believes, of salvation, thou thyself also affirmest 
that the fact of the mystery of the faith being 
divided in a manner, and its not being, as thou 
contendest, consummated, where necessity inter- 
venes, cannot take away salvation from a believ- 
ing and penitent man. Or if thou sayest that a 
man of this kind cannot be saved, we deprive 
all bishops of salvation, whom thou thus engagest, 
under risks as assured as possible, to be bound 
themselves to afford help to all those who live 
under their care, and are in weak health, in their 
districts, scattered up ^nd down, because other 
men of less degree among the clerics who ven- 
ture cannot confer the same benefit ; so that the 
blood of those who shall appear to have departed 
from this life without the benefit would have, of 
necessity, to be required at the hands of the 
bishops. And further, as you are not ignorant, 
the Holy Spirit is found to have been given to 
men who believe, by the Lord without baptism 
of water, as is contained in the Acts of the 
Apostles after this manner : " While Peter was 
still speaking these words, the Holy Ghost fell 
upon all them who heard the word. And they 
who were of the circumcision which believed 
were astonished, as many as came with Peter, 
because that on the Gentiles also was poured 
out the gift of the Holy Spirit. For they heard 
them speak with their tongues, and they magni- 
fied God. Then answered Peter, Can any man 
forbid water, that these should not be baptized, 
who have received the Holy Ghost as well as we ? 

670 

A TREATISE ON RE-BAPTISM. 

And he commanded them to be baptized in the 
name of Jesus Christ." ' Even as Peter also 
subsequently most abundantly taught us about 
the same Gentiles, saying : " And He put no 
difference between us and them, their hearts be- 
ing purified by faith." ^ And there will be no 
doubt that men may be baptized with the Holy 
Ghost without water, — as thou observest that 
these were baptized before they were baptized 
with water ; that the announcements of both 
John and of our Lord Himself were satisfied, 
— forasmuch as they received the grace of the 
promise both without the imposition of the apos- 
tle's hands and without the laver, which they 
attained afterwards. And their hearts being puri- 
fied, God bestowed upon them at the same time, 
in virtue of their faith, remission of sins ; so that 
the subsequent baptism conferred upon them this 
benefit alone, that they received also the invoca- 
tion of the name of Jesus Christ, that nothing 
might appear to be wanting to the integrity of 
their service and faith. ^ 

6. And this also, — looking at it from the op- 
posite side of this discussion, — those disciples 
of our Lord themselves attained, upon whom, 
being previously baptized, the Holy Spirit at 
length came down on the day of Pentecost, de- 
scending from heaven indeed by the will of God, 
not of His own accord, but effused for this very 
office, and moreover upon each one of them. 
Although these were already righteous, and, as 
we have said, had been baptized by the Lord's 
baptism even as the apostles themselves, who 
nevertheless are found on the night on which 
He was apprehended to have all deserted Him. 
And even Peter himself, who boasted that he 
would persevere in his faith, and most obstinately 
resisted the prediction of the Lord Himself, yet 
at last denied Him, that by this means it might 
be shown to us, that whatever sins they had con- 
tracted in the meantime and in any manner, 
these same sins, by the faith in them subse- 
quently attested as sincere, were witliout doubt 
put away by the baptism of the Holy Spirit. 
Nor, as I think, was it for any other reason that 
the apostles had charged those whom they ad- 
dressed in the Holy Spirit, that they should be 
baptized in the name of Christ Jesus, except 
that the power of the name of Jesus invoked 
upon any man by liaptism might afford to him 
who should be baptized no slight advantage for 
the attainment of salvation, as Peter relates in 
the Acts of the Apostles, saying : " For there is 
none other name under heaven given among 
men whereby we must be saved." ■♦ As also the 

' Acts X. 44-48. 

2 Acts XV. 9. 

3 [It was a. not.ible compliance with the example of Christ, Matt, 
iii. 15. " They had received," etc., yet that was no reason why the 
ordinance of Christ should be slighted.] 

■♦ Acts iv. 12. 

Apostle Paul unfolds, showing that God hath ex- 
alted our Lord Jesus, and " given Him a name, 
that it may be above every name, that in the 
name of Jesus all should bow the knee, of things 
heavenly and earthly, and under the earth, and 
every tongue should confess that Jesus is Lord 
in the glory of God the Father." And he on 
1 whom, when he should be baptized, invocation 
[ should be made in the name of Jesus, although 
j he might obtain baptism under some error, still 
I would not be hindered from knowing the truth 
at some time or another, and correcting his error, 
and coming to the Church and to the bishop, 
and sincerely confessing our Jesus before men ; 
so that then, when hands were laid upon him by 
the bishop, he might also receive the Holy Spirit, 
and he would not lose that former invocation of 
the name of Jesus. Which none of us may dis- 
allow, although this invocation, if it be standing 
bare and by itself, could not suffice for affording 
salvation, lest on this principle we should believe 
that even Gentiles and heretics, who abuse the 
name of Jesus, could attain unto salvation with- 
out the true and entire thing. Yet it is ex- 
tremely useful to believe that this invocation of 
the name of Jesus, together with the correction of 
error and the acknowledgment of the belief of the 
truth, and with the putting away of all stain of 
past conversation, if rightly performed with the 
mystery of God among men of this kind, obtains 
a place which it would not have had, and finally, 
in the true faith and for the maintenance of the 
integrity of the sign, is no hindrance, when its 
supplement which had been wanting is added ; 
and that it is consistent with good reason, with 
the authority of so many years, and so many 
churches and apostles and bishops ; even as it 
is the very greatest disadvantage and damage to 
our most holy mother Church, now for the first 
time suddenly and without reason to rebel against 
former decisions after so long a series of so many 
ages. For not for any other reason Peter — who 
had already been baptized and had been asked 
what he thought of the Lord by the Lord Him- 
self, and the truth of the revelation of the Father 
in heaven being bestowed on him had confessed 
that Christ was not only our Lord, but was the 
Son of the living God — was shown subsequently 
to have withstood the same Christ when He made 
announcement of His passion, and therefore was 
set forth as being called Satan. J^or no other 
reason except because it would come to pass that 
some, although varying in their own judgment, 
and somewhat halting in faith and doctrine, 
although they were baptized in the name of 
Jesus, yet, if they had been able to rescind their 
error in some inter\'al of time, were not on that 
account cut off from salvation ; but at any time 
that they had come to the right mind, obtained 
by repentance a sound hope of saK'ation, espe- 

A TREATISE ON RE-BAPTISM. 

671 

cially when they received the Holy Spirit, to be 
baptized by Whom is the duty of every man, they 
would have intended some such thing. Even as 
we do not apprehend that Peter in the Gospel 
suffered this alone, but all the disciples, to whom, 
though already baptized, the Lord afterwards 
■says, that " all ye shall be offended in me," ' all 
of whom, as we observe, having amended their 
faith, were baptized after the Lord's resurrection 
with the Holy Spirit. So that not without reason 
■we also in the present day may believe that men, 
amended from their former error, may be bap- 
tized in the Holy Spirit, who, although they were 
baptized with water in the name of the Lord, 
might have had a faith somewhat imperfect. Be- 
cause it is of great importance whether a man is 
not baptized at all in the name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, or indeed whether in some respect he 
halts when he is baptized with the baptism of 
water, which is of less account provided that 
afterwards a sincere faith in the truth is evident 
in the baptism of the Spirit, which undoubtedly 
as of greater account. 

7. Neither must you esteem what our Lord 
said as being contrary to this treatment : " Go 
ye, teach the nations ; baptize them in the name 
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost." 2 Because, although this is true and 
right, and to be observed by all means in the 
Church, and moreover has been used to be ob- 
served, yet it behoves us to consider that invo- 
cation of the name of Jesus ought not to be 
thought futile by us on account of the veneration 
and power of that very name, in which name all 
kinds of power are accustomed to be exercised, 
and occasionally some even by men outside the 
Church. But to what effect are those words of 
Christ, who said that He would deny, and not 
know, those who should say to Him in the day 
of judgment, " Lord, Lord, have we not prophe- 
sied in Thy name, and in Thy name cast out 
demons, and in Thy name done many wonder- 
ful works," when He answered them, even with 
emphasis,^ " I never knew you ; depart from me, 
ye who work iniquity," •* unless that it should be 
shown to us, that even by those who work iniq- 
tiity might these good works also be done, by 
the superfluous s energy of the name of Christ ? 
Therefore ought this invocation of the name 
of Jesus to be received as a certain beginning of 
the mystery of the Lord common to us and to 
all others, which may afterwards be filled up 
with the remaining things. Otherwise such an 
invocation would not avail if it should remain 
alone, because after the death of a man in this 
position there cannot be added to him anything 

' Mark xiv. 27. 

- Matt, xxviii ig. 

3 " Jurejurando." 

* Mark xiv. 27. 

^ [Query, superabounding?] 

at all, nor supplemented, nor can, in anything, 
avail him in the day of judgment, when they shall 
begin to be reproached by our Lord with those 
things which we have above mentioned, none of 
whom notwithstanding in this present time may 
by any man be so hardly and cruelly prohibited 
from aiding themselves in those ways which we 
have above shown. 

8. But these things thou wilt, as thou art wont, 
contradict, by objecting to us, that when they 
were baptized, the disciples were baptized per- 
fectly, and rightly, and not as these heretics ; 
and this thou must needs assume from their 
condition, and His who baptized them. And 
therefore we reply to this proposition of thine, 
not as accusers of the Lord's disciples, but as we 
are constrained, because it is necessary that we 
should investigate by reasons where and when, 
and in what measure, salvation has been be- 
stowed on each of us. For that our Lord was 
born, and that He was the Christ, appeared by 
many reasons to be believed, not unjustly, by 
His disciples, because He had been bom of the 
tribe of Judah, of the family of David, and in 
the city of Bethlehem ; and because He had 
been announced to the shepherds by the angels 
at the same moment that there was born to them 
a Saviour ; because His star being seen in the 
east. He had been most anxiously sought for 
and adored by the Magi, and honoured with 
illustrious presents, and distinguished offerings ; 
because while still a youth, sitting in the temple 
with the doctors of the law. He wisely, and with 
the admiration of all, had disputed ; because 
when He was baptized He had been glorified, as 
had happened to none others, by the descent of 
the Holy Spirit from the opened heavens, and 
by its abode upon Him ; and moreover by the 
testimony of His Father, and also of John the 
Baptist ; because, beyond the inferior capacity 
of man, He understood the hearts and thoughts 
of all men ; because He cured and healed weak- 
nesses, and vices, and diseases, with very great 
power; because He bestowed remissions of sins, 
with manifest attestation ; because He expelled 
demons at His bidding ; because He purified 
lepers with a word ; because, by converting 
water into wine. He enlarged the nuptial festiv- 
ity with marvellous joyfulness ; because He re- 
stored or granted sight to the blind ; because 
He maintained the doctrine of the Father with 
all confidence ; because in a desert place He 
satisfied five thousand men with five loaves ; 
because the remains and the fragments filled 
more than twehe baskets ; because He every- 
where raised up the dead, according to His 
mercy ;. because He commanded the winds and 
the sea to be still ; because He walked with His 
feet upon the sea ; because He absolutely per- 
formed all miracles. 

672 

A TREATISE ON RE-BAPTISM. 

9. By which things, and by many deeds of 
this kind tending to His glory, it appeared to 
follow as a consequence, that in whatever man- 
ner the Jews think about Christ, and although 
they do not believe concerning Jesus Christ our 
Lord, that even they themselves thought that 
such and so great a one would without any death 
endure to eternity, and would possess the king- 
dom of Israel, and of the whole world for ever; 
and that it should not be destroyed. Whence, 
moreover, the Jews dared to seize Him by force, 
and anoint Him for the kingdom, which indeed 
He was compelled to evade ; and therefore His 
disciples thought that in no other way would 
He bestow upon them eternal life, except He 
Himself had first continued this temporal life 
into that eternal one in His own experience. 
In fine, when they were passing through Galilee, 
Jesus said to them, " The Son of man is to be 
delivered into the hands of men, and they will 
kill Him ; and after three days He shall rise 
again." ' and they were greatly grieved, because, 
as we have said, they had formed a very different 
notion previously in their minds and hearts. 
And again, this also w.qs the speech of the Jews, 
in contradiction against Him, when He taught 
them of Himself, and announced fiiture things 
to them, and they said, " We have heard out of 
the law that Christ abideth for ever : and how 
sayest thou that the Son of man must be lifted 
up? "2 And so there was this same presump- 
tion concerning Christ in the mind of the dis- 
ciples, even as Peter himself, the leader and 
chief of the apostles, broke forth into that ex- 
pression of his own incredulity. For when he, 
together with the others, had been asked by the 
Lord what he thought about Him, that is, whom 
he thought Him to be, and had first of all con- 
fessed the truth, saying that He was the Christ 
the Son of the living God, and thereiore was 
judged blessed by Him because he had arrived 
at this truth, not after the flesh, but by the reve- 
lation of the heavenly Father ; yet this same 
Peter, when Jesus began to show His disciples 
that He must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many 
things from the elders, and priests, and scribes, 
and be killed, and after the third day rise again 
from the dead ; nevertheless that true confessor 
of Christ, after a few days, taking Him aside, 
began to rebuke Him, saying, " Be propitious to 
Thyself : this shall not be ; " ^ so that on that 
account he deserved to hear from the Lord, 
" Get thee behind me, Satan ; ■♦ thou art an 
offence unto me, because he savoured not the 

' Mark ix. 30. 

- John xii 34 

3 Matt. xvi. 22. 

* [Isa. xiv. 12. The sin of I.ucifer had, very possibly, been this 
of rebeUing against the Incarnation and the introduction thereby of 
an order of beings higher than himself Hence our Lord recognised 
in Peter's words the voice of the old adversary, and" called him 
" Satan." A prerrujnition of his lapse.] 

things which are of God, but those things which 
are of men." Which rebuke against Peter be- 
came more and more apparent when the Lord 
was apprehended, and, frightened by the damsel, 
he said, " I know not what thou sayest, neither 
know I thee ; " 5 and again when, using an oath, 
he said this same thing ; and for the third time, 
cursing and swearing, he affirmed that he knew 
not the man, and not once, but frequently, de- 
nied Him.^ And this disposition, because it was 
to continue to him even to the Lord's passion, 
was long before made manifest by the Lord, that 
we also might not be ignorant of it. Again, after 
the Lord's resurrection, one of His disciples,. 
Cleopas, when he was, according to the error of 
all his fellow-disciples, sorrowfully telling what 
had happened to the Lord Himself, as if to some 
unknown person, spoke thus, saying of Jesus the 
Nazarene, " who was a prophet mighty in deed 
and in word before God and all the people ; 
how the chief priests and our rulers delivered 
Him to be condemned to death, and fastened 
Him to the cross. But we trusted that it had been 
He which should have redeemed Israel." ^ And 
in addition to these things, all the disciples also 
judged the declaration of the women who had 
seen the Lord after the resurrection to be idle 
tales ; and some of themselves, when they had 
seen Him, believed not, but doubted ; and they 
who were not then present believed not at all 
until they had been subsequently by the Lord 
Himself in all ways rebuked and reproached ; 
because His death had so oftended them that 
they thought that He had not risen again, who 
they had believed ought not to have died, be- 
cause contrary to their belief He had died once. 
And thus, as far as concerns the disciples them- 
selves, they are found to have had a faith neither 
sound nor perfect in such matters as we have 
referred to ; and what is much more serious, 
they moreover baptized others, as it is written \\\ 
the Gospel according to John. 

lo. Besides, what wilt thou say of those who 
are in many cases baptized by bishops of very 
bad character, who yet at length, when God so 
wills it, convicted of their crimes, are even de- 
prived of their office itself, or absolutely of com- 
munion? Or what wilt thou decide of those 
who may have been baptized by bishops, whose 
opinions are unsound, or who are very ignorant 
— when they may not have spoken clearly and 
honestly, or even have spoken otherwise than is 
fit in the tradition of the sacrament, or at least 
may have asked anything, or asking, have heard 
from those who answered what ought by no means 

5 RTatt. xxvi. 70. 

* [It has been profoundly felt, that, as the Church of Rome in her 
early rectitude (Rom. i. 8) reflected Peter's coifrssion, so in her 
lapse (Rom. xi. 20, 21) she reflects this terrible rebuke. If she wai 
once identified with Peter's Rock, so now, alas! with Peter's Satan.\ 

7 Luke xxiv. 20, 21. 

A TREATISE ON RE-BAPTISM. 

67 

to be so asked or answered ? And still this does 
not greatly injure that true faith of ours, although, 
moreover, these more simple men may deliver 
the mystery of the faith without the elegance 
and order that thou wouldst use. And thou wilt 
assuredly say, with that marvellous carefulness of 
thine, that these too should be baptized again, 
since this is especially the thing which is wanting 
to them, or hinders their being able to receive, 
uncorrupted, that divine and inviolable mystery 
of the faith. And yet, O excellent man, let us 
attribute and allow to the heavenly agencies their 
power, and let us concede to the condescension 
of the divine majesty its appropriate operations ; 
and understanding how great is the advantage 
therein, let us gladly acquiesce in it. And thus, 
as our salvation is founded in the baptism of the 
Spirit, which for the most part is associated with 
the baptism of water, if indeed baptism shall be 
given by us, let it be conferred in its integrity and 
with solemnity, and with all those means which 
are written ; and let it be administered without 
any disconnection of anything. Or if, by the 
necessity of the case, it should be administered 
by an inferior cleric, let us wait for the result, 
that it may either be supplied by us,' or reserved 
to be supplied by the Lord. If, however, it 
should have been administered by strangers, let 
this matter be amended as it can and as it allows. 
Because outside the Church there is no Holy 
Spirit, sound faith moreover cannot exist, not 
alone among heretics, but even among those who 
are established in schism. And for that reason, 
they who repent and are amended by the doc- 
trine of the truth, and by their own faith, which 
subsequently has been improved by the purifica- 
tion of their heart, ought to be aided only by 
spiritual baptism, that is, by the imposition of 
the bishop's hands, and by the ministration of 
the Holy Spirit. Moreover, the perfect seal 
of faith has been rightly accustomed to be given 
in this manner and on this principle in the Church. 
So that the invocation of the name of Jesus, which 
cannot be done away, may not seem to be held in 
disesteem by us ; which assuredly is not fitting ; 
although such an invocation, if none of those 
things of which we have spoken should follow it, 
may fail and be deprived of the effect of salva- 
tion. For when the apostle said that there was 
" one baptism," == it must needs have been by the 
continued effect of the invocation of the name 
of Jesus, because, once invoked, it cannot be 
taker, away by any man, even although we might 
venture, against the decision of the apostles, to 
repeat it by giving too much, yea, by the desire of 
superadding baptism. If he who returns to the 
Church be unwilling again to be baptized, the re- 

' Sczl. the bishop. [The plural of "solidarity." See p. 128, 
note 5, supra, and Elucidation XI. p. 159.J 
* Eph. iv. 5. 

suit will be that we may defraud him of the bap- 
tism of the Spirit, whom we think we must not 
defraud of the baptism of water. 

1 1 . And what wilt thou determine against the 
person of him who hears the word,^ and haply 
taken up in the name of Christ, has at once 
confessed, and has been punished before it has 
been granted him to be baptized with water? 
Wilt thou declare him to have perished because 
he has not been baptized with water? Or, in- 
deed, wilt thou think that there may be some- 
thing from without that helps him to salvation, 
although he is not baptized with water? Thy 
thinking him to have perished will be opposed 
by the sentence of the Lord, who says, " Who- 
soever shall confess me before men, him will I 
also confess before my Father which is in 
heaven ; " ■* because it is no matter whether he 
who confesses for the Lord is a hearer of the 
word or a believer, so long as he confesses that 
same Christ whom he ought to confess ; be- 
cause the Lord, by confessing him, in turn 
Himself graces His confessor before his Father 
with the glory of his martyrdom, as He prom- 
ised. But this assuredly ought not to be taken 
too liberally, as if it could be stretched to such 
a point as that any heretic can confess the name 
of Christ who notwithstanding denies Christ 
Himself; that he believes on another Christ, 
when Christ avows that it cannot avail him at 
all ; forasmuch as the Lord said that He 5 must 
needs be brought to confession by us before 
men, which cannot be done without Him, and 
without veneration of His name. And there- 
fore both^ ought to stand by the confessor, 
sound, and sincere, and uncontaminated, and 
inviolated, without any choice being made of 
the confessor himself, whether he is righteous or 
a sinner, and a perfect Christian or an imperfect 
one, who has not feared to confess the Lord at 
his own greatest peril. And this is not contrary 
to the former discussion, because there is left 
therein time for the correction of many things 
which are bad, and because certain things are 
conceded to the very name only of our Lord ; 
while martyrdom cannot be consummated except 
in the Lord and by the Lord Himself, and 
therefore nobody can confess Christ without His 
name, nor can the name of Christ avail any one 
for confession without Christ Himself. 

12. Wherefore the whole of this discussion 
must be considered, that it may be made clearer. 
For the invocation of the name of Jesus can 
only be an advantage if it shall be subsequently 
properly supplemented, because both prophets 

3 By him who hears the word is meant a catechumen (Rigaltius). 
[Bunsen, vol. ii. p. 317. He quotes the Apostolical Constitutions 
(Alexandria), "Let the catechumens be three years hearing the 
word," etc.] 

* Matt. X. 32. 

5 The original interpolates " non." 

' \SciL baptisms (?) i.e., of water and of blood.] 

674 

A TREATISE ON RE-BAPTISM. 

and apostles have so declared. For James says 
in the Acts of the Apostles : " Men and breth- 
ren, hearken : Simon hath declared how God at 
the first visited the Gentiles, to take out of them 
a people for His name. And to this agree the 
words of the prophets ; as it is written, After 
this I will return, and will build again the tab- 
■ernacle of David, which has fallen down ; and I 
will build again the ruins thereof, and I will 
,aise it up anew ; that the residue of men may 
•seek the Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom 
my name is called upon them, saith the Lord, 
■who doeth these things." ' Therefore also the 
residue of men, that is, some of the Jews and all 
the Gentiles upon whom the name of the Lord 
is called, may and of necessity must seek the 
Lord, because that very invocation of the name 
affords them the opportunity, or even imposes 
on them the necessity, of seeking the Lord. 
And with these they prescribe the Holy Scrip- 
tures — whether all or only some of them — to 
discuss still more boldly concerning the truth 
than with the Gentiles upon whom the name of 
the Lord Jesus, the Son of the living God, has 
not been invoked, as it likewise has not upon 
the Jews who only receive the Old Testament 
Scriptures. And thus men of both of these 
kinds, that is, Jews and Gentiles, fully believing 
as they ought, are in like manner baptized. But 
heretics who are already baptized in water in the 
name of Jesus Christ must only be baptized with 
the Holy Spirit ; and in Jesus, which is " the only 
name given under heaven whereby we must be 
saved," death is reasonably despised, although, if 
they continue as they are, they cannot be saved, 
because they have not sought the Lord after the 
invocation of His name upon them, — even as 
those who, on account of false Christs, perchance 
have refused to believe, of whom the Lord says, 
■*' Take heed that no man lead you into error. 
For many shall come in my name, saying, I am 
Christ, and shall lead many into error."- And 
again He says : " Then if any man shall say 
unto you, Lo here is Christ, or lo there ; believe 
it not. For there shall arise false Christs, and 
false prophets, and shall show great signs and 
wonders ; so that, if it were possible, even the 
very elect shall be deceived." ^ /\nd these mir- 
acles, without doubt, they shall then do under 
the name of Christ ; in which name some even 
now appear to do certain miracles, and to proph- 
esy falsely. But it is certain that those, because 
they are themselves not of Christ, therefore do 
not 1)elong to Christ, in like manner as if one 
should depart from Christ, abiding only in His 
name, he would not be much advantaged ; nay, 
rather, he is even burdened by that name, al- 

' Acts XV. 13-17. 
2 Matt. xxiv. 4, etc. 
^ Matt. xxiv. 23, 34. 

I 

though he may have been previously very faith- 
ful, or very righteous, or honoured with some 
clerical office, or endowed with the dignity of 
confession. For all those, by denying the true 
Christ, and by introducing or following another 
— although there is no other at all — leave them- 
selves no hope or salvation ; not otherwise than 
they who have denied Christ before men, who 
must needs be denied by Christ ; no considera- 
tion for them being made from their previous 
conversation, or feeling, or dignity, equally as 
they themselves have dared to do away with 
Christ, that is, their own salvation, they are con- 
demned by the short sentence of this kind, 
because it was manifestly said by the Lord, 
" Whosoever shall deny me before men, I also 
will deny him before my Father which is in 
heaven." As this word "whosoever," also in 
the sentence of confession, most fully shows us 
that no condition of the confessor himself can 
stand in the way, although he may have been 
before a denier, or a heretic, or a hearer, or one 
who is beginning to hear, who has not yet been 
baptized or converted from heresy to the truth 
of the faith, or one who has departed from ,the 
Church and has afterwards returned, and then 
when he returned, before the bishop's hands 
could be laid upon him, being apprehended, 
should be compelled to confess Christ before 
men ; even as to one who again denies Christ, 
no special ancient dignity can be effectual to him 
for salvation. 

13. For any one of us will hold it necessary, 
that whatever is the last thing to be found in a 
man in this respect, is that whereby he must be 
judged, all those things which he has previously 
done being wiped away and obliterated.* And 
therefore, although in martyrdom there is so 
great a change of things in a moment of time, 
that in a very rapid case all things may be 
changed ; let nobody flatter himself who has 
lost the occasion of a glorious salvation, if by 
chance he has excluded himself therefrom by 
his own fault ; even as that wife of Lot, 5 who in 
a similar manner in time of trouble only, con- 
trary to the angel's command, looked behind 
her, and she became a pillar of salt. On which 
principle also, that heretic who, by confessing 
Christ's name, is put to death, can subsequently 
correct nothing, if he should have thought any- 
thing erroneously of God or of Christ, although 
by believing on another God or on another 
Christ he has deceived himself: he is not a 
confessor of Christ, but in the name only of 
Christ ; since also the apostle goes on to say, 
" And if I shall give up my body so that I may 

* [Ezek. xxxiii. 12. On the principle th.it what i.s deepest in 
man's heart proves, finally, the character; Phil. ii. 12. A very sol- 
emn consideration in human accountability (i Pet. i. 17), but not to 
be disjoined from 2 Cor. vi. 10. ] 

5 [Vol. i. p. 505, note 12, this series.] 

A TREATISE ON RE-BAPTISM. 

675 

be burnt up with fire, but have not love, I profit 
nothing." ' Because by this deed he profits 
nothing who has not the love of that God and 
Christ who is announced by the law and the 
prophets and in the Gospel in this manner : 
" Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, with all 
thy heart, and with all thy mind, and with all 
thy thought ; and thou shalt love thy neighbour 
as thyself. For on these two commandments 
hang all the law and the prophets ; " - — even as 
John the evangelist said, " And every one that 
loveth is born of God, and knoweth God ; for 
God is love ;" ^ even as God also says, " For 
God so loved the world, that He gave His only- 
begotten Son, that every one that believeth on 
Him should not perish, but have everlasting 
life," •♦ — as it manifestly appears that he who 
has not in him this love, of loving us and of 
being loved by us, profits nothing by an empty 
confession and passion, except that thereby it 
appears and is plain that he is a heretic who 
believes on another God, or receives another 
Christ than Him whom the Scriptures of the Old 
and New Testament manifestly declare, which 
announce without any obscurity the Father om- 
nipotent, Creator of all things, and His Son. For 
it shall happen to them as to one who expects 
salvation from another God. Then, finally, con- 
trary to their notion, they are condemned to 
eternal punishment by Christ, the Son of God 
the Father omnipotent, the Creator whom they 
have blasphemed, when God shall begin to 
judge the hidden things of men according to 
the Gospel by Christ Jesus, because they did 
not believe in Him, although they were washed 
in His name. 

14. And even to this point the whole of that 
heretical baptism may be amended, after the 
intervention of some space of time, if a man 
should survive and amend his faith, as our God, 
in the Gospel according to Luke, spoke to His 
disciples, saying, " But I have another baptism 
to be baptized with." s Also according to Mark 
He said, with the same purpose, to the sons of 
Zebedee : " Are ye able to drink of the cup which 
I drink of, or to be baptized with the baptism 
wherewith I am baptized ? " ^ Because He knew 
that those men had to be baptized not only with 
water, but also in their own blood ; so that, as 
well baptized in this baptism only, they might 
attain the sound faith and the simple love of 
the laver, and, baptized in both ways, they might 
in like manner to the same extent attain the 
baptism of salvation and glory. For what was 
said by the Lord, " I have another baptism to be 

' I Cor. xiii. 3. 

2 Matt. xxii. 37. 

3 I John iv. 7, 8. 
■♦ John iii. 16. 

5 Luke xii. 50. 

6 Mark x. 38. 

baptized with," signifies in this place not a sec- 
ond baptism, as if there were two baptisms, but 
demonstrates that there is moreover a baptism of 
another kind given to us, concurring to the same 
salvation. And it was fitting that both these 
kinds should first of all be initiated and sancti- 
fied by our Lord Himself, so that either one of 
the two or both kinds might afford to us this one 
twofold saving and glorifying baptism ; and cer- 
tain ways of the one baptism might so be laid 
open to us, that at times some one of them 
might be wanting without mischief, even as in 
the case of martyrs that hear the word, the bap- 
tism of water is wanting without evil ; and yet 
we are certain that these, if they had any indul- 
gence, would also be used to be baptized with 
water. And also to those who are made lawful 
believers, the baptism of their own blood is 
wanting without mischief, because, being bap- 
tized in the name of Christ, they have been re- 
deemed with the most precious blood of the 
Lord ; since both of these rivers of the baptism 
of the Lord proceed out of one and the same 
fountain, that every one who thirsts may come 
and drink, as says the Scripture, " From his belly 
flowed rivers of living water ; " ^ which rivers 
were manifested first of all in the Lord's passion, 
when from His side, pierced by the soldier's 
spear, flowed blood and water, so that the one 
side of the same person emitted two rivers of a 
different kind, that whosoever should believe and 
drink of both rivers might be filled with the Holy 
Spirit. For, speaking of these rivers, the Lord 
set this forth, signifying the Holy Spirit whom 
they should receive who should believe on Him : 
" But the Spirit was not yet given, because Jesus 
was not yet glorified."** And when He thus 
said how baptism might be produced, which the 
apostle declares to be one, it is assuredly mani- 
fest on that principle that there are different 
kinds of one and the same baptism that flow 
from one wound into water and blood ; since 
there are there two baptisms of water of which 
we have spoken, that is, of one and the same 
kind,9 although the baptism of each kind ought 
to be one, as we have more fully spoken. 

15. And since we seem to have divided all 
spiritual baptism in a threefold manner, let us 
come also to the proof of the statement pro- 
posed, that we may not appear to have done 
this of our own judgment, and with rashness. 
For John says of our Lord in his epistle, teach- 
ing us: "This is He who came by water and 
blood, Jesus Christ ; not by water only, but by 
water and blood : and it is the Spirit that beareth 
witness, because the Spirit is truth. For three 
bear witness, the Spirit, and the water, and the 

7 John vii. 38. 
^ John vii. 39. 
9 Unius atque ejusdem speciet. 

676 

A TREATISE ON RE-BAPTISM. 

blood: and these three are one;"' — that we 
may gather from these words both that water 
is wont to confer the Spirit, and that men's own 
blood is wont to confer the Spirit, and that the 
Spirit Himself also is wont to confer the Spirit. 
For since water is poured forth even as blood, 
the Spirit also was poured out by the Lord upon 
all who believed. Assuredly both in water, and 
none the less in their own blood, and then espe- 
cially in the Holy Spirit, men may be baptized. 
For Peter says : " But this is that which was 
spoken by the prophet ; It shall come to pass 
in the last days, saith the Lord, I will pour out 
my Spirit upon all flesh : and their sons and 
their daughters shall prophesy, and their young 
men shall see visions, and their old men shall 
dream dreams : and upon my servants, and 
upon my handmaidens, will I pour out of my 
Spirit; "2 — which Spirit we discover to have 
been communicated in the Old Testament, not 
indeed everywhere nor at large, but with other 
gifts ; or, moreover, to have sprung of His own 
will into certain men, or to have invested them, 
or to have been upon them, even as we observe 
that it was said by the Lord to Moses, about the 
seventy elders, " And I will take of the Spirit 
which is upon thee, and will put it upon them."^ 
For which reason also, according to His promise, 
God put upon them from another of the Spirit 
which had been upon Moses, and they prophe- 
sied in the camp. And Moses, as a spiritual 
man, rejoiced that this had so happened, al- 
though he was unwillingly persuaded by Jesus 
the son of Nave to oppose this thing, and was 
not thereby induced. Further, also in the book 
of Judges, and in the books of Kings too, we 
observe that upon several, there either was the 
Spirit of the Lord, or that He came unto them, 
as upon Gothoniel, Gideon, Jephthah, Samson, 
Saul, David, and many others. Which comes to 
this result, that the Lord has taught us most 
plainly by them the liberty and power of the 
Holy Spirit, approaching of His own will, say- 
ing, " The Spirit breathes where He will ; and 
thou hearest His voice, and knowest not whence 
He cometh or whither He goeth." "> So that 
the same Spirit is, moreover, sometimes found 
to be upon those who are unworthy of Him ; 
not certainly in vain or without reason, but for 
the sake of some needful operation ; as He was 
upon Saul, upon whom came the Spirit of God, 
and he prophesied. However, in later days, 
after the Spirit of the Lord departed from 
him, and after a malign spirit from the Lord 
vexed him, because then he had come, after 
the messengers whom he had previously sent 

' I John V. 6. 

= Acts ii. 17, 18. 

3 Num. xi. 17. 

* John iii. 5. [Greei, nvevfjia. Syriac as here rendered.] 

before with care, with intent to kill David ; and 
they therefore fell into the chorus of the proph- 
ets, and they prophesied, so that they neither 
were able nor willing to do what they had been 
bidden. And we believe that the Spirit which 
was upon them all effected this with an admira- 
ble wisdom, by the will of God. Which Spirit 
also filled John the Baptist even from his mother's- 
womb ; and it fell upon those who were witb 
Cornelius the centurion before they were bap- 
tized with water. Thus, cleaving to the baptism 
of men, the Holy Spirit either goes before or 
follows it ; or failing the baptism of water, it 
falls upon those who believe. W^e are coun- 
selled that either we ought duly to maintain the 
integrity of baptism, or if by chance baptism is 
given by any one in the name of Jesus Christ, 
we ought to supplement it, guarding the most 
holy invocation of the name of Jesus Christ, as 
we have most abundantly set forth ; guarding, 
moreover, the custom and authority which so 
much claim our veneration for so long a time 
and for such great men. 

16. But since the first part of this argument 
seems to be unfolded, we ought to touch on its 
subsequent part, on account of the heretics ; be- 
cause it is very necessary not to pass over that 
discussion which once falls into our hands, lest 
perchance some heretic should dare, of his 
subtlety, to assail those of our brethren who are 
more simple. For because John said that we 
must be baptized in the Holy Ghost and in fire, 
from the fact that he went on to say and fire, 
some desperate men have dared to such an extent 
\^ carry their depravity, and therefore very crafty 
men seek how they can thus corrupt and vio- 
late, and even neutralize the baptism of holiness. 
Who derive the origin of their notion from Simon 
Magus, practising it with manifold perversity 
through various errors ; to whom Simon Peter, 
in the Acts of the Apostles, said, " Thy money 
perish with thee, because thou hast thought that 
the grace of God could be possessed by money ; 
thou hast neither part nor lot in this work ; for 
thy heart is not right with God." 5 And such 
men as these do all these things in the desire 
to deceive those who are more simple or more 
inquisitive. And some of them try to argue that 
they only administer a sound and perfect, not as 
we, a mutilated and curtailed baptism, which 
they are in such wise said to designate, that 
immediately they have descended into the water, 
fire at once appears upon the water. Which if 
it can be effected by any trick, as several tricks 
of this kind are affirmed to be — of Anaxilaus 
— whether it is anything natural, by means of 
which this may happen, or whether they think 
that they behold this, or whether the work and 

5 Acts viii. 20, 21. 

A TREATISE ON RE-BAPTISM. 

677 

magical poison of some malignant being can 
force fire from the water ; still they declare such a 
deceit and artifice to be a perfect baptism, which 
if faithful men have been forced to receive, there 
■will assuredly be no doubt but that they have 
lost that which they had. Just as, if a soldier 
after taking an oath should desert his camp, and 
in the very different camp of the enemy should 
wish to take an oath of a far other kind, it is 
plain that in this way he is discharged from his 
old oath. 

17. Moreover, if a man of this sort should 
again return to thee, thou wilt assuredly hesitate 
whether he may have baptism or no ; and yet it 
will behove thee, in whatever way thou canst, to 
aid even this man if he repent. For of this 
adulterous, yea, murderous baptism, if there is 
any other author, it is then certainly a book de- 
vised by these same heretics on behalf of this 
same error, which is inscribed The Preaching 
-of Paul; ' in which book, contrary to all Scrip- 
tures, thou wilt find both Christ confessing His 
own sin — although He alone did no sin at all 
— and almost compelled by His mother Mary 
unwillingly to receive John's baptism. Also, that 
when He was baptized, fire was seen to be upon 
the water, which is written in neither of the Gos- 
pels. And that after such long time, Peter and 
Paul, after the collation of the Gospel in Jerusa- 
lem, and the mutual consideration and alterca- 
tion and arrangement of things to be done finally, 
were known to one another, as if then for the 
first time ; and certain other things devised of 
this kind disgracefully and absurdly ; — all which 
things thou wilt find gathered together into that 
book. But they who are not ignorant of the 
nature of the Holy Spirit, understand that what 
is said of fire is said of the Spirit Himself. For 
in the Acts of the Apostles, according to that 
same promise of our Lord, on the very day of 
Pentecost, when the Holy Spirit had descended 
upon the disciples, that they might be baptized 
in Him, there were seen sitting upon each one 
tongues as if of fire, that it might be manifest 
that they were baptized with the Holy Ghost and 
with fire — that is, with that Spirit which was, 
whether fire, or as fire, such as was the fire which 
burned in the bush, and did not consume the 
bush ; and such as is that fire which is the Spirit 
of the Angel, as saith the Scripture, " Who mak- 
eth His angels spirits, and His ministers a burn- 
ing fire ; " ^ whom if thou shouldst resemble, or 
be a companion or sharer with, thou shalt be 
able to dread no fire, not even that which, going 
before the Lord in the day of judgment, shall 

' Rigaltius says that Jerome mentions this document, and regards 
it as apocryphal. And Eusebius refers to the nepioSoi IleTpou, which, 
according to the common reading of Peter for Paul in the text, may 
point to the same document. [Vol. ii. 341, note 10; and vol. iv. 
p. 246.] 

2 Ps. CIV. 4. 

bum up the whole world, save those who are 
baptized in the Holy Spirit and in fire. 

18. And the Spirit, indeed, continues to this 
day invisible to men, as the Lord says, "The 
Spirit breathes where He will ; and thou know- 
est not whence He cometh, or whither He 
goeth."^ But in the beginning of the mystery- 
of the faith and of spiritual baptism, the same 
Spirit was manifestly seen to have sat upon the 
disciples as it had been fire. Moreover, the 
heavens being opened, to have descended upon 
the Lord like a dove ; because many things, yea, 
almost all things which were to be, are manifest 
— which, however, were only invisible neverthe- 
less, — now also are shown to the eyes and to 
the incredulity of men, either partially, or at 
times, or in figure, for the strengthening and 
confirming of our faith. But neither should I 
omit that which the Gospel well announces. For 
our Lord says to the paralytic man, " Be of good 
cheer, my son, thy sins are forgiven thee," ^ that 
He might show that hearts were purified by faith 
for the forgiveness of sins that should follow. 
And this remission of sins that woman also which 
was a sinner in the city obtained, to whom the 
Lord said, "Thy sins are forgiven thee." 5 And 
when they who were reclining around began to 
say among themselves, " Who is this that for- 
giveth sins ? " ^ — because concerning the para- 
lytic the scribes and Pharisees had murmured 
crossly — the Lord says to the woman, " Thy 
faith hath made thee whole; go in peace." *^ 
From all which things it is shown that hearts are 
purified by faith, but that souls are washed by 
the Spirit ; further, also, that bodies are washed 
by water, and moreover that by blood we may 
more readily attain at once to the rewards of 
salvation. 

19. I think that we have fully followed out 
the announcement of John the Baptist, whence 
we began our discourse, when he said to the 
Jews, " I indeed baptize you with water unto 
repentance ; but He who cometh after me is 
greater than I, whose shoe's latchet I am not 
worthy to unloose : He shall baptize you with 
the Holy Ghost, and with fire." ^ Moreover, I 
think also that we have not unsuitably set in 
order the teaching of the Apostle John, who says 
that " three bear witness, the Spirit, and the 
water, and the blood ; and these three are one."** 
And, unless I am mistaken, we ha\"e also ex- 
plained what our Lord says : " John indeed bap- 

3 John iii. 8. 

* Matt. ix. 2. 

5 Luke vii. 48. 

* Luke vii. 50. 
' Luke iii. 16. 

' I John V. 8. [It is noteworthy that he quotes the Latin formula, 
and not that («t? to iv cicrtc) of the CJreek. Now, the Latin, repeat- 
ing (in verse 8) the formula {hi ires uiium sunt) which belongs ti> 
the dubious protasis, is so far evidence that such a verse existed in 
the old Greek. It is important that the Latin is not conformed to the 
received formula of the a/>odosis, " the three agree in one."] 

678 A TREATISE ON RE-BAPTISM. 

tized with water, but ye shall be baptized with we do that in a subsequent place, that none 

the Holy Ghost." ' Moreover, I think that may think that we are stirring up the present 

we have given no weak reason as the cause of debate on a single article ; although this custom 

the custom. Let us have a care, although even alone ought, among men who have the 

fear of God, and are lowly, to maintian a chief 

> Acts i. 5. place. 

NOTE BY THE EDINBURGH TRANSLATOR. 

Letters of Cyprian to Quintus, to Jubaianus, to Pompey, on " the baptism of heretics ; " and to Magnus on " bap- 
tizing the Novatians, and those who obtain grace on a sick-bed," may be found translated in Ep. Ixx. (p. 377, 
supra), Ep. Ixxii. (p. 379, siepra), Ep. Ixxiii. (p. 386, supra), and Ep. Ixxv. (p. 397, supra), respectively; and 
the Letter of Firmilian to Cyprian against the Letter of Stephen, at p. 390, supra, Ep. Ixxiv. All these letters 
are repeated, in extenso, in the Moniimenta Veterum. 

Eusebius says, by way of introduction to the fragment of a letter written to Stephen by 
Dionysius of Alexandria, as follows : " Dionysius indited to Stephen the first of those letters 
which were written on the subject of baptism, when no small controversy had arisen whether they 
who are converted from any kind of heresy ought to be purged by baptism (because an ancient 
custom had prevailed, that in receiving such there should only be hands laid upon them, with 
prayers). Cyprian, who then ruled the Church of Carthage, was the first who judged that they 
must not be admitted to communion unless they were first purified from error by baptism. But 
Stephen, thinking that nothing should be innovated contrary to the tradition which had already 
obtained in that matter from the beginning, was indignant at this. And as Dionysius had already 
written many letters to him on this argument, he intimates to him finally, that all the churches 
everywhere, now that the fury of persecution was abated, detesting the turbulent novelty of 
Novatian,' had established peace with one another." ^ 

• Eusebius calls him Novatus. 2 See H. E., book viii. chaps, ii., iii., and iv. ; and vol. vi., this series. 

INDEXES. 

HIPPOLYTUS 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 

Academics, confused teaching of, 21. 
Adam, the perfect man, 49. 
yEons, 86, 1 18. 
Alexandria, canons of, 257. 
Amanuensis, of Hippolytus, 202. 
Amos, prophecy of the last days, 

243- 

Anaxagoras, cosmogony of, 14. 

Anaximander, cosmogony of, 13. 

Anaximenes, cosmogony of, 14. 

Ancient of Days, 189. 

Annas and Caiaphas, inherit Levi's 
curse, 164. 

Antichrist, prophecy of, 190, 204-206, 
214, 216-217, 247-250; springs 
from the tribe of Dan, 207 ; his 
two advents, 217. 

Antiochus, 184, 214. 

Apelles, heretic, 115, 147. 

Aphorism, a striking one, 230. 

Apostles, the twelve, labors and mar- 
tyrdom, 254-255. 

Apostolic Sees, equality of, 157 
(note). 

Apparitions, 38. 

Apsethus the Libyan, story of, 74. 

Aratus, author of heretical opinions, 
42. 

Archelaus, cosmogony of, 15. 

Aristotle, theory of substance and 
accidents, 19, of the soul, 20; 
general sketch of his philoso- 
phy, lOI. 

Arithmeticians, pretenders to proph- 
ecy, 30; interpret life by num- 
bers, 31, 45. 

Aser, 165-166. 

Astrology, basis of heretical teach- 
ing, 24 ; fallacy of its processes, 
25, 33 ; refuted by facts, 37 ; Pe- 
ratic system derived from, 61. 

Astronomers, 28; system of Pythag- 
oras, 84. 

■Vthanasian Confession, 237. 

Babylon, indentified with Rome, 211 ; 
judgment of, in Apocalypse, 
212. 

l^aptism of Christ, example to Chris- 
tians, 236. 

Earuch, book of, remarkable passage 
in, 224; heretical book of Jus- 
tinus, 69-73. 

Basilides, 100; heretical follower of 
Aristotle, 103 ; general descrip- 
tion of his cosmogony and the- 
ology, 104-108; sum of heretical 
opinions, 144. 

Beast, number of, no certain inter- 
pretation, 215; mark of, 249. 

Bells, 258. 

Beron, and Helix, 230; heretic, con- 
foundb the natures of Christ, 

23 '-234- 

Beryl, or Tharses, 182. 

Bishops, successors to the Apostles 
in ruling and teaching, 10. 

Blood and water from Christ's side, 

V 239. 

Bolsena, miracle of anticipated, 92. 

Boreas, 172. 

Brachmans, Lidian philosophers, 21. 

Brahmins, 9. 

Bunsen, 47, 80, 81 ; testimony to the 
value of Hippolytus' works, 2; 
mistakes on the primitive consti- 
tion of the Church, 155 (note), 
and in theology, 161 (note). 

Caius, Roman presbyter, 5. 

Callistians, sect of, 160 (note). 

Callistus, adviser of his bishop, 125; 
his alleged martyrdom, 128; 
character and history, 128-131; 
how made bishop, 157-158 ; here- 
siarch, 160. 

Canons, of Hippolytus used by the 
Ethiopian Christians, 256; of 
Alexandria attributed to Hip- 
J polytus, 257. 

Canticles, book of, comment on, 
176. 

Carpocrates, heretical tenets, 113. 

Caulacau, 52, 154. 

Cemphus, explanation of, 173. 

Cerinthus, 100; heretical tenets con- 
cerning Christ, 114; summary 
of, 147. 

Chaldeans, 27. 

Children, The Three of the Cap- 
tivity, 18S ; Song of, 191, 239. 

Christ, prophesied by Jacob, 206; by 
Isaiah, 176, 207; Ezekiel, 177, 
208; Daniel, 177, 208; his two 
advents, 213, 247; forerunners, 
213. 

Cleomenes, disciple of Noetus, 125, 

128. 
Clepsydra, an imperfect measure of 

time, 28. 
Coleridge, H. N., note on the Greek 

mysteries, 157 (note). 
Conclusion of the refutation, 152. 
Constantine, vision of, 251. 
Corinth, maiden of, 240. 
Cosmogonies, 40; the Homeric, 66; 

of Justinus, 69; of Pythagoras, 

83, 98 ; of Aristotle, 102. 
Councils, primitive, independence of, 

158 (note). 
Creed, Nicene, illustrated, 205 ; Atha- 

nasian, 237. 

Daniel, prophecy of, comment on, 
177-191, 208, 210; on the last 
days, 245. 

Darkness, at the Crucifixion, 230. 

Deluge, comment on, 196-198. 

Democracy, foreshown, 209. 

Democritus, cosmogony of, 16. 

Diapsalma, 201. 

Disciples, the Seventy, names and 
martyrdom of, 255. 

Docetae, heretics, tenets of, 117, 145; 
doctrine of the Licarnation, 
119, of creation, 119, of the Bap- 
tism and Crucifixion, 119; de- 
rived from the Greek Sophists, 
120; summary of their teaching, 
145. 

Dollinger, 4, 158. 

Druids, origin of, 22. 

•' 

Easter, 120; of the Quartodecimans, 
123. 

Ebioneans, heretics, doctrine of, 114, 

Economy, in interjiretation, 220. 

Ecphantes, philosophy and cosmog- 
ony of, 17. 

Elchasai, his life and teachings, 132, 
148. 

Emjjedocles, philosojjhy of, 13, no. 

Encratites, heretics, 124. 

End of the woikl, pro])hecy of, 243, 
250-253. 

Endor, witch of, ^69. 

Epicurus, his theory of atoms, 20 ; 
denial of Providence, 21 ; ideas 
of pleasure and reward, 21. 
681 

682 

HIPPOLYTUS: INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 

JCpiphanes, heretic, 91. 

Esseni, tenets of, 134; sects of, 136; 
their traditions derived from 
Jews through the Greeks, 137. 

Ethiopian Christians, canons of, 256. 
^Eucharist, daily, 252; white vest- 
ments at, 257. 

Excommunication, mild form of, 267. 

Ezekiel, prophecy, conmient on, 177. 

Fragments from commentaries, 163. 

Gabriel, 180, iSr. 
Genesis, commentaries on, 163. 
God, alone uncreate and Creator, 
150; God of God, 167. 

Hades, 174, 194; meaning and extent 
of, 221-222. 

Heel, bruising of, 166. 

Heli.x (see Beroit), 231. 

Heraclitus, philosophy of, 13, 157; 
origin of Noetian heresy, 126. 

Heresies, originate in heathen phil- 
osophy, 10; characteristics of, 
47, 100; contemporaneous, 125, 
155; epitome of, 140. 

Hermes, 51. 

Hermogenes, opinion of, 122, 148. 

Herodotus, 69. 

Hesiod, poetical origin of the muses, 
22. 

Hippo, philosophy and cosmogony 
of, 17. 

Hippolytus, Roman disciple of Irenae- 
us, writes in Greek. 3; discovery 
of his statue, 3 ; Bishop of Por- 
tus and martyr, 6; relations to 
the apostolic age, 7 ; his theory 
elaborated, 100; opposes Zephy- 
rinus and Callistus, 157; his 
mildness and severity, 159. 

Homilies, fragments of, 238. 

Hosea, prophecy of last days, 243. 

Hymn, of the Naasseni, 58 ; of Gnos- 
tics, 91 ; a primitive, based on 
Isaiah, 218. 

Impositions, 36 ; connected with here- 
I sy, 40. 

^ Incense, spiritual exposition of, 251 
(note). 

Irenaeus, his maxim illustrated, vi., 4. 

Isaac, S|>iritual meaning of his bless- 
ing of Jacob, 168. 

Isaiah, prophecy of, comment on, 
176, 207, 2 1 0-21 1; prophecy of 
last days, 242. 

Israel, blessings of, interpreted, 163- 
168; various interpretations of 
this name, 225. 

Jeremiah, prophecy of, comment on, 

177- . 

Jews, their sects, 134; Esseni, 134; 
Pharisees, 137 ; Sadducees, 137; 
their chronology, 14S-149; trea- 
tise concerning, 219; reject and 
persecute Christ, 220. 

Jezebel, her eyes painted, 193. 

Judgment, the Last, 222, 251-254. 

Justiniis, heresy of. origin of the 
Ophites, 69; essentially heathen, 
69; his allegory of Herodotus' 
legend of Hercules, 69-73; sum- 
mary of his teaching, 145. 

Just One, the, 221. 

Latin Christianity, its rise, vi. 

Law, teachers of, their succession, 

195; interpretation of, 196. 
Lawless one, the, 246, 248. 
Leucippus, cosmogony of, 16. 
Levi, the curse of, 164. 
Light of Light, applied to Christ, 

227, 236. 
Little Labyrinth, 4. 
Logos, derived from the Father, 1 50 ; 

Creator of all, 151 ; God of God, 

151 ; made man, 152. 
Lyre, legend of invention of, 43, 46 

(notes). 

Magic and sorcery among heretics, 

3 5-40- 

Magistrianus, story of, 241 (note). 

Marcia, 158; concubine of Commo- 
dus, 129; kind to the Christians, 
130. 

Marcion, and Cerdon, heretic fol- 
lowers of Empedocles, 110-112; 
summary of, 146. 

Marcus, heretic, hymn of, 91 ; sacri- 
lege of, 92 ; profanes the Eucha- 
rist, 92 ; his system of letters, 
94; pilfers from Pythagoras, 97. 

Marriage, early canons on, 160 (note). 

Matthias, 103. 

Melchisedecians, 147. 

Micah, prophecy of last days, 243. 

Michael, 182, 190. 

Minchaah, 187 (note). 

Missa, not the modern Mass, 256. 

Monad, 120; system of Monoinms, 
120, 146. 

Monoimus the Arabian, heretical 
opinions of, 120-122, 146. 

Montanists, heretical opinions and 
leaders of, 1 23 ; summary of, 

^47-. 
Moses, his rod, 121 ; a divine teacher, 
194 ; the law given by him hand- 
ed clown by successive prophets, 
194-195; ex])osition of his his- 
tory, 196-199. 

Naasseni, heresy of, its origin, 47 ; 
tenets and interpretation of Holy 
Scripture, 48-58, 141 ; profess 
to follow Homer, 52 ; hvmn of, 

Nicene Creed, to be studied in second 
and third centuries, v. ; harmo- 
nizes ante-Nicene doctrine, 161 ; 
continues in universal force to 
our times, 161 ; testimony of 
Professor .Shedd, i6i. 

Nicolaus, founder of the Nicolai- 
tan heresy, one of the seven 
deacons, 115; barbarous terms 
used by them, 154 (note). 

Noetus, heretic, 125, 148; his heresy 
derived from Heraclitus, 126; 
general exposition, 223-227. 

Ophites, 74, 124. 

Papa, Phrygian appellation for all 
men, 54; modern ajjplication to 
Bishop of Rome, 154 (note). 

Paradise, place of, 163. 

Paradoxes, 237. 

Parmenides, cosmogony of, 16. 

Partridge, similitude of, 216. 

Passover of the Law not eaten by 
Christ, 240. 

Patriarch, title applied to Hippoly- 
tus, 258. 

Paul, blessing of Benjamin applied 
to, 168. 

Peratae, heresy of, 58 ; derived from 
astrology, 59; their doctrine 
63, 142. 

Period, the seventh, 179. 

Pharisees, sect of Esseni, 137. 

Philosophers, natural and morai, 9, 
summary of, 140-141. 

Philosophumoia, discovery of, 3, 5 , 
current in the East, neglected in 
the West, 3; copied by Theod- 
oret, 160. 

Philumene, prophetess of Apelles, 

US- 
Phrygians, relation to heresy of Naas- 
seni, 54; their mysteries, 56. 

Plato, theory of original principles, 
18, 221 ; of God and of the soul, 
18; of good and evil, 19; pil- 
fered from by Valentinus, 90. 

Plebs, Acts V. 13, explained, 159. 

Portus, See of Hippolytus, 5; not 
Aden in Arabia, 6. 

Prepon, heretic follower of Marcion, 

/ 112. 

Presbyter, use of the word, 99. 

Proverbs, book of, commentaries on, 
172-175. 

Providence, supplies means for arri- 
val at truth, V. 

Province, the Roman, 176. 

Provinces, ecclesiastical, 157-159. 

Prudentius, his hvmn, 6. 

Psalms, Messianic, interpretation of, 
1 70-1 7 1 ; general exposition of, 
199-202; fragment on, 202-203. 

Ptolem^Eus, heretic, 91. 

Purgatory, refuted, 222-223. 

Pythagoras, his theory of the spheres 
and of numbers, 11; disci])line 
of his followers, 12, 98; princi- 
ples of his philosphy, 82; sym- 
bols, 84 ; Golden Verses, 85. 

Quartodecimans, heresy of, 123. 
Queen, a certain, 240. 
Quinet, E., on councils ancient and 
UKidern, 162. 

Recapitulation, 140. 
Resurrection, prophesied in Scrip- 
ture, 218; final, 222. 
Reuben, his curse spiritualized, 164. 

Sabbath, the, notion of Monoimus, 
121. 

Sadducees, sect of Esseni, 137. 

Samuel, his appearance to .Saul in- 
terpreted, 169. 

Saturnians, heretics, tenets of, 109. 

Saturnilus, system of, 109; called' 
Saturninus, 109. 

Scriptures, Holy, value of quotations 
from, 219; testimonies to, 227; 
studied by all, 250; a safeguiird 
against Antichrist, 250; public 
reading of, 251. 

Secundus, heretic, 91. 

Selah (see Diapsalvia), 201. 

HIPPOLYTUS: INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 

683 

Sepulchre, Christ's body therein not 
emptied of Divinity, 194. 

Sethians, heretics, 64; origin in 
heathen philosophy, 66; sum of 
their tenets, 142. 

Seventy, the. See Disciples. 

Sheol, 174. 

Ship, symbol of the Church, 216. 

Sibyl, the, 62. 

Simon Magus, 74, 143; his triad, 76; 
explanations of Moses, 78 ; im- 
moralities, 80; meets St. Peter, 
80; the statue at Rome, 81 ; his 
last end, 91. 

Sk "rates, disciple of Archelaus, 17; 
represented by Plato, 17. 

Sonship of Christ, 229. 

Spurious pieces, 242. 

Stars, astronomical theories of, 29 ; 
influence on life, 43. 

Stoics, theory of fate, 20; of soul 
and body, 20. 

Suburbicarian Sees, 159. 

Susannah, book of, interpreted, 191- 
194. 

Synaxis, term applied to Holy Com- 
munion, 257, 259 (note). 

Targum, the, 197-198. 

Tartarus, scriptural use of the word, 

153, 161 (note), 174. 
Tatian, disciple of Justin Martyr, 

certain opinions of, 122, 146. 
Tertullianists, 123. 
Thales, philosopher and astronomer, 

II. 
Tharses. See Beryl. 
Theodotus, heretic, 114, 147 ; another 

of the name, 115. 
Theophany, at the Baptism of Christ, 

234, 236. 
Theotokos, applied to the Blessed 

Virgin, 242, 259 (note). 
Times, signs of the last, 243-244. 
Titan, number of the Beast, 215. 
Trinity, the, doctrine of, 228. 
Truth, doctrine of, 150-152; rewards 

of, 153; Hippolytus' defence of, 

153 (note); preservation of, 161 

(note). 

Valentinus, disciple of Simon Magus, 
81 ; plagiarist from Pythagoras, 
85, 88, and from Plato, 90; his 

philosophical theories, 86-88 ; 

summary of his teachings, 144. 
Vestments, white, at Holy Commun- 

ion, 257-258. 
Vision of Nebuchadnezzar, 178. 

Water, a symbol of Christ, 234. 

Weaving, analogue of the Incarna- 
tion, 205. 

Wisdom, in Proverbs, interpreted, 175. 

Witnesses, the two, 213, 249. 

Woman of the Apocalypse, symbol 
of the Church, 217. 

Word, the, eternal generation of, 
227 ; incarnate in Christ, 229, 
231-232; truly man, 230. 

Wordsworth, Bishop, notes of, etc., 
47, 130, 160 ; criticism of Bunsen, 
161. 

Xenophanes, his philosophy and cos- 
mogony, 17. 

Zebulon, his blessing spiritualized, 
165. 

Zephyrinus, bishop of Rome, fa- 
vourer of heretics, 125-130. 

Zodiac, signs of, 27, t,t^, 59, 84. 

\ 

HIPPOLYTUS. 

INDEX OF TEXTS. 

Gen. 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

i. I . . . . 

. 119 

Gen. xlix. 12-15 • • '^5 

2 Chron. iii. 

1.3.4 . 177 

i. 2 

77 

xlix. 16-20 

. 165 

Job ix. 7 . 

... 60 

i. 2 . . . . 

237 

xlix. 16, 17 

. 207 

xxxi. I 

. . • 173 

i. 3 . . . . 

7 

xlix. 16, 17 

. 246 

xii. 8 

• • • 53 

|. 3 . . . . 

104 

xlix. 21-26 

166 

Ps. ii. . . 

. ... 170 

1. 4, 5. 7 • . 

119 

xlix. 27 

. 168 

ii. 2 . 

. ... 164 

i. 5, 6, 7, 8 . 

163 

Ex. iii. 2 . . 

. 119 

ii. 5 . 

... 22 1 

i. 6, 7 . . . 

73 

iii. 6 . . 

223 

ii. 9 . 

... 51 

i. 7 

57 

iv. 2-4 . 

62 

iii. 5 . 

. . . 206 

1.9. . . . 

»97 

vi. 2, 3 . 

90 

viii. 2 . 

. . . . 96 

1. 26 ... 

109 

vi. 2, 3 . 

106 

xvi. 10 

. . . 220 

i. 28 . . . . 

70 

vii. I . . 

187 

xix. I . 

. . . . 96 

ii. 2 

88 

vii. 9-13 

62 

xix. 3 . 

... 56 

ii. 2, 7, 10 . 

77 

vii., viii. 

121 

xix. 4, 5 

... 123 

ii. 7 . . . . 

. 88 

xii. 17 . 

I 22 

xix. 6 . 

... 218 

ii. 7 . . . . 

168 

XX. 3 . 

223 

xxii. 6 

... 53 

ii. 8. . . . 

70 

XX. 13-15 

67 

xxii. 20, : 

•I . . • 53 

ii. 10, I1-14 . , 

57 

XXV. 10 . 

179 

xxii., xxii 

i., xxiv. . 170 

ii. 16, 17 . . , 

67 

xxxii. 4 . 

183 

xxiv. 7 

... 170 

ii. 16, 17 . . . 

71 

xxxiii. 3 . 

183 

xxiv. 7 

... 236 

iii. I . • . . 

207 

xxxiv. 19 

248 

xxiv. 7-9 

... 53 

iii. 5 • • • 

153 

Num. viii. 16 

248 

xxiv. 8 

... 53 

iii. 15 . . . 

166 

Deut. iv. 24 . 

75 

xxix. 3 

... 53 

iii. 19 ... . 

89 

Jv. 35 • 

88 

xxix. 3 

... 66 

iii. 24 . . . 

79 

V. 17-19 

67 

xxix. 3 

... 143 

iv, 5 . . . , 

62 

v. 22 . 

118 

xxix. 3 

. . . 236 

iv. 15 . . . , 

62 

ix. 3 . 

88 

xxix. 10 . 

• • . 53 

vi. 3 . . . . 

200 

xxiii. 13 

136 

xxxi. 22 

... 202 

vii. 6 . . . . 

197 

xxviii. 66, 

67 

250 

xxxii. 5 

... 107 

viii. I . . . , 

198 

xxxi. 20 

54 

xxxii. 9 

... 151 

X. 9 . . . , 

63 

xxxii. 33 . 

171 

xxxiii. 6 

... 228 

xi. 16 . . . 

149 

xxxii. 34, 35 

216 

XXXV. 17 

. • . 53 

xi. 26 . . . 

149 

xxxiii. 8 . 

164 

xxxvi. 6 

... 171 

xii. I . . . 

67 

xxxiii. II 

198 

xxxviii. 5 

... 238 

xix. 37, 38 . 

• -'5 

xxxiii. 17 

57 

xxxviii. 6 

... 170 

XXV. 23 . . 

• '^g 

xxxiii. 18 

165 

xliv. 2 

... 175 

xxvii. . . . 

168 

xxxiii. 22 

207 

xliv. 17 

... 166 

xxvii. I . . 

• 63 

xxxiii. 22 

246 

xlv. II . 

... 167 

xxvii. 9 . . 

. 169 

Jo.sh. X. 12 . . 

176 

xlvi. 4 . 

. . . 235 

xxvii. 20 . . 

. 169 

I Sam. ii. 35. 

. 180 

1-3 . 

. . . 88 

xxvii. 41 . . 

. 169 

ix. 9 . 

. 205 

li.3 . 

... 107 

xxviii. 7 . . 

• 54 

X. I . 

• 58 

Ii. 10.. 

• • • 237 

xxviii. 17 . . 

. 54 

xvi. 13, 

>4 

• 58 

Iv. 15 . 

. . . . 202 

XXX. 37-39 . 

• P 

xxviii. 

. 169 

Iviii. II 

. . . 202 

xxxiii. 10 . . 

. 63 

I Kings iii. 12 

. 172 

lix. II 

. ... 202 

xliv. 2-5 . . 

• 52 

iv. 32 

. 176 

Ixii. 6 . 

... 202 

xlvi. II . . 

• 149 

xii. 14 

4 

Ixviii. 18 

. . . . 202 

xlviii. 3, 4 . 

. 168 

xvii. I 

• 247 

Ixix. I 

. . . . 219 

xlix. 3 . . . 

. 163 

2 Kings vi. 5 

. 129 

Ixxvii. 16 

• . • 235 

xlix. 4, 5, 7 . 

. 164 

xxiii. 8 

. 191 

Ixxvii., Ix 

xviii. . 171 

xlix. 8-10. . 

. 246 

xxiv. 10 

• 177 

Ixxviii, 5^ 

I ... 171 

xlix. 8-12. . 

. 206 

XXV. 27 

• 177 

Ixxxii. 6 

... 52 

xlix. II . . 

. 164 

I Chron. iii. 15 

. 177 

Ixxxix. 4 

. ... 203 

Ps. xc. . . 
xc. 4 . 
xcvi. II 
civ. 2 . 
cyi. 30-3 
cix., ex. 
ex. I . 
ex. I . 
ex. I . 
ex. 3 . 
ex. 3 . 
ex. 4 . 
ex. 4 . 
exi. 10 
exiv. 5 
cxvii. 19 
exviii. 20 
exviii. 22 
exix. . . 
exix. 30-32 
exix. 137 
exxvii. 7 . 
exxxiii. 2 
exxxix. 15 
cxlviii. 4 
Prov. i. 3 . . 

i. 7 . . 

i. 7. . 

i. 32 . 

iv. 8 . 

v. 19 . 

vi. 27 . 

vii. 22 . 

vii. 26 . 

viii. 22-24 

ix. I . 

ix. I, 12 

ix. 10 . 

xi. 30 . 

xii. 2 . 

xvii. 27 

xxiv. 16 

XXV. I . 

xxvi. 27 
XXX. 15 

XXX. 18, 19, 2 

XXX. 21-23 

XXX. 24-28 

XXX. 29 

Eeeles. xi. 3 c 

Isa. i. 7 . . 

i. 7, 8 . 

i. 8 . . 

PAGE 

239 
179 

203 

253 
160 

170 

71 
16; 
2iy 

151 
229 

69 

73 

87 

235 

71 

71 

51 

239 

203 

222 

203 

»o5 
203 

235 
172 

87 
107 
192 

172 

173 
173 
173 
173 

77 
175 
173 

87 
173 
173 
173 

176 
193 
173 

174 
174 
174 
175 

243 
210 
251 

684 

HIPPOLYTUS : INDEX OF TEXTS. 

685 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

Isa. i. 16-19 .... 237 

Dan. ii. 3, 5 . . 

. . 186 

Matt v. 18 ... . 82 

Mark x. 18 . . . . 113 

i. 21 . 

206 

ii. 10, 14 . 

. . 186 

V. 18 . 

0 

242 

X. 38 . 

53 

i. 26 . 

182 

ii. 23 . . 

. 186 

V. 45 • 

50 

xi. 13, 14 

. 117 

ii. 4 . 

78 

w. 27, 29, 31 

. . 186 

vi. II . 

194 

xi. 20, 21 

. 117 

vi. 3 . 

252 

"•31-35 • 

. 208 

vn. 3. 4 

117 

xiii. i4-2< 

5 

, 218 

vii. 14 

• 56 

"•31-35 • 

■ • '^5 

vii. 6 . 

55 

Luke i. 17 . 

• 213 

viii. 6, 7 

216 

"•33.34 • 

. 187 

vii. 6 . , 

133 

i. 20 

• 235 

X. 12-17 

207 

"• 34, 35 • 

. . 209 

vii. II . 

64 

i. 26-38 

• 97 

xi. I . . . 

206 

"• 45 • • 

• 51 

vii. 13 . 

54 

'•35 

. 89 

xi. 2 . . 

175 

ii. 45, 46, 48, 

49. 187 

vii. 13, 14 

56 

'•35 

108 

xi. 14 

. 184 

iii. I . . 

. . 188 

vii. 13, 14 

192 

'•35 

. 237 

xi. 14 

215 

iii. 7 . . 

. 188 

vii. 14. . 

43 

i:43 

. 259 

xiv. 4-21 

208 

iii. 16, 19 . 

. 188 

vii. 18 . 

146 

11.7 

. 194 

xiy. 13-15 

215 

iii. 47 . . 

. 188 

vii. 21 . 

54 

ii. 22 

. 194 

xviii. I, 2 

216 

iii. 92, 93, 97 

. 188 

vii. 23. 

254 

ii. 23 

. 248 

xxiii. 4, 5 

215 

iv. 10-12 . 

• 76 

X. 5 . 

69 

ii. 25 

. 164 

xxvi. 10. 

218 

vii. . . . 

. 178 

X. 27 . 

50 

"• 34 

. 166 

xxvi. 19 . 

218 

vii. I, 2, 3, 4 

. 188 

X. 27 . 

181 

iii. 9 

" 55 

xxvi. 19. 

^5' 

vii. 2-8 

. 208 

X. 34 . 

68 

iii. 9 

. 78 

xxvi. 20. 

218 

vii. 2-8 

• 245 

XI. 14, 15 

. 119 

iii. 14 

• 252 

xxviii. 16 

51 

vii. 4, 6 . 

. 210 

xi. 27 . 

. 225 

iii. 17 

. 76 

xxix. II 

181 

vii. 5, 6, 7, 8 

. 189 

xi. 28 . 

165 

iv. 18 

. 181 

xxxiii. 17 

213 

vii. 8, 9 . 

. 214 

xii. 18 . 

. 205 

^'•35 

• 52 

xxxiii. 17 

253 

vii. 9-12, 13, 

14, 209 

xiii. 3-8 

. 118 

VI. 41, 42 

. 117 

xxxviii. 5, 7 

,8 

176 

vii. 9, 13, 22 

. 88 

xiii. 3-9 

• 54 

vii. 41 

. 200 

xl. 6 . . 

122 

vii. 13 . . 

• 191 

xm. 13 

. 52 

vii. 50 

. 254 

xl. 15 

• 57 

vii. 13 . . 

. 22 \ 

xiii. 30 

131 

viii. 5-8 

• 54 

xli. 8. . 

53 

vii. 13, 14 

• -'J 

xiii. 31, 32 

56 

viii. 5-8 

. 118 

xlii. I 

205 

vii. 13, 14, 17 

. 189 

xiii. 33y 34 

• 53 

^^.-..s • 

• 237 

xliii. I, 2 , 

53 

vii. 19, 22, 25 

. 190 

xm. 43 . 

190 

xiii. 7 . 

• 117 

xliv. 6 . 

224 

vii. 21 . . 

. 209 

xiii. 43 

. 218 

xiii. 15, i( 

. 181 

xlv. 5 

88 

viii. 2-8 . 

. 210 

xiv. ig 

• 135 

xiii. 19 

• 56 

xlv. 7 

172 

ix. 21 . . 

. 190 

xvi. 16, iJ 

237 

XV. 4-10 

• 98 

xlv. 11-15 

224 

ix. 24 . . 

• 179 

xvii. I . 

• 95 

xvi. 10, II 

, 1 

2 

• 151 

xlv. 14 . 

224 

ix. 27 . . 

• 213 

xvii. 5 . 

22 tj 

xvi. 24 

• 223 

xlv. 14, 18 . 

88 

ix. 27 . . 

• • 247 

xvii. 5 . 

• 230 

xvii. 4 . 

• 50 

xlv. 21, 22 

88 

ix. 27 . . 

. . 248 

xix. 17 

50 

xvii. 21 

• 50 

xlvii. 1-15 . 

211 

X. 6 . . . 

. 182 

xix. 17 

• 113 

xvii. 21 

• 53 

xlix. 9 . . 

181 

X. 6, 7 . . 

. 190 

XX. 16 . 

. 168 

xviii. 2-5 

. 216 

xlix. 15 

53 

X. 12, 13, 16, 

18, 190 

xxi. 19, 2C 

• "7 

xviii. 19 

• 50 

liii. I 

230 

X. 20 . . 

. 190 

xxi. 31 

• 54 

xviii. 19 

• 113 

liii. 2-5 

213 

xi. 31 . . 

. 218 

xxi. 31 

. 167 

xxi. 8 . 

. 244 

liii. 4 

230 

xi. 33 • • 

• 183 

xxii. 20 

• '36 

xxi. 8, 9 

• 244 

liii. 8 

48 

XI. 41 . . 

• 215 

xxii. 30 

. 238 

xxi. 18 

. 218 

liii. 9. 

200 

xii. I, 2,3, 7 

. 190 

xxiii. . 

• 154 

xxi. 20-2;; 

. 218 

liv. I 

55 

xii. 2 . . 

. 218 

xxiii. 27 

• 54 

xxi. 28 

. 21S 

Ivi. 3, 4 

. 205 

xii. 2 . . 

• 251 

xxiii. 38 

. 220 

xxii. 16 

. 240 

Iviii. 9 

193 

xii. 9, 1 1 . 

• '91 

xxiv. 12 

. 185 

xxii. 42 

■ 238 

Ix. I . 

218 

xii. II, 12 

. 218 

xxiv. 12 

. 244 

xxiii. . 

. 194 

Ixi. I . 

i8i 

Hos. i. 2 . . . 

• 73 

xxiv. 15-22 

. 218 

xxiv. 39 

240 

Ixiv. 4 

. 69 

vi. 3 . . 

• 235 

xxiv. 24 . 

. 248 

John i. 1-3 . 

. 22S 

Ixiv. 4 

• 71 

xin. 15. . 

• 243 

xxiv. 27, 28 

• 251 

i. 1-4 . 

63 

Ixiv. 4 

253 

xiv. 9 . . 

. 186 

xxiv. 27, 28, 

31 

218 

i. 3 . . 

56 

Ixv. I 

228 

Amos V. II, 12, 13 

• 243 

xxiv. 29 . 

251 

'•3.4 • 

52 

Ixvi. 24 

219 

Mic. ii. 7, 8 . . 

. 229 

xxiv. 29 . 

252 

i. 9 . . 

57 

Jer. i. 5 . 

n 

iii. 5-7 . . 

• 243 

XXV. 21, 23 

151 

i. 9 . . 

104 

i- 5 • 

210 

v. 5 . . . 

. 216 

XXV. 23 . 

254 

i. lo-ii 

228 

iv. II . 

216 

Zech. xii. 10. . 

2 C2 

XXV. 31-34 

• 252 

1. 14 . 

175 

viii. 16 

207 

Mai. iv. 2. . . 

• 217 

XXV. 34 . 

166 

i. 16 . 

168 

viii. 16 . 

246 

iv. 5, 6 . . 

• 213 

XXV. 34 . 

218 

i. 18 . 

225 

xvii. 9 

55 

Matt. ii. I, 2 

. 108 

XXV. 37 . 

253 

i. 20 

235 

xvii. II 

. 176 

ii. 9 . . 

• 235 

XXV. 46 . 

254 

i. 27 . 

235 

xvii. II 

• 215 

ii. 18 . . 

• 55 

xxvi. 41 . 

232 

i. 29 . . 

181 

xxii. 24 

178 

iii. 7 . . 

• 235 

xxvi. 41 . 

238 

i. 29 . 

206 

xxiii. 18 

228 

iii. 10 . . 

• • 55 

xxvi. 67 . 

237 

i. 29 . . 

213 

XXV. 11 

178 

iii. 10 . . 

• 78 

xxvii. 25 . 

164 

ii. i-ii 

53 

XXV. II 

180 

iii. II . . 

• 235 

xxvii. 29 . 

230 

)i. 4 . . . 

108 

xxxi. 15 

55 

iii. 12 . . 

• 76 

xxvii. 52, 53 

54 

ii. 19 . . 

206 

xliii. 8 

191 

iii. 13 . . 

• 235 

xxviii. 18 

209 

iii. 5, 6. . 

120 

xlix. 14 

171 

m. 14, 15, 16, 

17, 236 

xxviii. 19 

228 

iii. 6 . . 

52 

Ezek. iv. 6 

247 

iii. 16 . . 

• 237 

Mark iv. 3-8 . . 

118 

iii. 6 . . 

229 

xxviii. 2, 9 

215 

iv. 3 . . 

. • 235 

iv. 3-9 

54 

iii. 11, 13 . 

225 

xxviii. 2-10 

. 208 

IV. 15, 17 . 

. 167 

iv. 31, 32 

56 

iii. 13 . . 

225 

Dan. i. i, 2, 8 . 

185 

v. 15 . . 

• 5° 

ix. 2 . 

95 

iii. 13 . . 

238 

i. 12, ic 

) 

186 

V. 17 . . 

. 165 

X. 18 . . 

50 

iii. 14, I 

S- 

63 

686 

HIPPOLYTUS: INDEX OF TEXTS. 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PA 

John iii. 31 .... 201 

Acts vii. 52 ... . 221 

Gal. iii. 19 .... 113 

I Tim. V. 30 . . . . I 

iv. 7-14 

. 66 

viii. 9-24 

• 74 

iii. 20 

. 169 

vi. 20 

. I 

iv. 10 . 

• 57 

X. 36 . 

. 228 

iii. 28 

• 49 

vi. 20, 2 

1 

iv. X4 

■ 73 

xiii. 2 . 

• 259 

iv. 3. 

. 125 

2 Tim. ii. i, 2 

2 

iv. 14 

• 235 

xvii. 23 

. 114 

iv. 9 . 

• 125 

iii. 1-3 

2 

iv. 21 

• 56 

XX. 28-31 

. 125 

iv. 26 

• 52 

iv. 8 . 

• 2 

V. 22 

. 225 

xxii. 14 

. 221 

iv. 27 

• 55 

Heb. i. 3 . 

. 2 

V. 25 

. 218 

xxvii. 40 

. 216 

v-3 • 

. 123 

i. 9 . 

2 

V. 25 

• 251 

xxviii. 25 

• 237 

v. 17. 

. 72 

vii. 21 

V. 30 

. 226 

Rom. i. 17 . 

. 218 

V. 22 

• 171 

vii. 21 

-^■37 

• 53 

i. 20-27 

• 50 

vi. 15 

. 49 

xii. 29 

vi. 29 

. 226 

iii. 25 . 

. 226 

VI. 15 

. 152 

Jas. ii. 13 . 

2 

vi-35 

. 166 

V. 14 . 

. 106 

Eph. i. 10 

. 232 

Tit. ii. 13 . 

. 2 

VI. 44 

• 54 

viii. II 

. 225 

i. 21 

. 107 

I Pet. i. 24 

vi. 53 

• 53 

viii. II, 12 

. 89 

ii. 6. 

• 237 

iii. 19 

2 

vi.53 

• 255 

viii. 17 

• 237 

ii. 14 

. 181 

v. 1-3 

. 1 

vi. 66 

• 255 

viii. 19, 22 

. 106 

ii. 17 

• 54 

v-3 

. I 

vii. 38 

■ 235 

viii. 19-22 

108 

i'i- 3-5 

. 107 

2 Pet. i. 4 

. I 

viii. 16, 18 

. 226 

viii. 36 . 

• 175 

iii. 14-1 

8 

. 89 

i. 4 

2 

viii. 44 

64 

ix. 5 . 

224 

iii. 15 

51 

i. 18, I 

9 

. I 

ix. I 

• 57 

ix. 5 . 

225 

iii. 15 

. 224 

i. 21 

^ 2 

X.7. 

. 64 

X. 4 . 

. 236 

iv. 6 

. 228 

ii. I 

2 

X. 8 . 

. 89 

X. 18 . 

51 

iv. 13 

. 205 

ii. 4 

. I 

X.9. 

5^ 

xi. 17-21 

4 

iv. 26 

. 248 

11. 4 

. I 

X. 17, I 

3 

. 148 

xiv. 4 . 

131 

V. 14 

• 51 

ii. 4 

. I 

X. 18 

. 230 

xvi. 14 

256 

V. 14 

218 

ii. 22 

. I 

X. 30 

226 

I Cor. ii. 8 . 

235 

V. 15, I 

5 

244 

iii. 3 

2 

X. 34 

52 

ii. 9 . 

69 

Phil. ii. 6, 7 

143 

iii. 12 

X. 34 

153 

ii. 9 . 

71 

ii. 7. 

. 66 

I John ii. 18 

1 

XI. 51, i 

>2 

230 

ii.9 . 

73 

ii. 7. 

220 

iii. 10 

1 

xi. 52 

206 

li. 9 . 

223 

ii. 7 . 

• 235 

iv. I 

2 

^\:.S^ 

259 

ii.9 • 

253 

ii. 7-9 

. 167 

v. 16 

. I 

Xlll. I , 

226 

ii. 13 . 

107 

ii. 10 

. 209 

Jude 18, 19 

■ 2 

xiv. 6 

220 

11. 13, 14 

54 

ii. II . 

252 

Rev. i. 8 . 

xiv. 8, c 

226 

ii. 14 . 

89 

iii. 2 . 

244 

ii. 6 . 

. I 

xiv. 1 1 ' 

130 

iv. 15. 

154 

iii. 15 

167 

ii. 24 

xiv. 12 

226 

v. 7 . 

152 

Col. 1. 16 . 

252 

iii. 14 

xiv. 30 

174 

v.7,8 

122 

i. 16. 

253 

iii. 14 

XV. I 

206 

v.7,8 

123 

i. 18. 

240 

iii. 21 

I 

xvi. 26 

237 

v. 17 . 

238 

i. 19. 

59 

iii. 21 

, 2 

xvi. 28 

229 

viii. 6 

224 

i. 19. 

121 

V. 5 . 

. 2 

xvii. 5 

167 

X. n . 

54 

i. 26 . 

89 

V. 10 . 

I 

xvii. 22, 23 

153 

X. II . 

192 

ii. 8 . . 

125 

vi. 14 

2 

xvii. 22, 23 . 

226 

X. 15 . . 

259 

ii. 8 . 

244 

xi. 3. . 

2 

xviii. 37 . 

206 

XI. 19. . 

125 

ii. 9 . . 

59 

.xi. 3. . 

2 

xix. 14 . . 

179 

xi. 29-34 

259 

ii.9 • 

142 

XI. 3, 6 

2 

xix. 26 . 

72 

xi. 32 . . 

77 

ii. II, 14 

, I 

5 

120 

xi. 4-6 . 

2 

xix. 37 . 

252 

XV. 20 

240 

ii. 14 

181 

xii. 1-6 

2 

XX. 17 . 

226 

XV. 23-28 

226 

ii. 20 

125 

xiii. 11-18 

2 

XX. 27 . 

240 

XV. 47 . 

167 

I Thess. iv. 12 . 

219 

xiii. 18 . . 

2 

Vets ii. 3 . . 

237 

XV. 52 

251 

iv. 16 . 

251 

xvii. 9 . . 

2 

ii. 20 . 

251 

2 Cor. ii. II . . 

86 

2 Thess. ii. i-ii . 

218 

xvii., xviii. 

2 

ii. 24 . 

66 

V. 17 . . 

49 

ii. 3, 4-8 

247 

XX. 6 . . 

2 

ii. 34 . 

238 

V. 17 . . 

152 

ii. 8 . . 

160 

XX. II . . 

2 

111. 14 . 

221 

xii. 2 . . 

54 

iii. 2 . 

204 

-xxi. I . . 

2 

iii. 24 . 

170 

xii. 4 . . 

108 

I Tim. ii. 5 . . 

169 

xxii. 15 

2 

iv. 19 . 

226 

xiii. 4 

166 

iv. 1-5 . 

124 

V. 13 . 

« 

159 

Gal. i. I . . . 

206 

iv. 3 . . 

112 

V. 29 . 

226 

ii. 4 . • . 

192 

IV. 3- 

5 • 

135 

CYPRIAN. 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 

Adultery, extreme sinfulness of, 332, 

334-. 
Almsgiving, exhortation to, 478-484; 

extent of, in the primitive Church, 

563 (note). 
Amen, use of, 560 (note). 
Anointing in baptism, 376. 
Antichrist at hand, 346, 349. 
Ark, the, type of the Church, 394. 
Assembly (synod) composed of clergy 

and laity, 310. 
Aurelius, confessor, 311; ordained 

reader, 312. 
Axe, at the root of the tree, 595 

(note). 

Baptism, grace irt, 276, 3S8 seqq. ; 
infant, not to be delayed, 353- 
354 ; remission of sins in, '354 ; 
of water, 360 ; not repeated, 360 ; 
none out of the Church, 375, 
385, 565 seqq.; chrism in, 376; 
heretical, invalid, 377, and Coun- 
cil of Carthage on, 565-572; df 
the Samaritan convgrts, 381 ; 
clinic, valid, 400. 

Bishops, succession of, the Church 
founded on, 305 ; concurrence of, 
in Roman and African councils, 
328-329 ; mutual independence 
of, 332 ; ordained by God when 
duly chosen, 340-341 ; appointed 
by Christ, 366; to be ordained 
by the bishops of the province, 
and in public, 37 1 ; in the Church, 
and the Church in the bishop, 
374; each holds an undivided 
part in the one Episcopate, 423; 
no "bishop of bishops," 565. 

Black (mourning) garments not suit- 
able for Christians, 474. 
^ Bread, spiritual and natural (in the 
Lord's Prayer), 452. 

Caecilius, teacher of Cyprian, 268. 

Captives, Christian, redeemed by the 
church of Carthage at great 
price, 355. 

Carthage, church of, Roman testi- 
mony to, 30S ; numbers of, 418 
(note) ; Council of, 565-572. 

Catechumens, care for, in danger, 
293 ; martyrdom of, equivalent to 
baptism, 385. 

Celerina, martyr, 313. 

Celerinus, writer in behalf of lapsed 
sisters, 29S; confessor, 312; or- 
dained reader, 313. 

Chastity, discipline and advantage 
of, 587 ; degrees of, 588 ; pre- 
cepts of, 589; examples of Joseph 
and Susanna, 589-590; condi- 
tions of, 591. 

Children, the Three, faith and courage 
of, 34!^. 372, 407, 446 ; martyrs, 503. 

Chrism in baptism, 376. 

Christ, rejected by the Jews, reveals 
God to man, 468. 

Christians, exhorted to obedience, 
284, to humility, 283, to persever- 
ance, 284, to purity, 285, to prayer, 
286, to temperance, 287 ; perse- 
cutions of, under IDemetrianus, 
461, how endured and divinely 
punished, 462-465 ; rewards of 
their faith, 465 ; must expect 
suffering in this life, 472. 

Church, unity of, in the episcopate, 
318, 376, 422", necessity of com- 
munion with, 318; not to be 
divided nor forsaken, 322, 423; 
no Christian apart from, ^^Si 
has one baptism, 382 ; typified 
by the Ark, 394, by the Sun, 423, 
by the Bride and coat of Christ, 
423, by Rahab and by the Pass- 
over, 424. 

Collections for the poor and prisoners, 
282. 

Confessors, the Church's care and 
honour for, 282, 295, 302, 315; 
character required in, 283 ; some 
in peril of heresy, 427. 

Confirmation, supplement to baptism, 
376, 378. 

Continency, excellence of, 436. 

Cornelius, ordained bishop of Rome, 
319; evidence of his ordination 
received and approved by Cyp- 
rian, 320 ; restores certain schis- 
matics repenting, 323; his char- 
acter, 329; how made bishop, 

329. 333- 
Council of Carthage on heretical 

baptism, 565-572. 
Councils, freedom of, 41 1 (note). 
Crenientius, sub-deacon and martvr, 

281. 
Custom not to be followed against 

truth, 382, 571. 

Cyprian, St., his theory of the epi* 
copate primitive, not mediaeval, 
263, 415 (note) ; preserves equal 
rights to all orders, 263 ; his life, 
264; dates and order of his 
Epistles, 265 ; Life by Pontius, 
267-274; election and character 
as bishop, 269; conduct in the 
plague, 270; exile, 271; vision 
of martyrdom, 271; his passion 
and death, 274; does nothing 
without consent of his clergy 
and people, 282 ; vision of Chris- 
tian duty, 286; withdrawal justi- 
fied by his clergy, 304; excon> 
municates Felicissimus and fol- 
lowers, 316; assembles a synod 
of African bishops, 336; his 
anxiety to restore the lapsed, 
344; redeems Numidian captives, 
355; defence against Florentius, 
372 ; controversy with Stephen 
on heretical baptism, 376-379, 
419 (note), 565-572; approach 
of martyrdom, 409; his writings 
contradict the papal theory, 557 
(note) ; interpolations of his 
Treatise on the Unity of the 
Church, 558; presides and pro- 
nounces sentence in the Council 
of Carthage, 572 ; treatises at- 
tributed to him, 573. 

> ''Deacons, humility required in, 365- 
366; appointed by the Apostles, 
366. 

Death, to be desired rather than 
feared by Christians, 469. 

Demoniac possession, instance of, 

392-393- 
Departed, no confession possible for, 

33'. 335; offerings for, not 

allowed in certain cases, 367. 
Discipline, ancient, to be maintained, 

especially by martyrs, 309, and 

virgins, 431 ; value of, 430; 

severity against worldiness, 595. 
Donatus, Epistle to, 275. 
Dress of virgins, treatise on, 429; 

God's order in, how corrupted, 

434- 

Episcopate, Church founded on, 305; 
one, 318, 413 (note), 423; repre- 
sents the priesthood, 340; not 
6S7 

688 

CYPRIAN : INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 

developed from the presbyterate, 
410 (note). 

Eucharist, a safeguard in persecution, 
337 ; how received, 350 ; not to 
be celebrated with water only, 
359, nor with wine only, 362 ; 
types of, in Holy Scripture, 359- 
360; loaf of, symbolizes the 
unity of Christians, 362, 398; 
morning celebration, memorial 
of the Resurrection, 363 ; carried 
to the sick, 488, 561 (note). 

Evaristus, schismatic, deposed and 
excommunicated, 325. 

Exorcism in baptism, power and con- 
ditions of, 402. 

Felicissimus and his followers ex- 
communicated, 316; his crimes, 
338; author of schism, 415 
(note). 

Fortunatus, schismatic bishop, 342, 
415 (note). 

Gehenna, punishments of, 584. 
Gladiatorial shows, wickedness of, 

"-n, 576-577- 

Heretics, cannot give true baptism, 
376-385, 425, 565-572, nor attain 
true martyrdom, 384, 426; ap- 
point bishops without ordination, 
424; have not Christ's presence, 
425; types of, in the Old Testa- 
ment, 427 ; compared with the 
lapsed, 427 ; why favoured by 
certain confessors, 427. 

Holy Ghost, why He came in the 
form of a dove, 424. 

Idolatry, sin of, purged by repent- 
ance, 334; really demon-wor- 
ship, 467 ; .Scripture testimonies 
against, 528. 

Idols, vanity of, 415. 

Innocents, the Holy, martyrdom of, 
349- 

Jealousy, sin and evil of, 493-495. 
ews. Scripture testimonies against, 
of idolatry,' 508 ; rejecting the 
prophets, 50S, and Christ, 509 ; 
not understanding Scripture, 
509; rejected by God, 510, the 
law and priesthood being abro- 
gated, and the temple destroyed, 
511, the Gentiles taking their 
place, 512-513, and the Baptism 
and Cup of Christ replacing 
tneir rites, 514; Christ the Wis- 
dom and Word of God, 515-516, 
divine, 517, the Saviour, 518, 
incarnate, 519, born in IJethle- 
hem, 520, of low estate, 520, the 
Lamb slain, 521, the Stone, 522, 
the Bridegroom, 523, crucified, 
524, risen and exalted, 525, re- 
vealing the Father, 526, Judge 
and King, 527 ; the jews neglect- 
ing mercy and charity, 530-533, 
humility and patience, 534, trust 
in God, 535, fear of God, 539, 
forgiveness, 541 ; exacting usury, 
546. 

Job, an example of offerings, 481. 

Judah, Lion of, 513, 562 (note). 

Laity, in i)rimitive councils, 411 
(note). 

Lapsed, the, to be communicated in 
sickness if penitent, 281, 328, 
but not otherwise, 290, 304, 441 ; 
martyrs importuned for them, 
291 ; greatness of their sin, 292, 
441 ; peace to be given to the 
penitent and exiled, 297 ; their 
case decided by council of clergy 
and laity, 310, 317; merciful 
judgment of them required, 332; 
decree of the African synod on, 
336 ; worldliness a cause of their 
sin, 438; instance of divine judg- 
ment in Cyprian's time, 443-444; 
exhortation to repentance, 446. 

Laws, abuse of, 278. 

Lord's Prayer, the, common to Chris- 
tians only, 449-450; exposition 
of, in detail, 449-455 ; illustra- 
tions of, from Jewish liturgies, 
559 (note), use of Amen in, 560 
(note). 

Lucian, martyr, gives peace to the 
lapsed at Rome, 299; rebuked 
by Cyprian, 300. 

Lucius, bishop of Rome and con- 
fessor, his banishment and resto- 
ration, 352. 

Maccabees, martyrs of, 349, 503- 

505- 
Manna, types of grace, 401. 
Mappalicus, martyr, 288-289. 
Martyrdom, glory and blessing of, 

303, 496, 579-587 ; exhortation 

to. 347-350. 579-587; supplies 
the want of baptism, 385; in 
will, sufficient, 473 ; a baptism 
of blood, 497 ; rewards of, 505- 
506, 538, 579-587. 
Martyrs, their faith, courage, and 
sufferings, 287-288, 403 ; the 
glory of the Church, 289, 296; 
importuned for the lapsed, 291 ; 
commemorated in oblations, 313, 
315; boys, 404, 407; letters of, 
405-406; Scripture examples of, 

503- 

Mortality, how made a blessing to 
Christians, 472-473. 

Mourning (garments), unfit for Chris- 
tians, 474. 

Nicostratus, deacon, crimes and dep- 
osition of, 325. 

Novatian, schismatically ordained, 
rejected by Cyprian, 319-321, 

333- 
Novatus, schismatic, character and 

crimes of, 325. 

Numidianus, confessor, ordained 

presbyter, 314. 

Offerings for the departed, 367. 
Orders, minor, origin of, 417 (note). 
Ordination, the term used of a 
bishop, 413 (note). 

Paradise, recognition of friends in, 

475- 
Patience, advantage of, 484 ; example 
of Christ, 485, of the patriarchs, 
486-489; sin and result of im- 
patience, 489. 

Peace given to the lapsed by certain 
martyrs, 299. 

Persecutions, how endured, 461-465; 
divine judgments for, 462-464; 
reward of faith and patience 
under, 465. 

Perseverance in faith better than at- 
tainment, 284. 

Peter, St., Christ's charge to, refers 
to the whole episcopate, 305 ; the 
Church built on him answering 
for all, 341, 374, 377, 382, 394, 
422 ; does not claim supremacy, 
377; meaning of "the Rock," 
561 (note). 

Pontiff, the designation of a bishop, 
270. 

Poor, care of the Church for, 314. 

Prayer, exhortation to, 286; for the 
lapsed, 310; reverence in, 448; 
conditions of acceptable, 455- 
456; examples, 456; hours of, 
456-457. 

Presbyters, some claim all authority, 
289; not to serve in secular 
things, 367 ; to be publicly chosei» 
and ordained, 370. 

Psalms, sung at meals, 280; varia- 
tions in numbering of, 546 (note), 
564 (note). 

Regeneration, effect of, 279. 

Remission of sins, only in the 
Church, 378 ; first by St. Peter, 
then by all the Apostles, 381 ; 
to all bishops as successors of 
the Apostles, 394 ; from God 
only, 442 ; examples of denial to 
the impenitent in Holy Scrip 
ture, 443. 

Repentance, tokens of, 293; a claim 
for the Church's peace, 335; ex- 
hortation to, 592-595. 

Riches, abuse of, 278. 

Rock of the Church, how interpreted, 
561 (note). 

Rome, See of, source of unity, 344 ; 
not above the African bishops, 
344, 596; not always follows the 
tradition of the Apostles, 391 ; 
succession from St. Peter, 394 ; 
its primacy, not supremacy, ac- 
knowledged by Cyprian, 596. 

Sacrifice, to idols, guilt of, 330; sacri- 
fice not acceptable without love, 

454- 
Scriptures, authority of, in councils, 

328. 
Seven, number, symbol of perfection, 

5°3- . . 
Sin, condition of forgiveness, 453. 
Stephen, bishop of Rome, position 

in regard to heretical baptism, 

376-379; breaks the unity of the 

Church, 396. 
Strangers, the Church's care for. 

314- 
Sursttm Corda, verse and response 

in St. Cyprian's time, 455, 559 
(note). 
Synod, African, decree of, on giving 
peace to the lapsed, 2?i^- 

Teaching presbyters, a distinct class, 
301. 

CYPRIAN: INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 

689 

Theatres, licentiousness of, 277, 576; 
acting in, not allowed to Chris- 
tians, 356; their idolatry, 576, 
cruelty, 577, folly, 578. 

Tobias, example of, 48 1, 503. 

Unity of the Church, in the episco- 
pate, 318 ; Cyprian's treatise on, 
referred to, 327 ; necessary to 
ordination, 329, to teaching, 333 ; 
types in Holy Scripture, 398- 
399; how beginning from St. 
Feter, 422. 

Unity of God, acknowledged by 
heathen, 467. 

Virginity, blessing of, 5S9. 

Virgins, abuses among, 357, 435; 
discipline of, 358; glory of the 
Church, 431 ; modesty of dress 
required in, 432, even if rich, 
433; not to frequent marriage 
feasts nor public baths, 435. 

Vision given to a dying Christian, 473. 

Water made wine, spiritual meaning 
of, 362. 

Widows, examples in Holy Scrip- 
ture, 480. 

Will of God, how to be done, 451. 

Works of God, beauty of, 578. 

Works of mercy. Christian extent of, 
in the early Church, 528, 563 
(note). 

World, in the Church, 438 ; material, 
decay of, 458, 475, 560 (note); 
God's judgments on, 459. 

Xistus, bishop of Rome, martyrdom 
of, 408. 

CYPRIAN. 

INDEX OF TEXTS. 

PAGE 1 

PAGE 1 

PAGE 

PAGE 

Gen. i. 4 570 1 

Ex. xix. 22 ... . 370 

Num. XX. 25, 26 . . 370 

I Sam. i. 13 . . . 

448 

i. 26 . . 

434 

xix. 22 . . 

379 

xxiii. 14 . . 

513 

ii. 3, 4 • • 

533 

ii. 24 . . 

589 

XX. 3 . . . 

498 

xxiii. 19 . 

524 

ii. 5 . . . 

513 

iii. 14, 15 . 

519 

XX. 4 . . . 

498 

xxiv. 7-9 

519 

ii. 25 . . 

499 

iii. 16 . . 

436 

XX. 4 . . 

549 

xxiv. 17 

519 

ii. 25 . . . 

542 

iii. 16 . . 

543 

XX. 7 . . . 

537 

Deut. iv. 10 . . 

540 

ii. 30 . . 

450 

iii. 17-19 . 

487 

XX. 12 . . 

384 

iv. 24 . 

381 

ii. 30 . . 

495 

iii. 17-19 . 

548 

XX. 23 . . 

549 

vi. 5 • 

539 

ii:35. 36 . 

5'2 

V. 24 . . 

474 

xxii. 20 . . 

343 

VI. 13 . . 

439 

viii. 7 . . 

340 

V. 24 . . 

548 

xxii. 20 . . 

364 

vi. 13 . . 

459 

viii. 7 . . 

366 

XI. 1-3 . . 

513 

xxii. 20 . . 

439 

vi. 13 . 

498 

viii. 7 . . 

373 

xiv. 18 . . 

359 

xxii. 20 . . 

462 

vi. 13 . 

535 

xvi. 7 . . 

445 

xiv. 18 . . 

512 

xxii. 20 . 

498 

viii. 2 . 

47i 

xvi. 7 . . 

547 

XV. 6 . . 

510 

xxii. 22-24 

556 

X. 20 . 

498 

xxi. 4 . . 

544 

XV. 6 . . 

545 

xxii. 28 . 

537 

xiii. 3 . 

472 

2 Sam. vii. 4, 5 . . 

5" 

xix. 24 . . 

j44 

xxiii. 2 . . 

345 

xiii. 3 . 

501 

vii. 5 . . 

520 

xix. 26 . . 

287 

xxiii. 7 . . 

521 

xiii. 3 . 

537 

vii. 12-16 . 

5" 

xxii. I, 2 

537 

xxiii. 20, 21 

517 

xiii. 5 . 

318 

vii. 12-16 . 

520 

xxii. II, 12 . 

517 

xxviii. 43 

364 

xiii. 6-10 

. 499 

I Kings i. 36 . . 

560 

vxii. II, 12 

539 

xxviii. 43 

370 

xiii. 12-18 

499 

xi. 4 . . 

• 55' 

XXV. 23 

512 

xxviii. 43 

379 

xiii. 19 . 

547 

xi. 14 . . 

• 454 

xxvii. 27-29 

513 

xxix. 3 . . 

459 

xvii. 12 . 

319 

xi. 23 . . 

• 553 

xxxi. 13 . 

517 

xxxii. I . 

508 

xvii. 12, 13 

340 

xi. 31 . . 

• 4^3 

XXXV. I . , 

517 

xxxii. 6 . 

550 

xvii. 12, 13 

358 

xvii. 14 . 

. 481 

xxxvii. 19, 20 . 

375 

xxxii. 31 

442 

xvii. 12, 13 

365 

xviii. 21 . 

570 

xxxviii. 14, 15 . 

545 

xxxii. 31-33 . 

499 

xvii. 12, 13 

373 

xix. 7, 8 . 

■ 452 

xlviii. 17-19 . . 

5'3 

xxxii. 31-33 . 

508 

xviii. 10 . 

• 553 

xix. 10 

508 

xlix. 8-12 . 

5'3 

Lev. vii. 20 . . . 

441 

xviii. 18, 19 

5»2 

2 Kings xvii. 20, 21 

399 

xlix. II 

360 

vii. 20 . 

554 

xxiii. 19 . 

• 546 

xxiv. 1 1 . 

454 

xlix. 24 

522 

xix. 2 . 

376 

xxiii. 21-23 

• 543 

I Chron. xvi. 36 . 

560 

fix. i. 12 . . 

501 

xix. 13 . 

553 

xxiv. 26 . 

334 

2 Chron. xv. 2 . . 

542 

iii. 2 . . 

555 

xix. 18 . 

285 

xxvii. 8 . 

r22 

XV. 2 . . 

500 

iii. 2-6 . 

524 

xix. 18 . 

555 

xxvii. 15 . 

. 560 

xxiv. 20 . 

• 345 

iii. 16 . . 

3'7 

xix. 27 . 

445 

xxviii. 44 

• 513 

Neh. ix. 26 . . . 

508 

iv. 24-26 

414 

xix. 27 . 

553 

xxviii. 66 

524 

Job i. 5 . . . . 

481 

vi. II, 12 

502 

xix. 32 . 

553 

XXX. 6 

• 5'o 

i. 8 .... 

471 

xii. 3-12 

522 

XX. 7 

450 

xxxii. 17 

. 498 

i. 8 .... 

537 

xii. 4 . . 

553 

XX. 10 . 

589 

xxxii. 17 

508 

i. 12 . . . . 

454 

xii. 6 . . 

363 

xxi. 17 . 

364 

xxxii. 35 

• ^^1 

i. 21 . . . . 

471 

xii. II 

535 

xxi. 17 . 

370 

xxxii. 39 

. 498 

i. 21, 22 . . . 

534 

xii. 13 . 

464 

xxi. 21 . 

379 

xxxiii. 9 

449 

ii. 9, ic . . . 

537 

xii. 13 . 

525 

xxiv. 13, I 

4 

537 

xxxiii. 9 

. 480 

ii. 10 . . . . 

471 

xii. 46 . 

398 

Num. v. 22 . 

560 

xxxiii. 9 

500 

xiv. 4, 5 . . . 

547 

xii. 46 . 

424 

viii. 5-7 

. 401 

Josh. i. 8 . . 

. 386 

xxix. 12, 13 . 

556 

ziii. 21 . 

517 

xii. 3 . 

331 

ii. 18, 19 

• 398 

xxix. 12, 13, 15, 16 

^^l 

xiv. 11-14 

• 500 

xvi. 9, 10 

• 366 

ii. 19 . 

• 424 

xxxi. 27 

498 

xiv. 19 . 

• 5'7 

xvi. 26 

• 370 

iii. 15 . 

• 562 

Ps. i. 2 

557 

xvii. 9-14 

• 525 

xvi. 26 

. 400 

V. 2 

• 5'o 

i. 5 . 

543 

xvii. 11-14 

• 501 

xvii. 5 

• 399 

V. 10, II 

• 562 

ii. 1-3 

5" 

xix. 10, II 

• 525 

xvii. 10 

• 47' 

V. i3-'5 

• 523 

ii. 1-3 

5^<^ 

xix. 15 . 

• 544 

xvii. 10 

• 537 

xxiv. 26, 2 

7 

. 522 

11. 6 . 

527 

xix. 18 . 

• 555 

xix. 2 . 

• 376 

Judg. ii. 11-13 

• 508 

ii. 7, 8 

5>9 

xix. 22 . 

• 364 

xix. 8, 9, 

12, 

13 

, 401 

iv. I . 

. 508 

ii. 10 . 

556 

690 

CYPRIAN: INDEX OF TEXTS. 

691 

FACE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

Ps. ii. 1 1 540 

Ps. lix. II .... 468 

Prov. iii. 28 . . . . 531 

Isa. iii. I, 2 . . . 

• 514 

ii. 12 . 

• 357 

Ixii. I 

• 535 

viii. 22-31 

515 

iii. 12 ... 

• 441 

ii. 12 . 

. 430 

l.xiy. 3 . 

• 580 

ix. 1-5 

360 

iii. 12 ... 

• 306 

ii. 12 . 

• 551 

Ixviii. 1-7 

• 526 

ix. 1-6 

516 

iii. 12 . . . 

. 556 

iii. 5 . 

• 525 

Ixviii. 4 . 

. 518 

ix. 8 . 

555 

iii. 16 . . . 

• 433 

iv. 4 . 

• 448 

Ixviii. 5 . 

. 556 

ix. 12 

566 

V. 8 . . . . 

• 550 

iv. 5 . 

. 512 

Ixviii. 6 . 

. 286 

ix. 19 

376 

V. 25, 26, 27 . 

• 514 

V. 2 . 

• 457 

Ixviii. 6 . 

. 398 

ix. 19 

396 

vi. 9, 10 . . . 

• 509 

V. 2, 3 

• 527 

Ixviii. 6 . 

• 424 

ix. 19 

566 

vi. 10 . . . 

. 580 

vi. 5 .- 

• 331 

Ixviii. 6 . 

• 449 

x-3 

453 

vii. 9. . . . 

• 509 

vi. 5 . 

• 556 

Ixviii. 6 . 

• 454 

x-3 

479 

vii. 9 . . . . 

• 545 

xiv. 1-4 

• 527 

Ixviii. 6 . 

• 553 

X. 9 

547 

vii. 10-15 . . 

• 519 

xiv. 9-1 1 

• 527 

Ixxii. I, 2 

• 527 

X. 19 

555 

vii. 13, 14 . . 

. 288 

XV. 6 . 

• 546 

Ixxii. I, 2 

■ 544 

xi. 24 

481 

viii. 16, 17 . . 

. 510 

xvi. 10 

. 525 

Ixxiii. 27 

• 391 

xi. 26 

55° 

ix. I, 2 . . . 

• 514 

xviii. 25, 26 

554 

Ixxiv. 12 

527 

xii. 16 

• 535 

ix. 6 . . . . 

• 524 

xyiii. 43, 44 

• 513 

Ixxxii. I, 6, 

7 

. 518 

xii. 22 

• 555 

X. 22 . . . . 

• 455 

xix. 5, 6 . . 

• 523 

Ixxxii. 3 . 

• 534 

xiii. 24 

■ 555 

X. 2^. . . . 

. 516 

xix. 9 . 

• 541 

Ixxxii. 5 . 

• 509 

xiv. 25 

• 537 

xi. 1-3 .. . 

. 520 

xix. 12 

. 547 

Ixxxii. 5 . 

. 518 

XV. I . 

• 496 

xi. 10 . . . 

• 514 

XX. 4 . 

. 298 

Ixxxii. 8 . 

• 527 

XV. 3 . 

• 448 

xiii. 6-9 . . . 

• 464 

XX. 7, 8 

501 

Ixxxiv. I . 

• 475 

XV. 3 . 

• 547 

xiv. 13, 14, 15, 16 

. 339 

xxii. 6-8 

• 521 

Ixxxiv. I, 2 

• 548 

XV. 10, 12 

• 358 

xiv. 16 , . . 

• 556 

xxii. 15 

• 521 

Ixxxviii. 9 

• 524 

xvi. 6 . 

• 476 

xxii, 13, 14 

• 550 

xxii. 16-22 

524 

Ixxxix. 19 

. 287 

xvi. 6 . 

• 531 

XXV. II . . , 

• 524 

xxii. 27, 28 

• 527 

Ixxxix. 19 

• 375 

xvi. 27 

• 346 

xxvi. II . . . 

• 5'7 

xxiii. 5 . 

361 

Ixxxix. 27-3 

3 

5'6 

xvi. 32 

• 535 

xxviii. 16 . . 

r-yy 

xxiv. 3, 4 

553 

Ixxxix. 30 

• 438 

xvii. 4. 

. 346 

xxix. 10. . . 

' 343 

xxiv. 3-6 

523 

Ixxxix. 30 

• 592 

xvii. 4. 

• 374 

xxix. 10 . . . 

. 446 

xxiv. 7-10 

527 

Ixxxix. 30-32, ; 

53 

. 286 

xviii. 19 

• 331 

xxix. 11-18 . 

• 509 

XXV. 4, 5 . 

519 

Ixxxix. 32, 33 

• 333 

xix. 5 . 

• 396 

xxix. 13 . . . 

. 362 

xxvii. 3, 4 

501 

Ixxxix. 32, 23 

■ 548 

xix. 9 . 

. 567 

xxix. 13 . . . 

. 370 

xxviii. 4, 5 

509 

xciii. II . 

• 552 

xix. 17 

• 531 

xxix. 13 . . . 

• 387 

XXX. 3 . , 

525 

xcvi. 5 . 

• 549 

xix. 18 

• 555 

xxix. 14. . . 

. 484 

XXX. 9 . . 

556 

xcvii. I . 

• 527 

XX. 7 . 

. 481 

xxix. 15 . . . 

• 547 

xxxiii. 6 . 

516 

cvii. 20 , 

516 

XX. 7 

■ 531 

XXX. I . . . 

• 341 

xxxiv. I . 

537 

ex. I, 2 . 

. 526 

XX. 9 

■ 476 

XXX. I . . . 

• 592 

xxxiv. 8-10 

514 

ex. 3 . . 

• 512 

XX. 13 

■ 555 

XXX. 15 . . . 

• 306- 

xxxiv. 9 . 

541 

ex. 4 . . 

• 359 

XX. 22 

■ 463 

XXX. 15 . . . 

• 592 

xxxiv. 12, 13 

429 

cxi. 10 

• 539 

xxi. I 

■ 553 

XXX. 51 . . . 

• 447 

xxxiv. 12, 13 

537 

cxii. 9 

• 531 

xxi. 13 

• 477 

xxxi. 6 . . . 

• 592 

xxxiv. 13 

320 

cxiii. 13 . 

• 580 

xxi. 13 

• 531 

xxxiii. 10, II . 

• 525 

xxxiv. 18 . . 

534 

cxv. 4-8 . 

• 498 

xxiii. 9 

. 458 

xxxiii. 14-27 . 

• 527 

xxxiv. 19 . . 

534 

exvi. 5 

• 538 

xxiii. 9 

• 546 

XXXV. 3-6 . . 

. 518 

xxxvii. 7 . . 

493 

exvi. 12, 13, 

15 

• 404 

xxiv. 15 

554 

xl. 3-5 • • • 

• 517 

xxxvii. 12, 13 . 

493 

cxvi. 13 . 

• 337 

XXV. 21 

531 

xl. 6 . . . . 

. 432 

xxxvii. 25 . . 

453 

exvi. 15 . 

. 288 

XXV i. 4 

458 

xl. 6, 7, . . . 

• 548 

xxxvii. 25, 26 . 

481 

cxvi. 15 . 

. 407 

xxvi. 27 

555 

xli. 15-20 . . 

• 517 

xxxvii. 25, 26 . 

531 

cxvi. 15 . 

■ 506 

xxviii. 14 

539 

xiii. 2-4. . . 

• 521 

xxxviii. 35, 36 

339 

cxviii. 6 . 

501 

xxviii. 27 

478 

xiii. 6-8. . . 

. 51& 

xli. I . . 

477 

exviii. 6 . 

535 

xxviii. 27 

531 

xiii. 13, 14 . . 

. 490 

xli. I . . 

531 

cxviii. 8 . 

535 

xxviii. 28 

534 

xiii. 24 . . . 

■ 443 

xlv. I . 

516 

cxviii. 18 

548 

xxix. 22 . 

396 

xiii. 24 . . . 

• 454 

xlv. 6, 7, 

10 

518 

exviii. 21-26 

522 

Eecles. i. 14 . 

535 

xliii. 1-3 . . 

. 502 

xlv. II . 

394 

exviii. 22 

457 

iii. 21 

547 

xliii. 13, 14 

526 

1. 1-6 . . 

526 

cxviii. 26 

• 517 

v. 4 , 

543 

.xliii. 18-21. . 

• 360 

1.3,6. . 

490 

cxix. I, 2 

506 

V. 10 

550 

xliii. 18-21. . 

• 511 

1. 13-15 . 

512 

cxix. I, 2 

539 

X. 9 . . 

553 

xliii. 25 . . . 

592 

1. 14, 15 . 

543 

cxix. 120 

524 

Isa. i. 2 . . . 

495 

xliv. 21, 22 

592 

1. 16 . . 

551 

cxxvi. 5, 6 . 

506 

i. 2-4 . 

509 

xlv. I . . . 

514 

1. 16-18 

363 

exxvi. 5, 6 . 

538 

i. 3 . . . 

450 

xlv. 14-16 . . 

517 

1.17 . 

430 

cx.xxi. I . 

547 

1. 7-9 . 

Sio 

xlvi. I, 2, 5 

549 

1. 17, 18 . 

372 

cxxxii. II 

520 

1. II, 12. 

512 

xlvi. 6, 7 . . 

• 549 

1. 18 . . 

551 

exxxiii. i 

390 

i. 1 5-20 . . 

515 

xlvi. 8 . . . 

• 592 

1. 19, 20 . 

320 

exxxiii. i 

553 

i. 17, 18. . 

556 

xlviii. 21 . . 

360 

1. 20 . . 

555 

cxxxv. 15-18 

498 

i. 19 . . . 

547 

xlviii. 21 . . 

5" 

1. 23 . . 

512 

exxxv. 16-18 

549 

ii. 2 . . . 

390 

1.5,6 . . . 

284 

li.5 . . 

547 

cxxxix. 16 . . 

445 

ii. 2-4 . . 

523 

1.5-7 . . . . 

520 

h. 17 . . 

471 

cxli. 2 . . 

363 

ii. 3,4 . . 

510 

Hi. 10 . . . 

5'7 

Ii. 17 . . 

534 

cxli. 5 . . 

376 

ii. 5, 6 . . 

510 

Iii. 11 . . . . 

439 

Ii. 18 . . 

403 

clxi. 2 . . 

524 

ii. 8 . . . 

462 

Hi. II ... 

544 

H. 19 . . 

407 

Prov. i. 19 . . 

479 

ii.8,9 . . 

364 

Hi. 15 ... . 

514 

liii. 5 . . 

431 

i. 28, 29 , 

509 

ii. 8, 9 . . 

439 

liii. I . . . . 

516 

liii. 5 . . 

547 

iii. II . . 

430 

ii.8,9 . . 

498 

liii. 1-7 . . . . 

520 

Ivi. II 

• 535 

iii. II, 12 

551 

ii. 12. . 

339 

liii. 7 . . . . 

284 

692 

CYPRIAN : INDEX OF TEXTS. 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

Isa. liii. 7-9 .... 521 

Jer. xi. 18, 19 . . 

521 

Hos. iv. 1-4 . . . 

. 460 

Matt. V. 4 .... 233 

liii. 12 . 

• 521 

xi. 19 . . . 

. 524 

iv. 1-4 . . . 

. 546 

V. 4 . 

• 534 

liv. 1-4 . 

• 5'^ 

XV. 9 . . . . 

. 525 

vi. I ... 

• 457 

V- 5 • 

• 534 

liv.7,8. 

. ST~ 

XV. 18 . . . 

3S1 

vi. 2 . . . 

■ 525 

V. 6 . 

• 360 

Iv. I . . 

• 555 

xvi. 9 . , . 

• 523 

vi. 6 ... 

531 

V. 6 . 

• 53' 

Iv. 4, S • 

5'3 

xvii. 5 . . . 

. 442 

viii. 4 . . . 

• 340 

V. 7 . 

' 531 

lv.6, 7 . 

• 535 

xvii. 5-7 . . 

• 535 

viii. 4 . . . 

• 371 

V. 8 . 

• 323 

lv.6, 7 . 

592 

xvii. 9 . . . 

• 5'9 

ix. 4 ... 

. 341 

V. 8 . 

• 552 

Ivii. I, 2 

521 

xviii. 7 • • • 

593 

i.v. 4 , . . 

• 370 

V. 9 . 

», 

• 429 

Ivii. 6 . 

343 

xviii. 12. . . 

593 

i.x. 4 . . . 

. 400 

V. 9 . 

■ 533 

Ivii. 6 

364 

xxiii. 16, 17 . 

3'« 

xi. 9, 10 

. 5'8 

V. 10 . 

, 506 

Ivii. 6 . 

49S 

xxiii. 16-21 

425 

xiv. 2 . . , 

594 

V. 10 . 

. 538 

Ivii. 15 . 

592 

xxiii. 20 . . 

. 509 

Joel ii. 12 . . . 

445 

V. ia-12 

• 303 

Iviii. 7 . 

552 

xxiii. 23. . . 

■ 445 

ii. 12, 13 . . 

333 

V. 13 . 

. 421 

Iviii. i-g 

477 

xxiii. 23, 24 . 

448 

ii. 13 . . . 

447 

V. 13 . 

• 553 

Iviii. 1-9 

53' 

xxiii. 23, 24 . 

547 

n. 13 . . . 

485 

V. 13 . 

• 567 

Iviii. 6-9 

456 

x.\iii. 28, 30, 32 

3(>3 

li. 15, 16 . . 

523 

V. 16 . 

. 284 

lix. I . 

» 

443 

XXV. 4 . . . 

508 

iii. 14 . . . 

346 

V. 16 . 

. 542 

lix. I . 

461 

XXV. 6 . . . 

459 

Amos iv. 7 . . . 

459 

V. 19 . 

• 362 

lix. 1-4 

516 

XXV. 6, 7 . . 

508 

V. 6 . . . 

464 

V. 19 . 

. 404 

lix. 1-4 

546 

xxviii. 6 . . . 

560 

viii. 9, 10 . 

• 525 

V. 19 . 

• 494 

Ixi. I, 2 

519 

XXX. 8, 9 . . 

5n 

Mic. iv. 2, 3 . . . 

510 

V. 19 . 

• 554 

Ixiii. 2 

360 

xxxi. 10, II 

5" 

V. 2 . . . . 

520 

V. 21, 22 

• 535 

Ixiii. 9 

5'8 

xxxi. 31-34 . 

511 

vi. 6-9 . . . 

541 

V. 22 

• 340 

Ixv. I 

514 

xxxi. 31-41 

540 

vii.i, 2, 3. . 

594 

V. 22 . 

• 537 

Ixv. 2 

524 

xlviii. 10 . . 

543 

vii. 8 . . . 

594 

V. 23, 24 

306 

Ixv. 13-15 

5'4 

xlix. 19 . . . 

562 

vii. 14-18 . . 

541 

V. 23, 24 

• 533 

Ixvi. I, 2 

517 

li. 15-18 . . 

549 

Nah. i. 5-7 . . . 

541 

V. 26 . 

• 479 

Ixvi. I, 2 

534 

li. 16-19 . . 

549 

Hab. i. 16 ... 

547 

V. 26 . 

• 548 

Ixvi. 2 . 

284 

Lam. ii. 18 . . . 

593 

ii. 4. . . . 

510 

V- 34-37 

537 

Ixvi. 2 . 

296 

iii. 31 . . . 

593 

ii- 4 

545 

V. 36 . 

• 434 

Ixvi. 2 . 

539 

iii. 40 . . . 

593 

ii. 5. . . . 

339 

V. 37 . 

344 

Ixvi. 15, 16 

490 

Ezek. viii. 13, 14 . 

357 

111. 3-5 ; . 

524 

V. 42 . 

532 

Ixvi. 18, 19 

514 

ix. 4, 5 . . 

464 

iii. 17 . . = 

463 

V. 43-45 

• 495 

Ixvi. 21 . 

409 

ix. 4-6 . . 

525 

Zeph. i. 2, 3 . . . 

546 

V. 43-48 

485 

Ixvi. 24 . 

464 

xiv. 12-14 • 

499 

i. 7. . . . 

524 

V. 44, 45 

546 

Jer. i. 5 . . . 

442 

xiy. 13 . . 

443 

i. 13, 14 . . 

550 

vi. 2 

545 

1. 5 . . 

5'3 

xvii. 24 . . . 

593 

ii. I ... 

594 

vi. 3, 4 

• 545 

11. 12, 13 . 

549 

xviii. 7, 8 . , 

546 

iii. 8 . , . 

490 

vi. 8 . 

453 

ii. 12, 13, I 

9. 

20 

xviii. 20 . . 

334 

iii. 8 . . . 

555 

vi. 9 . 

449 

27 . . . 

549 

xviii. 21 . . . 

594 

Hag. i. 9 . . . . 

459 

vi. 10 . 

539 

ii. 13. 

376 

xviii. 30 . . 

594 

i. 12 ... 

541 

vi. 12 . 

■ 541 

11. 13. 

425 

xviii. 32 . . . 

485 

Zech. i. 3 . . . . 

594 

vi. 15 . 

■ 453 

li. 13. . 

509 

xxxii. 12 . . , 

593 

iii. I, 3, 5 . 

521 

vi. 19-21 

478 

ii. 19, 20 

549 

xxxiii. 10 

593 

111. 8, 9 . . 

522 

vi. 20, 21 

531 

ii. 25. . 

592 

x.xxiii. II 

447 

ix. 9 . . . . 

527 

vi. 24 . 

444 

ii. 27 . 

549 

xxxiii. 1 1 

556 

x. II, 12 . , . 

518 

vi. 26 . 

536 

11. 30 . 

• 459 

xxxiii. 12 

488 

xii. 10 . . . 

524 

vi. 31 . 

453 

ii. 32. 

592 

xxxiii. 12 

500 

Mai. i. 10, II . . 

512 

VI- 31-33 

478 

iii. 6 . 

593 

xxxiv. 3, 4 . 

280 

i. II . . . . 

290 

vi- 3^-33 

535 

iii. 9, 10 

363 

xxxiv. 3-6 . 

33^ 

i. I I . . . . 

409 

vi. 34 . , 

452 

iii. 12 

593 

xxxiv. 4 . . 

33^ 

i. 14 . . . . 

527 

vi. 34 . 

535 

iii. 14 

593 

xxxiv. 4-6 . . 

369 

ii. I, 2 . , . . 

344 

vii. 2 . 

453 

iii. 15 

357 

xxxiv. 10, 16 . 

369 

ii. I, 2 . . . . 

388 

vii. 6 . . 

458 

iii. 15 

430 

x.xxiv. 10-16 . 

33^ 

ii. 5 . . . . 

541 

vii. 6 . 

546 

iii. 15 

511 

xxxiv. 10-16 

5>i 

ii. 5-7 ... . 

517 

vii. 9-1 1 

333 

iii. 15 

551 

xxxvi. 25, 26 

376 

11. 10 . . . 

533 

vii. 12 . 

455 

iii. 22 . 

593 

x.xxvi. 25, 26 

401 

ii. II . . . . 

508 

vii. 13, 14 

534 

iv. 3. 4 

510 

xxxvi. 36 . . 

593 

iii. 3 • • • 

548 

vii. 21 . 

383 

iv. 14 

593 

xxxvii. 11-14 . 

548 

iii. 7 . . . . 

485 

vii. 21 . . 

539 

v. 3 • 

459 

Dan. ii. 31-35 . . . 

523 

iv. I . . . 

464 

vii. 22, 23 

542 

VI. 10 . 

509 

ii. 43 . . . . 

560 

iv. I . . . . 

490 

vii. 24 . 

422 

vi. 18 . 

5'3 

iii. 16-18. . . 

348 

iv. I . . . . 

526 

vii. 24-27 

554 

vii. 6. 

499 

iii. 16-18 . . . 

407 

iv. 2 . . . . 

457 

viii. 4 . 

340 

vii. 16 

442 

iii. 16-18 . . . 

503 

Matt. i. 20, 21 . . . 

519 

viii. 4 . . 

366 

vii. 16 

499 

iii. 16-18 . . . 

535 

i. 23 . . . . 

518 

viii. II 

451 

vii. 25 

508 

iv. 27 . . , . 

477 

ii. I, 2 . . . 

520 

viii. II, 12 

514 

viii. 4 

556 

iv. 34 . . , . 

594 

ii. 1,2. . . . 

527 

viii. 20 

53" 

viii. 4 

593 

vi. 24-28 . . . 

541 

ii. 20, 23 . . . 

375 

viii. 22 

450 

viii. 6 

593 

vii. 13, 14 . . 

525 

iii. 9 . . , . 

359 

viii. 29 . 

527 

viii. 7-9 

509 

ix. 4 . . . . 

446 

iii. 10 ... . 

542 

ix. 4 . . 

44S 

ix. 23, 24 

535 

xii. 4 . . . . 

466 

iii. 10 ... . 

586 

ix. 12 . . 

33^ 

X. 2 . 

544 

xii. 4-7 . . . 

509 

iii. 10 ... . 

595 

ix. 12 . . 

3^9 

X. 2-5 

549 

Hos. i. 10 . . . . 

512 

iii. II . . . . 

5" 

ix. 13 . . 

385 

X. 9, I I 

• 549 

ii. 23 . . . . 

512 

iii. 15 ... . 

378 

X. 5 ^ 

399 

CYPRIAN : INDEX OF TEXTS. 

69 

pxge 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

Matt. X. 8 . . 

• 555 

Matt, xviii. 32 . . 

• 3" 

Mark xiv. 38 . . . 454 

Luke xvii. 10 . . . 305 

X. 10 . 

. 420 

xviii. 32 . . 

• "^53 

xiv. 58 

511 

xvii. 21 

547 

X. 16 . 

• 553 

xix. 5 . . . 

. 589 

xvi. 17, iJ 

5 ! 

569 

xvii. 31, 32 

500 

X. 18 . 

• 32J 

xix. 8 . . . 

• 589 

Luke i. 4 . . 

563 

xviii. 3 

286 

X. 19, 20 

. 288 

xix. II . . 

• 358 

i- 30-33 

520 

xviii. 8 

389 

X. 19, 20 

• 337 

xix. II . . 

■ 431 

}-35 • 

520 

xviii. 8 

429 

X. 19, 20 . 

349 

xix. II, 12 . 

• 543 

1- 41-43 

519 

xviii. 10-14 

449 

X. 19, 20 

404 

xix. 17 . . 

421 

I. 67-69 

519 

xviii. 14 . 

428 

X. 19, 20 

502 

xix. 17-21 . 

532 

ii. 2 

562 

xviii. 29, 30 

348 

X. 19, 20 

53S 

xi.\. 21 . . 

440 

ii. 10, II 

519 

xviii. 29, 30 

506 

X. 22 . 

283 

xix. 21 . . 

478 

ii. 29 . 

470 

xviii. 29, 30 

538 

X. 22 

315 

x.\i. 13 . . 

555 

ii. 29, 30 

548 

xix. 8, 9 . 

• 478 

X. 22 

428 

.\xi. 15, 16 . 

290 

ii-37 . 

457 

xix. 8, 9 . 

• 532 

X. 22 

487 

xxi. 22 . . 

303 

V. 16 . . 

455 

xix. 9 . . 

• 359 

X. 22 

500 

xxii. 32 . . 

305 

vi. 12 . 

286 

xix. 40 

. 290 

X. 25 

552 

xxii. 37-40 . 

498 

vi. 12 . 

455 

XX. 34-38 

• 543 

X. 28 

349 

x.xii. 39 . . . 

2S5 

vi. 22 . 

• 440 

XX. 35 . . 

. 268 

X. 28 

407 

xxii. 40 . . . 

455 

vi. 22, 23 

• 348 

XX. 35. . 

. 406 

X. 28 

500 

xxiii. 6-8 . . 

534 

VI. 22, 23 

. 506 

XX- 35, 36 

• 436 

X. 28 

538 

xxiii. 9 . . . 

450 

vi. 22, 23 

. 538 

xxi. 3, 4 . 

. 480 

X. 29 

340 

xxiii. 9 . . . 

504 

vi. 32 

• 546 

.\xi. 14, 15 

• 404 

X. 29 

373 

xxiii. 37, 38 . . 

5'o 

vi. 36 

• 331 

xxi. 14, 15 

502 

X. 32 

315 

xxiv. 2 . . . 

5" 

VI- 37 

• 541 

xxi. 17 . . 

• 542 

X. 32, 33 

290 

xxiv. 4-31 . . 

503 

yii. 47 

• 556 

xxi. 31. 

• 469 

X. 32, 33 • 

499 

xxiv. 5 . . 

3S3 

ix. 24 

506 

xxi. 36. 

. 406 

X. 32. 33 

538 

xxiv. 25 . . . 

383 

ix. 25 

• 550 

xxii. 8 . 

. 581 

X.33 • • 

311 

XXV. 21 . . . 

268 

IX. 48 

. 285 

x.'tii. 15 

• 337 

^■33 • • 

343 

XXV. 31-46 . . 

483 

ix. 48 

• 493 

xxii. 31 

• 455 

X. 37 . . 

480 

XXV. 31-46 . . 

528 

ix. 48 

534 

xxii. 31, 3 

2 

. 286 

X. 37, 38 • 

303 

XXV. 31-46 . . 

532 

ix. 50 

• 397 

xxii. 32 

. 280 

X. 37, 38 • 

500 

XXV. 34 . . . 

451 

ix. 56 

354 

xxii. 42 

• 337 

X. 37, 38 • 

539 

XXV. 34 . . , 

495 

ix. 62 

. 287 

xxiv. 44-^ 

7 

• 509 

X. 39 • • 

5fl 

XXV. 36 . . . 

355 

ix. 62 

. 500 

John i. I . . 

. 5,8 

X. 39 • • 

586 

XXV. 36 . . . 

447 

ix. 62 

535 

i. 1-5 . 

. 5'6 

X. 42 . . 

532 

XXV. 36 . . . 

555 

X. 16 

340 

1.9, 10. 

• 5'0 

xi. 13 . . 

510 

xxvi. 18 . . . 

492 

X. 16 

■ 373 

i. II . . 

• 449 

XI. 25, 26 . 

541 

xxvi. 28, 29 . . 

361 

xi. 10 

. 286 

i. II, 12 

• 509 

xi. 28-30 . 

5" 

xxvi. 39 . . , 

451 

xi. 20 

444 

i. 26, 27 

. 524 

xi. 28-30 . 

557 

xxvi. 39 . . 

539 

xi. 20 

. 516 

i. 29 . 

. 522 

xii. 7 . . 

385 

xxvii. 3, 4 . . 

521 

xi. 23 

376 

i- 36, 37 

527 

xii. 29-31 

455 

xxvii. 45 . , . 

5;5 

XI. 23 

394 

11. 19 . 

5'/, 

xii. 30 . . 

423 

xxviii. 18. . . 

568 

xi. 23 

397 

in. 5 . 

37*^ 

xii. 30 . 

553 

xxviii. 18, 19 . 

380 

xi. 40, 

41 

532 

iii. 5 . 

3^5 

xii. 30 

^^l 

xxviii. 18, 19 . 

567 

xi. 41 

476 

• iii- 5 • 

566 

xii. 30 

568 

xxviii. 18-20 

302 

xii. 8 

443 

111. 3, 6 

511 

xii. 32 . 

542 

xxviii. 18-20 

363 

xii. 9 

• 311 

iii. 5, 6 

542 

xii. 34, 35 • 

340 

xxviii. 18-20 . 

526 

xii. 20 

453 

iii. 6 . 

566 

xii. 36, 37 . 

537 

xxviii. 19. . . 

567 

xii. 20 

479 

iii. 14, 15 

524 

xii. 39, 40 . 

525\ 

xxviii. 19. . . 

569 

xii. 20 

550 

iii. iS, 19 

510 

xiii. 17 

526 

xxviii. 20. . . 

406 

xii- 33 

478 

iii. 18, 19 

543 

xiii. 27 . . 

283 

Mark iii. 28, 29 . . 

290 

X"- 33 

532 

iii. 27 . 

533 

xiii. 45, 46 . 

478 

iii. 28, 29 . . 

542 

XII. 35 

429 

iii. 27 . 

570 

xiii. 45, 46 . 

531 

iv. 24 . . . . 

541 

xn. 35-37 

500 

iii. 28, 29 

523 

xiv. 31 

545 

vi. 13 . . . . 

376 

XH- 35-37 . 

524 

iii. 36 . 

526 

XV. 4 . 

384 

vii. 9 . . . . 

318 

xii- 35-37 

536 

IV. 4 . 

288 

XV. 13 

326 

vii. 9 . . . , 

427 

xii. 47 . . 

285 

iv. 13. 14 

360 

XV. 13 

^i' 

vii. 9 . , . 

448 

xii. 47 

539 

iv. 23 . 

448 

XV. 13 

384 

vii. 13 . , 

362 

xii. 48 

428 

iv- 32-34 

,550 

XV. 14 

318 

vii. 13 . . 

370 

xii. 50 

385 

V. 14 . 

284 

XV. 14 

427 

vii. 13 . . 

387 

xiii. 9 

596 

V. 14 . 

334 

XV. 26 

^P 

vii. 22 . . 

426 

xiv. II 

283 

V. 14 . 

430 

xvi. 18 

561 

viii. 36 . . 

439 

xiv. II 

534 

V. 14 . 

542 

xvi. 18, 19 

305 

viii. 38 . . 

362 

xiv. 12-14 

532 

V. 22, 23 . 

527 

xvi. 18, 19 

. 422 

viii. 38 , . 

445 

xiv. 33 

452 

V. 22, 23 

544 

xvi. 19 

394 

i.x. 22 . . . 

545 

xiv. 33 

500 

V- 31, 32 

373 

xvi. 19 

419 

X. 29 . . . 

440 

xiv. 33 

536 

V. 39- 40 

512 

xvii. 5 . 

362 

xi. 24 . . . 

• 545 

XV. 7 . 

324 

V. 43 • • 

5'7 

xvii. 5 . 

510 

xi. 25 . . . 

425 

XV. 7 . . 

333 

V- 45-47 

512 

xvii. 20 

• 545 

xi. 25 . . . 

454 

xvi. 8 . 

384 

vi. 27 . 

453 

xviii. 17 

. 312 

xii. 29-31 . 

426 

xvi. 9 . 

433 

vi. 35 . . 

5^4 

xviii. 17 

. 347 

xii. 29-31 . 

498 

xvi. II, 12 

478 

VI. 37, 38 . 

382 

xviii. 17 

. 397 

xiii. 6 . . . 

• 392 

xvi. 14 

479 

vi. 38 . 

432 

xviii. 19 

. 286 

xiii. 6 . . . 

426 

xvi. 15 

369 

vi. 38 . . 

45' 

xviii. 19, 20 

. 425 

xiii. II . . 

. 420 

xvi. 25 

550 

vi.38 . . 

539 

xviii. I 

9, 

20 

• 533 

xiii. 23 . . 

. 427 

xvii. 7- 

10 

547 

vi. 53 . . 

452 

694 

CYPRIAN : INDEX OF TEXTS. 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PACP 

Tohn vi. 53 .... 514 

John xvii. 8 . . . . 560 

Rom. ii. 4-6. . . . 485 

I Cor. vi. 10. . . . 

34a 

vi. 53 

542 

xvii. 20 

455 

ii. 4-6 . 

544 

vi. 15. . . 

589 

vi. 58 

45- 

xvii. 21 

391 

ii. 12 . 

554 

VI. 15-17 . 

55' 

vi. 65 

3«4 

xvii. 24 

474 

ii. 13 . 

554 

vi. 18. . . 

33A 

vi. 67 

341 

xvii. 24 

S48 

ii. 24 . 

284 

vi. 18-20 . . 

55' 

vi. 67-69 

374 

xviii. 22, 2 

3 

340 

iii. 3 . . 

428 

V). 19. . . 

430 

vii. 21, 38 

5]4 

xviii. 23 

366 

HI- 3. 4 

341 

vi. 19, 20 . 

536 

vii. 37-39- 

360 

xviii. 23 

372> 

iii- 3> 4 

372 

vi. 20. . . 

450 

viii. 12. 

363 

xix. 11 . 

454 

iii- 3. 4 

374 

vi. 20. . . 

500 

viii. 12 . 

494 

xix. 1 1 . 

553 

iii- 3. 4 

570 

vii. 1-7 . . 

543 

viii. 12 . 

519 

xix. 23, 24 

423 

iii. 8 . 

554 

vii. 7 . . . 

586 

viii. 24. 

509 

XX. 21 . 

422 

iii. 13-18 

493 

vii. 10, II . 

553 

viii. 31, 32 . 

487 

XX. 21-23 

381 

iii. 23, 24 

526 

vii. 29-31 . 

53^^ 

viii. 31, 32 . 

500 

XX. 21-23 

400 

V. 2-5 . 

50 » 

vii. 30, 31 . 

433 

viii. 34 

450 

XX. 22, 23 

394 

v. 2-5 . 

534 

vii. 32 . . 

43' 

viii. 44 

450 

XX. 22, 23 

419 

V. 8, 9. 

332 

VII. 32-34 . 

544 

ix. 31 

364 

XX. 23 . 

569 

viii. 12-14 

■ 495 

vii. 39, 40 . 

550 

jx. 31 

370 

XX. 27-29 

5'8 

viii. 16, 17 

• 347 

viii. 2 . . 

541 

ix. 31 

376 

xxi. 15. 

422 

viii. 16, 17 

501 

viii. 8 . . 

■ 550 

ix. 31 

571 

xxi. 17 . 

280 

viii. 16, 17 

• 539 

viii. 13 . . 

• 357 

X. 9. 

526 

Acts i. 7 . , . 

553 

viii. 16, 17, 1 

8 

407 

ix. 22 . . 

331 

X. 9. 

542 

i. 14. . 

429 

viii. 18 

• 350 

ix. 24 . . 

■ 586 

X. II, I 

2 

280 

i. 14. . . 

449 

viii. 18 

■ 404 

ix. 24, 25 . 

. 288 

X. 16 

398 

i. 15. . 

370 

viii. 18 

. 506 

ix. 24, 25 . 

. t;or 

X. 16 

423 

ii. 2-4 . 

555 

viii. 18 

539 

ix. 24, 25 . 

• 542 

X. 18 

468 

"• 38, 39 

2^?, 

viii. 18 

• 584 

X. I . . . 

• 509 

X. 18 

525 

iii. I . . 

457 

viii. 24, 25 

487 

X. I, 2 . . 

. 402 

X. 30 

398 

iii. 6. . 

550 

viii. 24, 25 

546 

X. 6 . . . 

. 402 

X. 30 

423 

iv. 2 . . 

2,7' 

viii. 35 • 

. 287 

X. 12 

• 332 

X. 34-3^ 

5 . 

518 

iv. 8-12 

522 

viii. 35 • 

303 

X. 12 

. 541 

XI. 25 

474 

iv. 32 . 

286 

viii. 35-37 

. 500 

X. 13 

• 554 

xii. 25 

349 

iv. 32 . 

429 

viii. 35-37 

539 

X. 21 

. 290 

xii. 25 

407 

iv. 32 . 

483 

ix. 3-5 ■ 

518 

X. 21 

309 

xii. 25 

500 

iv. 32 . 

533 

xi. 20, 21 

2S4 

X. 21 

• 441 

xii. 25 

^f 

V- 3> 4 . ■ 

543 

xi. 20, 21 

534 

X. 23 

• 432 

xii- 35 

586 

vii. 60 . 

488 

xi; Z?,-3(> 

547 

X. 23 

• 554 

xiii. 14, 15 

283 

viii. 14 . 

562 

xii. I, 2 

404 

X. 23, 

• 331 

xiii. 14, 15 . 

545 

viii. 17 . 

378 

xii. I, 2 

501 

xi. I 

• 33^ 

xiii. 16. . 

284 

viii. 20 . 

555 

xii. 13. 

355 

xi. 4 

■ 437 

xiii. 16, 17 . 

534 

viii. 20 . 

594 

xii. 14 . 

537 

xi. 16 

• 309 

xiii. 27 . . 

553 

viii. 36. 37 

545 

xii. 17 . 

541 

xi. 16 

. 382 

xiv. 6 . 

2.^3 

viii. 37 . 

268 

xii. 19. 

463 

xi. 16 

• 386 

xiv. 6 

389 

ix. 5 . . 

580 

xii. 21 . 

541 

xi. 19 

• 424 

xiv. 6 

448 

IX. 40 . 

477 

xiii. 3 . 

545 

xi. 19 

554 

xiv. 6 

526 

X. 2, 4 . 

456 

xiii. 7, 8 

534 

xi. 23- 

-26 '. 

^f* 

xiv. 6 

542 

X. 26 . 

491 

xiii. 12, r 

494 

xi. 26 

363 

xiv. 6 . 

569 

X. 28 . 

354 

xiv. I . 

388 

xi. 27 

290 

xiv. 15 

421 

X. 47 . 

378 

xiv. 4 . 

332 

xi. 27 

395 

xiv. 27 

429 

xiii. 7-9 

562 

xiv. 4 . 

541 

xi. 27 

441 

xiv. 27 

533 

xiii. 2,2 . 

564 

xiv. 12, i;; 

402 

xi. 27 

554 

xiv. 28 

548 

xiii. 46, 47 . 

514 

xiv. 17 

550 

xi. 33 

550 

XV. I 

359 

xiv. 14, 15 

491 

XV. 16. 

290 

xii. 12-30 . 

263 

XV. 12 

286 

XV. 7 . . 

419 

xvi. 20 

405 

xii. 26 . . 

292 

XV. 12 

426 

XV. 13 . 

562 

I Cor. i. 10 . 

424 

xii. 26 . . 

33^ 

XV. 12, 13 

533 

XV. 13, 19 

572 

i. 10 . 

553 

xii. 26 . . 

355 

XV. 14, 15 

362 

XV. 22 . 

312 

i. 17-24 

552 

xii. 28 . . 

263 

XV. 18-20 

349 

XV. 28. 29 

557 

i. 22-24 

5>6 

xiii. 2-5 . . 

426 

XV. 18-20 

502 

xvi. 16 . 

402 

i. 26 . 

420 

xiii. 2-8 . . 

533 

XV. 18-20 

54^ 

xvi. 25 . 

537 

iii. 1-3 

494 

.xiii. 3 . . 

384 

xvi. 2, 3 

538 

xvii. II 

507 

ni. 1-3 

533 

xiii. 4 . . 

494 

XV i. 2-4 

347 

xix. 6 . 

534 

iii. 13 

332 

..xiii. 4-7 . . 

488 

xvi. 2-4 

502 

xix. 15 . 

402 

iii. 16 

355 

xiii. 7, 8 . . 

426 

xvi. 20 . 

502 

XX. 29-31 

. 283 

iii. 16, 17 

542 

xiii. 12 . . 

547 

xvi. 20, 22 

470 

xxi. 9 . 

546 

iii. 18-20 

484 

xiv. 16 . . 

560 

xvi. 23 . 

448 

xxii. 16 

569 

iii. 18-20 

552 

xiv. 29, 30 . 

378 

xvi. 23, 24 

560 

xxiii. 4, 5 

340 

iv. 7 . . 

533 

xiv. 30 . . 

389 

xvi. 28 . 

470 

xxiii. 4, 5 

• 366 

iv. 20. 

554 

xiv. 34, 35 • 

546 

xvi. Z3 ■ 

487 

xxiii. 4, 5 

• 373 

V. 4 . 

292 

xiv. 36 . . 

596 

xvi. 33 . 

502 

xxviii. 22 

562 

v. 7 . 

434 

XV. 31 . . 

^°l 

xvi. 33 . 

534 

Rom. i. 8 . . 

• 309 

v. 7, 8 

536 

^^•33 ■ ■ 

346 

xvii. 3 . 

• 383 

i. 21, 23 

• 498 

vi. I, 2 

. 546 

XV. 23 ■ • 

427 

xvii. 3 . 

• 455 

i. 25, 26 

• 535 

vi. 4 . 

. 586 

XV. 33 . . 

554 

xvii. 3 . 

• 464 

i. 26, 27 

. 278 

VI. 7-9 

546 

XV. 36 . . 

548 

xvii. 3 . 

. 498 

>■ 3f>-32 

• 372 

vi. 9 . 

450 

XV. 41-44 • 

548 

xvii. 3- 

5 

. 5'6 

11. 1-3 . 

. 541 

vi. 9-1 1 

551 

XV. 47 

a • 

436 

CYPRIAN : INDEX OF TEXTS. 

695 

I Cor, 

2 Cor 

14 

Gal. i. 

i. 

i. 

i. 

i. 

i. 

i. 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

iii 

iii 

iii. 

iii. 

iii. 

iv. 

iv. 

iv. 

V. 
V. 
V. 
V. 
V. 
V. 
V. 

vi. 
vi. 
vi. 

vi. 
vi. 
vi. 
vi. 

vi. 

vi. 

vi. 

Eph. ii, 

ii. 

iv. 

iv. 

iv. 

iv. 

XV. 47-49 
XV. 47-49 
XV. 47-49 
XV. 53-55 
XV. 54, 55 

1. 20 
ii. 10 
ii. 10 
ii. 10 
iii. 14-16 
V. 10 . 
V. 10 . 

V. 15 . 

VI. 14 
vi. 14 
vii. 10 
viii. 12, 13 
viii. 14, 15 
ix. 6, 7 
ix. 9 . 
ix. 10 
ix. 10, 
ix. 12 
ix. 12 
X. 13 
xi. 2 . 
xi. 29 
xi. 29 
xii. 7-9 
XII. 7-9 
xii. 21 
xii. 21 
xiii. 2 

10 . 
10 . 
10 . 
10 . 
10 . 
5 • 
5 • 
9 • 
11-14 
.6-9 
.6-9 

• 27 

27 

.27 

4. 
16 
21 
12 
14. 15 

15 • 

17-22 

17-24 

19-21 

24 

1, 2 

1, 2 

7- 
7 • 

9, 10 
9, 10 
14 . 
14 . 
14 . 

17 • 
17-18 
20 . 
I 

2,3 

2, 3 

3 • 

PAGE 

495 
520 

536 

548 

556 

560 

293 

345 
594 
509 

527 
548 
500 

383 
551 
594 
533 
532 
532 
532 
478 
532 
478 
532 
545 
394 
292 

355 
472 

534 
334 
594 
594 
301 

361 
341 
358 
362 

431 

547 

7>n 

416 

545 
562 

359 
510 

355 
387 
393 
519 
358 
401 
414 

533 
28s 
452 

551 
566 

431 

332 
535 
371 
445 
483 
488 

431 
536 

Eph. iv. 3-6 . 
iv. 4 
iv. 5 . 
IV. 5, 6 
iv. 15, 16 
iv. 22-24 
iv. 26 . 
iv. 27 . 
iv. 29 . 
iv. 29 . 
iv. 30. 31 

IV. 30, 31 
v. 4 . . 

V. 5. . 
v. 6. . 
V. 6, 7 . 
V. 6, 7 . 
V. 25, 26 
V. 25, 26 
V. 28, 29 

V. 31. 32 

VI. 1-3 . 
vi. 4 
vi. 5, 6 . 
vi. 9 

vi. 12-17 
vi. 12-17 

Phil. i. 18 . 
i. 18 . 
i. 21 
i. 21 
i. 21 
i. 24 . 
i. 26 
ii. 6-1 r 
ii. 6-1 1 
ii. 9, 10 
ii. 14, 15 
li. 15 . 
n. 15 . 
ii. 21 
iii. 2 
iii. 15 . 
iii. 1.9-2 1 
iii. 21 . 
iii. 21 . 
iv. 8 . 
iv. 18 . 
Col. i. 15, i8 
ii. 8 . . 
ii. 8, 10 
ii. II 
ii. 18 . 
ii. 20 
ii. 20 
iii. 1-4 . 
iii. 1-4 . 
iii. 5, 6 . 
iii. 16 . 
iv. 2 . . 
iv. 2 . . 
I Thess. ii. 12 
iv. 3 
iv. 6 
iv. 13 
iv. 13, 14 
- , V. 2, 3 
586 2 Thess. ii. 10 . 
7,^Z ii. 10-12 

526 ii. II . 

374 iii. 6 . 

396 ^ iii. 6 . 
334 iii. 6 . 
488 iii. 8 . 
424 iii. 14, 15 

PAGE 
566 
422 

571 
396 
26 

53 
535 
357 
320 

537 
488 

534 
545 
334 
429 

318 

365 
388 

398 
589 

325 
552 
552 
552 
552 
350 
556 
382 

395 
404 

470 
582 

304 
312 
521 

545 
491 

537 
284 
542 
536 
346 
363 
536 
403 
474 

563 
456 

516 

Zl>^ 

484 
510 
491 

536 
586 

495 
536 
334 
578 
286 

557 
406 

589 
553 
474 
548 

553 
446 

343 
364 
347 
429 
551 
283 
551 

I Tim. i. 3 . . 
i. 13 . . 
u. 9, lO . 
ii. 9, 10 . 
ii. 11-14 
iii. 6 . . 
iv. 12 
iv. 17 . 
V. 3. 6 . 
V. 8 . . 
V. II, 12 
V. 19 . . 

V. 20 . . 

v. 22 . 

vi. 3-5 • 

VI. 3-5 • 
vi. 6 . . 
vi. 7 . . 
vi. 7-10. 
vi. 7-10. 
vi. 9 . . 

2 Tim. ii. 4 . . 

ii. 4, 5 • 

II. 4, 5 . 
ii. II, 12 

ii. 16. . 

ii. 17 . . 

ii. 17 . . 

ii. 17 . . 

ii. 20. . 

ii. 20 . . 
ii. 23, 24 
ii. 24 

iii. 1-9 . 
iii. 12 

iii. 13 . 

iv. 3. 4 . 

iv. 6-8 . 

iv. 6-8 . 

7 . . . 

i. 15 . . . 

iii. 2 . , . 

iii. 5 . . . 

iii. 10, II . 

iii. 10, II . 

iii. II . . 

Heb. ii. 5 . , 

ii. II . . 

V. I . . . 

vi. 2 . . 

vi. 2 . . 

xi. 35 . • 

XI. 35 . . 

xi. 36. Zl • 

xii. 6 . . 
xiii. 10 
I 

Tit. i. 

Jas. ii. .J 

V. 14 . 

I Pet. ii. 5 

ii. 

5 • • 
ii. II, 12 
ii. 21 . . 
ii. 21-23 • 
ii. 21-23 • 
iii. 3, 4 . 
iii. 4 . . 
iii. 18. . 
iii. 20, 21 
iii. 20, 21 
iii. 21 . . 
iv. 6 . . 
iv. 12 . . 
iv. 
iv. 

12-14 
12-14 

IV. 15 

466 
382 

432 

544 

546 

268 

366 

301 

552 

552 

552 

552 

552 

284 

318 

387 

471 

453 

479 

550 

440 

366 

501 

536 

499 

595 

383 

446 

552 

327 

334 

547 

389 
426 

471 
467 

551 
289 

539 
371 
354 

555 
388 

346 

552 

369 
580 
409 
.385 
534 
349 
504 
289 
286 
533 
385 
376 
409 

417 
284 

494 
486 

545 
432 
544 
526 

389 
398 
394 

526 

507 
348 

5?' 
284 

1 Pet. iv. 15, 16 

V. 5 . . 
V. 5 . . 
V. 8 . . 

2 Pet. ii. II, 12 

ii. 13, 14, 
ii. 16 . . 
iii. 9 . . 
I John i. 8 . . 
i. 8 . . 

8,9 . 

1, 2 . 

•3. 4 . 
.6. . 
.6 . . 
.6 . . 
.6 . . 

9 • . 
9-1 1 . 

15 • 
15-17 

15-17 
15-17 
17 . 
17 . 
18, 19 
18, 19 
19, 
19 

19 
21, 2 

23- 
23- 

27. 

10, 1 

15 

15 
17 
17 
4 . 

2, 3 

3 • 

4 • 
16 
16 
20 

7 • 
7 . 
16. 
II . 

1. 

ii 

ii 

ii 

ii 

ii 

ii 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

ii. 

iii. 

iii, 

iii. 

iii 

iii. 

iv. 

iv. 

iv. 

iv. 

iv. 

iv. 

iv. 

v 

v. 

V. 

2 John x 

Jude II . . 

II . . 

•-— ■ • 

Rev. i. 6 , . 
i. 12-18 

ii. 5 . . 

ii. 5 . . 

ii. 5 . . 

II. 7 . . 

ii. ID . 
ii. 10 

ii. 10 . 

ii. 23 . 

ii. 23 . 

iii. II . 

iii. II . 

iii. 14 . 

iii. 17, 18 

iii. 21 . 

v.i-5 . 
V. 6-10 . 

V. 8 . . 
V. 10 

vi. 9 . . 
vi. 9-u 

545 
295 
297 

491 
536 

285 
502 
560 

453 
547 
476 

33^ 
30- 
347 
432 
486 

536 
533 
494 
475 
432 
451 
536 
420 

539 
37<i 
397 
341 
424 
552 
552 

499 
526 

376 
533 
454 
494 
480 

532 
535 
519 
383 
501 
426 

533 
533 
418 

423 
542 
572 
366 

399 
330 
298 

526 

293 
306 

595 
538 

315 

502 

538 
289 

547 
488 
501 
560 
480 

303 
520 
522 
560 
298 

587 
490 

696 

CYPRIAN: INDEX OF TEXTS. 

Rev. vi. 9-1 1 
vii. 3 
vii. 9-15 
vii. 9-17 
vii. 14 . 
viii. 3, 4 
ix. I . . 
ix. 4 
ix. 13-21 

538 
464 

505 
538 
497 
560 

550 
464 

550 

Rev. xi. 16, 17 
xiv. I . 
xiv. 4 . 
xiv. 6, 7 
xiv. 9-1 1 
xiv. 9-1 1 
xiv. 16, 17 
XV. 2-4 . 
xvi. 15 . 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

540 

Rev. xvii. 1-4 . 

• 544 

Rev. xxi. 6, 7 . . 

• 555 

• 525 

xviii. 4-9 . 

• 544 

xxi. 9-1 1 . . 

523 

544 

xix. 6, 7 . 

. 524 

xxi. 14 . . . 

374 

498 

xix. 10 . . 

. . 491 

xxii. 9 . . . 

49' 

. 499 

xix. 11-13. 

• 516 

xxii. 10-12 . 

. 490 

550 

xix. 11-16. 

. 528 

xxii. 10-12 . 

542 

540 

XX. 4, 5 . . 

. 506 

xxii. 13, 14 . 

525 

540 

xxi. 6 . . 

• 516 

538 

xxi. 6, 7 . 

. 518 

CAIUS, NOVATIAN, APPENDIX. 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 

Angel of the Covenant, the Son of 

God, 627-631. 
Apocalypse, early received at Rome, 

600. 
Apostles Peter and Paul, remains of. 

at Rome, 601. 
Ark, type of the Church, 658. 

Baptism of the Spirit, 669, 671; of 
water, 670; of blood, 676; of 
fire, 676. 

Caius, presbyter, historical notice of, 
and his works, 599. 

Cerinthus, heresies of, 601. 

Christ, divinity of, a primitive doc- 
trine, 601 ; psalms and hymns 
in honour of, 601, 604 (note) ; 
prophecies of, 618, 621; truly 
man, 619, and God, 620, proved 
by Holy Scripture, 621 ; testi- 
mony of Moses, 626 ; Christ seen 
by Abraham, 627, by Hagar, and 
Jacob, 629; equal with God, 
633; His divinity acknowledged 
by heretics making Him the 
Father, 634; Son of God distin- 
guished from Son of man, 634 ; 
suffered as man only, 635 ; Scrip- 
ture testimonies of the Son of 
God, 636; one with the Father 
in substance, not in person, 637- 

640, 642 ; of the Father, 643-644 ; 

why acknowledged by the first 

disciples, 671, but with imperfect 

faith, 672. 
Creation, works of God in, 611, 617. 
Cross, sign of, in Jacob's blessing, 

631. 

Deluge, the, symbol of persecution, 

658. 
Dove of Noah, type of baptism, 658. 

God, over ^11 things, attributes of, 
612; Creator of all, 613; per- 
fect, 614; without human pas- 
sions or form, 615; ineffable, 
616; His providence, 617. 

Heretical baptism, acts and records 
of, noted, 653; not to be re- 
peated, 667, but completed by 
imposition of hands, 668, 673, 
but valid without such comple- 
ment, 669, 673 ; note from Euse- 
bius on, 678. 

Holy Spirit, person and office of, 640. 

Intemperance among Christians, 649. 

Lapsed, not to be denied mercy, 659; 
instances from Scripture, 660- 
661. 

Law of Jewish meats, to be under- 
stood spiritually, 645. 
Laying on of hands, complement of 
^y baptism, 668 ; given by bishops 
only, 669. 

Martyrdom, not possible to deniers 
of Christ, 673-674. 

Meats, law of, spiritual, 645; animal, 
given after the Fall, 646; dis- 
tinction of clean and unclean for 
man's sake only, and spiritually 
interpreted, 647, done away by 
Christ, 648, but not to permit 
luxury or intemperance, 649, nor 
partaking of idol-meats, 650. 

Natalius, heretic, account of, 601. 
Novatian, historical notice of, 607* 

orthodoxy of his writings, 608; 

extant works, 608 ; anonymous 

treatise against his heresy, 657- 

663. 

Paraclete, the, receives from Christ 
what He reveals to man, 625: 
His person and office, 640. 

Scriptures, perverted by heretics, 
602 ; canon of, in the second 
century, 603. 

697 

CAIUS, NOVATIAN, APPENDIX. 

INDEX OF TEXTS. 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PAOB 

Gen. i. 26 627 

Ps. xix. 6, 7 . . . . 622 

Isa. xlv. 22 ... . 

613 

Matt. X. 33 . . 

> ■ 659 

i. 26. 

. 636 

xxii. 18, 17 

. 639 

liii. 2 

619 

xii. 32 . . 

, . 641 

i. 27. 

. 627 

xxxi v. 15 

615 

liii. 5. . . . 

619 

XV. 17 . . 

^i^ 

i. 31. 

. 614 

xliv. , . 

643 

liii. 7. . . . 

619 

xvi. 16 . 

"3/ 

i. 31. 

. 646 

xlv. . . 

643 

liii. 7. . . . 

639 

xvi. 17 

.. 637 

iii. 5 

. 631 

xlv. I . . 

622 

Iv. 3 . . . . 

618 

xvi. 22 

. . '>72 

vi. 5-7 , 

. 658 

xlv. I . . 

624 

Iv. 4, 5 . . . 

618 

xviii. 7 

. . 608 

vii. 2 

. 646 

xlv. I . . , 

626 

Ivii. 16 . . . 

660 

xix. 17 

. 642 

viii. 21 

. 615 

xlv. I . . 

627 

Ivii. 17 . . . 

660 

xxii. 29 . 

636 

ix. 3 

. 646 

xlv. 7 . . 

641 

Ivii. 19 ... , 

660 

xxii. 37 . 

. . 

xi. 7 . 

. 627 

li.4 . . . 

662 

Ixi. I . . . . 

641 

xxiii. 8-10 . 

• '■\ 

xii. 7 . 

. 627 

Ixviii. 18. . 

618 

Ixv. 2 . . . 

619 

xxiii. 12 . 

. . 66i 

xvii. 8 . 

. 618 

Ixix. 21 . . 

639 

Ixv. 2 . . . 

639 

xxiii. 42 . 

. . ?o 

xix. 24 

. 629 

Ixxii. I . . 

619 

Ixvi. I . . . 

613 

xxiv. 4 . 

. . 6, 

xix. 24 

. 636 

Ixxxii. I, 2 . 

631 

Ixvi. I . . . 

615 

xxiv. 23, 24 

• • 67<t 

xxi. 17 

. 629 

Ixxxix. 30 ■ 

660 

Ixvi. 2 . . . 

614 

xxvi. 70 . 

. . 672 

xxi. i8 

. 629 

xcvii. 7 . 

63^ 

Jer. V. 22 

611 

xxviii. 19. 

. . 658 

xxi. 20 

. 629 

ciii. 24 . , 

613 

X. 24 . . . . 

660 

xxviii. 19. 

. . 667 

XXV. 31 

. 632 

ciii. 32 . . 

613 

Ezek. i. 10 . . . 

617 

xxviii. 19. 

. . 671 

xxxi. 11-13 . 

• 630 

civ. 4 . . . 

677 

xviii. 4 . . 

662 

xxviii. 20. 

. . 621 

xxxii. 24 . . 

. 629 

ex. I . . . 

637 

xviii. 21 . . . 

661 

Mark vii. 19 . . 

. . 645 

xxxii. 24-27 . 

• 630 

ex. I, 2 . 

619 

xviii. 30 . . 

659 

vii. 19. . 

. 648 

xxxii. 30, 31 . 

. 630 

exix. 176. . 

662 

xviii. 30-32 . 

663 

ix. 30 . . 

. . 672 

xlviii. 14, 15 . 

• 631 

cxxxvi. 12 » . 

6IS 

xxxiii. 10, II 

660 

X.38 . . 

. . 67s 

xlix. 10 . • 

. 618 

exxxix. 8, 9, 10 

616 

xxxiii. 12 . . 

661 

XIV. 27 

. . 671 

xlix. II 

• 633 

exlviii. 5 . . . 

613 

xxxiii. 12 

674 

Luke i. 35 . . 

. • 63s 

Ex. iii. . . 

. 629 

Eeeles. v. 6 . . . 

630 

xxxiv. . . . 

662 

iii. 16 . . 

• 677 

iii. 2 . . 

. 617 

Isa. i. 20 . . 

6IS 

xxxvi. 17-23 

660 

vi. 5 . . 

. . 620 

iii. 14. . 

. 614 

vii. 13 . 

618 

xliv. 10-13 . 

658 

vii. 39 . . 

. = 660 

iv. 13. . 

. 618 

vii. 14 . 

621 

Dan. vii. 9, 10 . . 

663 

vii. 48 . . 

. 677 

vii. I . . 

• 631 

viii. 3 . 

639 

Hos. i. 7 . . . . 

621 

vii. 50 . . 

. 677 

ix. 28 . . 

. 660 

ix. 6 . . 

628 

vi. 3 , . . 

619 

X. 19 . . . 

• 659 

xxiii. 20. 

. 628 

ix. 6 . . 

629 

Joel ii. 12, 13 . . 

660 

X. 22 . . 

. 637 

xxxi. 18 . 

. 615 

ix. 6 . . 

632 

ii.28 . . . 

640 

xi. 10 . . 

. 662 

xxxiii. 20 

. 627 

ix. 6 . . 

639 

Amos iv. II, . . 

629 

xii. 50 . . 

. 67s 

Lev. xi. 4 . . 

. 647 

xi. I , 

. 6T8 

Mic. vii. 8-10 . . 

661 

xiii. 1-5 . 

. 662 

Num. V. 2 

. . 658 

xi. 2, 3 . 

641 

Hah. iii. 3 . . . 

621 

XV. 6-10 . . 

. 662 

xi. 17 . 

. . 676 

xi. 10 

. 619 

Zeph. iii. i, 2, 3 

■ 659 

xvii. I . . 

. 608 

xxii. 21 

. 629 

xiv. 12 , 

672 

Zech. vii. 6 . . . 

649 

XX. 38 . 

. 636 

Deut. i. 17 . 

. . 662 

XXX. I . 

657 

xi. 16 . . . 

66f 

xxiv. 20, 21 

. 672 

iv. 39 . 

. . 613 

XXXV. 3 . 

621 

Mai. iii. i ... 

630 

John i. I . . . 

. 622 

VI. 4 . 

. 642 

XXXV. 3-6 

. 618 

iii. 6 . , . 

614 

i. I . . . . 

. 624 

viii. 3 . 

. 648 

xxxvii. 20 

642 

Matt. i. 23 . . . 

635 

i. I, 2 . . 

. 642 

xviii. 15 

. 618 

xl. 12 . 

642 

iii. II . . . 

668 

i. 3 . . . , 

. 622 

xxviii. 66 

. 618 

Xl. 22, 12 

■ 613 

iii. 11; . . . 

670 

i. 3 . . . . 

. 624 

xxxii. 8 . 

. 627 

xlii. 2, 3 

618 

V. 8 . . . 

640 

i. 3 . . , 

. 626 

Josh. v. 13 . . 

. . 629 

xlii. 8 . 

6'3 

vii. 2 . . . 

661 

i. 3 . . . . 

= 632 

I Sam. ii. 3-8 . 

. . 661 

xlii. 19 . 

. 658 

vii. 22, 23 . 

659 

i. 10, II . . 

= 622 

ix. 2 . . 

. 661 

xliii. II . 

642 

vii. 26, 27 

659 

i. 14 . . . 

c 619 

I Kings xxviii. II 

. . 629 

xliii. 25, 26 

• 663 

ix. 2 . , . . 

677 

i. 14 . . . 

. 622 

2 Chron. xix. 16 

. . 6i6 

xliv. 6, 7 

. 642 

X. 28 . . . 

636 

i. 14 . . . 

. 627 

Ps. ii. 7, 8 , . 

• • 637 

xlv. I 

. 637 

x. 28 . . . . 

662 

i. 14 . . . 

• 635 

ii. 8 . 

. 

. 

. . 619 

xlv. 7 . 

> 614 

X. 29, 30 . . 

. 617 

i. 14 . . . 

. 642 

698 

CAIUS, NOVATIAN, APPENDIX : INDEX OF TEXTS. 

699 

John i. 15 . 
ii. 19 . 

iii- 3> 5 
iii. 5 . 
iii. 8 . 
iii. 13 . 
iii. 16 . 
iii. 31 . 

III. 31, 32 

111- 34. 35 

IV. 21 . 
iv. 24 . 
iv. 34 , 
iv. 38 . 

V. 17 . 
V. 19 . 
V. 19 . 
V. 26 . 
vi. 26, 27 
vi. 38 . 
vi. 46 . 
vi, 51 . 
vi. 62 o 
vi. 64 . 
vi. 67 . 

•'**' • ii. 38 . 
v • .11. 39 . 

•viii. 14, 15 
' • 'iii. 17, 18 
viii. 23 
•viii. 42 
J -'/iii. 51 
i\^ viii. 58 
£>d X. I . . 
•'' > X. 8. . 
sd X. 18 . 
^^ X. 27, 28 
''' X. 30 . 
X. 30 . 
X. 30 . 

^■33 ' 
X- 35. 36 
X. 36 . 
X. 36 . 
xi. 12 . 

PAGE 
623 
632 

668 
676 

677 
622 

623 
632 

631 
616 

6i6 
648 
632 

639 
623 

633 
623 
649 

637 
623 
623 
623 
661 
659 
675 

624 

637 
624 
624 
624 
6-5 
657 
657 
632 

622 
625 

637 
638 
625 

631 
638 

637 

John xi. 26 

xii. 20 
xii. 34 
xiv. 6 
xiv. 7 
xiv. 8 
xiv. 9 
xiv. 12 
-xiv. 15, 16 
xiv. 16, 17 
xiv. 18 
xiv. 23 
xiv. 26 
xiv. 28 
xiv, 28 

XV. I 

XV. 9, I 
XV. 15 

XV. 20 

XV. 21 

xvi. 7 
xvi. 13 
xvi. 14 
xvii. 3 
xvii. 3, 
xvii. 5 
xvii. 5 
xvii. 5 
XX. 17 
XX. 22 
XX. 22, 23 
XX. 28 
XX. 28 
Acts i. 4, 5 

i-5 • 
ii. 17 

ii. 17, 18 
ii- 33 

IV. 12 o , 

viii. 20, 21 
X. 15 . 
X. 44-48 
xi. 15-17 
XV. 7, 8 
XV. 9 . 

PAGE 
625 

637 
672 
638 
638 
638 
638 
639 
639 
640 
640 
639 
639 
637 
639 
639 
639 
639 
640 

639 
640 
640 
625 
626 

637 
622 
626 
637 
637 
669 
640 
622 
642 

668 
678 
640 
676 
658 
670 
676 
646 
670 
668 
668 
670 

Acts XV. 13-17 , 
Rom. i. 8 . . o 
i. 20 . 
ii. II . 
vii. 14. 
viii. 7 . 
viii. 9 , 
ix. 5 . 
IX. 5 , 
xi. 20, 21 
xi- 33 • 
xi- 33 • 
xiv. 4 , 
xiv. 17 

1 Cor. i. 10 . 

ii. 9 . 
ii. 12 , 

Hi- 3 • 
111. 6, 7, 

iii. 12 

vi. 13 

vi. 13 

vii. 40 

X. 25 . 

xi. 17 

xii. 3 . 

xiii. 3 

xiv. 32 

xvi. 50 

2 Cor. iii. 17 

VI. 10 . . 

Gal. 

1. 

[ . . 0 . 

1. 

12 ... . 

111. 

17 . . . 

111. 

20 . . . 

IV. 

4- . . . 

V. 

17 . » - 

Eph 

IV 

.5 . . , 

IV 

. 10 , . . 

V. 

6, 7 - . . 

VI 

12 . , . 

Phil 

11. 

6-11 . , 

11, 

12 . . . 

111 

.2 -. . . 

• 674 

. 672 

. 614 

. 662 

• 645 

. 641 

. 641 

. 622 

. 642 

. 672 

o 614 

. 618 

. 661 

. 648 

. 668 

. 617 

. 641 

. 661 

- 638 

- 659 

• 645 
. 648 
. 641 
. 648 
. 661 
. 641 

- 675 
. 641 
. 620 
. 641 
. 640 

- 674 
. 622 
. 622 
. 646 

o 642 

. 620 

. 641 

< 673 

c 627 

. 663 

. 645 

' ^33 

, 674 

• 657 

Phil. iii. 14 

• 

645 

Col. i. 15 . c . 

632 

i. 16 . . , 

622 

ii. 15 . . 

632 

ii. 18, 19 . 

649 

ii. 21, 23 c 

649 

I Tim. i. 17 , , 

614 

ii. 5 ... 

632 

IV. I = , 

641 

iv, I, 2, 3 

• f 

64S 

IV. 4 . , 

649 

iv. 4. 5 • 

648 

vi. 8 . . 

649 

vi. ID . 

649 

vi. 16 

627 

vi. 16 . 

642 

vi. 17 

649 

Tit. i. 15 . . . 

648 

Heb. i. 3 . . . 

628 

V. 7 , . . 

644 

X.30 

J 

659 

X11.29. 

617 

Jas. IV. 6 , 

» • 

661 

I Pet. i. 17 

t 

674 

X. II 

• 

631 

2 Pet. i. 4 . . 

Q 

631 

I John ii. 1 1 

« 

661 

iv.7,8 -. 

675 

iv. 12 . 

627 

V. 6 . , 

676 

V. 8 . , 

677 

Jude 14, 15 , . 

662 

19 . . . 

641 

Rev. 11. 5 . , . 

66i 

iii. 17 . . . 

657 

iv. 7 . . . 

617 

V. 13, 14 . . 

618 

vi. 12-17 • - 

663 

xi. 15 . . . 

631 

xii. 15 . , . 

661 

xvii. 15. . . 

658 

xix. 13 . . . 

622 

XX, II-I 

3 • - 

663 

I 

Date Due 

MT)Yii^ 

Nov-rr 

^ \(^ N 

^vlL 

' " ■'■10) 

tRvMr Burou Cat. no. 1137 

WL 1935 

m3M.i 

CLAPP 

3 5002 00413 9429 

The ante-Nicene fathers. Translations of 

t^mt. 

BR 60 . A5 5 

The Ante-Nicene fathe 

rs