Treasury of the 
True Dharma Eye 

Zen Master Dose n’s Shobo Genzo 

eEpireD BY Kazuaki Tanahashi 

“A vast, beautiful translation of the master work of the Japanese 
genius Dogen Zenji. English-speaking practitioners will be 
indebted to Kaz Tanahashi and his associates for this truly 
magnificent teaching, an indispensable contribution to Zen 
letters.” 

—Peter Matthiessen (Muryo Roshi) 

“At long last! A discerning, poetic, and, intimate rendering of 
Dogen’s true expression of the dharma. Dogen’s devotees have 
long awaited Tanahashi’s complete translation of the Shobogenzo 
into a contemporary and deeply profound version. Those new to 
the wisdom of this great teacher as well as those who treasure 
him will delight in the extraordinary work by our foremost 
translator and interpreter of Dogen’s masterpiece.” 

—Pat Enkyo O’Hara, Abbot, Village Zendo, New York, New York 

“Kaz Tanahashi, a renowned translator of Dogen and noted artist, 
has put together an outstanding team of co-translators to create a 
complete rendering of Dogen’s magnum opus, the Shobo Genzo. 
This publication, which will be in great demand by all scholars, 
students, and practitioners of Zen Buddhism and Eastern thought 
more generally, is both accurate and accessible in following the 
original text literally while capturing the spirit of Dogen’s poetic 
genius. Although there are numerous versions of the work 
available in English, this new edition is sure to be the one turned 
to and cited consistently by knowledgeable readers.” 

—Steven Heine, Professor of Religious Studies and Director of 
Asian Studies, Florida International University, author of Zen Skin, 

Zen Marrow and Opening a Mountain: Koans of the Zen Masters 

“Reading over Treasury of the True Dharma Eye: Zen Master Dogen’s 
Shobo Genzo, I am astonished first by the incredible range and 
variety of Dogen’s writings, and second by the immense task that 
has been done to translate this major text. With the possible 
exception of Hakuin’s complete writings, there is nothing in 
Japanese Zen to equal the immense breadth and depth of Dogen’s 
work, which ranges from direct instructions in simple language to 
the most complex and profound teachings that use words to go far 
beyond words. I am convinced that Zen students will find this text 
especially valuable to contemplate, study, and absorb over the 
entire course of their lifetimes.” 

—Stephen Addiss, author of The Art of Zen 

ABOUT THE BOOK 

Treasury of the True Dharma Eye (Shobo Genzo, in Japanese) is a 
monumental work, considered to be one of the profoundest 
expressions of Zen wisdom ever put on paper, and also the most 
outstanding literary and philosophical work of Japan. It is a 
collection of essays by Eihei Dogen (1200-1253), founder of Zen’s 
Soto school. 

Kazuaki Tanahashi and a team of translators that represent a 
Who’s Who of American Zen have produced a translation of the 
great work that combines accuracy with a deep understanding of 
Dogen’s voice and literary gifts. This eBook includes a wealth of 
materials to aid understanding, including maps, lineage charts, a 
bibliography, and an exhaustive glossary of names and terms— 
and, as a bonus, the most renowned of all Dogen’s essays, 
“Recommending Zazen to All People.” 

KAZUAKI TANAHASHI, a Japanese-trained calligrapher, is the 
pioneer of the genre of “one stroke painting” as well as the 
creator of multicolor enso (Zen circles). His brushwork has been 
shown in solo exhibitions in galleries, museums, and universities 
all over the world. Tanahashi has edited several books of Dogen’s 
writings and is also the author of Brush Mind. 

Sign up to learn more about our books and receive special offers 
from Shambhala Publications. 

Sign Up 

Or visit us online to sign up at shambhala.com/eshambhala. 

CONTRIBUTORS 

ASSOCIATE EDITOR 
Peter Levitt 

TRANSLATORS 
Robert Aitken 
Steve Allen 

Reb Anderson 
Chozen Jan Bays 
Hogen Bays 
Edward Brown 
Gyokuko Carlson 
Kyogen Carlson 
Linda Ruth Cutts 
Andy Ferguson 
Norman Fischer 
Gaelyn Godwin 
Natalie Goldberg 
Joan Halifax 
Paul Haller 
Blanche Hartman 
Arnold Kotler 
Taigen Dan Leighton 
Peter Levitt 

John Daido Loori 
Susan Moon 
Wendy Egyoku Nakao 
Josho Pat Phelan 
Lewis Richmond 
David Schneider 
Jean Selkirk 
Alan Senauke 
Kazuaki Tanahashi 
Katherine Thanas 
Mel Weitsman 
Dan Welch 
Michael Wenger 
Philip Whalen 

"Treasury of the 
True Duarma Eve 
Zen Master Dogen’s Shobo Genzo 

EDITED BY 
Kazuaki Tanahashi 

SHAMBHALA 
BOSTON & LONDON * 2012 

SHAMBHALA PUBLICATIONS, INC. 
Horticultural Hall 
300 Massachusetts Avenue 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115 
www.shambhala.com 

© 2010 by the San Francisco Zen Center 

The enso design on the book cover is by Shunryu Suzuki and is reproduced by permission of 
San Francisco Zen Center. 

The Credits section constitutes a continuation of this copyright page. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage 
and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Dogen, 1200-1253. 
[Shobo genzo. English] 
Treasury of the true dharma eye: Zen master Dogen’s Shobo genzo / edited by Kazuaki 
Tanahashi. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
eISBN 978-0-8348-2836-0 
ISBN 978-1-59030-474-7 (hardcover: alk. paper) 
1. Sotoshu—Doctrines—Early works to 1800. 

I. Tanahashi, Kazuaki, 1933- II. Title 
BQ9449.D654S5313 2010 
294.3’85—dc22 
2010015405 

CONTENTS 

‘ef 

8. 

9. 

10 

a1. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17, 

18. 

a9, 

20. 

Aw 

22. 

22. 

24. 

25 

26. 

af: 

28. 

Cleansing 

Washing the Face 

Receiving the Marrow by Bowing 

. Valley Sounds, Mountain Colors 
Refrain from Unwholesome Action 
The Time Being 

Power of the Robe 

Transmitting the Robe 

Mountains and Waters Sutra 
Buddha Ancestors 

Document of Heritage 

Dharma Blossoms Turn Dharma Blossoms 
Ungraspable Mind 

Ungraspable Mind, Later Version 
Old Mirror 

Reading a Sutra 

Buddha Nature 

Awesome Presence of Active Buddhas 
The Buddhas’ Teaching 

Miracles 

Great Enlightenment 

The Point of Zazen 

29. Going Beyond Buddha 

30. Thusness 

31a. Continuous Practice, Part One 

31b. Continuous Practice, Part Two 

32. Ocean Mudra Samadhi 

33. Confirmation 

34. Avalokiteshvara 

35. Arhat 

36. Cypress Tree 

37. Radiant Light 

38. Body-and-Mind Study of the Way 

39. Within a Dream Expressing the Dream 
40. Expressions 

41. Painting of a Rice Cake 

42. Undivided Activity 

43. The Moon 

44. Flowers in the Sky 

45. Old Buddha Mind 

46. The Bodhisattva’s Four Methods of Guidance 

47. Twining Vines 

VOLUME TWO 

48. 

49. 

50. 

ol, 

D2. 

oa. 

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 

58. 

se 

60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 

66. 

67. 

68. 

MONASTERY CONSTRUCTION PERIOD, 1243-1245 

Three Realms Are Inseparable from Mind 
Speaking of Mind, Speaking of Essence 
The Buddha Way 

The Reality of All Things 

Intimate Language 

Buddha Sutras 

Insentient Beings Speak Dharma 
Dharma Nature 

Dharani 

Face-to-Face Transmission 

Rules for Zazen 

Plum Blossoms 

Ten Directions 

Seeing the Buddha 

All-Inclusive Study 

Eyeball 

Everyday Activity 

Dragon Song 

Spring and Autumn 

The Meaning of Bodhidharma’s Coming from India 

Udumbara Blossom 

69. 

70. 

ge 

Tas 
Tas 

74. 

7a: 

7. 

Tes 

78. 

79. 

80. 

81. 

82. 

83. 

84. 

Arousing the Aspiration for the Unsurpassable 
Arousing the Aspiration for Enlightenment 
Tathagata’s Entire Body 

King of Samadhis 
Thirty-seven Wings of Enlightenment 

Turning the Dharma Wheel 
Self-Realization Samadhi 

Great Practice 

DAIBUTSU MONASTERY PERIOD, 1245-1246 

Space 

Eating Bowl 

Practice Period 
Seeing Others’ Minds 

King Wants the Saindhava 

EIHEI MONASTERY PERIOD, 1246-1253 

Instructions on Kitchen Work 
Leaving the Household 

Eight Awakenings of Great Beings 

85. 

86. 

87. 

88. 

89. 

90. 

3 

92. 

93. 

94. 

99. 

96. 

FASCICLES NOT DATED BY DOGEN 

Karma in the Three Periods 

Four Horses 

Virtue of Home Leaving 

Making Offerings to Buddhas 

Taking Refuge in Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha 
Identifying with Cause and Effect 

Monk of the Fourth-Stage Meditation 

Only a Buddha and a Buddha 

Birth and Death 

Heart of the Way 

Receiving the Precepts 

One Hundred Eight Gates of Realizing Dharma 
Afterword - Michael Wenger 

Appendixes 

1. Recommending Zazen to All People - Dogen 

2. Dogen’s Life and Teaching - Keizan Jokin 

3. Dogen’s Editions of the Book 

4. Lineage of Chinese Zen Ancestors 

5. Maps Related to the Text 

6. Eihei-ji Presumed Original Layout 

7. Monks’ Hall 

8. Time System 
Glossary 

Selected Bibliography 
E-mail Sign-Up 

PUBLISHER’S NOTE 

VOLUME ONE 

PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

surprised how much of the movement in the meditation hall as taught 
by Dogen in the thirteenth century is practiced in a Zen center in your 
own city almost seven hundred years later. 

I have been extremely fortunate to collaborate in translation with a 
number of outstanding Zen teachers and writers. I worked with one or 
two partners in translating each short essay. We examined original 
sentences word by word and came up with the best possible 
corresponding expressions in English. As associate editor of this work, 
Peter Levitt has gone over the entire text several times and made 
valuable suggestions. The strength and consistency of our translations 
owe much to him. Our intention is to offer a translation that is as 
accurate as possible, but also one that is inspiring and useful for 
practitioners of dharma in the Western world. 

Because Dogen’s writing is known for its difficulty, we provide 
various kinds of assistance to help readers “decode” the text: 

* We present the essays in chronological order (as dated by 
Dogen) so that readers can trace the development of Dogen’s 
thinking and teaching. In the section “Texts in Relation to 
Dogen’s Life and Translation Credits” at the beginning of the 
first volume, we explain the background of each fascicle in 
relation to other fascicles. 

* The Editor’s Introduction discusses Dogen’s characteristic 
expressions, with examples quoted in the introduction endnotes. 

* In the main text, short explanations are enclosed in brackets. 

* An extensive glossary at the end of the second volume provides 
more detailed explanations of terms and names, as well as 
linguistic details. 

* The words of earlier teachers and other writers that Dogen 
comments upon are italicized. 

Treasury of the True Dharma Eye is the fourth Dogen book project 
sponsored by the San Francisco Zen Center, following Moon in a 
Dewdrop, Enlightenment Unfolds, and Beyond Thinking. 1 worked for San 
Francisco Zen Center from 1977 to 1984 as a scholar in residence. 
Since then the Zen Center has been supporting the Dogen translation 
projects. Before that, from 1960 to 1968 I worked with Shoichi 
Nakamura Roshi, my Zen teacher and cotranslator, to produce the first 
complete modern Japanese translation of Dogen’s Shobo Genzo. In 
1965 Robert Aitken Roshi and I made the first translation of the text 
“Actualizing the Fundamental Point” included in this book. It has been 
a half-century journey of conversation with my venerated and beloved 
master Dogen. I have enjoyed every moment of studying his writing 

and translating it. 

I would like to thank Shunryu Suzuki Roshi for inviting me to speak 
about Dogen to his students at Soko Temple in 1964, before he 
founded San Francisco Zen Center. This became a seed for my 
longterm association with the Zen Center. My gratitude goes to 
Richard Baker Roshi and the successive abbots of the Zen Center and 
its officers for supporting the translation project while they were in 
charge. I am particularly grateful to Michael Wenger Roshi, who has 
overseen the project as director of publications at the Zen Center and 
wrote the afterword of this book. 

All my cotranslators have been delightful to work with and have 
taught me tremendously. Mel Weitsman Roshi has been my most 
frequent translating partner and the one I have worked with longest. 
Joan Halifax Roshi has invited me to give dharma talks during a 
number of sesshins and also to lead Dogen seminars. 

We benefit a great deal from traditional Soto scholars, including 
Menzan Zuiho and Bokusan Nishiari. Works by Dr. Doshu Okubo and 
Dr. Fumio Mastani have always been helpful. 

My appreciation goes to Dr. Carl Bielefeldt, Dr. Linda Hess, Dr. 
William Johnston, Shohaku Okumura Roshi, Christian H. B. Haskett, 
and Dr. Friederike Boissevain for their expert advice. Thanks to Zen 
Master Daegak Genthner, Shirley Graham, Roberta Werdinger, 
Luminous Owl Henkel, Jogen Salzberg, Junna Murakawa, Silvie 
Senauke, Mahiru Watanabe, Nathan Wenger, Wolfgang Wilnert, Ann 
Colburn, Karuna Tanahashi, and Ko Tanahashi for their help in a 
variety of ways. Our translation project owes much to a grant from the 
Dragon Mountain Temple. 

Norman Fischer Roshi was also the translation editor for Moon in a 
Dewdrop and the author of the introduction to Beyond Thinking. Susan 
Moon, who was translation editor of Enlightenment Unfolds, also has 
helped enliven descriptions of some of the Chinese masters in the 
glossary. Dan Welch was translation editor for Beyond Thinking. Dr. 
Taigen Dan Leighton, our scholarly editor, checked the glossary and 
updated our bibliography. Andrew Ferguson provided information on 
Chinese masters through his book China’s Zen Heritage and was kind 
enough to check all the Chinese transliteration as well as the sites on 
the maps. 

It is always wonderful to work with the staff of Shambhala 
Publications. I am extremely grateful to Peter Turner, Dave O’Neal, 
Hazel Bercholz, and Ben Gleason for taking on this large project. I 
thank Kendra Crossen for her excellent copyediting. 

KAZUAKI TANAHASHI 
Berkeley, California 

NOTES TO THE READER 

alphabetized in the glossary and bibliography. The order is not 
reversed for Buddhist names, such as Eihei Dogen and Chinese 
laypeople’s names. The abbots of Zen monasteries are often referred to 
by the name of the mountain, monastery, or region where they resided 
(as in the example of Eihei Dogen of the Eihei Monastery). Similarly, 
many monasteries are named after the mountains on which they were 
built. 

TIME, DATES, AND THE BUDDHA’S DATES 

Years in this book are dated according to the common era (c.£.) and 
before the common era (8.c.£.), but in referring to months we follow 
the lunar calendar traditionally used in East Asia. The first to third 
months correspond to spring, and the other seasons follow in three- 
month periods. The fifteenth day of each month is the day of the full 
moon. The lunar calendar occasionally adds an extra month in order 
to synchronize with the solar year. Even though approximately thirty 
days of the end of each lunar year run into the next solar year, to 
avoid confusion, we accord the entire lunar year to its corresponding 
solar year. 

In the traditional East Asian system, a day has twelve hours. The 
time from sunrise to sunset is divided into six hours. The nighttime is 
also made up of six hours. In accordance with the movement of the 
sunrise and sunset, the length of hours in daytime and nighttime 
change. The diagrams in appendix 8 illustrate the division of the day 
into portions, according to which monastic practices are performed in 
an orderly manner. 

Traditional East Asian understanding of Shakyamuni Buddha’s dates 
is different from that of contemporary scholars. See Buddha, 
Shakyamuni in the glossary for details. 

AGE 

People’s ages are reckoned according to the traditional East Asian 
approach, whereby a person is one year old at birth and gains a year 
on New Year’s Day of the East Asian lunar calendar, not on one’s 
birthday. 

UNITS OF MEASUREMENT 

Please see the glossary at the end of volume two for traditional Asian 

measuring units that appear in the text. 

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION 

the notion of the self. Dogen describes such an experience of his own 
at the climactic moment of his study as “dropping away body and 
mind.” 1 

BEYOND SPACE AND TIME 

The distance from here to there is no longer concrete. A meditator 
walks on the top of a high mountain and swims deep in the ocean, not 
only becoming an awakened one but also identifying with a fighting 
spirit... A person who bows becomes one with the person who is 
bowed to... 

Sizes become free of sizes. The depth of a dewdrop is the height of 
the moon.:; The entire world is found in a minute particle. Extremely 
large becomes extremely small, and vice versa.:; Here is another view 
of reality distinct from our usual way of seeing. 

It is not that duality stops existing or functioning; the small is still 
small and the large is still large. The body remains the body and the 
mind remains the mind. Without discerning the differences between 
things, we could not conduct even the simplest task of our daily lives. 
And yet, in meditation the distinctions seem to dissolve and lose their 
usual significance. Dogen calls this kind of nondualistic experience 
nirvana, which exists at each moment of meditation. 

Dogen is perhaps the only Zen master in the ancient world who 
elucidated in detail the paradox of time. For him, time is not separate 
from existence: time is being.., 

Certainly, there is the passage of time marked by the movement of 
the sun or the clock that always manifests in one direction, from the 
past, to the present, to the future. On the other hand, in some cases 
we feel that time flies, and in other cases it moves slowly or almost 
stands still. 

In meditation, according to Dogen, time is multidirectional: 
Yesterday flows into today, and today flows into yesterday; today 
flows into tomorrow, and tomorrow flows into today. Today also flows 
into today..:Time flies, yet it does not fly away... This moment, which 
is inclusive of all times, is timeless. 2 

Further, time is not apart from the one who experiences it: time is 
the self... Time flows in “I,” and “I” makes the time flow. It is selfless 
“T” that makes time full and complete... 

BEYOND LIFE AND DEATH 

Time is also life. In the same manner, time is death. Like other Zen 

teachers, Dogen repeatedly poses an urgent existential question: 
realizing the brevity of our life, we need to clarify the essential 
meaning of life and death.» 

Life and death are often called “birth and death” in Buddhism, 
based on the understanding that we are born and die innumerable 
times moment by moment.., Meditation is a way to become familiar 
with life and death. If we realize that we keep on being born and 
dying all the time, we become intimate with death as well as life. 
Thus, we may be better prepared for the moment of our departure 
from this world than we would be otherwise; and this, in turn, reduces 
our fear of dying. 

For Dogen, each moment of our life can be a complete and all- 
inclusive experience of life..; The life of “I” is not separable from the 
life of the whole—the life of all beings.., In the same way, death is a 
complete and all-inclusive experience. », 

When we fully live life and fully die death, life is not exclusive of 
death; death is not exclusive of life. Then life and death are no longer 
plural but singular as life-and-death or birth-and-death. 

It is a dilemma of life: We all die, and yet, avoiding death is no 
solution. When we thoroughly face death, death becomes “beyond 
death.”.; Dogen tells us that this is the meaning of “life-and-death” for 
an awakened person. 

ENLIGHTENMENT AND BEYOND 

The Zen way of going beyond the barrier of dualism is to meditate in 
full concentration. This is called “just sitting.”»» 

Dogen’s invaluable contribution to clarifying the deep meaning of 
meditation is his introduction of the concept called the “circle of the 
way.” It means that each moment of our meditation encompasses all 
four elements of meditation: aspiration, practice, enlightenment, and 
nirvana. : 

“Aspiration” is determination in pursuit of enlightenment. 
“Practice” is the effort required for actualizing enlightenment. 
“Enlightenment” is the awakening of truth, the dharma. “Nirvana,” in 
his case, is the state of profound serenity, in which dualistic thoughts 
and desires are at rest.» 

Dogen says that even a moment of meditation by a beginning 
meditator fully actualizes the unsurpassable realization, whether that 
is noticed or not.» In this way, enlightenment, often regarded as the 
goal, is itself the path. The path is no other than the goal.. 

The word “enlightenment,” a translation of the Sanskrit word bodhi 
(literally, “awakening”), has layers of meaning: 

1. According to Mahayana sutras, Shakyamuni Buddha said, “I have 
attained the way simultaneously with all sentient beings on the great 
earth.”;, That is to say that all sentient and insentient beings are 
illuminated by the Buddha’s original enlightenment and thus carries 
buddha nature—the potential for or the characteristics of 
enlightenment.:; In other words, in the Buddha’s eye, all are equally 
enlightened and none are separate from the Buddha.: However, this 
does not mean, from the ordinary, dualistic perspective, that all beings 
become wise and free of delusion..:, 

2. In Dogen’s explanation of the “circle of the way,” all those who 
practice meditation are fully enlightened. Enlightenment is not 
separate from practice; enlightenment at each moment is no other 
than the unsurpassable enlightenment.:: This aspect may be called the 
unity of practice-enlightenment or practice-realization... Dogen 
emphasizes practice that is inseparable from enlightenment as the 
essential practice of the way of awakened ones—the buddha way. The 
awareness of enlightenment, however, may not necessarily be 
recognized by everyone all the time, as it is an experience deeper than 
one grasped by intellect alone. 

3. When we practice meditation, we often don’t notice that we are 
already enlightened, and thus we look for enlightenment somewhere 
other than in practice. Dogen calls this tendency of separation “great 
delusion.” This pursuit, however, provides us with the potential for 
“sreat enlightenment,” which is a merging of the unconscious 
practice-enlightenment and conscious understanding. 

This enlightenment can happen unexpectedly and dramatically as a 
body-and-mind experience of the nonseparation of all things, rather 
than as a theoretical understanding. Such spiritual breakthroughs, 
sometimes called “seeing through human nature” (kensho in 
Japanese), may bring forth exuberance. Dogen quotes many such 
stories of “sudden realization” by ancient Chinese Zen practitioners as 
cases of study (koans).«: 

However, Dogen discourages his students from striving for 
breakthroughs, cautioning that this pursuit is based on the notion of a 
separation between practice and enlightenment... This kind of 
realization or “attaining the way” takes time and usually follows a 
series of failed attempts. In regard to this, Dogen says, “. . . even if you 
are closely engaged in rigorous practices, you may not hit one mark 
out of one hundred activities. But by following a teacher or a sutra, 
you may finally hit a mark. This hitting a mark is due to the missing 
of one hundred marks in the past; it is the maturing of missing one 
hundred marks in the past.” 

An awakened person, a buddha, is someone who actualizes 
enlightenment. If enlightenment is nothing separate from practice, it is 

clear that all those who practice meditation as recommended in 
Buddhism are buddhas. And those who have experienced and reached 
deep understanding of the nonseparation of all things are regarded as 
ones who have attained the way. 

However, for Dogen, attaining the way is not the final goal. He 
encourages practitioners of the buddha way to go beyond buddhas 
and leave no trace of enlightenment.., That is to say, we are not 
supposed to remain in the realm of nonduality. 

Going beyond the boundary of all things is important. It is wisdom, 
which is the basis of compassion. Only when we identify ourselves 
with others can we genuinely act with love toward others. At the same 
time, however, for practical and ethical reasons in our daily activities, 
we need to maintain the boundaries of self and other. An enlightened 
person is someone who embodies the deep understanding of 
nonduality while acting in accordance with ordinary boundaries, not 
being bound to either realm but acting freely and harmoniously..; 

IRONY OF AUTHENTICITY 

“Self-realization without a teacher” is seen as a cause of self- 
righteousness and arrogance, and thus is traditionally discouraged in 
Zen. Dogen, however, is free and radical enough to say that studying 
dharma with a sutra or a teacher is none other than self-realization 
without a teacher..; As everyone has a different background, character, 
and situation, one has to arrive at one’s own realization. On the other 
hand, Dogen is orthodox enough to say that realization without a 
teacher is to study with the teacher and to study with a scripture. 

The single point Dogen repeatedly brings out throughout his 
teaching career is authenticity. He describes himself as one who has 
authentically received transmission of the true dharma from his 
teacher, Rujing.. All of the effort in his writings is directed toward 
understanding, enlivening, expounding, and transmitting what he sees 
as the authentic teaching of the Buddha..; Dogen sometimes uses the 
words “authentic” and “authentically” several times in one sentence! 

The main sources of his inspiration, other than Rujing’s words, are 
Indian Buddhist scriptures and Chinese Zen texts. Dogen draws stories, 
sayings, verses, and guidelines from these texts to authenticate the 
practice of the way he is engaged in. Dogen’s words “longing for the 
ancient” well reflect his admiration of and dedication to the teachings 
of Shakyamuni Buddha and the subsequent dharma descendants up to 
Rujing..> 

Some of the earlier Zen practitioners in China were eccentric and 

wild-spirited, and did not live in monasteries. Dogen draws teachings 
from their examples, but he himself chooses to follow the tradition of 
thorough and solemn daily monastic practice. He regards all daily 
activities, including wearing the robe, cooking, and engaging in 
administrative work, as sacred. Dogen orchestrates the whole 
monastic life in ceremonial patterns, highly choreographing every 
movement—when and how to enter the meditation hall, how to bow, 
how to sit down, how to eat, and even how to use the toilet. 

His operating principle is based on guidelines from Chinese Zen 
monasteries. The seating and movements are organized hierarchically 
around the abbot as the supreme authority. The status of monastery 
officers and the dharma ages (years from the time of ordination) of 
monks are next in line. Geographically, north is regarded as higher 
than south and the left side as higher than the right side. Perhaps this 
reflects a combination of ancient Indian custom and the Chinese 
imperial court system. Everyone in the monastic community is 
expected to follow the guidelines exactly.:: By participating in a well- 
established communal environment, he seems to believe, practitioners 
can mature their spirituality with little chance to create unwholesome 
actions.:: 

Being authentic for Dogen means being true not only to the 
tradition, but to the particularity of each person’s experience, which is 
intuitive and fresh. This may explain why Zen practitioners have 
produced enormous amounts of literature. The emphasis on 
spontaneity and individual creativity may explain why Dogen himself 
produced a unique and extensive body of writing. 

It is striking to note that Dogen’s obsession with strict monastic 
guidelines does not confine him in his imaginative and thought- 
provoking expressions. Rather, his highly patterned daily life becomes 
the basis for the unprecedented degree of freedom in his use of 
language. For him, the realm of unbounded imagination derives from 
reality itself—brought about only by authentic practice. 

DOGEN’S STYLE OF WRITING 

Dogen was one of the first Buddhist teachers to write in Japanese. 
(Until then, Japanese students of Buddhism commonly read and wrote 
in Chinese, which was pronounced in a Japanese approximation of 
Chinese pronunciation.) He wrote the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye 
in medieval Japanese, although he retained ancient and medieval 
Chinese forms when quoting from Zen and secular Chinese texts, as 
well as Buddhist sutras. While some of his poetry was composed in 
Japanese, Dogen wrote all official statements, most of the monastic 

guidelines, and many of his poems in Chinese. 

The Chinese language has thousands of ideographs and is rich in 
expressing poetic images and philosophical concepts. Meanwhile, it 
has no grammatical conjugations and lacks definite parts of speech. 
The relationship between words is often implicit. Thus, its sentence 
structure is suggestive and ambiguous. 

The Japanese writing system combines Chinese ideographs and 
Japanese phonetic letters. Its grammar has inflections and parts of 
speech, so sentence structure is usually explicit. The logical structure 
of the Japanese language thus allowed Dogen to pioneer a genre of 
immensely critical essays in his own language. 

When Dogen takes up Chinese texts and makes his own translations, 
he sometimes stretches the original meanings. Part of the poetry and 
surprise of Dogen’s thinking is characterized by this stretching. For 
example, a line of Rujing’s poetry can normally be translated as “Plum 
blossoms open in early spring.” Dogen translates it as “Plum blossoms 
open early spring.” Also, a line from the Great Pari-nirvana Sutra is 
traditionally translated as “All have buddha nature.” He translates it 
as “All beings are buddha nature.” 

At times Dogen also breaks down a Chinese line into individual 
ideographs and rearranges the sequence. For example: “The mind 
itself is buddha,” “The mind is buddha itself,” “Buddha is itself the 
mind,” “The mind itself buddha is,” “Buddha is the mind itself.” 

A fascicle of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye often starts with a 
summary paragraph in Dogen’s own tempered sentences, giving the 
topic an ultimate value. When he talks about the monastic robe, for 
example, he describes it as the most essential thing in Buddhist 
practice. In the same manner, all monastic activities, as well as 
scriptures, ancestors, and dharma transmission, are given absolute 
values. 

Then, he quotes from Buddhist scriptures, Zen dialogues, or Zen 
poems and comments on each line, making a detailed examination of 
the meaning behind the words. He does not hesitate to harshly 
criticize great masters like Linji and Yunmen, while admiring their 
teachings in other passages. At the same time, he reveres the accounts 
of the earliest Chinese masters, such as Bodhidharma and Huineng, 
the Sixth Ancestor, as well as later ancestors of his lineage. 

Dogen focuses on theoretical aspects of the teaching, while 
constantly reminding students that awakening is beyond thinking. In 
some of his essays and monastic guidelines, he gives detailed 
instructions on the practical aspects of zazen and communal activities, 
often mixed with philosophical interpretations and poetic expressions. 

Commenting on earlier Zen masters’ words, Dogen develops his own 
thought and finds a way to expand the meaning of their words to 

elaborate his understanding of the utmost importance of each 
moment. A remarkable example of this is his interpretation of a verse 
by Yaoshan (ninth-tenth century): “For the time being, stand on a high 

mountain .. .” From this, Dogen develops his thought that time is no 
other than being—the concept of “time being,” which I alluded to 
previously. 

The Chinese Zen literature contains a number of stories in which 
teachers of scriptures abandon lecturing in favor of practicing Zen, or 
in which Zen teachers make comments that appear to question the 
primacy of the scriptures. Actually, it is not common for Zen teachers 
to make extensive efforts to examine the meanings of scriptural 
phrases. It seems that Chinese Zen marked a distinct departure from 
the Mahayana texts that embody splendorous cosmic mythology and 
highly systematic theories. Instead, Chinese Zen leaders focused on a 
practitioner’s experience of the very moment in each individual 
situation. They tended to point to concrete daily objects such as 
sandals, a whisk, or a walking stick. Parts of the body—top of the 
head, eyeballs, nostrils, fists, and heels—were their favorite points of 
reference. 

Dogen speaks such Zen language as this. At the same time, however, 
he conducts a thorough investigation of phrases from a number of 
sutras, which makes him unique as a Zen teacher. His writings in the 
Treasury of the True Dharma Eye provide a synthesis of these two 
traditional aspects: studies of scripture that contain vast systematic 
expressions of the Buddhist teaching, and Zen, which emphasizes 
direct experience of the essence of Buddhist teaching through 
meditation. 

Most of the texts in the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye were 
delivered to Dogen’s practicing community. He may have read the text 
aloud (as opposed to speaking spontaneously from a rough note) but 
there is no evidence that he received questions. His main audience 
consisted of resident monks, and possibly some senior nuns who were 
his students. Laypeople such as donors and laborers who happened to 
be working on the monastery construction were at times invited. He 
also had an invisible audience of heavenly beings, and sometimes 
describes dharma teachers as “guiding masters of humans and devas.” 

It is clear that Dogen’s thinking and understanding deepened as he 
wrote his essays. He made a careful revision of his texts with the help 
of Ejo, his senior student and successor-to-be. Either Dogen or Ejo 
made final clean copies of the manuscripts. 

DECODING THE ZEN PARADOX 

Dogen’s writings are known for their impenetrability. Zen 
practitioners who study the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye say that it 
often takes years to understand some passages in the text. The 
difficulty of his writings comes from the depth of Buddhist thinking in 
general and the use of Zen stories or words that are enigmatic, plus his 
own idiosyncratic style of writing. 

In exploring the deeper meanings of Zen stories, poetry, teachings, 
and Buddhist sutras, Dogen expands, twists, and manipulates the 
meanings of the words from the texts he quotes.;; By presenting 
unique and at times outrageous interpretations, he unleashes a great 
variety of descriptions on the state of meditation. 

Dogen makes use of a full range of Zen rhetoric on the paradox of 
awakening beyond thought. The traditional teaching device includes 
nonverbal expressions such as silence, shouting, beating, and gestures, 
which have been recorded in words. Sacrilegious or violent words and 
absurd images that are intended to crush stereotypical thinking are 
not uncommon in Zen heritage. Opposite answers to the same 
question may be given, and different questions may be responded to 
with the same answer. 

Here are examples of other types of Zen rhetoric that Dogen adopts 
and employs: 

1. Startling images: “There is [a mountain] walking, there is [a 
mountain] flowing, and there is a moment when a mountain gives 
birth to a mountain child.”:; 

2. Upside-down language: “The forest runs around the hunting 
dog.’ 

3. Tautology: “A fish swims like a fish. .. . A bird flies like a bird.”:, 

4. Negative tautology: “An ancient buddha said, ‘Mountains are 
mountains, waters are waters.’ These words do not mean mountains 
are mountains; they mean mountains are mountains.” :s 

5. Chopped logic: “At the very moment of asking the meaning of 
Bodhidharma’s coming from India, this dharma wheel is nothing is 
essential. Nothing is essential doesn’t mean not to utilize or break this 
dharma wheel. This dharma wheel turns in nothing is essential.”:» 

6. Contradiction: “We manifest the voice of insentient beings 
speaking dharma with the eyes. Investigate the eyes extensively. 
Because the voice heard by the eyes should be the same as the voice 
heard by the ears, the voice heard by the eyes is not the same as the 
voice heard by the ears.” 

7. The same word with contrasting meanings: “To study the self 
[selfless universal self] is to forget the self [ego]. To forget the self is 
to be actualized by myriad things.”:: 

8. Opposite uses of the same metaphor: (a) “When Bodhidharma 

came from India, the root of twining vines [entanglement with letters 
and theories] was immediately cut off and the pure, single buddha 
dharma spread. Hope that it will be like this in our country.”. (b) 
“‘Teacher and disciple practice mutually’ is twining vines [intimate 
interactions] of buddha ancestors.” :: 

9. Reversed statement: “An ancient buddha said, ‘A painting of a 

rice cake does not satisfy hunger.’ . . . there is no remedy for satisfying 
hunger other than a painted rice cake.” «; 
10. Non sequitur: “Zhaozhou . . . was once asked by a monk, ‘I 

heard that you personally saw Nanquan. Is it true?’ Zhaozhou said, ‘A 
giant radish was here in Zhen Region.””:s 

11. One equals half: “Since intimacy surrounds you, it is fully 
intimate, half intimate.”.. 

12. One equals many: “When even one single thing is serene, 
myriad things are serene.” 

13. Seemingly mundane talk: “Zhaozhou, Great Master Zhenji, 
asked a newly arrived monk, ‘Have you been here before?’ The monk 
said, ‘Yes, I have been here.’ Zhaozhou said, ‘Have some tea.””s 

These modes of absurdity, contradiction, and double meaning are 
partly East Asian but mostly Zen, where there is inherent distrust in 
conventional language and logic. Dogen often makes an effort to crush 
and penetrate normal intellectual views, going directly to the source 
of consciousness that is reality itself, before reasoning in duality and 
nonduality arise. He sometimes calls this mode of communication 
“intimate language” or “true expression.” It is a realm of word beyond 
word and logic beyond logic. 

IMAGE OF TRANSCENDENCE 

Awakening starts with the recognition that there are those who are 
awakened and those who are not. Once awakened, you are free from 
the distinction between them. This freedom is transcended to the 
point that there are those who are awakened and those who are not, 
which appears similar to the beginning stage. On this advanced level 
of freedom, however, you are totally yourself and act without 
hindrance. 

Thus, there are: affirmation, negation, negation of negation, and 
negation of “negation of negation.” This direction toward the next 
level of experience can be characterized as: duality, nonduality that is 
transcendence of duality, transcendence of transcendence, and 
transcended activities. 

This may be seen as a map of freedom, an intellectual analysis. But, 

in fact, this kind of transcendence is experienced freely and 
intuitively. Let us examine some of the terms Dogen employs to 
demonstrate an immediate experience: 

“Dropping away body and mind,” “casting off limitations,” and 
“hurling away enlightenment” are some of the basic images of release 
from restricted self-experience. That means you “set aside” usual 
concerns and are “detached” from both awakening and not 
awakening. 

While you “give up holding back,” you are not motionless. Rather, 
you “break away” and take “the path of letting go.” You “leap out,” 
“leap over,” and “leap clear.” You “jump,” “fly beyond,” and “leap 
beyond ancient and present.” In Chinese and Japanese, transcending is 
described as “going beyond” (as in “going beyond buddhas”), which 
indicates the direction of “going upward,” “surpassing” buddhas and 
ancestors. 

The act of “inquiring beyond” and “expressing beyond” is none 
other than “breaking through the bamboo node [intellect and 
theories]” and “going beyond discriminatory thoughts” by “breaking 
open,” “penetrating,” and “passing through the barrier of dualism.” 
Being “free and transparent” may be possible by “cutting through,” 
“cutting apart,” “cutting to the original,” “crushing,” “smashing,” and 
“vanishing.” This is sometimes represented by such _ graphic 
expressions as “cracking open particles” and “plucking out eyeballs.” 

When all preconceived notions of goals and objectives are “lost,” 
you “float free” and “let myriad things advance themselves.” That is 
the “realm of the unconstructed,” “beyond knowing,” and “beyond 
thinking.” Here, there is “no effort” and “no creation.” 

This place of “no doing” is not being lazy or idly thinking about 
freedom. Instead, it is an experience “beyond obstruction” for the 
purpose of “thorough understanding,” “fully actualizing,” “realizing 
through the body,” and the “embodiment” of “directly clarifying the 
source beyond words.” It is not separate from each moment of “sitting 
through” and “cutting through sitting.” 

29 66 

THE TIME WHEN DOGEN LIVED 

In Japanese history, the era when Dogen lived is called the Kamakura 
Period (1185-1333). The preceding periods are the Asuka Period 
(593-710), the Nara Period (710-794), and the Heian Period (794- 
1185). 

Buddhist doctrine was introduced to Japan through Chinese- 
language texts from Korea in the mid-sixth century. Since Buddhism 
was accompanied by the writing system and advanced technology of a 

great civilization, it quickly received imperial patronage and spread 
throughout the country. The appointment of Prince Shotoku as the 
regent, who was to dedicate his life to the practice and propagation of 
Buddhism, marked the beginning of the Asuka Period. 

The grid-shaped city planning of Nara, the new capital of Japan, 
followed that of the Chinese capital city Chan’an. The construction of 
the Todai Temple, which housed an enormous Buddha statue, 
exemplified a concerted national effort initiated by the monarch to 
create a society based on the infinite luminosity of the universal 
buddha light described in the Avatamsaka Sutra. The six schools of 
Buddhism, most of which were based on various philosophical 
principles, flourished. 

A larger-scale planned city of Heian (Kyoto), to the north of Nara, 
became the imperial capital, where a highly refined court culture 
developed. Trade with China increased, and a number of monks 
studied in Tang China, a flourishing world empire. The Shingon 
(mantra) School, focused on highly ritualized Esoteric Buddhist 
prayers, became one of the two most influential schools of Buddhism 
in Japan. The Tendai School—the Japanese form of the Tiantai School 
in China—was the other powerful school, with a comprehensive 
Buddhist training center on Mount Hiei in the northeast of Kyoto. 

Assimilating with the indigenous Shintoism, Buddhism became an 
indispensable part of everyday life. Buddhist masters competed with 
one another to gain imperial patronage, offering a variety of magical 
prayers. Mount Hiei housed one of the strongest armies of monk- 
soldiers, who frequently engaged in battles, sometimes burning other 
monasteries. The Tendai armed forces were known for their frequent 
demonstrations in Kyoto and for forcing their demands upon the 
imperial government. 

According to Buddhist texts, the period of five hundred years after 
the time of Shakyamuni Buddha is the Age of True Dharma, which is 
followed by another five hundred years of the Age of Imitation 
Dharma. Then the Age of Declining Dharma emerges. Many Japanese 
Buddhists believed that this last period of no true practice or 
enlightenment started in 1052. People attributed calamities such as 
famines, epidemics, social disorder, and wars to the decline of 
dharma. The wish to attain rebirth in the Pure Land prevailed among 
those who felt that it was hopeless to attain enlightenment in the 
present world. 

The samurai families—the Taira Clan from the western part of the 
country and the Minamoto from the east—served as imperial guards 
and expanded their influence. First, Kiyomori Taira became a 
powerful military ruler, still serving the emperor. Then, Yoritomo 
Minamoto defeated the Taira armies in a series of battles and 

established the Shogun government in Kamakura. This was the 
beginning of the Kamakura Period. Later, the Hojo Family took over 
the Kamakura government and called its head “Regent.” 

Buddhism in this period may be characterized by the emergence of 
“single practice.” Honen and his noted disciple Shinran came into 
conflict with the Tendai establishment, which forced them into exile, 
but they succeeded in spreading the wholehearted practice of chanting 
homage to Amitabha Buddha. Dogen established the Zen practice of 
“just sitting.” Later, Nichiren spread the practice of chanting homage 
to the Lotus Sutra—Namu-Myoho-Renge-Kyo. This “single practice” of 
Buddhism, in all its variations, appealed to great numbers of farmers, 
warriors, and court nobles, eventually becoming the mainstream of 
faith in Japan. 

THE EARLY LIFE OF DOGEN 

The first biographical account of Dogen was written by Keizan Jokin, 
who was a dharma successor of Gikai, one of Dogen’s senior students. 
It appears as a chapter of Keizan’s book, Transmission of Light, 
completed forty-seven years after Dogen’s death. We have included it 
in appendix 2. 

Three other early biographies, all of which were written more than 
a century after Dogen’s death, are also important sources for 
reconstructing the first part of Dogen’s life. They are Biographies of the 
First Three Ancestors of the Eihei Monastery (Eihei-ji sanso gyogo-ki), 
author unknown, already in existence during the Oei Era (1394- 
1428); Biography of the First Ancestor, Zen Master, Priest Dogen (Shoso 
Dogen zenji osho gyoroku), author unknown, published in 1673; and 
Kenzei’s Biography of the Founder Dogen of Eihei (Eihei kaisan gyojo 
Kenzei-ki) by Kenzei (1415-1474)... 

According to the biography by Keizan, Dogen—whose given name is 
unknown (his name Eihei is taken from the name of his monastery)— 
was born in 1200 cz. By Dogen’s own words, he was an adopted son 
of a “minister of the Minamoto family.” Keizan identifies Motofusa, 
Lord of the Pine Palace, as this mysterious person. It seems, however, 
that a later theory by Soto historians which attributes Michitomo 
Minatomo (1171-1227) as Dogen’s foster father is most convincing. 
Michitomo was a distinguished poet known as an editor of Shin Kokin 
Shu, a celebrated imperial anthology of waka (a traditional Japanese 
poem consisting of thirty-one syllables). Dogen presumably received a 
high tutorial education in Chinese literature and Japanese poetry. He 
says, “When I was young, I loved studying literature that was not 
directly connected to Buddhism.” 

Dogen lost his mother when he was eight (by the Japanese way of 
reckoning age). Possibly referring to this early misfortune, he himself 
says, “Realizing the impermanence of life, I began to arouse the way- 
seeking mind.”,, At thirteen, he visited monk Ryokan, who lived in a 
hut at the foot of Mount Hiei, northeast of Kyoto, and subsequently 
entered the monkhood himself. In the following year he was formally 
ordained by Koen, Head Priest of the Tendai School. Probably Koen 
was the one who named this novice Buppo Dogen, meaning “Buddha 
Dharma, Way Source.” Dogen left Mount Hiei after receiving basic 
training as a monk and studying the scriptures. Later he reflected: 
“After the aspiration for enlightenment arose, I began to search for 
dharma, visiting teachers at various places in our country.”,», We don’t 
know whom he visited, except Koin, who was abbot of the Onjo 
Monastery—a noted Tendai center of esoteric practices—and a 
dedicated follower of Honen, the main propagator of the Amitabha 
chanting practice. Dogen recalls: “The late Bishop Koin said, ‘The 
mind of the way is acquired after understanding that one thought 
embraces all existence in the billion worlds.””,; Dogen summarizes the 
first four years of his pursuit: “I had some understanding of the 
principle of cause and effect; however, I was not able to clarify the 
real source of buddha, dharma, and sangha. I only saw the outer forms 
—the marks and names.”,, 

Dogen continues: “Later I entered the chamber of Eisai, Zen Master 
Senko, and for the first time heard the teaching of the Linji School.”:: 
Myoan Eisai, who had visited China twice and received dharma 
transmission from Xuan Huaichang, was among the first to teach Zen 
in Japan. But because the Tendai establishment was oppressing new 
movements of Buddhism, he had to teach conventional esoteric 
practices along with Zen. It was around 1214 when Dogen visited 
Eisai at the Kennin Monastery in Kyoto, one of the three monasteries 
Eisai had founded. Eisai was seventy-four years old, and he died the 
following year. 

In 1217, Dogen became a disciple of Butsuju Myozen, Eisai’s 
successor as abbot of the Kennin Monastery. We can assume that 
Dogen was trained by Myozen in koan studies, which was the 
principal method of training in the Linji School. Koans are exemplary 
stories of ancient masters pointing to realization, which are 
investigated by the students under the personal guidance of their 
teacher, and may lead to direct experience of the nondual aspect of all 
things beyond intellect. In 1221, Dogen received a certificate of full 
accomplishment from Myozen. 

Myozen was respected in Kyoto and even gave the bodhisattva 
precepts to the former emperor Gotakakura, but he was aware of the 
need to deepen his studies. As China was the only place where he 

could study authentic Zen, he wanted to follow Eisai’s example of 
traveling to the Middle Kingdom. Dogen, a young but outstanding 
student at the Kennin Monastery, was allowed to accompany Myozen. 

Myozen’s party, including Dogen and two other disciples, left Japan 
from the Port of Hakata on Kyushu Island in the second month of 
1223. Two months later, the boat arrived at the then main trading 
port of Ninbo (in present-day Zhejiang Province). Reflecting on this 
Dogen writes, “After a voyage of many miles during which I entrusted 
my phantom body to the billowing waves, I have finally arrived. . . .”» 

Dogen’s first encounter with Chinese Zen happened the following 
month when he was still on board, waiting for permission to enter a 
monastery. Myozen, who was acknowledged as Eisai’s dharma heir, 
had already left the boat and been admitted to the monastery. An old 
monk who was the head cook of a nearby monastery came on board to 
buy dried mushrooms. After some conversation, Dogen said, 
“Reverend Head Cook, why don’t you concentrate on zazen practice 
and on the study of the ancient masters’ words, rather than troubling 
yourself by holding the position of head cook and just working?” The 
old monk laughed and replied, “Good man from a foreign country, 
you do not yet understand practice or know the meaning of the words 
of ancient masters.” Dogen was surprised and ashamed.., 

China’s highest-ranking Zen monasteries were located in Zhejiang 
Province, where Dogen arrived. He entered one of them, the Jingde 
Monastery on Mount Tiantong, also known as Mount Taibai. Soon he 
noticed monks around him holding up their folded dharma robes, 
setting them on their heads, and chanting a verse silently with palms 
together: “How great! The robe of liberation . . .” Seeing this solemn 
ritual for the first time, he vowed to himself: “However unsuited I 
might be, I will become an authentic heir of the buddha dharma, 
receiving authentic transmission of the true dharma, and with 
compassion show the buddha ancestors’ authentically transmitted 
dharma robes to those in my land.” 

The abbot of the Jingde Monastery was Wuji Liaopai, in the dharma 
lineage of Dahui Zonggao who had been the most influential advocate 
of koan studies in the Linji School. While studying in Liaopai’s 
community for a year and a half, Dogen familiarized himself with 
formal monastic practices. Then, he started visiting other monasteries 
in search of a true master. 

In early 1225, Dogen went to meet Abbot Yuanzi of the Wannian 
Monastery at Mount Tiantai, who showed Dogen his document of 
dharma heritage and offered dharma transmission. Dogen had learned 
the significance of documents of heritage in the Chinese Buddhist 
tradition, as the proof of the completion of studies and succession of 
the dharma lineage. They were often kept strictly confidential, but 

Dogen had managed to see some and made careful studies of them. 
Moved by Yuanzi’s offer to transmit dharma to him, Dogen bowed and 
burned incense, but did not accept. 

The more closely he saw what was happening in monasteries in the 
heartland of Chinese Zen, the more he was disappointed. He 
comments in his journal: “Nowadays elders of different monasteries 
say that only direct experience without discrimination—to hear the 
unhearable and to see the unseeable—is the way of buddha ancestors. 
So they hold up a fist or a whisk, or they shout and beat people with 
sticks. This kind of teaching doesn’t do anything to awaken students. 
Furthermore, these teachers don’t allow students to inquire about the 
essentials of the Buddha’s guidance and they discourage practices that 
aim to bear fruit in a future birth. Are these teachers really teaching 
the way of buddha ancestors?” 

Dogen also saw corruption in monastic practices. Even documents of 
dharma heritage that were supposed to be valued with utmost respect 
were given to those who were not qualified. Monks tended to seek 
credentials from famous masters who had given dharma heritage to 
retainers of the king. Some monks, when they grew old, bribed public 
officials in order to get a temple and hold the abbot’s seat. 

In 1225, Dogen heard that Rujing, who had been abbot of the 
Qingliang and Jingci monasteries, had just become abbot of the 
Jingde Monastery on Mount Tiantong, where Dogen had first stayed. 
Rujing was a monk from the Caodong School, in which “just sitting,” 
rather than koan studies, was emphasized. He was known as a strict 
and genuine teacher, not easily admitting monks into his community 
and often expelling those who did not train seriously. Dogen returned 
to Mount Tiantong. While he participated in the practice of the 
monastery as one of hundreds of monks, he wrote to Rujing, 
explaining why he had come from Japan and requesting the status of a 
student who could enter the abbot’s room for receiving personal 
guidance. This letter impressed Rujing, who must have heard from 
officers of the monastery that Dogen was a remarkable student. Rujing 
wrote back and granted his request, saying, “Yes, you can come 
informally to ask questions any time, day or night, from now on. Do 
not worry about formality; we can be like father and son.” 

On the first day of the fifth month of 1225, Dogen entered the 
abbot’s room and met Rujing for the first time. On this occasion 
Rujing affirmed his recognition of Dogen and said, “The dharma gate 
of face-to-face transmission from buddha to buddha, ancestor to 
ancestor, is actualized now.” 

This exhilarating time for Dogen was also a time of great loss. 
Myozen died from illness on the twenty-seventh day of the same 
month. He had been teacher to Dogen for eight years, as well as a 

traveling companion and fellow seeker. 

Expressing his doubt to Rujing about the current trend of Zen 
teachers who would emphasize “transmission outside scriptures” and 
discourage students from studying the Buddha’s teaching, Dogen 
asked for Rujing’s comment. Rujing said, “The great road of buddha 
ancestors is not concerned with inside or outside. . . . We have been 
followers of the Buddha for a long time. How can we hold views that 
are outside the way of the Buddha? To teach students the power of the 
present moment as the only moment is a skillful teaching of buddha 
ancestors. But this doesn’t mean that there is no future result from 
practice.”:. Thus, Rujing demonstrated that he was an ideal teacher for 
Dogen, who was seeking Zen that fully embodied the teaching of the 
Buddha described in scriptures. 

While receiving rigorous training from Rujing, Dogen asked him 
further questions in a respectful but challenging way, showing his 
sincerity as well as his brilliance. Rujing was confident of himself as 
an authentic carrier of the Zen tradition, and Dogen sought to 
experience the heart of his teaching. The culmination of his practice 
came one day in zazen when he heard Rujing speak in the monks’ 
hall. Reflecting on this experience, Dogen says, “Upon hearing 
Rujing’s words ‘dropping off,’ I attained the buddha way.”:: In the fall 
of 1227, after completing his study and receiving a document of 
heritage from Rujing, Dogen ended his four-year visit to China. He 
went back to Japan to teach people in his own country. 

DOGEN AS A DHARMA TEACHER 

In the tenth month of 1227, soon after returning to the Kennin 
Monastery in Kyoto, Dogen wrote a record of bringing home the relics 
of Myozen, the former abbot.:: In the same year he wrote a short 
manifesto called “Recommending Zazen to All People,” in a brief but 
formal and elaborate Chinese style. This text, a translation of which is 
included in appendix 1, was his declaration of establishing a new form 
of Buddhist practice in Japan, based on his understanding of the 
traditional Zen teaching he had studied in Song-Dynasty China. Dogen 
was twenty-eight years old in the Japanese way of counting. 

The Treasury of the True Dharma Eye provides detailed information 
about the teaching life of Dogen, as he meticulously recorded the 
dates of creation in the colophons of most of its fascicles. Some other 
writings of his, including monastic guidelines, were dated. Dogen’s 
students recorded his frequently given formal talks, whose dates either 
were recorded or can be guessed. We present an outline of his life as a 
Zen master through textual evidence in the section headed “Texts in 

Relation to Dogen’s Life and Translation Credits.” 

The first part of Dogen’s teaching career was the wandering and 
preparation period, from age twenty-eight to thirty-four (1227-1233). 
Then he constructed and taught at a small monastery as abbot: the 
Kosho Horin Monastery period, from age thirty-four to forty-four 
(1233-1243). He continued to teach and write during the construction 
period of a full-scale monastery, from age forty-four to forty-six 
(1243-1245). Then he taught at the Daibutsu Monastery, later 
renamed the Eihei Monastery, from age forty-six to fifty-four (1245- 
1253). 

Dogen first intended to spread zazen widely to all people, but he 
gradually put more and more emphasis on training committed Zen 
students to the point of saying that attaining the way would only be 
possible for home leavers (ordained monks and nuns). He gave 
dharma transmission to a few students, including Ejo—his lifetime 
teaching assistant and editor, who succeeded him as abbot of Eihei 
Monastery. 

The Treasury of the True Dharma Eye is Dogen’s lifework, while the 
Extensive Record of Priest Eihei Dogen—edited by his students, Sen’e, 
Ejo, and Gien—is a huge collection of his texts including formal talks, 
monastic guidelines, Chinese-style and waka poems, as well as other 
writings. 

Although he rejected calling his community a Zen school or a 
Buddha Mind school, it was difficult for his dharma descendants to 
distinguish their group from other schools of Buddhism. Thus, Dogen 
became regarded as the founder of the Soto School—the Japanese 
form of the Caodong School, of which Rujing transmitted the lineage 
to Dogen. 

By the efforts of his dharma heirs and descendants, in particular by 
that of Keizan Jokin (1268-1325), who incorporated Dogen’s teaching 
into that of Esoteric Buddhist practice, the Soto School spread largely 
in the countryside as its main base. This was in contrast to the Rinzai 
School, which was supported by the shoguns of the Ashikaga Clan and 
the emperors during the Muromachi Period (1336-1573), and 
developed high Zen culture, centering in the city of Kyoto. The Soto 
School is currently the largest school of Buddhism in Japan. 

TRANSMISSION OF THE TEXTS AND LATER 
SCHOLARSHIP 

Originals and hand copies of Dogen’s writings were scattered in 
temples all over Japan. But thanks to traditional and contemporary 
scholarship, a critical edition that compares variants in all available 

versions of Dogen’s texts has been published and is available for 
study.ss 

While Dogen’s dharma descendants increased, gaining popular 
support and building temples all over Japan, most of his writings were 
quickly forgotten. Not one substantial commentary was written on his 
essays between the fourteenth and seventeenth centuries. 

There was a movement in the Soto community after the seventeenth 
century, however, to restore the founder’s spirit. The movement 
included extensive studies of his writings, resulting in the publication 
of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye by the Eihei Monastery, along 
with the emergence of commentaries on Dogen’s writings by several 
monk-scholars. 

Studies about Dogen remained in the domain of Soto sectarian 
scholarship until the 1920s, when Japanese scholars of Western 
philosophy started to realize the importance of Dogen’s thinking. That 
was when Tetsuro Watsuji’s Shamon Dogen (Monk Dogen) awakened 
interest in Dogen’s work among intellectuals. 

In the 1960s, Dogen began to be recognized as one of the greatest 
essayists in the history of Japanese literature. His writings were 
selected for various collections of classical literature. Since the 1960s, 
six translations of the entire Treasury of the True Dharma Eye have 
been published, making much of Dogen’s thought available to 
Japanese readers. 

As Zen meditation began to spread to the Western world in the 
1950s, translations of some of Dogen’s writings started to appear in 
Western languages. Over fifty books of Dogen translation and studies 
have been published in English, which makes Dogen by far the most 
extensively studied East Asian Buddhist in the Western world. How his 
influence will extend is yet to be seen. 

DOGEN IN OUR TIME 

Meditation is increasingly gaining importance in contemporary 
society. As technology advances and the pace of life becomes faster 
and faster, participants of the global society feel constantly stressed 
and driven by anxiety in their efforts to catch up with the speed and 
complexity of everyday life. In this state of the world, there is a 
tremendous need for us to slow down, relax, and heal. 

Dogen’s way, along with meditative arts such as yoga and taichi, 
can be one of the practices that help us to calm down and remain 
peaceful while being attentive to body, mind, and outer situations. 

Although it is possible for us to meditate for years and still be self- 
centered, the teaching of the self beyond self—the experience of 

selflessness through meditation—is enormously useful. How, then, can 
we achieve inner freedom? How can we be free from polarizing 
ourselves from others? How can we be free from dualistic thinking 
and from language itself? Dogen seems to provide clues to these 
questions. 

Dogen’s descriptions of meditation point to a radical expansion of 
our view of the world. That is, through a meditation-based life, 
awareness of the interconnection of all things expands our sense of 
self beyond the conventional confines of a world centered on our 
personal egos. Thus, the distinction between us and others becomes 
less significant. More and more we feel the joy and pain of others. 
This helps us to be compassionate and leads to action that helps others 
and ourselves by way of loving-kindness. 

We may not understand or agree with everything Dogen says: We 
may not favor his criticism of other Buddhists or non-Buddhists. His 
teaching may be too austere, too strict, and too monastic for us. His 
view of history may not accord with contemporary scholarship. 
However, his unshakable belief in the power of meditation and the 
immense potential of an individual action can be inspiring. « 

For Dogen, dreams and illusions have as much reality as actual 
phenomena. This notion leads us to confirm the power of fantasy and 
vision, which is often the basis for all types of creative, scientific, and 
social pursuits. Although Dogen was neither a social reformer nor a 
peace activist, as a Buddhist he was a pacifist. At the same time, his 
thoughts on the power of vision can be immensely helpful for those 
who work for peace and the environment. 

Dogen’s discourse on karma illuminates the inseparableness of cause 
and effect. Where there is a cause, whether it is large or small, good or 
bad, there is and will be an effect. We may not agree with his point, 
based on Buddhist scriptures, that some of the effects will take place 
in our future lifetime or lifetimes after death and rebirth. In fact, we 
may not believe in reincarnation at all. It is possible, however, for us 
to imagine that our actions will affect others, future generations, and 
the environment, instead of ourselves alone. We can also see that we, 
other people, all beings, and the environment are closely 
interconnected. Thus, it is possible to establish an understanding that 
all causes have effects, and that there is no cause without effect. Such 
trust in and identification with causation can be a basis for actions in 
our time. 

Dogen’s recommendations on how to brush the teeth and how to 
use the toilet may no longer be valid, as our lifestyle today is different 
from that of his time. On the other hand, much of Dogen’s instruction 
on how to sit and move in the meditation hall and how to work in the 
kitchen still has relevance in Zen monasteries and Zen centers in the 

Western world. His utmost positivity and trust in the power of action 
are compelling for those who are discouraged by the enormity of our 
social problems and who tend to be cynical and inactive. Furthermore, 
his teaching of sitting up straight helps us to sit, stand, walk and face 
the world in a forthright way. His ironic statement, “We will 
thoroughly engage in each activity in order to cultivate fertile 
conditions to transform the ten directions,”:, is an excellent reminder 
that we need to pay full attention to every detail of our work with 
others in order to prepare ourselves to transform ourselves and, hence, 
the world. 

NOTES 

1. Dogen’s term for meditation is zazen, meaning meditation in a 
sitting posture. He says, “The zazen I speak of . . . is simply the 
dharma gate of enjoyment and ease” (Recommending Zazen to All 
People, appendix 1). 

2. The state of meditation is called samadhi. For Dogen, this samadhi 
has been passed on by a number of awakened ones from the past. 
He says, “Buddhas and ancestors continuously maintain ocean 
mudra [form] samadhi” (Ocean Mudra Samadhi, chapter 32). 

3. For Dogen, the state of meditation is all-inclusive. It is also in 
constant movement, which he calls “flowing.” He says, “Spring with 
all its numerous aspects is called flowing. When spring flows there 
is nothing outside of spring” (The Time Being, chapter 12). Dogen 
encourages meditators to experience this all-inclusive state: “When 
you paint spring, do not paint willows, plums, peaches, or apricots 
—just paint spring” (Plum Blossoms, chapter 59). 

4. Dogen quotes and comments on a poem by Su Dongpo, expressing 
the poet’s understanding which emerged in meditation: “Valley 
sounds are the long, broad tongue [of the Buddha]. Mountain colors 
are no other than the unconditioned body [of the Buddha] . . .” 
(Valley Sounds, Mountain Colors, chapter 10). 

Dogen also quotes a poem by his teacher, Rujing, which 
expresses a state of meditation: “Old plum tree bent and gnarled 
all at once opens one blossom, two blossoms, three, four, five 
blossoms, uncountable blossoms, not proud of purity, not proud 
of fragrance; spreading, becoming spring, blowing over grass and 
trees...” (Plum Blossoms, chapter 59). 

5. There is no mention of “good meditation” or “bad meditation” in 
Dogen’s extensive writings. Nor does he discuss physical or 
psychological problems in meditation. 

6. “When even for a moment you sit upright in samadhi expressing the 

buddha mudra [form] in the three activities [body, speech, and 
thought], the whole world of phenomena becomes the buddha seal 
[expression] and the entire sky turns into enlightenment” (On the 
Endeavor of the Way, chapter 1). 

7. “Nonseparation” may be also described as “undividedness” or 
“nonduality.” 

8. The state of meditation Dogen explains is based on general and Zen 
Buddhist teachings. He says, “In buddha dharma it is always taught 
that body and mind are not separate, and that essence and 
characteristics are not two” (On the Endeavor of the Way, chapter 
1). As he uses the words “body” and “mind” not separately from 
each other, “body-and-mind” can be a suitable translation. For 
example: “When you see forms or hear sounds, fully engaging body- 
and-mind, you intuit dharma intimately” (Actualizing the 
Fundamental Point, chapter 3). 

9. In continuation of the above line, Dogen says, “Unlike things and 
their reflections in the mirror, and unlike the moon and its 
reflection in the water, when one side is illumined, the other side is 
dark” (ibid.). 

10. “To study the way of enlightenment is to study the self. To study 
the self is to forget the self. To forget the self is to be actualized by 
myriad things. When actualized by myriad things, your body and 
mind as well as the bodies and minds of others drop away” (ibid.). 
Also, “To carry the self forward and illuminate myriad things is 
delusion. That myriad things come forth and illuminate the self is 
awakening” (ibid.). 

11. According to Keizan’s biography of Dogen: “One day during the 
late-evening zazen, Rujing said to the assembly, ‘Practicing Zen is 
dropping away body and mind.’ Upon hearing this, Dogen suddenly 
had great realization. Immediately [after zazen], he went up to the 
abbot’s quarters and offered incense to Rujing, who said, ‘Why are 
you offering incense to me?’ Dogen said, ‘I have dropped away body 
and mind.’ Rujing said, “You have dropped away body and mind. 
Your body and mind have been dropped away’” (appendix 2). 

12. Dogen quotes a verse by Yaoshan, a Chinese Zen master: “For the 
time being, stand on top of the highest peak. For the time being, 
proceed along the bottom of the deepest ocean. For the time being, 
three heads and eight arms [of a fighting demon]. For the time 
being, an eight- or sixteen-foot body [of the Buddha]” (The Time 
Being, chapter 12). 

13. A verse by Rujing, Dogen’s teacher: “Both the bower and the 
bowed-to are empty and serene by nature and the way flows freely 
between them. How wondrous!” (Journal of My Study in China, 
Enlightenment Unfolds, p. 8). 

14. “Enlightenment does not divide you, just as the moon does not 
break the water. You cannot hinder enlightenment, just as a drop of 
water does not crush the moon in the sky. The depth of the drop is 
the height of the moon” (Actualizing the Fundamental Point, 
chapter 3). 

15. “Understanding these words [about the entire universe] is going 
beyond buddhas and ancestors by seeing that extremely large is 
small and extremely small is large” (Awesome Presence of Active 
Buddhas, chapter 24). 

16. This is a special usage of the word “nirvana.” For Dogen, each 
moment of practice encompasses this experience. “Between 
aspiration, practice, enlightenment, and nirvana, there is not a 
moment’s gap; continuous practice is the circle of the way” 
(Continuous Practice, Part One, chapter 31A). 

17. Dogen elaborates the poem by Yaoshan, quoted in note 12, by 
saying: “For the time being here means time itself is being, and all 
being is time” (The Time Being, chapter 12). 

18. “So-called today flows into tomorrow, today flows into yesterday, 
yesterday flows into today. And today flows into today, tomorrow 
flows into tomorrow” (ibid.). 

19. “Do not think that time merely flies away. Do not see flying away 
as the only function of time. If time merely flies away, you would be 
separated from time” (ibid.). 

20. “Before the emergence of a single mind, single thought’ 
[immeasurable past] is this very day. Temper your practice without 
missing this very day” (Old Mirror, chapter 21). 

21. “In essence, all things in the entire world are linked with one 
another as moments. Because all moments are the time being, they 
are your time being” (The Time Being, chapter 12). 

22. “To fully actualize the [buddha’s] golden body with the golden 
body—to arouse the way-seeking mind, practice, attain 
enlightenment, and enter nirvana—is nothing but being, nothing 
but time” (ibid.). 

23. “The real issue here, to clarify birth and to clarify death, is the 
great matter of causes and effects in the buddha house” (Refrain 
from Unwholesome Action, chapter 11). 

24. “. .. those who clarify the Tathagata’s treasury of the true dharma 
eye, the wondrous heart of nirvana, believe in this principle of birth 
and death moment by moment” (Arousing the Aspiration for 
Enlightenment, chapter 70). 

25. “Birth is just like riding in a boat. You raise the sails and you 
steer. Although you maneuver the sail and the pole, the boat gives 
you a ride, and without the boat you couldn’t ride. But you ride in 
the boat, and your riding makes the boat what it is” (Undivided 

Activity, chapter 42). 

26. After the line quoted in note 25, Dogen continues: “At just such a 
moment, there is nothing but the world of the boat. The sky, the 
water, and the shore are all the boat’s world, which is not the same 
as a world that is not the boat’s. Thus, you make birth what it is, 
you make birth your birth” (ibid.). 

27. “At the moment of death’s undivided activity, while it covers the 
entire earth and the entire sky, it hinders neither death’s undivided 
activity nor birth’s undivided activity” (ibid.). 

28. “Death is a phase that is an entire period of itself, with its own 
past and future. For this reason, death is understood as beyond 
death” (Birth and Death, chapter 93). 

29. “Just sitting” is the practice of zazen with no attempt to solve 
questions or expectation of attainment or enlightenment, and 
without either repressing or holding on to thoughts and feelings. 
Dogen emphasized this way of sitting. 

30. For the meaning of nirvana, see note 16. 

31. The essence of what is transmitted in Zen is described as “the 
treasury of the true dharma eye, the wondrous heart of nirvana.” 
Dogen, however, did not fully explain what he meant by “nirvana” 
here. So we need to guess from such statements as: “How can you 
differentiate this into body and mind, and separate birth-and-death 
from nirvana?” (On the Endeavor of the Way, chapter 1) and “In 
awakening there are aspiration, practice, enlightenment, and 
nirvana. Within the dream there are aspiration, practice, 
enlightenment, and nirvana. Every awakening within a dream is the 
genuine form, without regard to large or small, superior or inferior” 
(Within a Dream Expressing the Dream, chapter 39). 

32. “Because practice within realization occurs at the moment of 
practice, the practice of beginner’s mind is itself the entire original 
realization” (On the Endeavor of the Way, chapter 1). 

33. In the “circle of the way” (see n. 16), the way toward 
enlightenment is not linear, but rather is complete at each moment, 
encompassing practice and enlightenment. 

34. “At age thirty, after practicing continuously, he [the Buddha] 
attained the way simultaneously with all sentient beings on the 
great earth” (Continuous Practice, Part One, chapter 314A). 

35. Dogen interprets the statement from the Maha Pari-nirvana Sutra, 
“All sentient beings have buddha nature,” as “Living beings all are 
buddha nature.” He reads “all have” (shitsu u in Japanese) as “all 
are” (Buddha Nature, chapter 23). 

36. “Because earth, grass, trees, walls, tiles, and pebbles in the world 
of phenomena in the ten directions all engage in buddha activity, 
those who receive the benefits of the wind and water are 

inconceivably helped by the buddha’s transformation, splendid and 
unthinkable, and intimately manifest enlightenment” (On the 
Endeavor of the Way, chapter 1). 

37. The paradox of buddha nature is that although buddha nature is 
all beings, it is only actualized. “Buddha nature invariably arises 
simultaneously with attaining buddhahood” (Buddha Nature, 
chapter 23). 

38. “To suppose that practice and realization are not one is a view of 
those outside the way; in buddha dharma they are inseparable” (On 
the Endeavor of the Way, chapter 1). 

39. This concept is called “inseparableness of practice and 
realization”; or “practice within realization” (ibid.). 

40. “. . . those who are greatly deluded about realization are sentient 
beings” (Actualizing the Fundamental Point, chapter 3). Here Dogen 
refers to the term “sentient beings” as those who are not awakened. 

41. Early in his teaching career Dogen collected three hundred koans 
and called them the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye, later known as 
Shinji [Chinese] Shobo Genzo. He used many of the koans in the 
essays presented in the present book. 

42. In an informal talk Dogen said, “Even if you obtain some ideas by 
studying koans and words, it may cause you to go further away 
from the buddha ancestors’ path. Instead, dedicate your time to 
sitting upright, not seeking achievement, and not seeking 
enlightenment. This is the ancestral way.” Treasury of the True 
Dharma Eye: Record of Things Heard. Enlightenment Unfolds, pp. 57- 
58. 

43. Speaking of Mind, Speaking of Essence, chapter 49. 

44. “When actualized by myriad things, your body and mind as well 
as the bodies and minds of others drop away. No trace of 
enlightenment remains, and this no-trace continues endlessly” 
(Actualizing the Fundamental Point, chapter 3). 

45. For Dogen’s teaching on ethics, see Refrain from Unwholesome 
Action, pp. 95- 103. Also on harmonious practice, “The assembly of 
students in the hall should blend like milk and water to support the 
activity of the way” (Regulations for the Auxiliary Cloud Hall at the 
Kannondori Kosho Gokoku Monastery, chapter 5). 

46. “When you study buddha dharma with a sutra or with a teacher, 
you come to realization without a teacher” (Dharma Nature, chapter 
55). 

47. “I, Dogen, first bowed formally to Rujing, my late master, Old 
Buddha Tiantong, and received transmission face to face on the first 
day of the fifth month, the first year of Baoqing Era of Great Song, 
and was thereby allowed to enter the inner chamber” (Face-to-Face 
Transmission, chapter 57). 

48. “. .. I made a vow to myself: However unsuited I may be, I will 
become an authentic holder of the buddha dharma, receiving 
authentic transmission of the true dharma, and with compassion 
show the buddha ancestors’ authentically transmitted dharma robes 
to those in my land” (Power of the Robe, chapter 13; Transmitting 
the Robe, chapter 14). 

49. “We come to know the ancient sutras and texts as a result of our 
longing for the authentic teaching. As we long for the ancient 
teaching, the sutras of old come forth” (Continuous Practice, Part 
Two, chapter 31B). 

50. See Practice Period (chapter 79) and Guidelines for Practice of the 
Way (Beyond Thinking, pp. 103-117) for procedures in the monks’ 
hall. See Cleansing (chapter 7) for instruction on use of the toilet. 

51. See Regulations for the Auxiliary Cloud Hall at the Kannondori 
Kosho Gokoku Monastery, chapter 5. 

52. See Refrain from Unwholesome Action, chapter 11. 

53. The Mind Itself Is Buddha, chapter 6. 

54. For a typical example, see note 35. 

55. Mountains and Waters Sutra, chapter 15. 

56. Spring and Autumn, chapter 66. 

57. The Point of Zazen. 

58. Mountains and Waters Sutra, chapter 15. 

59. The Buddhas’ Teaching, chapter 25. 

60. Insentient Beings Speak Dharma, chapter 54. 

61. Actualizing the Fundamental Point, chapter 3. 

62. On the Endeavor of the Way, chapter 1. 

63. Twining Vines, chapter 47. 

64. Painting of a Rice Cake, chapter 41. 

65. Seeing the Buddha, chapter 61. 

66. Intimate Language, chapter 52. 

67. Thusness, chapter 30. 

68. Everyday Activity, chapter 64. 

69. The four biographies of Dogen mentioned here are included in 
Eihei Kaisan Dogen Zenji Gyojo Kenzei-ki, edited by Kodo Kawamura. 
70. Editor’s translation of a line from Treasury of the True Dharma Eye: 

Record of Things Heard. 

71. Ibid. 

72. On the Endeavor of the Way, chapter 1. 

73. Treasury of the True Dharma Eye: Record of Things Heard. 

74. Journal of My Study in China, Enlightenment Unfolds, p. 3. 

75. Ibid. 

76. Ibid. 

77. Instructions for the Tenzo, Moon in a Dewdrop, p. 59. 

78. Power of the Robe, chapter 13. 

79. Journal of My Study in China, Enlightenment Unfolds, p. 4. 

80. Ibid., p. 3. 

81. Face-to-Face Transmission, chapter 57. 

82. Journal of My Study in China, Enlightenment Unfolds, pp. 4-5. 

83. Extensive Record of Priest Eihei Dogen, Beyond Thinking, p. 145. 

84. Record of Bringing Master Myozen’s Relics, Enlightenment Unfolds, 
p. 30. 

85. Okubo Doshu, ed., Dogen Zenji Zenshu (Entire Work of Zen Master 
Dogen), 3 vols. (Tokyo: Chikuma Shobo, 1970). 

86. For example, Dogen says, “The time being of all beings throughout 
the world in water and on land just actualizes your complete effort 
right now. All beings of all kinds in the visible and invisible realms 
are the time being actualized by your complete effort, flowing due 
to your complete effort” (The Time Being, chapter 12). 

87. Donation Request for Monks’ Hall at the Kannondori Monastery, 
Enlightenment Unfolds, p. 47. 

TEXTS IN RELATION TO DOGEN’S LIFE AND TRANSLATION CREDITS 

Colophon: “Written at the Kannondori Monastery on the fifteenth day, 
the midyear [seventh month], the first year of the Tempuku Era 
[1233].” 

Translated by Edward Brown and the Editor. 

1228 

On the seventeenth day, the seventh month, of this year, Rujing died. 
Monk Jiyuan from Mount Tiantong traveled to Japan to inform Dogen 
of Rujing’s death. 

1230 

When an unusual nationwide famine filled many cities with the dead, 
Dogen settled in a small temple in Fukakusa, a village to the south of 
Kyoto. 

1231 

1. ON THE ENDEAVOR OF THE WAY (BENDOWA) 

“On the Endeavor of the Way” is Dogen’s systematic elucidation of his 
understanding of Zen, based on the principle that practice and 
enlightenment are inseparable. Using a set of imaginary questions and 
answers, he responds to doubts and skepticism by those accustomed to 
conventional Buddhist practices. This essay reflects Dogen’s first 
attempt to express his thinking in the vernacular Japanese language. 
Until then Buddhist teachings had been studied and written almost 
exclusively in the Japanese form of Chinese. 

“On the Endeavor of the Way” is highly respected in the Soto School 
as Dogen’s most comprehensive explanation of dharma. However, 
Dogen did not include the words Shob6 Genzo, “Treasury of the True 
Dharma Eye,” at the beginning of its title. When he later edited the 
Treasury of the True Dharma Eye, he did not include this fascicle in 
either the seventy-five-fascicle or the twelve-fascicle version. The 
reason why Dogen set aside this text may be that, addressed to an 
open audience, it reflects his intention to spread dharma broadly, 
while his teaching evolved toward training a small number of 
committed students as his community matured. 

According to Menzan Zuiho’s Eliminating Wrong Views on_ the 
Treasury of the True Dharma Eye (Shobo Genzo Byakujaku Ketsu, 1738), 
this text had been discovered in a courtier’s house in Kyoto. Manzan 
Dohaku included this piece in the appendix of his eighty-four-fascicle 
version of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye in 1684. Abbot Kozen 

of the Eihei Monastery included this as the opening piece in his 
ninety-five-fascicle version of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye, 
published by the monastery in 1690. 

Colophon: “Midautumn day [the fifteenth day of the eighth month], in 
the third year of the Kanki Era [1231], by Dogen, who has 
transmitted dharma from Song China.” 

Translated by Lewis Richmond and the Editor. 

Kosto Monastery Periop 

text second in his seventy-five-fascicle version of the Treasury of the 
True Dharma Eye. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Monastery 
on a day of the summer practice period in the first year of the 
Tempuku Era [1233].” 

Translated by Edward Brown and the Editor. 

3. ACTUALIZING THE FUNDAMENTAL POINT (GENJO KOAN) 
Completing his first practice period on the full-moon day (the 
fifteenth) of the seventh month, Dogen gave this text to his lay student 
Koshu Yo on the full-moon day of the following month. Koshu must 
have joined the practice period, and perhaps he was leaving for his 
home on the southwestern island of Kyushu. 

Koan—the original word for “fundamental point” in the title— 
usually means an exemplary Zen story given by a teacher to a student 
for spiritual investigation. But Dogen used the word here to point to 
the reality of all things that is to be realized. 

“Actualizing the Fundamental Point” is probably the best-known 
and most studied text of all Dogen’s writings, both for its summary of 
his teaching and for its poetic beauty. While other fascicles are 
focused on the themes indicated by their titles, “Actualizing the 
Fundamental Point” covers multiple themes, including awakened ones 
and nonawakened persons, enlightenment and delusion, birth and 
death, the potential of enlightenment (buddha nature) and 
actualization of it. 

Dogen used this text as the opening fascicle of the seventy-five- 
fascicle version of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye. He revised this 
text nineteen years later. Consequently, this text covers a span 
between the beginning and the end of his monastic teaching. (The 
earlier manuscript of this fascicle no longer exists.) 

Colophon: “Written around midautumn, the first year of the Tempuku 
Era [1233], and given to my lay student Koshu Yo of Kyushu Island. 
Revised in the fourth year of the Kencho Era [1252].” 

Translated by Robert Aitken and the Editor. Revised at San Francisco 
Zen Center and later at Berkeley Zen Center. 

1234 
Ejo joined Dogen’s temporary monastery. Soon he started transcribing 
Dogen’s informal evening talks, creating a text that became known as 

the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye: Record of Things Heard (Shob6 
Genzo Zuimonki). Ejo was to be Dogen’s lifetime disciple, editor, and 
dharma successor. 

1235 

Dogen gave Ejo the bodhisattva precepts. He also wrote a fundraising 

letter for construction of a monks’ hall at the Kannondori Monastery. 
He put together a collection of three hundred Chinese Zen koans, 

titled the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye. Seen as a lifetime notebook 

for his teaching, this book is known as the Chinese-Language Treasury 

of the True Dharma Eye (Shinji Shobd Genzo). 

1236 

The monks’ hall was opened at the monastery. Dogen renamed his 
practice center the Kosho (Raising Sages) Zen Monastery. (This name 
was mentioned by Sen’e in the Extensive Record of Priest Eihei Dogen.) 
Ejo was appointed head monk. 

1237 
Dogen wrote Instructions for the Tenzo (Tenzo Kyokun). 

Occupied with establishing his monastery, Dogen put aside the 
writing of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye for nearly five years. 

1238 

4. ONE BRIGHT PEARL (IKKA MYOJU) 

Dogen presented “One Bright Pearl” to the assembly of the 
Kannondori Kosho Horin (Avalokiteshvara’s Guiding Power, Raising 
Sages, Treasure Forest) Monastery on the fourth day of the practice 
period. In this essay he introduces the ancient Chinese Zen master 
Xuansha, takes up a set of dialogues by him with a student, and offers 
a thorough examination of the koan. It is the only fascicle Dogen 
wrote this year. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery, Uji County, Yamashiro Province, on the eighteenth day, 
the fourth month, the fourth year of the Katei Era [1238].” 

Translated by Edward Brown and the Editor. 

1239 
5. REGULATIONS FOR THE AUXILIARY CLOUD HALL AT THE 

KANNONDORI KOSHO GOKOKU MONASTERY (KANNONDORI 
KOSHO GOKOKU-JI JU’UN-DO SHIKI) 
Only three years after the construction of a monks’ hall about seventy 
feet square, it apparently was too small, and an additional monks’ hall 
was built. Unlike most other fascicles of the Treasury of the True 
Dharma Eye, which are short teachings, “Regulations for the Auxiliary 
Cloud Hall” was intended as a guideline for newcomers who were not 
yet ready to reside permanently and practice in the main monks’ hall. 

The monastery name Dogen used here—“Avalokiteshvara’s Guiding 
Power, Raising Sages, Treasure Forest, Protecting the Nation 
Monastery”—may reflect his wish to gain imperial patronage as a 
temple for protection of the country. Soon, however, he seemed to 
have abandoned the idea of seeking such patronage and thus dropped 
the name Gokoku (Protecting the Nation). 

This piece was included in Kozen’s ninety-five-fascicle version of the 
Treasury of the True Dharma Eye in 1690. But it had not been included 
in Dogen’s seventy-five or twelve-fascicle version of brief essays. 

Colophon: “This was written on the twenty-fifth day, the fourth 
month, the first year of the En’o Era [1239].” 

Translated by Reb Anderson and the Editor. 

6. THE MIND ITSELF IS BUDDHA (SOKUSHIN ZEBUTSU) 

In the midst of the summer practice period’s scorching heat, Dogen 
delivered the talk “The Mind Itself Is Buddha” to his community. Here 
he discusses the Buddhist notion of “mind”—which is distinct from a 
“soul” believed to last after death. Mind is inseparable from body and 
from all phenomena. In this fascicle he introduces what can be called 
the “four pillars of buddha dharma”—aspiration, practice, 
enlightenment, and nirvana. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery, Uji County, Yamashiro Province, on the twenty-fifth day, 
the fifth month, the first year of the En’o Era [1239].” 

Translated by Steve Allen and the Editor. 

7. CLEANSING (SENJO) 

One can assume that Dogen’s community members were disciplined in 
the monks’ hall, but relaxed outside the practice place and sloppy in 
the washroom. In this fascicle, completed in the winter, Dogen 
explains in detail how to be mindful in using the washroom. For 

Dogen, body, mind, and the environment cannot be isolated from one 
another; keeping them clean is an essential practice of dharma. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery, Uji County, Yamashiro Province, on the twenty-third day, 
the tenth month, the first year of the En’o Era [1239].” 

Translated by Peter Levitt and the Editor. 

8. WASHING THE FACE (SEMMEN) 

“Washing the Face” is a lengthy text presented on the same day as the 
preceding text, “Cleansing.” Dogen offered this piece three times in 
eleven years, which underscores the importance of the practice of 
washing the face in his teaching. Kozen’s version places this text as 
the fifty-sixth fascicle, according to the date of its second presentation. 
Nonetheless, we place it here based on the date of Dogen’s first 
presentation. 

Colophons: “Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery on the twenty-third day, the tenth month, the first year of 
the En’o Era [1239].” “Presented again to the assembly of the 
Yoshimine Temple, Yoshida County, Echizen Province, on the 
twentieth day, the tenth month, the first year of the Kangen Era 
[1243].” “Presented once more to the assembly of the Eihei 
Monastery, Kichijo Mountain, Yoshida County, Echizen Province, on 
the eleventh day, the first month, the second year of the Kencho Era 
[1250].” 

Translated by Linda Ruth Cutts and the Editor. 

1240 

9. RECEIVING THE MARROW BY BOWING (RAIHAI TOKUZUI) 
Dogen’s writing of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye seems to have 
accelerated around the year 1240. He wrote “Receiving the Marrow 
by Bowing” before the summer practice period. 

Here Dogen focuses with amazing clarity on the equality of 
accomplished female and male practitioners. Although he had female 
students, and perhaps allowed them to join the practice, it is likely 
that, according to custom, they were seated in a low-status position. 
(In “Continuous Practice, Part Two,” Dogen speaks of a Daoist 
practitioner’s being seated lower than nuns in his teacher Rujing’s 
monastery. There is no evidence that Dogen seated nuns differently 
from his teacher.) So, it is possible to assume that there was prejudice 

against female practitioners in his community, and outside of it. 
Among his own students, he may have encountered reluctance to 
admit nuns to the practice period. On this issue of sexism, we can see 
that Dogen was radically free of prejudice. At the same time, however, 
since he was a traditional teacher in a sexist society, his treatment of 
his female students doesn’t seem to have been completely free of 
discrimination. 

Colophon: “Written at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery on the 
clear-bright day [the fifteenth day from spring solstice], the second 
year of the En’o Era [1240].” 

Translated by Peter Levitt and the Editor. 

10. VALLEY SOUNDS, MOUNTAIN COLORS (KEISEI SANSHOKU) 

In every year, the summer practice period started on the full-moon 
(fifteenth) day of the fourth month. This text was presented on the 
nineteenth day of the fourth month in the form of jishu, which is a 
semiformal dharma talk. It is likely that Dogen’s jishu consisted of 
reading his draft to the group of practicing students. 

In this text, Dogen focuses on stories of three ancient Chinese Zen 
practitioners who had spiritual breakthroughs in natural settings and 
expressed their realizations in verses. Dogen repeatedly cautioned his 
community not to look for such breakthroughs outside their daily 
practice. 

Colophon: “On the fifth day of the practice period, the second year of 
the En’o Era [1240], this was presented to the assembly of the 
Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery.” 

Translated by Katherine Thanas and the Editor. 

11. REFRAIN FROM UNWHOLESOME ACTION (SHOAKU MAKUSA) 
One month after the end of practice period, on the full-moon day—the 
traditional day of repentance—Dogen delivered this text to those who 
were still at the monastery. His theme is basic, the “Seven Original 
Buddhas’ precepts.” Dogen presents a radically fresh and complete 
view of the precepts. Refraining from unwholesome or evil action is 
not a prohibition, but thorough practice, the experience of buddha 
dharma itself. Dogen had set up a monastic environment so that this 
would be possible. Of course, those who violated the monastery 
guidelines were asked to leave. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Kosho Horin Monastery, 
Uji County, Yamashiro Province, on the harvest moon day [the 
fifteenth day], the eighth month, the second year of the En’o Era 
[1240].” 

Translated by Mel Weitsman and the Editor. 

12. THE TIME BEING (UJD 

On the first day of the tenth month of 1240, Dogen completed this 
short but strikingly philosophical text. Deepening one’s meditation, 
one may grasp at once the unity of body and mind, practice and 
enlightenment, time and being, as well as that of time and self. Time, 
experienced simultaneously as momentary and timeless, is the essence 
of Dogen’s contemplation. 

Colophon: “On the first day of winter [the first day, the tenth month], 
the first year of the Ninji Era [1240], this was written at the Kosho 
Horin Monastery.” 

Translated by Dan Welch and the Editor. 

13. POWER OF THE ROBE (KESA KUDOKU) 

On the day Dogen completed “The Time Being,” he delivered this text, 
full of practical information about the Buddhist robe. Adorning one’s 
body with an authentic Buddhist robe is essential for actualizing 
enlightenment. Inverting secular values, he writes that an excrement- 
cleaning cloth (for cleaning a toilet) is the purest of all materials for 
making a robe. This is the first text where Dogen quotes extensively 
from Buddhist scriptures. He made this the third fascicle in his later 
twelve-fascicle version of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye. Some 
parts of this fascicle are repeated in “Transmitting the Robe.” 

Colophon: “This was presented to the assembly of the Kannondori 
Kosho Horin Monastery on the first day of winter, the first year of the 
Ninji Era [1240].” 

Translated by Blanche Hartman and the Editor. 

14. TRANSMITTING THE ROBE (DEN’E) 

“Transmitting the Robe” has the same date as “Power of the Robe,” 
and there is much overlap between them. Possibly an original text was 
divided in two during the process of editing. “Transmitting the Robe” 
is included in the seventy-five-fascicle version. 

Colophon: “This was written at the Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery on the first day of winter, the first year of the Ninji Era 
[1240]. Dogen, Shramana who has transmitted dharma from Song 
[China].” 

Translated by Jean Selkirk and the Editor. 

15. MOUNTAINS AND WATERS SUTRA (SANSUIKYO) 

Seventeen days after dating “The Time Being,” “Power of the Robe,” 
and “Transmitting the Robe,” Dogen presented this highly imaginative 
and poetic text late at night to his assembly of students. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly at Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery at the hour of the Rat [midnight], the eighteenth day, the 
tenth month, the first year of the Ninji Era [1240].” 

Translated by Arnold Kotler and the Editor. 

Dogen gave thirty-one formal talks between 1235 and 1240. Formal 
talks were short ceremonial discourses given in the dharma hall, 
recorded in Chinese by one of his senior students and later collected in 
the Extensive Record of Priest Eihei Dogen. 

1241 

16. BUDDHA ANCESTORS (BUSSO) 

“Buddha Ancestors” marked Dogen’s tenth year of writing and 
compiling his monumental work. In the New Year, Dogen completed 
this text, which consists mostly of ancestors’ names up to that of his 
teacher, Rujing. These names have been recited daily by Dogen’s 
countless dharma descendants. 

Colophon: “Written and presented at Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery, Uji County, Yamashiro Province, Japan, on the third day, 
the first month, the second year of the Ninji Era [1241].” 

Translated by Lewis Richmond and the Editor. 

17. DOCUMENT OF HERITAGE (SHISHO) 

Dogen took three months to prepare the “Document of Heritage.” He 
completed it at the end of spring, but, because of the secret nature of 
the theme, he did not deliver it to the community. Much of this piece 
describes his dialogues with monks, including abbots of famous 

monasteries in China. Demonstrating his extraordinary abilities of 
memorization and close observation, Dogen speaks of viewing 
treasured certificates of dharma transmission. He recalls being offered 
a document of heritage and politely declining the opportunity. He is 
very critical of the state of Zen in China at that time. He quotes 
Rujing’s words on documents of heritage but, perhaps out of modesty, 
does not speak of his experience of receiving authentication from 
Rujing. The second colophon below seems to imply that he continued 
to edit the text over two years after it was written. 

Colophons: “On the twenty-seventh day, the third month, the second 
year of the Ninji Era [1241], this was written at Kannondori Kosho 
Horin Monastery by monk Dogen, who has transmitted dharma from 
China.” “On the twenty-fourth day, the ninth month, the first year of 
the Kangan Era [1243], I have hung my traveling stick at the grass- 
thatched hut in Yoshimine Village, Echizen Province. A written seal.” 

Translated by Lewis Richmond and the Editor. 

18. DHARMA BLOSSOMS TURN DHARMA BLOSSOMS (HOKKE TEN 
HOKKE) 

In the spring of 1241, Monk Ekan, the main teacher of the Japan 
Daruma (Bodhidharma) School, joined Dogen’s community. This Zen 
school had been founded by Nonin a half century before. Ekan, who 
had earlier sent Ejo to study with Dogen, brought along many other 
students, including Gikai, Giin, and Gien. 

Another person who joined the practice period was Etatsu, who 
seems to have been a newly ordained scholar of the Lotus Sutra. 
Possibly inspired by Etatsu’s aspiration for Zen practice, Dogen wrote 
this fascicle. In the exceptionally long colophon of this fascicle 
(quoted below), he compares the story of Huineng, the Sixth Chinese 
Ancestor, guiding a scholar of the sutra, to his own guidance of Etatsu. 

“Dharma Blossoms” indicates the Lotus Sutra, which is referred to as 
the Dharma Blossoms Sutra in Chinese. It also means the blossoming 
of reality. In this fascicle, Dogen plays with the unfolding of this 
double concept. 

Colophon: “This was written and given to Zen person Etatsu to 
celebrate his home leaving and entry into the practice of the way, 
during the summer practice period in the second year of the Ninji Era 
[1241]. Shaving the head is a good thing. To shave the head over and 
over again makes a true home leaver. Today’s home leaving is the 
natural fruit of the natural power of the dharma blossoms turning in 
the past. The dharma blossoms of this moment will certainly bear fruit 

as dharma blossoms in the future. They are not Shakyamuni’s dharma 
blossoms, nor all buddhas’ dharma blossoms, but the dharma 
blossoms’ dharma blossoms. Every day the turning of the dharma 
blossoms is as it is, beyond perception, beyond knowledge. Dharma 
blossoms emerge at this moment, beyond knowing, beyond 
understanding. Past moments are your breathing in and breathing out. 
Present moments are your breathing in and breathing out. Treasure 
these moments as dharma blossoms, wondrous and inconceivable. 
Monk Dogen, who has transmitted dharma from China, founder of the 
Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery.” 

Translated by Michael Wenger and the Editor. 

19. UNGRASPABLE MIND (SHIN FUKATOKU) 

After his story of a Lotus Sutra scholar giving up his extensive studies 
and directly experiencing the meaning of the sutra in the previous 
fascicle, Dogen here presents the story of a scholar of the Diamond 
Sutra. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery, Uji County, Yamashiro Province, in the summer practice 
period, the second year of the Ninji Era [1241].” 

Translated by Michael Wenger and the Editor. 

20. UNGRASPABLE MIND, LATER VERSION (GO SHIN FUKATOKU) 

It seems that after delivering an earlier version of “Ungraspable Mind” 
to the community, Dogen further edited and expanded the text. This 
later version was only “written,” rather than “presented,” during the 
same practice period. 

Dogen included the earlier version in the seventy-five-fascicle 
version, but not the later version. Kozen included both versions in his 
Eihei-ji edition. 

Colophon: “Written at the Kosho Horin Monastery on a day of 
summer practice period, the second year of the Ninji Era [1241].” 

Translated by Michael Wenger and the Editor. 

21. OLD MIRROR (KOKYO) 

After the end of the practice period, many of the mature Zen students 
stayed on. This winter Dogen’s creative energy burst forth; he wrote 
six fascicles of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye, beginning with 

“Old Mirror.” 

The mirror in ancient China was a disk made of bronze, which 
needed polishing at times. Reflecting all things, it is a mysterious 
analogy for awakened mind, like the full moon, an eyeball, or a pearl. 
Dogen takes up a number of Zen stories, as well as Chinese and 
Japanese secular stories, on mirror disks, and comments on them with 
vigor. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery on the ninth day, the ninth month, the second year of the 
Ninji Era [1241].” 

Translated by Lewis Richmond and the Editor. 

22. READING A SUTRA (KANKIN) 

Six days after delivering “Old Mirror,” Dogen offered this text to the 
assembly on the first full-moon day of winter. Contrary to the general 
Chinese Zen adage of “transmission outside the scripture,” Dogen 
emphasizes the invariable value of Buddhist scriptures. He quotes and 
comments on several Zen stories about scriptures and explains the 
rites of reading scriptures in a monastery, revealing his extraordinary 
capacity to observe and describe liturgy in detail. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Kosho Horin Monastery, 
Uji County, Yamashiro Province, on the fifteenth day, the ninth month 
in autumn, the second year of the Ninji Era [1241].” 

Translated by John Daido Loori and the Editor. 

23. BUDDHA NATURE (BUSSHO) 
About a month after presenting “Reading a Sutra,” Dogen delivered 
this long and highly theoretical text. He examines and comments on a 
number of ancient Zen masters’ statements on the dilemma of the 
universality and inconceivability of enlightenment. He exerts himself 
to uncover the logic in seemingly illogical words on the subject found 
throughout the Zen tradition. 

Dogen later placed this text third in the seventy-five-fascicle version 
of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye, following “Actualizing the 
Fundamental Point” and “Manifestation of Great Prajna.” 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Kosho Horin Monastery, 
Uji County, Yamashiro Province, on the fourteenth day, the tenth 
month, the second year of the Ninji Era [1241].” 

Translated by Mel Weitsman and the Editor. 

24. AWESOME PRESENCE OF ACTIVE BUDDHAS (GYOBUTSU IIGI) 
Contemplating the expression of buddhahood in “Buddha Nature,” 
Dogen must have been thinking about the aspect of action or practice 
of buddhas. Practice is what makes a person a buddha. “Awesome 
Presence of Active Buddhas” was completed about the same time as 
“Buddha Nature” but was not presented to the community. 

Colophon: “Written in the middle of the tenth month, the second year 
of the Ninji Era [1241], at the Kannondori Horin Monastery by Monk 
Dogen.” 

Translated by Taigen Dan Leighton and the Editor. 

25. THE BUDDHAS’ TEACHING (BUKKYO) 

Dogen’s students who had studied with other Zen masters must have 
been familiar with the Zen expression “transmission outside the 
scriptures.” Dogen asserts that it is a mistaken notion and explains the 
Buddhas’ expressions by laying out categories of scriptures in the 
Buddhist canon. The tone of his criticism has sharpened by now. 

Colophons: “Presented to the assembly of the Kosho Monastery, 
Yamashiro Province, on the fourteenth day, the eleventh month, the 
second year of the Ninji Era [1241].” Presented again “On the 
seventh day, the eleventh month, the third year of the Ninji Era 
[1242].” 

Translated by Peter Levitt and the Editor. 

26. MIRACLES (JINZU) 

Two days after delivering “The Buddhas’ Teaching,” Dogen read 
“Miracles” to the residents of his monastery. For Dogen, the everyday 
practice of dharma is a series of miracles, while being free from 
desires is a miracle. Further, going beyond miracles is the ultimate 
miracle. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery on the sixteenth day, the eleventh month, the second year 
of the Ninji Era [1241].” 

Translated by Katherine Thanas and the Editor. 

Dogen gave fifty-eight formal talks in 1241. 

1242 

27. GREAT ENLIGHTENMENT (DAIGO) 

“Great Enlightenment” is the first of seventeen fascicles Dogen wrote 
this year—the most prolific period of his writing career. He revised 
and presented this text a second time in Echizen Province exactly one 
year later. 

Dogen calls the experience of going beyond the separation of 
enlightenment and delusion “great enlightenment.” In this teaching, 
enlightenment is not exclusive of delusion. Thus, for him, “great 
delusion” is not exclusive of enlightenment. 

Colophons: “Abiding at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery, I 
present this to the assembly on the twenty-eighth day, the first month, 
the third year of the Ninji Era [1242].” “Staying at the ancient 
Yoshimine Temple, I revise and present this to the assembly of humans 
and devas on the twenty-eighth day, the first month, the second year 
of the Kangen Era [1243].” 

Translated by Blanche Hartman and the Editor. 

28. THE POINT OF ZAZEN (ZAZEN SHIN) 

In “The Point of Zazen,” Dogen speaks of the mind of meditation, 
commenting on two classical stories on the meaning of zazen. He 
offers sharp criticism of several Chinese writings that were supposed 
to express the rules and approach of zazen. Then, with great 
reverence, line by line, he interprets “The Point of Zazen,” a verse 
pointing to the heart of meditation, by Hongzhi Zhengjue. Hongzhi 
had been a prominent master of the Caodong School in the twelfth 
century—the lineage Dogen inherited. Hongzhi advocated “silent 
illumination Zen.” Dogen adapted the verse, changing several words 
and making a stunning improvement. He brought his manuscript to 
Echizen Province and presented it to his community there a year and a 
half later. 

Colophons: “Written at the Kosho Horin Monastery on the eighteenth 
day, the third month, the third year of the Ninji Era [1242].” 
“Presented to the assembly at the Yoshimine Temple, Yoshida County, 
Echizen Province, in the eleventh month of the fourth year of the Ninji 
Era [1243].” 

Translated by Michael Wenger and the Editor; Dogen’s poem 

translated by Philip Whalen and the Editor. 

29. GOING BEYOND BUDDHA (BUKKOJO JI) 

Five days after completing “The Point of Zazen,” Dogen shared “Going 
Beyond Buddha” with his monastic community. In this fascicle, he 
describes the dynamic state of being a buddha by saying, “You reach 
buddha, and going further, you continue to see buddha.” 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly at the Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery on the twenty-third day, the third month, the third year of 
the Ninji Era [1242].” 

Translated by Mel Weitsman and the Editor. 

30. THUSNESS (IMMO) 

There was only three days’ difference between the delivery of the 
preceding fascicle, “Going Beyond Buddha,” and that of “Thusness.” 
The title, “Immo,” is the Japanese translation of the Chinese colloquial 
word renmo. Meaning “in this way,” “like this,” “like that,” “this,” or 
“that,” this word is a key term in Zen dialogues. Dogen shows some 
usages of the word and attempts to decode it with his own style of 
transcendental language. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery on the twenty-sixth day, the third month, the third year of 
the Ninji Era (1242).” 

Translated by Mel Weitsman and the Editor. 

In the spring of 1242, Dogen wrote an afterword to the Recorded 
Sayings of Priest Rujing, Sequel. (Rujing had passed away in 1228, one 
year after Dogen’s departure from the Tiantong Monastery. A two- 
fascicle book titled the Recorded Sayings of Priest Rujing was compiled 
by Wensu and others, and was published in 1229. This sequel was 
edited by Yuan, who may have asked Dogen to write this afterword 
because of the high regard in which Rujing’s students held him. The 
completed book was to be delivered in fall of the same year.) 

31A. CONTINUOUS PRACTICE, PART ONE (GYOJI, JO) 

31B. CONTINUOUS PRACTICE, PART TWO (GYOJI, GE) 

Seven days after the delivery of “Thusness,” Dogen completed an 
exceptionally long text. It is noteworthy that Dogen first introduces his 
concept of the “circle of the way” at the beginning of this text. 

This text is traditionally divided into two parts and bound into two 
volumes. In Part One, stories of three Indian ancestors are arranged in 
chronological order, followed by stories of nineteen Chinese teachers 
that seem to be thematically arranged. In Part Two, stories of eleven 
Chinese teachers from Bodhidharma to Rujing are presented, not 
necessarily in chronological order. Dogen merged these into one 
fascicle in the seventy-five-fascicle version of the Treasury of the True 
Dharma Eye. 

Colophon (31a): “Editing completed on the eighteenth day, the first 
year of the Ninji Era [1243]. [Dogen]” 

Colophon (31b): “Written at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery 
on the fifth day, the fourth month, the third year of the Ninji Era 
[1242].” 

Translated by Mel Weitsman and the Editor, with David Schneider. 

32. OCEAN MUDRA SAMADHI (KAPIN ZEMMAIT) 

Dogen had been away from the ocean for some years, residing in a 
monastery near the Uji River that runs through a flat valley, south of 
Kyoto. 

And yet, the ocean’s depth was part of his meditation. In “Ocean 
Mudra Samadhi” he speaks of samadhi that is as vast and dynamic as 
an ocean. 

Colophon: “Written at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery on the 
twentieth day, the fourth month, the third year of the Ninji Era 
[1242].” 

Translated by Katherine Thanas and the Editor. 

33. CONFIRMATION (JUKI) 

“Confirmation” is the second fascicle Dogen completed at the 
beginning of the summer practice period. The monastery had been 
busy preparing for and entering the practice period. Perhaps Dogen 
was occupied with daily writing and that is why he did not present 
“Continuous Practice,” “Ocean Mudra Samadhi,” and this piece to the 
community. 

The title, “Juki,” is a Japanese translation of the Sanskrit word 
vyakarana, meaning “predicting enlightenment”—that is, the Buddha’s 
prediction that a disciple will attain enlightenment in the future. The 
word suggests a span of time the practitioner will have between 
receiving a prediction and realizing enlightenment. Dogen presents his 

view of “prediction” according to the principle of the inseparability of 
practice and enlightenment. 

Colophon: “Written at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery on the 
twenty-fifth day, the fourth month, in summer, the third year of the 
Ninji Era [1242].” 

Translated by Lewis Richmond and the Editor. 

34. AVALOKITESHVARA (KANNON) 

“Avalokiteshvara” was the fourth fascicle Dogen wrote in the fourth 
month, and was read to the participants of the practice period. 
Dogen’s first small practice place was called Kannondori 
(Avalokiteshvara’s Guiding Power) Monastery. When it was renamed 
Kosho Horin Monastery, he still kept the original name, Kannondori, 
and at times used it for the beginning of the monastery name. It is 
possible to guess that Avalokiteshvara was his guardian bodhisattva. 
And yet, Dogen did not speak much about the guiding power of the 
bodhisattva. Instead, he used the dialogue between two Chinese 
dharma brothers to unfold the essential Zen understanding of 
Avalokiteshvara. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly on the twenty-sixth day, the 
fourth month, the third year of the Ninji Era [1242].” 

Translated by Joan Halifax and the Editor. 

35. ARHAT (ARAKAN) 

One month after the beginning of the practice period, on the day of 
the full moon, Dogen offered this teaching, “Arhat,” to participants. 
Arhats are known as sages of early Buddhism, disciples of the Buddha. 
Mahayana practitioners tended to look down on arhat practice, 
considering it to be Hinayana, compared with Mahayana bodhisattva 
practice. Dogen here fully values the arhats’ way. 

Colophon: “Abiding at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery, Uji 
County, Yamashiro Province, this was presented to the assembly on 
the fifteenth day, the fifth month, the third year of the Ninji Era 
[1242].” 

Translated by Peter Levitt and the Editor. 

36. CYPRESS TREE (HAKUJUSHI) 

Six days after delivering “Arhat,” Dogen taught “Cypress Tree.” Much 
of this text reflects on the austere life of the Chinese Zen master 
Zhaozhou, whose enigmatic words pointing toward a cypress tree’s 
awakened nature are investigated here. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of Kannondori Monastery, Uji 
County, Yamashiro Province, on the twenty-first day, the season of 
Iris Festival, the fifth month, the third year of the Ninji Era [1242].” 

Translated by Katherine Thanas and the Editor. 

37. RADIANT LIGHT (KOMYO) 

Around the first day of the sixth month, at midpoint of the practice 
period, Dogen broke the schedule of communal zazen because of the 
fierce heat and humidity. (He resumed scheduled zazen on the first 
day of the ninth month, one and a half months after the practice 
period. Such a three-month break seems to have been common. Dogen 
mentioned it in his formal talks this year and in 1252.) 

On the second day of the sixth month, Dogen delivered this text to 
the participants in the dark of midnight in the lingering rainy season. 
He implies that the radiant light of practice-enlightenment was, 
nevertheless, right there. As Yunmen said, one can find radiant light in 
the monks’ hall, the buddha hall, the kitchen, and the monastery gate. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery at the fourth segment of the third night period, the second 
day, the sixth month, the third year of the Ninji Era [1242]. It has 
been raining for a long time, and raindrops drip from the eaves. 
Where is the radiant light? The assembly must look and penetrate 
Yunmen’s words.” 

Translated by Mel Weitsman and the Editor. 

38. BODY-AND-MIND STUDY OF THE WAY (SHINJIN GAKUDO) 

Soon after the practice period ended, on the fifth day of the eighth 
month, a copy of the newly published Recorded Sayings of Priest Rujing, 
Sequel was delivered from China to Dogen. On the following day he 
gave a formal talk about it. 

According to Dogen, to study buddha dharma is to practice without 
separating body from mind. In this fascicle, however, he temporarily 
divides the practice into study with mind and study with body, 
spelling out these two aspects in detail. 

Colophon: “This was taught to the assembly of the Horin Monastery 
on the ninth day, the ninth month, the third year of the Ninji Era 
[1242].” 

Translated by Dan Welch and the Editor. 

39. WITHIN A DREAM EXPRESSING THE DREAM (MUCHU 
SETSUMU) 

In early winter, twelve days after the presentation of “Body-and-Mind 
Study of the Way,” Dogen delivered “Within a Dream Expressing the 
Dream” to his monastic community. 

Here, Dogen uses the word “dream” to describe the enlightenment 
of the Buddha, and the meditative experience of all practitioners. 
Counter to the common notion that dreams are unreal and actual 
phenomena are real, he asserts that the awakened ones’ profound 
wisdom is concrete, the source of all teaching, while actual 
phenomena are transient and unreliable. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery, Uji County, Yamashiro Province, on the twenty-first day, 
the ninth month, the third year of the Ninji Era [1242].” 

Translated by Taigen Dan Leighton and the Editor. 

40. EXPRESSIONS (DOTOKU) 

Twelve days after the presentation of “Within a Dream Expressing the 
Dream,” Dogen shared this text, “Expressions,” with his assembly. The 
“expression” here means words, or expressions beyond words, that 
emerge from one’s genuine understanding of reality, unique to the 
person. In this text, Dogen offers examples of speaking and not 
speaking. 

Colophon: “Written and presented to the assembly of Kannondori 
Kosho Horin Monastery on the fifth day, the tenth month, the third 
year of the Ninji Era [1242].” 

Translated by Peter Levitt and the Editor. 

41. PAINTING OF A RICE CAKE (GABYO) 

One month after “Expressions” was delivered, Dogen taught this text 
at his monastery in the middle of winter. Here, Dogen takes up 
Xiangyan’s famous words “A painting of a rice cake does not satisfy 
hunger,” meaning that descriptive scriptures are not a direct 
experience of reality. Dogen turns it around in an astounding way. He 

insists that a painted rice cake alone can satisfy hunger. Although it 
appears to be an impenetrable paradox, this may be a natural 
development from his discourse that Buddhist scripture is an entire 
expression of the Buddha’s teaching (as seen in the fascicle “The 
Buddhas’ Teaching”). 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery on the fifth day, the eleventh month, the third year of the 
Ninji Era [1242].” 

Translated by Dan Welch and the Editor. 

42. UNDIVIDED ACTIVITY (ZENKI) 

Two days after presenting his “Painting of a Rice Cake,” Dogen taught 
“The Buddhas’ Teaching” to his monastic community for the second 
time. 

In the following month, close to the end of the year, Dogen was 
invited to give a dharma talk at the Kyoto residence of Lord 
Yoshishige Hatanao, who was going to be his primary supporter. 
Yoshishige was a high-ranking officer in the Kyoto office of Minamoto 
Clan Shogun, then ruler of Japan. This office was close to the 
Rokuharamitsu (Six Paramita) Monastery, in the Rokuhara area—east 
of the Kamo River, between Gojo Dori (Fifth Avenue) and Shichijo 
Dori (Seventh Avenue) in Kyoto. 

Addressing an audience of mostly laypeople, in this brief discourse 
Dogen stresses that each individual should live fully and actively. 
Possibly this presentation was decisive in Yoshishige’s invitation to 
Dogen to move to Echizen and found a monastery. (Dogen moved 
most of his community to Echizen seven and a half months later.) Did 
Yoshishige already have a strong commitment to build a full-scale 
monastery and support the community? The monastery opened one 
and a half years later, and Dogen described practice period in a full- 
scale monastery in “Practice Period” three years later, in 1245. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly at the residence of the former 
governor of Izumo Province, next to the Rokuharamitsu Temple, 
Kyoto, on the seventeenth day, the twelfth month, the third year of the 
Ninji Era [1242].” 

Translated by Edward Brown and the Editor. 

Dogen gave twenty-six formal dharma talks in 1242. 

1243 (IN KYOTO AREA) 

43. THE MOON (TSUKI) 

Back in Kosho Monastery, Dogen wrote a short piece, “The Moon,” 
soon after New Year’s Day, as the first of twenty-two fascicles to be 
completed this year. 

Dogen spells the Japanese title, “Tsuki,” meaning “moon,” in a very 
unusual way, using two ideographs, tsu (entire) and ki (activity). (See 
“Moon, The” in the glossary for the ideographs.) Ki for “activity” also 
appears in the title of “Undivided Activity,” the preceding fascicle. 
The moon in Buddhism is a metaphor for enlightenment, often 
represented by a full moon. For Dogen, the moon represents 
meditation in each moment; the moon waxes and wanes, and yet it is 
always full. This is the dilemma Dogen explores in this text, which 
was not presented to the community. 

Colophon: “Written at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery on the 
sixth day, the first month, the fourth year of the Ninji Era [1243]. 
Monk Dogen.” 

Translated by Mel Weitsman and the Editor. 

44. FLOWERS IN THE SKY (KUGE) 
On the twenty-eighth day of the first month, Dogen delivered “Great 
Enlightenment” for the second time. 

Although his writing was at its peak, he did not complete any other 
fascicles for two months. What was Dogen doing during this spring? 
What was more important and pressing than writing his life’s work? 
Was he possibly drawing plans for the construction of his new 
monastery? 

“Flowers in the Sky,” meaning “illusion,” goes along with such 
previous fascicles as “Within a Dream Expressing the Dream” and 
“Painting of a Rice Cake,” turning negative images upside down and 
making them represent the realm of enlightenment. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery on the tenth day, the third month, the first year of the 
Kangen Era [1243].” 

Translated by Dan Welch and the Editor. 
45. OLD BUDDHA MIND (KOBUTSU SHIN) 

As was customary, the summer practice period at Dogen’s monastery 
started in the middle of the fourth month. Unusually, he left the 

community for several days and presented “Old Buddha Mind” at a 
temple near Yoshishige Hatano’s residence, in the city of Kyoto. 
Perhaps this visit to the city of Kyoto was at the request of Yoshishige. 
They may well have discussed arrangements to move Dogen’s 
community to Echizen, and the construction of new monastery 
buildings. Perhaps speaking to his primary supporter, Yoshishige, in 
this brief presentation Dogen summarizes the mind of ancient 
buddhas. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly at the Rokuharamitsu Temple 
[in Kyoto] on the twenty-ninth day, the fourth month of the Kangen 
Era [1243].” 

Translated by Joan Halifax and the Editor. 

46. BODHISATTVA’S FOUR METHODS OF GUIDANCE (BODAISATTA 
SHI SHOHO) 

Dogen wrote this text five days after his discourse, “Ancient Buddha 
Mind.” The colophon does not say where he wrote it. He may still 
have been in Kyoto. The fact that Dogen included a description of 
himself (“Monk Dogen, who transmitted dharma from China”), 
suggests that he gave the text to Yoshishige. The style is easy and 
straightforward, explaining the virtues common to lay and ordained 
practitioners in all Buddhist schools. 

Colophon: “Written on the fifth day, the fifth month, the fourth year 
of Ninji [1243] by Monk Dogen, who transmitted dharma from 
China.” 

Translated by Lewis Richmond and the Editor. 

47. TWINING VINES (KATTO) 

Back in his monastery eight days before the end of the practice period, 
Dogen gave this talk, “Twining Vines.” This was his last known 
dharma presentation in the vicinity of Kyoto. 

Again in this text, Dogen takes up a negative phrase, “twining 
vines,” which normally means “entanglement of words and concepts,” 
and brilliantly turns it around, indicating an intimate and dynamic 
transmission of dharma. 

Colophon: “Presented at the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery, Uji County, Yamashiro Province, on the seventh day, the 
seventh month, the first year of the Kangen Era [1243].” 

Translated by Mel Weitsman and the Editor. 

As customary, the practice period at the Kosho Monastery ended on 
the fifteenth day of the seventh month. Several days later, Dogen and 
most of his community moved to Echizen Province on the Japan Sea. 

Monastery Construction Periop 

Translated by Josho Pat Phelan and the Editor. 

49. SPEAKING OF MIND, SPEAKING OF ESSENCE (SESSHIN SESSHO) 
Dogen inscribed the place and year of presentation but did not put 
down a date, which was unusual, since he was a meticulous record 
keeper. Ejo copied this text on the eleventh day, the first month of the 
following year. Later, Dogen placed it between “Three Realms Are 
Inseparable from Mind” and “The Reality of All Things” in his seventy- 
five-fascicle version, which implies a chronological order. (And yet, no 
one knows exactly when this fascicle was presented.) 

The phrase “speaking of mind, speaking of essence” was at times 
criticized in the Zen tradition as too theoretical. In fact, Dogen himself 
had said, “Turning circumstances and turning mind is rejected by the 
great sage. Speaking of mind and speaking of essence is not agreeable 
to buddha ancestors” (“Mountains and Waters Sutra”). Here, to the 
contrary, Dogen emphasizes the importance of expressions of mind 
and essence. He no longer would merely admire ancient Chinese Zen 
masters like Linji and Yunmen; he offers harsh criticisms of them. 
Dogen seems to have developed full confidence as the leader of a 
monastic community. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, 
Yoshida County, Echizen Province, in the first year of the Kangen Era 
[1243].” 

Translated by Peter Levitt and the Editor. 

50. THE BUDDHA WAY (BUTSUDO) 

Dogen had some mature Zen students in the Kosho Zen Monastery (as 
it was called by Sen’e in 1236; see above), who had moved to Echizen 
with him. Some of them, especially former followers of the Daruma 
School, such as Ejo and Giun, must have identified themselves as 
“Zen” practitioners. Dogen needed to say that his teaching did not 
belong to the “Zen School” or any other sect. He simply taught the 
“buddha way.” He intended to be a genuine disciple of the Buddha, 
not confined by sectarian limitations. This is a clear departure from 
his earlier view, presented in “On the Endeavor of the Way,” of the 
Five Schools of Zen as something fixed and authoritative. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, 
Yoshida County, Echizen Province, on the sixteenth day, the ninth 
month, the first year of the Kangen Era [1243].” 

Translated by Mel Weitsman and the Editor. 

51. THE REALITY OF ALL THINGS (SHOHO JISSO) 

On a late autumn day, whose date was forgotten by Dogen or Ejo, 
Dogen presented “The Reality of All Things” to his community. He 
criticizes the current state of Chinese Zen and the tendency to view 
Buddhism, Daoism, and Confucianism as being in accord. Perhaps he 
listened to the chirping of birds while writing that an ancient master 
and Rujing equally associated the chirping of birds as expressing the 
reality of all things. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, 
Echizen Province, Japan, in the ninth month, the first year of the 
Kangen Era [1243].” 

Translated by Lewis Richmond and the Editor. 

52. INTIMATE LANGUAGE (MITSUGO) 

“Intimate Language” was also read to Dogen’s practicing community 
in the temporary setting of the Yoshimine Temple in late autumn. For 
Dogen, “intimate” means direct, close, without gap, and without 
intermediary words and concepts. Here Dogen writes that the essence 
of Zen practice is something intimate between the self and the true 
self, as well as between master and disciple. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the ancient Yoshimine 
Temple of Yoshida County, Echizen Province, on the twentieth day, 
the ninth month, the first year of the Kangen Era [1243].” 

Translated by Michael Wenger and the Editor. 

53. BUDDHA SUTRAS (BUKKYO) 

“Buddha Sutras” is the last piece Dogen wrote and presented during 
the transitional four-month autumn. In this text, he asserts that no 
spiritual breakthrough is possible without the aid of Buddhist 
scriptures, again counter to the common Zen notion of “transmission 
outside the scriptures.” 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, 
Yoshida County, Echizen Province, in the ninth month, the first year 
of the Kangen Era [1243].” 

Translated by Mel Weitsman and the Editor. 

54. INSENTIENT BEINGS SPEAK DHARMA (MUJO SEPPO) 

Dogen takes up three ancient Zen dialogues, none of which fully 
explain what “insentient beings speaking dharma” means. However, 
Dogen’s statement at the beginning, “This speaking dharma is spoken 
by dharma,” seems to offer an important clue. Could it be that dharma 
is a kind of an insentient being? 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the ancient Yoshimine 
Temple, Yoshida County, Echizen Province, on the second day, the 
tenth month, the first year of the Kangen Era [1243].” 

Translated by Alan Senauke and the Editor. 

55. DHARMA NATURE (HOSSHO) 

In the short text “Dharma Nature,” Dogen discusses the paradox of 
enlightenment. Scriptures and teachers cannot bring the self to 
realization, because all realizations are actualized by the self, and yet 
without them the self cannot come to realization. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, 
Echizen Province, in early winter [the tenth month], the first year of 
the Kangen Era [1243].” 

Translated by Peter Levitt and the Editor. 

56. DHARANI (DARANI) 

Although the day and month of composition were not recorded, the 
fifty-sixth fascicle offers Dogen’s startling explanation of a key 
Buddhist practice. “Dharani,” a Sanskrit word meaning “upholding,” 
“support,” or “remembrance,” makes a case for chanting magical 
spells, the heart of Esoteric Buddhist practice. Dogen sees this practice 
as teacher and disciple bowing to each other. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, 
Echizen Province, in the first year of the Kangen Era [1243].” 

Translated by Joan Halifax and the Editor. 

57. FACE-TO-FACE TRANSMISSION (MENJU) 

On the twentieth day of the tenth month of 1243, Dogen presented 
“Washing the Face” to students for the second time, with some 
additions. On the same day he presented “Face-to-Face Transmission.” 
Here he emphasizes the authentic transmission of dharma from person 

to person. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Monastery, 
Yoshida County, Echizen Province, on the twentieth day, the tenth 
month, the first year of the Kangen Era [1243].” 

Translated by Reb Anderson and the Editor. 

58. RULES FOR ZAZEN (ZAZEN GI) 

In the middle of the winter in snow country, Dogen delivered “Rules 
for Zazen” to his community. This fascicle offers the most basic 
teaching on zazen. It was probably aimed at monks and lay 
practitioners assembled to engage in preliminary work for 
construction scheduled for the following spring. This month he also 
redelivered “The Point of Zazen,” perhaps with his advanced students 
in mind. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, 
Yoshida County, Echizen Province, in the eleventh month, the first 
year of the Kangen Era [1243].” 

Translated by Dan Welch and the Editor. 

59. PLUM BLOSSOMS (BAIKA) 

In deep winter, anticipating the blooming of plum blossoms, Dogen 
wrote this fascicle, introducing and commenting on eight poems by 
Rujing. Earlier this year on the fifth day of the eighth month, the 
recently compiled Recorded Sayings of Zen Master Rujing, Sequel had 
arrived from China. 

Colophon: “This was written on the sixth day, the eleventh month, the 
first year of the Kangen Era [1243], at the Yoshimine Temple, 
Yoshida County, Echizen Province. Snow is three feet deep all over the 
land.” 

Translated by Mel Weitsman and the Editor. 

60. TEN DIRECTIONS (JIPPO) 

“Ten directions”—the eight compass points plus above and below— 
includes all the realms of awakening and luminosity. The snow- 
covered mountains around him must have inspired Dogen to write this 
text. But his community was planning to move to a lower altitude, 
where there was less snow. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, 
Echizen Province, Japan, on the thirteenth day, the eleventh month, 
the first year of the Kangen Era [1243].” 

Translated by Mel Weitsman and the Editor. 

61. SEEING THE BUDDHA (KEMBUTSU) 

In the mid-eleventh month, Dogen’s community was already in the 
grass-thatched hut at the foot of Yamashi Peak. He addresses in 
“Seeing the Buddha” the question of physically seeing Shakyamuni 
Buddha, or experiencing the heart of the Buddha without actually 
seeing him. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly at Yamashi Peak on the 
nineteenth day, the eleventh month, the first year of the Kangen Era 
[1243].” 

Translated by Gaelyn Godwin and the Editor. 

62. ALL-INCLUSIVE STUDY (HENZAN) 

Eight days after delivering “Seeing the Buddha,” Dogen read “All- 
Inclusive Study” to his community. The word in the Japanese title 
(Henzan) refers to a Zen student traveling all over to study with 
various masters. But Dogen uses this word to mean “studying 
thoroughly with a master (without needing to study with others).” 
This resonates with Xuansha’s words, “Bodhidharma did not come to 
China. Huike did not go to India.” 

Colophon: “Taught in a grass-thatched hut at the foot of Yamashi 
Peak, Echizen Province, on the twenty-seventh day, the eleventh 
month, the first year of the Kangen Era [1243].” 

Translated by Mel Weitsman and the Editor. 

63. EYEBALL (GANZED 

Eighteen days after “All-Inclusive Study,” Dogen delivered “Eyeball” 
and the following two talks on the same day. In line with “Plum 
Blossoms,” Dogen presents six quotations from the Recorded Sayings of 
Zen Master Rujing, Sequel as part of a monthly memorial day for 
Rujing. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly, at Yamashi Peak, Echizen 

Province, on the seventeenth day, the twelfth month, the first year of 
the Kangen Era [1243].” 

Translated by Peter Levitt and the Editor. 

64. EVERYDAY ACTIVITY (KAJO) 

“Everyday Activity” was delivered on the same day as the preceding 
text. Again in this fascicle Dogen discusses four quotations from the 
Recorded Sayings of Zen Master Rujing, Sequel. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly at the foot of Yamashi Peak, 
Echizen Province, on the seventeenth day, the twelfth month, the first 
year of the Kangen Era [1243].” 

Translated by Arnold Kotler and the Editor. 

65. DRAGON SONG (RYUGIN) 

“Dragon Song” was the last of the nineteen fascicles Dogen wrote in 
Echizen during the first seven months of 1243, the most prolific time 
of his life. Strikingly, he does not reference building the monastery, 
although he must have been very busy preparing for its construction. 
In this text, he addresses the dynamism and joy of sitting still. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly on the foot of Yamashi Peak on 
the twenty-fifth day, the twelfth month, the first year of the Kangen 
Era [1243].” 

Translated by Mel Weitsman and the Editor. 

Dogen gave five formal talks in 1243. 

1244 
66. SPRING AND AUTUMN (SHUNJU) 
Although the month and day of “Spring and Autumn” were not 
recorded, it was possibly delivered in a hut at the foot of Yamashi 
Peak. It was spring, yet it was too cold to return to the Yoshimine 
Temple. Dogen’s theme is a single koan regarding the Zen way of 
facing cold and heat. Dogen examines and criticizes six Chinese 
masters’ responses to this koan. 

The fact that this fascicle was presented twice hints that some of the 
residents were away, helping prepare for construction, performing 
tasks such as cutting wood. 

Colophon: “Presented twice to the assembly in a deep mountain of 
Echizen in the second year of the Kangen Era [1244]. At the moment 
of meeting Buddha, the Unicorn Sutra is expounded. An ancestor 
[Qinquan commenting on Shitou] said, ‘Although there are many 
horns, a single horn is sufficient.’” 

Translated by Katherine Thanas and the Editor. 

67. THE MEANING OF BODHIDHARMA’S COMING FROM INDIA 
(SOSHI SAIRAIT I) 

As in the preceding fascicle, “Spring and Autumn,” the month and day 
were not recorded in the colophon, but one can assume that Dogen 
delivered “The Meaning of Bodhidharma’s Coming from India,” along 
with five others, in a hut at the foot of Yamashi Peak during the 
coldest time of the year. In this text, Dogen examines Xiangyan’s 
words on the impossibility of verbally expressing the experience of 
nonduality. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly in a deep mountain of Echizen 
Province on the fourth day, the second month, the second year of the 
Kangen Era [1244].” 

Translated by Wendy Egyoku Nakao and the Editor. 

68. UDUMBARA BLOSSOM (UDON GE) 

In midspring, when the snow began to melt, Dogen and _ his 
community returned to the Yoshimine Temple. Presumably, this brief 
fascicle is directed to a mixture of long-term students and those who 
had recently arrived for the monastery construction. Dogen speaks of 
the legend that Shakyamuni Buddha took up a flower and blinked as 
Mahakashyapa smiled—commonly considered the first Zen 
transmission. He explains that all awakened ones in the past, present, 
and future emerge from this exchange. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly, while residing at the Yoshimine 
Temple, Echizen Province, on the twelfth day, the second month, the 
second year of the Kangen Era [1244].” 

Translated by Chozen Jan Bays, Hogen Bays, and the Editor. 

69. AROUSING THE ASPIRATION FOR THE UNSURPASSABLE 
(HOTSU MUJO SHIN) 

Two days after delivering “Udumbara Blossom,” Dogen presented this 
and the following fascicles to his assembly. Some copied versions of 
these two fascicles have the same title, “Arousing the Aspiration for 
Enlightenment” (Hotsu Bodai Shin). To avoid confusion, this earlier 
fascicle was renamed later, possibly by Dogen himself. 

Between these brief texts, this fascicle is more directed to lay 
practitioners of Buddhism, perhaps those who participated in 
monastery construction, not necessarily limited to Zen practitioners. 
(Some parts of the text are addressed to monks.) This text mentions 
virtues, including the construction of buddha images and stupas. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, 
Yoshida County, Echizen Province, on the fourteenth day, the second 
month, the second year of the Kangen Era [1244].” 

Translated by Steve Allen and the Editor. 

70. AROUSING THE ASPIRATION FOR ENLIGHTENMENT (HOTSU 
BODAI SHIN) 

Delivered on the same day as the preceding fascicle, “Arousing the 
Aspiration for Enlightenment” is addressed to bodhisattvas and 
practitioners of “beginner’s mind.” These two texts deal with a theme 
common to Buddhism in general. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, 
Yoshida County, Echizen Province, on the fourteenth day, the second 
month, the second year of the Kangen Era [1244].” 

Translated by Peter Levitt and the Editor. 

71. TATHAGATA’S ENTIRE BODY (NYORAI ZENSHIN) 

The day after the preceding fascicles were presented, Dogen delivered 
“Tathagata’s Entire Body” and the following fascicle, “King of 
Samadhis,” on the same day of the full moon. Again, this text runs 
counter to the common Zen expression “transmission outside the 
scriptures.” Dogen asserts that scriptures are no other than the entire 
body of the Buddha Shakyamuni. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, 
Yoshida County, Echizen Province, on the fifteenth day, the second 
month, the second year of the Kangen Era [1244].” 

Translated by John Daido Loori and the Editor. 

72. KING OF SAMADHIS (SAMMAI OZAMMAI) 

Delivered on the same day as “Tathagata’s Entire Body,” “King of 
Samadhis” reflects the height of Dogen’s creativity and brilliance. It 
discusses zazen, the heart of Zen practice, in the context of Buddhism 
in general. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple on the 
fifteenth day, the second month, the second year of the Kangen Era 
[1244].” 

Translated by Norman Fischer and the Editor. 

On the nineteenth day of the second month, four days after the 
delivery of “Tathagata’s Entire Body” and “King of Samadhis,” ground 
for the dharma hall of the new monastery was leveled. On the twenty- 
first day of this month, foundation stones were set and the pillars were 
erected. On the twenty-second day, the wooden framework of the 
dharma hall was raised. It was completed four months later. 

73. THIRTY-SEVEN WINGS OF ENLIGHTENMENT (SANJUSHICHI 
HON BODAI BUMPO) 

In this long text, “Thirty-seven Wings of Enlightenment,” Dogen 
presents a comprehensive list of Buddhist virtues, not specific to Zen, 
perhaps addressing home leavers. He emphasizes the necessity of 
leaving one’s household. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, 
Echizen Province, on the twenty-fourth day, the second month, the 
second year of the Kangen Era [1244].” 

Translated by Peter Levitt and the Editor. 

74. TURNING THE DHARMA WHEEL (TEMBORIN) 

Still residing temporarily at the Yoshimine Temple, three days after 
presenting “Thirty-seven Wings of Enlightenment,” Dogen read this 
short text on a general Buddhist theme to his practicing and working 
community. Here he discusses the authenticity of the Shurangama 
Sutra. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Monastery, 
Echizen Province, on the twenty-seventh day, the second month, the 
second year of the Kangen Era [1244].” 

Translated by Taigen Dan Leighton and the Editor. 

75. SELF-REALIZATION SAMADHI (JISHO ZAMMAI) 

Two days after presenting “Turning the Dharma Wheel,” Dogen read 
“Self-Realization Samadhi” to the assembly. In this text he revisits the 
Buddhist paradox of enlightenment, which he previously discussed in 
“Speaking of Mind, Speaking of Essence.” He explains that scriptures 
and teachers cannot create self-realization, because all realization is 
actualized by the self. Yet without them the self cannot be realized. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly while residing at the Yoshimine 
Temple on the twenty-ninth day, the second month, the second year of 
the Kangen Era [1244].” 

Translated by Mel Weitsman and the Editor. 

76. GREAT PRACTICE (DAI SHUGYO) 
Nine days later, Dogen read “Great Practice” to his community. This 
concluded a prolific time at the Yoshimine Temple and the hut on 
Yamashi Peak. In nine months after arriving in Echizen, Dogen 
completed twenty-two fascicles of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye. 
Here Dogen takes up the Zen parable of an old Zen master who was 
reborn as a wild fox. Dogen criticizes later Zen masters’ comments for 
not fully expressing the gravity of cause and effect. The subject of 
karma—one’s action and its effect—becomes a critical concern in his 
teaching from this point on. Some parts of the text in this fascicle 
overlap those in “Identifying with Cause and Effect.” 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, 
Echizen Province, on the ninth day, the third month, the second year 
of the Kangen Era [1244].” 

Translated by Dan Welch and the Editor. 

There is no record that Dogen held a practice period in 1244. His 
silence may reflect the intensity of monastery construction and 
organization. A number of monks arrived in the seventh month. 

On the eighteenth day of the seventh month, one day after Rujing’s 
memorial day, Dogen moved from Yoshimine Temple to his new 
monastery. He opened its dharma hall and named it Daibutsu (Great 
Buddha) Monastery. 

On the fourteenth day of the eighth month, Dogen made a vow to 
hand carve a Buddha image for the monastery. 

On the first day of the ninth month, a ceremony marking 
completion of the dharma hall was performed. 

On the third day of the eleventh month, a framework-raising 

ceremony for the monks’ hall was performed. 
Dogen gave six formal talks in 1244. 

Dawutsu Monastery Periop 

Echizen Province, on the thirteenth day, the sixth month, during the 
summer practice period, in the third year of the Kangen Era [1245].” 

Translated by Norman Fischer and the Editor. 

80. SEEING OTHERS’ MINDS (TASHIN TSU) 

In the heat of summer, close to the end of the practice period, Dogen 
expanded and edited a large section of “Ungraspable Mind” (later 
version), which had not been presented to the community. Then he 
delivered this text under a new title to his students. In this fascicle he 
focuses on the story of a Zen master challenging a miracle worker. He 
sharply criticizes different Chinese Zen masters’ comments on the 

story. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly at the Daibutsu Monastery, 
Echizen Province, on the fourth day, the seventh month, the third year 
of the Kangen Era [1245].” 

Translated by Michael Wenger and the Editor. 

81. KING WANTS THE SAINDHAVA (OSAKU SENDABA) 

In midwinter, three months after the end of the first practice period at 
the Daibutsu Monastery, Dogen delivered “King Wants the 
Saindhava.” He examines ancient Zen masters’ commentaries on the 
word saindhava. Its multiple meanings require mind-to-mind 
transmission for others to understand its implications. 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Daibutsu Monastery on 
the twenty-second day, the tenth month, the third year of the Kangen 
Era [1245].” 

Translated by Josho Pat Phelan and the Editor. 

Dogen gave fifteen formal talks in 1245. 

Emer Monastery Perriop 

Dogen did not write or deliver any fascicle of the Treasury of the True 
Dharma Eye during the second practice period at the Daibutsu 
Monastery. It seems that his teaching focus shifted toward creating 
detailed monastic guidelines, and giving frequent formal talks for his 
practicing community. 

On the full-moon day of the sixth month, Dogen renamed his 
training center the Eihei (Eternal Peace) Monastery. On this day he 
completed the Guidelines for Officers of the Eihei Monastery, Echizen 
Province, Japan. 

82. INSTRUCTIONS ON KITCHEN WORK (JI KUIN MON) 

Soon after the end of the practice period, at the beginning of autumn, 
Dogen delivered “Instructions on Kitchen Work” to his community. 
Similar to his earlier “Guidelines for the Auxiliary Cloud Hall at the 
Kannondori Kosho Gokoku Monastery,” this was initially written as 
monastic guidelines but was later included in the Eihei-ji edition of 
the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye. 

There is a section on duties of the head cook in Guidelines for 
Officers of the Eihei Monastery, Echizen Province, Japan, which he wrote 
in Chinese two months earlier. But this text, composed in Japanese, 
seems to be directed to monks and kitchen workers less experienced or 
educated than the head cook. 

Introductory note: “Presented to the assembly on the sixth day, the 
eighth month, the fourth year of the Kangen Era [1246].” 

Translated by Peter Levitt and the Editor. 

83. LEAVING THE HOUSEHOLD (SHUKKE) 

In midautumn Dogen presented “Leaving the Household” as the only 
fascicle of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye delivered to his 
community at the Eihei Monastery. 

This is the last-dated piece in the seventy-five-fascicle version 
(which is identified by Ejo as the “early written version”) of the 
Treasury of the True Dharma Eye. The grouping of this version was to 
be completed sometime after this. 

Dogen begins with a Zen reference on receiving precepts and 
leaving the household, but relies on quotations from the larger body 
of Buddhist scriptures. He says, “Unsurpassable enlightenment is 
fulfilled at the moment you leave the household and receive the 
precepts. It is not fulfilled other than on this day.” 

Colophon: “Presented to the assembly of the Eihei Monastery, Echizen 

Province, on the fifteenth day, the ninth month, the fourth year of the 
Kangen Era [1246].” 

Translated by Peter Levitt and the Editor. 

Dogen gave seventy-five formal talks in 1246. 

In the third month, Tokiyori Hojo became the fifth regent of the 
Kamakura government. (After the death of the first Shogun, Yoritomo 
Minamoto, in 1199, successive members of the Hojo Clan became 
regents of the Kamakura government, gradually taking power. 
Tokiyori was the one who took full power.) One of the first things he 
did was to invite Dogen to Kamakura. 

1247 
Dogen was at the Eihei Monastery during the practice period. 

He gave thirty-five formal talks this year. It is possible that he was 
working on restructuring of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye—the 
seventy-five- and twelve-fascicle versions. 

On the third day of the eighth month, he left for Kamakura to teach 
laypeople, primarily leaders of the samurai government. 

Dogen gave the precepts to a number of people, including Tokiyori. 
Tokiyori asked Dogen to stay longer and open a monastery in 
Kamakura, but Dogen declined. Aside from the ten poems he gave 
Tokiyori’s wife, practically none of Dogen’s writings remain from this 
period. 

1248 
On the thirteenth day of the third month, Dogen returned to the Eihei 
Monastery, ready to lead the practice period. 

He gave fifty-two formal talks this year. 

1249 
In the first month, Dogen completed the Guidelines for the Study Hall at 
the Kissho Mountain, Eihei Monastery. 

He gave fifty-eight formal talks this year. 

1250 
On the eleventh day of the first month, Dogen delivered “Washing the 
Face” for the third time. 

He gave fifty-one formal talks this year. 

1251 

Dogen gave sixty-nine formal talks this year. 

1252 
Dogen revised “Actualizing the Fundamental Point.” He may have 
been still working on restructuring of the Treasury of the True Dharma 
Eye— the seventy-five- and twelve-fascicle versions. 

He gave fifty-one formal talks this year. 

He became sick in the autumn. 

1253 

84. EIGHT AWAKENINGS OF GREAT BEINGS (HACHI DAININ GAKU) 

At the beginning of the year—the sixth day of the first month—Dogen 
wrote “Eight Awakenings of Great Beings.” The text consists largely of 
quotations from the Pari-nirvana Admonition Outline Sutra. He only 
added some simple interpretations of Shakyamuni Buddha’s last 
words. Clearly, as Ejo suggests in his colophon, Dogen intended to 
mirror the Buddha’s last words in his own final teaching. 

Colophon: “Written at the Eihei Monastery on the sixth day, the first 
month, the fifth year of the Kencho Era [1253].” 

Ejo’s colophon: “Now, on the day before the end of the practice period 
in the seventh year of the Kencho Era [1255], I have asked Secretary 
Gien to copy this. I have also proofread it today. This text was written 
by our late master during his last illness. He rewrote all [seventy-five] 
fascicles of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye he had written in 
kana [mixture of ideographs and Japanese phonetics]. He wanted to 
add recently written fascicles and altogether create a one-hundred- 
fascicle version. He started writing this text as the twelfth fascicle [of 
the recently written pieces]. Then his sickness advanced, and the 
compilation of the entire text had to stop. Thus, this fascicle is the last 
teaching left behind by our late master. Unfortunately, we are unable 
to see the one-hundred-fascicle-version manuscript. It is indeed most 
regrettable. Those who long for our late master should not fail to copy 
and maintain this fascicle. It is the last admonition of Shakyamuni 
Buddha, as well as that of our late master.” 

Translated by Reb Anderson and the Editor. 

There is no record of Dogen’s formal talks in 1253. 
On the eighth day of the seventh month, Dogen became sick again. 
Gikai attended to him. 

On the fourteenth day of the same month, Dogen appointed Ejo the 

second abbot of the Eihei Monaster, giving him a robe Dogen himself 
had sewn. 

On the fifth day of the eighth month, at Yoshishige Hatano’s 
request, Dogen left for Kyoto to treat his sickness. 

On the fifteenth day of the eighth month, under a harvest moon, he 
wrote a poem. 

In autumn 

even though I may 

see it again, 

how can I sleep 

with the moon this evening? 

On the twenty-eighth day of the eighth month, Dogen passed away 
at his lay student Kakunen’s residence in the city of Kyoto. 

Fascictes Nor Datep BY Docen 

Kencho Era [1255], I have copied my late master’s draft.” 

Translated by Peter Levitt and the Editor. 

87. VIRTUE OF HOME LEAVING (SHUKKE KUDOKU) 

Dogen radically expanded his text on a common Buddhist theme that 
he had brought up in 1246 with “Leaving the Household.” “Virtue of 
Home Leaving” was included in the twelve-fascicle version as the 
leading piece. 

Ejo’s colophon: “A day during the summer practice period, the seventh 
year of the Kencho Era [1255].” 

Translated by Paul Haller and the Editor. 

88. MAKING OFFERINGS TO BUDDHAS (KUYO SHOBUTSU) 

Dogen describes various offerings to buddhas, suggesting that such 
offerings are essential practice for enlightenment. This is one of the 
fascicles Ejo included in the twelve-fascicle version. 

Ejo’s colophon: “[Edited during] The summer practice period, the 
seventh year of the Kencho Era [1265].” 

Translated by Natalie Goldberg and the Editor. 

89. TAKING REFUGE IN BUDDHA, DHARMA, AND SANGHA (KIE 
BUPPOSO) 

This fascicle is also called “Taking Refuge in the Three Treasures” (Kie 
Sambo). As Ejo says in his colophon, Dogen did not edit it. After 
Dogen’s death, it was put in the twelve-fascicle version as one of the 
“recently written pieces.” 

Ejo’s colophon: “Copying of this draft written by our late master was 
completed on a day of the summer practice period in the seventh year 
of the Kencho Era [1255]. He could not revise and finalize the 
manuscript, although he would have made some additions and 
deletions in the process of editing. Since this is no longer possible, I 
have preserved his draft as it is.” 

Translated by Gyokuko Carlson, Kyogen Carlson, and the Editor. 

90. IDENTIFYING WITH CAUSE AND EFFECT (SHINJIN INGA) 

Examining the same theme as “Great Practice,” and possibly written 
later, “Identifying with Cause and Effect” shows Dogen’s mature 
thinking about cause and effect. Undated and perhaps unedited by 
Dogen, this fascicle was collected in the twelve-fascicle version. 

Ejo’s colophon: “During the summer practice period in the seventh 
year of the Kencho Era [1255], I copied our late master’s draft. There 
may be a second or final version edited by him, but I have used his 
draft for the time being.” 

Translated by Katherine Thanas and the Editor. 

91. MONK OF THE FOURTH-STAGE MEDITATION (SHIZEN BIKU) 
This short piece, interwoven with quotations from pre-Mahayana and 
Mahayana sutras, is also undated and unedited. It is one of Dogen’s 
later pieces placed in the twelve-fascicle version. 

Ejo’s colophon: “Copied from a draft [by Dogen] during the practice 
period of the seventh year of the Kencho Era [1255].” 

Translated by Andy Ferguson and the Editor. 

92. ONLY A BUDDHA AND A BUDDHA (YUIBUTSU YOBUTSU) 

Basing his title on a phrase from the Lotus Sutra, Dogen explains in 
simple language that the full experience of dharma can be passed on 
only from a buddha to a buddha. This text was not found in either the 
seventy-five or the twelve-fascicle version. Perhaps Dogen gave it to 
one of his students in an early time but did not keep a copy of it. It 
was part of the twenty-eight-fascicle version, transmitted at the Eihei 
Monastery, and later known as the Secret Treasury of the True Dharma 
Eye. It was included in Kozen’s edition. 

Translated by Edward Brown and the Editor. 

93. BIRTH AND DEATH (SHOJI) 

“Life and death” are often described as “birth and death” in Buddhism, 
with the understanding that each individual is born and dies in each 
moment. Like “Only a Buddha and a Buddha,” this short fascicle was 
included in Kozen’s edition. It seems to be one of Dogen’s earliest 
pieces, as the writing style and vocabulary are similar to those in 
“Actualizing the Fundamental Point” and “Undivided Activity.” 

Translated by Arnold Kotler and the Editor. 

94. HEART OF THE WAY (DOSHIN) 

The short text “Heart of the Way” was originally titled “The Buddha 
Way” (Butsudo), but Kozen renamed it, since there was already 
another fascicle with that title. Here, Dogen refers to such lay 
practices as creating a buddha image and printing copies of the Lotus 
Sutra. 

Translated by Peter Levitt and the Editor. 

95. RECEIVING THE PRECEPTS (JUKAI) 

In the twelve-fascicle version, the short undated text “Receiving the 
Precepts” is second, after “Leaving the Household.” Like some other 
fascicles of this version, it may have been written in the last part of 
Dogen’s life. Drawing examples from ancient Zen masters, Dogen 
explains the significance of receiving the precepts and describes the 
procedure for an ordination ceremony. 

Translated by Michael Wenger and the Editor. 

96. ONE HUNDRED EIGHT GATES OF REALIZING DHARMA 
(IPPYAKUHACHI HOMYO MON) 

Unlike other fascicles of the Treasury of the True Dharma Eye, most of 
“One Hundred Eight Gates of Realizing Dharma” is a long quotation 
from one sutra. This undated piece lacks a usual introductory section, 
and Dogen’s explanation appears very briefly at the end. It seems to be 
a rough draft written during the last part of his life. It is placed in the 
twelve-fascicle version immediately before Dogen’s last known text, 
“Fight Awakenings of Great Beings.” This text was not included in 
Kozen’s ninety-five-fascicle version. Because we have included it, our 
volume has one more fascicle than his seventeenth-century edition. 

Translated by Peter Levitt and the Editor. 

DOGEN’S LIFE AND TEACHING (APPENDIX 2) 

There is a section on Dogen in Transmission of Light (Denk6é Roku) by 
Keizan Jokin (1268-1325), completed in 1300, nearly half a century 
after Dogen’s death. Keizan’s book describes the lives and teachings of 
Shakyamuni Buddha and fifty-two dharma holders in a lineage 
through Dogen and Ejo. Keizan, a successor of Gikai and the founder 
of the Soji Monastery, widely disseminated Dogen’s teaching among 
priests and laity, and is regarded as the second founder of the Soto 
School. 

Translated by Susan Moon and the Editor. 

Wanperwe Prriop 

1 
On THE Ewpeavor OF THE Way 

Au BUDDHA TATHAGATAS who individually transmit inconceivable 

dharma, actualizing unsurpassable, complete enlightenment, have a 
wondrous art, supreme and unconditioned. Receptive samadhi is its 
mark; only buddhas transmit it to buddhas without veering off. Sitting 
upright, practicing Zen, is the authentic gate to free yourself in the 
unconfined realm of this samadhi. 

Although this inconceivable dharma is abundant in each person, it 
is not actualized without practice, and it is not experienced without 
realization. When you release it, it fills your hand—how could it be 
limited to one or many? When you speak it, it fills your mouth—it is 
not bounded by length or width. 

All buddhas continuously abide in this dharma, and do not leave 
traces of consciousness about where they are. Sentient beings 
continuously move about in this dharma, but where they are is not 
clear in their consciousness. 

The concentrated endeavor of the way I am speaking of allows all 
things to come forth in realization so they may practice going beyond 
in the path of letting go. Passing through the barrier [of dualism] and 
dropping off limitations in this way, how could you be hindered by 
nodes in bamboo or knots in wood [concepts and theories]? 

Great Song, I came back to Japan with the vision of spreading the 
teaching and saving sentient beings—a heavy burden on my 
shoulders. And yet I have put aside the hope of having the teaching 
prevail everywhere until the time of surging opportunity. For the time 
being I wander about like a cloud or a waterweed, and let the wind of 
the ancient sages be heard. 

There may be true students who are not concerned with fame and 
gain who allow their aspiration for enlightenment to guide them and 
earnestly desire to practice the buddha way. They may be misguided 
by incapable teachers and obstructed from the correct understanding; 
intoxicated in confusion, they may sink into the realm of delusion for 
a long time. How can they nourish the correct seed of prajna and 
encounter the time of attaining the way? Since I am wandering about, 
which mountain or river can they call on? Because of my concern for 
them, I would like to record the standards of Zen monasteries that I 
personally saw and heard in Great Song, as well as the profound 
principle that has been transmitted by my master. I wish to leave for 
students of the way the authentic teaching of the buddha house. This 
is indeed the essence: 

The great master Shakyamuni entrusted dharma to Mahakashyapa 
at the assembly on Vulture Peak; it was then authentically 
transmitted from ancestor to ancestor down to Venerable 
Bodhidharma. Bodhidharma went to China and entrusted dharma 
to the great master Huike; this was the beginning of dharma 
transmission in the eastern country. In this way, by direct 
transmission, it reached Huineng, the Sixth Ancestor, Zen Master 
Dajian. Then the authentic buddha dharma spread in China, and 
the teaching that is not concerned with concepts and theories 
took form. 

At that time there were two outstanding disciples of Huineng: 
Nanyue Huairang and Qingyuan Xingsi. They both equally 
received the buddha seal, as guiding masters of humans and 
devas. Their two lineages spread, and later the Five Gates opened: 
the Fayan School, the Guiyang School, the Caodong School, the 
Yunmen School, and the Linji School. At present in Great Song 
China only the Linji School prospers throughout the country. But 
in spite of their different styles, each of the Five Schools holds the 
one seal of the buddha mind. 

In China after the Later Han Dynasty [25-220 cxr.J, the 
teachings of Buddhist scriptures were introduced and spread all 
over the land, but there was no conclusive teaching as yet. When 
Bodhidharma came from India [527 c.z.], the root of twining vines 
was immediately cut off and the pure, single buddha dharma 

spread. Hope that it will be like this in our country. 

Now, all ancestors and all buddhas who uphold buddha dharma 
have made it the true path of unfolding enlightenment to sit 
upright, practicing in the midst of receptive samadhi. Those who 
attained enlightenment in India and China followed this way. 
Thus, teachers and disciples intimately transmitted this excellent 
art as the essence of the teaching. 

In the authentic tradition of our heritage, it is said that this 
directly transmitted, straightforward buddha dharma is the 
unsurpassable of the unsurpassable. From the first time you meet 
a master, without depending on incense offering, bowing, 
chanting buddha names, repentance, or reading scriptures, just 
wholeheartedly sit, and thus drop away body and mind. 

of water and fire widely engage in circulating the buddha’s 
transformation based on original realization. Because of this, all those 
who live with you and speak with you also receive immeasurable 
buddha virtue, practice continuously, and extensively unfold the 
endless, unremitting, unthinkable, unnameable buddha dharma 
throughout the entire world of phenomena. 

All this, however, does not appear within perception. Because it is 
unconstructedness in stillness, it is immediate realization. If practice 
and realization were two things, as it appears to an ordinary person, 
each could be recognized separately. But what can be met with 
recognition is not realization itself, because realization is not reached 
with a discriminating mind. 

In stillness, mind and object merge in realization and go beyond 
enlightenment. Thus, in the state of receptive samadhi, without 
disturbing its quality or moving a single particle, you engage the vast 
buddha activity, the extremely profound and subtle buddha 
transformation. 

Grasses, trees, and lands that are embraced by this way of 
transformation together radiate a great light and endlessly expound 
the inconceivable, profound dharma. Grass, trees, and walls bring 
forth the teaching to all beings, including common people and sages; 
all beings in response extend this dharma to grass, trees, and walls. 
Thus, the realm of self-awakening and awakening others invariably 
holds the mark of realization with nothing lacking, and realization 
itself is manifested without ceasing for a moment. 

This being so, the zazen of even one person at one moment 
imperceptibly accords with all things and fully resonates through all 
time. Thus, in the past, future, and present of the limitless universe, 
this zazen carries on the buddha’s transformation endlessly and 
timelessly. Each moment of zazen is equally the wholeness of practice, 
equally the wholeness of realization. 

This is so not only while sitting; like a hammer striking emptiness, 
before and after its exquisite sound permeates everywhere. How can it 
be limited to this time and space? Myriad beings all manifest original 
practice, original face; it is impossible to measure. Even if all buddhas 
of the ten directions, as innumerable as the sands of the Ganges, exert 
their strength and with the buddha wisdom try to measure the merit 
of one person’s zazen, they will not be able to fully comprehend it. 

Question 1: We have now heard that the merit of zazen is lofty 
and great. But an ignorant person may be doubtful and say, 
“There are many gates for buddha dharma. Why do you 
recommend zazen exclusively?” 

Answer: Because this is the front gate for buddha dharma. 

Question 2: Why do you regard zazen alone as the front gate? 
Answer: The great master Shakyamuni authentically transmitted 
this splendid method of attaining the way, and all buddha 
tathagatas of the past, future, and present attain the way by 
practicing zazen. For this reason it has been transmitted as the 
front gate. Furthermore, all ancestors in India and China attained 
the way by practicing zazen. Thus, I now teach this front gate to 
human beings and devas. 

Question 3: We understand that you have studied the path of the 
buddha ancestors and authentically transmit the tathagatas’ 
excellent art. This is beyond the reach of ordinary thought. 
However, reading sutras or chanting buddha’s name must be 
causes and conditions of enlightenment. How can zazen, just 
sitting uselessly doing nothing, be depended upon for attaining 
enlightenment? 

Answer: If you think that the samadhi of all buddhas, their 
unsurpassable great art, is just sitting uselessly doing nothing, you 
malign the Great Vehicle. Such misunderstanding is like saying 
there is no water when you are in the middle of the ocean. Just 
now, all buddhas sit serenely at ease in receptive samadhi. Is this 
not the actualization of vast merit? What a pity that your eye is 
not yet open, that your mind is still intoxicated! 

The realm of all buddhas is inconceivable. It cannot be reached 
by intellect—much less can those who have no trust or who lack 
wisdom know it. Only those who have the great capacity of 
genuine trust can enter this realm. Those who have no trust are 
unable to accept it, however much they hear it. Even at the 
assembly on Vulture Peak, there were those who were told by 
Shakyamuni Buddha, “You may leave if you wish.” 

When genuine trust arises, practice and study with a teacher. If 
it does not, wait for a while. It is regrettable if you have not 
received the beneficence of the buddha dharma. 

Also, what do you understand of the merit attained by reading 
sutras, chanting buddha’s name, and so on? It is futile to think 
that just moving the tongue and making a sound is meritorious 
Buddhist activity. If you regard these as the buddha dharma, it 
will be farther and farther away. 

Actually, the meaning of studying sutras is that if you 
understand and follow the rules of practice for sudden or gradual 
realization taught by the Buddha, you will unmistakably attain 
enlightenment. In studying sutras you should not expend thoughts 
in the vain hope that they will be helpful for attaining realization. 

To attempt to reach the buddha way by chanting buddha’s 
name thousands of times is like foolishly trying to go south while 
heading north, or to fit a square peg into a round hole. To be 
consumed with words and letters while ignorant of the way of 
practice is like a physician forgetting how to prescribe medicine; 
what use can it be? People who chant all the time are just like 
frogs croaking day and night in spring fields; their effort will be 
of no use whatsoever. Even worse off are those deluded by fame 
and gain who cannot give up such practices, because their 
acquisitiveness is so deep. Such people existed in the past; are 
there not even more today? What a pity, indeed! 

Just understand that when a master who has attained the way 
with a clear mind authentically transmits to a student who has 
merged with realization, then the wondrous dharma of the Seven 
Original Buddhas, in its essence, is actualized and maintained. 
This cannot be known by those who study words. Therefore, set 
aside your doubt, practice zazen under an authentic teacher, and 
actualize buddhas’ receptive samadhi. 

Question 4: The Lotus School and the Avatamsaka School, which 
have been transmitted to Japan, both expound the ultimate of 
Mahayana teaching. Furthermore, the teaching of the Mantra 
School was directly transmitted by Vairochana Tathagata to 
Vajrasattva, and its lineage from teacher to disciple since then has 
not been interupted. This teaching expounds “Mind itself is 
buddha,” and “Everyone’s mind becomes buddha.” They also 
advocate the authentic enlightenment of the Five Buddhas within 
one sitting, instead of practice through many eons. It is regarded 
as the supreme buddha dharma. What extraordinary aspect of the 
practice you mention makes you recommend it, disregarding the 
practice of other schools? 

Answer: You should know that in the buddha house we do not 
discuss superiority or inferiority of the teaching; nor do we 
concern ourselves with the depth or shallowness of the dharma, 
but only with the genuineness of practice. 

There are those who, attracted by grass, flowers, mountains, 
and waters, flow into the buddha way; and there are those who, 
grasping soil, rocks, sand, and pebbles, uphold the buddha seal. 
Although the boundless words of the Buddha permeate myriad 
things, the turning of the great dharma wheel is contained inside 
a single particle of dust. In this sense, the line “Mind itself is 
buddha” is the moon reflected on water, and the teaching “Sitting 
itself is becoming buddha” is a reflection in the mirror. Do not be 
concerned with the splendor of the words. By showing the 

buddha ancestors’ excellent way of direct transmission, I am just 
recommending the practice of the immediate realization of 
enlightenment, hoping that you will become a true practitioner of 
the way. 

For the transmission of buddha dharma, the teacher should be a 
person who has merged with realization. Scholars concerned with 
words and letters cannot do it; this would be like the blind 
leading the blind. 

Those within the gate of the buddha ancestors’ authentic 
transmission venerate an accomplished adept who has attained 
the way and merged with realization, and entrust this master with 
the upholding of buddha dharma. Accordingly, when spirit beings 
of the visible and invisible realms come to pay homage, or when 
arhats who have attained the fruits of realization come to inquire 
about the dharma, this master will not fail to clarify the means to 
illumine their mind-ground. This is not known in other teachings. 
Buddha’s disciples should study the buddha dharma alone. 

Know that fundamentally you do not lack unsurpassed 
enlightenment, and you are replete with it continuously. But you 
may not realize it, and may be in the habit of arousing 
discriminatory views, and regard them as real. Without noticing, 
you miss the great way, and your efforts will be fruitless. Such 
discriminatory views create flowers of emptiness. 

You may imagine the twelvefold causation of rebirth, or the 
twenty-five existences, and have such views as the Three or Five 
Vehicles, and whether the Buddha exists or not. But do not take 
up these views and regard them as the correct way of practicing 
buddha dharma. 

Instead, sit zazen wholeheartedly, conform to the buddha form, 
and let go of all things. Then, leaping beyond the boundary of 
delusion and enlightenment, free from the paths of ordinary and 
sacred, unconstrained by ordinary thinking, immediately wander 
at ease, enriched with great enlightenment. When you practice in 
this way, how can those who are concerned about the traps and 
snares of words and letters be compared to you? 

Question 5: Among the three learnings there is the practice of 
samadhi, and among the six practices there is the practice of 
dhyana. Both of these have been studied by all bodhisattvas from 
the moment of arousing the aspiration for enlightenment, and 
both are practiced by the clever and dull. The zazen you speak of 
seems to be something like this. Why do you say that the true 
teaching of the Tathagata is contained in it? 

Answer: Your question arises because the treasury of the true 

dharma eye, the single great matter of the Tathagata, the 
unsurpassable great dharma, has been named the Zen [Dhyana] 
School. You should know that the name “Zen [Chan] School” 
appeared in China and spread eastward. It was not heard of in 
India. When the great master Bodhidharma sat facing the wall at 
the Shaolin Temple on Mount Song for nine years, neither monks 
nor laypeople knew the Buddha’s true teaching, so they called 
him the Brahman who concentrated on zazen. Subsequently, all 
buddha ancestors of every generation always devoted themselves 
to zazen. Heedless laypeople who saw them, without knowing the 
truth, informally called them the Zazen School. Later the word za 
—sitting—was dropped, and nowadays it is called the Zen School. 

The meaning of this teaching has been made clear through the 
discourses of our ancestors. Do not identify zazen with the 
dhyana or samadhi of the six practices or the three learnings. 

The authenticity of the transmission of this buddha dharma is 
unhidden through all time. Long ago at the assembly on Vulture 
Peak the Tathagata entrusted Venerable Mahakashyapa alone 
with the unsurpassable, great teaching—the treasury of the true 
dharma eye, the wondrous heart of nirvana. This event was 
witnessed by devas in the heavenly world; do not doubt it. The 
buddha dharma is protected by these devas and its merit does not 
decrease. 

Know that the practice of zazen is the complete path of buddha 
dharma, and nothing can be compared to it. 

Question 6: Why, among the four bodily presences taught in the 
buddha house, do you emphasize sitting alone, recommend Zen 
samadhi, and expound entry into realization? 

Answer: It is impossible to know completely the methods by 
which all buddhas from the past practiced and entered 
realization, one after another. It is hard to know, but if you look 
into it, all buddhas are engaged in zazen as the source of 
realization. Don’t look for anything else. 

Extolling it, an ancestor said [in the Guidelines for Zen 
Monasteries], “Zazen is the dharma gate of enjoyment and ease.” 
Thus, we know that sitting practice, among the four bodily 
presences, is the way of enjoyment and ease. Furthermore, it is 
not merely the practice of one or two buddhas, but all buddha 
ancestors practiced in this way. 

Question 7: While it is clear that those who have not yet realized 
buddha dharma should practice zazen and attain realization, for 
those who have already understood the buddha’s correct 

teaching, what should they expect from zazen? 

Answer: Although we should not talk about dreams with careless 
people, nor give a boat pole to a woodcutter, nevertheless I will 
give instruction about this. 

To suppose that practice and realization are not one is a view of 
those outside the way; in buddha dharma they are inseparable. 
Because practice within realization occurs at the moment of 
practice, the practice of beginner’s mind is itself the entire 
original realization. 

When giving instruction for zazen practice, we say that you 
should not have any expectation for realization outside of 
practice, since this is the immediate original realization. Because 
this is the realization of practice, there is no boundary in 
realization. Because this is the practice of realization, there is no 
beginning in practice. 

In this way, Shakyamuni Tathagata and Venerable 
Mahakashyapa were both fulfilled by practice within realization; 
great master Bodhidharma and Huineng—high ancestor Dajian— 
were drawn in and turned by practice within realization. The 
ancient way of abiding in buddha dharma has always been like 
this. 

Practice just here is not apart from realization. Fortunately, 
each one of us has individually inherited this wondrous practice; 
each beginner’s endeavor of the way brings forth original 
realization in the realm of the unconstructed. Know that in order 
not to divide this realization, which is inseparable from practice, 
buddha ancestors always caution you not to be lax in your 
practice. Release this wondrous practice and original realization 
fills your hands. Liberate original realization and wondrous 
practice is upheld throughout your body. 

As I personally saw in Great Song, the Zen monasteries in 
various places all had meditation halls where five to six hundred, 
or even up to two thousand monks, practiced zazen day and 
night. When I asked the abbots of these monasteries, masters who 
had inherited the seal [authentic experience] of buddha mind, 
about the essential meaning of buddha dharma, I was told that 
practice and realization are not two different things. 

Therefore, I recommend to students who are already studying 
with a teacher, as well as all those outstanding people who seek 
the truth of buddha dharma, to practice zazen and endeavor in 
the way under the guidance of an authentic teacher, and 
investigate the teaching of the buddha ancestors without 
distinguishing between beginning or advanced, and without being 
concerned about ordinary or sacred. 

An ancient ancestor once said, “It is not that there is no 
practice and no realization; it is just that they cannot be divided.” 
It has also been said that “Someone who sees the way practices 
the way.” Understand that practice is endeavor in the midst of 
attaining the way. 

Question 8: In the past, various teachers went to Tang China, 
became transmitters of the dharma, and spread the scriptural 
teaching widely throughout Japan. Why did they ignore a 
practice such as you have described and introduce only scriptural 
teaching? 

Answer: The reason these ancient teachers did not introduce this 
dharma is that the time was not yet ripe. 

Question 9: Did those masters in ancient times understand this 
dharma? 
Answer: If they had understood it, it would have spread. 

Question 10: One master said: 

Do not grieve over birth [life] and death. There is an immediate 
way to be free from birth and death, namely, to know the 
principle that the nature of mind is permanent. 

It [the principle] means that because this body is already alive, 
it will eventually die, but the mind-nature will not perish. You 
should recognize that mind-nature exists within your body and is 
not affected by birth and death. This is its inherent nature. The 
body is a temporary form; it dies here and is born there, and is 
not fixed. Mind is permanent; it does not change through the past, 
future, or present. 

To understand this is to be free from birth and death. If you 
understand this principle, you become free from ordinary birth 
and death and enter the ocean of mind-nature when your body 
perishes. When you flow into the ocean of nature, you attain the 
wondrous virtue of all buddha tathagatas. Even though you 
realize this now, because your body is formed as a result of 
deluded actions from past lives, you are not the same as all sages. 
If you do not recognize this principle, you will go around in birth 
and death forever. Therefore, you should hasten to understand 
that mind-nature is permanent. If you just spend your whole life 
leisurely sitting, what can you expect? 

Does such a statement as this accord with the path of all 
buddhas and ancestors? 

Answer: The view you have mentioned is not at all the buddha 
dharma, but rather the view of Shrenika, an outsider, who said: 

There is a soul in one’s body, and this soul, on encountering 
conditions, recognizes good and bad, right and wrong. To discern 
aching and itching, or to know pain and pleasure, is also this 
soul’s capacity. However, when the body is destroyed, the soul 
comes out and is born in another world. So it appears to be dead 
here, but since there is birth in another place, it is permanent 
without dying. 

To follow this view and regard it as the Buddha’s teaching is 
more foolish than grasping a piece of stone and regarding it as 
gold. Such shameful ignorance cannot be compared to anything. 
National Teacher Huizhong of Great Tang criticized this deeply. 
To take up the mistaken view that mind is permanent and forms 
perish, while regarding this as equal to the wondrous teaching of 
all buddhas, or to create the causes of birth and death while 
wishing to be apart from birth and death—is this not foolish? It is 
most pitiable. Just understand it as the mistaken view of someone 
outside the way and do not listen to it. 

As I cannot refrain from being sympathetic, let me disabuse you 
of your mistaken view. In buddha dharma it is always taught that 
body and mind are not separate, and that essence and 
characteristics are not two. This has been known throughout 
India and China, so there is no room for mistake. 

In fact, from the perspective of permanence, all things are 
permanent; body and mind are not separate. From the perspective 
of cessation, all things cease; essence and characteristics cannot 
be divided. How can you say body perishes but mind is 
permanent? Is it not against the authentic principle? Furthermore, 
you should understand that birth-and-death is itself nirvana. 
Nirvana is not realized outside of birth-and-death. Even if you 
think that mind is permanent apart from the body, and 
mistakenly assume that buddha wisdom is separate from birth- 
and-death, the mind of this assumption still arises and perishes 
momentarily and is not permanent. Is it not truly ephemeral? 

Reflect that the teaching of the oneness of body and mind is 
always being expounded in the buddha dharma. How, then, can 
mind alone leave the body and not cease when the body ceases? 
If body and mind are inseparable sometimes and not inseparable 
at other times, the Buddha’s teaching would be false. To think 
that birth-and-death must be rejected is the mistake of ignoring 
buddha dharma. You must refrain from this. 

The so-called “dharma gate of the whole reality of mind- 
nature” in buddha dharma includes the entire world of 
phenomena without separating essence from characteristics or 
birth from death. Nothing, not even enlightenment or nirvana, is 
outside of mind-nature. All things and all phenomena are just one 
mind; nothing is excluded or unrelated. It is taught that all 
dharma gates are equally one mind, and there is no 
differentiation. This is the understanding of mind-nature in the 
buddha house. How can you differentiate this into body and 
mind, and separate birth-and-death from nirvana? Already, you 
are a buddha child. Do not listen to the tongues of mad people, 
quoting an outsider’s view. 

Question 11: Should those who are entirely engaged in zazen 
strictly follow the precepts? 

Answer: Holding to the precepts and engaging in pure actions is 
the rule of the Zen Gate (School) and the teaching of buddha 
ancestors. Even those who have not yet received the precepts or 
have broken the precepts can still receive the benefit of zazen. 

Question 12: Is it all right for those who practice zazen also to 
engage in chanting mantras or in the practice of shamatha 
[calming the mind] and vipashyana [analytical introspection]? 
Answer: When I was in China and asked masters about the essence 
of the teaching, I was told that none of the ancestors who 
authentically transmitted the buddha seal in India and China in 
the past or present had ever engaged in such a combination of 
practices. Indeed, without devoting yourself to one thing, you 
cannot penetrate the one wisdom. 

Question 13: Should zazen be practiced by lay men and women, or 
should it be practiced solely by home leavers? 

Answer: The ancestors say, “In understanding buddha dharma, 
men and women, nobles and commoners, are not distinguished.” 

Question 14: Home leavers are free from various involvements and 
do not have hindrances in zazen in pursuit of the way. How can 
the laity, who are variously occupied, practice single-mindedly 
and accord with the buddha way, which is unconditioned? 
Answer: Buddha ancestors, out of their kindness, have opened the 
wide gate of compassion in order to let all sentient beings enter 
realization. Who among humans and heavenly beings cannot 
enter? 

If you look back to ancient times, the examples are many. To 

begin with, Emperors Dai and Shun had many obligations on the 
throne; nevertheless, they practiced zazen in pursuit of the way, 
and penetrated the great way of buddha ancestors. Ministers Li 
and Fang [Pei Xiu] both closely served their emperors but they 
practiced zazen, pursued the way, and entered realization in the 
great way of buddha ancestors. 

This just depends on whether or not you have the willingness. 
It does not matter whether you are a layperson or a home leaver. 
Those who can discern excellence invariably come to trust in this 
practice. Those who regard worldly affairs as a hindrance to 
buddha dharma think only that there is no buddha dharma in the 
secular world; they do not understand that there is no secular 
world in buddha dharma. 

Recently, there was a high official of Great Song, Minister Feng, 
who was an adept in the ancestral way. He once wrote a poem 
concerning his view of practice: 

I enjoy zazen between my official duties 

and seldom sleep lying on a bed. 

Although I appear to be a minister, 

I’m known as a Buddhist elder 
throughout the country. 

Although he was busy in his official duties, he attained the way 
because he had a deep intention toward the buddha way. When 
considering someone like him, reflect on yourself and illuminate 
the present with the past. 

In Song China, kings and ministers, officials and common 
people, men and women, grounded their intention on the 
ancestral way. Both warriors and literary people aroused the 
intention to practice Zen and study the way. Among those who 
pursued this intention, many of them illuminated their mind- 
ground. From this we understand that worldly duties do not 
hinder the buddha dharma. 

When the true buddha dharma is spread widely in the nation, 
the rule of the monarch is peaceful because all buddhas and devas 
protect it unceasingly. If the rule is peaceful, the buddha dharma 
gains eminence. 

When Shakyamuni Buddha was alive, even those who 
previously had committed serious crimes or had mistaken views 
attained the way. In the assemblies of the ancestors, hunters and 
woodcutters attained enlightenment. As it was so for them at that 
time, it is so for anyone now. Just seek the teaching of an 

authentic master. 

Question 15: Can we attain realization if we practice, even in this 
last age of decline? 

Answer: In the scriptural schools they explain various categories, 
but in the true Mahayana teachings dharma is not divided into 
periods of truth, imitation, and decline. Instead, it is taught that 
everyone attains the way by practice. Particularly in this 
authentically transmitted teaching of zazen, you are filled with 
the treasure you already have, entering dharma and leaving 
bondage behind. Those who practice know whether realization is 
attained or not, just as those who drink water know whether it is 
hot or cold. 

Question 16: Someone once said: 

In buddha dharma, if you comprehend the meaning of “Mind 
itself is buddha,” that will be sufficient without any chanting of 
sutras or practicing the buddha way. To know that “buddha 
dharma originally lies in the self” is the completion of attaining 
the way. Other than this, you need not seek from anyone else. 

Why should you be troubled with practicing zazen and pursuing 
the way? 

Answer: This statement is entirely groundless. If what you say is 
true, then whoever has a mind would immediately understand the 
meaning of buddha dharma. You should know that buddha 
dharma is studied by giving up the view of self and other. 

If the understanding of “Self itself is buddha” were the 
attaining of the way, Shakyamuni Buddha would not have taken 
the trouble to elucidate the way. Let me illuminate this with an 
excellent case of an ancient master: 

Once a monk called Director Xuanze was in the assembly of Zen 
Master Fayan. Fayan asked him, “Director Xuanze, how long have 
you been in my community?” 

Xuanze said, “I have been studying with you for three years.” 

Fayan said, “You are a recent member of the community. Why 
don’t you ask me about buddha dharma?” 

Xuanze said, “I cannot deceive you, sir. When I was studying 
with Zen Master Qingfeng [Baizhao Zhiyuan], I mastered the state 
of ease and joy in buddha dharma.” 

Fayan said, “With what words did you enter this 
understanding?” 

Xuanze said, “When I asked Qingfeng, ‘What is the self of a Zen 

student?’ he said, ‘The fire spirits are here to look for fire.’”” 

Fayan said, “That is a good statement. But I’m afraid you did 
not understand it.” 

Xuanze said, “The fire spirits belong to fire. So I understood 
that fire looks for fire and self looks for self.” 

The master said, “Indeed, you did not understand. If buddha 
dharma were like that, it would not have been transmitted until 
now.” 

Then Xuanze was distressed and left the monastery. But on his 
way he said to himself, “The master is a renowned teacher in this 
country, a great leader of five hundred monks. His criticism of my 
fault ought to have some point.” 

He went back to Fayan, apologized, and said, “What is the self 
of a Zen student?” 

Fayan said, “The fire spirits are here to look for fire.” 

Upon hearing this statement, Xuanze had a great realization of 
buddha dharma. 

In this way, we know that mere recognition of “Self itself is 
buddha” is not penetrating buddha dharma. If the understanding 
of “Self itself is buddha” were buddha dharma, Fayan would not 
have given such criticism or guidance. Just inquire about the 
rules of practice as soon as you meet a master, single-mindedly 
practice zazen, and pursue the way, without leaving a half- 
understanding in your mind. Then the excellent art of buddha 
dharma will not be in vain. 

Question 17: We have heard that in India and China there have 
been people in the past and present who realized the way on 
hearing the sound of bamboo being struck, or who understood the 
mind when seeing the color of blossoms. Great Master 
Shakyamuni was awakened to the way when he saw the morning 
star, and Venerable Ananda understood the dharma when a 
banner pole fell down. Furthermore, among the Five Houses after 
the six early ancestors in China, there were many who realized 
the mind-ground with one word or half a phrase. Not all of them 
necessarily practiced zazen in pursuit of the way; is this not so? 

Answer: Of those who clarified the mind upon seeing a form, or 
who realized the way upon hearing a sound, not one had any 
intellectual thinking regarding the endeavor of the way and not 
one was concerned about their self other than their original self. 

Question 18: People in India and China are straightforward by 
nature. As they are in the center of civilization, when buddha 
dharma is taught to them, they can immediately enter it. People 

in our country since ancient times have been bereft of 
compassionate wisdom, and it is difficult for the right seed of 
prajna to be nourished. This is because we are uncivilized. Is it 
not regrettable? Thus, the monks in our country are inferior to 
even the laity in those great countries. Our entire nation is foolish 
and narrow-minded, and we are deeply attached to visible merit 
and fond of worldly values. If such people do zazen, can they 
immediately realize buddha dharma? 

Answer: What you say is correct. Among people in our own 
country, compassionate wisdom does not yet prevail, and their 
nature is rather coarse. Even if the true dharma is explained to 
them, its nectar becomes poisonous. They easily pursue fame and 
gain, and it is difficult for them to be free from delusion. 

However, to enter the realization of buddha dharma, one does 
not need the worldly wisdom of humans and devas as a boat for 
fleeing the world. When the Buddha was alive, one person 
realized the four fruits of attainment when he was hit by a ball; 
another understood the great way by wearing a robe in jest. They 
were both ignorant people, like beasts, but with the aid of 
genuine trust they were able to be free from delusion. A 
laywoman serving food to an ignorant old monk sitting in silence 
was enlightened. This did not depend upon wisdom, scripture, 
words, or speech; it was only brought about by genuine trust. 

Now, Shakyamuni Buddha’s teaching has been spread in the 
billion worlds for about two thousand years. Those countries are 
not necessarily the countries of compassionate wisdom, and the 
people are not necessarily sharp and intelligent. However, the 
Tathagata’s true dharma in essence has a great inconceivable 
meritorious power, and spreads in those countries when the time 
is ripe. 

If you practice with genuine trust, you will attain the way, 
regardless of being sharp or dull. Do not think that buddha 
dharma cannot be understood in this country because this is not a 
country of compassionate wisdom and people are foolish. In fact, 
everyone has the seed of prajna in abundance; it is only that they 
have rarely realized it and have not yet fully received buddha 
dharma. 

This exchange of questions and answers may have been rather 
confusing; a number of times flowers of emptiness were made to 
bloom. However, since the meaning of zazen in pursuit of the way has 
not been transmitted in this country, those who wish to know about it 
may be regretful. Therefore, for the sake of those who wish to 
practice, I have recorded some of the essential teachings of the clear- 

eyed teachers, which I learned in China. Beyond this, guidelines for 
practice places and the regulations for monasteries are more than I 
can mention now. They should not be presented casually. 

Our country lies to the east of the dragon ocean, far from China, but 
the Buddha’s teaching was transmitted eastward to Japan, about the 
time of Emperors Kimmei and Yomei. This is the good fortune of our 
people, yet the philosophy and rituals have been entangled, and 
authentic practice was not established. Now, if you make patched 
robes and mended bowls your whole life, build a thatched-roofed hut 
near a mossy cliff or white rock, and practice sitting upright, you 
immediately go beyond buddha and directly master the great matter 
of your life’s study. This is the admonition of Dragon Fang [Longya], 
the transmitted way of practice of Mount Rooster-Foot [where 
Mahakashyapa practiced]. Concerning the method of zazen, I would 
refer you to “Recommending Zazen to All People,” which I wrote 
during the Karoku Era [1225-1227]. 

Although a king’s edict is needed for spreading dharma in the 
country, if we think of the Buddha entrusting the dharma to kings and 
ministers on Vulture Peak, all the kings and ministers who have 
appeared in the billion worlds are born because of their wish from a 
previous birth to protect and guard buddha dharma. Where this 
teaching prevails, is there any place that is not a buddha land? Thus, 
spreading the way of buddha ancestors does not depend upon place or 
circumstance. Just consider that today is the beginning. 

I have written this to leave for people of excellence who aspire to 
practice buddha dharma and for true students who wander like 
waterweeds, seeking the way. 

Midautumn day [the fifteenth day of the eighth month], in the third 
year of the Kanki Era [1231], by Dogen, who has transmitted dharma 
from Song China. 

Kosuo Monastery Prniop 

Z 

Manresration OF Great Prasna 

A\vatoxrresuvara BODHISATTIVA, WHILE experiencing deeply the 

manifestation of prajna [wisdom beyond wisdom], clearly saw with 
the entire body that all five skandhas are empty. These five skandhas 
[streams of body and mind]—form, feeling, perception, inclination, 
and discernment—are fivefold prajna. Clear seeing is prajna. To 
expound this teaching, it is said [in the Maha Prajna Paramita Heart 
Sutra] that form is emptiness and emptiness is form. Form is form. 
Emptiness is emptiness [boundlessness]. One hundred grasses are 
thus. Myriad forms are thus. 

The manifestation of the twelvefold prajna [the prajna of the six 
senses and their objects] means twelve types of entering [into buddha 
dharma]. 

There is the eighteenfold prajna: the prajna of eyes, ears, nose, 
tongue, body, and mind; the prajna of sight, sound, smell, taste, touch, 
and objects of mind; also the prajna of the corresponding 
consciousness of eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind. 

There is the fourfold [noble truth] prajna: suffering, craving, 
freedom from suffering, and the path. There is the sixfold 
[manifestation] prajna: generosity, precepts, patience, vigor, 
contemplation, and prajna. 

There is the singlefold prajna: unsurpassable, complete 
enlightenment, actualized at this very moment. There is the 
manifestation of the threefold prajna: the past, present, and future. 
There is the sixfold [great element] prajna: earth, water, fire, air, 
space, and consciousness. The fourfold [bodily posture] prajna: 
walking, standing, sitting, and lying down, common in daily activities. 

skandha, the wisdom skandha, the emancipation skandha, and the 
emancipation of views skandha are established. The fruits of 
entering the stream, of once-returning, of no-longer-returning, 
and of the arhat are established. The pratyeka-buddha’s 
enlightenment is established. The unsurpassable, complete 
enlightenment is established. Buddha, dharma, and sangha 
treasures are established. The turning of the wondrous dharma 
wheel and awakening sentient beings are established. 

The Buddha read the monk’s mind and said to him, “That’s right, 
that’s right. The very profound manifestation of prajna is subtle and 
fathomless.” 

This monk’s understanding was that taking refuge in all things is 
taking refuge in prajna that does not arise or perish. At the very 
moment of taking refuge, the prajna that establishes precepts, 
samadhi, wisdom, and awakening sentient beings is actualized. This 
prajna is called emptiness. So the actualization of emptiness is 
established. This is the manifestation of prajna that is extremely subtle 
and fathomless. 

prajna, which the Buddha has explained, and protecting the 
bodhisattvas who practice it, are not different from protecting empty 
space.” 

Thus, know that receiving, reciting, or reflecting upon the profound 
manifestation of prajna is no other than protecting prajna. Intending 
to protect is receiving, reciting, and so forth. 

Thus, the Buddha, the World-Honored One, is the manifestation of 
prajna. The manifestation of prajna is all things. All things are aspects 
of emptiness—not arising [beyond arising], not perishing, not defiled, 
not pure, not increasing, and not decreasing. To actualize the 
manifestation of prajna is to actualize the Buddha, the World-Honored 
One. 

3 

Accruauzine THE Fonpamentat Powr 

As ALL THINGS are buddha dharma, there is delusion, realization, 

practice, birth [life] and death, buddhas and sentient beings. As 
myriad things are without an abiding self, there is no delusion, no 
realization, no buddha, no sentient being, no birth and death. The 
buddha way, in essence, is leaping clear of abundance and lack; thus 
there is birth and death, delusion and realization, sentient beings and 
buddhas. Yet in attachment blossoms fall, and in aversion weeds 
spread. 

environs. At the moment when dharma is authentically transmitted, 
you are immediately your original self. 

full experience of buddha dharma. Do not suppose that what you 
attain becomes your knowledge and is grasped by your intellect. 
Although actualized immediately, what is inconceivable may not be 
apparent. Its emergence is beyond your knowledge. 

4 
One Bricur Peart 

Xuansua, GREAT MASTER Zongyi, of Mount Xuansha, Fu Region, China, 

of the Saha World, used to be called Shibei. His family name was Xie. 
When he was a householder, he loved fishing and boating on the 
Nantai River, doing as fishermen do. 

At the beginning of the Xiantong Era [860-873] a golden-scaled fish 
came to him without his seeking it, and he suddenly had the urge to 
leave the dusty world. So he gave up his boat and went off into the 
mountains. He was thirty years old when he realized the 
precariousness of the floating world and the preciousness of the 
buddha way. Then he went to Mount Xuefeng and studied with 
Xuefeng, Great Master Zhenjiao, endeavoring in the way day and 
night. 

One day, as he was leaving the mountain with his traveling bag to 
visit other monasteries to further his study, his toe hit a rock and 
began to bleed. In sharp pain he suddenly had a realization and said 
to himself, “If my body doesn’t exist, where does this pain come 
from?” So he went back to see Xuefeng. 

Xuefeng said, “What’s happening, Ascetic Bei [Shibei]?” 

Xuansha said, “No one can be fooled.” 

Xuefeng loved his words and said, “Who doesn’t know these words, 
yet who else could say them?” Then he said, “Why doesn’t Ascetic Bei 
with the traveling bag go and study all over?” 

Xuansha said, “Bodhidharma didn’t come to China. Huike didn’t go 
to India.” 

Xuefeng praised him. 

Although Xuansha was a fisherman who had never read sutras even 
in dreams, he focused on his intention to practice and was strongly 
determined. Xuefeng saw his practice excel in the community and 
regarded him as an outstanding student. The coarse cotton robe 
Xuansha had on all the time was worn out and tattered, so he put ona 
paper robe beneath it. He sometimes added dried mugwort grass to 
cover himself. He did not study with anyone other than Xuefeng. In 
this way, he acquired the capacity to inherit Xuefeng’s dharma. 

Some years after attaining the way, Xuansha instructed his students, 
saying, “The entire world of the ten directions is one bright pearl.” 

Once a monk asked him, “I heard that you said, ‘The entire world of 
the ten directions is one bright pearl.’ How should I understand this?” 

Xuansha said, “The entire world of the ten directions is one bright 
pearl. What do you do with your understanding?” 

The next day Xuansha asked the monk, “The entire world of the ten 
directions is one bright pearl. How do you understand this?” 

The monk said, “The entire world of the ten directions is one bright 
pearl. What do you do with your understanding?” 

Xuansha said, “I see that you have worked out a way to get through 
the demon’s cave on the black mountain.” 

wave, ten feet of pearl, ten feet of illumination. 

In expressing his understanding, Xuansha said, The entire world of 
the ten directions is one bright pearl. What do you do with your 
understanding? These words are an expression that buddhas inherit 
from buddhas, ancestors inherit from ancestors, and Xuansha inherits 
from Xuansha. If you do not want to inherit this expression, there may 
be a way not to do so. But even if you totally avoid it for a while, this 
expression arises all-inclusively right now. 

The next day Xuansha asked the monk, The entire world of the ten 
directions is one bright pearl. How do you understand this? This is an 
expression that takes up yesterday’s statement and, adding another 
layer, blows it back today. His question today pushes down 
yesterday’s nodding laugh. 

The monk said, The entire world of the ten directions is one bright 
pearl. What do you do with your understanding? Speak! This is riding the 
robber’s horse to chase the robber [the self looking for the self]. An 
authentic buddha speaking to you walks in the midst of various 
beings. Now turn the light inward and illuminate yourself. How many 
ways do you understand this? You may say, “seven pieces of milk 
cake” or “five pieces of herb cake.” Yet, there is teaching and practice 
south of Xian and north of Tan [anywhere]. 

Xuansha said, I see that you have worked out a way to get through the 
demon’s cave on the black mountain. Know that the sun face and moon 
face have not switched over since ancient times. The sun face emerges 
with the sun face, and the moon face emerges with the moon face. So, 
even in the sixth month [height of summer], do not say your nature is 
hot. The timeless thusness of this one bright pearl is boundless. It is 
just that the entire world of the ten directions is one bright pearl, not 
two or three. The entire body is one true dharma eye, the true body, a 
single phrase. The entire body is illumination; the entire body is the 
entire mind. When the entire body is the entire body, there is no 
hindrance. It is gently curved and turns round and round. 

With the power of the bright pearl manifesting in this way, 
Avalokiteshvara and Maitreya see form and hear sound; old buddhas 
and new buddhas reveal their bodies and expound dharma. At this 
very moment the bright pearl hangs in space or is sewn inside the 
robe; it is hidden under the gill [of a dragon] or in the hair. This is 
one bright pearl, the entire world of the ten directions. Although it is 
sewn inside the robe, do not try to hang it outside the robe. Although 
it is hidden under the gill or in the hair, do not try to take it out. 

A man sewed a valuable pearl inside the clothes of a dear friend 
who was drunk [as told in the Lotus Sutra]. A dear friend always gives 
a valuable pearl. When a pearl is sewn inside one’s clothes, one is 
always drunk. This is one bright pearl, the entire world of the ten 

directions. All things, turning or not turning [seen when one is drunk 
or sober], are one bright pearl. Knowing the bright pearl is one bright 
pearl. This is how it is with one bright pearl. 

This being so, although you may say, “I am not a bright pearl,” you 
should not doubt. Whether you doubt it or not, such doubt comes 
from a limited view. Limited views are merely limited. 

How lovely is one bright pearl’s infinite colors and shades! Bits and 
pieces of its colors and shades express the entire world of the ten 
directions. No one can take it away, or throw a tile at it in the 
marketplace. Do not be concerned about falling or not falling into 
cause and effect in the six paths. Not ignoring cause and effect, from 
beginning to end, is the face of the bright pearl, is the eye of the 
bright pearl. 

To think or not to think one hundred times about what the bright 
pearl is or is not is like gathering and binding weeds [to trap 
yourself]. But when you clarify the body and mind as the bright pearl 
through the dharma words of Xuansha, you understand that mind is 
not the self. 

Who is concerned whether or not appearing and disappearing are 
the bright pearl? Even if you are concerned, that does not mean you 
are not the bright pearl. It is not something outside of the bright pearl 
that causes practice and thought. Therefore, forward or back, your 
every step in the demon’s cave on the black mountain is one bright 
pearl. 

Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery, 
Uji County, Yamashiro Province, on the eighteenth day, the fourth 
month, the fourth year of the Katei Era [1238]. 

5 

Recutations FOR THE Avxuiary Croup Hau AT THE Kannonvort 

Kosto Goxoxu Monastery 

Tose wHo HAVE way-seeking mind and wish to abandon fame and 

gain should enter. Those who are half-hearted and lack sincerity 
should not enter. If the entry is a mistake, after some consideration 
one may be asked to leave. 

Know that when the way-seeking mind is aroused within, there is 
immediate freedom from fame and gain. In the vastness of the billion 
worlds, true heirs of dharma are rare. In spite of the long history of 
our country you should make the present moment the true source, 
having compassion for later generations by giving emphasis to the 
present. 

The assembly of students in the hall should blend like milk and 
water to support the activity of the way. Although now for some 
period you are either guest or host, later you will be buddha ancestors 
equally throughout time. Therefore, you should not forget the feeling 
of gratitude. It is rare to meet one another and practice what is rare to 
practice. This is called the body and mind of buddha dharma; you will 
certainly become a buddha ancestor. 

Having left your home and birthplace, now you depend on clouds 
and you depend on water. The support to you and your practice given 
by this assembly of students surpasses that which was given by your 
father and mother. Your father and mother are temporarily close to 
you in birth and death, but this assembly of students is your 
companion in the buddha way of enlightenment for all time. 

Do not look for a chance to go out. But, if necessary, going out is 
permitted once a month. People in the past lived in the remote 
mountains and practiced far away in the forests. Not only were they 
free from nearly all worldly affairs, but they also relinquished all 
relationships. You should learn the heart of their hiding brilliance and 
obscuring traces. Now is the time for the fire on your head to be 
brushed off. Is it not sad if you waste this time, concerning yourself 
with secular affairs? Life is impermanent and unreliable. No one 
knows where and when this dew-like existence will drop from the 
grass. Not recognizing impermanence is truly regrettable. 

Do not read books in the hall, even Zen texts, and do not bring in 
personal correspondence. In the hall you should endeavor in the way 
of realizing the great matter. When facing the bright window, you 
should illuminate the mind with the authentic teaching. Do not waste 
a moment. Concentrate your effort. 

Day or night, always inform the director of the hall where you are 
going to be. Do not play around according to your own impulses; your 
actions affect the discipline of the entire assembly. Who knows? This 
may be the last day of your life. It would be truly regrettable to die 
while indulging in pleasures. 

Do not be concerned with the faults of others. Do not see others’ 
faults with a hateful mind. There is an old saying that if you stop 
seeing others’ faults, then naturally seniors are venerated and juniors 
are revered. Do not imitate others’ faults; just cultivate virtue. The 
Buddha prohibited unwholesome actions but did not tell us to despise 
those who practice unwholesome actions. 

Whether carrying out either important matters or trifles, always 
consult with the director of the hall. Those who do things without 
consulting with the director of the hall should leave. If you neglect the 
formality of guest and host, you can understand neither the true nor 
the conditional. 

Inside or near the hall, do not put your heads together and talk 
loudly. The director should prohibit this. 

Do not do chanting circumambulation in the hall. 

Do not hold or carry beads in the hall. Do not enter or leave with 
your hands hanging down. 

Do not chant the names of buddhas or sutras in the hall. However, 
this is permitted when supporters request sutra chanting on a 
particular occasion. Do not spit, blow your nose, or laugh loudly. Be 
sobered by the fact that the work of the way is not yet mastered. 
Regret the subtle passage of time, which is eating away this 
opportunity for practice of the way. Then you may have the sense of 
being a fish in a small puddle. 

Those assembled in the hall should not wear brocade but rather 
things like paper robes. Those who understood the way in the past 
were all like this. 

Do not enter the hall intoxicated with wine. If you do so by 
accident, you should make a formal repentance. Do not have wine 
brought into the hall. Do not enter the hall smelling of onions. 

Quarreling persons should go out of the hall, because their 
quarreling not only hinders their own work in the way but also that of 
others. Those who see such quarreling and do not stop it are equally 
at fault. 

Those who do not follow the guidelines of the hall should be 

removed. Those who are amused by or in sympathy with such 
students are also at fault. 

Do not show the inside of the hall to visiting monks or laypeople, as 
this may disturb the students. Do not speak loudly with guests near 
the hall, and do not talk about practice in a self-praising way, in order 
to get offerings. However, those who have a long-standing intention to 
practice or those who are on pilgrimage may be allowed inside. In 
such cases, always consult the director of the hall beforehand. 

Practice zazen in this hall just as in the monks’ hall. Never neglect 
early morning zazen or the evening practice instruction period. 

At mealtime, those who drop monks’ bowls or utensils on the floor 
should be fined according to the regulations of the monastery. 

The admonitions of buddha ancestors should always be followed. 
The pure guidelines of the monastery are to be inscribed in your bones 
and mind. 

Wish to be serenely composed for your entire life and to practice 
the way free of expectations. 

These regulations are the body and mind of the ancient buddhas. 
Respect and follow them. 

This was written on the twenty-fifth day, the fourth month, the first 
year of the En’o Era [1239]. 

6 
Tue Mino [tse IS Buppua 

Wrarar BUDDHAS AND ancestors have maintained without exception is 

“The mind itself is buddha.” However, this particular expression was 
not known in India; it was first heard in China. 

Many students misunderstand this teaching, as they do not file a file 
about it [examine it thoroughly]. Because they do not file a file, they 
fall into a group of those outside the way. Upon hearing the phrase 
The mind itself is buddha, ignorant people think that the thoughts and 
awareness of ordinary beings, who have not aroused the aspiration for 
enlightenment, are already buddhas. They think in this way because 
they have not yet met an authentic teacher. 

are real only if the soul abides in them. As these objects arise 
from the soul, the original nature, they are true reality. But they 
are not permanent; they exist and then disappear. 

As the soul intuitively knows bright and dark, it is called a 
knowing spirit. It is also called the true self, the source of 
awakening, true nature, or true body. To realize such a true 
nature is described as returning to permanence. This soul is called 
a great being that returns to reality. 

After such realization, the soul does not transmigrate in birth 
and death; it enters the ocean of the true nature of no birth and 
death. There is no reality other than this. When this true nature is 
not revealed, the three realms and the six paths emerge one after 
another. 

This was Shrenika’s theory. 

accounts of this kind of teaching. It has been particularly popular in 
recent times. They gather together three or five hundred monks and 
tell them that this is the essential teaching of the south. By taking up 
the Platform Sutra, altering the text, mixing in coarse stories, and 
leaving out sacred teachings, they confuse later generations. How can 
we call their statements teachings? How painful it is that our school is 
in such decline! If seeing, hearing, understanding, and knowing were 
buddha nature, Vimalakirti would not have said, ‘Dharma is different 
from seeing, hearing, understanding, and knowing. To practice seeing, 
hearing, understanding, and knowing is only to practice seeing, 
hearing, understanding, and knowing. It is not seeking dharma.” 

Huizhong, a senior disciple of Huineng, Old Buddha Caoxi [the 
Sixth Ancestor], was a great teacher of humans and devas. Clarify his 
essential teaching and make it a standard for study. 

The mind itself is buddha, which has been maintained by buddha 
ancestors, is not something those outside of the way or practitioners of 
the Two Lesser Vehicles can even dream of. Only buddha ancestors 
together with buddha ancestors have been actualizing and penetrating 
The mind itself is buddha. Thus, it has been heard, practiced, and 
realized. Buddha’s one hundred grasses have been taken up; they have 
been made to disappear. However, this cannot be explained as the 
sixteen-foot golden body [of the Buddha]. 

This is the fundamental point, which does not wait for actualization. 
It does not avoid being decomposed. In itself, there are three realms— 
there is no walking away. Itself is not merely inseparable from mind. 
The mind is a wall. It is not stained by muddy water; it is not created. 

Study thoroughly: “The mind itself is buddha,” “The mind is buddha 
itself,” “Buddha is itself the mind,” “The mind itself Buddha is,” 
“Buddha is the mind itself.” By studying thoroughly in this way and 
taking up The mind itself is buddha, you authentically transmit it to The 
mind itself is buddha. It has been authentically transmitted until today. 

The mind that has been authentically transmitted is: one mind is all 
things, all things are one mind. 

Thus, an ancient teacher said, “If you realize this mind, there is not 
an inch of land left on earth.” 

Know that when you realize this mind, the entire sky collapses and 
the whole earth explodes. Or, if you realize this mind, the earth raises 
its surface by three inches. 

Thus, we know that the mind is mountains, rivers, and the earth; 
the mind is the sun, the moon, and stars. What is said here is not 
more, not less. 

Mountains, rivers, and earth mind are just mountains, rivers, and 
the earth. There are no extra waves or sprays [in this mind]. The sun, 
the moon, and stars mind is just the sun, the moon, and stars. There is 
no extra fog or mist. The coming and going of birth and death mind is 
just the coming and going of birth and death. There is no extra 
delusion or enlightenment. The walls, tiles, and pebbles mind is just 
the walls, tiles, and pebbles. There is no extra mud or water. Four 
great elements and five skandhas mind are just four great elements 
and five skandhas. There is no extra horse or monkey. The chair and 
whisk mind is just the chair and whisk. There is no extra bamboo or 
wood. 

This being so, The mind itself is buddha does not divide The mind 
itself is buddha. Buddhas do not divide buddhas. Thus, The mind itself is 
buddha indicates buddhas of aspiration, practice, enlightenment, and 
nirvana. Those who have not actualized aspiration, practice, 
enlightenment, and nirvana do not experience The mind itself is 
buddha. 

Even if you arouse the aspiration for enlightenment and actualize 
practice-realization for a moment, that is The mind itself is buddha. 
Even if you arouse the aspiration for enlightenment and actualize 
practice-realization within the most minute particle, that is The mind 
itself is buddha. Even if you arouse the aspiration for enlightenment 
and actualize practice-realization for innumerable kalpas, that is The 
mind itself is buddha. Even if you arouse the aspiration for 
enlightenment and actualize practice-realization in a flash of thought, 
that is The mind itself is buddha. Even if you arouse the aspiration for 
enlightenment and actualize practice-realization within half a fist, that 
is The mind itself is buddha. 

Those who say that practicing for an eon to become buddha is not 
The mind itself is buddha have not seen, known, and studied The mind 
itself is buddha. They have not met an authentic teacher who expounds 
The mind itself is buddha. 

The buddhas spoken of here are none other than Shakyamuni 
Buddha. Shakyamuni Buddha is The mind itself is buddha. When all 
buddhas in the past, present, and future are buddhas, they unfailingly 
become Shakyamuni Buddha. This is “The mind itself is buddha.” 

Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery, 
Uji County, Yamashiro Province, on the twenty-fifth day, the fifth 
month, the first year of the En’o Era [1239]. 

7 

Cizansine 

Tue PRACTICE-REALIZATION THAT buddha ancestors have guarded and 

maintained is called nondefilement. 

Nanyue Huairang, who would later become Great Master Dahui of 
the Guanyin Monastery, Mount Nanyue, was once asked by Huineng, 
the Sixth Ancestor, “Do you depend on practice-realization?” 

Nanyue said, “It is not that there is no practice-realization. It is just 
that it should not be defiled.” 

Huineng said, “This nondefilement is what all buddhas have 
mindfully guarded. You are like this. I am like this. All ancestors in 
India were also like this.” 

cleanse with the water, vow to embody pure patience and become 
fully undefiled together with all sentient beings. 

Water is not necessarily pure or impure by origin. The body is not 
necessarily pure or impure by origin. All things are like this. Water is 
not sentient or insentient. The body is not sentient or insentient. All 
things are like this. 

The teaching of the Buddha, the World-Honored One, is like this. It 
is not that you purify the body with water; there is a method to 
maintain buddha dharma with buddha dharma. This is called 
cleansing. 

You authentically receive this cleansing in person with the single 
body-mind of buddha ancestors. This is to see and hear a single phrase 
of buddha ancestors. It is to abide clearly in a sole radiant light of 
buddha ancestors. This is to actualize immeasurable, boundless merit. 

At the very moment of embodying the awesome presence of this 
practice in body-mind, the timeless original practice is fully 
accomplished. Thus, the body-mind of this practice is originally 
actualized. 

shaved for years shaved their heads. 
When he ascended to the teaching seat [for a formal talk] or when 
he gave an informal talk, he would snap his fingers loudly and scold: 

Those who keep long hair and nails meaninglessly without 
knowing the reason should be pitied for violating dharma, even if 
they have the body-mind of the Southern Continent, Jambudvipa. 

As the ancestral way has been in decline for the last two or 
three hundred years, there are a number of such people. They 
become the heads of monasteries, being authorized to receive the 
titles of masters, and pretend to guide others. This does not 
benefit humans and devas. 

In the monasteries all over China there is not a single person 
who has the aspiration for the way, and for a long time there has 
not been one who has attained the way. There are only groups of 
those who are decadent. 

When Rujing taught the assembly in this way, none of those who 
were mistakenly called elders of monasteries in various directions 
were resentful or spoke back. 

Know that keeping long hair has been cautioned against by buddha 
ancestors, and keeping long nails is a conduct of those outside the 
way. A descendant of buddha ancestors should not indulge in behavior 
that is against dharma. Cleanse your body-mind. Cut your nails and 
shave your head. Do not be negligent in washing off excrement and 
urine. 

mix it with water to make it liquid, and wash off the urine. With 
another pellet, wash yourself of the excrement in the same way. 
[Repeat this a few times.] Take up another pellet and clean the place 
where the excrement has dropped. Finally, use another pellet to wash 
your hands in the same way. 

Since monks started living in monasteries, a toilet house has been 
used. It is called the “east building.” It used to be called the “brook 
house.” It is sometimes called the “wash house.” This is a building 
essential to an abode of monks. 

sure that the ends of the sleeves are aligned with the lapels. Fold the 
outer robe again vertically and bring the top part of the outer robe 
over the bamboo hanger. The lower part of the outer robe and the 
sleeves hang on your side of the bamboo hanger, while the waist part 
of the outer robe touches the bamboo hanger. 

Then, cross both sides of the towel, which is already hanging, pull 
them around the outer robe, and tie a knot two or three times to keep 
the outer robe from slipping down. After this, bow to the outer robe. 
Next, take a strap and tie the sleeves of your underclothes across your 
armpits over your shoulders [in the undergarment]. 

Then, walk to the toilet area, get water in the wooden bucket, carry 
it with the right hand, and step into the toilet room. When pouring 
water into the bucket, do not fill it—make it nine out of ten. Change 
your sandals in front of the toilet door. Put on the cattail sandals 
[provided at the toilet] and leave your own straw sandals in front of 
the toilet. This is called “changing sandals.” 

hand, wet the left hand well, cup it, pour water into it, and first wash 
urine from yourself three times. Then wash off the excrement. Wash 
properly and make your body clean. During this process, do not tilt 
the bucket roughly, pour too much water, or quickly lose water by 
overfilling the cupped hand. 

After washing your body, put the bucket back in its position. Use 
the stick or paper to dry both areas of your body thoroughly. Then, 
pull and straighten up the bottom and corners of the underclothes 
with your right hand. When you carry the bucket with the right hand 
and leave the toilet, take off the cattail sandals and put on your straw 
sandals. Then, go to the washing area and return the bucket to its 
original position. 

Next, wash your hands. Pick up an ash ladle with the right hand, 
scoop up some ash, and place it on a tile. Add some drops of water to 
it with your right hand and wash the soiled [left] hand. You wash it 
by rubbing it on the tile, just like sharpening a rusty knife. Wash it 
with ash three times. Then, place dirt on the tile, add drops of water, 
and wash the hand three more times. After that, get some honey 
locust powder with the right hand, dip both hands into water in a 
small wooden bucket, and wash them well. Wash your hands 
thoroughly up to the wrist. Wash them with complete attention and 
sincerity. Thus, wash three times with ash, three times with dirt, and 
once with honey locust powder. In this way, washing seven times at 
each use of the toilet is the right amount. Finally, wash your hands in 
a large wooden bucket. At this time, don’t use herb or ash but rinse 
your hands with cold or warm water. After washing, put the used 
water into a small bucket. Get fresh water in the large bucket and 
rinse your hands again. 

Then, hang the towel over the left elbow and perfume your hands. 
In the common area, there is a stick of aloeswood carved in the shape 
of a treasure jar. It is as thick as a thumb and four times as long as 
four fingerwidths. A string about one shaku [one foot] long is threaded 
through the holes on both ends of this aloeswood, which is hung on a 
bamboo hanger. If you rub this stick with both hands, they become 
fragrant. 

When you hang your strap on the bamboo hanger, do not put it on 
top of another; keep the straps from being entangled with each other. 

This procedure [for using the toilet] is to cleanse the buddha land, 
to beautify the buddha land. Follow this procedure thoroughly. 

Do not act hastily. Do not think of getting it over with and going 
back quickly. Quietly think of the teaching: “In the wash house, 
dharma is not expounded.” Do not make observations on the monks 
who are on their way to the toilet. 

For cleansing in the toilet room, cold water is suitable. It is said that 
hot water may cause stomach upset. For washing hands, it is all right 
to use warm water. The wash house is equipped with a kettle for this 
purpose. 

The Guidelines for Zen Monasteries says, “Even late at night, keep 
water heated and oil [for the lamp] burning. Make hot water available 
at all times so the monks are not interrupted.” In this way we know 
that both hot and cold water are used in the wash room. 

If the toilet gets dirty, shut the door and put up a “Dirty” sign. If the 
bucket is dropped by mistake, also shut the door and put up a “Wet” 
sign. Do not use the toilets when you see such signs. If you are 
entering a dirty or wet toilet and someone else signals to you by 
snapping their fingers, stay outside for a moment [to let the person 
clean the toilet]. 

In the practice places of buddha ancestors, there is always the 
awesome practice of this cleansing. Among those who practice in the 
practice places of buddha ancestors, there is always the awesome 
practice of this cleansing. Cleansing is not forced by the self, but is the 
conduct of awesome practice itself. Cleansing is the continuous 
procedure of all buddhas. Cleansing is the everyday activity of all 
ancestors. It is the buddha procedure not only of all buddhas in this 
realm, but of buddhas in the ten directions. It is the buddha procedure 
of the pure land and impure land. 

Those who hear little think that buddhas don’t have a procedure in 
the wash house or that the procedure for buddhas in the Saha World is 
different from that of buddhas in the pure land. This is not the study 
of the way. 

Know that the matter of being clean or dirty is like drips of blood 
for those who have left the household. Sometimes it is gentle, and 
other times it is severe. Thus, be aware that all buddhas use a wash 
house. 

house should not be placed in the east or north side [of the 
monastery], but in the south or west side. A place for urination should 
be also like this.” 

Follow this format, this is a plan for monasteries in India—the 
buildings where the Tathagata is still present. Know that this format is 
not only the buddha procedure of a single buddha, but of the practice 
places—monasteries—of the Seven Original Buddhas. This was not 
initiated [by Shakyamuni Buddha], but it has been the awesome 
practice of all buddhas. 

If you build a monastery and practice buddha dharma before 
clarifying this matter, there may be a number of mistakes, the 
awesome practice may not be complete, and buddha enlightenment 
may not be actualized. When you construct a practice place and found 
a monastery, follow the dharma procedure authentically transmitted 
by buddha ancestors. Since this dharma procedure is of authentic heirs 
and of authentic transmission, its merit has been accumulated. 

Without being authentically transmitted heirs of buddha ancestors, 
you have not yet known the body-mind of buddha dharma. Without 
knowing the body-mind of buddha dharma, you have not yet clarified 
the buddha work. That the buddha dharma of Shakyamuni Buddha 
has spread throughout the ten directions means that the body-mind of 
the Buddha is actualized. The very moment of the body-mind of the 
Buddha being actualized is just this. 

Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery, 
Uji County, Yamashiro Province, on the twenty-third day, the tenth 
month, the first year of the En’o Era [1239]. 

8 
Wasuine THE Face 

Tue Lotus Sutra says, “If you spread oil on your body after removing 
dirt, and wear fresh robes, you are clean inside and outside.” 

This dharma was expounded by the Tathagata at the lotus assembly 
when he taught those who were engaged in the four practices of 
enjoyment and ease. It is not equal to other teachings and not the 
same as accounts in other sutras. 

Thus, cleansing body and mind, spreading scented oil on the body 
after removing dirt, is a primary buddha dharma. To wear fresh 
clothes is a dharma of purification. By washing away dirt and 
spreading scented oil on the body, you are clean inside and outside. 
When you are clean inside and outside, your body, mind, and environs 
are all clean. 

But those who are ignorant and do not hear and practice buddha 
dharma say, “Although you can wash your skin, you have five main 
organs and six sub-organs in your body. If you don’t wash all your 
organs, you are not purified.” Those who make such a statement have 
not yet heard and known buddha dharma. They have not encountered 
an authentic teacher, a descendant of buddha ancestors. 

Now, study the true dharma of buddha ancestors, discarding the 
words of those with outrageously crooked views. The boundary of all 
phenomena cannot be determined, and the inside and outside of 
various elements are ungraspable. Thus, the inside and outside of 
body and mind are ungraspable. However, a bodhisattva of the final 
body washes the kashaya and cleanses the body and mind before 
sitting in the place of enlightenment and attaining the way. This is the 
awesome ritual of buddhas of the past, present, and future in the ten 
directions. A bodhisattva of the final body has the most venerable and 
supreme merit, wisdom, body, mind, and splendor, different from 
others in all aspects. Our way of washing and cleansing should be like 
that. 

A person’s body and mind change according to situations and time. 
A billion worlds can be sat through within a single sitting. Even so, at 
that very moment the body and mind cannot be measured by self or 
other. It is the power of buddha dharma. The scale of the body and 

mind is not five or six feet, because the five or six feet is not 
unchangeable. 

Where the body is neither bounded nor boundless, it is not limited 
to this world or that world, to the entire world or the immeasurable 
entire world. As in an old saying, “What is it here? Describe it roughly 
or in detail.” 

The scale of mind cannot be known by thinking and discernment, 
either. It cannot be known by beyond thinking and beyond 
discernment. The scale of body and mind is like this; so is the scale of 
cleansing. To take up this scale of cleansing, practicing and realizing 
it, is what buddhas and ancestors have cared for. 

Do not make your scheming self a priority. Do not make your 
calculating self real. By washing and cleansing, you thoroughly take 
up the scale of body and mind and purify them. Even the four great 
elements and five skandhas, and what is indestructible [in the body 
and mind], can be purified by cleansing. 

Do not merely think that rinsing with water makes things clean. 
How can water be originally pure or impure? Even if water is 
originally pure or impure, we do not say that water makes the places 
it reaches pure or impure. Only when you maintain the practice and 
realization of buddha ancestors, the buddha dharma of washing with 
water and cleansing with water, is water transmitted. By practicing 
and realizing in this way, you leap over purity, penetrate impurity, 
and drop away beyond purity and beyond impurity. In this way, the 
teaching of washing what is not yet defiled and washing what is 
greatly pure is maintained in the way of buddha ancestors alone. It is 
not known by those outside the way. 

If the statement by those who are ignorant were true, even if you 
grind the five organs and six sub-organs into powder, make them into 
emptiness, and wash them with the entire ocean, how could the body 
and mind be pure if you don’t wash inside the particles? How could 
you attain purity without washing inside the emptiness? But those 
who are ignorant don’t know the way to cleanse emptiness. 

You take up emptiness and wash emptiness, take up emptiness and 
wash body and mind. If you accept washing with trust in this way, 
you maintain the practice and realization of buddha ancestors. 

When you wash in the true dharma authentically transmitted by 
buddhas and ancestors, the inside and outside of body and mind, as 
well as the inside, the outside, and the in-between of the five organs, 
six sub-organs, body, mind, environs, the world of phenomena, and 
empty space are immediately cleansed. When you cleanse with 
incense and flowers, the past, present, future, causes and conditions, 
actions and effects are immediately purified. 

who bows and one who is bowed to are both at fault. One who bows 
and one who is bowed to are originally empty, and originally dropped 
away [free]. Thus, always wash your face. 

The time for washing the face is either at the fifth night period or at 
dawn. When Rujing, my late master, was abbot of the Tiantong 
Monastery, he designated the last part of the third night period for 
washing the face. 

Wear a one- or two-piece robe, carry a hand towel, and go to the 
sink for washing the face. The hand towel is a regular-width cloth 
twelve shaku [feet] long. It should not be white. A white cloth is 
prohibited. 

tie a sash [for holding up tucked sleeves]. 

In case you wash your face at the sink behind the monks’ hall, pick 
up a face-washing basin, get some warm water in the cauldron, and 
set it in the sink. If you are somewhere else, pour some warm water 
from the warm wooden tub. 

not chew more than three bu [three tenths of one sun (inch)] of it.” 

You chew the tooth stick repeatedly and brush the surface of the 
teeth as if you were polishing them. Brush and rinse several times. 
Mindfully brush the gums also. Brush and clean in between the teeth. 
With frequent rinsing, your mouth is cleansed. Then scrape the 
tongue. 

The Sutra of Three Thousand Guidelines for Pure Conduct says, “There 
are five guidelines for scraping the tongue: Do not practice 
excessively; stop when bleeding; do not make a large hand motion 
that may stain your robe; do not throw away the willow twig and hit 
someone else; always practice it in a sheltered place.” 

What is called “three tongue scrapings” means to scrape the tongue 
while holding water in your mouth three times. It does not mean 
scraping in three strokes. Remember to stop if you start bleeding. 
Scrape the tongue thoroughly in this way. 

The Sutra of Three Thousand Guidelines for Pure Conduct says, 
“Cleansing the mouth means to chew the willow twig, rinse the 
mouth, and scrape the tongue.” 

Thus, buddha ancestors and their descendants have protected and 
maintained the use of a willow twig. 

to heaven. 

Thus, a way to make an offering to the Buddha is to offer a willow 
twig in the early morning. Then you offer various things. Although 
there are many stories about offering a willow twig to the Buddha and 
letting the Buddha use a willow twig, since you need to know it, I 
have now presented this story of King Prasenajit’s offering, which 
became a tall tree. 

On the same day, six teachers outside the way were defeated by the 
Buddha and ran away in fright. They all jumped into water and were 
drowned. 

[According to the Wise and Fools Sutra:] “Nine hundred million 
followers of the six teachers outside the way went to see the Buddha 
and asked him to make them his disciples. The Buddha said, ‘Come, 
monks.’ Then, they all became monks with their hair and beards 
dropped away and their bodies wrapped in dharma robes. The Buddha 
expounded essential dharma. Their desires being dissolved, they all 
became arhats.” 

In this way, because the Tathagata used a willow twig, humans and 
devas made offering of it to the Tathagata. We clearly know that 
chewing a willow twig is maintained by buddhas, bodhisattvas, and 
their disciples. Without using it, the way of using it will be neglected. 
It would be deplorable not to use it. 

Even if it has the other wing, it would not be able to fly. Then, it 
would not be able to follow the path of birds. A bodhisattva is like 
this. Without being equipped with these eighteen types of wings, the 
practice of the bodhisattva way would not be possible. 

Among the eighteen items, a willow twig is listed first. It is the first 
thing to carry. Those who clarify the use of a willow twig are 
bodhisattvas who clarify buddha dharma. Those who do not yet 
clarify this have not yet dreamed of buddha dharma. This being so, 
seeing a willow twig is seeing a buddha ancestor. 

If someone asks you, “What is the essential matter?” say, “I have 
fortunately met Old Man Eihei chewing a willow twig.” 

This bodhisattva precept of the Indra’s Net Bodhisattva Sutra has 
been maintained in the past, present, and future by bodhisattvas of the 
past, present, and future. Thus, a willow twig has been maintained in 
the past, present, and future. 

Such bushes are also used by monks and laypeople for removing 
dust from their shoes or brushing their hair. They vary in size but are 
the same type of tool. Yet, they are only used by one person out of ten 
thousand. 

So, monks and laypeople in Great Song China have bad breath. 
When they speak, their breath can be smelled two or three shaku 
away, which is hard to bear. Those who call themselves reverend 
teachers who have attained the way, or guiding masters of humans 
and devas, are not aware of the way to rinse the mouth, scrape the 
tongue, and chew a willow twig. The decline of the great way of 
buddha ancestors is beyond measure. 

Risking our dewdroplike life in crossing the ocean of ten thousand li 
and crossing mountains and rivers of a foreign land, we seek the way. 
However, it is our lamentable fortune to see such a decline of dharma. 
How much of the pure dharma has perished before us? It is 
regrettable, truly regrettable. 

On the other hand, both monks and laypeople in and out of the 
imperial court in Japan see and hear about a willow twig. To do so is 
to hear and see the buddha light. But their way of chewing a willow 
twig is not in accordance with the way, and the practice of brushing 
the tongue has not been transmitted; their practice is coarse. 
Compared with those in Song who don’t know about a willow twig, 
people here are aware of the excellent practice. Sorcerers also use 
willow twigs. Know that a willow twig is a tool for being away from 
the dusty world. It is a means for cleansing. 

right hand, rinse the mouth, and scrape the tongue several times. You 
keep scraping with the blade of the torn willow twig almost until the 
tongue starts to bleed. 

When you rinse the mouth, chant this mantra from the Avatamsaka 
Sutra to yourself: 

By my rinsing the mouth and teeth, 
may all beings 

face the gate of pure dharma 

and attain ultimate emancipation. 

Rinse a number of times while washing inside the mouth, including 
the back of the lips, the bottom of the tongue, and the bottom of the 
upper jaw, with the front tips of the index finger, middle finger, and 
ring finger, as if you were licking them. If you have just eaten oily 
food, use acacia powder. 

After using the willow twig, discard it behind the screen. Snap your 
fingers three times after discarding it. There is a bucket for discarded 
willow twigs at the sink in the back of the monks’ hall. Discard it 
somewhere else in other places. Spit out the water for rinsing the 
mouth outside the bucket. 

dipper to drip, or in any other way. Do not splatter the warm water 
and wet a nearby place. 

Reflect quietly and rejoice that although we live in the last five 
hundred years [of the three periods of five hundred years after the 
time of Shakyamuni Buddha] in a faraway island of a remote country, 
as our wholesome karma from the past has not decayed, we have 
authentically received the awesome procedure of ancient buddhas, 
practice it, and realize it without staining it. Walk with light steps and 
speak quietly while returning to the cloud hall. 

The huts for elder practitioners need to have sinks for washing the 
face. Not to wash the face goes against the guidelines. At the time of 
washing the face, skin medicine may be used. 

Chewing a willow twig and washing the face is the true dharma of 
ancient buddhas. It should be practiced and realized by those who 
practice the way with way-seeking heart. If warm water is not 
available, use cold water, which also is an old way, ancient dharma. 
When warm or cold water is not available in the early morning, wipe 
your face thoroughly, spread fragrant herbs or incense powder, then 
bow to the Buddha, burn incense, chant sutras, and do zazen. 

Without washing the face, all the practices would lack authenticity. 

Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery 
on the twenty-third day, the tenth month, the first year of En’o Era 
[1239]. 

POSTSCRIPT 

In India and China, all people, including kings, princes, ministers, 
officials, laity, monks, noble and ordinary men and women, and 
farmers, wash their faces. They have face-washing basins in their 
homes, made of silver or hard tin. They offer washing their faces to 
the shrines of devas and gods. They offer washing their faces to the 
stupas of buddha ancestors. Both laypeople and monks, after washing 
their faces, dress up and bow to devas, gods, ancestors, and parents. 
They bow to their teachers, the three treasures, myriad spirits in the 
three realms, and the lords of the ten directions. Nowadays, farmers, 
rural workers, fishermen, and woodcutters don’t forget to wash their 
faces. Yet, they do not chew willow sticks. 

In Japan, the king, ministers, the young and old, the noble and 
ordinary, laity and monks, don’t forget to chew a willow twig and 
rinse their mouths. But they don’t wash their faces. One gain, one loss. 

To maintain both washing the face and chewing the willow twig is 
to fulfill what is lacking. It is the illuminated presence of buddha 

ancestors. 

Presented again to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, Yoshida 
County, Echizen Province, on the twentieth day, the tenth month, the 
first year of the Kangen Era [1243]. 

Presented once more to the assembly of the Eihei Monastery, Kichijo 
Mountain, Yoshida County, Echizen Province, on the eleventh day, the 
first month, the second year of the Kencho Era [1250]. 

9 

Recervine THE Marrow BY Bowie 

In THE PRACTICE of unsurpassable, complete enlightenment, what is 

most difficult is to find a guiding teacher. The guiding teacher should 
be a strong person, regardless of being a male or female. The teacher 
should be a person of thusness, with excellent knowledge and wild fox 
[transformative] spirit, whether living in the past or present. This is 
the face [essence] of attaining the marrow, the guiding virtue. This is 
“not ignoring cause and effect,” and “You and I are just this.” 

After you encounter your guiding teacher, practice diligently in the 
endeavor of the way, casting off myriad conditions, without sparing a 
moment. Practice with heart, practice with beyond heart, practice 
even with half a heart. In this way, brush off the fire on your head 
[practice with urgency], or stand on your toes [practice intensely]. 

If you practice in this way, you will not be destroyed by jealous 
demons; the ancestor [Huike] who cut off his arm and attained the 
[Bodhidharma’s] marrow becomes not other [than you]. The master 
who drops away body and mind is you yourself. 

You attain the marrow and are invariably transmitted dharma 
through your utmost sincerity and trusting heart. There is no path that 
comes from anything other than sincere trust; there is no direction 
that emerges from itself. 

Thus, you regard dharma as weighty and your own body as lightly 
weighted. You retreat from the world and make the way your abode. 
If you consider your own body weightier than dharma, dharma is not 
transmitted to you and you will not be able to attain the way. 

Although the aspiration for making dharma weighty is not limited 
to a single path, and does not depend on instructions from others, let 
me make one or two points. 

Regarding dharma as weighty means this: If you encounter someone 
who maintains the great dharma, having received the 
acknowledgment—“You have attained my marrow”’—whether the 
person is a pillar or a lantern, a buddha, wild fox, demon, man or 
woman, you should keep your body and mind on the zazen seat and 
attend to the person even for immeasurable eons. It is common to 
attain body and mind, which are just like widely spread rice plants, 
flax, bamboo, or reed. But it is rare to encounter dharma. 

Zhaozhou bows. It is an extraordinary aspiration, the mind art of an 
old buddha. 

It is an excellent custom of study that when a nun has attained the 
way, attained dharma, and started to teach, monks who seek dharma 
and study join her assembly, bow to her, and ask about the way. It is 
just like finding water at the time of thirst. 

Nun Miaoxin was a student of Yangshan. When Yangshan was 
looking for someone to fill the position of the director of the 
guesthouse at the foot of Mount Yangshan, he asked his senior 
students, who had served as officers, to make a recommendation. 
After some discussion, Yangshan said, “Although Miaoxin is a woman, 
she has heroic aspiration. She should be suited to serve as the director 
of the guesthouse.” 

Everyone agreed, and Miaoxin was appointed to the position. None 
of Yangshan’s other students resented the decision. As it was not a 
minor position, those who recommended Miaoxin were careful about 
this selection. 

While Miaoxin filled this position, there was a group of seventeen 
monks from Shu, in the west, who were on the road in search of a 
master. On their way to climb up to Yangshan’s monastery, they 
stopped and stayed at the guesthouse. While they rested in the 
evening, they discussed the story about the wind and the banner of 
Huineng, High Ancestor of Caoxi. The seventeen monks’ 
interpretations were all wrong. 

Miaoxin, who overheard the discussion outside the room, said, 
“How wasteful! How many pairs of straw sandals have these 
seventeen blind donkeys worn out? They haven’t even dreamed of 
buddha dharma.” 

Her assistant worker told them that Miaoxin had not approved their 
understanding. Instead of being upset with her disapproval, the monks 
were ashamed of their lack of understanding. They got formally 
dressed, offered incense, bowed, and asked her to teach. 

Miaoxin said, “Come closer.” 

When the seventeen monks were still getting closer, Miaoxin said, 
“Tt is not that wind flaps. It is not that the banner flaps. It is not that 
your mind flaps.” 

Hearing her words, all seventeen monks had realization. They 
thanked her and formally became her students. Soon after, they went 
back to Shu without climbing up to Yangshan’s monastery. Indeed, 
this is nothing the bodhisattvas of three classes or ten stages can come 
up with. It is work transmitted by buddha ancestors from heir to heir. 

Thus, even nowadays when the position of abbot or head monk is 
not filled, you should request a nun who has attained dharma to 
assume the position. However aged or senior a monk may be, what’s 
the use of someone who has not attained the way? The master of an 
assembly should be a person of a clear eye. 

Those who are drowned in the body and mind of villagers are often 
so stubborn that even laypeople may ridicule them. It is not worth 
mentioning in buddha dharma. Some refuse to bow to female teachers 
who have received dharma transmission. Because these people lack 

knowledge and study, they are close to animals and far from buddha 
ancestors. 

If such people are deeply determined to throw their body and mind 
wholeheartedly into buddha dharma, buddha dharma takes pity on 
them without fail. Foolish humans and devas still have the capacity to 
feel the truth. How should the authentic dharma of all buddhas not 
have compassion to respond to sincere hearts? Even mud, rocks, sand, 
and pebbles have hearts to be affected by sincerity. 

Today, nuns stay in monasteries of Great Song. When the 
attainment of dharma by one of them is acknowledged and she is 
appointed abbess of a nunnery by the government, she ascends the 
teaching seat in the monastery where she is staying. All monks, 
including the abbot, assemble, stand, and listen to her dharma 
discourse. Some monks ask questions. This has been the custom since 
ancient times. 

One who has attained dharma is a true authentic buddha and 
should not been regarded as the same as before. When we see the 
person, someone who is new and extraordinary sees us. When we see 
the person, today sees today. 

When arhats, pratyeka-buddhas, or bodhisattvas of the three stages 
and ten classes come to a nun who maintains the treasury of the true 
dharma eye, they should bow and ask about dharma, and she should 
receive their bow. 

Why are men special? Emptiness is emptiness. Four great elements 
are four great elements. Five skandhas are five skandhas. Women are 
just like that. Both men and women attain the way. You should honor 
attainment of the way. Do not discriminate between men and women. 
This is the most wondrous principle of the buddha way. 

[monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen]; they are compassionate 
parents of sentient beings. They are like dragon princesses who have 
attained buddhahood. You should make an offering and respect them 
just as you respect buddha tathagatas. This is an authentic custom of 
the buddha way. Those who do not know this custom and do not 
receive it should be pitied. 

Written at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery on the clear-bright 
day [the fifteenth day from spring solstice], the second year of the 
En’o Era [1240]. 

POSTSCRIPT 

There have been women on the throne in Japan and China. The entire 
land is ruled by the monarch, and all people become her subjects. This 
is not done to respect the human form but to respect the position. 
Since of old, nuns have been respected solely for their attainment of 
dharma, and not for their human form. 

Again, if there is a nun who has become an arhat, all the merits that 
follow the four fruits come and assemble around her. Who among 
humans and devas comes close to the merits of the four fruits? No 
devas in the three realms can equal the merits; none of them are 
worth as much. So, they all revere the merits. 

Furthermore, who would not revere someone who has aroused the 
great heart of the bodhisattva and received transmission of the 
Tathagata’s authentic dharma? Not to revere such a person is 
naturally ridiculous. Not to revere your own _ unsurpassable 
enlightenment is to foolishly slander dharma. 

In Japan, some daughters of the emperor or ministers have positions 
similar to that of the empress. Some empresses hold Buddhist titles. 
Some of these women have shaven heads and other don’t. Monks who 
are greedy for fame and love to receive benefits rush to their houses 
and keep hitting their foreheads on these women’s footwear. This is 
even lower than being their retainers. There are many of those who 
become their servants and simply grow old. What a pity that they 
were born in this remote small nation and are not aware that this is a 
corrupt custom! This does not happen in India or China, but only in 
our country. It is lamentable. 

They shave their faces and heads in vain and break the Tathagata’s 
authentic dharma. It is a serious wrongdoing. It is sad that they forget 
that the worldly path is made of dreams, phantoms, and empty 
blossoms, and are bound as servants of these women. They act like 
this for the sake of a worldly path. Why don’t they revere those who 

should be revered for the sake of unsurpassable enlightenment? They 
act like this because they have little aspiration to regard dharma as 
weighty and they are not filled with the aspiration to seek dharma. 

When they greedily receive treasures, they think it is justifiable to 
receive donations, particularly from women. When you seek dharma 
you should have an aspiration that goes beyond this kind of thinking. 
If you do so, grass, trees, and walls will give out true dharma; all 
things in heaven and earth will offer true dharma. This is a principle 
you should know without fail. Even if you meet a true teacher, if you 
don’t arouse this aspiration to seek dharma, you won’t receive the 
benefit of dharma water. Endeavor thoroughly. 

the celestial demon’s method? 

What is the fault of women? What is the virtue of men? There are 
unwholesome men, and there are wholesome women. Hoping to hear 
dharma and leave the household does not depend on being female or 
male. 

Before becoming free from delusion, men and women are equally 
not free from delusion. At the time of becoming free from delusion 
and realizing the truth, there is no difference between men and 
women. 

If you vow for a long time not to look at women, do you leave out 
women when you vow to save numberless sentient beings? If you do 
so, you are not a bodhisattva. How can you call it the Buddha’s 
compassion? This is merely nonsense spoken by a soaking-drunk 
shravaka. Humans and devas should not believe in such a practice. 

If you exclude those who have broken precepts, you may exclude all 
bodhisattvas. If you exclude those who may break precepts in the 
future, you may exclude all bodhisattvas who arouse the aspiration for 
enlightenment. If you exclude them in such a way, you need to 
exclude everyone. Then, how can buddha dharma be actualized? To 
make such vows is the mad intention of fools who don’t know buddha 
dharma. It should be lamented. 

If you make such a vow [as not looking at women], is it that 
Shakyamuni Buddha and all bodhisattvas in his lifetime had broken 
precepts? Was their aspiration for enlightenment shallower than 
yours? Quietly ponder this. 

Was it not possible for the ancestor who was entrusted with dharma 
[Mahakashyapa] and all bodhisattvas during the Buddha’s lifetime to 
practice unless they made such a vow? With such a vow, not only are 
you unable to awaken women, you are also unable to go and hear 
women who have attained dharma and expound dharma for humans 
and devas. If you don’t go and hear them teach, you are not 
bodhisattvas but those outside the way. 

When we look at Great Song China, there are monks who seem to 
have trained for a long time merely counting the sands in the ocean 
[studying letters] and wandering around in the ocean of birth and 
death. On the other hand, there are women who have studied with 
teachers, endeavored in the way, and become guiding teachers of 
humans and devas. 

There was an old woman who refused to sell a rice cake [to Deshan] 
and discarded it. What a pity, there are male monks who count the 
sands in the ocean of teaching and have never dreamed of buddha 
dharma! 

When you see an object, learn to clarify it. Being scared of it and 
only trying to avoid it is the teaching and practice of shravakas in the 

Lesser Vehicle. If you give up the east and hide in the west, it is not 
that there is no object in the west. Even if you keep escaping, there 
are objects afar and objects nearby. This is not the way of 
emancipation. The farther away you push objects, the deeper you may 
be attached to them. 

reach. Who can block their practice? 

Having wondrous enlightenment is an unsurpassable stage. When 
women become buddhas of this stage, what in all directions cannot be 
thoroughly experienced? Who can try to block them and keep them 
from arriving at this stage? They attain the power of broadly 
illuminating all the ten directions. What is the point of creating a 
secluded area? 

Or, do you want to block heavenly women and keep them from 
getting to this secluded area? Do you also want to block goddesses and 
keep them from getting to this secluded area? Heavenly women and 
goddesses are those who have not yet become free from delusions. 
They are still sentient beings who transmigrate. Sometimes they break 
precepts and sometimes they don’t. Human females and animal 
females also at times break precepts, and at times don’t. Who is going 
to block the way of heavenly women and goddesses? They join the 
buddha assemblies of the past, present, and future and practice at the 
buddha places. If there are places different from the buddha places 
and buddha assemblies, who can trust them as places of buddha 
dharma? Such secluded areas are of utmost stupidity and only confuse 
worldly people. It is more foolish than foxes who try to protect their 
holes from humans. 

The ranks of the Buddha’s disciples, either bodhisattvas or 
shravakas, are: first, monks; second, nuns; third, laymen; and fourth, 
laywomen. This status has long been known among devas and 
humans. The secondranking disciples of the Buddha are higher than a 
wheel-turning king or Indra. There is no place these disciples cannot 
go. Their high status cannot be compared to that of kings or ministers 
of a small country in a remote land. 

When I look at practice places that do not allow nuns, I see that 
men who are country people, farmers, and woodcutters still go in 
freely. None of the kings, ministers, government officers, and prime 
ministers are prohibited from entering. 

Who, including farmers and these others, can compare to nuns in 
terms of the practice of the way and attainment of ranks [of the 
disciples of the Buddha]? Whether it is debated on the basis of 
worldly law or the buddha dharma, country people should not enter 
where nuns enter. 

The basis for a “secluded area” is an extreme confusion. This custom 
was initiated in our small country. What a pity that children of the 
compassionate father [the Buddha] of the three realms are blocked 
from entering some places in this country! 

Some of those who live in the so-called secluded areas do not avoid 
the ten unwholesome actions and commit the ten grave offenses. Is it 
that these areas are criminal places and those who do not commit 

crimes are excluded? Furthermore, the five grave crimes are regarded 
as the most serious of unwholesome actions. Those who live in the 
secluded areas may also commit such crimes. Such demon realms 
should be opened up. If they study the Buddha’s teaching and enter 
the Buddha’s world, it will certainly be an act to return the kindness 
of the Buddha. 

Were the ancient teachers who built the secluded areas aware of the 
meaning of creating it? From whom did they receive such a teaching? 
Whose seal of approval did they have? 

Buddhas, sentient beings, the great earth, vast space, who enter the 
great area established by all buddhas, are liberated from bondage and 
return to the source that is buddhas’ wondrous dharma. This being so, 
sentient beings who step into this area even once receive the buddha 
merit. It is the merit of not veering off and attaining purity. 

When one place of practice is established, all the worlds of 
phenomena are established. When it is once established, all the worlds 
of phenomena are established. There is an area of practice established 
with water. There is an area established with mind. There is also an 
area established with emptiness. This is something to be transmitted 
from person to person. 

To establish an area of practice, after sprinkling nectar water, taking 
refuge [in the three treasures], and purifying the ground, we chant a 
verse: “This area and all worlds of phenomena have been purely 
established.” Do senior monks who talk about the secluded areas 
know the meaning of this phrase? 

I suppose they don’t understand that in establishing an area of 
practice, all worlds of phenomena are established. Perhaps they are 
intoxicated with the wine of shravakas and regard a small area as a 
great area. I hope they will quickly come out of their everyday 
intoxication and merge with the worlds of phenomena that are a great 
area of all buddhas. 

All sentient beings should bow to and revere the merit of receiving 
the [Buddha’s] broad offering of awakening. Who would not call it the 
marrow of attaining the way? 

10 
V attey Sounps, Mounraw Cotors 

In tHe TRANSMISSION of unsurpassable, complete enlightenment by 

numberless buddha ancestors, various practices have arisen. Study 
such examples as ancient practitioners crushing their bones and Huike 
chopping off his arm. Embody in yourself the dedication of a boy 
spreading his hair on muddy ground for the Buddha to walk on. 

Slipping out of your old skin, not constrained by past views, you 
manifest immediately what has been dormant for boundless eons. As 
this very moment manifests, “I” don’t know, “who” doesn’t know, 
“you” have no expectations, and “the buddha eye” sees beyond seeing. 
This experience is beyond the realm of human thinking. 

something extraordinary. 

The valley sounds of Dongpo would refresh practitioners of later 
generations. How sad for those who miss the dharma of the 
manifested buddha body! How are mountain colors seen and valley 
sounds heard otherwise? Are mountain colors and valley sounds one 
phrase or half a phrase? Are they eighty-four thousand verses of 
scripture? You may regret that mountains and waters conceal sounds 
and colors, but you may also rejoice that the moment of 
enlightenment emerges through mountains and waters. 

The tongue [of the Buddha] does not take a break. The colors are 
beyond coming and going. Are the sounds and colors intimate when 
they are apparent, or are they intimate when they are obscured? Are 
they one whole expression or half an expression? During past springs 
and autumns, Dongpo had not seen or heard the mountains and 
waters. He saw and heard them for the first time that night. 
Bodhisattvas who study the way, open your minds to mountains 
flowing and to water not flowing. 

Dongpo had this awakening soon after he heard Changzong talk 
about insentient beings speaking dharma. Although Dongpo did not 
leap when he heard Changzong’s words, towering billows flew into 
the sky upon his hearing the sounds of the valley. Was it the valley 
sounds or the tide of awakening that jolted Dongpo? 

I suspect that Changzong’s voices of insentient beings speaking 
dharma are resounding even now, still blended with the sounds of the 
night’s stream. Who can fathom this water? Is it a bucketful or does it 
fill whole oceans? 

In the end let me ask you: Was it Dongpo who was awakened or the 
mountains and waters that were awakened? Who today sees right 
away with a clear eye the long, broad tongue and the unconditioned 
body [of the Buddha]? 

A cooking monk means one who supports the assembly by cooking 
rice, an equivalent of a kitchen assistant in our country. He followed 
this vow for years. 

One day Xiangyan said to Guishan, “My mind is undifferentiated; I 
cannot speak. Can you speak for me, Master?” 

Guishan said, “I wouldn’t mind explaining it to you, but if I did, you 
would resent me in the future.” 

Sometime later, Xiangyan went to the memorial site of Nanyang 
Huizhong, National Teacher Dazheng, at Mount Wudang, and built 
himself a hut. For company, he planted some bamboo. 

One day, while he was sweeping the path, a pebble flew up and 
struck a bamboo. At the unexpected sound, Xiangyan had thorough 
awakening. After bathing and cleansing himself, he faced Mount Gui, 
offered incense, prostrated himself, and said, “Master, if you had 
spoken for me at that time, this could not have happened. Your 

> 99 

kindness is deeper than my parents’.” Then he wrote a poem: 

One stroke dissolves knowledge. 
Struggle no longer needed. 

I will follow the ancient path 

not lapsing into quietude. 

Noble conduct beyond sound and form— 
no trace anywhere. 

Those who have mastered the way 

may call this an unsurpassable activity. 

He presented this poem to Guishan, who said, “This fellow has gone 
through.” 

Who does not enter with ripened causes? Who enters and then goes 
away? This awakening is not limited to Lingyun. If mountain colors 
were not the unconditioned body, how could this awakening have 
occurred? This is how he inherited dharma from Guishan. 

will they recognize the true dragon? 

Rujing, my late master, Old Buddha, called such people “pitiful 
fellows.” Because of unwholesome causes in previous lives, they do 
not seek dharma for the sake of dharma. In this life, they are 
suspicious of the true dragon when they see it, and are put off by 
genuine dharma when they encounter it. As their body, mind, flesh, 
and bones are not ready to follow dharma, they are unable to receive 
it. Because the lineage of the ancestral school started long ago, the 
aspiration for enlightenment has become a distant dream. How pitiful 
that people do not know about or see treasure even though they were 
born on a mountain of treasure! Where can they find dharma 
treasure? 

Among those who study the way, it is rare to find determination for 
true dharma. Such determination is the buddha radiance, the buddha 
mind, which has been transmitted from buddha to buddha. 

From the time of the Tathagata to this day, there have been many 
concerned with fame and gain in the study of the way. But if they 
meet a true master and turn toward true dharma, they will readily 
attain the way. Know that there is a disease for fame and gain among 
practitioners of the way. Among beginners as well as longtime 
practitioners, some have the opportunity to receive the teaching, 
while others don’t. Some long for the ancient way, but there are also 
demons who slander the teaching. Do not be attached or upset in 
either case. When you remember how few realize the three poisons as 
the three poisons, you no longer have resentment. 

Do not forget the joyful aspiration that arises when you first seek 
the way. When you arouse the aspiration for enlightenment, you do 
not seek dharma in order to be respected by others. You abandon 
fame and gain, and without veering off you aspire to attain the way. 
You do not look for respect or gifts from kings or ministers. Even 
though these may come to you, it should not be your primary 
intention to become entangled with humans and devas. But foolish 
people, even those with way-seeking mind, quickly forget their 
original aspiration and hope for offerings from humans and devas. 
Receiving such offerings, they rejoice that the merit of buddha 
dharma has arrived. When kings and ministers come to take refuge in 
the buddha, foolish teachers may feel rewarded. This is a hazard of 
practice. Remember to have compassion for them, but do not rejoice. 

Do you recall that the Buddha said these golden words? “Even now, 
at the time of the Tathagata, there are many who are antagonistic.” 
Thus, foolish people do not understand the wise; small-minded ones 
regard great sages as enemies. 

Also, the ancestors in India were sometimes overpowered by kings, 
those outside the way, or practitioners of the Two Lesser Vehicles. It 
was not that the ancestors lacked deep understanding or that those 
others excelled. 

When Bodhidharma came from India and stayed at Mount Song, 
neither the Emperor of Liang nor the Emperor of Wei understood him. 
At that time there were two critics, Scripture Master Bodhiruchi and 
Precept Master Guangtong. They were afraid they would lose their 
fame and gain to a true teacher, so they tried to block him. It was as if 
they were trying to cover the sun. They were worse than Devadatta, 
who lived at the time of the Buddha. What a pity! The fame and gain 
they were attached to would have been discarded like excrement by 
Bodhidharma. This behavior was the result of their lack of 

understanding buddha dharma. They were like dogs barking at a well- 
intentioned person. 

Do not resent such dogs, but vow to guide them with this blessing: 
“Dogs, arouse the aspiration for enlightenment.” An old sage said, 
“There are animals who have human faces.” On the other hand, there 
are demons who take refuge in the Buddha and make offerings to him. 

To hear with the ear is an everyday matter, but to hear with the eye 
is not always so. When you see buddha, you see self-buddha, other- 
buddha, a large buddha, a small buddha. Do not be frightened by a 
large buddha. Do not be put off by a small buddha. Just see large and 
small buddhas as valley sounds and mountain colors, as a broad, long 
tongue, and as eighty-four thousand verses. This is liberation, this is 
outstanding seeing. 

There is a common saying that expresses this: “Totally superb, 
totally solid.” An earlier buddha said: “It covers heaven, it 
encompasses the earth.” This is the purity of a spring pine, the 
magnificence of an autumn chrysanthemum. Just this. 

When you reach this realm, you are a master of humans and devas. 
If you teach others before arriving in this realm, you will do great 
harm to them. Without knowing the spring pine or the autumn 
chrysanthemum, how can you nourish others and how can you cut 
through their roots of confusion? 

With repentance you will certainly receive invisible help from 
buddha ancestors. Repent to the buddhas with mind and body. The 
power of repentance melts the roots of unwholesomeness. This is the 
single color of true practice, the true heart of trust, the true body of 
trust. 

11 

Rerraw FROM Unwuotesome Accion 

Ancent BUDDHAS SAY: 

Refrain from unwholesome action. 
Do wholesome action. 
Purify your own mind. 
This is the teaching of all buddhas. 

This teaching has been authentically transmitted from earlier 
buddhas to later buddhas of the future as the Seven Original Buddhas’ 
general precepts in the ancestral school. Later buddhas received these 
precepts from earlier buddhas. This teaching is not limited to the 
Seven Original Buddhas; it is the teaching of all buddhas. Thoroughly 
investigate this point. 

This dharma way of the Seven Original Buddhas is always the 
dharma way of the Seven Original Buddhas. Transmitting and 
receiving these precepts is a mutual activity. This is the teaching of all 
buddhas—the teaching, practice, and enlightenment of hundreds, 
thousands, and myriads of buddhas. 

Unwholesome action is [the manifestation of] one of the three 
natures: the wholesome action nature, the unwholesome action 
nature, and the neutral nature. The unwholesome action nature is 
unborn, just as the wholesome action nature and neutral nature are 
unborn. These three natures are also nondefiled and are reality. 
However, these three natures are manifested in various ways. 

As for unwholesome action, unwholesome action in this world and 
unwholesome action in other worlds are sometimes the same and 
sometimes different. Unwholesome action in former times and 
unwholesome action in the present time are sometimes the same and 
sometimes different. Unwholesome action in the deva world and 
unwholesome action in the human world are sometimes the same and 
sometimes different. Furthermore, there is a great difference between 
the buddha way and the worldly realm in what is called unwholesome 
action, wholesome action, or neutral action. Wholesome action and 
unwholesome action are time, although time is neither wholesome 
action nor unwholesome action. Wholesome action and unwholesome 

action are dharma, although dharma is neither wholesome action nor 
unwholesome action. As dharma is all-inclusive, unwholesome action 
is all-inclusive. As dharma is all-inclusive, wholesome action is all- 
inclusive. 

When you listen, study, practice, and realize unsurpassable, 
complete enlightenment, it is deep, vast, and wondrous. You learn this 
unsurpassable enlightenment either by following a teacher or by 
following a sutra. First you understand it as refrain from unwholesome 
action. If you do not understand it as refrain from unwholesome action, 
it is not true buddha dharma, but the speech of demons. Know that to 
understand unsurpassable enlightenment as refrain from unwholesome 
action is the true buddha dharma. 

Refrain from unwholesome action. This is not what ordinary people 
first interpret it to mean, although it may sound like it when we hear 
enlightenment expounded as a teaching of enlightenment. We 
understand in this way because it is an expression of unsurpassable 
enlightenment. It is words of enlightenment, therefore it is spoken 
enlightenment. Moved by what is spoken and heard—unsurpassable 
enlightenment—you vow to refrain from unwholesome action and 
practice refraining from unwholesome action. 

When you refrain from unwholesome action, the power of practice 
is immediately actualized. This is actualized on the scale of the entire 
earth, the entire universe, all time, and all dharmas. This is the scale 
of refrain from. 

This very person at this very moment abides in the place, comes 
from it, and goes to it, where no unwholesome action is created. No 
unwholesome action is created, although the person appears to be 
faced with the conditions of creating unwholesome action or of 
associating with those who create unwholesome action. 

When the power of refrain from is actualized, unwholesome action 
does not manifest as unwholesome action. Unwholesome action has 
no fixed form. You can pick it up or let it go. At the moment we 
understand this, we know that unwholesome action does not 
overcome a person and a person does not destroy unwholesome 
action. 

skandhas is immediately actualized. Without defiling the self of the 
four elements and the five skandhas, the four elements and the five 
skandhas of today are practiced. The power of the four elements and 
the five skandhas practiced at this moment actualizes the practice of 
the four elements and the five skandhas in the past. 

When you move mountains, rivers, and earth, as well as the sun, the 
moon, and stars to practice, they in return move you to practice. This 
is not the open eye of just one time, but the vital eye of all times. 
Because it is all the open eye, the vital eye of all times, you move all 
buddhas and all ancestors to practice, to listen to the teaching, and to 
realize the fruit. 

Since all buddhas and ancestors have not allowed the teaching, 
practice, and enlightenment to be divided, the teaching, practice, and 
enlightenment have not hindered all buddhas and ancestors. For this 
reason, when you move buddhas and ancestors to practice, none of 
them are separated from before or after your realization, either in the 
past, present, or future. At the time when sentient beings become 
buddhas and ancestors, they become buddhas and ancestors without 
hindering the buddhas and ancestors who already exist. Ponder this 
point closely while walking, abiding, sitting, and lying down 
throughout the twelve hours of the day. It is not that a sentient being 
is destroyed, taken away, or lost by becoming a buddha ancestor, but 
a sentient being is dropped away. 

You allow the cause and effect of wholesome and unwholesome 
actions to practice. It is not that you put cause and effect into action 
or that you create cause and effect, but cause and effect at times allow 
you to practice. 

The original face of cause and effect is already clear. Because this is 
dropping away, it is refrain from, unborn, impermanent, not ignoring, 
and not dropping. 

When you study in this way, you realize that unwholesome action is 
none other than refrained from. Assisted by this realization, you see 
through, and by sitting you cut through refraining from unwholesome 
action. 

At the beginning, middle, and end, as refraining from unwholesome 
action is actualized, then unwholesome action does not arise through 
causes and conditions. It is just refrain from. Unwholesome action does 
not cease through causes and conditions. It is just refrain from. As 
unwholesome action is all-inclusive, all dharmas are all-inclusive. 

Those who only know that unwholesome action arises through 
causes and conditions and do not see that causes and conditions 
themselves are refrain from should be pitied. Because buddha seeds 
come forth through conditions, conditions come forth through buddha 
seeds. 

It is not that unwholesome action does not exist, but it is just refrain 
from. It is not that unwholesome action does exist, it is just refrain 
from. Unwholesome action is not emptiness, but it is just refrain from. 
Unwholesome action is not form, but it is just refrain from. 

Unwholesome action is not refrain from, it is just refrain from. For 
example, a spring pine is neither nonexistent nor existent. It is refrain 
from. Autumn chrysanthemum is neither nonexistent nor existent. It is 
refrain from. All buddhas are neither nonexistent nor existent. They 
are refrain from. Pillars, lanterns, whisk, and staff are neither existent 
nor nonexistent. They are refrain from. Self is neither existent nor 
nonexistent. It is refrain from. 

Studying in this way actualizes the fundamental point. The 
fundamental point is actualized. Investigate this through host [self] 
and investigate this through guest [other]. 

Since this is so, regretting that you have created what should not be 
created is also inevitably the practice of refrain from. Nevertheless, 
intending to create unwholesome action just because you hear that 
unwholesome action is refrain from is just like walking north to try to 
get to the southern county of Yue. 

Refrain from and unwholesome action are not only “the well seeing 
the donkey,” but also the well seeing the well [inseparable from each 
other], the donkey seeing the donkey, the person seeing the person, 
the mountain seeing the mountain. Just as we speak in this way, 
unwholesome action is refrain from. 

It is said, “Buddha’s true dharma body is like the empty sky. It 
manifests forms responding to conditions just like the moon reflected 
in the water.” Because it is refrain from that responds to things, it is 
refrain from that manifests forms. It is just like emptiness that claps 
toward the left and toward the right [without hindrance], like the 
moon reflected in water. The moon is fully immersed in the water. In 
this way refrain from is actualized without doubt. 

Do wholesome action. This wholesome action is [manifestation of] 
one of the three natures. Although there are many varieties of 
wholesome action, there is no wholesome action that is already 
actualized and waiting for someone to practice it. At the very moment 
of doing wholesome action, there is no wholesome action that does 
not come forth. 

Although myriads of wholesome actions are formless, they arrive at 
the place where wholesome action is done faster than a magnet 
drawing iron. Its power is stronger than a vairambhaka storm. The 
great earth, mountains, rivers, the lands of the world, or the 
increasing effect of action cannot hinder the intentional encounter of 
wholesome action. 

However, there is a principle that views of wholesome action vary 
in the world. The views define what is wholesome action. It is just the 
same as all buddhas in the past, present, and future expounding 
dharma. Buddhas expounding dharma while they are in the world is 
just time. They expound nondiscriminating dharma according to their 
life spans and the dimensions of their bodies. 

This being so, wholesome action by a person who practices trust is 
far different from wholesome action by a person who practices 
dharma. Nevertheless, they are not two separate dharmas. It is like a 
shramana’s keeping the precepts and a bodhisattva’s breaking the 
precepts. 

Wholesome action does not arise due to causes and conditions, nor 
does it cease due to causes and conditions. Although wholesome 
action is all phenomena, all phenomena are not wholesome action. 
Causes and conditions, as well as wholesome actions, equally begin in 
completeness and end in completeness. 

Although wholesome action is do, it is not self, and not known by 
the self. It is not other, and not known by other. In knowing, there is 
self and other. In seeing, there is self and other. Thus, the vital eye of 
each is within the sun and within the moon. 

This is do. At the very moment of do, the fundamental point is 
actualized. Yet, it is not the beginning or the end of the fundamental 
point. It is not the eternal abiding of the fundamental point. Should 
this not be called do? 

Although practicing wholesome action is do, it cannot be discerned. 
Although this do is a vital eye, it cannot be discerned. Do is not 
actualized for the sake of discernment. Discernment by the vital eye is 
not the same as discernment by something else. 

Wholesome action is neither existent nor nonexistent, neither form 
nor emptiness. It is just do. Actualizing at any place or actualizing at 
any moment is inevitably do. This do always actualizes all that is 
wholesome action. Although actualizing do is the fundamental point, 
it is neither arising nor ceasing, neither causes nor conditions. The 
entering, abiding, and departing of do is also like this. When one 
wholesome action among all wholesome actions is do, all things, the 
whole body, and the true ground altogether are moved to do. 

Both cause and effect of wholesome action actualize the 
fundamental point through do. Cause is not before and effect is not 
after. Cause is complete and effect is complete. Cause is all-inclusive 
just as dharma is all-inclusive. Effect is all-inclusive just as dharma is 
all-inclusive. Although effect is experienced, induced by cause, one is 
not before and the other is not after. We say that both before and after 
are all-inclusive. 

buddha dharma and did not understand the buddha dharma. 

Even if you caution against doing unwholesome action by intention, 
and encourage doing wholesome action by intention, you actualize 
refrain from. On the whole, in the buddha dharma, what you first hear 
from a teacher and what you finally achieve are the same. This is 
called genuine from head to tail. It is also called “inconceivable cause, 
inconceivable effect,” or “buddha cause, buddha effect.” Cause and 
effect in the buddha way is neither a heterogeneous maturing nor a 
homogenous stream. Since this is so, without buddha cause, buddha 
effect cannot be experienced. Because Daolin expressed this essential 
teaching, it was buddha dharma. 

Even if unwholesome action fills worlds upon worlds, and swallows 
up all things upon all things, refrain from is emancipation. Wholesome 
action is wholesome action in the beginning, middle, and end. It is the 
true essence, marks, substance, and activity of do, as it is. Because 
Zhuyi did not follow this track, he said, “Even a three-year-old can say 
this.” Lacking the capacity for true expression, he uttered these words. 

What a pity, Zhuyi! Why did you say this? Because you have not 
touched upon buddha wind [the buddha teaching]. Do you know 
about a three-year-old child? Do you understand the principle of a 
child’s inherent capacity? Those who understand know that a three- 
year-old child also understands all buddhas in the three worlds. How 
can those who cannot understand all buddhas in the three worlds 
understand a three-year-old child? Do not think that to face a person 
is to understand a person. Do not think that not to face a person is not 
to understand a person. 

Those who understand a speck of dust understand the entire world. 
Those who master one thing master myriad things. Those who do not 
master myriad things do not master one thing. Because those who 
study mastering see myriad things as well as one thing through 
penetration, those who study a speck of dust simultaneously study the 
entire world. 

It is extremely foolish to assume that a three-year-old child cannot 
express buddha dharma and that what a three-year-old child says is 
easy. The real issue here, to clarify birth and to clarify death, is the 
great matter of causes and effects in the buddha house. 

An old master said, “When you are born, you have the capacity to 
roar like a lion.” The capacity to roar like a lion is a virtue of the 
Tathagata turning the dharma wheel. It is turning the dharma wheel. 

Another old master said, “The coming and going of birth and death 
is the true human body.” 

In this way, to clarify the true human body and to have the virtue of 
roaring like a lion are indeed the great matter, and are not to be taken 
lightly. For this reason, to understand the words and practice of a 

three-year-old child is a great matter of causes and conditions. This is 
sometimes the same and sometimes not the same as the words and the 
practice of all buddhas in the three worlds. 

Because Zhuyi was ignorant and had never heard the expression of 
the three-year-old child, without even questioning it he responded as 
he did. He did not even hear Daolin’s voice of the way, which was 
louder than thunder. He wanted to point out that Daolin failed to hit 
the mark and said, “a three-year-old child could say it.” In this way he 
failed to hear the lion’s roar of the child and missed the turning 
dharma wheel of the Zen master. 

Daolin pitied him and responded further: Even if a three-year-old 
child can say this, even an eighty-year-old person cannot practice it. This 
means that the words of the three-year-old child hit the mark. 
Thoroughly study these words. Even an eighty-year-old person cannot 
practice it. Thoroughly investigate these words. 

The child’s expression is entrusted to you; it is not entrusted to the 
child. The old person’s practice of the unattainable is entrusted to you; 
it is not entrusted to the old person. To understand, speak, and live in 
this way is the point of the buddha dharma. 

Presented to the assembly of the Kosho Horin Monastery, Uji County, 
Yamashiro Province, on the harvest moon day [the fifteenth day], the 
eighth month, the second year of the En’o Era [1240]. 

12 
Tue Tive Bzwe 

An ANCIENT BUDDHA [Yaoshan] said: 

For the time being, stand on top of the highest peak. 

For the time being, proceed along the bottom of the deepest 
ocean. 

For the time being, three heads and eight arms [of a fighting 
demon]. 

For the time being, an eight- or sixteen-foot body [of the 
Buddha]. 

For the time being, a staff or whisk. 

For the time being, a pillar or lantern. 

For the time being, the children of [common families] Zhang and 
Li. 

For the time being, the earth and sky. 

For the time being here means time itself is being, and all being is 
time. A golden sixteen-foot body is time; because it is time, there is 
the radiant illumination of time. Study it as the twelve hours of the 
present. Three heads and eight arms is time; because it is time, it is not 
separate from the twelve hours of the present. 

one another. The way-seeking mind arises in this moment. A way- 
seeking moment arises in this mind. It is the same with practice and 
with attaining the way. 

Thus, the self setting itself out in array sees itself. This is the 
understanding that the self is time. 

Three heads and eight arms move forward as your time being. It 
looks as if they are far away, but they are here and now. The eight- or 
sixteen-foot body moves forward as your time being. It looks as if it is 
nearby, but it is exactly here. Thus, a pine tree is time, bamboo is 
time. 

At this moment, you enlighten the entire world with three heads 
and eight arms; you enlighten the entire world with the sixteen-foot 
golden body. To fully actualize the entire world with the entire world 
is called thorough practice. 

To fully actualize the golden body with the golden body—to arouse 
the way-seeking mind, practice, attain enlightenment, and enter 
nirvana—is nothing but being, nothing but time. 

Mountains are time. Oceans are time. If they were not time, there 
would be no mountains or oceans. Do not think that mountains and 
oceans here and now are not time. If time is annihilated, mountains 
and oceans are annihilated. As time is not annihilated, mountains and 
oceans are not annihilated. 

This being so, the morning star appears, the Tathagata appears, the 
eye appears, and holding up a flower appears. Each is time. If it were 
not time, it could not be thus. 

13 

Power OF THE Rose 

Bopsmrarma, THE HicH Ancestor of Mount Song, alone transmitted 

the authentic teaching of the robe to China. He is the twenty-eighth- 
generation ancestor from Shakyamuni Buddha. In India twenty-eight 
generations of ancestors transmitted this teaching from heir to heir. 
The Twenty-eighth Ancestor entered China and became the First 
Ancestor there. After transmission of the teaching through five 
generations in China, Huineng of Caoxi became the thirty-third- 
generation ancestor. He is called the Sixth Chinese Ancestor. 

Huineng, who would later become Zen Master Dajian, received a 
robe from Hongren at Mount Huangmei and maintained it for the rest 
of his life. This robe is still enshrined at the Baolin Monastery in 
Mount Caoxi, where he taught. 

Over the generations, one emperor after another requested that the 
robe be brought to the palace. When it was, people made offerings 
and bowed to it. Thus, the robe has been worshipped as a sacred 
object. Emperors Zong, Su, and Dai of the Tang Dynasty occasionally 
invited the robe to be brought to the palace. Each time it was brought 
and each time it was returned, an imperial messenger accompanied it. 

Once, when Emperor Dai sent this buddha robe back to Mount 
Caoxi, he proclaimed: “We order Liu Chongjing, the Nation’s Chief 
General, to transport the robe with great respect. We regard this robe 
as a national treasure. You should place it in the main temple with 
appropriate procedures. Make sure that the monks are notified of our 
command and protect the robe without fail.” 

There is more merit in seeing the buddha robe, hearing the teaching 
of it, and making offerings to it than in presiding over the billion 
worlds. To be the king of a nation where the robe exists is an 
outstanding birth among innumerable births and deaths; it is indeed 
the most supreme birth. 

heir. Teachers who were not in this lineage were not given the buddha 
kashaya. 

A transmission in the lineage of Bodhisattva Bhadrapala, a 
descendant of Prajnatara, the Twenty-seventh Ancestor, reached 
Dharma Teacher Sengzhao, but no buddha kashaya was transmitted to 
him. 

Daoxin, the Fourth Ancestor in China, guided Niutou, who would 
later become Zen Master Farong, but did not give him a buddha 
kashaya. 

Although the power of the Tathagata’s dharma is not lacking and its 
benefit is broad for thousands of years, even for those who did not 
receive heir-to-heir transmission of kashaya, those who received 
authentic heir-to-heir transmission of kashaya are not the same as 
those who didn’t. Therefore, when humans or devas receive a robe, 
they should receive one authentically transmitted by the buddha 
ancestors. 

In India and China, even laypeople received kashaya in the Ages of 
True Dharma and Imitation Dharma. Nowadays, in the lands remote 
from India when the buddha dharma is thin and declining, those who 
shave their heads and faces, calling themselves the Buddha’s disciples, 
do not maintain the kashaya. They do not believe, know, or 
understand that the kashaya is to be maintained. What a pity! How 
can they know its form, color, and measurement? How can they know 
the proper way to wear it? 

We are thousands of miles away from the land where the Buddha 
was born, on the other side of mountains and oceans. We are unable 
to go there, but due to the influence of our past good actions, we are 
no longer blocked by mountains and oceans nor excluded by our 
ignorance in this remote place. We have met the true teaching and are 
determined to practice it day and night. We maintain, uphold, and 
guard the kashaya continuously. 

Thus, the power of the kashaya is actualized through our practice, 
not merely with one or two buddhas but with as many buddhas as the 
sands of the Ganges. Even if it is your own practice, you should revere 
it, rejoice in it, and wholeheartedly express gratitude for the profound 
gift transmitted by the ancestral teachers. Even animals repay 
kindness; how should humans not recognize the kind help by others? 
If you do not understand kindness, you are more foolish than animals. 

The power of the buddha robe, the buddha dharma, cannot be 
known and understood except by ancestors who transmit the Buddha’s 
true dharma. When you follow the path of buddhas, you should 
joyfully appreciate the buddha robe, the buddha dharma. You should 
continue this authentic transmission even for hundreds and thousands 
of future generations. This is buddha dharma freshly actualized. 

Authentic transmission is not like mixing water with milk, but 
rather like the crown prince being installed as king. You can use milk 
mixed with water if there is not enough milk. But don’t mix milk with 
oil, lacquer, or wine. If there is authentic transmission, even an 
ordinary teacher of a mediocre lineage can be regarded as milk. How 
much more so with the authentic transmission of buddhas and 
ancestors? It is like the installation of the crown prince. Even worldly 
people say that a king only wears the former king’s robe. How could a 
buddha’s child wear a robe other than the buddha robe? 

Since the tenth year of the Yongping Era [67 cx.] of Emperor 
Xiaoming of the Later Han Dynasty, monks and laypeople often went 
back and forth between India and China. But none of them said that 
they had met an ancestor in India who had authentic transmission 
from buddha ancestors. Thus, there was no lineage of face-to-face 
transmission from the Tathagata. These seekers only studied with 
masters of sutras and treatises and brought back Sanskrit scriptures. 
They did not say they had met ancestors who had authentically 
inherited buddha dharma. They did not say there were ancestors who 
had transmitted the buddha kashaya. Thus, we know that those people 
did not enter deeply into the chamber of buddha dharma and clarify 
the meaning of the correct transmission of the buddha ancestors. 

The Tathagata Shakyamuni entrusted the treasury of the true 
dharma eye, the unsurpassable enlightenment, to Mahakashyapa along 
with the kashaya which had been transmitted by his teacher, 

Kashyapa Buddha. The robe was transmitted heir to heir for thirty- 
three generations, to Huineng. The shape, color, and measurements 
were intimately transmitted. After that, dharma descendants of 
Qingyuan and Nanyue, transmitting the dharma, sewed and wore the 
ancestral dharma. The teaching of washing and maintaining the robe 
was not known except by those who studied in the chamber of a 
master who had transmitted this teaching face to face. 

For hundreds of years during the Liang, Chen, Sui, Tang, and Song 
dynasties, a number of scholars of Mahayana and Hinayana gave up 
lecturing on scripture, having learned that it was not the ultimate 
teaching. Intending to study the authentically transmitted dharma of 
buddha ancestors, they would invariably drop off their old robes and 
receive an authentically transmitted kashaya. This is departing from 
the limited and turning to the genuine. 

The Tathagata’s dharma is rooted in India, where teachers in the 
past and present have gone beyond the limited views of ordinary 
people. As the realms of buddhas and the realms of sentient beings are 
neither limited nor unlimited, the teaching, practice, practitioner, and 
essence of Mahayana and Hinayana cannot be contained by ordinary 
people’s views. However, in China, practitioners often ignore 
teachings from India and regard recent interpretations with limited 
views as buddha dharma, which is a mistake. 

Those who arouse an aspiration and wish to receive a kashaya 
should receive an authentically transmitted one. Do not receive a 
kashaya with a new design. What is called an authentically 
transmitted kashaya is what has been transmitted from Bodhidharma 
and Huineng, heir to heir directly from the Tathagata, without a 
generation’s gap. This is the authentically transmitted kashaya worn 
by dharma heirs and dharma descendants. Newly designed kashayas 
in China are not appropriate. The kashayas worn by monks from India 
in the past and present are all like the buddha ancestors’ authentically 
transmitted kashayas. None of them wore kashayas like those newly 
made by monks of the Precept School in China. Those who are 
ignorant believe in the kashayas of the Precept School, but those who 
have clear understanding do not. 

The power of the kashaya transmitted by buddha ancestors is clear 
and easy to accept. The authentic transmission has been handed down 
from person to person. The true form has been shown to us directly. It 
still exists, as this dharma has been inherited up to the present. The 
ancestors who received a kashaya are all teachers and students who 
merged their minds and received dharma. Therefore, you should make 
a kashaya in the manner authentically transmitted by buddha 
ancestors. 

As this is the authentic transmission, ordinary people and sages, 
humans and devas, as well as dragon kings, all know it. To be born to 
the abundance of this dharma and to wear a kashaya even once and 
maintain it for a moment is no other than wearing an amulet that 
assures the attainment of unsurpassable enlightenment. 

When one phrase or one verse permeates your body and mind, it 
becomes a seed of illumination for limitless kalpas, and this brings you 

to unsurpassable enlightenment. When one dharma or one wholesome 
action permeates your body and mind, it is also like this. 

Moment by moment a thought appears and disappears without 
abiding. Moment by moment a body appears and disappears without 
abiding. Yet, the power of practice always matures. A kashaya is 
neither made nor not made, neither abiding nor not abiding. It is the 
ultimate realm of buddha and buddha. A practitioner who receives it 
unfailingly attains and experiences its power. 

Those who have no wholesome past actions cannot see, wear, 
receive, and understand a kashaya even if they live for one, two, or 
innumerable lifetimes. When I look at practitioners in China and 
Japan, I see that there are those who are able to wear a kashaya and 
those who are not. Their ability to wear one does not depend on how 
noble or lowly they are, how wise or ignorant they are, but on their 
wholesome past actions. Therefore, those who have received a 
kashaya should rejoice in their wholesome past actions, without 
doubting their accumulated merit. Those who have not received a 
kashaya should wish for one. Try to sow a seed of a kashaya 
immediately in this lifetime. Those who cannot receive one because of 
their hindrances should repent to buddha tathagatas and the three 
treasures. 

How strongly people in other countries wish to have the Tathagata’s 
authentic transmission of the dharma of the robe in their countries, 
just as in China! How deep their regret is and how sorrowful they are 
that they do not have it! With what fortune have we encountered the 
authentic transmission of the World-Honored One’s robe dharma! This 
is due to the great power of our having nurtured prajna in the past. 

Now, in this unwholesome time—the Age of Declining Dharma— 
people have no regret that they do not have authentic transmission, 
but they are jealous that others do. They seem like a gang of demons. 
What they believe and what they practice are not genuine, but only 
bound by their past actions. They should take refuge in the 
authentically transmitted buddha dharma as the true place of return in 
studying the buddha way. 

You should know that a kashaya is what all buddhas respect and 
take refuge in. It is the buddha body, the buddha mind. It is called the 
clothing of emancipation, the robe of the field of benefaction, the robe 
beyond form, the unsurpassable robe, the robe of patience, the 
Tathagata’s robe, the robe of great love and great compassion, the 
robe as a victorious banner, and the robe of unsurpassable, complete 
enlightenment. Receive it indeed with utmost respect. This is why you 
should not alter it. 

Either silk or common cloth is used as the material for a robe, 
according to the situation. It is not necessarily true that common cloth 
is pure and silk is impure. On the other hand, it would be 
unreasonable and laughable to exclude common cloth and only choose 
silk. According to the usual practice of buddhas, the robe of discarded 
cloth is regarded as excellent. 

There are ten types of discarded cloth, including burned cloth, cloth 
chewed by oxen, cloth chewed by rats, and cloth from corpses. People 
throughout India throw away such cloth on streets or fields, just as we 
do with excrement-cleaning cloth. So, a robe of discarded cloth is 
actually called a robe of excrement-cleaning cloth. Practitioners pick 
up such cloths, wash them, and repair them for use. There can be 
pieces of silk and common cloth among them. Give up discrimination 
between silk and common cloth, and study the meaning of discarded 
cloth. Long ago a monk washed such a robe of discarded cloth in 
Anavatapta Lake, when the dragon king rained down flowers in 
admiration and respect. 

There are teachers in the Lesser Vehicles who groundlessly say that 
threads are incarnated bodies of the tree god. Practitioners of the 
Great Vehicle should laugh about it. Which thread is not an incarnated 
body? Those who have ears to hear about incarnated bodies may not 
have the eyes to see them. Know that among the cloths you pick up, 
there can be common cloth and silk. Because cloth is made differently 
in different regions, it is difficult to identify the materials. Eyes cannot 
see the difference. Do not discuss whether the material you pick up is 
silk or common cloth. Just call it discarded cloth. 

Even if a human or a deva turns into discarded cloth, it is not 
sentient but just discarded cloth. Even if a pine or chrysanthemum 
turns into discarded cloth, it is not insentient but just discarded cloth. 
Discarded cloth is actualized only when you accept that discarded 
cloth is beyond silk or common cloth, not gold, silver, or a pearl. 
Discarded cloth is not yet dreamed of by those who have not yet given 
up discrimination between silk and common cloth. 

Venerable Shanavasin is the third entrusted ancestor of the dharma 
treasury. He was born wearing a layperson’s robe. The robe turned 
into a kashaya when he became a monk. 

Nun Shuklayah was born with a kashaya, birth after birth, and in 
between, as a result of offering a carpet to the Buddha. 

When we meet Shakyamuni Buddha and leave the household, the 
lay clothing we acquire at birth immediately turns into a kashaya, just 
as Shanavasin’s did. Thus, a kashaya is neither silk nor common cloth. 
The power of buddha dharma transforms body, mind, and all things in 
this way. 

It is clear that our body, mind, and environs are immediately 
transformed when we leave the household and receive the precepts. 
But we often do not notice this because of our ignorance. This effect of 
buddha dharma is applied not only to Shanavasin and Nun Shuklayah 
but to us all. Do not doubt this great benefit. Endeavor to clarify this 
point. The kashaya that covers the body of one who has received the 
precepts is not limited to common cloth or silk. The Buddha’s 
transformation is beyond our comprehension. The pearl hidden inside 
the robe is beyond the understanding of those who count letters. 

This is how to wash a kashaya: You put it unfolded into a clean 
wooden tub, cover it with thoroughly boiled water that has been 
purified by incense, and leave it for one hour [roughly two hours by 
the modern way of counting]. Another way is to boil water mixed 
with pure ash and cover the kashaya until the water cools. Nowadays 
it is common to use ash water. It is called aku no yu in Japan. 

When the ash water cools, rinse the kashaya many times with clear, 
hot water. Do not scrub it with your hands or stomp on it. After thus 
removing sweat and oil stains, mix fragrant powder of sandalwood or 
aloeswood with cold water and rinse the kashaya in it. 

Then, hang it on a clean rod to dry. When it is completely dry, fold 
it and put it high on the altar. Burn incense, spread flower petals on 
the altar, circumambulate the kashaya clockwise a few times, and bow 
to it. After three, six, or nine full bows, kneel and put your palms 
together, then hold up the kashaya with both hands, chant the 
kashaya verse, and put it on properly. 

If there are sentient beings overcome by hunger or thirst, 
poverty-stricken, or in most humble positions, as well as hungry 
ghosts, who obtain a piece of a kashaya no bigger than a hand, I 
vow that such beings will be satisfied with food and drink, and 
that their wishes will be immediately actualized. 

If there are sentient beings who are in conflict, harbor grudges, 
and fight one another, or if there are devas, dragons, gandharvas, 
asuras, garudas, kinnaras, mahoragas, kumbhandas, pisachas, 
humans, or nonhumans who fight one another, I vow that if such 
beings think of a kashaya, then compassionate mind, gentle mind, 
generous mind, serene mind, wholesome mind will rise and they 
will attain purity. 

If people who battle, quarrel, or are in legal conflicts bring a 
patch of kashaya for self-protection and pay respect to it, they 
will always be victorious and overcome difficulties, because 
others will not harm, confuse, or belittle them. 

Ratnakosha Buddha, if my kashaya did not possess the above 
five sacred powers, I would be deceiving all buddhas who have 
been present for limitless eons in the world of the ten directions, 
and I would not achieve unsurpassable, complete enlightenment 
for conducting buddha activities in the future; thus I would be 
without wholesome dharma and unable to overcome those who 
are outside the way. 

Good assembly, Ratnakosha Buddha then extended his golden 
right arm, stroked Mahakaruna Bodhisattva on the head, and said 
in admiration, “Splendid, splendid, courageous bodhisattva. Your 
vow is a rare treasure that expresses great wisdom. You will 
actualize unsurpassable, complete enlightenment and your 
kashaya robe will possess those five sacred powers and cause 
immeasurable benefit.” 

Good assembly, upon hearing Ratnakosha Buddha’s admiration, 
Mahakaruna Bodhisattva rejoiced and became exuberant. Then 
Ratnakosha Buddha extended his golden right arm, with long and 
slender fingers and palm as soft as a feathery celestial robe. 
Ratnakosha Buddha stroked the bodhisattva on the head and 
turned him into a youth of twenty. 

Good assembly, all the devas, dragons, gandharvas, humans, 
and nonhumans placed their hands together and dedicated 
flowers and music to Mahakaruna Bodhisattva. They continued to 
admire the bodhisattva while they sat still. 

From the time when Shakyamuni Buddha was alive in this world up 
to the present, these five sacred powers of the kashaya have been 
described in sutras and precept texts for bodhisattvas and shravakas. 
Indeed, the kashaya is a buddha robe of all buddhas of the past, 
present, and future. Although the power of all kashayas is unlimited, 
receiving a kashaya from the heritage of Shakyamuni Buddha excels 
receiving a kashaya from the heritage of other buddhas. 

The reason for this is that Shakyamuni Buddha made these vows to 
initiate the power of the kashaya in his former life as Mahakaruna 
Bodhisattva when he made five hundred vast vows to Ratnakosha 
Buddha. The power of the kashaya is unlimited and beyond thought. 
Thus, what transmits the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of the World- 
Honored One is the kashaya robe. Ancestors who have transmitted the 
treasury of the true dharma eye have always authentically transmitted 
a kashaya. 

Sentient beings who maintain and pay respect to a kashaya have 
always attained the way within two or three lifetimes. Even wearing 
the kashaya as a joke or for profit can lead to attainment of the way. 

Because of my high status and proper conduct, I grew arrogant 
and broke a precept. I fell into hell and experienced various 
punishments. In my next birth I met Shakyamuni Buddha, left the 
household, attained six miraculous powers, and became an arhat. 
From this I know that if you leave the household and receive 
precepts, even if you break a precept, you can become an arhat 
because of the merit of the precepts you have received. But you 
cannot attain the way if you only create unwholesome deeds 
without receiving the precepts. I was once a criminal falling in 
and out of hell. If a mere criminal dies and enters hell, there is 
nothing to attain. So, you should know that even if you break a 
precept, you can attain the fruit of the way.” 

The cause of Nun Utpalavarna’s becoming an arhat in this story is 
none other than putting on a kashaya for a joke. In her second birth, 
she became a nun at the time of Kashyapa Buddha, and in her third 
birth she became a great arhat at the time of Shakyamuni Buddha and 
accomplished the three types of knowledge and six miraculous 
powers. The three types of knowledge are the celestial eye, knowing 
the past, and knowing how to remove desires. The six miraculous 
powers are the power of celestial activity, insight into others’ minds, 
the celestial eye, the celestial ear, knowing the past, and removing 
desires. 

Indeed, a mere criminal dies in vain and enters hell. The criminal 
comes out of hell and becomes a criminal. As Utpalavarna had a 
causal connection with the precepts, even though she broke a precept, 
she was able to attain the way. As a result of putting on a kashaya for 
a joke, she could attain the way even in her third birth, How much 
more likely you are to attain the way if you arouse a pure heart of 
trust and put on a kashaya for the sake of unsurpassable 
enlightenment! Can the merit not be complete? Even further, the 
merit of maintaining a kashaya with utmost respect throughout a 
lifetime is vast and boundless. 

Those who arouse the aspiration for enlightenment should 
immediately receive a kashaya. To encounter this fortunate life but 
not to plant buddha seeds is regrettable. Having received a human 
body in this world, Jambudvipa, you have a chance to meet 
Shakyamuni Buddha’s dharma, to share life with ancestors who are 
heirs of buddha dharma, and to receive a kashaya that has been 
directly transmitted from person to person. It would be a pity not to 
do this and to spend your life in vain. 

In the authentic transmission of the kashaya, only transmission 
through the ancestors is authentic heritage. Transmission through 
other teachers cannot compare to this. However, even if you receive a 

kashaya from a teacher without transmission, the merit is profound. 
How much more merit there is in receiving a kashaya from an 
authentic teacher of heir-to-heir, face-to-face transmission! Indeed, in 
this way you become a dharma child and a dharma grandchild of the 
Tathagata. This is truly to inherit the Tathagata’s skin, flesh, bones, 
and marrow. 

The kashaya is transmitted through buddhas of the ten directions in 
the past, present, and future without a break. Buddhas, bodhisattvas, 
shravakas, and pratyeka-buddhas of the ten directions in the past, 
present, and future maintain it. 

nineteen, twenty-one, twenty-three, or twenty-five. The first three 
kinds of great robes consist of panels of one short and two long 
pieces of cloth. The second three kinds of great robes consist of 
panels of one short and three long pieces of cloth. The last three 
kinds of great robes consist of panels of one short and four long 
pieces of cloth. A robe with more panels is not standard.” 

Upali said, “Great virtuous World-Honored One, how many 
sizes of great robes are there?” 

The Buddha said, “There are three sizes: large, medium, and 
small. A large robe measures three hasta [the length from elbow 
to middle fingertip] vertically and five hasta horizontally. A small 
robe measures two and a half hasta vertically and four and a half 
hasta horizontally. A medium robe measures between these two.” 

Upali said, “Great virtuous World-Honored One, how many 
panels does an uttarasangha [outer] robe have?” 

The Buddha said, “It has seven panels. Each panel consists of 
one short and two long pieces of cloth.” 

Upali said, “Great virtuous World-Honored One, what are the 
sizes of an uttarasangha robe?” 

The Buddha said, “There are three sizes. A large robe measures 
three hasta vertically and five hasta horizontally. A small robe 
measures half a hasta less each way. A medium robe measures 
between these two.” 

Upali said, “Great virtuous World-Honored One, how many 
panels does an antarvasa [inner] robe have?” 

The Buddha said, “It has five panels. Each panel consists of one 
short and one long piece of cloth.” 

Upali said, “Great virtuous World-Honored One, what are the 
sizes of an antarvasa robe?” 

The Buddha said, “There are three sizes: large, medium, and 
small. A large antarvasa robe measures three hasta vertically and 
five hasta horizontally. A small and a medium antarvasa robe 
measure the same as the uttarasangha robe.” 

The Buddha also said, “There are two other types of antarvasa 
robe. One measures two hasta vertically and five hasta 
horizontally. The other measures two hasta vertically and four 
hasta horizontally.” 

The sanghati robe is the double robe. The uttarasangha robe is the 
outer robe. The antarvasa robe is the inner or under robe. The 
sanghati robe is also called the great robe, the visiting palace robe, or 
the expounding dharma robe. The uttarasangha robe is a seven-panel 
robe. It is a less formal robe for joining the assembly. The antarvasa is 
a five-panel robe, which is an informal or a work robe. 

Always maintain these three types of robes. Also, there is a sixty- 
panel sanghati robe. Maintain this. 

Some sources say that the height of human bodies varies 
corresponding to the maximum life span, which ranges between 
80,000 years and 100 years. Other sources say that the height of 
human bodies does not vary. It is a correct teaching to say it does not 
vary. But the heights of a buddha’s body and a human body are 
different. Human bodies can be measured, but the buddha’s body 
cannot. Thus, when Shakyamuni Buddha wore the past Kashyapa 
Buddha’s robe, it was neither too long nor too wide. When the future 
Maitreya Tathagata wears Shakyamuni Buddha’s robe, it will be 
neither too short nor too narrow. Be aware that a buddha’s body is 
beyond long and short. Brahma, the king of gods who resides high in 
the form realm, could not see the top of the Buddha’s head. 
Maudgalyayana, a disciple of the Buddha, traveled all the way to the 
Heaven of Shining Banner and still heard the Buddha’s voice. Thus, 
the Buddha was seen and heard near and far. How marvelous it is! All 
the merits of the Tathagata are like this. Keep this in mind. 

by ordinary human beings. 

Lay bodhisattvas also wear kashayas. In China, Emperor Wu of the 
Liang Dynasty and Emperor Yang of the Sui Dynasty both wore a 
kashaya. Emperors Dai and Su [of the Tang Dyanasty] also wore a 
kashaya, studied with monks, and received the bodhisattva precepts. 
Other lay men and women of the past and present also have received 
a kashaya together with the Buddhist precepts. 

In Japan, Prince Shotoku wore a kashaya and expounded such 
sutras as the Lotus Sutra and the Shrimala Devi Sutra, when he 
perceived the marvel of celestial flowers raining down. Since then the 
buddha dharma has spread widely in our country. Prince Shotoku was 
not only the Regent of the Nation, but also a guiding master of 
humans and devas. A messenger of the Buddha, he was both father 
and mother of sentient beings. Although the form, color, and 
measurements of a kashaya were not transmitted accurately in Japan, 
still, because of Prince Shotoku’s influence, we are able to see and 
hear about kashayas. If he had not introduced the Buddha’s teaching, 
it would have been a great loss to us. 

Later, Emperor Shomu also received a kashaya and the bodhisattva 
precepts. In this way, even those who are on a throne or those who 
are retainers can receive a kashaya and the bodhisattva precepts. 
There is no wholesome fortune for humans that excels this. 

Some sources say that the kashaya worn by laypeople is called “a 
single-stitch robe” or “a lay robe” and that double stitching is not used 
for that. Other sources say that when laypeople go to the practice 
place, they wear three types of dharma robes and use tooth-cleaning 
twigs, rinsing water, eating utensils, and sitting mats to engage in 
pure practice just as monks do. These are words of ancient masters. 
However, in the direct transmission of buddha ancestors, the kashaya 
given to kings, ministers, lay practitioners, and warriors is invariably 
double-stitched. Laborer Lu [Huineng] did receive the buddha kashaya 
when he was a layman, which is an excellent precedent. 

Then put it on. Visualize your teacher, or visualize a stupa in the 
kashaya. Also recite this verse when you put on the kashaya after 
washing it. 

Then the World-Honored One said in a verse: 

Listen carefully, Monk Junanaprabha. 

The robe of the field of great benefaction has ten excellent merits: 
While worldly clothes increase defilement, 

the dharma robe of the Tathagata does not. 

The dharma robe provides modesty, completes repentance, 
and creates the field of benefaction. 

It protects you from cold, heat, and poisonous creatures 

and strengthens your way-seeking mind 

for attaining the ultimate understanding. 

Manifesting the form of a mendicant home leaver, 

it frees people from greed and desire, removes five wrong views, 
and helps you to hold authentic practice. 

By revering and bowing to the sacred-banner kashaya, 

you will have the benefaction of King Brahma. 

When you wear the kashaya, visualize a stupa 

creating benefaction, eliminating unwholesomeness, 

and joining humans and devas. 

The noble form of the kashaya arouses respect 

in a true seeker who becomes free from worldly dust. 

All buddhas praise it as an excellent field 

most beneficial to sentient beings. 

The inconceivable miraculous power of the kashaya 

nurtures practice for enlightenment. 

The sprout of practice grows in the spring field; 

the splendid fruit of enlightenment is like a harvest in autumn. 
The kashaya is true armor, impenetrable as diamond, 

the deadly arrows of delusion cannot pierce it. 

I have now recited the ten excellent merits of kashaya. 
For eons, more comments could be made, but I’ll say this: 
A dragon who wears even a shred of kashaya 

can’t be devoured by a gold-winged garuda. 

A person who holds a kashaya while crossing the ocean 
will not fear dragons, fish, or harmful beings. 

Lightning and thunder, heaven’s wrath, 

will not frighten a monk who wears a kashaya. 

When a layperson carries a kashaya with respect, 

no evil spirits draw near. 

When you arouse the beginner’s mind, 

leave home and worldly affairs to practice the way, 
demon palaces in the ten directions will tremble 

and you will immediately realize the dharma king’s body. 

These ten excellent merits encompass the wide-ranging merit of the 
buddha way. Understand clearly the merits expounded in these prose 
and verse lines. Do not put them aside after reading, but continue to 
study them phrase by phrase. These excellent merits come from the 
power of the kashaya, not from the power of a practitioner’s vigor or 
long practice. 

The Buddha said, “The miraculous power of the kashaya is beyond 
thought.” It is not something ordinary people or wise sages can 
comprehend. When the dharma king’s body is immediately actualized, 
the kashaya is always worn. Those who do not wear a kashaya have 
never actualized the dharma king’s body. 

This is the way for a monk who practices outdoors and collects 
discarded cloths. There are four types as well as ten types of discarded 
cloths. When you collect cloths, you should save pieces without holes. 
Also, the parts heavily stained with urine and excrement are not 
taken. Save the pieces that can be washed clean. 

I wear the Tathagata’s teaching 
to awaken countless beings. 

This was the first time I had seen the kashaya held up in this way, 
and I rejoiced, tears wetting the collar of my robe. Although I had 
read this verse of veneration for the kashaya in the Agama Sutra, I had 
not known the procedure. Now, I saw it with my own eyes. In my joy I 
also felt sorry that there had been no master to teach this to me and 
no good friend to recommend it in Japan. How sad that so much time 
had been wasted! But I also rejoiced in my wholesome past actions 
[that caused me to experience this]. If I had stayed in my land, how 
could I have sat side by side with the monks who had received and 
were wearing the buddha robe? My sadness and joy brought endless 
tears. 

Then, I made a vow to myself: However unsuited I may be, I will 
become an authentic holder of the buddha dharma, receiving 
authentic transmission of the true dharma, and with compassion show 
the buddha ancestors’ authentically transmitted dharma robes to those 
in my land. I rejoice that the vow I made at that time has not been in 
vain, and that there have been many bodhisattvas, lay and ordained, 
who have received the kashaya in Japan. Those who maintain the 
kashaya should always venerate it day and night. This brings forth 
most excellent merit. To see or hear one line of the kashaya verse is 
not limited to seeing and hearing it as if we were trees and rocks, but 
pervades the nine realms of sentient beings. 

buddha robe. 

This was presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery on the first day of winter, the first year of the Ninji Era 
[1240]. 

14 

‘Transmrrrine THE Ros 

Bopsmrarma, THE HicH Ancestor of Mount Song, alone transmitted 

the authentic teaching of the robe to China. He is the twenty-eighth- 
generation ancestor from Shakyamuni Buddha. In India twenty-eight 
generations of ancestors transmitted this teaching from heir to heir. 
Then six generations of ancestors clearly transmitted it in China. 
Altogether, thirty-three generations of ancestors transmitted it in India 
and China. 

white robes [home leavers and laypeople] who have bowed to this 
robe all have great capacity to have trust in the dharma. Without 
being helped by wholesome actions in the past, how can they 
personally bow to the buddha robe authentically transmitted from 
buddha to buddha? Those with skin, flesh, bones, and marrow [of the 
Buddha] should rejoice. Those who are unable to receive it with trust 
should deplore that they are not seeds of buddhas, although that is the 
result of their past actions. 

Even laypeople say that to see an action of a person is to see the 
person. Similarly, to bow to a buddha’s robe now is to see the buddha. 
You should construct hundreds and thousands of stupas and make 
offerings to the buddha robe. Those even in the deva realm and in the 
ocean who have hearts should revere the robe. Those in the human 
realm who know the sincerity and excellence of the wheel-turning 
kings should revere this robe. 

What a pity that some heads of state didn’t know that there was 
such a valuable treasure in their country [China]! Some of them, 
confused by the teaching of Daoist practitioners, abolished buddha 
dharma. They wore cloth headwear instead of putting on the kashaya, 
and spoke about attaining longevity. There were such heads of state in 
the Tang and Song Dynasties. Although they were emperors, they 
were lowlier than their subjects. Quietly observe this. 

authentically transmitted from heir to heir, the buddha robe has been 
authentically transmitted from heir to heir. 

Know that one attains the way upon hearing the four-line verse or 
upon hearing one phrase. Why does the four-line verse or the one 
phrase have such miraculous power? Because they are both buddha 
dharma. Now, the supreme [excrement-cleaning] robe, [often in the 
form of] the nine-panel robe, has been authentically transmitted with 
buddha dharma. They should not be inferior to the four-line verse. 
They should not have less miraculous effect than the one phrase. 

This being so, for these two thousand and some years, all those who 
have trust in and practice dharma, who are student followers of the 
Buddha, have maintained and protected kashayas as their own bodies 
and minds. Those who are ignorant of the true dharma of all buddhas 
do not venerate kashayas. Although Indra and the Dragon King of 
Anavatapta Lake are both lay kings of deva worlds, they maintain and 
protect kashayas. 

But those who have shaved their heads and call themselves children 
of the Buddha don’t know that a kashaya is to be received and 
maintained. How should they know its shape, color, and 
measurements? Do they know how to put it on? Further, they have 
not even dreamed of the awesome manner of wearing it. 

of it, you will have the merit of making an offering not only to one or 
two buddhas but also to countless, one hundred, thousand, billion 
buddhas. Even if this is done by you, revere, love, and appreciate your 
action. 

Thoroughly express your gratitude for the great kindness of the 
ancestors who have transmitted the robe and dharma. Even animals 
repay others’ kindness. How can a human not know others’ kindness? 
If you didn’t appreciate others’ kindness, you would be worse and 
more foolish than animals. 

The merit of a kashaya is not even dreamed of by those who are not 
ancestors and do not transmit the Buddha’s true dharma. How then 
can they clarify the shape, color, and measurements of a kashaya? 
Those who long for the traces of buddhas should long for their 
kashayas. If this authentic transmission is authentically transmitted, 
this is indeed buddha dharma even one hundred, one thousand, and 
myriad generations later. The proof of this realization is evident. 

Even a layperson [Lord Qing] said, “If it were not the late king’s 
robe, I would not wear it. If it were not the late king’s law, I would 
not follow it.” The buddha way is just like that. Other than the late 
buddha’s dharma robe, what would you wear in the practice of the 
buddha way and serving all buddhas? Those who do not wear this 
cannot enter the buddhas’ assembly. 

Since the tenth year of the Yongping Era [67 cxz.] of the Emperor 
Xiaoming of the Later Han Dynasty, monks and laypeople often went 
back and forth between India and China. But none of them said that 
they had met an ancestor in India who had authentic transmission 
from buddha ancestors. Thus, there was no lineage of face-to-face 
transmission from the Tathagata. These seekers only studied with 
masters of sutras and treatises and brought back only names and 
aspects of buddha dharma. They did not say they had met ancestors 
who had authentically inherited buddha dharma. They did not say 
there were ancestors who had transmitted the buddha kashaya. 
Therefore, those people did not enter deeply into the chamber of 
buddha dharma and clarify the meaning of the authentic transmission 
of the buddha ancestors. 

They only think that the kashaya is a robe and don’t know that it is 
valued in buddha dharma. It is a pity, indeed. A buddha robe is 
transmitted to and received by an authentic heir of the treasury of the 
true dharma eye. It is a commonly known fact among humans and 
devas that there are no ancestors authentically transmitting the 
dharma treasury who have not seen and heard of the buddha robe. 
Thus, the authentic transmission and learning of the shape, color, and 
measurements, and the great merit, as well as the body, mind, bones, 

and marrow of a buddha kashaya, lie only in the authentically 
transmitted work of the buddha house. This is not known in the 
teaching of various Agama schools. What has been independently 
created by practitioners nowadays is not authentic transmission by 
authentic heirs. 

The Tathagata Shakyamuni, our great teacher, entrusted the 
treasury of the true dharma eye, the unsurpassable enlightenment, to 
Mahakashyapa along with the kashaya. The robe was transmitted heir 
to heir for thirty-three generations to Huineng. The shape, color, and 
measurements have been intimately transmitted, freshly received, and 
maintained until now. This is an authentic transmission that each of 
the high ancestors of the Five Schools received and maintained. For 
forty or fifty generations, teacher and disciple without exception have 
sewn and worn the kashaya. This has been transmitted afresh from 
buddha to buddha in merged realization generation after generation. 

pieces and one short piece of cloth 
Eighty-four thousand panels, each panel consisting of eight long 
pieces and one short piece of cloth 

This is a summary. There are other types of kashayas. All these are 
outer robes. Both laypeople and monks receive and maintain them. To 
receive and maintain them means to wear them and not to keep them 
folded without use. 

Those who shave their heads and faces but hate and fear kashayas 
without receiving and maintaining them are demons or people outside 
the way. 

Baizhang, Zen Master Dazhi, said, “Those who lack wholesome 
seeds planted in the past avoid and dislike a kashaya. They fear and 
avoid true dharma.” 

When Shakyamuni Buddha was about to leave his palace and enter 
the mountains for the first time, a tree god held up an outer robe and 
said, “If you wear this robe with reverence, you will be protected from 
harm by demons.” It is said that the Buddha revered it and wore it for 
twelve years without ceasing. This is a story told by scriptures, 
including the Agama Sutra. 

It is also said that a kashaya is an auspicious robe. Those who wear 
it invariably attain an excellent place. There has never been a time in 
the world when this robe has not emerged. Its emergence at any 
moment is a matter of timeless kalpas. A matter of timeless kalpas is 
its arrival at any moment. To attain a kashaya is to attain the emblem 
of the Buddha. This being so, among all buddha tathagatas there is no 
one who has not received and maintained it. There is no one who has 
received and maintained a kashaya and has not become a buddha. 

Transmission of the Lamp, and the Universal Transmission of the Lamp. 
This marked a departure from the limited views of the scriptural and 
precepts schools to revering the great way that had been authentically 
transmitted by buddha ancestors. Such people all became buddha 
ancestors. 

Those who are in the present should also study with ancient 
ancestors. If you are to receive a kashaya, authentically receive an 
authentically transmitted kashaya. Receive it with trust. Do not 
receive a forged kashaya. 

Speaking of an authentically transmitted kashaya, the one 
authentically transmitted from Shaolin [Bodhidharma] through Caoxi 
[Huineng] has been passed on from heir to heir without missing even 
one generation. In this way, the work of the way has been exactly 
passed on, and the buddha robe has been intimately handed down. 
The buddha way is authentically transmitted to the buddha way. It 
does not depend on the hearsay of an idle person. 

There is a common saying: “One thousand hearings do not match 
one seeing. One thousand seeings do not match one attainment.” If we 
reflect on this, even one thousand seeings and ten thousand hearings 
cannot match one attainment, an authentic receiving of the buddha 
robe. 

Those who doubt authentic transmission have not dreamed of it, but 
authentic transmission of the buddha robe is more intimate than 
hearing about a buddha sutra. Even one thousand sutras and ten 
thousand attainments cannot match one realization. Buddha ancestors 
are the merging of realization. Do not follow the mediocre schools of 
scripture and precepts. 

The power of the robe in the ancestral gate [school] has actually 
been transmitted in its original form. It has been received and 
inherited up until now without a break. Those who authentically 
receive it are all dharma-transmitted ancestors who have merged with 
realization. They excel bodhisattvas of the ten stages and three classes. 
See it, revere it, bow to it, and place it on your head. 

That you accept the teaching of authentic transmission of this 
buddha robe in your body and mind with trust is a sign of 
encountering the Buddha. Not to be able to receive this dharma is a 
life to be lamented. Deeply affirm that covering your body with this 
kashaya even once is an amulet of protection for ensuring 
enlightenment. 

It is said that if you dye your mind with one phrase or one verse of 
teaching, it will become timelessly radiant without lack. To dye your 
body and mind with a single dharma is just like this. 

Although the mind has no abode and is not possessed by the self, its 
power is concrete. Although the body has no abode, its power is 

concrete. A kashaya also neither comes nor goes. It is not possessed by 
the self or other; it abides where it is maintained and assists the one 
who maintains it. The power of what is attained by the kashaya must 
also be like this. 

Making a kashaya is not limited to the ordinary or sages. Its 
meaning cannot be thoroughly understood by bodhisattvas of the ten 
stages and three classes. Those who don’t have seeds of enlightenment 
planted in the past do not see, hear about, and know a kashaya even 
for one lifetime, two lifetimes, or innumerable lifetimes. How then can 
they receive and maintain it? 

There are those who comprehend the merit of a kashaya touching 
their bodies even once, and there are those who don’t. Those who 
understand this merit should rejoice, and those who don’t should hope 
for it. Those who cannot should lament. 

Within and outside the billion worlds, both humans and devas 
widely see, hear, and know that the buddha robe has only been 
transmitted inside the gate of buddha ancestors. Also, the facts about 
the buddha robe are known inside the ancestral gate alone, and not 
inside other gates. 

Those who resent themselves for not knowing about the buddha 
robe are foolish. Even if they are well versed in eighty-four thousand 
samadhis and dharanis, if they have not authentically received the 
buddha ancestors’ dharma of the robe and have not clarified the 
authentic transmission of the kashaya, they are not authentic heirs of 
buddhas. 

How many sentient beings in other realms would wish that the 
buddha robe had been authentically transmitted in their own lands 
just as it has been transmitted to China? They may be ashamed or 
have deep sorrow. 

Indeed, we encounter the dharma of the Tathagatha, the World- 
Honored One’s authentically transmitted way of the robe. It is due to 
the seeds of great merit planted in the past. Nowadays, in this 
unwholesome time in the world of declining dharma, there are a 
number of groups of demons who are not ashamed of not having 
authentic transmission but are jealous of it. Where they abide and 
what they possess are not their true self. To authentically receive the 
true dharma alone is the straight path of studying the Buddha. 

Receive and maintain it accordingly. 

Nowadays in Great Song China, those who call themselves students 
of precepts [practitioners of the Precept School] are not ashamed, 
resentful, or even aware of receiving incomprehensible teachings in 
their house, because they are intoxicated with the wine of shravakas. 
Following their own minor thinking, such people have altered the 
kashaya that was transmitted from India and used for a long time 
through Han and Tang China. This is based on their limited views, of 
which they should be ashamed. If a robe that comes from such minor 
thinking is worn, much of the buddha form will be missing. Because 
they did not extensively study the buddha guidelines, they have 
created such a robe. It is clear that the body-mind of the Tathagata 
has been authentically transmitted in the ancestral gate alone, and has 
not flown into the work of their houses. If they had known the buddha 
guidelines even one out of ten thousand, they would not have 
destroyed the buddha robe in this way. They do not even clarify 
scriptural text and the essence of it. 

that see transformation. It seems they have eyes but don’t have ears, 
or they have ears but don’t have eyes. Where are their ears and eyes? 

Know that among the cloths you pick up, there can be silklike cloths 
and common cloths among them. When you use them for making a 
kashaya, you should not call it silk or common cloth, but just call it 
excrement-cleaning cloth. As it is excrement-cleaning cloth, it is 
neither silk nor common cloth. Even if a human or a deva turns into 
discarded cloth, it is not sentient but just discarded cloth. Even if a 
pine or chrysanthemum turns into discarded cloth, it is not insentient 
but just discarded cloth. 

When you know that excrement-cleaning cloth is beyond silk and 
common cloth and beyond a jewel, excrement-cleaning cloth emerges 
and you encounter excrement-cleaning cloth. Those who haven’t given 
up discrimination between silk and common cloth have never 
dreamed of excrement-cleaning cloth. If those who make a kashaya of 
coarse cloth and maintain it for lifetimes are not aware of this way of 
seeing the material for a kashaya, this is not authentically receiving 
the buddha robe. 

Among various types of kashaya, there are a common-cloth 
kashaya, a silk kashaya, and a leather kashaya. They are all worn by 
buddhas—buddha robes with buddha merit. 

While there is authentically transmitted teaching on kashaya, those 
who have not been freed from ordinary views make light of buddha 
dharma, do not believe in the buddha words, and try to follow 
ordinary thinking. They must be called people outside the way who 
have been entrusted with buddha dharma. They are among the group 
of those who destroy the true dharma. 

Some also say that they have altered the buddha robe by following 
the teaching of devas. Perhaps they want to be a heavenly buddha or 
have become a type of deva. However, the Buddha’s disciples should 
expound buddha dharma to devas, instead of inquiring into the way of 
devas. How pitiful! Those who have not authentically received buddha 
dharma speak in this way. 

Devas and the Buddha’s descendants hold varied views, and devas 
come down [to the human realm] to inquire of the Buddha’s 
descendants about dharma. It is because the deva views and the 
Buddha views are far different from each other. 

Discard the minor views of shravakas in the Precept School, and do 
not accept their views. Know that they are views of the Lesser School. 

The Buddha said, “Those who kill their parents repent, but those 
who slander the dharma do not.” Thus, the path of minor views and 
doubts are not the original intention of the Buddha. The great road of 
buddha dharma cannot be reached by the Lesser Vehicles. No one 
other than those in the ancestral way with the entrusted dharma 

treasure knows of the authentic transmission of the Buddha’s great 
precepts. 

robes kashayas, there are no true ancestors who allow them to be their 
branches and leaves [descendants]. How can they nurture the seeds of 
wholesome roots? How, then, can they attain the fruit? 

Now, we do not only see and hear the buddha dharma that has not 
been encountered for vast kalpas, but we also see, hear, study, and 
maintain the buddha robe. This is no other than seeing the Buddha. 
This is to hear the buddha voice, radiate the buddha light, and 
experience the buddha experience. This is to receive the buddha mind 
from person to person, attaining the buddha marrow. 

ancestors they receive authentic transmission. They receive and 
maintain this, authentically transmitted, as buddha ancestors not 
depending on the emergence and no-emergence of body or mind. 

my joy I also felt sorrow that there had been no master to teach this to 
me and no good friend to recommend it in Japan. How sad that so 
much time had been wasted! 

But I also rejoiced in my wholesome past actions. If I had stayed in 
my land, how could I have sat side by side with the monks who had 
received and were wearing the buddha robe? My sadness and joy 
brought endless tears. 

Then, I made a vow to myself: However unsuited I may be, I will 
become an authentic holder of the buddha dharma, receiving 
authentic transmission of the true dharma, and I will compassionately 
show people in my land the buddha ancestors’ authentically 
transmitted dharma robe. 

The vow I made at that time must not have been in vain, thanks to 
the invisible assistance of true trust. The buddha children who receive 
and maintain the kashaya now should endeavor in the practice of 
revering it day and night. This brings forth genuine merit. The effect 
of seeing and hearing one line of the kashaya verse may extend to 
trees and rocks. The power of the authentically transmitted kashaya is 
rare to encounter in the ten directions. 

15 
Mounramws AND Warers Sura 

Mountains AND WATERS right now actualize the ancient buddha 

expression. Each, abiding in its condition, unfolds its full potential. 
Because mountains and waters have been active since before the 
Empty Eon, they are alive at this moment. Because they have been the 
self since before form arose, they are emancipation actualized. 

Because mountains are high and broad, their way of riding the 
clouds always extends from the mountains; their wondrous power of 
soaring in the wind comes freely from the mountains. 

buddha ancestors. Seeing into mind and seeing into essence is the 
activity of people outside the way. Confined words and phrases do not 
lead to liberation. There is something free from all of these views. 
That is: Green mountains are always walking, and Eastern mountains 
travel on water. Study this in detail. 

They are immature, foolish fellows not even worth discussing. In 
China these two or three hundred years, there have been many groups 
of demons and six types of heretical thinkers. What a pity! The great 
road of buddha ancestors is crumbling. People who hold this view are 
not even as good as shravakas of the Lesser Vehicles and are more 
foolish than those outside the way. They are neither laypeople nor 
monks, neither human nor heavenly beings. They are more stupid 
than animals that learn the buddha way. 

The illogical stories mentioned by those bald-headed fellows are 
only illogical for them, not for buddha ancestors. Even though they do 
not understand, they should not neglect studying the buddha 
ancestors’ path of understanding. Even if it is beyond understanding in 
the end, their present understanding is off the mark. 

I have personally seen and heard many people like this in Song 
China. How sad that they do not know about the phrases of logical 
thought, or penetrating logical thought in phrases! When I laughed at 
them in China, they had no response and remained silent. Their idea 
about illogical words is only a distorted view. Even if there is no 
teacher to show them the original truth, their belief in spontaneous 
enlightenment is a view of those outside the way. 

backward, leaping beyond the vital path where other fathoms other. 

Know that even though all things are unbound and not tied to 
anything, they abide in their own condition. However, when most 
human beings see water, they only see that it flows unceasingly. This 
is a limited human view; there are actually many kinds of flowing. 
Water flows on the earth, in the sky, upward, and downward. It flows 
around a single curve or into many bottomless abysses. When it rises 
it becomes clouds. When it descends it forms abysses. 

runs upward, downward, and in all directions. 

However, one buddha sutra does say, “Fire and air go upward, earth 
and water go downward.” This upward and downward require 
examination. Examine this from the point of view of the buddha way. 
Although you use the word downward to describe the direction earth 
and water go, earth and water do not actually go downward. In the 
same way, the direction fire and air go is called upward. 

The world of phenomena is not limited by up, down, or the cardinal 
directions. They are tentatively designated according to the directions 
in which four great elements, five great elements, or six great 
elements go. The Heaven of No Thought should not be regarded as 
upward nor should Avichi Hell be regarded as downward. The Avichi 
Hell is the entire world of phenomena; the Heaven of No Thought is 
the entire world of phenomena. 

are assembled. But after entering the mountains, not a single person 
meets another. There is just the vital activity of the mountains. There 
is no trace of anyone having entered the mountains. 

When you see mountains from the ordinary world, and when you 
meet mountains while in mountains, the mountains’ head and eye are 
viewed quite differently. Your idea or view of mountains not flowing 
is not the same as the view of dragons and fish. Human and heavenly 
beings have attained a position concerning their own worlds that 
other beings may doubt or may not have the capacity to doubt. 

Do not remain bewildered and skeptical when you hear the words 
Mountains flow; but study these words with buddha ancestors. When 
you take up one view, you see mountains flowing, and when you take 
up another view, mountains are not flowing. One time mountains are 
flowing, another time they are not flowing. If you do not fully 
understand this, you do not understand the true dharma wheel of the 
Tathagata. 

An ancient buddha said, “If you do not wish to incur the cause for 
Unceasing Hell, do not slander the true dharma wheel of the 
Tathagata.” Carve these words on your skin, flesh, bones, and marrow; 
on your body, mind, and environs; on emptiness and on form. They 
are already carved on trees and rocks, on fields and villages. 

spent in the mountains, and his opening of the way occurred in the 
mountains. Thus, even his father, a wheel-turning king, did not wield 
authority in the mountains. 

Know that mountains are not the realm of human beings or the 
realm of heavenly beings. Do not view mountains from the standard of 
human thought. If you do not judge mountains’ flowing by the human 
understanding of flowing, you will not doubt mountains’ flowing and 
not flowing. 

16 

Buppua A\nczstors 

Accruauzine BUDDHA ANCESTORS means to uphold and see them in 

veneration. It is not limited to buddhas of the past, present, and 
future, but it is going beyond buddhas who are going beyond 
themselves. It is taking up those who have maintained the face and 
eye of buddha ancestors, formally bowing and encountering them. 
They have manifested the power of the buddha ancestors, dwelt in it, 
and actualized it in the body. 

Sanghanandi, Honored One 
Gayashata, Honored One 
Kumarata, Honored One 
Jayata, Honored One 
Vasubandhu, Honored One 
Manorhita, Honored One 
Haklenayashas, Honored One 
Simhabhikshu, Honored One 
Basiasita, Honored One 
Punyamitra, Honored One 
Prajnatara, Honored One 

Bodhidharma, Honored One 
Huike, Honored One 
Sengcan, Honored One 
Daoxin, Honored One 
Hongren, Honored One 
Huineng, Honored One 
Xingsi, Honored One 
Xiqian, Honored One 
Weiyan, Honored One 
Tansheng, Honored One 
Liangjie, Honored One 
Daoying, Honored One 
Daopi, Honored One 
Guanzhi, Honored One 
Yuanguan, Honored One 
Jingxuan, Honored One 
Yiqing, Honored One 
Daokai, Honored One 
Zichun, Honored One 
Qingliao, Honored One 
Zhongque, Honored One 
Zhijian, Honored One 
Rujing, Honored One. 

Written and presented at Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery, Uji 
County, Yamashiro Province, Japan, on the third day, the first month, 
the second year of the Ninji Era [1241]. 

17 

Document OF Herrracz 

A BUDDHA IS TRANSMITTED dharma only from a buddha, an ancestor only 

from an ancestor, through merging realization in direct transmission. 
In this way, it is the unsurpassable enlightenment. It is impossible to 
give the seal of realization without being a buddha, and it is 
impossible to become a buddha without receiving the seal of 
realization from a buddha. Who else, other than a buddha, can certify 
this realization as the most venerable, the most unsurpassable? 

When you have the seal of realization from a buddha, you have 
realization without a teacher, realization without self. This being so, it 
is said, “A buddha receives realization from a buddha; an ancestor 
merges realization with an ancestor.” The meaning of this teaching 
cannot be understood by those who are not buddhas. How then can it 
be measured by bodhisattvas of the ten stages or even those in the 
stage of enlightenment equal to buddhas’? 

Furthermore, how can it be discerned by masters of sutras or 
treatises? Even if they explain it, they still do not understand it. 

assembly: “There are forty ancestors from the Seven Original Buddhas 
to myself, and there are forty ancestors from myself to the Seven 
Original Buddhas.” 

This is clearly the meaning of the authentic heritage of buddha 
ancestors. The Seven Original Buddhas include those who appeared in 
the last eon and those who appeared in the present eon. Nevertheless, 
the continuation of face-to-face transmission of the forty ancestors is 
the buddha way and the buddha heritage. 

Thus, proceeding from Huineng to the Seven Original Buddhas is 
the buddha heritage of forty ancestors. And going beyond from the 
Seven Original Buddhas to Huineng is the buddha heritage of forty 
buddhas. 

The buddha way, the ancestor way, is like this. Without merging 
realization and without buddha ancestors, there is no buddha wisdom 
and there is no thorough ancestral experience. Without buddha 
wisdom, there is no accepting buddha; without thorough experience, 
there is no merging of realization between ancestors. 

buddhas. In this buddha way, the document of heritage is always 
given at the time of transmitting dharma. Those without dharma 
heritage are people outside the way who believe in spontaneous 
enlightenment. If the buddha way had not clearly established dharma 
heritage, how could it have come down to the present? 

For this reason, when a buddha becomes a buddha, a document of 
heritage is given to a buddha’s heir buddha, and this document of 
heritage is given by a buddha’s heir buddha. 

The meaning of the document of heritage is this: you understand 
the sun, the moon, and stars, and inherit dharma; you attain skin, 
flesh, bones, and marrow, and inherit dharma; you inherit a robe or 
staff, a pine branch or whisk, an udumbara blossom or a brocade robe; 
you receive straw sandals or an arched bamboo staff. 

At the time of dharma heritage, the document is handwritten with 
the blood of the finger or the tongue. Or, it is handwritten with oil or 
milk. Every one of these is a document of heritage. 

Those who entrust and those who receive this heritage are both the 
buddha’s heirs. Indeed, whenever buddha ancestors are actualized, 
dharma heritage is actualized. At the time of actualization, 
innumerable buddha ancestors arrive without expectation and receive 
dharma without seeking. Those who inherit dharma are all buddha 
ancestors. 

Rujing would say, “Ask Abbot Weiyi about the customs of my region.” 

One day Weiyi said, “Old writings worth seeing are treasures of 
humankind. How many of them have you seen?” 

I said, “I have seen a few.” 

Then he said, “I have a scroll of old writing. I will show it to you at 
your convenience.” He brought it to me. It was a document of heritage 
of the Fayan lineage that he had obtained from the articles left behind 
by an old master. So it was not what Weiyi himself had received. 

The document said, “The First Ancestor, Mahakashyapa, was 
awakened by Shakyamuni Buddha. Shakyamuni Buddha was 
awakened by Kashyapa Buddha.” 

Upon seeing this, I was firmly convinced that there is dharma 
heritage between an authentic heir and an authentic heir. This was a 
teaching I had never seen before. At that moment the buddha 
ancestors had invisibly responded to my wish and helped me, a 
descendant of theirs. I had never been moved so much. 

Dongshan lineages. 

But among students, particularly among those who call themselves 
descendants of Linji, some intend wrongdoing. Usually those studying 
in the community of a master request a scroll of the master’s portrait 
and a scroll of his dharma words in order to prepare to meet the 
standard requirement of dharma heritage. But these fellows ask the 
attendants of masters for dharma words and portraits, and collect and 
hide many of them. When they are old they bribe public officials to 
get a temple and hold the abbot’s seat without having received 
dharma from the masters whose dharma words and portraits they 
obtained. Instead, they receive dharma from the famous masters of the 
time or from the masters who have given dharma heritage to retainers 
of the king. They covet fame without regard to attaining dharma. 

What a pity that there are such crooked habits at this wicked time 
of decayed teaching! Not even one of those fellows has ever dreamed 
of the way of buddha ancestors. 

document of heritage and let Ryuzen see it, saying, “This is a thing not 
commonly shown, but I will let you pay homage to it.” 

About eight years after that, in the autumn of the sixteenth year of 
the Jiading Era [1223], when I was first staying at Mount Tiantong, 
Ryuzen cordially requested that librarian Chuan show this document 
of heritage to me. In this document of heritage, the names of the forty- 
five ancestors from the Seven Original Buddhas through Linji were 
lined up, and the names and monograms of masters after Linji were 
written inside a drawn circle. The name of the new heir was written at 
the end under the date. In this way a difference was made between 
the masters before and after Linji. 

is written, followed by the words “This person has studied with me,” 
“This person has joined my assembly,” “This person has entered my 
chamber,” or “This person has inherited dharma from me.” Then the 
names of the ancestors of the past are written in the traditional 
sequence. 

Also, in the Linji School there is an oral instruction that the dharma 
succession is given not necessarily by the first teacher or the last 
teacher, but by the right teacher; this is the principle of direct 
heritage. 

One of the Linji lineage’s documents of heritage, which I actually 
saw, is written as follows: 

Librarian Liaopai, a courageous man, is my disciple. I have 
studied with Priest Zonggao of Mount Jing. Zonggao succeeded 
Keqin of Mount Jia. Keqin succeeded Fayan of Yangqi. Fayan 
succeeded Shouduan of Haihui. Shouduan succeeded Fanghui of 
Yangqi. Fanghui succeeded Chuyuan of Ciming. Chuyuan 
succeeded Shanzhao of Fenyang. Shanzhao succeeded Xingnian of 
Shoushan. Xingnian succeeded Yanzhao of Fengxue. Yanzhao 
succeeded Huiyong of Nanyuan. Huiyong succeeded Cunjiang of 
Xinghua. Cunjiang is senior heir of the High Ancestor Linji. 

This document was given by Deguang, Zen Master Fuzhao of Mount 
Ayuwang, to Wuji Liaopai. When Wuji was the abbot of Mount 
Tiantong, Chiyu, a junior priest, privately brought it to Liaoran Hall 
and showed it to me. It was the twenty-first day of the first month, the 
seventeenth year of the Jiading Era [1224] of Great Song. What a joy 
it was! It was only possible by the invisible help of buddha ancestors. I 
saw it after offering incense and formally bowing to it. 

The reason I requested to see this document of heritage was that 
Director Shiguang personally told me about it in Serene Light Hall 
around the seventh month of the previous year. 

So I asked Shiguang, “Who keeps it?” 

He said, “It is in the master abbot’s quarters. If you request 
cordially, you may be able to see it.” After I heard this, day and night 
I wanted to see it. Then later I rendered my wholehearted request to 
Junior Priest Chiyu. 

The document was written on a mounted piece of white silk. The 
outside of the scroll was made of red brocade; the axis ends were of 
jade. It was about nine sun in height and over seven shaku long. Most 
people were not allowed to see it. 

I thanked Chiyu. Also, I went to see Abbot Wuji immediately, 
offered incense, and thanked him. Then he said, “Few people know 

about this, and now you do, elder. This is a fulfillment of your 
practice of the way.” I was very pleased. 

Vimalakirti Hall and the Great Hall of Mount Tiantai were quiet, 
without anyone around. 

This document of heritage was written on white brocade with a 
pattern of fallen plum blossoms. Its height was over nine sun and its 
length over one hiro [sixty sun]. Its axis ends were made of yellow 
jade. The outside of the scroll was brocade. 

On my way back to Tiantong from Mount Tiantai, I stayed at the 
entry hall of the Husheng Monastery on Mount Damei. At that time I 
had an auspicious dream that the ancestor Damei came up to me and 
gave me a branch of plum blossoms in full bloom. This image of the 
ancestor was worthy of great respect. The branch was one shaku tall 
and one shaku wide. Aren’t these plum blossoms as rare as an 
udumbara blossom? This dream was just as real as being awake. I 
have never before told this story to anyone in China or Japan. 

that buddhas have received dharma from buddhas in this way until 
now. This is the way of studying buddhas.” 

Then I said, “Shakyamuni Buddha came out into the world and 
attained the way after the pari-nirvana of Kashyapa Buddha. 
Furthermore, how could the buddha of the present eon inherit from 
the buddha of the previous eon? What is the meaning of this?” 

Rujing said: 

What you mentioned is the view of scriptural schools or the way 
of bodhisattvas of the ten stages and three classes, which is 
different from the way of direct heritage of buddha ancestors. Our 
way of transmission between buddhas and buddhas is not like 
that. 

We understand that Shakyamuni Buddha did inherit dharma 
from Kashyapa Buddha. And we learn that Kashyapa Buddha 
entered pari-nirvana after giving dharma heritage to Shakyamuni 
Buddha. If Shakyamuni Buddha had not received dharma from 
Kashyapa Buddha, it would be the same as the group of six bald- 
headed rascals [during the Buddha’s time] who believe in 
spontaneous enlightenment. Who, then, could believe in 
Shakyamuni Buddha? 

Because of this heritage from buddha to buddha until now, 
each buddha is an heir. Buddhas are not lined up, nor are they 
gathered together, but they just inherit from each other. Thus, we 
understand. 

It has nothing to do with measurements that are taught in 
various Agama Schools, such as eons or long lifetimes. If you say 
that dharma heritage started from Shakyamuni Buddha, it would 
be only about two thousand years old, which is not so old. And 
the heritage would range only over forty generations, which is 
rather new. But buddha heritage should not be understood in this 
way. We understand that Shakyamuni Buddha received dharma 
from Kashyapa Buddha, and Kashyapa Buddha received dharma 
from Shakyamuni Buddha. When you understand in this way, it is 
the true dharma heritage of all buddhas and all ancestors. 

Then, for the first time, I not only accepted that there is dharma 
heritage of buddha ancestors, but I also was able to get out of the old 
pit I had been in up to that time. 

On the twenty-seventh day, the third month, the second year of the 
Ninji Era [1241], this was written at the Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery by monk Dogen, who has transmitted dharma from China. 

On the twenty-fourth day, the ninth month, the first year of the 
Kangan Era [1243], I have hung my traveling stick at the grass- 
thatched hut in Yoshimine Village, Echizen Province. A written seal. 

18 

Dauarma Biossoms Turn Duarma Biossoms 

Tue BUDDHA LANDS of the ten directions are just dharma blossoms. 

Here, all buddhas of the ten directions in the past and present who 
abide in unsurpassed, complete enlightenment turn dharma blossoms 
and are turned by dharma blossoms. In this way there is the original 
practice of bodhisattvas, not turning back or veering away; there is 
the most profound, immeasurable wisdom of buddhas; there is the 
serene, subtle samadhi difficult to comprehend and difficult to enter. 

Manjushri, the awakened one, speaks of dharma blossoms [in the 
Lotus Sutra] as the ocean of buddha lands where only buddhas are 
together with buddhas. Shakyamuni Buddha speaks of dharma 
blossoms thus: “I know form as suchness. So do the buddhas in the ten 
directions.” He then says, “The buddhas in the ten directions and I 
know it well,” and “I want sentient beings to open themselves and 
enter this realization.” 

Samantabhadra activates the turning of dharma blossoms of 
unthinkable power and spreads unsurpassed, complete enlightenment, 
profound and timeless, in the Jambudvipa world, where grass and 
trees large and small are equally nourished by moistening rain. The 
turning of dharma blossoms extends to places where it is not known. 
As Samantabhadra’s turning of dharma blossoms occurs, a great 
assembly gathers on Vulture Peak. Seeing the coming of 
Samantabhadra, Shakyamuni Buddha acknowledges his arrival with 
illuminating light from the white tuft on his forehead. 

During the assembly, Manjushri contemplates and speaks to 
Maitreya, turning dharma blossoms and immediately predicting his 
future enlightenment. Samantabhadra, buddhas, Manjushri, and the 
great assembly, all thoroughly understand the turning of dharma 
blossoms, which is wholesome at the beginning, middle, and end. 

In this way dharma blossoms emerge as: “The One Vehicle alone is 
the essential teaching.” Because this emergence is the essential 
teaching, the Buddha says, “Only a buddha together with a buddha 
can fully experience the reality of all things.” 

The dharma is always One Buddha Vehicle. Only buddhas can help 
buddhas to fully experience this reality. All buddhas, including the 
Seven Original Buddhas, help other buddhas to fully experience this 

reality and make it possible for Shakyamuni Buddha to attain the way. 
This occurs in the buddha lands in the ten directions, encompassing 
India and China. This is the dharma that reached Huineng, the Thirty- 
third Ancestor, Zen Master Dajian. It is the One Vehicle dharma of 
buddhas alone fully experiencing reality. This alone is the one 
essential matter, One Buddha Vehicle. 

At this very moment, buddhas emerge in the world; they emerge 
right here. The transmission of Qingyuan’s buddha wind until now, 
the spreading of Nanyue’s dharma gate into the world, is the 
emergence of the Tathagata’s knowledge of thusness. Truly, the 
dharma blossoms fully experience only a buddha together with a 
buddha, unfold, and enter the realization of a buddha heir, an heir 
buddha. 

This is called the Wondrous Lotus Flowers Dharma Sutra. It teaches 
the dharma to bodhisattvas. As these dharmas are all dharmas, 
Vulture Peak, empty sky, ocean, and earth are all lotus flowers. This is 
reality; this is thusness. It is things abiding in their condition. It is the 
great essential matter. It is buddha knowledge, the continuous abiding 
in worldly aspects, thusness, the timeless lifespan of tathagatas, 
immeasurable profundity. It is the impermanence of all things. It is the 
lotus flower samadhi. It is Shakyamuni Buddha. It is turning dharma 
blossoms and dharma turning blossoms. It is the treasury of the true 
dharma eye, the wondrous heart of nirvana. It is manifesting the body 
and awakening beings. It is giving a prediction of enlightenment and 
bringing forth a buddha, maintaining and abiding in dharma. 

essential matter? It is the buddha unfolding knowledge and entering 
realization. You are originally buddha knowledge. You who have this 
knowledge are a buddha. You should trust right now that the buddha 
knowledge is your own mind.” 

Then he taught with a verse: 

When your mind is deluded, you are turned by the dharma 
blossoms. 

When your mind is enlightened, you turn the dharma blossoms. 
If you cannot clarify the meaning after chanting the sutra at great 
length, you become its enemy. 

Thinking beyond thinking is right. 

Thinking about thinking is wrong. 

If thinking and beyond thinking do not divide the mind 

you can steer the white-ox cart endlessly. 

Hearing this verse, Fada further asked Huineng, “The sutra says, 
‘Great shramanas and bodhisattvas all exhaust their thinking and 
analyzing, but they cannot fathom the Buddha’s wisdom.’ Leading 
ordinary people to understand their own mind is called the Buddha’s 
knowledge. Only those who are of excellent capacity avoid doubting 
and slandering the Buddha’s teaching. The sutra also talks about three 
types of carts. How different is the great-ox cart from the white-ox 
cart? Please, master, would you teach me?” 

Huineng said: 

The meaning of the sutra is clear. It is you who are deluded. 
Those in the Three Vehicles cannot fathom the Buddha’s wisdom 
because they think and analyze. However hard you think and 
project, you remain far away. The Buddha only expounds for 
ordinary people, not for buddhas. Those who walk away from the 
Buddha’s sermons look for the three carts elsewhere. Yet they are 
already seated on the white-ox cart outside the gate. 

The sutra clearly tells you “not two, not three.” Why don’t you 
understand this? The three carts are expedient means; they were 
taught in the past. The One Vehicle is reality; it is here now. I 
want you to leave the expedient means of the past to the past and 
return to reality. When you return to reality, it is not merely a 
name. Know that all things are rare treasures that belong to you. 
Receive and make use of them. Do not regard these treasures as 
belonging to your parents or your child. Do not feel that you have 
to use them. This is the meaning of the Lotus Sutra. Chant it every 
moment from kalpa to kalpa, day and night, without opening a 
scroll of the sutra. 

Rejoicing in these instructions, Fada presented this verse of 
admiration: 

After chanting the sutra three thousand times 

I was annihilated by Caoxi’s single verse. 

Without clarifying the meaning of birth in life, 

how can one end madness throughout lifetimes? 

Although there are expedient carts pulled by sheep, deer, or oxen, 
wholesomeness is manifest in the beginning, middle, and end. 
Who is aware that the King of Dharma 

abides in the burning house? 

Upon receiving this poem, Huineng said, “From now on, you will be 
called the Sutra-Chanting Monk.” 

This is how Fada studied with Huineng. Since then, the dharma 
blossoms of the dharma blossoms turning and turning the dharma 
blossoms have been expounded. This had not been heard of before 
their dialogue. Indeed, to clarify buddha’s knowledge is itself the 
treasury of the true dharma eye, it is itself the buddha ancestor. You 
can see from Fada’s case that those who vainly count letters, as 
numerous as pebbles and sands [of the Ganges], cannot understand. 

In order to fathom the true meaning of the dharma, thoroughly 
study the ancestor’s teaching as a single great matter. Do not try to 
learn it through other vehicles. The thusness of reality and the true 
characteristics, true form, true function, true cause and effect of the 
dharma blossoms turning, had not existed or been spoken of before 
Huineng. 

What is spoken of as turned by dharma blossoms is your mind is 
deluded. Your mind is deluded is no other than turned by dharma 
blossoms. Thus, the deluded mind is turned by dharma blossoms. The 
meaning is that while the deluded mind is no other than all 
phenomena, reality is turned by dharma blossoms. To be turned in 
this way is neither to be rejoiced in nor sought after, neither to attain 
nor to arrive. 

This being so, dharma blossom turning is not two, not three. As 
there is only One Buddha Vehicle, and the dharma blossoms turning 
and being turned are, in reality, One Buddha Vehicle, one great 
matter, these are bits and pieces [of One Vehicle] alone. Thus, do not 
resent delusion. What you practice is the bodhisattva way, seeing 
buddhas through the original practice of the bodhisattva. Each 
unfolding of the teaching, each entering into enlightenment, is 

dharma blossoms turning. 

There is delusion in the burning house, delusion at the gate, 
delusion away from the gate, delusion in front of the gate, delusion 
inside the gate. Inside-the-gate, away-from-the-gate, as well as at-the- 
gate, and the burning house are actualized in delusion. This is the 
unfolding of the teaching and entering enlightenment on the white-ox 
cart. 

When you enter majestically, riding the white-ox cart, do you 
regard the ground as the place of entering, or do you see the burning 
house as the place of departing? Do you fully regard being at the gate 
as passing the gate? 

Know that the cart wheel turns the burning house, unfolds the 
teaching and enters enlightenment. The ground turns the burning 
house, unfolds the teaching, and enters enlightenment. At-the-gate 
turns the entire gate, unfolds the teaching, and enters enlightenment. 
Innumerable gates turn the one gate, unfold the teaching, and enter 
enlightenment. Each unfolding of the teaching and each entrance into 
enlightenment turns the innumerable gates, unfolds the teaching, and 
enters enlightenment. Turning unfolds the teaching and enters 
enlightenment inside the gate. Turning unfolds the teaching and 
enters enlightenment away from the gate. Turning of the ground 
inside the burning house unfolds the teaching and_ enters 
enlightenment. 

Thus, the burning house is beyond understanding, and the ground is 
beyond knowing. Who regards the turning of the three realms as the 
wheel of the One Vehicle? Who regards unfolding the teaching and 
entering enlightenment as going in and out of the gate? If you seek 
the cart wheel instead of the burning house, how many turnings will 
there be? If you desire the burning house and not the ground, how 
profound will it be? Do you fully understand the ground as the 
equanimity of Vulture Peak? Do you practice the evenness of the 
ground on Vulture Peak? Thoroughly engage in the practice to make 
“the place where sentient beings rejoice” into “my [the Buddha’s] 
indestructible Pure Land.” 

[The Lotus Sutra says,] “I wholeheartedly wish to see the Buddha.” 

Study thoroughly whether this I is you or other. There is attaining 
the way by sharing the [buddha] body, and there is attaining the way 
with the entire body. 

“Appearing together on Vulture Peak” took place because the 
Buddha’s body-and-mind was not held back. There is unfolding the 
teaching and entering enlightenment by “always being present and 
expounding dharma.” There is unfolding the teaching and entering 
enlightenment through “manifesting nirvana by skillful means.” 

Who has trust in understanding and trust in beyond understanding, 

when the Buddha says, “They do not see me, although I am close to 
them.” 

“The place filled with celestial beings” is the land of Shakyamuni 
Buddha and Vairochana Buddha—the land of eternal, serene light. 
Encompassing the four lands within ourselves, we abide in the buddha 
land of one thusness. 

When you see a speck of dust, it is not that you do not see the world 
of phenomena. When you realize the world of phenomena, it is not 
that you do not realize a speck of dust. When buddhas realize the 
world of phenomena, they do not keep you from realization. 
Wholesomeness is manifest in the beginning, middle, and end. 

Thus, realization is reality right now. Even shocks, doubts, fears, 
and frights are none other than reality right now. However, with 
buddha knowledge it is different; seeing a speck of dust is different 
from sitting within a speck of dust. Even when you sit in the world of 
phenomena, it is not broad. Even when you sit in a speck of dust, it is 
not narrow. If you are not fully present, you do not fully sit. If you are 
fully present, you are free of how large or narrow it is where you are. 
Thus, you have thoroughly experienced the essential unfolding of 
dharma blossoms. 

Is it that the manifestation and essence of your practice now 
originates in the world of phenomena or in a speck of dust? Have no 
shocks and doubts, no fears or frights. Just this turning of dharma 
blossoms is the original practice, deep and wide. In seeing the speck of 
dust and seeing the world of phenomena, there is no attempt to create 
or measure. Even those who attempt to create or measure do so in 
accordance with dharma blossoms. 

When you hear the words “unfold the teaching and enter 
enlightenment,” understand that the buddhas want sentient beings to 
do so. “Opening the buddha wisdom” is the dharma blossoms turning; 
this is “manifesting buddha wisdom.” “Realizing buddha wisdom” is 
the dharma blossoms turning; this is entering buddha wisdom. 
“Manifesting buddha wisdom” is the dharma blossoms turning; this is 
realizing buddha wisdom. 

This is the dharma blossoms turning, opening the teaching and 
entering enlightenment; each is a way of thorough practice. Truly the 
buddha tathagatas’ realization of wisdom is turning broad and 
profound dharma blossoms. Giving a prediction of enlightenment is 
the unfolding of the buddha wisdom by the self. It is not the dharma 
blossoms turning to be given to others. This is what is meant by the 
words When your mind is deluded, it is turned by the dharma blossoms. 

When your mind is enlightened, you turn the dharma blossoms means 
that you turn the dharma blossoms. That is to say, when the dharma 
blossoms fully turn you, you are empowered to turn the dharma 
blossoms. While the original turning never stops, you return to turn 
the dharma blossoms. While the donkey [delusion] has not left, the 
horse [enlightenment] has arrived. This is the single great matter 
manifesting here and now. 

Although bodhisattvas who emerge from the earth into myriad 
worlds are the great sages of timeless dharma blossoms, still they 
emerge now turned by themselves and turned by others. Do not regard 
emerging from the earth alone as turning the dharma blossoms. 
Regard emerging from the sky also as turning the dharma blossoms. 
Know with buddha wisdom that bodhisattvas emerge not only from 
the earth or the sky, but also from the dharma blossoms. 

At the moment of dharma blossoming, invariably the parent is 
young and the child is old. It is not that the child is not a child and the 
parent is not a parent. Yet, you need to learn that the child [you] is 
indeed old and the parent [dharma] is truly young. Do not be like 
those who lack trust and are startled by this statement. What is 
usually distrusted is that now is a moment of dharma blossoming. 
Nevertheless, trust and turn the dharma blossoms as “in the time of 
the Buddha.” Turned by the unfolding of the teaching and by entering 
enlightenment, bodhisattvas emerge from the earth. Turned by 
buddha wisdom, bodhisattvas emerge from the earth. 

At the moment of turning the dharma blossoms there is the 
enlightened mind of the dharma blossoms, there are the dharma 
blossoms of enlightened mind. They are below and above in the air. 
What is below or above in the air is none other than the turning of the 
dharma blossoms. This is the Buddha’s timeless life span. 

Turn the dharma blossoms [of understanding] that the Buddha’s life 
span, the dharma blossoms, the world of phenomena, and the mind 
are actualized below and above in the air. Thus, below and above are 
nothing but the manifestation of the turning of the dharma blossoms. 

Sometimes the dharma blossoms are turned into three types of 
herbs, and sometimes they are turned into two types of trees. Do not 
wait to possess enlightenment. Do not wonder about not possessing 
enlightenment. To turn the self and aspire to enlightenment is to be in 
the southern buddha land. To attain the way is to join the Vulture 
Peak assembly of the southern buddha land. To be on Vulture Peak is 
itself to turn the dharma blossoms. There are assemblies in the air of 
buddha lands in the ten directions. They are embodiments of the 
turning of the dharma blossoms. Thus, the dharma blossoms of the 
buddha lands in the ten directions are turned. There is not a gap for 
even a speck of dust. 

“Form is emptiness” is the turning of dharma blossoms, beyond 
coming and beyond going. “Emptiness is form” is the turning of 
dharma blossoms, beyond birth and beyond death. This is not only 
when the Buddha was in the world and when he has passed away. 

That another person is intimate with you is that you are intimate 
with the person. To express respect is to give a gift like a pearl hidden 
in the hair or sewn into the robe [as told in the Lotus Sutra]. 
Thoroughly examine such moments [as dharma blossoms turning]. 

There is the turning of the dharma blossoms actualizing a jeweled 
tower five hundred yojana high in front of the Buddha [Shakyamuni]. 
There is the turning of the dharma blossoms actualizing the Buddha 
[Prabhutaratna] sitting in a tower two hundred yojana wide. There is 
the turning of the dharma blossoms actualizing bodhisattvas emerging 
from the ground and abiding in the air, when mind is without 
hindrance and form is without hindrance. There is the turning of the 
dharma blossoms actualizing bodhisattvas emerging from the sky and 
abiding in the ground, while immersed in the eye and immersed in the 
body. There is Vulture Peak in the tower, and a jeweled tower in 
Vulture Peak. The jeweled tower stands in the air. The air is air as the 
jeweled tower. The ancient buddha [Prabhutaratna] sits side by side 
with the Vulture Peak Buddha [Shakyamuni] in the tower, and the 
Vulture Peak Buddha enters realization for the Buddha in the tower. 

The Vulture Peak Buddha turns the dharma blossoms with body, 
mind, and the whole environs. Emerging on Vulture Peak means the 
buddha in the tower manifests, remaining in the ancient buddha land 
and timelessly passing away. When you investigate emerging and 
entering, do not follow commonplace ideas or the interpretations of 
those in the Two Lesser Vehicles. Just study the turning of the dharma 
blossoms. Timelessly passing away is magnificient realization 
embodied by the Buddha. It is not limited to inside the tower, in front 
of the buddha, the treasure stupa, empty space, the world of 
phenomena, or Vulture Peak. It is not limited to half a realm or the 
entire realm. It is not limited to the condition of phenomena. It is just 
beyond thinking. 

There is the turning of dharma blossoms, manifesting a buddha 
body and expounding dharma, manifesting this body and expounding 
dharma. There is the turning of dharma blossoms manifesting as 
Devadatta, and there is the turning of dharma blossoms by saying, 
“You may leave this assembly if you wish.” Do not assume the time 
you wait [for the Buddha] with joined hands gazing upward to be 
sixty short eons. You may call the time of wholehearted waiting 
innumerable eons, yet you cannot measure buddha wisdom. You 
cannot equate the duration of wholehearted waiting to the size of 
buddha wisdom. 

Do not assume that this turning of dharma blossoms is limited to the 
path of a bodhisattva’s original practice. At the assembly of the lotus 
blossoms, there is the act of turning dharma blossoms—“Today the 
Tathagata expounds the Great Vehicle.” Dharma blossoms are dharma 
blossoms right now, beyond perception and knowledge, beyond 
knowing and understanding. Thus, innumerable eons are one 
hairbreadth moment of the turning of dharma blossoms. It is a 
straightforward expression of the Buddha’s incalculable life span. 

It has been several hundred years since the Lotus Sutra was 
transmitted and started turning the dharma blossoms in China. Many 
people have written commentaries. Some of them have been 
outstanding teachers. But no one has attained and activated the 
essence of turning the lotus blossoms like Huineng, Old Buddha, High 
Ancestor of Caoxi. To hear it now and encounter it now is an ancient 
buddha meeting an ancient buddha. Are we not in the land of an 
ancient buddha? 

Rejoice! From eon to eon there have been dharma blossoms. From 
day to night there have been dharma blossoms. As dharma blossoms 
have been active from eon to eon, from day to night, whether your 
body and mind are strong or weak, they are dharma blossoms. Such 
blossoms are a rare treasure, radiant light, a practice place, broad and 
vast, great and timeless. When your mind is deluded, you are turned 
by the dharma blossoms. When your mind is enlightened, you turn the 
dharma blossoms. Indeed, this is dharma blossoms turning dharma 
blossoms. 

[Let me repeat:] When your mind is deluded, you are turned by the 
dharma blossoms. When your mind is enlightened, you turn the 
dharma blossoms. When you thoroughly experience this, it is dharma 
blossoms turning dharma blossoms. 

To honor and dedicate yourself to this teaching is no other than 
dharma blossoms turning dharma blossoms. 

This was written and given to Zen person Etatsu to celebrate his home 
leaving and entry into the practice of the way, during the summer 
practice period in the second year of the Ninji Era [1241]. Shaving 
the head is a good thing. To shave the head over and over again 
makes a true home leaver. Today’s home leaving is the natural fruit of 
the natural power of dharma blossoms turning in the past. The 
dharma blossoms of this moment will certainly bear fruit as dharma 
blossoms in the future. They are not Shakyamuni’s dharma blossoms, 
nor all buddhas’ dharma blossoms, but the dharma blossoms’ dharma 
blossoms. Every day the turning of the dharma blossoms is as it is, 
beyond perception, beyond knowledge. Dharma blossoms emerge at 
this moment, beyond knowing, beyond understanding. Past moments 

are your breathing in and breathing out. Present moments are your 
breathing in and breathing out. Treasure these moments as dharma 
blossoms, wondrous and inconceivable. Monk Dogen, who has 
transmitted dharma from China, founder of the Kannondori Kosho 
Horin Monastery. 

19 
Uneraspaste Mio 

Suakyvamunt BuppHA says, “The past mind is ungraspable. The present 
mind is ungraspable. The future mind is ungraspable.” 

This has been a point of study by buddha ancestors who have 
gouged out the caves and baskets [limited dualistic views] from what 
is ungraspable in the past, present, and future. They have used the 
caves and baskets of the self to do so. 

This self is ungraspable mind. Thinking and discerning at this very 
moment is ungraspable mind. The entire body that utilizes the twelve 
hours of a day is ungraspable mind. 

Buddha ancestors understood mind that is ungraspable from the 
time they entered the inner chambers [of their masters]. Without 
entering the inner chambers, there would not have been questioning, 
answering, seeing, and hearing about ungraspable mind. This is not 
even dreamed of by those who are masters of sutras and treaties, or by 
shravakas and pratyeka-buddhas. 

Here is a familiar example: 

Deshan Xuanjian was proclaiming that he had mastered the 
Diamond Sutra, calling himself Diamond King Chou. He claimed that 
he was particularly familiar with Xinlong’s commentary. He had 
collected twelve bundles of commentaries. It appeared that he was 
incomparable. However, he was merely a descendant of dharma 
teachers of letters 

Once, hearing about the unsurpassable dharma transmitted heir to 
heir in the south, Deshan felt very competitive. He learned about the 
assembly of Longtan, Zen Master Chongxin, so he crossed mountains 
and rivers carrying his books to meet him. On his way he stopped to 
catch his breath and saw an old woman. 

Deshan said to her, “What do you do?” 

The old woman said, “I sell rice cakes.” 

Deshan said, “Please sell me some.” 

The old woman said, “What will you do with them, reverend?” 

Deshan said, “I will eat them to refresh myself.” 

The old woman said, “What are you carrying?” 

Deshan said, “Haven’t you heard of me? I am Diamond King Chou. I 

specialize in the Diamond Sutra. There is no part of it I haven’t 
mastered. These are important commentaries on the sutra.” 

The old woman said, “May I ask you a question?” 

Deshan said, “Of course, ask me anything.” 

The old woman said, “I was told that the Diamond Sutra says, ‘The 
past mind is ungraspable. The present mind is ungraspable. The future 
mind is ungraspable.’ With which mind will you satisfy your hunger 
with these cakes? If you can answer, I will give you some cakes. 
Otherwise, I will not.” 

Dumbfounded, Deshan was unable to answer. The old woman 
flapped her sleeves and went away without giving Deshan any rice 
cakes. 

How regrettable! The king of commentators, who wrote 
commentaries on hundreds of scrolls, a lecturer for decades, was so 
easily defeated by a humble old woman with a single question. There 
is great difference between those who have entered an authentic 
teacher’s chamber and received transmission, and those who have not. 

Deshan said to himself, “A painted rice cake does not satisfy 
hunger.” He is now known as a dharma heir of Longtan. 

Reflecting on this story, it is clear that Deshan had not clarified the 
matter. Even after meeting Longtan, he must have feared the old 
woman. He was an immature student and not an old buddha going 
beyond realization. 

Although the old woman shut him up, we cannot say whether she 
was a person of true understanding. It is possible that she had heard of 
ungraspable mind and asked this question, thinking that mind is 
ineffable. 

If Deshan had been fully awakened, he would have been able to 
respond and discern whether or not the old woman was a person of 
true understanding. But since Deshan was not yet Deshan, we do not 
know or see through the old woman’s understanding. 

Those who nowadays wear cloud robes and mist sleeves [monks], 
who laugh at Deshan for being unable to respond and praise the old 
woman for her brilliance, are foolish. We may doubt the old woman’s 
understanding because, when Deshan could not answer, she could 
have said, “Reverend, you cannot answer my question. Ask me the 
same question and I will give you an answer.” If she could have 
answered Deshan, it would have been clear that she was truly a 
person of realization. 

Asking a question is not yet making a statement. There has never 
been a case since olden times where someone who said nothing was 
regarded as a person of realization. 

Groundless self-proclamations are useless just as in the case of 
Deshan. Those who have not made a right statement should not be 

accepted, just as in the case of the old woman. 

Try to speak for Deshan. When asked by the old woman, he should 
have said, “If so, don’t sell me rice cakes.” If he had done so, it would 
have been a sharp investigation of the way. 

Deshan may ask the old woman, “The past mind is ungraspable. The 
present mind is ungraspable. The future mind is ungraspable. With 
which mind will you satisfy your hunger with these cakes?” 

Then, the old woman should say, “Reverend, you only know that 
rice cakes satisfy your hunger. You don’t know that mind satisfies the 
rice cakes’ hunger, or that mind satisfies the mind’s hunger.” 

If she says so, Deshan will try to find an answer. 

At that moment, she should pick up three pieces of rice cake and 
offer them to Deshan. When Deshan moves to receive them, the old 
woman should say, “The past mind is ungraspable. The present mind 
is ungraspable. The future mind is ungraspable.” 

Again, Deshan may open his hand to receive the rice cakes. The old 
woman should pick one up, hit Deshan with it, and say, “A corpse 
with no spirit. Don’t be dumbfounded.” 

If Deshan speaks upon hearing these words, it will be good. If not, 
the old woman should continue to say more. Merely flapping her 
sleeves and going away are not like holding a stinging bee inside the 
sleeves [is not sharp enough]. 

Deshan did not say to the old woman, “I cannot answer. Please 
speak for me.” Thus, he did not say what he was supposed to say, and 
did not ask what he was supposed to ask. 

What a pity! Deshan and the old woman’s discussion on past mind 
and future mind has not been grasped by the future mind. 

Deshan does not seem to have acquired clarity even after that. His 
actions were only coarse. As he studied with Longtan for a long time, 
he must have had occasion to break Longtan’s head horn [surpass the 
teacher] and to receive the pearl from the gill [of the dragon]. But he 
only blew at a candle and was short of transmission of the lamp. 

Accordingly, monks who study the way should always make a 
diligent effort. Those who take an easy path are not adequate. Those 
who make a diligent effort are buddha ancestors. 

The inexhaustibility of mind is to buy a piece of painted rice cake 
and chew it up in a single bite. 

Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery, 
Uji County, Yamashiro Province, in the summer practice period, the 
second year of the Ninji Era [1241]. 

20 
Uncraspasie Mino, Larter Version 

Tue UNGRASPABLE MIND is all buddhas. Buddhas have maintained this as 

unsurpassable enlightenment. 

The Diamond Sutra says, “The past mind is ungraspable. The present 
mind is ungraspable. The future mind is ungraspable.” 

This is the ungraspable mind of the three realms [desire, form, and 
no-form realms], the ungraspable mind of all things, which is 
maintained and actualized by the ungraspable mind as all buddhas. 

This understanding cannot be realized without studying with 
buddhas, and cannot be authentically transmitted without studying 
with ancestors. To study means to practice with the sixteen-foot 
golden body and to practice with a blade of grass. To study with all 
buddhas means to practice with skin, flesh, bones, and marrow, and to 
practice with [Mahakashyapa’s] smile. 

That is, it means to practice with a buddha who has authentically 
transmitted the treasury of the true dharma eye heir to heir; to 
practice directly pointing to the mind seal of buddhas and ancestors; 
and to receive the bones, marrow, and face, as well as the body, hair, 
and skin. Those who have not studied the buddha way, who have not 
entered the ancestors’ chambers, have not experienced this. Those 
who have not asked or spoken about dharma have not even dreamed 
of it. 

Deshan said, “Please sell me some.” 

The old woman said, “What will you do with them, reverend?” 

Deshan said, “I will eat them to refresh myself.” 

The old woman said, “What are you carrying?” 

Deshan said, “Haven’t you heard of me? I am Diamond King Chou. I 
specialize in the Diamond Sutra. There is no part of it I haven’t 
mastered. These are important commentaries on the sutra.” 

The old woman said, “May I ask you a question?” 

Deshan said, “Of course, ask me anything.” 

The old woman said, “I was told that the Diamond Sutra says, ‘The 
past mind is ungraspable. The present mind is ungraspable. The future 
mind is ungraspable.’ With which mind will you satisfy your hunger 
with these cakes? If you can answer, I will give you some cakes. 
Otherwise, I will not.” 

Dumbfounded, Deshan was unable to answer. The old woman 
abruptly flapped her sleeves and went away without giving Deshan 
any rice cakes. 

How regrettable! The king of commentators, who wrote 
commentaries on hundreds of scrolls, a lecturer for decades, was 
easily defeated by a humble old woman with a single question. There 
is a great difference between those who have entered an authentic 
teacher’s chamber and received transmission, and those who have not. 

Those who hear the word ungraspable and think that everyone’s 
mind is equally ungraspable have no vitality. Those who think that 
mind is ungraspable because everyone has mind miss the point. 

Deshan at that moment realized for the first time that a painted rice 
cake does not satisfy hunger and that one needs to meet a true teacher 
in order to practice the way. Hence he met Longtan, actualized the 
vital way of teacher and disciple, and became a true person. He 
became not only a high ancestor to Yunmen and Fayan but also a 
guiding teacher for humans and devas. 

As I reflect on this story, it is clear that Deshan at that time had not 
clarified the matter. Although the old woman shut him up, we cannot 
say whether she was a person of true understanding. It is possible that 
she had heard of ungraspable mind and asked this question, thinking 
that mind is ineffable. 

If Deshan had been fully awakened, he would have been able to 
respond and discern whether the old woman was a person of true 
understanding. But as Deshan was not yet Deshan, we do not know or 
see through the old woman’s understanding. Doubt about the old 
woman remains. Seeing Deshan unable to say a word, she should have 
said, “Reverend, if you cannot answer, why don’t you ask me? I will 
answer it for you.” 

If Deshan had asked and the old woman had expressed herself, her 
true understanding would have been revealed. The bones, marrow, 
and faces of the ancient buddhas, as well as their light and 
auspiciousness, would have revealed the virtue of studying together. 
Thus, Deshan, the old woman, ungraspableness, exhaustibleness, the 
rice cake, and the mind would have become free from grasping and 
from letting go. 

The buddha mind encompasses the past, present, and future. 
Although this mind and the past, present, and future are not apart by 
even a hairbreadth, if we separate them they would be as distant as 
eighteen thousand miles. 

When asked about the past mind, say, “Ungraspable.” When asked 
about the present mind, say, “Ungraspable.” When asked about the 
future mind, say, “Ungraspable.” 

It means that there is no mind that is called ungraspable. But it is 
described as ungraspable for the time being. Do not say the mind 
cannot be exhausted; just say it is ungraspable. Do not say the mind 
can be exhausted; just say it is ungraspable. 

When asked about the past mind that is ungraspable, say, “Birth and 

death come and go.” When asked about the present mind that is 
ungraspable, say, “Birth and death come and go.” When asked about 
the future mind that is ungraspable, say “Birth and death come and 
go.” 
There is buddha mind that is walls, tiles, and pebbles. Buddhas in 
the past, present, and future realize it as ungraspable. Walls, tiles, and 
pebbles are just buddha mind. Buddhas in the past, present, and future 
realize them as ungraspable. 

Furthermore, the ungraspableness of mountains, rivers, and the 
great earth is within the self; the ungraspableness is the mind. There is 
also the ungraspableness of “With no place to abide, the mind 
emerges.” All buddhas in the ten directions expound eighty thousand 
dharma gates in each lifetime. The mind that is ungraspable is like 
this. 

At the time of Nanyang Huizhong, National Teacher Dazheng, 
Tripitaka Master Daer came from India to the capital city [of 
Chang’yan in China]. He claimed that he had mastered the power of 
seeing others’ minds. Emperor Su of the Tang Dynasty asked Huizhong 
to test him. Daer saw Huizhong, bowed to him, and stood on the right 
side of him. 

Huizhong said, “Have you mastered the power of seeing others’ 
minds?” 

Daer said, “Not really.” 

Huizhong said, “Tell me where this old monk is.” 

Daer said, “You are the teacher of the nation, reverend. Why are 
you in the West River enjoying the racing boats?” 

Huizhong paused for a while and said, “Tell me where am I now.” 

Daer said, “You are the teacher of the nation, reverend. Why are 
you on the Tianjin Bridge watching monkeys play?” 

Huizhong again said, “Tell me where I am.” 

Daer tried to see for some time but could not see where Hui zhong 
was. 

Huizhong shouted: “You are possessed by the spirit of a wild fox. 
You don’t have the power of seeing others’ minds.” 

Daer remained silent. 

It is not good not to understand this. A buddha ancestor and a 
Tripitaka master are not the same. They are as far apart from each 
other as heaven and earth. A buddha ancestor clarifies buddha 
dharma and a Tripitaka master does not. Indeed, a layperson can be a 
Tripitaka master who specializes in literature. So, even if Daer not 
only was well versed in the languages of India but also had mastery in 
seeing others’ minds, he had never dreamed of the body and mind of 
the buddha way. Upon his encounter with Huizhong, he was defeated. 

In studying the mind in the buddha way, all things are mind, the 
three realms are inseparable from mind, inseparable from mind is 
inseparable from mind, buddha is mind. Do not mistake the mind of 
the self or of other in the buddha way. Do not vainly float down the 
West River. Do not imagine the Tianjin Bridge. In order to maintain 
the body and mind of the buddha way, study the mastery of wisdom 
in the buddha way. In this buddha way, the entire earth is all mind; it 
does not change by appearing and disappearing. The entire dharma is 
all mind. Understand the entire mind as mastery of wisdom. 

Daer did not see this. He was merely a wild fox spirit. Therefore, he 
did not see Huizhong’s mind and understand his mind from his first 
two questions. He was a wild fox spirit wastefully fooling with racing 
boats and playing monkeys. How could he have seen Huizhong? It is 
clear that he did not know where Huizhong was. 

Daer did not hear the words in Huizhong’s third question, Tell me 
where this old monk is. If he had heard them, he would have asked the 
meaning of the question. But he didn’t, so he missed the question. 

If Daer had studied buddha dharma, he would have heard 
Huizhong’s words and seen Huizhong’s mind. Because he had not 
studied buddha dharma, he wasted the opportunity of meeting the 
guiding master of humans and devas. How pitiful! How sad! 

How can a scholar of the Tripitaka come close to the practice of 
buddha ancestors? Furthermore, treatise masters and Tripitaka 
masters in India may never understand Huizhong’s practice. What a 

Tripitaka master knows should be known by Indra or a treatise 
master. What Indra or a treatise master knows may be reached by a 
bodhisattva in the ten stages or three classes, or a bodhisattva who is 
a candidate to be a buddha. But the body and mind of Huizhong 
cannot be known by a bodhisattva in the ten stages or three classes, or 
a bodhisattva who is a candidate to be a buddha. To speak of body 
and mind in the buddha house is like this. Know this and trust that 
this is so. 

mind of Huizhong. 

Now, the reason I say that they did not know why Huizhong had 
tested Daer is this: Huizhong said, Tell me where this old monk is. This 
is how he asked Daer if he knew buddha dharma. If Daer had known 
buddha dharma, he should have investigated Huizhong’s question in 
buddha dharma. To investigate it in buddha dharma is to ask where 
Huizhong was in here, there, unsurpassable enlightenment, realization 
of prajna, emptiness, the earth, a grass-roof hut, or a place of treasure. 

Daer did not understand Huizhong’s mind and wastefully presented 
a view of an ordinary person or the Two Lesser Vehicles. 

Huizhong asked again, Tell me where this old monk is. For this Daer 
presented another fruitless statement. 

Huizhong finally asked, Tell me where this old monk is. Daer thought 
about it for some time but did not say anything. He was 
dumbfounded. Then Huizhong scolded him and said, You are possessed 
by the spirit of a wild fox. You don’t have the power of seeing others’ 
minds. But Daer could not say anything. 

When I reflect on this story, all five masters thought that Huizhong’s 
criticism indicated that Daer knew where he was the first two times 
but did not know the third time. It is not so. Huizhong scolded that 
Daer was a mere fox spirit and had not even dreamed of buddha 
dharma. It is not that Daer knew where he was for the first two times 
but did not for the third time. Huizhong’s scolding Daer scolded him 
all the way. 

Huizhong’s point was: Is there seeing others’ minds in buddha 
dharma? If so, investigate “others” in buddha dharma, investigate 
“mind” in buddha dharma, and investigate “understanding” in buddha 
dharma. However, Huizhong thought Daer’s statements had nothing to 
do with buddha dharma and could not be called buddha dharma. The 
reason he tested him three times was that even if Daer had a right 
answer for the third time, what he said the first two times were not 
the teaching of buddha dharma and it was not what Huizhong was 
asking for; so Daer should be criticized. Huizhong asked him three 
times to see whether Daer had understood the true meaning of the 
question. 

Secondly, I say these five masters did not understand Huizhong’s 
mind. The reason is: The body and mind of Huizhong were not known 
and understood by Daer. They cannot be reached by bodhisattvas of 
the ten stages or three classes. They cannot be clarified by candidates 
for buddhas or those who have understanding equal to enlightenment. 
How could they be understood by an ordinary person like Daer? 
Clearly understand this. 

Those who suppose that Daer can know and reach the body and 
mind of Huizhong do so because they themselves do not know the 

body and mind of Huizhong. If you say that those who understand 
others’ minds can know Huizhong, then would practitioners of the 
Lesser Vehicles understand him? No. They cannot even get close to 
Huizhong. Nowadays there are many practitioners of the Lesser 
Vehicles who read Mahayana scriptures. They do not know the body 
and mind of Huizhong either. And they do not even dream of the body 
and mind of buddha dharma. You should know that even if they read 
Mahayana scriptures, they are practitioners of Hinayana. The body 
and mind of Huizhong are not to be understood by those who practice 
miraculous powers. 

The body and mind of Huizhong cannot be measured by Huizhong 
himself. The reason is that practice is never about the intention to 
become a buddha. Therefore, even a buddha eye cannot see them. The 
activity is dropped away from a birdcage or a fishing net. It is not 
bound by a birdcage or a fishing net. 

Hearing Xuansha, Xuedou said, You lost. You lost. Xuedou said so 
since he had approved Xuansha. He should not have said so if he had 
not. 

Haihui Shouduan said, If Huizhong was on top of Daer’s nostrils, why 
was it difficult to see? Because Daer did not know that Huizhong was 
inside his eyeball. He also discusses the third time. He should have 
denied Daer’s seeing of Huizhong the first two times, but he didn’t. 
How could he know that Huizhong was on top of Daer’s nose or inside 
his eyeball? 

These five old masters were not clear about Huizhong’s teaching. It 
looks as if they did not pursue buddha dharma enough. 

Know that Huizhong is a buddha who excelled in his time. He had 
authentically received transmission of the treasury of true dharma 
eye. That is why scholars of the Lesser Vehicles who study scriptures 
and treatises did not come close to him. 

“Seeing others’ mind” can be seen as seeing others’ thought from 
the Lesser Vehicles’ viewpoint. It is wrong to think that such scholars 
of the Lesser Vehicles who study scriptures and treatises understood 
one half or even the tip of one hair of Huizhong. You should just know 
that they had no idea about Huizhong’s teaching. 

You might think that Daer knew where Huizhong was the first two 
times but not the third time; that he should not be criticized because 
he was right two out of three times, and that he was not completely 
wrong. Then who would criticize Daer, and who would trust 
Huizhong? 

Huizhong’s intention was to criticize Daer for not experiencing the 
body and mind of buddha dharma. The five masters made such 
mistakes. None of them grasped Huizhong’s teaching. 

Huizhong expressed the ungraspable mind of the buddha way. It is 
hard to believe that those who did not understand this one teaching 
do understand other teachings. Know that ancient teachers sometimes 
made mistake after mistake. 

Indra once asked Huizhong, “How do we get liberated from 
everyday activities?” 

Huizhong said, “You get liberated by practicing the way.” 

Indra asked further, “What is the way?” 

Huizhong said, “Momentary mind is the way.” 

Indra said, “What is the momentary mind?” 

Huizhong raised a finger and said, “This is the base of prajna. That 
is the net of pearls.” 

Indra made a deep bow. 

There are many discussions on body and mind from the viewpoint 
of the buddha way in the assemblies of buddhas and ancestors. To 
study them is beyond the intellectual reach of the ordinary and sacred. 
Study mind that is ungraspable. 

Written at the Kosho Horin Monastery on a day of summer practice 
period, the second year of the Ninji Era [1241]. 

21 
Ow Mhrror 

Waar ALL BUDDHAS and ancestors have maintained and transmitted, 

person to person, is an old mirror. This is one seeing, one face; one 
image, one casting [of the bronze mirror]; one practice and one 
realization. When a barbarian comes, a barbarian appears in eighteen 
thousand forms. When a Chinese person comes, a Chinese person 
appears in myriad years in one moment. When the old comes, the old 
appears. When the new comes, the new appears. When a buddha 
comes, a buddha appears. When an ancestor comes, an ancestor 
appears. 

the boy left home and received the precepts, the mirror disappeared. 
People near and far admired these extraordinary occurrences. 

Although this cannot be compared with anything in this Saha 
World, we should consider whether anything similar can be found in 
any world. Know that scriptures carved on trees and stones, teachers 
active in farmlands and villages, yellow paper and red scrolls—these 
are all round mirrors. How can we regard Gayashata as exceptional? 

Once, when Gayashata was traveling, he saw Venerable 
Sanghanandi and approached him. 

Sanghanandi asked him, “What expression do you have at hand?” 

Understand that this is not merely a question. 

Gayashata said in verse: 

All buddhas are a great round mirror. 
There is no obscuration inside or out. 
Two people have one understanding. 
Minds and eyes are alike. 

How was the great round mirror of all buddhas born together with 
Gayashata? From his birth, he brought forward the clarity of the great 
round mirror. All buddhas equally study and see this mirror. All 
buddhas are cast images of this mirror. 

The great round mirror is beyond wisdom and truth, beyond essence 
and characteristics. Although there is something called a great round 
mirror in the teaching of the ten sages and three classes [of 
bodhisattvas], it is not the same as this great round mirror of all 
buddhas. Not all buddhas are limited to wisdom. Buddhas have 
wisdom, but we do not regard wisdom as buddhas. Know that 
speaking of wisdom is not the ultimate expression of the buddha way. 

Even if you see or hear that the great round mirror of all buddhas is 
born together with you, there is a further teaching. This great round 
mirror does not belong to this life or another life. It is not a jade 
mirror, a bronze mirror, a flesh mirror, or a marrow mirror. 

Is this verse spoken by the round mirror or by the boy? Even though 
the boy expounded this four-line verse, he had never studied it in 
scriptures or with a teacher. He said this by holding up the round 
mirror. From the time he was an infant he was always looking at this 
mirror. It seemed that he had this understanding from birth. Was the 
great round mirror born together with the boy, or was the boy born 
together with the great round mirror? They must have been born 
together before and after. 

The great round mirror is the power of all buddhas. There is no 
obscuration inside or out means that there is no inside other than 
outside, and no outside that has any obscuration inside. This mirror 

has no front or back. 

As for two people have one understanding and their minds and eyes are 
alike, being alike means one person meets another. The image inside 
has mind, eye, and one understanding. The reflection outside has 
mind, eye, and one understanding. The bodies, minds, and environs 
[of the two people] that emerge are alike inside and outside. There is 
neither self nor other. Two people encounter, two people are alike. 
Other is called self, self becomes other. 

Minds and eyes are alike means the minds are like the minds, the 
eyes are like the eyes. Being alike is minds and eyes. It is just like 
saying that both minds and eyes are alike. Minds are alike just as the 
Third Ancestor [Jianzhi—Mirror Wisdom] or the Sixth Ancestor 
[Dajian—Great Mirror]. Eye and eye are alike just as the eye of the 
way is immersed in the eye. 

This is the meaning of Gayashata’s words. This is what he presented 
to Sanghanandi upon meeting him. Take up these words and study the 
buddha face, ancestor face, of the great round mirror as a family 
member of the old mirror. 

mirror. 

Xuansha said, “One hundred broken pieces.” 

For the moment, investigate the essential matter spoken of by 
Xuefeng—what is it? For the moment, take a look at Xuefeng’s old 
mirror. The words like an old mirror I have in myself mean that the 
mirror is completely boundless and not limited to outside or inside. It 
is a pearl rolling on a board. 

When a barbarian comes, a barbarian appears is [a thorough 
experience of] one red beard. When a Chinese person comes, a Chinese 
person appears means that this person has lived [in a civilized land] 
altogether with the three or five elements since the beginning of time. 
Xuefeng manifested the Chinese person with the power of the old 
mirror. Because this Chinese person is not merely a Chinese person, a 
Chinese person appears. Regarding Xuefeng’s words, Both the barbarian 
and the Chinese person disappear, I say further that the mirror also 
disappears. 

Regarding Xuansha’s words broken into one hundred pieces, let me 
say: Now I am demanding of you: Give me back the broken pieces. 
How can you give me the bright mirror? 

pure. Your body will not disturb your mind, and you will be able to 
live long.” 

comes, the old appears. What reflects the old and the new is an old 
mirror. 

mirror? How is it? Extensively study the words of the buddha 
ancestor. 

Xuefeng’s reply, Both the barbarian and the Chinese person disappear, 
means the barbarian and the Chinese person disappear together at the 
moment of a bright mirror. What is the meaning of both disappearing? 
While the coming and appearing of the barbarian and the Chinese 
person do not hinder the old mirror, why do they both disappear? 

Even if Xuefeng said, When a barbarian comes, a barbarian appears, 
and when a Chinese person comes, a Chinese person appears, the coming 
of a bright mirror is the coming of a bright mirror. Thus, the barbarian 
and the Chinese person who appear in an old mirror together 
disappear together. This being so, in these words by Xuefeng, there is 
an old mirror, a bright mirror. Be clear about the teaching that the 
moment when a bright mirror truly comes does not hinder the 
barbarian that appears in an old mirror. 

Xuefeng’s words When a barbarian comes, a barbarian appears, when 
a Chinese person comes, a Chinese person appears do not indicate that 
the barbarian or the Chinese person come and appear on the face of 
an old mirror, on the back of an old mirror, or outside of an old 
mirror. His words do not indicate that the barbarian and the Chinese 
person come and appear together with an old mirror. 

Listen to Xuenfeng’s words. The moment of the barbarian and the 
Chinese person coming and appearing actualizes the coming and 
appearing of a barbarian and the Chinese person in an old mirror. To 
say that the mirror still exists when both the barbarian and the 
Chinese person disappear is to be ignorant about appearing and to be 
negligent about coming. It is more than confusion. 

Then, Xuansha said, I have a different understanding. Xuefeng said, 
How do you understand? Xuansha said, Please ask me a question. Do not 
miss this request by Xuansha. It is not hurling insight between parent 
and child [master and student]. When Xuansha requested his master 
to ask him a question, he must have known what was going to be 
asked. When the thunder of questioning arises, there is no way to 
escape. 

Xuefeng said, What about the moment when you encounter the 
emergence of a bright mirror all of a sudden? This question is one piece 
of old mirror the parent and child investigate together. 

Xuansha said, One hundred broken pieces. These words mean one 
hundred, one thousand, or ten thousand pieces. The moment of 
encountering the emergence of a bright mirror all of a sudden is one 
hundred broken pieces. To study and realize one hundred broken pieces is 
a bright mirror, because letting the bright mirror express itself must 
be in the form of one hundred broken pieces. Where miscellaneous 
pieces are hanging, there is the bright mirror. Do not try to peek into a 

moment when a bright mirror is not miscellaneous pieces or when 
there are no miscellaneous pieces. A bright mirror is just one hundred 
broken pieces. To face the one hundred broken pieces is to face a 
solitary sheer peak. 

Then, is the one hundred broken pieces spoken of by Xuansha an 
expression of an old mirror or a bright mirror? This is when you 
should ask for a turning word. This is no longer a talk about an old 
mirror or a bright mirror. You could still keep asking about an old 
mirror or a bright mirror. But, do sand, pebbles, and walls get to the 
tip of your tongue and not turn into one hundred broken pieces when 
you question Xuansha’s words? 

In what form are the broken pieces manifested? [I say:] The moon 
in an ancient blue sky. 

for it. 

Sansheng said, Why do you call what is nameless for eons an old 
mirror? 

This is an expression by Sansheng to authenticate an old mirror. 
Eons means before the emergence of a single mind, single thought. No 
name comes out for eons. Nameless is sun face, moon face, an old 
mirror face, a bright mirror face of these eons. When nameless is truly 
nameless, eons are not eons. When eons are not eons, Sansheng’s 
expression is beyond an expression. 

“Before the emergence of a single mind, single thought” is this very 
day. Temper your practice without missing this very day. Indeed, the 
statement nameless for eons is renowned. How can you call it an old 
mirror? A dragon head, a snake tail? 

Responding to Sansheng’s statement, Xuefeng should have said, “An 
old mirror. An old mirror.” But instead, Xuefeng said, A scratch is 
made. 

It means that a scratch has emerged. How can there be a scratch on 
an old mirror? A scratch is made must mean nameless for eons. 

A scratch means an old mirror is nameless for eons. A scratch on an 
old mirror is an entire old mirror. As Sansheng had not come out of 
the cave—a scratch on an old mirror—the question he asked is 
completely a scratch on an old mirror. 

Thus, study that a scratch can be made on an old mirror, and that 
what is scratched is also an old mirror. This is the study of an old 
mirror. 

Sansheng continued: What’s the urgency? I don’t know the words. 

He was asking what the urgency was. Was the urgency about today 
or tomorrow, self or other, the entire world of the ten directions or in 
the country of Great Tang? Investigate this thoroughly. 

Regarding I don’t know the words, there are expressed words, 
unexpressed words, and completed words. The teaching of words is 
actualized now. 

For example, how about the words, “I have attained the way 
simultaneously with sentient beings on the great earth”? In this way, 
words should not be like an elaborately woven brocade [decorative 
endeavor] or facing each other. It is like, “I don’t know who faces me” 
[as Emperor Wu said to Bodhidharma]; it is facing but not-knowing 
each other. It is not that there are no words, but just not-knowing. 
Not-knowing is a straightforward bare heart. It is bright and clear not- 
seeing. 

Xuefeng said, It is this old monk’s fault. This statement may be 
interpreted to mean that Xuefeng admitted his mistake in the earlier 
expression. But it is not the case. This old monk is an accomplished 
master in the house [of the Buddha], who wholeheartedly practices 

being an old monk and nothing else. In one thousand changes and ten 
thousand transformations, into a god’s head and a demon’s face, the 
practice of the way is just being one old monk. Buddhas come and 
ancestors come, while myriad years arise in a single moment, yet the 
practice of the way is just being one old monk. The fault is the abbot’s 
being busy. 

Reflecting on this dialogue, Xuefeng is a horn of Deshan’s lineage, 
and Sansheng is an outstanding disciple of Linji. Both masters, being 
descendants of Qingyuan and Nanyue, equally hold respectable 
lineages. They maintained an old mirror in this way. This is a model 
for those who practice later. 

vertically and horizontally all the way. An old mirror is neither 
multiple nor large. Wide indicates the measure of it. It does not mean 
breadth. Wide is like measuring two or three inches, or counting seven 
or eight pieces. In the arithmetic of the buddha way, great 
enlightenment and beyond enlightenment are counted as two or three 
ounces, and buddha ancestors are counted as fivefold or tenfold. Ten 
feet is the breadth of an old mirror. The breadth of an old mirror is 
singlefold. 

Xuansha said, How wide is that furnace? There is nothing hidden in 
this statement. Study it as a one-thousand-year-old and ten-thousand- 
year-old statement. 

When you see a furnace, who is the one that sees? When you see a 
furnace, it is not seven feet or eight feet. Xuansha’s question was not a 
confused statement. It actualizes something remarkable. It is like 
saying, “What has thus come?” 

How wide is not asking about the size in an ordinary way. It is an 
understanding of being emancipated right where you are. This should 
not be doubted. Listen to Xuansha’s words for a teaching that the 
characteristics of a furnace are beyond measurement. Do not drop the 
ball you are holding on the ground; just smash it. This is endeavor. 

Xuefeng said, It is as wide as an old mirror. Reflect quietly on these 
words. He did not say that the furnace is one foot wide. It is not that 
to say one foot is right and to say as wide as an old mirror is wrong. 
Just reflect on the practice of saying, It is as wide as an old mirror. 

Many people think that Xuefeng was wrong in not saying, “one foot 
wide.” Investigate, however, the completeness of being wide. Reflect 
on one whole piece of an old mirror. Do not miss the practice of like. It 
is like [Xiangyan’s] saying, “Hold up a vital posture on the old path. 
Do not fall into stagnancy.” 

Xuansha said, Reverend master, your heels have not yet touched the 
ground. What he meant by reverend master, or reverend priest, is not 
necessarily Xuefeng. Xuefeng is a reverend master. 

Ask where the heels are. Investigate what the heels are. Investigate 
whether the heels are the treasury of the true dharma eye, the empty 
sky, the entire earth, or the life vein. Are they many, one, half, or one 
hundred thousand [heels]? Study in this way. 

What is the ground in your heels have not yet touched the ground? The 
great earth is called the ground according to the views of one kind of 
being. Among other beings, some see it as the inconceivable dharma 
gate of emancipation, while others see it as the place where all 
buddhas practice the way. 

So, what is the ground the heels are supposed to touch? Is the 
ground real existence or real nonexistence? Or, does the ground mean 

that there is not even an inch of it in the great way? Ask in this way 
and that way. Say it to self and others. 

Is it right or wrong that the heels touch the ground? Why did 
Xuansha say that Xuefeng’s heels have not yet touched the ground? At 
the very moment when there is not an inch of land on the great earth, 
touching the ground is not yet, and not touching the ground is not yet. 

Thus, your heels have not yet touched the ground is the activity of the 
reverend master. It is work of the heels. 

Mazu said, “I intend to become a buddha.” 

Then Nanyue picked up a tile and started polishing it on a stone 
near Mazu’s hut. 

Mazu said, “Master, what are you doing?” 

Nanyue said, “Polishing a tile.” 

Mazu said, “Why are you polishing the tile?” 

Nanyue said, “I am trying to make a mirror.” 

Mazu said, “How can you polish a tile and make a mirror?” 

Nanyue said, “How can you do zazen and become a buddha?” 

People have been interpreting this great story for hundreds of years 
as Nanyue’s encouragement to Mazu. It is not necessarily so. The 
activity of a great sage is far beyond ordinary understanding. 

Without polishing a tile, how can a great sage have the skillful 
means to make a true person? The capacity of making a true person is 
the bones and marrow of buddha ancestors. Although it is fabricated, 
it is a furnishing [essential] of the house. Without being furniture or 
equipment, Nanyue’s teaching could not have been transmitted in the 
buddha house. In particular, this immediately guided Mazu. From this 
we know that the work authentically transmitted by buddha ancestors 
is no other than directly pointing. 

Indeed, at the moment a polished tile becomes a mirror, Mazu 
becomes a buddha. At the moment Mazu becomes a buddha, Mazu 
immediately becomes Mazu. At the moment Mazu becomes Mazu, 
zazen immediately becomes zazen. 

Thus, polishing a tile and turning it into a mirror has been 
maintained as the bones and marrow of the ancient buddha. This 
being so, there is an old mirror made of a tile. Although this mirror is 
polished, it has never been defiled. It is not that the tile is dirty. It is 
just that a tile that is a tile is polished. To actualize the work of 
making a mirror in this way is the endeavor of buddha ancestors. 

If polishing a tile did not make a mirror, polishing a mirror would 
not make a mirror either. Who can doubt this? This making is making 
a buddha, making a mirror. 

There may be those who question whether polishing a mirror 
becomes polishing a tile by mistake. The time of polishing cannot be 
fathomed by the measure of other times. 

Nanyue’s expression, however, is an expression of expressions. Thus, 
polishing a tile is making a mirror. Those of you nowadays should also 
try to polish a tile to make a mirror. It will certainly be a mirror. 

If a tile does not become a mirror, a human being does not become 
a buddha. If you look down at a tile as a lump of mud, you look down 
at a human being as a lump of mud. If a human has mind, a tile 
should have mind. Who knows that there is a mirror that is brought 

forth as a tile and is actualized as a tile? Who knows that there is a 
mirror that is brought forth as a mirror and is actualized as a mirror? 

Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery 
on the ninth day, the ninth month, the second year of the Ninji Era 
[1241]. 

22 
Reape A Surra 

Tue PRACTICE AND realization of unsurpassable, complete 

enlightenment is brought forth sometimes by a teacher and sometimes 
by a sutra. A teacher is a buddha ancestor of the entire self. A sutra is 
a sutra of the entire self. We say this because you yourself are the self 
of all buddha ancestors, and the self of all sutras. 

Although it is called the self, it is not bound by “you” and “I.” It is a 
vital eyeball, a vital fist. Thus, there is remembering, reading, 
chanting, copying, receiving, and maintaining a sutra. All of these are 
the practice-realization of buddha ancestors. 

To encounter a sutra, however, is not easy. Among the innumerable 
lands, it is difficult to hear the name of a sutra. Even in the assembly 
of buddha ancestors, it is difficult to hear the name of a sutra. Even 
among receivers of the life veins [of buddha dharma], there are those 
who have not even heard the name of a sutra. 

Without being buddha ancestors, it is impossible to see, hear, read, 
chant, and understand the meaning of a sutra. Upon studying with a 
buddha ancestor, you also study a sutra. Then the hearing, 
maintaining, receiving, and expounding of a sutra is actualized in 
arriving, hearing, and speaking through ears, eyes, nose, tongue, body, 
and mind. 

Those who expound discourses of teaching outside the way for the 
sake of seeking fame cannot practice the buddha sutras that have been 
transmitted by carvings on trees and rocks, being spread in fields and 
villages, being demonstrated in a great number of lands, and 
expounded in empty space. 

went back to the abbot’s quarters. 

The director followed him and said, “You promised to expound 
dharma to the assembly. How come you did not say a word?” 

Yaoshan said, “Sutras have sutra scholars. Treatises have treatise 
scholars. What do you expect from this old monk?” 

What Yaoshan taught is that a fist has a fist teacher and an eyeball 
has an eyeball teacher. 

However, ask Yaoshan, “It is not that I expect something from you. 
But, master, what kind of teacher are you?” 

Know that there was a sutra-chanting monk in the buddha way who 
was personally named by Huineng. The chanting of Sutra-Chanting 
Monk is neither chanting nor beyond chanting. It cannot be measured 
by being or beyond being. Indeed, this is not putting down the scrolls 
[of the Lotus Sutra] for eons and not lacking a moment of chanting the 
sutra. From the sutra to the sutra there is nothing other than the sutra. 

were not limited to one or two, but were hundreds, thousands, 
myriads, and billions of scrolls. He spoke of so many, but it is 
immeasurable. 

Prajnatara regarded not abiding in the realm of skandhas while 
exhaling as hundreds, thousands, myriads, and billions of scrolls of 
sutras. But this cannot be counted by ordinary people or sages. It is 
not in the realm of ordinary people or sages. Thus, it can neither be 
measured by the intellect of those who are wise, nor be guessed by the 
wisdom of those who have knowledge. Neither can it be discussed by 
the intellect of those who are beyond wise, nor can it be arrived at by 
the wisdom of those who have knowledge beyond knowledge. Rather, 
it is buddha ancestors’ practice-realization, skin, flesh, bones, marrow, 
eyeball, fist, top of the head, nostril, staff, whisk, leaping away from 
making. 

The old woman said, “I asked the master to rotate the entire canon. 
Why did he only rotate half of the canon?” 

Now, do not interpret this as Dasui walking around the meditation 
platform or as the meditation platform walking around Dasui. This is 
not only a circle of a fist or an eyeball, but drawing a circle, creating a 
circle. 

However, did the old woman have an eye or not? She said, Why did 
he only rotate half of the canon? Although these words may have been 
authentically transmitted by a fist, she should have spoken further, “I 
asked the master to rotate the entire canon. Why did he merely fool 
with his spirit?” Even if she said this by mistake, she would have been 
someone with an eye. 

window, “Reverend, what sutra are you reading?” 

The monk said, “The Vimalakirti Sutra.” 

Yunju said, “I am not asking you about the Vimalakirti Sutra. What 
sutra are you reading?” 

At this the monk entered realization. 

Yunju’s question—What sutra are you reading?—addressed a single 
path of silently reading throughout a vast time span. Without speaking 
about what the monk was reading, this question put a dead snake on 
the road [woke him up]. Thus, this question—What sutra—emerged. 
The monk unmistakably encountered a person [himself]. So he said, 
The Vimalakirti Sutra. 

To read a sutra is to take up and assemble all buddha ancestors, 
turn them into an eyeball, and read it. At this very moment buddha 
ancestors become buddhas, expound dharma, expound buddha, and 
become. Without this moment of reading a sutra, the top of the head 
and the face of buddha ancestors had not actualized. 

beforehand, sets it in front of the hall, and hands the incense to the 
donor at the host’s signal. The host and the donor go into the hall 
from the southern side of its front entrance. 

The donor goes to the Sacred Monk, burns incense, and makes three 
bows, while holding the incense burner. In the meantime, the 
monastery host slightly faces the donor while standing with hands in 
shashu at the northern side. 

After bowing, the donor turns around in a rightward direction and 
makes a standing bow to the abbot while holding up the incense 
burner. The abbot, remaining seated on the chair, holds up the sutra 
book [between the thumbs and index fingers] with hands in gassho, 
and receives the donor’s greeting. 

Then, the donor turns to the north, performs a standing bow, and 
makes a circumambulation in the hall, starting in front of the head 
monk’s seat. This is led by the monastery host. When the greeting 
circuit is over, the donor returns to the Sacred Monk and makes a 
standing bow while holding up the incense burner. At this time, the 
monastery host stands with hands in shashu facing north in the south 
side of the entrance. After bowing to the Sacred Monk, the donor 
follows the host out of the hall, walks around in front of the hall, 
enters the hall again, and makes three bows to the Sacred Monk. 

Then, the donor sits on a crossed-legged chair for the conclusion of 
the recitation. This chair is placed facing south near the pole to the 
north of the Sacred Monk. Or it is placed facing north near the pole in 
the opposite side. After the donor is seated, the monastery host makes 
a standing bow to the donor and takes a seat. 

It is possible to have the recitation of a gatha while the donor makes 
a greeting circuit. The gatha chanters’ seats can be either to the right 
or left of the Sacred Monk, according to circumstances. Fine incense, 
such as aloeswood, or incense sticks are inserted into the portable 
incense burner and burned. This incense is prepared by the donor. 
When the donor makes a circumambulation, the assembly of monks 
hold their hands in gassho. 

Next, the recitation honorarium is presented. The amount of the 
honorarium is decided by the donor. Sometimes materials such as 
cotton or fans are presented. This offering is delivered by the donor, a 
monastery officer, or an assistant worker. It is placed in front of each 
monk, not in the monk’s hand. Each monk receives it with a gassho. 

The honorarium can be presented at the midday meal on the day of 
recitation. In this case, after the donated meal, the head monk hits the 
umpan with a mallet once and distributes the honorarium. 

A sheet of paper on which the intention of the donation is written is 
posted on the pole north of the Sacred Monk. 

spoon. Monks take the snacks while they remain seated for recitation. 

The snacks are set on the tables for the sutra books, without using 
additional small tables. While snacks are eaten, the sutra books 
remain on the tables. After the snack is over, monks leave the seats 
one by one, rinse their mouths, and return to continue recitation. 

This recitation is done daily from the time of the morning meal to 
that of the midday meal. A drum is hit three times during the midday 
meal, signaling the end of recitation; those who have been chanting 
leave their seats. 

From the first day of recitation, a plaque reading “The practice 
place in celebration of the Emperor’s birthday” is hung under the east 
eave in front of the buddha hall. The plaque is yellow. Also, an intent 
of celebration is written on yellow paper mounted on a lattice panel. 
This plaque is posted on the eastern pole in the front area inside the 
buddha hall. The abbot’s name in two ideographs is written on a small 
red or white sheet of paper, which is pasted underneath the date on 
the plaque. 

Recitation is done in this way: On the day of the Emperor’s birthday 
the abbot ascends the teaching seat and offers words of celebration. 
This is an ancient custom that has not become outdated. 

Sometimes a monk aspires to recite a sutra. A monastery has a 
recitation hall in the communal area where recitation is practiced. It 
follows the guidelines presented above. 

23 
Buppua Nature 

Suaxvamunt BUDDHA SAID, “Living beings all are buddha nature. The 
Tathagata is continuously abiding and not subject to change.” 

As this is the lion roar of our great teacher Shakyamuni turning the 
wheel of dharma, it is the top of the head and the eyeball of all 
buddhas and ancestors. It has been practiced for two thousand one 
hundred nineteen years (up to this day, the second year of the Ninji 
Era of Japan). It has been maintained by more than fifty generations 
of authentic heirs (up to Rujing, my late master, Priest Tiantong)— 
twenty-eight generations in India and twenty-three generations in 
China. Buddha ancestors of the ten directions have also maintained it. 

What is the meaning of the World-Honored One’s teaching? It is the 
turning dharma wheel of “What has thus come?” 

Living beings are also called “sentient beings,” “various beings,” or 
“various kinds.” The all are is none other than sentient beings and 
living beings. 

Thus, all are buddha nature. One form of all beings is sentient 
beings. At this very moment, the inside and outside of sentient beings 
are the all are of buddha nature. This understanding is not only the 
skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of a person-to-person transmission, but 
“You have attained my skin, flesh, bones, and marrow.” 

Know that the are of all are buddha nature is beyond are and are not. 
All are are the buddha words, the buddha tongue. They are the eyeball 
of buddha ancestors and the nostrils of patched-robed monks. The 
words all are are not limited to embryonic beings, original beings, 
inconceivable beings, or any other kind of beings. Furthermore, they 
do not mean causal beings or imaginary beings. All are are free from 
mind, object, essence, or aspects. This being so, the body, mind, and 
environs of Living beings all are [buddha nature] are not limited to the 
increasing power of action, imaginary causation, things as they are, or 
the practice realization of miraculous powers. 

If Living beings all have were so, actualizing the way by all sages, the 
enlightenment of all buddhas, and the eye of buddha ancestors would 
be [caused by] the increasing power of action, imaginary causation, 
and so forth. But it is not so. In the entire world, there is no extra 

speck of dust. Buddha nature is immediate, and there is no second 
person [nothing outside], just as it is said, “Cut through the original 
person beyond knowing; action consciousness continues without 
ceasing.” Buddha nature is not the being of imaginary causation, 
because “Nothing is hidden in the entire world.” 

“Nothing is hidden in the entire world” does not necessarily mean 
“The entire world is full of beings.” To say, “The entire world is self- 
existence” is a crooked view held by those outside the way. What is 
not hidden is not original beings, as it encompasses past and present. 
It is not an embryonic being, as it is not affected by even one speck of 
dust from outside. It is not a suddenly emerged being, as it is shared 
by all beings. It is not a beginningless being, as it is “What has thus 
come?” It is not an embryonic being, as “Everyday mind is the way.” 

Know that in the midst of all are, sentient beings are hard to find. If 
you thoroughly understand all are, all are will be penetrated and 
dropped off. 

get the other. 

Buddha nature is no other than all are, because all are is buddha 
nature. All are is not a hundred broken pieces. All are is not a single 
rail of iron. As it is a held-up fist [something dynamic], it is not 
limited to large or small. When it is called buddha nature, it cannot be 
put shoulder to shoulder with all sages, it cannot be put shoulder to 
shoulder with buddha nature. 

Some people think that buddha nature is like seeds of grass and 
trees: when dharma rain is abundant, sprouts and stems grow; 
branches, leaves, flowers, and fruit mature; and their fruit contains 
seeds. Such a view is an assumption of ordinary people. If you come 
up with such an assumption, investigate thoroughly that each and 
every seed, flower, and fruit is itself pure mind. 

A fruit has seeds that are not visible but develop roots, stems, and 
so forth. The elements of the plants are not assembled from outside, 
but branches and twigs grow. Not limited to inside or outside, the 
growth of plants is not in vain, past and present. Thus, even if you 
take up the view of ordinary people, the roots, stems, branches, and 
leaves are the all are of buddha nature that rises and perishes 
simultaneously with all things. 

past and present have thought that it means we should wait until 
buddha nature manifests in the future; that as a result of practice we 
will eventually encounter the time when buddha nature manifests; 
and that when the time is not ripe, buddha nature will not manifest 
even if we inquire about dharma from a teacher and endeavor in the 
practice of the way. They think in this way and stay in the [secular] 
world of red dust fruitlessly while keeping a monk’s appearance. Such 
people appear to be those outside of the way who believe in 
spontaneous enlightenment. 

The words If you want to understand buddha nature mean “if you 
want to understand buddha nature immediately.” Observe cause and 
effect over time means “You should know cause and effect over time.” 
You should intimately observe cause and effect over time means that if 
you want to know buddha nature, it is no other than knowing cause 
and effect over time. When the time is ripe means that the time has 
already arrived. How can we doubt it? A time of doubting also is a 
time when buddha nature is present to the self. 

Know that when the time is ripe means that the twelve hours of the 
day are not passed in vain. When the time is is like saying “when the 
time has arrived.” “When the time has arrived” is not the arrival of 
buddha nature. Thus, when the time has arrived, buddha nature is 
already actualized. This principle is self-evident. Generally, there is no 
time when the time has not yet arrived; there is no buddha nature that 
is not actualized. 

buddha nature. 

The six miraculous powers are not those taught in the Agama School. 
The six is the realization of the six miraculous powers of three three 
before and three three after [countless]. So, do not think that the six 
miraculous powers are limited to the one hundred grasses bright and 
clear and the mind of buddha ancestors bright and clear. Even though 
you may be limited by the thought of the six miraculous powers, you 
are immersed in the vastness of the ocean of buddha nature. 

that to have this name is to have no ordinary name. An ordinary name 
is not it. 

Daoxing’s words What is it? mean what is it? It is called what. That is 
the name. It makes what. What makes it. The name is it. The name is 
what. It is presented as mugwort tea or green tea. It is daily tea and 
rice. 

Hongren’s words It is buddha nature mean that it is buddha nature. 
Because it is what, it is buddha. Is it merely understood as what name? 
Even when it is not it, it is buddha nature. This being so, although it is 
what and it is buddha, when Hongren drops off and slips through, the 
name is always present. His is Zhou. However, he did not receive the 
name from his father or his ancestors, and he did not resemble his 
mother. Who can stand shoulder to shoulder with him? 

By saying You have no buddha nature, Daoxin was saying that 
although Hongren is not “who he is” and it’s up to him to determine 
who he is, he has no buddha nature [he is beyond buddha nature]. 
Learn and study what kind of moment it is when there is no buddha 
nature. Is it no buddha nature on the top of the buddha’s head, or is it 
no buddha nature that is going beyond? Do not be stuck with seven 
penetrations or search for eight masteries. 

No buddha nature is sometimes understood as the samadhi of this 
one moment. Ask whether there is no buddha nature when buddha 
nature attains buddhahood. Ask whether there is no buddha nature that 
arouses the aspiration [for enlightenment]. Have a pillar ask this 
question, or ask a pillar this question. Have buddha nature ask this 
question. 

In this way, the words no buddha nature are heard all the way from 
the ancestral chamber of Daoxin. These words are seen and heard on 
Mount Huangmei, in Zhou Province, and Mount Guishan. Be sure to 
endeavor with the words no buddha nature without being put off by 
the words. In tracing no buddha nature, there, straight on, is the 
standard of what, the moment of you, the response of it, and the name 
Zhou. 

Hongren’s words As buddha nature is empty, you say I have no buddha 
nature express clearly that empty is not no. In speaking of the 
emptiness of buddha nature, he did not say half a pound or eight 
ounces; he just said no [buddha nature]. As it is empty, he did not call 
it empty. As it is no [buddha nature], he did not call it no. As buddha 
nature is empty, he called it no. Thus, bits and pieces of no are a 
standard for speaking about emptiness. Emptiness is the measure of 
speaking no [buddha nature]. 

Empty mentioned here is not that of “Form is emptiness.” “Form is 
emptiness” does not mean to force form to be emptiness or to break 
up emptiness to establish form. 

Rather, it is the emptiness of “Emptiness is emptiness.” Emptiness is 
emptiness means there is a piece of rock hanging in emptiness. Thus, 
Daoxin and Hongren talked about no buddha nature, buddha nature 
that is empty, and buddha nature that is existence. 

teaching that sentient beings have no buddha nature. Those who are 
not immersed in seeing, hearing, and knowing that sentient beings 
without exception have no buddha nature have not yet seen, heard, or 
known buddha nature. 

When Huineng wholeheartedly sought to become a buddha and 
Hongren helped him to become a buddha, he had no other words or 
skillful means than saying People from Linguan have no buddha nature. 
Know that to say and hear no-buddha nature is a direct way to 
become a buddha. Thus, at the very moment of no-buddha nature you 
become a buddha. Those who have not seen, heard, or spoken no- 
buddha nature have not yet become a buddha. 

Huineng said, “There are people from the south and people from the 
north, but in buddha nature there is no south or north.” 

Take up these words and investigate the meaning behind them. 
Reflect with a bare heart upon the words south and north. His words 
have a point—a view that people become buddhas but buddha nature 
doesn’t become people. Was Huineng aware of it or not? 

Buddhas, including Kashyapa Buddha and Shakyamuni Buddha, are 
empowered to say Living beings all are buddha nature when they are 
buddhas and turning the dharma wheel, by receiving a portion of the 
all-inclusive power of the words no buddha nature spoken by Hongren 
and Huineng. How could the words Living beings all are buddha nature 
not inherit dharma from the no of no buddha nature? 

In this way, the words no buddha nature are heard far away from the 
chamber of Hongren and Huineng. Since Huineng was already a true 
person at that time, he should have further investigated the words no 
buddha nature. He should have asked, “Aside from whether one has 
buddha nature or not, how is buddha nature?” He should also have 
asked, “What is buddha nature?” Upon hearing the words buddha 
nature, people nowadays also discuss whether one has buddha nature 
or no buddha nature without asking what buddha nature is. This is 
hasty and careless. 

Thus, study the “no” of all “nos” through the no of no buddha nature. 
Dive over and over again into the statement of Huineng, There are 
people from the south and people from the north, but in buddha nature 
there is no south or north. Work on it and quietly let go of it. 

Some foolish people assume that Huineng’s statement means that 
people from the south differ from those from the north because of 
their qualities, but that buddha nature goes beyond south or north, as 
it is empty and fluid. This is ignorant beyond measure. Disregard such 
a crooked view and study straightforwardly. 

Later, Huineng taught his disciple Xinchang by saying, 
“Impermanence is itself buddha nature. Permanence is the mind that 

discriminates the wholesomeness and unwholesomeness of all things.” 

The impermanence Huineng speaks of is beyond the grasp of 
outsiders or practitioners of the Lesser Vehicles. Teachers and 
descendants of these people talk about impermanence, but they have 
not yet fully understood it. 

Impermanence expounds, practices, and realizes impermanence; all 
this is impermanence. Manifesting a [buddha] body and expounding 
dharma with the buddha body—this is buddha nature. Further, it is to 
manifest a tall dharma body and to manifest a short dharma body. 
Constantly being a sage is impermanence. Constantly being an 
ordinary person is impermanence. 

This is the meaning of Huineng’s words Impermanence is itself buddha 
nature. To say that those who are constantly sages or ordinary people 
cannot be buddha nature is a limited view, the narrow thinking of 
foolish people. Their understanding of buddha falls short. Their 
understanding of buddha nature falls short. 

Permanence means no turning. “No turning” is not affected by the 
passage of coming and going, although there are such changes as 
becoming free from desire or allowing desire itself to become free. 
This is permanence. Grass, trees, and forests are impermanent; they 
are buddha nature. Humans, things, body, and mind are impermanent; 
they are buddha nature. Land, mountains, and rivers are 
impermanent, as they are buddha nature. Unsurpassable, complete 
enlightenment is impermanent, as it is buddha nature. Great pari- 
nirvana is buddha nature, as it is impermanence. Practitioners of the 
Lesser Vehicles who hold limited views, and teachers and 
commentators of the Tripitaka, should be startled at this statement of 
Huineng. If they aren’t, they must be a group of outsider demons. 

Realizing that Nagarjuna’s teaching was extraordinary, the man’s 
aspiration was turned around. Then, while sitting, Nagarjuna 
manifested a body of complete freedom in the shape of a full moon. 
The assembly could hear his dharma talk, but they could not see him. 

In the assembly there was someone called Kanadeva, the son of a 
wealthy man, who said to the assembly, “Do you understand this?” 

People said, “We cannot see the master but we can hear him. Our 
minds do not understand what’s happening, and our bodies have not 
experienced such a thing.” 

Kanadeva said, “This is how the master manifests the form of 
buddha nature and shows it to us. The reason is that the samadhi of 
no-form has taken the shape of a full moon. Buddha nature is vast, 
empty, and clear.” 

Just as Kanadeva said this, Nagarjuna appeared on his seat and 
taught in verse: 

This body manifests a full moon 

expressing the bodies of all buddhas, 

teaching that it has no particular shape, 

expressing that revealing it is neither sound nor form. 

Thus, know that a true expression is not done by sound or form, and 
a true teaching has no particular shape. Nagarjuna expounded on 
buddha nature countless times. What is shown here is just an example. 

You should reflect without fail on Nagarjuna’s words If you want to 
see buddha nature, first let go of your pride. It’s not that you cannot see 
buddha nature, but to see it, you first need to let go of your pride. 
Because you are complex, there are many types of pride. There are 
myriad ways to let go of pride, and when you do, you see buddha 
nature. This is to see buddha nature with your eyes. 

Do not regard Nagarjuna’s words Buddha nature is neither large nor 
small as ordinary people or those in the Lesser Vehicle do. Stubborn 
people believe that buddha nature is enormous. This is the piling up of 
crooked thoughts. To be immersed in Nagarjuna’s words neither large 
nor small is to discern them as spoken just now. This discernment is a 
cause for listening. Listen to his verse now. He says, This body 
manifests a full moon expressing the bodies of all buddhas. As he 
manifested the body expressing all buddhas’ bodies, the body took the 
shape of a full moon. Thus, you should study that everything both 
long and short, square and round, is manifested in the shape of a full 
moon. If you are ignorant about the body or the manifestation, you 
are ignorant not only about the shape of the full moon but about the 
bodies of the buddhas. 

Foolish people may think that Nagarjuna manifested the shape of a 

full moon tentatively. This is a crooked thought of rascals who have 
not inherited the buddha way. When and where could he have 
manifested a form that was not his own body? Know that Nagarjuna 
was sitting on the teaching seat, just as everyone is sitting right now. 
This body manifests the shape of a full moon. Manifestation of the 
body is not limited to square or round, existent or nonexistent, 
revealed or hidden. Manifestation of this body is not limited to eighty- 
four thousand skandhas; it is just manifestation of this body. You 
speak of a full moon, but what about a crescent moon or sliver moon? 

As this manifestation of the body is to first let go of your pride, it is 
not Nagarjuna but the bodies of all buddhas. As this manifestation 
expresses all buddhas, it becomes free from all buddhas. Thus, it is not 
limited to the realm of buddhas. 

Even if there may be a void similar to the full moon of buddha 
nature, it cannot be compared with that full moon. Furthermore, 
expression [of buddha nature] is neither sound nor form. The 
manifestation of this body is neither form nor mind, nor is it in the 
realm of the skandhas. Although the manifestation of this body may 
look like the realm of the skandhas, it is expressing the bodies of the 
buddhas. This is expounding dharma; it is having no form. When 
having no form is the samadhi of no-form, the body is manifested. 

Although the assembly saw the shape of a full moon, what they did 
not see was a turning point of expounding dharma, the manifestation 
of a free body beyond form and sound. This hiding and revealing is 
the going back and forth of the full moon. 

At the very moment when Nagarjuna sat on his seat and manifested 
the body of freedom, the whole assembly only heard dharma without 
seeing him. His heir, Kanadeva, clearly understood the meaning of the 
full-moon shape, of the manifestation of the body, of the nature of all 
buddhas, and of the bodies of all buddhas. Although there were many 
who entered Nagarjuna’s room and received water, vessel to vessel, 
there was no one who could compare with Kanadeva, who was a 
venerable student sharing the seat with Nagarjuna, and was a guiding 
master of the assembly on the half seat. He authentically received the 
treasury of the true dharma eye, the unsurpassable great dharma, just 
like Venerable Mahakashyapa did on Vulture Peak. 

Previously, Nagarjuna was a Brahman master outside the buddha 
dharma. When his mind was turned, he sent away the students who 
had been studying with him. After he became a buddha ancestor, 
Kanadeva alone received the treasury of the great dharma as an 
authentic heir. This is a person-to-person transmission of the 
unsurpassable buddha way. 

However, a crooked group of people who hid their falsehood and 
groundlessly called themselves dharma heirs of Nagarjuna Bodhisattva 

compiled treatises and interpretations. Many of them were attributed 
to Nagarjuna although they were not by him. Those who had been 
driven away by him were confusing both humans and devas with 
these texts. Disciples of the Buddha should know that the teachings 
that were not passed on by Kanadeva are not the words of Nagarjuna. 
You can genuinely trust the teaching through Kanadeva. But many 
people knowingly accept the false teaching. We should deplore the 
foolishness of those who slander great prajna. 

Kanadeva pointed to Nagarjuna’s manifested body and said to the 
assembly, This is how the master manifests the form of buddha nature and 
shows it to us. The reason is that the samadhi of no-form has taken the 
shape of a full moon. Buddha nature is vast, empty, and clear. Who, 
among those skin bags here and there, seeing and hearing the buddha 
dharma spread in the billion worlds of phenomena of humans and 
devas, can say that the body of Nagarjuna was manifesting as buddha 
nature? In the billion worlds Kanadeva alone could say this. Others 
merely said that buddha nature is neither seen with the eyes, nor 
heard with the ears, nor known through consciousness. As they didn’t 
know that Nagarjuna’s manifestation of the body was buddha nature, 
they could not say so. Even though Ancestor Nagarjuna did not 
withhold his teaching, they could not see or hear it, as their eyes and 
ears were covered. They were unable to realize it, as their body 
consciousness had not arisen. When they saw and bowed to the 
samadhi of no-form that had taken the shape of a full moon, they 
could not see it. 

As Kanadeva says, Buddha nature is vast, empty, and clear. Thus, 
manifesting the body is itself expounding buddha nature, vast, empty, 
and clear. Expounding buddha nature is that body manifested [in a 
full-moon shape], expressing the bodies of all buddhas. Are there one 
or two buddhas who embody this expression? The buddha bodies are 
a manifestation of that body. Also, buddha nature is manifested as 
that body. 

The buddha ancestors’ perception that discerns the four great 
elements and the five skandhas is also a working of this manifested 
body. The skandhas, places, and realms are like this in all buddhas’ 
bodies. All merits are this merit. All buddhas’ merits are fully 
expressed and encompassed by this manifested body. The coming and 
going of all the innumerable, boundless merits are part of the working 
of this manifested body. 

However, those in early and later generations in the three countries 
[India, China, and Japan] who studied dharma later than Nagarjuna 
and Kanadeva have not spoken as these masters did. How many 
scholars of sutras and treatises have missed Nagarjuna and Kanadeva’s 
words? From the early times in China, people tried to paint this story, 

but they have not been able to paint it on body, mind, emptiness, or 
the wall. They have only painted the story with the tips of their brush. 
They have merely painted a mirrorlike circle on the dharma seat and 
claimed it as Nagarjuna’s manifestation of the full-moon body. For 
hundreds of years such paintings have been specks of gold 
[hindrances] in human eyes, but no one has pointed out that these 
paintings are false. What a pity! Myriad interpretations are off the 
mark. 

If people think that Nagarjuna’s manifestation of the full-moon 
shape is merely a single circle, they truly see a piece of a painted rice 
cake. It is fooling others; such laughing kills people. 

How sad, none of those in China, laity or home leavers, have taken 
Nagarjuna’s words seriously or understood Kanadeva’s statement! 
How, then, can they become intimate with Nagarjuna’s manifestation 
of the body? This is to be ignorant about the circular moon while 
missing the full moon. This is because they have neither studied the 
past nor longed for the past. Old buddhas and new buddhas, you 
should meet the true manifestation of the body instead of admiring a 
painted rice cake. 

Know that when you paint the manifestation of a full moon, do it on 
a dharma seat. Raising an eyebrow and blinking are just this. The 
treasury of the true dharma eye—skin, flesh, bones. and marrow—is 
just sitting solidly. Breaking into a smile is transmitted, making a 
buddha and making an ancestor. 

Without a moon shape, your painting will have no shape of 
thusness, no expounding of dharma, no sound or form, and no use. 
When you express the manifestation of the [buddha] body, paint a 
circular moon shape. When you paint a circular moon shape, paint a 
circular moon shape, actualize a circular moon shape, because the 
manifestation of body is a circular moon shape. When you paint a 
circular moon shape, paint a full moon, actualize a full moon. Thus, 
unless you paint the manifestation of the body, a circular moon shape, 
a full moon, and buddha bodies, you are not embodying the 
expression and painting the expounding of dharma, but merely 
creating a piece of painted rice cake. What’s the use of it? Look 
quickly. Who will be satisfied or not satisfied right at this moment? 
The moon is circular. The circle is the manifestation of the body. 
When you study the circle, don’t regard it as a coin or a piece of cake. 
The manifested body is a circular moon. It has the shape of a full 
moon. See the circle in a coin or in a rice cake. 

autumn of the sixteenth year of the Jiading Era [1224], I visited the 
Ayuwang Mountain Guanli Monastery for the first time. There on the 
walls of the western hallway, I saw paintings of the thirty-three 
ancestors of India. I did not have understanding at that time. Later, 
during the summer practice period of the first year of the Baoqing Era 
[1225], I visited the monastery again. I walked along the hallway with 
Guest Coordinator Chenggui from the western district of Shu. I asked 
him, “What is this painting?” 

Chenggui said, “Nagarjuna manifesting his body in the shape of a 
full moon.” He had no nostrils on his face and no wisdom in his 
explanation. 

I said, “Truly it looks like a piece of painted rice cake.” 

Although Chenggui burst into laughter, he had no sword in his 
laughter and no ability to tear off the painted rice cake. We exchanged 
a few words on our way to the relic hall and the six excellent places, 
but he did not even come up with any doubts. Other monks who 
spoke to us had no idea. 

So I said to Chenggui, “I will ask the abbot.” The abbot of the 
monastery at that time was Priest Daguang. 

Then, Chenggui said, “He doesn’t have nostrils. He cannot answer. 
How can he know?” So, I decided not to speak with Daguang. 

Although Chenggui spoke in this way, he did not seem to have 
realization. Those who joined the conversation did not have any 
remarkable expressions. The abbots of this monastery in the past and 
present did not question them and correct their views. 

Never paint what cannot be painted. Paint straightforwardly what 
needs to be painted. Yet, [Nagarjuna’s] manifestation of the body in 
the shape of a full moon had never been painted. 

In fact, as people are not awakened from the assumption that 
buddha nature is thought and consciousness, they seem to miss the 
expressions of “have buddha nature” and “have no buddha nature.” 
Those who learn that the point needs to be expressed are rare. Know 
that this negligence is due to giving up the subject. Among the abbots 
of various monasteries there are those who never mention buddha 
nature throughout their lifetimes. 

Some of these abbots say, “Those who listen to the [Buddha’s] 
teachings discuss buddha nature. Monks who practice Zen should not 
talk about it.” Those who say such things are truly beasts. What kind 
of demons attempt to mix with and defile the way of our Buddha 
Tathagata? Is there listening to the teaching in the buddha way? Is 
there practicing Zen in the buddha way? Know that there is nothing 
like listening to the teaching or practicing Zen in the buddha way. 

Yanguan, National Teacher Qi’an of Hang Region, who was a 
dharma heir of Mazu, once said to his assembly, “Living beings all 
have buddha nature.” 

Immediately investigate these words. All living beings have their 
own karma, practice, body-mind, and environs; their views vary. 
Ordinary people, those outside the way, those in the Three Vehicles 
and the Five Vehicles, are all different. 

What are called living beings in the buddha way encompasses all 
those who have heart. All those who have heart are living beings. 
Those who have no heart are also living beings. All living beings are 
heart. Thus, heart is all living beings. 

All living beings have buddha nature. Grass, trees, land, and earth 
are heart. As they are heart, they are living beings. As they are living 
beings they have buddha nature. Sun, moon, stars are all heart. As 
they are heart, they are living beings. As they are living beings, they 
have buddha nature. The statement of Yanguan have buddha nature 
means this. If not, it is not have buddha nature taught in the buddha 
way. 

The meaning of Yanguan’s words is that living beings alone have 
buddha nature. Those who are not living beings do not have buddha 
nature. Now, ask him, “Do all living beings have or not have buddha 
nature?” In this way, question and examine his understanding. 

Study that Yanguan did not say, “Living beings all are buddha 
nature,” but rather: “Living beings all have buddha nature.” Drop off 
the have of have buddha nature. Dropping off is one solid rail of iron. 
One solid rail of iron is the bird’s path. 

Thus, living beings all have buddha nature. These words not only 
penetrate living beings but penetrate buddha nature. Although 
Yanguan could not find a thorough expression, he did not miss the 
mark. It is not that his expression has no valuable teaching. But he 
may not have understood the deep meaning of his own words that 
embody the four great elements and the five skandhas, as well as skin, 
flesh, bones, and marrow. Thus, an expression is sometimes the result 
of a lifetime. Also, birth after birth can depend on an expression. 

Shakyamuni Buddha’s expounding of the way was Living beings all 
are buddha nature. What Guishan said was Entire living beings have no 
buddha nature. These two statements—all are and have no—are far 
apart. Whether Guishan’s statement is right or wrong can be 
questioned. However, Entire living beings have no buddha nature stands 
high in the buddha way. 

Yanguan’s statement have buddha nature can be likened to joining 
hands with an ancient buddha, or two people holding one walking 
stick. But Guishan’s statement is not like that; it is a single stick 
swallowing both people. 

Yanguan is an heir of Mazu, and Guishan is a descendant of Mazu. 
However, the descendant is advanced in Mazu’s way and the heir is 
not yet mature. Guishan makes an essential statement by saying, Entire 
living beings have no buddha nature, which does not fall off the straight 
line. This is how he maintained the sutra in his own house. 

Inquire further about how it is that living beings all are buddha 
nature or all have buddha nature. If living beings all have buddha 
nature, they must be a group of demons. It is covering all living beings 
with demons. 

As buddha nature is buddha nature, living beings are living beings. 
It is not that living beings originally possess buddha nature. Even if 
they beckon to buddha nature, it will not come. Do not say that Zhang 
drinks wine and Li gets drunk [that the two are not separate]. Those 
who originally have buddha nature are not living beings. If they are 
living beings [who have buddha nature], they are not [separately] 
buddha nature. 

Thus, Baizhang said, “To say ‘Entire living beings all have buddha 
nature’ is to slander buddha, dharma, and sangha. To say ‘Living 
beings have no buddha nature’ is also to slander buddha, dharma, and 
sangha.” 

In this way, have buddha nature and have no buddha nature are both 
slandering. Although it is slandering, you can still inquire about it. 
Ask Guishan and Baizhang, and hear their responses: “Slandering is 
not out of the question. But does buddha nature expound dharma?” If 
buddha nature expounds dharma, it must be immersed in expounding 
dharma. If it expounds dharma, it must go together with hearing it. 

Also, ask Guishan: “Even if you say, ‘Entire living beings have no 
buddha nature,’ you are not saying, ‘Entire buddha nature has no 
living beings’ or ‘Entire buddha nature has no buddha nature.’ 
Furthermore, you have not yet dreamed of ‘Entire buddhas have no 
buddha nature.”” Look into this. 

Baizhang, Great Master Dazhi, said to his assembly: 

The Buddha is the supreme vehicle. He is established in the 
buddha way as the one who has wisdom that is the highest of the 
highest. The Buddha has buddha nature. He is the guiding master 
who has attained unobstructed wind, unobstructed wisdom. Thus, 
he is the master of cause and effect, and freely uses happiness 
that comes with wisdom, transporting cause and effect on this 
cart. Abiding in birth, he is not held up by birth. Abiding in 
death, he is not obstructed by death. Abiding in the five skandhas, 
he is not obstructed by the five skandhas. He comes and goes 
freely with no difficulty, just like passing through an open gate. 
Thus, he brings every being, regardless of position or capacity, 
even an ant, into the inconceivable pure and wondrous land. 

This is Baizhang’s point. The so-called five skandhas are the 
indestructible [buddha] body. The [Buddha’s] work is like going 
through an open gate unobstructed by the five skandhas. Engaged in 
birth, do not be held up by birth. Engaged in death, do not be held up 
by death. Do not be attached to birth. Do not groundlessly fear death. 
Already there is buddha nature. 

Those who are shaken by death and try to avoid it are outside the 
way. Those who realize pressing conditions and utilize them as 
unobstructed wind are buddhas of the supreme vehicle. Where these 
buddhas abide is the pure and wondrous land. 

is practicing samadhi and wisdom equally. What they mean is that 
samadhi and wisdom are practiced equally when buddha nature is 
clearly seen. Nanquan was asking the meaning of this principle. It is 
just like asking, “Who clearly sees buddha nature?” It is also like 
asking the meaning of “buddha nature is clearly seen by equally 
cultivating buddha nature.” 

Huangbo’s words It can be done by not depending upon a single thing 
for twelve hours mean that even though the twelve hours abide in the 
twelve hours, they are not depending. Not depending upon a single thing 
is clearly seeing buddha nature because not depending is twelve hours. 

At what moment and to which land do these twelve hours arrive? 
Are the twelve hours spoken of here twelve hours of humans? Are 
there twelve hours somewhere else? Is it that the twelve hours in the 
silver world have arrived temporarily? Whether the twelve hours are 
in this land or in another realm, they are not depending. They are just 
twelve hours, they are not depending. 

Nanquan’s words to Huangbo, Isn’t that a view of another elder? are 
like asking, “Is this really your own view?” Even if you are asked 
whether this is your own view, don’t turn around and say it is. Even if 
this view fits you exactly, it may not fit Huangbo. Huangbo is not 
limited by you. The view of another elder is vastly revealed all the 
way through. 

Huangbo’s words Not really are based on a custom in Song China of 
not saying so even if one has a clear view. Therefore, not really does 
not mean “not really.” Do not assume that these words mean what 
they seem to mean. Even if the view of another is that of the elder, 
even if the view of another elder is that of Huangbo, what you should 
say is not really. A water buffalo comes out and bellows; to say it like 
this is to say it completely. Say the meaning of saying, the saying of 
saying it completely. 

Nanquan said, Putting aside for the moment the money for the gruel you 
have eaten, whom should I reimburse for the straw sandals? It means that 
although he wasn’t concerned about what Huangbo had contributed to 
the monastery for gruel, he wanted to return Huangbo’s money for the 
sandals. 

Study the meaning of this, life after life. Investigate why Nanquan 
wanted the matter of the money for gruel to be set aside for the 
moment. How do you understand the money for straw sandals? It 
means wearing out countless pairs of sandals in way-seeking travels. 

Speak! “If you don’t return the money, I won’t be wearing sandals.” 
Or say, “A couple of pairs of sandals.” This is a complete expression. 
This is an essential response. 

Huangbo stopped. He was silent. It does not mean that he stopped 

because he was not approved by Nanquan, or that he did not 
understand. A monk of true color is not like that. Know that speaking 
by not speaking is like a sword hidden within laughter. This is 
sufficient gruel and sufficient rice for clearly seeing buddha nature. 

nature must be no and a dog must be no. The monk asked the meaning 
of that. How is it that a dog’s buddha nature depends upon no? 

Zhaozhou said, “Because it has total ignorance.” 

He meant that it has is total ignorance. In the light of total 
ignorance and of it has, the dog is no, buddha nature is no. If total 
ignorance has not yet merged with a dog, how should a dog meet 
buddha nature? Even if both dog and buddha nature are let go of and 
taken in, still it is nothing but total ignorance all the way through. 

Thus, Yunju, High Ancestor, said, “When you study matters of 
buddha dharma, stop having your mind stuck on it.” In this way, you 
may have studied a portion of buddha dharma mistakenly for days 
and months, as a dog that gets buddha nature into the skin bag. 
Although it is intentionally obstructing, it is being buddha nature. 

that air and fire are no other than buddha nature. 

Thus, Changsha did not say that an earthworm has buddha nature, 
nor did he say that an earthworm has no buddha nature. He just said 
No illusion, then Air and fire are not yet scattered. Fathom the vital 
activities of buddha dharma through his words. Quietly ponder his 
statement Air and fire are not yet scattered. What is the point of not yet 
scattered? Does he mean that air and fire are assembled, but the 
moment of their being scattered has not arrived? It is not so. Air and 
fire are not yet scattered means the Buddha expounds dharma. Not yet 
scattered air and fire means dharma expounds the Buddha. 

This is the arrival of the moment when dharma is expounded [by 
the Buddha] in one sound. It is the arrival of the moment when 
expounding dharma is one sound. Dharma is one sound, because it is 
the dharma of one sound. 

Also, to assume that buddha nature exists only at the time of birth 
[life] and not at the time of death is [a result of] the least learning 
and shallow understanding. At the moment of birth, there is buddha 
nature and there is beyond buddha nature. At the moment of death, 
there is buddha nature and there is beyond buddha nature. 

If scattered and not yet scattered of air and fire is discussed, buddha 
nature is scattered and not yet scattered. At the time of scattered, there 
is buddha nature and there is beyond buddha nature. At the time of 
not yet scattered, there is buddha nature and there is beyond buddha 
nature. This being so, it is those outside the way who mistakenly 
believe that buddha nature does or does not exist according to 
whether something does or does not move, that the spirit does or does 
not exist according to whether one does or does not have 
consciousness, and that essential nature does or does not exist 
according to whether one does or does not know. 

From beginningless time, many ignorant people mistook 
consciousness for buddha nature, the original person. It is totally 
laughable. 

If we discuss buddha nature further, it should not be splattered with 
mud or wet with water [overexplained]—it is walls, tiles, and pebbles. 
In expressing beyond, what is buddha nature? Can you say in detail? 
[I say it is like a demon with] Three heads and eight arms. 

Presented to the assembly of the Kosho Horin Monastery, Uji County, 
Yamashiro Province, on the fourteenth day, the tenth month, the 
second year of the Ninji Era [1241]. 

24 

Awesome Presence OF Acre Buppuas 

Buppuas AT ALL times practice complete awesome presence; thus they 

are active buddhas. Active buddhas are neither reward-body buddhas 
nor incarnate-body buddhas, neither self-manifested buddhas nor 
buddhas manifested from others. Active buddhas are neither originally 
enlightened nor enlightened at some particular time, neither naturally 
enlightened nor without enlightenment. Such buddhas can never 
compare to active buddhas. 

Know that buddhas in the buddha way do not wait for awakening. 
Active buddhas alone fully experience the vital process on the path of 
going beyond buddha. This is something that self-manifested buddhas 
have never dreamed of. 

Because active buddhas manifest awesome presence in every 
situation, they bring forth awesome presence with their body. Thus, 
their transformative function flows out in their speech, reaching 
throughout time, space, buddhas, and activities. Without being an 
active buddha, you cannot be liberated from bondage to buddha and 
bondage to dharma, and you will be pulled into the cult of buddha- 
demons and dharma-demons. 

“Bondage to buddha” means being bound by the view that our 
perception and cognition of enlightenment is actually enlightenment. 
Experiencing such views even for a moment, you cannot expect to 
meet liberation, and you will remain mistaken. 

Seeing enlightenment as nothing but enlightenment may appear as a 
view that corresponds to enlightenment. Who would imagine calling it 
a crooked view? But this is like tying yourself up without a rope. 
Becoming further and further bound up, the tree you are tied to will 
not topple, and the wisteria vine binding you will not wither. In vain 
you struggle inside a pit in the vicinity of buddha, without seeing this 
as a sickness of the dharma body or as a trap of the reward body. 

Teachers of buddha dharma, such as scholars of the sutras and 
treatises who listen to the buddha way from afar, say that “to arouse a 
view of dharma nature within dharma nature is no other than 
ignorance.” These teachers talk about arousing a view of dharma 
nature without clarifying the bondage to dharma nature; they only 

accumulate the bondage of ignorance. They do not know about the 
bondage to dharma nature. Although this is regrettable, their 
awareness of the accumulation of the bondage of ignorance can be the 
seed for arousing the aspiration for enlightenment. 

Now, active buddhas are never bound by such ties. This being so [it 
is said in the Lotus Sutra], “In the past I practiced the bodhisattva way 
and have attained this long life span, still now unexhausted, covering 
vast numbers of years.” 

Know that it is not that the life span of the bodhisattva has 
continued without end only until now, or not that the life span of the 
Buddha has prevailed only in the past, but what is called vast numbers 
is a total, inclusive attainment. What is called still now is the total life 
span. Even if in the past I practiced is one solid piece of iron ten 
thousand miles long, it casts away hundreds of years vertically and 
horizontally. 

This being so, practice-realization is neither existence nor beyond 
existence. Practice-realization is not defiled [divided]. Although there 
are hundreds, thousands, and myriads [of practice-realizations] in a 
place where there is no buddha and no person, practice-realization 
does not defile active buddhas. Thus, there is no division in the 
practice-realization of active buddhas. It is not that there is no 
separation of practice-realization, but that this nondefilement is not 
nonexistent. 

buddhas, and what is thoroughly mastered by active buddhas, is like 
this. Thus, we know practice and realization are not concerned with 
essence or forms, roots or branches. While the everyday activities of 
active buddhas unfailingly allow buddhas to practice, active buddhas 
allow everyday activities to practice. This is to abandon your body for 
dharma, to abandon dharma for your body. This is to give up holding 
back your life, to hold on fully to your life. The awesome presence not 
only lets go of dharma for the sake of the dharma, it also lets go of 
dharma for the sake of mind. Do not forget that this letting go is 
unlimited. 

Do not take up the buddha measure to measure and analyze the 
great way. The buddha measure is one step, just like an open blossom. 
Do not hold out the mind measure to grope for and deliberate about 
the awesome presence. The mind measure is a single face, like the 
world. The measure of a single blade of grass is clearly the measure of 
the buddha ancestor mind—one blade that recognizes the 
whereabouts of active buddhas. 

Even if you recognize that one mind measure encompasses 
innumerable buddha measures, when you try to measure the active 
buddhas’ appearance by the motion and stillness of their visage, it is 
undoubtedly beyond measure. Since their conduct is beyond measure, 
measuring does not hit the mark, is not useful, and cannot be gauged. 

Leaving the gate there is grass, entering the gate there is grass, 
though there is not a bit of grass for myriad miles. Such “entering” 
and “leaving” are not essential. Grasping by entering does not wait for 
the letting go of leaving; these are mere apparitions of blossoms in the 
sky. 

Who would regard this apparition of blossoms in the sky as taking 
up a mistake and settling in with the mistake? Stepping forward 
misses, stepping backward misses, taking one step misses, taking two 
steps misses, and so there are mistakes upon mistakes. 

Heaven and earth are far distant [due to our mistakes], and yet the 
ultimate way is not difficult. Thoroughly understand that in the 
awesome presence, and the presence of awe, the great way is wide 
open. 

Know that upon emerging in birth, all emerge together on the way, 
and that upon entering death, all enter together on the way. From the 
head down to the tail, the awesome presence of rolling the pearl and 
of turning the jewel is manifested. 

birth are usually mentioned, but not moisture birth and egg birth. 
Furthermore, it has not even been dreamed that there could be births 
other than these four types. Even further, has it been seen, heard, or 
realized that there are these four types of birth beyond the four types 
of birth? In the great way of buddhas and ancestors, it has been 
intimately and explicitly transmitted that there are four types of birth 
beyond [the usual understanding of] these four types of birth. What 
groups of people have not heard, known, or clarified this 
understanding? 

As these four types of birth are already known, how many types of 
death are there? Are there four types of death for the four types of 
birth, or are there two or three types of death? Are there five or six, 
one thousand, or ten thousand deaths? To have even a little doubt 
about this point is part of the inquiry. 

Now, consider whether there are beings among these four types 
who only have birth without death. Are there any beings who only 
transmit death and do not transmit birth? Study whether or not there 
are beings who have birth alone or death without birth. 

There are people who hear the phrase “beyond birth” but do not 
clarify it, ignoring their body-and-mind endeavor. This is extreme 
foolishness. They should be called beasts who cannot even reach the 
four categories of beings with the capacity for faith, for understanding 
dharma, or for sudden or gradual awakening. How is this so? Even 
though they hear the words “beyond birth,” they need to question the 
meaning. And they do not ask further about beyond buddha, beyond 
the way, beyond mind, beyond extinction, beyond “beyond birth,” 
beyond world of phenomena, beyond dharma nature, or beyond 
death. They are like oxen and horses who vainly think only of water 
and grass. 

Know that birth-and-death is the activity of the buddha way; birth- 
and-death is the furnishings [essentials] of the buddha house. It is 
utilized when it needs to be utilized; it is fully clarified when it is 
clarified. Accordingly, all buddhas are clear about the implements of 
birth-and-death, and fully achieve their utilization. How can those 
who are ignorant of this realm of birth and death be called a person, 
or someone who has completed birth, or accomplished death? Do not 
believe that you are sunk in birth and death, or even think that you 
exist in birth and death. Do not blindly believe, or misunderstand, or 
disregard birth and death as merely birth and death. 

Some people say that buddhas only appear in the human realm, and 
think that they do not appear in other realms or worlds. If that were 
true, all realms would have been human realms when the Buddha was 
alive. This is like saying that human buddhas alone are venerable 
ones. However, there must be buddhas in the deva realm as well as 

buddhas in the buddha realm. Those who think that buddhas appear 
only in the human realm have not yet entered the inner chamber of 
buddha ancestors. 

Worldly people carry on deliberations about thinking and not 
thinking, having enlightenment or not having enlightenment, and 
fundamental or acquired enlightenment. These are merely worldly 
people’s categories, which have not been transmitted from buddha to 
buddha. The thinking of worldly people and the thinking of buddhas 
are completely different and cannot be compared. The original 
enlightenment discussed by worldly people and the original 
enlightenment actualized by buddhas are as far apart from each other 
as heaven and earth; they are beyond comparison. Even the 
deliberations of bodhisattvas of the ten stages or three classes do not 
match the expressions of buddhas. How can worldly people, vainly 
counting grains of sand, make accurate assessments? 

Nevertheless, there are many people who merely agree to the 
crooked, inverted views of worldly people or of those outside the way, 
and then mistakenly regard such views as the realm of buddhas. 
Buddhas say that the unwholesome roots of such people are deep and 
heavy, and they are to be pitied. However endless the unwholesome 
roots of such people may be, this tendency is their burden. For now, 
look into this and release it. Grasping such obstructions and involving 
yourself with them are not a good direction to pursue. 

Because this is great enlightenment, it is equally great 
enlightenment [within heavenly halls and the Pure Land]. In great 
delusion, it is equally great delusion. This is simply the toes wiggling 
in the sandals [nothing special] for active buddhas. Sometimes it is 
the sound of a fart or the smell of shit throughout the single path [of 
active buddhas]. This is smelled with the nostrils, and heard with the 
ears, body, and practice. Further, there is a moment of attaining “my 
skin, flesh, bones, and marrow.” Beyond this, there is no practice 
attained from others. 

In regard to freely penetrating the great way that completes birth 
and masters death, there is an ancient statement, “A great sage 
surrenders birth and death to the mind, surrenders birth and death to 
the body, surrenders birth and death to the way, surrenders birth and 
death to birth and death.” As this teaching is actualized without 
limitation in the past and present, the awesome presence of active 
buddhas is thoroughly practiced immediately. 

The teaching of birth and death, body and mind, as the circle of the 
way is actualized at once. Thoroughly practicing, thoroughly 
clarifying, is not forced. It is just like recognizing the shadow of 
deluded thought and turning the light to shine within. The clarity of 
clarity beyond clarity prevails in the activity of buddhas. This is 
totally surrendering to practice. 

To understand the meaning of totally surrendering, you should 
thoroughly investigate mind. In the steadfastness of thorough 
investigation, all phenomena are the unadorned clarity of mind. You 
know and understand that the three realms of desire, form, and 
formlessness are merely elaborate divisions of mind. Although your 
knowing and understanding are part of all phenomena, you actualize 
the home village of the self. This is no other than your everyday 
activity. 

This being so, the continuous effort to grasp the point in phrases 
and to seek eloquence beyond words is to take hold beyond taking 
hold and to let go beyond letting go. 

In this endeavor, what is birth? What is death? What are body and 
mind? What are giving and taking? What are surrendering and 
rejecting? Is there no encounter while entering and exiting the same 
gate? Is there hiding the body but exposing the horns within a single 
move? Do we understand from great deliberation, or know with 
considerate intention? Is this endeavor one bright pearl or the entire 
treasury of the sutras? Is it a single monk’s staff or a single layer of the 
face? Does this occur thirty years later or in myriad years within one 
moment? Examine this in detail, and make a detailed study of this 
examination. In this detailed examination, you hear sounds with your 

entire eye and see colors with your entire ear. 

Further, opening the single eye of a monk is going beyond 
phenomena before one’s eyes, going beyond objects before one’s eyes. 
There is the composure of smiling and blinking. This is the moment of 
the awesome presence of an active buddha. Not pulled by things or 
pulling things, not creating or producing causal conditions, not 
original nature or dharma nature, not abiding in one’s conditions, not 
original being, and not merely accepting any of these as suchness— 
this is simply the awesome presence of an active buddha. 

This being so, the fluctuating circumstances of the body and 
phenomena are left to the mind and phenomena. For now, the 
awesome presence of dropping off birth and dropping off death is 
solely surrendered to buddha. Thus, there is an understanding: “All 
things are inseparable from mind, and the three realms are 
inseparable from mind.” Further, in an expression that goes beyond, 
there is a statement that “inseparable from mind” is called “walls and 
pebbles.” Where there is nothing inseparable from mind, there are no 
walls and pebbles. 

The point is that the awesome presence of active buddhas is 
entrusted to the mind, phenomena, and the body. This awesome 
presence cannot be reached through the understandings of acquired 
enlightenment or original enlightenment. Furthermore, how can it be 
reached by those outside the way, those in the Two Vehicles, or 
bodhisattvas of the three classes or ten stages? 

This awesome presence is not comprehended by any person, and is 
beyond comprehension on any level. However lively it may be, each 
branch is just as it is. Is it one long piece of iron? Is it both ends of a 
worm moving? One long piece of iron is neither long nor short; both 
ends moving are neither self nor other. 

When the power of unrolling the matter and hurling insightful 
flashes is put into practice, the awesomeness encompasses all things, 
and the eye becomes lofty through the entire world. There is 
illumination that is not hindered by taking in or letting go. It is the 
monks’ hall, the buddha hall, the kitchen, or the monastery gate. 
Further, there is illumination that does not take in or let go. It is also 
the monks’ hall, the buddha hall, the kitchen, or the monastery gate. 

Moreover, there is an eye that penetrates the ten directions and 
receives the entire earth. This eye is in front of the mind and behind 
the mind. Such an eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind have the 
dazzling power of illumination. Thus, there are buddhas in the past, 
present, and future who maintain what is beyond knowing, and there 
are cats and white oxen who launch the insightful response of already 
knowing. This is grabbing the ox’s nose and having an eye. This 
expresses the dharma of active buddhas and allows the dharma of 

active buddhas. 

insightful flashes. This is unrolling the matter and hurling insightful 
flashes, turning dharma and dharma turning. This is called turning the 
dharma wheel. 

Even if the entire great earth is entirely in flames, there must be the 
dharma wheel turning the flame wheel, the dharma wheel turning all 
buddhas, the dharma wheel turning the dharma wheel, and the 
dharma wheel turning past, present, and future. 

This being so, flames are the great practice place of all buddhas 
turning the dharma wheel. If you try to assess this with the 
measurements of realms, time, human capacity, or ordinary or sacred, 
you cannot hit the mark. Because it cannot be assessed by these 
calculations, all buddhas in the three times abide in flames and turn 
the great dharma wheel. As they are called all buddhas in the three 
times, they go beyond these measurements. Because it is the practice 
place of buddhas in the three times turning the dharma wheel, there 
are flames. Because there are flames, it is the practice place of all 
buddhas. 

Xuansha said, As flames expound dharma to all the buddhas in the 
past, present, and future, all the buddhas remain standing and listen. You 
may hear this statement and say that Xuansha’s words are a more 
complete utterance than Xuefeng’s words, but it is not necessarily so. 
Know that Xuefeng’s statement is different from Xuansha’s. That is, 
Xuefeng speaks about the place where all buddhas in the three times 
turn the great dharma wheel, while Xuansha speaks about all buddhas 
in the three times listening to the dharma. 

Xuefeng’s statement is indeed about turning the dharma, but he 
does not actually discuss listening or not listening to dharma at the 
place of turning dharma. Thus, it does not sound as if turning the 
dharma is always listening to the dharma. Moreover, Xuefeng in his 
teaching did not say that buddhas in the three times expound dharma 
for the sake of flames. Nor did he say that buddhas in the three times 
turn the great dharma wheel for the sake of the buddhas in the three 
times, nor that flames turn the great dharma wheel for the sake of the 
flames. Is there any difference between the words turning the dharma 
wheel and turning the great dharma wheel? Turning the dharma wheel is 
not limited to expounding the dharma. Isn’t expounding the dharma 
necessarily for the sake of others? Thus, it is not that the words of 
Xuefeng have not exhausted the meaning of the words that he should 
have said. 

Definitely study in detail Xuefeng’s words abiding in flames and 
turning the great dharma wheel. Don’t be confused by Xuansha’s words. 

Penetrating Xuefeng’s statement awesomely presents the awesome 
presence of buddhas. The flames that contain the buddhas in the three 

times prevail not only in one or two limitless worlds of phenomena, 
and do not merely fill one or two particles of dust. In an attempt to 
discern the great dharma wheel’s turning, do not measure it as large 
or small, wide or narrow. Turning the great dharma wheel is neither 
for the self nor for others, neither for expounding nor for listening. 

Xuansha said, As flames expound dharma to all the buddhas in the 
past, present, and future, all the buddhas remain standing and listen. 
Although he said flames expound dharma to the buddhas in the three 
times, he did not say that flames turn the dharma wheel. Furthermore, 
he did not say that buddhas in the three times turn the dharma wheel. 
Although all buddhas in the three times remain standing and listening, 
how can the flames turn the dharma wheel of the buddhas in the three 
times? Do the flames that expound dharma for the buddhas in the 
three times also turn the great dharma wheel or not? Xuansha did not 
say that turning the dharma wheel occurs at this moment. He did not 
say that the dharma wheel does not turn. However, it might be 
supposed that Xuansha carelessly interpreted the turning of the 
dharma wheel as expounding the dharma wheel. If so, he did not yet 
comprehend the statement of Xuefeng. 

Xuansha knew that when flames expound dharma for the buddhas 
in the three times, the buddhas all remain standing and listen to the 
dharma. However, he did not realize that where the flames turn the 
dharma wheel, the flames remain standing and listen to the dharma. 
He did not say that where the flames turn the dharma wheel, the 
flames altogether turn the dharma wheel. All buddhas of the three 
times listening to the dharma are the dharma of all buddhas, which is 
not dependent on others. Do not consider the flames as dharma, as 
buddha, or even as flames. Indeed, do not ignore the statements of 
this master and his disciple. This is to say that they are not only red- 
bearded barbarians, but that they are barbarians with red beards. 

Although Xuansha’s words are like this, there is something you 
should study with great effort. Without regard to the limited views of 
the Great Vehicle or Lesser Vehicles held by teachers of sutras and 
treatises, just study the true characteristics that have been 
authentically transmitted from buddha to buddha, ancestor to 
ancestor. 

All the buddhas remain standing and listen. This is not limited to the 
views of the Great Vehicle or Lesser Vehicle. Teachers of sutras and 
treatises only know that buddhas expound dharma in response to the 
readiness of those who hear it. But they do not say that buddhas listen 
to the dharma, that buddhas practice, and that buddhas accomplish 
buddhahood. 

Regarding Xuansha’s words, All the buddhas remain standing and 
listen, this is the essence and experience of buddhas’ listening. Do not 

regard the capacity to expound the dharma as superior, and the 
capacity to listen to the dharma as inferior. If those who speak are 
venerable, those who listen are venerable as well. 

statement takes it up and releases it. 

Keqin has a statement that is not the same as Xuansha’s and not the 
same as Xuefeng’s: Blazing flames in the spreading sky are buddhas 
expounding dharma; the spreading sky in blazing flames is dharma 
expounding buddhas. This statement has been truly an illumination for 
those who have studied ever since. Even if you do not notice the 
blazing flames, if you are covered by the spreading sky, you have your 
share and others have theirs. Wherever the entire sky covers, there are 
always blazing flames. Even though you dislike these blazing flames 
and look somewhere else, how could it be otherwise? 

Rejoice! Although your skin bag was born far from the sages, and 
although this moment is distant from the sages, you have encountered 
the transforming guidance of the spreading sky that can still be heard. 
Although buddhas expounding dharma has been heard, how many 
layers of ignorance we have suffered from because of not having heard 
the statement dharma expounding buddhas! Accordingly, it is simply 
that all buddhas in the three times are expounded by dharma 
throughout the three times, and all dharmas in the three times are 
expounded by buddhas throughout the three times. 

It is the spreading sky alone that cuts apart the tangle of twining 
vines amid the winds. A single statement crushes both Vimalakirti and 
those who are not Vimalakirti, and nothing remains. 

25 
Tue Busan” Teacuine 

Tue ACTUALIZED EXPRESSION Of all buddhas is the buddhas’ teaching. 

Because buddha ancestors express this teaching for all buddha 
ancestors, it is authentically transmitted for the sake of teaching. This 
is turning the dharma wheel. Within the eyeball of this dharma wheel, 
you actualize all buddha ancestors and have all buddhas enter pari- 
nirvana. 

These buddha ancestors invariably emerge in a single particle and 
enter nirvana in a single particle. They emerge in the entire world and 
enter nirvana in the entire world. They emerge in a single moment 
and emerge in the ocean of multiple eons. And yet, their emergence in 
a single particle in a single moment lacks no merit. This cannot be 
replaced by their emergence in the entire world, in the ocean of 
multiple eons. 

This being so, do not say that buddhas who attain the way in the 
morning and enter nirvana that evening lack merit. If you say that one 
day contains little merit, then eighty years of human life is not long 
enough. When you compare the eighty years of human life with ten or 
twenty eons, it would be like one day and eighty years, and the merits 
of this buddha and that buddha could not be discerned. If you 
compare the merit of a long eon and timeless life with the merit of 
eighty years, there would be no room for doubt. 

In this way, the buddhas’ teaching is the buddha who teaches. It is 
the merit thoroughly experienced by buddha ancestors. It is not that 
buddhas are high and broad and their teaching of dharma is low and 
narrow. 

Know that if buddhas are large, their teaching is large; if buddhas 
are small, their teaching is small. Thus, know that buddhas and their 
teaching cannot be measured as large or small. It is beyond the 
aspects of wholesome, unwholesome, or neutral. It is not a teaching 
for oneself or others. 

Old Man Shakya expounded the teaching of the sutras throughout 
his lifetime. In addition, he authentically transmitted the dharma 
of one mind, the supreme vehicle, to Mahakashyapa. This has 
been passed down from person to person. Due to this, his 
teaching is a groundless theory presented in accordance with the 
capacity of listeners. Meanwhile, the dharma of one mind is the 
true nature of reality. This authentically transmitted single mind 
is called transmission outside of scriptures. It does not equal 
words in the Three Vehicles and the Twelve Divisions of the 
teaching. Because this mind is the supreme vehicle, it is called 
directly pointing to the human mind, seeing original nature, and 
becoming a buddha. 

This statement is not at all a work of buddha dharma. It has no vital 
path of leaping beyond and no awesome presence wherever the body 
reaches. 

Even if those who make such a statement were to call themselves 
pioneering teachers hundreds and thousands of years in the future, 
regard them as neither clarifying nor mastering buddha dharma or the 
buddha way. Why? Because they don’t know the Buddha, the 
teaching, the mind, inside, or outside. The reason is that they have 
never heard buddha dharma. 

When we speak of buddhas, those who don’t know the origin and 
effect of buddhas and their boundaries of coming and going cannot be 
called disciples of the Buddha. To talk only about this authentically 
transmitted single mind, while excluding authentic transmission of the 
buddhas’ teaching, is not to know buddha dharma. They do not know 
the single mind of the buddhas’ teaching. They have not heard of the 
single mind of the buddhas’ teaching. 

They speak of the buddhas’ teaching outside of the single mind. 
Their single mind is not the single mind. They speak of the single 
mind outside of the buddhas’ teaching. The buddhas’ teaching they 
speak of is not the buddhas’ teaching. Even if they have inherited the 
mistaken view of transmission outside the teaching, their words and 
truth do not fit each other because they do not yet know inside from 
outside. 

How can buddha ancestors who have transmitted the treasury of the 
true dharma eye person to person not transmit the buddhas’ teaching 
person to person? Furthermore, how would Old Man Shakya set up a 
teaching that is not a work of the buddha house? If Old Man Shakya 
lets the teaching be transmitted from person to person, which buddha 
ancestors can deny the teaching? Thus, what is called the supreme 
vehicle is the Three Vehicles and the Twelve Divisions of teaching, the 
great treasury and small treasury [Mahayana and Hinayana canons]. 

Know that what is called buddha mind is the Buddha’s eyeball, a 
broken wooden dipper. Since it is all things and the three realms, it is 
mountains, oceans, lands, the sun, the moon, and stars. The buddhas’ 
teaching is myriad things in all places. What is called outside is right 
here, arriving right here. 

Since authentic transmission is conducted from self to self, the self 
is within authentic transmission. You authentically inherit one mind 
from one mind. Thus, there is one mind in authentic transmission. The 
dharma of one mind, the supreme vehicle, is mud, stone, sand, and 
pebbles. Since mud, stone, sand, and pebbles are one mind, the mud, 
stone, sand, and pebbles are mud, stone, sand, and pebbles. If you 
speak of the dharma of one mind, the supreme vehicle, you should 
understand it like this. 

However, those who talk about transmission outside the teaching do 
not understand this meaning. So, do not believe the wrong view of 
transmission outside the teaching and thereby misunderstand 
buddhas’ teaching. 

If these people were right, the buddhas’ teaching should be called 
transmission outside the mind. If we were to say so, neither one 
phrase nor half a verse of the buddhas’ teaching would have been 
transmitted to us. If we do not say transmission outside the mind, we 
should not say transmission outside the teaching. 

Mahakashyapa is already the head of the dharma treasury as the 
heir of Shakyamuni Buddha. He authentically inherited the treasury of 
the true dharma eye and upholds the buddha way. It is biased to say 
that he should not have authentically inherited the buddhas’ teaching. 

Know that if you authentically inherit one phrase, you authentically 
inherit one dharma. If you inherit one phrase, you inherit mountains 
and you inherit waters. You cannot be separated from this very place. 

Shakyamuni Buddha authentically transmitted his treasury of the 
true dharma eye, unsurpassable enlightenment, to Mahakashyapa 
alone and to no one else. Authentic transmission was unquestionably 
to Mahakashyapa. Thus, all those who study truth in buddha dharma 
in the past and present always investigate thoroughly with buddha 
ancestors to determine the authenticity of teaching from the past. 
They do not ask others for this. Those who are not authenticated by 
buddha ancestors are not buddha ancestors. Those who want to be 
authenticated should be authenticated by buddha ancestors. The 
reason is that the original teachers of mastering the dharma wheel are 
buddha ancestors. 

Buddha ancestors alone, being past and present buddhas, clarify and 
authentically transmit the expression of existence and nonexistence as 
well as the expression of emptiness and form. 

The meaning of Xuansha’s reply is that the Three Vehicles and the 
Twelve Divisions of the teaching are the buddha ancestors’ dharma 
wheel, which turns in the place where there are buddha ancestors and 
in the place where there are no buddha ancestors. It turns equally 
before and after the time of ancestors. 

Further, the Three Vehicles and the Twelve Divisions of the 
teaching have the function of turning buddha ancestors. At the very 
moment of asking the meaning of Bodhidharma’s coming from India, 
this dharma wheel is nothing is essential. Nothing is essential doesn’t 
mean not to utilize or break this dharma wheel. This dharma wheel 
turns in nothing is essential. 

See that Xuansha did not say that the Three Vehicles and the 
Twelve Divisions of the teaching did not exist; he said that they were 
not essential. Because they are not essential, they are the Three 
Vehicles and the Twelve Divisions of the teaching. Because they are 
the Three Vehicles and the Twelve Divisions of the teaching, they are 
beyond the Three Vehicles and the Twelve Divisions of the teaching. 
Thus, Xuansha said, the Three Vehicles and the Twelve Divisions of 
the teaching are not essential. 

and death. 

When you observe these twelve causes, you examine them from the 
viewpoint of subject and object, cause and effect, in the past, present, 
and future. In this examination, the turning of the wheel is not 
essential at all; cause and effect are not essential at all. 

Know that if ignorance is one mind, inclination and discernment, 
and so on, are one mind. If ignorance perishes, inclination and 
discernment, and so on, perish. If ignorance is nirvana, inclination and 
discernment, and so on, are nirvana. We say so because birth is itself 
perishing. Ignorance is a phrase of expression. Discernment, name and 
form, and so on, are also like this. 

Know that ignorance, inclination, and so on, are no other than 
[Qingyuan’s statement]: “I have a hatchet. I live with it in this 
mountain.” [I am intimate with what I have.] Ignorance, inclination, 
and so on, are no other than “When I left the monastery, I asked the 
abbot to give me the hatchet.” 

The third vehicle is the Bodhisattva Vehicle. It is to achieve 
unsurpassable, complete enlightenment through the _ teaching, 
practice, and realization of the six paramitas. Achieving them is not 
creating, not not-creating, not initiating, not newly making, not 
achieving for a long time, not original practice, and not not-making. It 
is just achieving unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. 

The six paramitas [realizations] are: the paramita of giving, the 
paramita of precepts, the paramita of patience, the paramita of effort, 
the paramita of meditation, and the paramita of prajna [wisdom 
beyond wisdom]. These are all unsurpassable enlightenment, beyond 
any discussion of not-born and not-created. 

It is not necessarily that the paramita of giving comes first and the 
paramita of prajna comes last. A sutra says, “A bodhisattva of sharp 
capacity makes prajna first and giving last. A bodhisattva of dull 
capacity makes giving first and prajna last.” However, the paramita of 
patience can come first, and the paramita of meditation can come 
first. Thirty-six [six times six] paramitas can be actualized. From one 
basket [container], another basket is reached. 

Paramita means “arriving at the other shore” [of enlightenment]. 
Although the other shore does not have the appearance or trace from 
olden times, arriving is actualized. Arriving is the fundamental point. 
Do not think that practice leads to the other shore. Because there is 
practice on the other shore, when you practice, the other shore 
arrives. It is because this practice embodies the capacity to actualize 
all realms. 

The Twelve Divisions of the teaching: 

Sutra—a scripture in prose 

Geya—a teaching reiterated in verse 

Vyakarana—a prediction of enlightenment 

Gatha—a verse for chanting 

Udana—a teaching expounded not in response to a question 
Nidana—an explanation of causes [of unwholesome things] 
Avadana—a parable 

Itivrittaka—a past life [of a disciple of the Buddha] 
Jataka—a past life [of the Buddha] 

Vaipulya—a broad teaching 

Adbhuta-dharma—an unprecedented [magical] story 
Upadesha—a philosophical discussion 

The Tathagata personally expounded conditional and real matters of 
the world of skandhas, surroundings, and perceptions for sentient 
beings. This is called a sutra. 

He also reiterated his explanation of these matters in verses of four, 
five, six, seven, or eight syllables. This is called a gaya. 

Or he personally predicted a future event of a sentient being, such 
as a dove or a sparrow becoming a buddha. This is called a vyakarana. 

The Tathagata explained matters of the world in a solitary verse. 
This is called a gatha. 

He explained matters of the world without someone asking him a 
question. This is called an udana. 

He summarized unwholesome matters of the world and provided 
precepts. This is called a nidana. 

He explained matters of the world with a parable. This is called an 
avadana. 

He explained past lives of the Buddha’s disciples. This is called an 
itivrittaka. 

He explained matters of a past life. This is called a jataka. 

He explained broad matters of the world. This is called a vaipulya. 

He explained matters unprecedented in the world. This is called an 
adbhuta-dharma. 

And he discussed matters of the world. This is called an upadesha. 

These Twelve Divisions of scriptures have been created to give joy 
to sentient beings. They are the established explanations of the world. 

It is rare to hear the names of the Twelve Divisions of the teaching. 
These names are heard when buddha dharma is spread in the world, 
and they are not heard when buddha dharma perishes. They are also 
not heard when buddha dharma is not yet spread. Those who cultivate 
wholesome roots for a long time and see the Buddha hear these 
names. Those who hear them are bound to receive unsurpassable, 
complete enlightenment before long. 

Each of these Twelve Divisions is called a sutra. They are called the 

Twelve Divisions of the teaching or the Twelve Divisions of sutras. 

Each of the Twelve Divisions of the teaching contains the Twelve 
Divisions of the teaching; they are one hundred forty-four divisions of 
the teaching. As each of the Twelve Divisions of the teaching 
embodies the Twelve Divisions of the teaching, they are one division 
of the teaching. 

However, the number twelve is not the amount before or after a 
billion. The Twelve Divisions of the teaching are the eyeball of 
buddha ancestors, the bones and marrow of buddha ancestors, the 
work of the house of buddha ancestors, the radiant light of buddha 
ancestors, the splendor of buddha ancestors, the land of buddha 
ancestors. To see the Twelve Divisions of the teaching is to see buddha 
ancestors. To express buddha ancestors is to express the Twelve 
Divisions of the teaching. 

This being so, Qingyuan’s lowering his one leg [as a sign of 
approving Shitou] is the Three Vehicles and the Twelve Divisions of 
the teaching. Nanyue’s statement “Your words were close but did not 
hit the mark” is no other than the Three Vehicles and the Twelve 
Divisions of the teaching. 

Xuansha’s statement, The Three Vehicles and the Twelve Divisions of 
the teaching are not essential is also like this. When you take up this 
expression, there are only buddha ancestors. There is not half a 
person, not one thing other than buddha ancestors. Not even one thing 
has risen. 

How is it? Say, “Nothing is essential!” 

Without the capacity to return to one division, there cannot be nine 
divisions. As there is the capacity to return to one division, one 
division returns to one division. For this reason, there are eighty-one 
divisions. This is the division of just this, the division of the self, the 
division of a whisk, the division of a walking stick, the division of the 
treasury of the true dharma eye. 

These scriptures are the buddhas’ teachings. Know that the teachings 
of the buddhas are as many as the sands of the Ganges, a bamboo 
stick, and a whisk. The sands of the Ganges of the buddhas’ teachings 
are a staff and a fist. 

26 
Mhractss 

Tue MIRACLES I am speaking of are the daily activities of buddhas, 

which they do not neglect to practice. There are six miracles [freedom 
from the six-sense desires], one miracle, going beyond miracles, and 
unsurpassable miracles. Miracles are practiced three thousand times in 
the morning and eight hundred times in the evening. Miracles arise 
simultaneously with buddhas but are not known by buddhas. Miracles 
disappear with buddhas but do not overwhelm buddhas. 

Miracles occur equally in heaven and on earth. Miracles occur 
throughout practice and enlightenment whenever buddhas search in 
the Himalayas or practice like a tree or a rock. When the buddhas 
before Shakyamuni Buddha appeared as his disciples, bringing a robe 
and a stupa to him, he said, “This is a miracle caused by the 
inconceivable power of all buddhas.” Thus, we know that this miracle 
can also happen to buddhas now and buddhas in the future. 

Guishan said, “Huiji and I have been sharing miracles. This is no 
small matter.” 

Xiangyan said, “I was next door and heard you.” 

Guishan said to him, “Why don’t you try now?” 

Xiangyan made a bowl of tea and brought it to him. 

Guishan praised them, saying, “You two students surpass even 
Shariputra and Maudgalyayana with your miraculous activity!” 

If you want to understand buddhas’ miracles, you should study 
Guishan’s words. As this is no small matter, practicing miracles is 
studying the buddha way. Not practicing miracles is not studying the 
buddha way. This miraculous activity is transmitted heir to heir. Do 
not study miracles from those outside the way, those in the Two 
Lesser Vehicles, or interpreters of sutras. 

When we study Guishan’s miracles, we see that they were 
unsurpassable; each action was extraordinary. Beginning with Guishan 
lying down, there are: turning to face the wall, getting up, calling 
Huiji, talking about the dream, washing his face, and sitting up. 
Yangshan leaned forward to listen, and brought a basin of water and a 
towel. Guishan then described this as: Huiji and I have been sharing 
miracles. Study these miracles. 

These ancestors who authentically transmitted buddha dharma 
talked in this way. Do not merely interpret it as Guishan expressing 
his dream by washing his face. Regard their interaction as a series of 
miracles. 

Guishan said, This is no small matter. His understanding of miracles 
is different from that of practitioners who follow the Lesser Vehicles, 
have limited understanding, or hold small views. It is not the same as 
that of bodhisattvas of the ten stages and three classes. People of 
limited views study minor miracles and attain limited understanding. 
They do not experience the great miracles of buddha ancestors. 

These are miracles of buddhas, and miracles going beyond buddha. 
Those who study such miracles are beyond the reach of demons or 
those outside the way. Teachers and interpreters of sutras have never 
heard of this teaching, nor would they have accepted it even if they 
had heard. Rather than studying great miracles, teachers and 
interpreters of sutras, those outside the way, and practitioners of the 
Two Lesser Vehicles study minor miracles. 

Buddhas abide in and transmit great miracles, buddha miracles. Had 
it not been for buddha miracles, Yangshan would not have brought 
water and a towel, and Guishan would not have turned to the wall as 
he was lying down, nor sat up after washing his face. 

Encompassed by the power of great miracles, minor miracles occur. 
Great miracles include minor miracles but minor miracles do not 

know great miracles. Minor miracles are a tuft of hair breathing in the 
vast ocean, a mustard seed storing Mount Sumeru, the top of the head 
spouting water, or feet spreading fire. Miracles like these are minor 
miracles. The five or six miraculous powers are minor miracles. Those 
who practice them never dream of buddha miracles. The reason I call 
them minor miracles is that they are limited by circumstances and 
depend upon special practices and realizations. They may occur in this 
lifetime but not in another lifetime. They may be available to some 
people but not to others. They may appear in this land but not 
elsewhere. They may appear at times other than the present moment 
but not at the present moment. 

Great miracles are not like that. The teaching, practice, and 
enlightenment of buddhas are all actualized through miracles. They 
are actualized not only in the realm of buddhas but also in the realm 
of going beyond buddhas. The transformative power of miracle 
buddhas is indeed beyond thinking. This power appears before the 
buddha bodies appear, and is not concerned with the past, present, or 
future. The aspiration, practice, enlightenment, and nirvana of all 
buddhas would not have appeared without buddha miracles. 

In the inexhaustible ocean of the world of phenomena, the power of 
buddha miracles is unchanging. A tuft of hair not only breathes in the 
great ocean but it maintains, realizes, utilizes, and breathes out the 
great ocean. When this activity arises, it encompasses all worlds of 
phenomena. However, do not assume that there are no other activities 
that encompass all worlds of phenomena. 

A mustard seed containing Mount Sumeru is also like this. A 
mustard seed breathes out Mount Sumeru and actualizes the 
inexhaustible ocean of the world of phenomena. When a tuft of hair or 
a mustard seed breathes out a great ocean, breathing out happens in 
one moment, and it happens in myriad eons. Breathing out myriad 
eons and breathing out one moment happen simultaneously. How are 
a tuft of hair and a mustard seed brought forth? They are brought 
forth by miracles. This bringing forth is miracles. What enables a tuft 
of hair and a mustard seed to do things like that? Miracles enable 
them to do so. Miracles bring forth miracles. Do not think that 
miracles sometimes do and sometimes do not happen in the past, 
present, or future. Buddhas alone abide in miracles. 

Thoroughly investigate the meaning of these words. Fetching water 
means drawing and carrying water. Sometimes you do it yourself and 
sometimes you have others do it. Those who practice this are all 
miracle buddhas. Although miracles are noticed once in a while, 
miracles are miracles. It is not that things perish or are eliminated 
when they are unnoticed. Things are just as they are even when 
unnoticed. Even when people do not know that fetching water is a 
miracle, fetching water is undeniably a miracle. 

Carrying firewood means doing the labor of hauling, as in the time of 
Huineng, the Sixth Ancestor. Even if you do not know that miracles 
happen three thousand times in the morning and eight hundred times 
in the evening, miracles are actualized. Those who see and hear the 
wondrous activities of miracles by buddha tathagatas do not fail to 
attain the way. Attaining the way of all buddhas is always completed 
by the power of miracles. 

Causing water to spout out of the head is a practice of the Lesser 
Vehicles. It is merely a minor miracle. On the other hand, fetching 
water is a great miracle. The custom of fetching water and carrying 
firewood has not declined, as people have not ignored it. It has come 
down from ancient times to today, and it has been transmitted from 
there to here. Thus, miracles have not declined even for a moment. 
Such are great miracles, which are no small matter. 

bottom, and center of the formless body. The spouting out of fire is 
also like this. 

Not only is there the spouting out of water, fire, and air, but also 
there is the spouting out of buddhas from the top and bottom of the 
body. There is the spouting of ancestors from the top and bottom of 
the body. There is the spouting of immeasurable eons from the top 
and bottom of the body. There is also the spouting out of the ocean of 
the world of phenomena and the swallowing of the ocean of the world 
of phenomena from the top of the body. To spit out the lands of the 
world seven or eight times and to swallow them two or three times is 
also like this. The four, five, or six great elements, all elements, and 
immeasurable elements, are also great miracles that appear and 
disappear, are spit out, and swallowed. The great earth and empty 
space are miracles that are swallowed and spit out. 

Miracles have the power of being activated by a mustard seed and 
responding to a tuft of hair. Miracles arise, abide, and return to the 
source beyond the reach of consciousness. The various aspects of 
buddha miracles are beyond long or short—how can this be measured 
by discriminatory thinking? 

did not say whether the sorcerer has this miraculous power or not. 
Even if Old Man Shakyamuni had spoken about it, how would the 
sorcerer have understood the single miraculous power? Although the 
sorcerer had five miraculous powers, they are not the same as the five 
miraculous powers of the Buddha. 

Although the sorcerer’s powers may look like those of the Buddha, 
how can his powers compare to those of the Buddha? If the sorcerer 
attained even one of the Buddha’s powers, he could meet the Buddha 
by this power. 

When we see the sorcerer, he had powers similar to the Buddha’s, 
and when we see the Buddha, he had powers similar to the sorcerer’s. 
But the sorcerer did not have the Buddha’s miraculous powers. If one 
of the sorcerer’s powers could not reach one of the Buddha’s powers, 
none of his five powers could be equal to those of the Buddha. 

So what is the use of asking the Buddha, What miraculous power am I 
missing? Old Man Shakyamuni meant that the sorcerer should have 
asked about the powers the sorcerer already had. The sorcerer had not 
even mastered one of those powers. In this way the Buddha’s 
miraculous powers and other people’s miraculous powers look alike 
but in fact are completely different. 

Thus, a buddha masters the six-sense objects, which are all 
marked with emptiness. A buddha is free of conditions. Even 
having a body of five skandhas accompanied by desire, a buddha 
does not depend on anything. A buddha practices miracles that 
are grounded on the earth. 

Followers of the way, a true buddha has no form, and the true 
dharma has no marks. From your mind’s illusions, marks and 
appearances are created. What you get is a wild fox’s spirit, which 
is the view of those outside the way, and not of a true buddha. 

Thus, the six types of miracles of the buddhas cannot be reached by 
devas, demons, or those of the Two Lesser Vehicles. The six types of 
miracles of the buddha way cannot be measured. They are only 
transmitted to disciples of the buddha way, person to person, but not 
to others. Those who have not inherited such miracles do not know 
them. Know that those who have not inherited such miracles are not 
persons of the buddha way. 

An old teacher [Yongjia] said, “The six types of miracles are neither 
empty nor not empty. A circle of light is neither inside nor outside.” 

Neither inside nor outside means leaving no trace. When you practice, 
study, and realize no-trace, you are not disturbed by the six sense 
organs. Those who are disturbed should receive thirty blows. 

The six types of miracles should be studied like this. How can those 
who are not authentic heirs of the buddha house learn about this? 
They mistakenly regard running around inside and outside as the 
practice of returning home. 

The four fruits of the arhats are the essentials of the buddha way. But 
no teachers of the Tripitaka have authentically transmitted them. How 
can those who study letters or wander in remote lands receive these 
fruits? Those who are satisfied with minor achievements cannot 
master them. The four fruits are transmitted only by buddha and 
buddha. The so-called four fruits are to receive the four lines of verse, 
and this means that eyes, ears, nose, and tongue are undefiled by all 
things. Undefiled means unstained. Unstained means undivided mind 
—“T am always intimate with this.” 

The six types of miracles and the four fruits of the buddha way have 
been authentically transmitted in this manner. Know that anything 
different from this is not buddha dharma. Thus, the buddha dharma is 
always actualized through miracles. When actualized, a drop of water 
swallows the great ocean and a speck of dust hurls out a high 
mountain. Who can doubt that these are miracles? 

Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery 
on the sixteenth day, the eleventh month, the second year of the Ninji 
Era [1241]. 

27 

Great Enuicurenment 

Tue GREAT way of the buddhas has been transmitted with intimate 

attention; the work of the ancestors has been unfolded evenly and 
broadly. Thus, great enlightenment is actualized, and beyond 
enlightenment is the decisive way. In this way, enlightenment is 
realized and played with; enlightenment disappears in the practice of 
letting go. This is the everyday activity of buddha ancestors. 
Enlightenment taken up activates the twelve hours of the day. 
Enlightenment hurled away is activated by the twelve hours of the 
day. Furthermore, leaping beyond the mechanism of time there is 
twiddling with a mud ball and twiddling with spirit. 

Although it should be thoroughly understood that buddha ancestors 
are invariably actualized from great enlightenment, it is not that the 
entire experience of great enlightenment should be regarded as 
buddha ancestors, and it is not that the entire experience of buddha 
ancestors should be regarded as entire great enlightenment. Buddha 
ancestors leap beyond the boundary of great enlightenment, and great 
enlightenment has a face that leaps beyond buddha ancestors. 

Now, human capacity is greatly varied. For example, there are those 
who already have understanding at birth. At birth they are free from 
birth. That means they understand with the body at the beginning, 
middle, and end of birth. There are those who understand through 
study, ultimately understanding the self through practice. That means 
they practice with the body—the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of 
study. 

Besides those who have understanding at birth or through study, 
there are those who have understanding as buddhas. They go beyond 
the boundary of self and other, having no limit in this very place, and 
are not concerned with the notion of self and other. There are also 
those who understand without teachers. Although they do not rely 
upon teachers, sutras, essence, or form, and they do not turn the self 
around nor merge with others, nevertheless all things are revealed. 

Among these types of people, don’t regard one as sharp and another 
as dull. Various types of people, as they are, actualize various types of 
accomplishments. Examine what sentient or insentient being is 

without understanding at birth. If one has understanding at birth, one 
has enlightenment at birth, realization at birth, and practice at birth. 
Thus, the buddha ancestors who are already excellent tamers of beings 
are regarded as those who have enlightenment at birth. This is so 
because their birth has brought forth enlightenment. Indeed, this is 
enlightenment at birth that is filled with great enlightenment. This is 
the study of taking up enlightenment. Thus, one is greatly enlightened 
by taking up the three realms, by taking up one hundred grasses, by 
taking up the four great elements, by taking up buddha ancestors, and 
by taking up the fundamental point. All these are further attaining 
great enlightenment by taking up great enlightenment. The very 
moment for this is just now. 

Jingzhao Xiujing, Great Master Baozhi, of the Huayan Monastery in 
Jingzhao, was a dharma heir of Dongshan. Once a monk asked him, 
“What happens when a greatly enlightened person becomes deluded?” 

Jingzhao said, “A broken mirror no longer reflects images. Fallen 
flowers hardly ever climb up the tree.” 

The monk’s question was like a mere question, but it was a dharma 
talk to the assembly. Outside the assembly of the Huayan Monastery 
this would not have been spoken. And one who was not a dharma heir 
of Dongshan could not have responded like this. Indeed, he was 
someone mature enough to sit on the seat of a buddha ancestor. 

The so-called greatly enlightened person has neither been enlightened 
from the beginning nor received enlightenment from somewhere else. 
Great enlightenment is not something one encounters when one is old, 
after having worked for a long time as an ordinary monk in a 
communal place of the monastery. It does not emerge by pulling it out 
from oneself; nevertheless, one is greatly enlightened. 

Don’t regard not being deluded as great enlightenment. Don’t try to 
become deluded to obtain the seeds for great enlightenment. A greatly 
enlightened person is further greatly enlightened. A greatly deluded 
person is further greatly enlightened. Just as there is one who is 
greatly enlightened, there is a greatly enlightened buddha, greatly 
enlightened earth, water, fire, air, and emptiness; a _ greatly 
enlightened pillar and lantern. This is the meaning of a greatly 
enlightened person in the monk’s question. 

What happens when a greatly enlightened person becomes deluded? This 
is indeed a question to be asked. Jingzhao did not avoid it. This 
question has been admired in Zen monasteries as a meritorious work 
of a buddha ancestor. Investigate it. 

Is a greatly enlightened person who becomes deluded the same as 
an unenlightened person? When a greatly enlightened person becomes 
deluded, does the person use great enlightenment to create delusion? 
Does the person bring delusion from somewhere else and become 
deluded by covering the great enlightenment with delusion? Is it that 
a greatly enlightened person does not destroy great enlightenment but 
practices delusion? Or, is it that a greatly enlightened person becomes 
deluded means delusion brings forth another great enlightenment? 
Study thoroughly in this way. 

Is it that great enlightenment is a single hand, or is it that becoming 
deluded is a single hand? To inquire how a greatly enlightened person 
can become deluded should be the ultimate point of study. Know that 
there is great enlightenment that makes becoming deluded intimate. 

Accordingly, it is not that recognizing the thief as one’s own child is 

delusion, nor is it that recognizing one’s own child as the thief is 
delusion. It is just that great enlightenment is to recognize the thief as 
the thief. Delusion is to recognize one’s own child as one’s own child. 
Adding a little to a lot is great enlightenment. Taking out a little from 
a little is delusion. Accordingly, look for a deluded person and 
encounter a greatly enlightened one just as you grasp the deluded one. 
Is the self right now delusion or not delusion? Examine this and bring 
it to yourself. This is called encountering a buddha ancestor. 

Jingzhao said, A broken mirror no longer reflects images. Fallen flowers 
hardly ever climb up the tree. This teaching speaks of the moment when 
the mirror is broken. It is wrong to study the moment of broken mirror 
and compare it to the time when the mirror is not broken. It is a 
mistake to interpret Jingzhao’s words to mean that a greatly 
enlightened person is no longer deluded, because the person neither 
reflects images nor climbs up the tree. This is not a study of the way 
as it is. 

If what ordinary people think were right, you should ask, “What is 
the everyday activity of a greatly enlightened person?” They might 
say, “Can such a person still become deluded?” That is not how we 
should understand the dialogue between Jingzhao and the monk. 

When the monk said, What happens when a greatly enlightened person 
becomes deluded? he was asking about the very moment a greatly 
enlightened person becomes deluded. The very moment when these 
words are uttered, a broken mirror no longer reflects images and 
fallen flowers hardly ever climb up the tree. When fallen flowers are 
just fallen flowers, even if they get up to the top of a one-hundred-foot 
pole, they are still fallen flowers. When a broken mirror is just a 
broken mirror, whatever activities occur, they are merely broken 
pieces that no longer reflect images. Take up the teaching of the 
words a broken mirror and fallen flowers, and study the moment when 
a greatly enlightened person becomes deluded. 

Do not regard great enlightenment as becoming a buddha, returning 
to the source, and manifesting a buddha body. Do not regard 
becoming deluded as returning to be a sentient being. People with 
mistaken views talk about breaking great enlightenment and returning 
to be a sentient being. But Jingzhao was implying neither that great 
enlightenment gets broken or lost, nor that delusion appears. Do not 
think like those who have mistaken views. 

Indeed, great enlightenment is limitless, delusion is limitless, and 
delusion does not hinder great enlightenment; take up threefold great 
enlightenment and turn it into a half-fold minor delusion. Thus, the 
Himalayas are greatly enlightened to benefit the Himalayas. Wood 
and stone are greatly enlightened taking the forms of wood and stone. 

Buddhas’ great enlightenment is greatly enlightened for the sake of 

sentient beings. Sentient beings’ great enlightenment is greatly 
enlightened by buddhas’ great enlightenment. This goes beyond before 
and after. Great enlightenment right at this moment is not self, not 
other. Great enlightenment does not come from somewhere else—the 
ditch is filled in and the stream is stopped up. Great enlightenment 
does not go away—stop following others. How? Follow all the way 
through. 

has come.” It means that “becoming” and “coming” are 
enlightenment. 

It may look as if Yangshan was cautious about falling into the 
secondary and was denying a secondary enlightenment. But the 
secondary that becomes enlightenment is no other than the secondary 
that is true enlightenment. This being so, even the secondary, the 
hundredth, or the thousandth is enlightenment. It is not that the 
secondary is capped by the primary. 

Don’t say that yesterday’s self was the true self but today’s self is the 
secondary self. Don’t say that enlightenment just now was not there 
yesterday. It is not that enlightenment has begun this moment. Study 
in this way. Thus, great enlightenment is black, great enlightenment is 
white. 

Abiding at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery, I present this to 
the assembly on the twenty-eighth day, the first month, the third year 
of the Ninji Era [1242]. 

Staying at the ancient Yoshimine Temple, I revise and present this to 
the assembly of humans and devas on the twenty-eighth day, the first 
month, the second year of the Kangen Era [1243]. 

28 
Tue Powr OF Liazen 

Y aosuan, GREAT MaAsTER Hongdao, was sitting. A monk asked him, “In 

steadfast sitting, what do you think?” 
Yaoshan said, “Think not-thinking.” 
“How do you think not-thinking?” 
Yaoshan replied, “Beyond thinking.” 

Realizing these words of Yaoshan, you should investigate and 
receive the authentic transmission of steadfast sitting. This is the 
thorough study of steadfast sitting transmitted in the buddha way. 

Yaoshan is not the only one who spoke of thinking in steadfast 
sitting. His words, however, were extraordinary. Think not-thinking is 
the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of thinking and the skin, flesh, 
bones, and marrow of not-thinking. 

The monk said, How do you think not-thinking? However ancient not- 
thinking is, still we are asked how to think it. Is there not-thinking in 
steadfast sitting? How can going beyond steadfast sitting not be 
understood? One who is not shallow and foolish can ask and think 
about steadfast sitting. 

Yaoshan said, Beyond thinking. The activity of beyond thinking is 
crystal clear. In order to think not-thinking, beyond thinking is always 
used. In beyond thinking, there is somebody that sustains you. Even if 
it is you who are sitting steadfastly, you not only are thinking but are 
upholding steadfast sitting. When sitting steadfastly, how can steadfast 
sitting think steadfast sitting? Thus, sitting steadfastly is not buddha 
thought, dharma thought, enlightenment thought, or realization 
thought. 

This teaching was directly transmitted person to person from 
Shakyamuni Buddha to Yaoshan through thirty-six generations of 
ancestors. That means if you go beyond thirty-six generations from 
Yaoshan, you go back to Shakyamuni Buddha. What was authentically 
transmitted thus was think not-thinking. 

However, careless students in recent times say, “The endeavor of 
zazen is completed when your heart is quiescent, as zazen is a place of 
calmness.” Such a view does not even reach that of students of the 
Lesser Vehicles, and is inferior to the teachings of human and deva 

vehicles. How can we call them students of buddha dharma? In 
present-day Song China, there are many practitioners who hold such 
views. The decline of the ancestral path is truly lamentable. 

There are also people who say, “Practicing zazen is essential for 
those who are beginners or those who have started studying recently, 
but it is not necessarily the activity of buddha ancestors. Activity in 
daily life is Zen, and sitting is Zen. In speaking and in silence, in 
motion and stillness, your body should be tranquil. Do not be 
concerned only with the practice of zazen.” Many of those who call 
themselves descendants of Linji hold such a view. They say so because 
they have not received the transmission of the right livelihood of 
buddha dharma. 

Who are beginners? Are there any who are not beginners? When do 
you leave the beginner’s mind? Know that in the definitive study of 
the buddha dharma, you engage in zazen and endeavor in the way. At 
the heart of the teaching is a practicing buddha who does not seek to 
become a buddha. As a practicing buddha does not become a buddha, 
the fundamental point is realized. 

The embodiment of buddha is not becoming a buddha. When you 
break through the snares and cages [of words and concepts], a sitting 
buddha does not hinder becoming a buddha. Right now, you have the 
ability to enter the realm of buddha and enter the realms of demons 
throughout the ages. Going forward and going backward, you 
personally have the freedom of overflowing ditches, overflowing 
valleys. 

Mazu said, “My intention is to become a buddha.” 

Clarify these words. What is the meaning of become a buddha? Does 
become a buddha mean being made buddha by another buddha, or 
buddha making oneself buddha? Is this the emergence of one or two 
buddhas? Is the intention to become buddha dropping off, or is 
dropping off the intention to become buddha? Does this mean that 
however many ways there are to become buddha, to be immersed in 
this intention to become a buddha is the intention to become buddha? 

Know that Mazu meant that zazen is inevitably the intention to 
become buddha, and that zazen is inevitably becoming buddha with 
intention. Intention is prior to becoming a buddha and after becoming 
a buddha. Intention is the very moment of becoming buddha. 

I ask you: How much of becoming buddha is being immersed in 
intention? This immersion is immersed in immersion. Immersion is 
always a direct expression of totally becoming buddha, every bit of 
completely intending to become buddha. Do not avoid even a bit of 
intention. If you avoid it, you lose your body and miss your life. When 
you lose your body and miss your life, this too is immersion in 
intention. 

Nanyue picked up a tile and started to polish it on a rock. 

Mazu said, “What are you doing?” 

Indeed, who does not see this as polishing a tile? Who can see this 
as polishing a tile? So Mazu asked, What are you doing? 

What are you doing? is no other than polishing a tile. Whether in this 
world or in another world, polishing a tile has never ceased. Do not 
regard your view as the only view. In any activity, there is always this 
question. 

Those who see buddha without knowing and understanding buddha 
see water without understanding water, and see mountains without 
knowing mountains. To hastily conclude that what’s happening in 
front of you is a dead end is not a study of buddha. 

Nanyue said, “I am polishing this tile to make a mirror.” 

Clarify these words. Polishing a tile to make a mirror has a deep 
meaning; it is not a false statement, but actualizes the fundamental 
point. Although a tile is a tile and a mirror is a mirror, there are many 
ways to investigate the meaning of polishing. An ancient bright 
mirror, a bright mirror, comes from polishing a tile. Without knowing 
that all mirrors come from polishing tiles, you will not see or hear the 
words, mouth, or breath of buddha ancestors. 

Mazu said, “How can you make a mirror by polishing a tile?” 

Indeed, by polishing a tile and doing nothing else, an iron-willed 
practitioner does not make a mirror. Even if making a mirror is not 
polishing a tile, a mirror is immediately there. 

Nanyue said, “How can you become a buddha by doing zazen?” 

Be clear that zazen is not working toward becoming a buddha. The 
teaching that becoming a buddha has nothing to do with zazen is 
evident. 

Mazu said, “Then, how so?” 

These words may seem to be asking one thing but in fact are asking 
another. It is like close friends meeting; each is intimate with the 
other. How so? addresses both zazen and becoming a buddha at the 
same time. 

Nanyue said, “When driving a cart, if it stops moving, do you whip 
the cart or the ox?” 

In regard to driving a cart, what is moving and what is stopping? 
Does it mean that water flowing is the cart moving or water not 
flowing is the cart moving? You can also say that flowing is water not 
moving. There is a time when water’s moving is not-flowing. Thus, 
when you investigate the cart not moving, there is stopping and not 
stopping; it depends on time. The word stopping does not merely mean 
not moving. 

In regards to Nanyue’s words Do you whip the cart or the ox? is it 
that you sometimes hit the cart and sometimes hit the ox? Is hitting 
the cart the same or not the same as hitting the ox? In the secular 
world, there is no custom of hitting the cart. Although there is no 
custom of common people hitting the cart, in the buddha way there is 
the practice of hitting the cart; this is the eye of study. Even if you 
realize the practice of hitting the cart, it is not the same as hitting the 
ox. Study this thoroughly. 

Although hitting the ox is commonly practiced, you should 
investigate hitting the ox in the buddha way. Is it hitting a living 
buffalo, an iron ox, or a clay ox? Is it hitting with a whip, with the 
entire world, or with the whole mind? Is it hitting the marrow, hitting 
with the fist? How about fist hitting fist, and ox hitting ox? 

Mazu was silent. 

Do not ignore this silence. This is hurling a tile to attract a jewel, 
turning the head and turning the face. This silence cannot be taken 
away. 

Nanyue then instructed: “If you practice sitting Zen, you practice 
sitting buddha.” 

Investigate this statement and understand the pivotal point of the 
ancestral school. Those who miss the essential meaning of the practice 
of sitting Zen may say that it is the practice of sitting buddha. But how 
can those who are not authentic descendants be sure that the practice 
of sitting Zen is the practice of sitting buddha? Know that the zazen of 
beginner’s mind is the beginning of zazen. The beginning of zazen is 
the beginning of sitting buddha. 

Nanyue continued: “If you practice sitting Zen, [you will know that] 
Zen is not about sitting or lying down.” 

What Nanyue meant is that zazen is zazen, and it is not limited to 
sitting or lying down. This teaching has been transmitted person to 
person; thus boundless sitting and lying down are the self [beyond 
self]. When you reflect on your life activities, are they intimate with 
zazen or remote from it? Is there enlightenment in zazen, or is there 
delusion? Is there one whose wisdom penetrates zazen? 

Nanyue said further: “In the practice of sitting buddha, the buddha 
has no fixed form.” 

Nanyue spoke the words in this way. The reason why sitting buddha 
is neither singular nor plural is that sitting buddha is adorned with no 
fixed form. To speak of no fixed form is to speak of buddha’s form. As 
buddha has no fixed form, there is no escape from sitting buddha. 
Adorned with buddha’s no-fixed form, the practice of zazen is itself 
sitting buddha. In the dharma beyond condition, who can discriminate 
buddha from not-buddha? Falling away before discrimination, sitting 
buddha is sitting buddha. 

Nanyue said, “If you sit buddha, you kill [go beyond] buddha.” 

When you study sitting buddha further in this way, it has an aspect 
of kill buddha. At the very moment of sitting buddha there is killing 
buddha. If you want to find the extraordinary luminosity of killing 
buddha, always sit buddha. Kill may be an ordinary word that people 
commonly use, but its meaning here is totally different. Study how it 
is that sitting buddha is killing buddha. Investigate the fact that the 
buddha is itself killing buddha. Study killing and not killing a true 
person. 

Nanyue said, “If you are identified with [confined by] the sitting 
form, you have not reached the heart of the matter.” 

Identified with the sitting form, spoken of here, is to defile and 
abandon the sitting form. The reason is that when one is sitting 
buddha, it is impossible not to be identified with the sitting form. 
However clear the sitting form is, the heart of the matter cannot be 
reached, because it is impossible not to be one with the sitting form. 
To penetrate this is called “letting go of body and mind.” 

Those who have not practiced sitting do not reach the heart of the 
matter. The heart of the matter is sitting time, sitting person, sitting 
buddha, and the practice of sitting buddha. 

The sitting of mere sitting and mere lying down is not sitting 
buddha. Although usual sitting looks like sitting buddha or buddha 
sitting, it is not so. A person becomes buddha, becoming a buddha 
person. However, all people do not become buddhas. Buddhas are not 
all people, because buddhas are not limited to people. An ordinary 

person is not necessarily buddha, buddha is not necessarily an 
ordinary person. Sitting buddha is like this. 

In this way Nanyue was a profound teacher and Mazu was a 
thorough student. Mazu realized sitting buddha as becoming buddha, 
and Nanyue taught becoming buddha as sitting buddha. At Nanyue’s 
assembly there was this kind of investigation, and at Yaoshan’s 
assembly there was that dialogue. Know that what buddhas and 
ancestors have regarded as the pivotal point is sitting buddha. Those 
who are buddha ancestors employ this pivotal point. Those who aren’t 
have never dreamed of it. 

“Essentials of Zazen” are worthwhile. No version of “Rules for Zazen” 
clarifies the practice. They were written by those who did not know 
zazen, as they had not received the transmission of zazen person to 
person. “The Point of Zazen” included in the Jingde Record of 
Transmission of the Lamp and “Essentials of Zazen” included in the 
Jiatai Record of the Universal Lamp are also like this. 

What a pity! They visited and abided in monasteries of the ten 
directions and practiced all their lives, but they did not make a 
thorough effort even for one sitting. Sitting had not immersed in them 
and endeavor had not encountered them. It is not that zazen avoided 
them, but that they were carelessly intoxicated. They did not aspire to 
a genuine effort. 

Their texts merely aim to return to the source and origin, trying to 
cease thinking and to be still. That does not even come up to taking 
the steps of visualization, purification, nurturing, and attainment, or 
the view of the bodhisattvas of the last ten stages approaching 
buddha’s enlightenment. How could they have received and 
transmitted the buddha ancestors’ zazen? The Song Dynasty compilers 
of Zen texts included these writings by mistake. Those who study now 
should not pay attention to such writings. 

there is no thought of discrimination. 
When the illumination is wondrous, 
there is not the slightest hint. 

Where there is no thought of discrimination, 

the knowledge is extraordinary with no comparison. 
Where there is not the slightest hint, 

the illumination has nothing to grasp. 

The water is clear to the bottom 

where the fish swims without moving. 
The sky is vast and boundless 

where the bird flies away and disappears. 

The point presented here is the manifestation of great function, the 
awesome presence beyond sound and form, bamboo knots and wood 
grains [standards] before the parents were born. It is joyously not 
slandering buddha ancestors, not avoiding the death of body and 
mind. It is as extraordinary as having a head that is three feet tall and 
a neck that is two inches short. 

The hub of buddhas’ activity: Buddhas do not fail to make buddhas 
the hub. This hub is manifested. That is zazen. 

The turning of the ancestors’ hub: One’s late master spoke beyond 
words. This understanding is the basis of ancestors, of transmitting 
dharma, and of transmitting the robe. Turning heads and exchanging 
faces is the hub of buddhas’ activity. Turning faces and exchanging 
heads is the turning of the ancestors’ hub. 

Is known free of forms: This knowing is not, of course, conscious 
knowing. Conscious knowing is small. This knowing is not 
comprehension. Comprehension is created. Thus, this knowing is free 
of forms. Being free of forms is this knowing. Don’t regard it as all- 
inclusive knowledge. Don’t limit it to self-knowledge. Being free of 
forms is “When brightness [duality] comes, meet it with brightness. 
When darkness [nonduality] comes, meet it with darkness,” “Sit 
through the skin you were born with.” 

Illuminated beyond conditions: This illumination is not illuminating 
everything or illuminating with brilliance. Being beyond condition is 
this illumination. Illumination does not turn to conditions, as 
conditions are already illumination. Beyond means the entire world is 
not hidden, a broken world does not appear. It is subtle and 
wondrous. It is interchangeable and not interchangeable. 

When the knowledge is subtle, there is no thought of discrimination: 
Thought as knowledge does not depend on other-power. Knowledge is 

a shape, and a shape is mountains and rivers. The mountains and 
rivers are subtle. Subtle is wondrous. When you utilize it, it is lively. 
When you create a dragon, it is not limited inside or outside of the 
dragon gate. To utilize a bit of this knowledge is to know by bringing 
forth mountains and rivers of the entire world with all their force. If 
you don’t have knowledge by being intimate with mountains and 
rivers, there is not a shred or scrap of knowledge. Do not grieve that 
discernment and discrimination come slowly. Buddhas who have 
already discerned are already being actualized. There is no thought of 
discrimination means there is already merging. There is already 
merging is actualization. Thus, there is no thought of discrimination is 
not meeting even one person. 

When the illumination is wondrous, there is not the slightest hint: The 
slightest is the entire world. The illumination is naturally wondrous 
and luminous. Thus, it looks as if it hadn’t arrived. Do not doubt your 
eyes. Do not believe your ears. To directly clarify the source beyond 
words and not to grasp cases [koans] through words is illumination. 
This being so, illumination is not comparing, not grasping. To 
maintain illumination is extraordinary and to accept it as complete is 
no other than doubting it thoroughly. 

The water is clear to the bottom where the fish swims without moving. 
Water hanging in the sky does not get to the bottom. Furthermore, 
water that fills a vessel is not as clear as the water mentioned here. 
Water that is boundless is described as clear to the bottom. When the 
fish swims in this water, it is not motionless. It goes for myriad miles. 
There is no way to measure it and there is no shore to limit it. There is 
no sky for the fish to fly in and no bottom to get to, and there is no 
shore where someone sees the fish. In fact, there is no one who sees 
the fish. If you speak of recognizing the fish, there is merely water 
clear to the bottom. The activity of zazen is just like the fish 
swimming. Who can measure how many thousands and myriads of 
miles there are in zazen? Its journey is the entire body going on the 
path where no bird flies. 

The sky is vast and boundless where the bird flies away and disappears: 
The vast sky does not hang above. What hangs above is not called the 
vast sky. Furthermore, what encompasses all space is not called vast 
sky. What is neither revealed nor hidden, neither inside nor outside, is 
called vast sky. If the bird flies in this sky, it just flies in the sky. The 
activity of flying in the sky is immeasurable. Flying in the sky is the 
entire world; it is the entire world flying in the sky. Although we don’t 
know how far the flying goes, we say it beyond saying—we say flies 
away. It is “Go away with no string on your straw sandals.” When the 
sky flies away, the bird flies away. When the bird flies away, the sky 
flies away. When you speak about the investigation of flying, it is right 

here. This is the point of steadfast sitting. Even if you go myriad miles, 
it is right here. 

This is “The Point of Zazen” by Zhengjiao. Among the old masters 
throughout time, no one has written “The Point of Zazen” like this. If 
the stinky skin bags here and there would try to say something like 
this, they might not be able to do so in one or more lifetimes. There is 
no text like Zhengjiao’s. Rujing, my late master, would refer to him on 
his teaching seat as Old Buddha Hongzhi and would not refer to other 
teachers as Old Buddha. One who has the eye to see a true person 
recognizes the voice of buddha ancestors. Thus, we know that there is 
a buddha ancestor in the lineage of Dongshan. 

a fish swims like a fish. 
Vast sky transparent throughout; 
a bird flies like a bird. 

Although Zhengjiao’s text is not incomplete, zazen may be spoken 
of in this way. All descendants of buddha ancestors should practice 
zazen as the single great matter. It is the authentic seal transmitted 
from person to person. 

Written at the Kosho Horin Monastery on the eighteenth day, the third 
month, the third year of the Ninji Era [1242]. 

Presented to the assembly at the Yoshimine Temple, Yoshida County, 
Echizen Province, in the eleventh month, the fourth year of the Ninji 
Era [1243]. 

29 
Gowe Bevonp Buppua 

Donesuan, HicH ANCEsToR, Great Master Wuben of Mount Dong, Yun 

Region, is the direct heir of Yunyan, Great Master Wuzhu of Mount 
Yunyan, Tan Region. He is the thirty-eighth going-beyond ancestor 
from the Tathagata. He is the thirty-eighth ancestor going beyond 
himself. 

Dongshan once taught the assembly, “Concerning realization- 
through-the-body of going beyond buddha, I would like to talk a 
little.” 

A monk said, “What is this talk?” 

Dongshan said, “When I talk, you don’t hear it.” 

The monk said, “Do you hear it?” 

Dongshan said, “Wait till I don’t talk, then you hear it.” 

The words spoken here, going beyond buddha, originally came from 
Dongshan. Other buddha ancestors have studied his words and 
realized through-the-body going beyond buddha. Know that going 
beyond buddha is neither causality nor fruition. However, there is 
realization-through-the-body and complete attainment of you don’t 
hear it at the moment when I talk. 

Without going beyond buddha, you do not realize through-the-body 
going beyond buddha. Without talking, you do not realize through- 
the-body going beyond buddha. Going beyond buddha and talking 
neither reveal each other nor hide each other, neither give to nor take 
from each other. This being so, talking brings forth going beyond 
buddha. 

When going beyond buddha is actualized, you do not hear it. You do 
not hear it means buddha-going-beyond-buddha is not heard by the 
self. At the time of talking, you do not hear it. Know that talking is not 
stained by either hearing or not-hearing. It is not concerned with 
hearing or not-hearing. 

You are concealed within not-hearing. You are concealed within 
talking. It is like meeting a person and not meeting a person; being 
thus and not thus. When you talk, you don’t hear it. The meaning of 

you don’t hear it is that you are not hindered by the tongue or ears, 
you are not seen through by the eyes, you are not shielded by body 
and mind. This is not-hearing. Do not try to take this up and regard it 
as talking. Not-hearing is not talking. It is just that at the time of 
talking you do not hear it. Dongshan’s words When I talk, you don’t 
hear it mean that talking, from beginning to end, is just like wisteria 
vines entangled with each other. Talking is entangled with talking, it 
is permeated by talking. 

The monk said, Do you hear it? This does not mean that he is asking 
if the master hears the talking; he is not asking about the master or his 
talking. Instead, the monk is asking whether he should study direct 
hearing as the master talks. That is to say, he is asking whether 
talking is talking and hearing is hearing. Even if you can say 
something about it, it is beyond your speech. 

Examine thoroughly the words of Dongshan, Wait till I don’t talk, 
then you hear it. At the very moment of talking, there is no direct 
hearing. Direct hearing comes forth at the moment of not-talking. 

It is not that you unfortunately miss the moment of not-talking and 
must wait for not-talking. Direct hearing is not merely observing. It is 
true observation. It is not at the moment of direct hearing that talking 
goes away and is confined somewhere. It is not at the time of talking 
that direct hearing hides its body in the eye of talking and resounds 
like thunder. It is just that you do not hear at the time of talking; you 
directly hear at the time of not-talking. 

This is the meaning of I would like to talk a little and realization- 
through-the-body of going beyond buddha. That is to realize through-the- 
body direct hearing at the time of talking. This being so, Dongshan 
said, Wait till I don’t talk, then you hear it. However, going beyond 
buddha is not before the Seven Original Buddhas. It is the Seven 
Original Buddhas going beyond. 

ancestors, they have never dreamed of the words “going beyond 
buddha.” If this were spoken to Deshan or Linji, they would not get it 
right. Neither Yantou nor Xuefeng would be awakened even if their 
bodies were crushed and shattered with the blow of a fist. 

Dongshan’s words _ realization-through-the-body of going beyond 
buddha, I would like to talk a little, and You should know someone going 
beyond buddha cannot be fully realized merely by practice and 
enlightenment through one, two, three, four, five eons, or one 
hundred great eons. Only those who study the inconceivable road can 
realize it. 

Know that there is someone going beyond buddha. This is the full 
activity of playing with the spirit. So, understand going beyond 
buddha by taking up an ancient buddha and raising a fist. To see 
through this is to know someone who goes beyond buddha and 
someone who goes beyond not-buddha. 

The words of Dongshan do not mean that you should be someone 
who goes beyond buddha, or that you should meet someone who goes 
beyond buddha. He just means that you should know that there is 
someone who goes beyond buddha. The key to this barrier is not- 
knowing someone who goes beyond buddha, and not-knowing 
someone who goes beyond not-buddha. 

Someone who goes beyond buddha in this way is not-buddha. When 
you are asked “What is not-buddha?” consider: You do not call the 
person not-buddha because the person precedes buddha. You do not 
call the person not-buddha because the person follows buddha. You do 
not call the person not-buddha because the person surpasses buddha. 

The person is not-buddha merely because of going beyond buddha. 
“Not-buddha” is so called because buddha’s face is dropped away, 
buddha’s body and mind are dropped away. 

Not have six sense organs can be described as “The eyeballs have 
become tallow beads, the nostrils have become bamboo pipes, and the 
skull has turned into a shit dipper. What is the meaning of all this?” 

In this way, the six sense organs are not there. Because there are no 
six sense organs, this person has gone through the forge and bellows 
and has become a metal buddha. He has gone through a great ocean 
and has become a clay buddha. He has gone through the fire and has 
become a wooden buddha. 

Lacks seven consciousnesses means this person is a broken wooden 
dipper. Although he kills a buddha, he meets the buddha. Because he 
meets a buddha, he kills the buddha. If he tries to enter the heavens, 
the heavens are annihilated. If he goes toward hell, hell will burst 
immediately. If he meets face to face, his face breaks into a smile and 
there is no saindhava. Although he is in deep sleep, he talks a lot. 

Understand that this means all the mountains and the entire land 
know the self. Jewels and stones are all crushed into pieces. Quietly 
study and pursue this teaching of Jingyin. Do not neglect it. 

Caoshan said, “Benji.” 

Dongshan said, “Say something beyond that.” 

Caoshan said, “I will not say.” 

Dongshan asked again, “Why will you not say?” 

Caoshan said, “No-name Benji.” 

Dongshan approved it. 

It is not that there is nothing to say in going beyond, but there is no 
saying. Why will you not say? Because of no-name Benji. Therefore, 
saying in going beyond is no-saying. No-saying in going beyond is no- 
name. Benji of no-name is saying going beyond. Thus, he is Benji no- 
name. 

Thus, there is no-Benji. No-name drops away. Benji drops away. 

asked, “What is the fundamental meaning of buddha dharma?” 
Shitou said, “Not to attain, not to know.” 
Daowu said, “Is there a further turning point in going beyond?” 
Shitou said, “The vast sky does not keep white clouds from flying.” 

Now, Shitou is the second generation from Caoxi [Huineng]. Daowu 
of the Tianhuang Monastery is a younger dharma brother of Yaoshan. 
When Daowu asked Shitou about the fundamental meaning of buddha 
dharma, it is not a question asked by a beginner or someone who had 
recently started. Daowu asked this question when he was ready to 
understand the fundamental meaning if he heard it. 

Shitou said, Not to attain, not to know. Understand that in buddha 
dharma the fundamental meaning is in the initial aspiration, as well as 
in the ultimate level. This fundamental meaning is not to attain. It is 
not that there is no aspiration, no practice, or no enlightenment. But 
simply, not-attaining. The fundamental meaning is not to know. 
Practice-enlightenment is not nonexistent or existent, but is not to 
know, not to attain. 

Again, the fundamental meaning is not to attain, not to know. It is 
not that there is no sacred truth, no practice-enlightenment, but 
simply not to attain, not to know. It is not that there is a sacred truth 
and practice-enlightenment, but simply not to attain, not to know. 

Daowu said, Is there a further turning point in going beyond? It means 
that when the turning point is actualized, going beyond is actualized. 
Turning point is a provisional expression. The provisional expression is 
all buddhas, all ancestors. In speaking of it, there is further. Even if 
there is further, do not neglect going beyond. Speak accordingly. 

The vast sky does not hinder the white clouds from flying. These are 
Shitou’s words. The vast sky does not hinder the vast sky. Just as the 
vast sky does not hinder the vast sky from flying, white clouds do not 
hinder white clouds. White clouds fly with no hindrance. White 
clouds’ flying does not hinder the vast sky’s flying. Not hindering 
others is not hindering self. 

It is not that self and others need or have no hindrance. None of 
these requires no-hindrance or remains in no-hindrance. This is the 
no-hindrance brought out in the phrase The vast sky does not hinder the 
white clouds from flying. 

Right now, raise the eyebrow of the eye of study and see through 
the emergence of buddhas, ancestors, self, and others. This is a case of 
asking one question and answering ten. In asking one question and 
answering ten, the person who asks one question is the true person; 
the person who answers ten is the true person. 

Huangbo said, “Those who have left the household should 
understand things that have come from the past. Niutou, Great Master 
Farong, a disciple of Fourth Ancestor Daoxin, explained vertically and 
horizontally but did not know the key to the barrier of going beyond. 
With your own eye and brain you should discern the correct school 
from the incorrect.” 

Huangbo’s words things that have come from the past mean that 
which has been authentically transmitted from buddha ancestors. This 
is called the treasury of the true dharma eye, the wondrous heart of 
nirvana. Although it is in yourself, you should understand it. Although 
it is in yourself, it is beyond your understanding. Those who have not 
received authentic buddha-to-buddha transmission have never 
dreamed of it. 

Huangbo, as the dharma heir of Baizhang, exceeds Baizhang and, as 
a dharma descendant of Mazu, exceeds Mazu. In three or four 
generations of the ancestral school, there was no one who could stand 
shoulder to shoulder with Huangbo. Huangbo alone made it clear that 
Niutou [Ox Head] did not have two horns. Other buddha ancestors 
had not noticed it. 

Niutou, Zen Master Farong of Mount Niutou, was a respected 
teacher, a disciple of Dayi Daoxin, the Fourth Ancestor. When 
compared to that of Indian or Chinese sutra masters and treatise 
masters, his discourse was not inadequate. But regrettably he had not 
realized the key to the barrier of going beyond. 

If you do not have the key to the barrier of things that have come 
from the past, how can you discern correct from incorrect in buddha 
dharma? You are merely someone who studies words and phrases. 
Thus, knowing, practicing, and realizing the key to the barrier of 
going beyond is not something ordinary people can accomplish. 
However, where there is true endeavor, the key is realized. 

Going beyond buddha means that you reach buddha, and going 
further, you continue to see buddha. It is not the same as sentient 
beings’ seeing buddha. Therefore, if your seeing buddha is merely the 
same as sentient beings’ seeing buddha, it is not seeing buddha. If 
your seeing buddha is merely the same as sentient beings’ seeing 
buddha, it is seeing buddha mistakenly; how can you experience going 
beyond buddha? 

Know that Huangbo’s words going beyond cannot be understood by 
careless people of these times. Their dharma discourses cannot reach 
that of Niutou. Even if their dharma discourses equaled that of Niutou, 
they would be merely Niutou’s dharma brothers. How can they have 
the key to the barrier of going beyond? Other bodhisattvas of the ten 

stages or three classes can never have the key to the barrier of going 
beyond. How can they open and close the barrier of going beyond? 
This is the eye of study. One who has the key to the barrier of going 
beyond goes beyond buddha, realizing through-the-body going beyond 
buddha. 

Presented to the assembly at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery 
on the twenty-third day, the third month, the third year of the Ninji 
Era [1242]. 

30 

Tuusness 

Yonsu, GREAT MASTER Hongjue of Mount Yunju, an heir of Dongshan, 

is a thirty-ninth-generation dharma descendant of Shakyamuni 
Buddha. He is an authentic ancestor of the Dongshan School. One day 
he said to the assembly, “You are trying to attain thusness, yet you are 
already a person of thusness. As you are already a person of thusness, 
why be worried about thusness?” 

It means that one who aspires to experience thusness is immediately 
a person of thusness. If so, why be worried about thusness? 

For the time being, we will regard the teaching by Yunju, 
“immediately getting to unsurpassable enlightenment,” as thusness. 
Within this unsurpassable manifestation of enlightenment, the entire 
world of the ten directions is but a small portion; enlightenment 
exceeds the boundary of the entire world. 

You are an accoutrement that exists in the entire world of the ten 
directions. How do you know it to be thus? You know it because your 
body and mind are not you; they appear in the entire world of the ten 
directions. 

Your body is not you; your life is transported, moving in time 
without stopping even for a moment. Where has your youthful face 
gone? When you search for it, there is no trace. When you ponder 
deeply, there are many from the past whom you cannot encounter 
again. The pure mind does not stay; it comes and goes in fragments. 
Even if there is truth, it does not stay within the boundary of yourself. 

Because of thusness, you arouse a boundless aspiration for 
enlightenment. Once this aspiration arises, you let go of what you 
have been playing with. You come forward to hear what you have 
never heard and realize what is not yet realized. This is not at all self- 
doing. Know that it is so because you are a person of thusness. 

How do you know that you are a person of thusness? You know it 
because you want to attain thusness. As you already have the face and 
eye of a person of thusness, do not worry about thusness now. Even if 
you worry, it is thusness not to be worried about. 

Also, do not be startled at the thusness of thusness. Even if there is 
thusness that you are startled at or wonder about, it is thusness. It is 

thusness not to be startled at. 

Do not measure this with the yardstick of buddha or mind. Do not 
measure it with the yardstick of the world of phenomena or the entire 
world. It is just If you are already a person of thusness, why be worried 
about thusness? 

This being so, thusness of sound and form is thus; thusness of body 
and mind is thus; thusness of all buddhas is thus. 

For example, when you understand the moment of falling to the 
ground as thusness, you will not doubt the moment of falling to the 
ground at the moment of getting up. 

Since ancient times, these words have been spoken in both India 
and the deva world: “One who falls to the ground uses the ground to 
stand up. One who ignores the ground and tries to stand cannot.” The 
meaning is that those who fall down on the earth stand up on the 
earth; it is impossible to get up without using the earth. 

Some people interpret this as great enlightenment, which is the 
desirable way to become free from body and mind. Thus, when being 
asked how buddhas attain the way, they say that it is like those who 
fall to the ground and use the ground to stand up. 

Thoroughly investigate this and penetrate the views from the past, 
the future, and this very moment. Great enlightenment, beyond 
enlightenment, further delusion, and loss of delusion are immersed in 
enlightenment, immersed in delusion. They all fall to the ground and 
get up using the ground. 

This is an expression above the heavens and below the heavens. It is 
an expression from India and China, from the past and present. It is an 
expression of old and new buddhas. It leaves nothing uncovered and 
lacks nothing. 

This being so, those who only understand thus but miss beyond 
understanding thus have not thoroughly studied this expression. Even 
though the expression of an old buddha has been passed down as thus, 
when you hear the expression of an old buddha as an old buddha, you 
should inquire beyond. 

Even if it had not been spoken in India or in the deva world, you 
should say something further in this way: “If one who falls to the 
ground uses the ground to stand up, it is not possible even for 
immeasurable eons.” 

Here is one vital path for getting up: “One who falls to the ground 
uses the sky to stand up. One who falls to the sky uses the ground to 
stand up.” Without being thus, you can never get up. This has always 
been the way with all buddhas and ancestors. 

Someone may ask, “How far apart are the sky and the ground from 
each other?” In response to such a question, you might reply, “The sky 
and the ground are eighteen thousand miles apart. One who falls to 
the ground uses the sky to stand up. One who ignores the sky and tries 
to stand cannot. One who falls to the sky uses the ground to stand up. 
One who ignores the ground and tries to stand cannot.” 

Those who are unable to express this have not yet known and seen 
the measure of the ground and the sky in the buddha way. 

dharani. The meaning of this is that when even one single thing is 
serene, myriad things are serene. If the blowing of the wind is serene, 
the ringing of the bell is serene. This is why Gayashata said, 
“Altogether serene.” 

You may say the mind that is ringing is not the wind ringing; the 
mind that is ringing is not the bell ringing; the mind that is ringing is 
not the mind that is ringing. Investigate thusness intimately and just 
say, “The wind rings. The bell rings. The blowing rings. The ringing 
rings.” You realize thusness not because why be worried about thusness? 
but because “why pursue thusness?” 

One day in a marketplace he heard someone chanting a sutra. It was 
neither what he was waiting for nor what others had recommended to 
him. Having lost his father when quite young, he had been the sole 
support of his mother. He did not know that one bright pearl hidden 
in the robe could illuminate and break open the entire universe. 

As soon as he attained clarity, he left his old mother and looked for 
a teacher. It is a rare case for people. No one takes the obligation and 
love toward parents lightly. But since he regarded dharma as 
weightier than his obligation and love, he left his mother. This is the 
meaning of the words [in the Lotus Sutra] “If you hear with wisdom, 
you trust and understand what you hear immediately.” 

This kind of wisdom can neither be acquired from someone else nor 
be aroused by oneself. Wisdom is transmitted to wisdom; wisdom 
searches for wisdom. Once, wisdom formed the bodies of five hundred 
bats [who listened to the dharma]; they had no other bodies and 
minds. At another time, wisdom was intimate within the bodies of ten 
thousand fish; even without conditions or causes, they could 
immediately attain understanding upon hearing the dharma. 

Wisdom neither comes nor enters. It is just like when the god of 
spring encounters spring. Wisdom is neither with thought nor without 
thought. Wisdom is neither with mind nor without mind. How can it 
be concerned with large or small? How can it be discussed as delusion 
or enlightenment? 

It means that without knowing what buddha dharma is and without 
having heard it, one does not look for and wish for it. But upon 
hearing dharma, one regards obligations as less weighty and forgets 
about oneself. It is because the body-and-mind that has wisdom is no 
longer the self. This is called you trust and understand what you hear 
immediately. 

We do not know how many rounds of birth and death we go 
through wastefully in the dusty world, in spite of having this wisdom. 
It is just like a stone containing jade; the jade does not know that it is 
inside the stone, and the stone does not know that it contains the jade. 
A person discovers and removes the jade. This is not what the jade 
expected or what the stone was waiting for. It does not depend on the 
stone’s view or the jade’s thought. Likewise, although a person and 
wisdom are not acquainted with each other, without exception the 
way is heard by wisdom. 

It is said [in the Lotus Sutra] that one with no wisdom who doubts 
will be lost forever. Although wisdom is neither being nor nonbeing, 
there is the being of a timeless spring pine and the nonbeing of fallen 
chrysanthemum blossoms. At the moment of no-wisdom, 
unsurpassable enlightenment becomes doubt; all things are altogether 
doubted. At that moment, one is lost forever; the words one hears and 

the things to realize become no other than doubt. 

There is no self—no place to hide in the all-inclusive world. There is 
no other—just one straight rod of iron for myriad miles. Even as 
branches grow thus, there is only one vehicle of dharma in the entire 
world. Even as leaves fall thus, things abide in their conditions, and 
there is the aspect of the world as permanent. Thus, being wisdom and 
being no wisdom are like sun face and moon face [day and night of 
the same day]. 

As he was a person of thusness, Huineng attained clarity. Later he 
went to Mount Huangmei and met Hongren, Zen Master Daman. 
Hongren then assigned him to work as a laborer. Huineng pounded 
rice day and night for eight months. 

Once, in the middle of the night, Hongren slipped into the pounding 
hut and asked Huineng, “Is the rice hulled now?” 

Huineng said, “Hulled but not yet sifted.” 

Hongren tapped the mortar with his cane three times. Huineng 
shuffled the rice three times. This is regarded as the moment when 
teacher and student merged. Although neither known by the self nor 
understood by others, the transmission of dharma and_ the 
transmission of the robe took place at this very moment of thusness. 

ungraspable, beyond thusness is ungraspable. Thusness is as it is. The 
function of this word is neither limited nor not limited. 

Study thusness as ungraspable. Inquire about ungraspability in 
thusness. This thusness, this ungraspability, is not merely concerned 
with buddha thoughts. Understanding is ungraspable. Enlightenment 
is ungraspable. 

SIA 
Conrmuous Practice, Paar Ons 

On THE GREAT road of buddha ancestors there is always unsurpassable 

practice, continuous and sustained. It forms the circle of the way and 
is never cut off. Between aspiration, practice, enlightenment, and 
nirvana, there is not a moment’s gap; continuous practice is the circle 
of the way. This being so, continuous practice is undivided, not forced 
by you or others. The power of this continuous practice confirms you 
as well as others. It means your practice affects the entire earth and 
the entire sky in the ten directions. Although not noticed by others or 
by yourself, it is so. 

Accordingly, by the continuous practice of all buddhas and 
ancestors, your practice is actualized and your great road opens up. By 
your continuous practice, the continuous practice of all buddhas is 
actualized and the great road of all buddhas opens up. Your 
continuous practice creates the circle of the way. By this practice, 
buddha ancestors abide as buddha, not-abide as buddha, have buddha 
mind, and attain buddha without cutting off. 

Because of this practice, there are the sun, the moon, and stars. 
Because of this practice, there are the great earth and the open sky. 
Because of this practice, there are body, mind, and their environs. 
Because of this practice, there are the four great elements and the five 
skandhas. Continuous practice is not necessarily something people in 
the world love, but it should be the true place of return for everyone. 
Because of the continuous practice of all buddhas of the past, present, 
and future, all buddhas of the past, present, and future are actualized. 

The effect of such sustained practice is sometimes not hidden. 
Therefore, you aspire to practice. The effect is sometimes not 
apparent. Therefore, you may not see, hear, or know it. Understand 
that although it is not revealed, it is not hidden. 

As it is not divided by what is hidden, apparent, existent, or not 
existent, you may not notice the causal conditions that led you to be 
engaged in the practice that actualizes you at this very moment of 
unknowing. The reason you don’t see it is that becoming conscious of 
it is not anything remarkable. Investigate in detail that it is so because 
the causal condition [the aspiration] is no other than continuous 
practice, though continuous practice is not limited by the causal 

condition. 

Continuous practice that actualizes itself is no other than your 
continuous practice right now. The now of this practice is not 
originally possessed by the self. The now of this practice does not 
come and go, enter and depart. The word “now” does not exist before 
continuous practice. The moment when it is actualized is called now. 
This being so, your continuous practice of this day is a seed of all 
buddhas and the practice of all buddhas. All buddhas are actualized 
and sustained by your continuous practice. 

By not sustaining your continuous practice, you would be excluding 
buddhas, not nurturing buddhas, excluding continuous practice, not 
being born and dying simultaneously with all buddhas, and not 
studying and practicing with all buddhas. Blossoms opening and 
leaves falling now are the actualization of continuous practice. 
Polishing a mirror or breaking a mirror is no other than this practice. 

Even if you might try to ignore it in order to hide a crooked 
intention and escape from it, this ignoring would also be continuous 
practice. To go off here and there looking for continuous practice 
appears similar to the aspiration for it. But it is like leaving behind the 
treasure at the home of your true parent and wandering poor in 
another land. Wandering through wind and water at the risk of your 
life, you should not discard the treasure of your own parent. While 
you were searching in this way, the dharma treasure would be missed. 
This being so, continuous practice should not slacken even for a 
moment. 

was engaged without negligence in the twelve ascetic practices: (1) 
Not to accept invitations from people, to practice begging daily, and 
not to receive money as an alternative for food. (2) To stay on 
mountains and not in villages or towns. (3) Not to ask for or accept 
clothing, but to take clothing from the dead in cemeteries, and dye 
and sew the cloth for robes. (4) To take shelter under a tree in the 
field. (5) To have one meal a day, which is called sangha asanika. (6) 
Not to lie down day or night, but to practice walking meditation and 
sleep sitting up, which is called “sangha naishadika.” (7) To own three 
robes and nothing more and not to lie down with a robe on. (8) To 
live in cemeteries rather than in monasteries or houses; to sit zazen 
and seek the way while gazing at skeletons. (9) To seek out a solitary 
place, with no desire to lie down with or to be close to others. (10) To 
eat fruit before the meal and not after. (11) To sit in an open space 
and not to desire to sleep under a tree or in a house. (12) Not to eat 
meat or cream and not to rub the body with flax oil. 

These are called the twelve ascetic practices. Venerable 
Mahakashyapa did not turn back or deviate from them throughout his 
lifetime. Even after authentically receiving the Tathagata’s treasury of 
the true dharma eye, he did not retire from these practices. 

Once the Buddha said, “You are old now. You should eat like the 
rest of the monks.” 

Mahakashyapa said, “If I had not encountered the Tathagata, I 
would have remained a self-enlightened buddha, living in mountains 
and forests. Fortunately, I have met the Tathagata. This is a beneficent 
gift of dharma. So, I cannot forgo my ascetic practice and eat like the 
rest of the monks.” 

The Tathagata admired his determination. At another time 
Mahakashyapa looked exhausted because of his ascetic practices, and 
the monks looked down on him. Then the Tathagata graciously called 
Mahakashyapa up to him and offered him half of his seat. Thus, 
Mahakashyapa sat on the Tathagata’s seat. Know that Mahakashyapa 
was the most senior monk in the assembly of the Buddha. It is 
impossible to list all the practices he did in his lifetime. 

sleep, he was called Venerable Undefiled Sides. In order to pick up a 
sutra in the dark, he would radiate his inner light, an ability he had 
from birth. 

When Parshva was about to give up his household and wear a 
monk’s robe at the age of eighty, a young boy in the town criticized 
him, saying, “You are ignorant. What you are going to do doesn’t 
make sense. Monks maintain two types of practice: learning samadhi 
and chanting. You are too old and frail to learn these things. You will 
only confuse the pure stream and eat monks’ food in vain.” 

Hearing this criticism, he thanked the boy and reaffirmed his vow: 
“Until I master the Tripitaka, become free of desires in the three 
realms, achieve the six miraculous powers, and attain the eight types 
of emancipation, I will not lie down on my side.” 

After that he did not skip even one day of contemplation while 
walking, sitting, and standing. During the day he studied the teachings 
and at night he practiced tranquil concentration. After three years he 
mastered the Tripitaka. He became free of desires in the three realms 
and attained proficiency in the three types of knowledge. 

Parshva was in his mother’s womb for sixty years before his birth. 
Did he seek the way in the womb? Eighty years after his birth, he left 
his household to study the way. It was one hundred and forty years 
after he was conceived. Although outstanding, he was older and more 
frail than anyone else. In the womb he was old and after birth he was 
old. However, he did not mind people’s criticism and had unrelenting 
determination. That is why after only three years his endeavor to 
attain the way was fulfilled. Upon seeing him and being inspired by 
him, how could we be slack in our endeavor? Do not be hindered by 
old age and frailty. 

Birth is hard to fathom. Is this birth or not? Is this old age or not? 
The views of water by four types of beings vary. We should just focus 
our aspiration and endeavor on the practice of the way. We should 
understand that the practice of the way is no other than seeing into 
birth and death, yet our practice is not bound by birth and death. 

It is extremely foolish of people nowadays to put aside the endeavor 
of the way when they become fifty or sixty years old, even seventy or 
eighty. If we are concerned about how many months and years we 
have lived, this is merely a limited human view, which has nothing to 
do with the study of the way. Do not consider whether you are in your 
prime or old and frail. Single-mindedly aspire to study and master the 
way, standing shoulder to shoulder with Parshva. Do not look back or 
cling to a heap of dust in the graveyard. If you do not have single- 
minded aspiration and are not awakened, who would pity you? 
Practice to see directly just as you would add eyeballs to a skeleton 

lying in the wilderness. 

served food by a heavenly being when he was living in his hermitage 
called Sanfeng [Three Peak] Hut. During that time, Yunju went to 
study with Dongshan, under whose teaching he settled the great 
matter of the way and returned to his hut. When the heavenly being 
brought food again, he looked for Yunju for three days but could not 
see him. Without depending on heavenly offerings, Yunju was fully 
dedicating himself to the great way. Ponder his aspiration for practice. 

living on Mount Gui for twenty years. Ancestor Guishan had studied 
in the assembly of Baizhang. Quietly think about and remember 
Changqing’s activities of those twenty years. There are many who 
study Guishan’s words, but the continuous practice of not studying the 
words of Ancestor Guishan is rare. 

one can call you speechless. Even buddhas would not know what to 
make of you.” 

Zhaozhou expresses sustained practice in this way. You should 
know that not speak for five or ten years may have the appearance of 
being speechless, but because of the merit of do not leave the monastery 
and do not speak, it is not the same as being speechless. The buddha 
way is like this. One who is capable of speaking but doesn’t speak is 
not like an ordinary person who has not heard the voice of the way. 
Thus, unsurpassable continuous practice is not leave the monastery. Not 
leave the monastery is total speech that is dropping off. Most people do 
not know, nor speak of, going beyond speechless. No one keeps them 
from speaking of it, but nevertheless they don’t speak of it. They do 
not discover or understand that to go beyond speechless is to express 
thusness. How regrettable! 

Quietly engage in the sustained practice of not leave the monastery. 
Do not be swayed east or west by the winds of east and west. The 
spring breeze and the autumn moon of five or ten years, unbeknownst 
to us, have the ring of emancipation beyond sound and form. This 
voice is not known to the self, not understood by the self. Learn to 
treasure each moment of sustained practice. Do not assume that not to 
speak is useless. It is entering the monastery, leaving the monastery. 
The bird’s path is the forest. The entire world is the forest, the 
monastery. 

Mount Damei is in Qingyuan Prefecture. Fachang from Xiangyang 
founded the Husheng Monastery on this mountain. When studying in 
the assembly of Mazu, Fachang asked him, “What is buddha?” 

Mazu said, “Mind itself is buddha.” 

Upon hearing these words, Fachang had realization. 

Fachang climbed to the top of Mount Damei and dwelt there in a 
hut. He ate pinecones and wore lotus leaves, as there were many lotus 
plants in a small pond on that mountain. He practiced zazen for over 
thirty years, and was completely detached from human affairs. 
Without paying attention to which day it was, he only saw the green 
and yellow of the surrounding mountains. These were rugged years. 

During zazen he set an iron stupa of eight cun in height on his head. 
It was like wearing a jeweled crown. As his intention was not to let 
the stupa fall down, he would not sleep. This stupa is still listed as a 
stored treasure at the Husheng Monastery. He practiced in this way 
continuously, without slackening. 

After many years, a monk from the assembly of Yanguan went to 
the mountain looking for wood to make a staff. He lost his way and 

after a while found himself in front of Fachang’s hut. Seeing Fachang, 
he asked, “How long have you been on this mountain?” 

Fachang said, “I have seen nothing but the green and yellow of the 
surrounding mountains.” 

The monk said, “How do I get off this mountain?” 

Fachang said, “Follow the stream.” 

Mystified by Fachang, the monk went back and told Yanguan about 
him. 

Yanguan said, “When I was in Jiangxi, I saw a monk like that, but I 
haven’t heard of him since. This might be him.” 

Yanguan sent the monk to Fachang and invited him to come to the 
monastery. Fachang would not leave the mountain but responded with 
a poem: 

A decayed tree remains in the cold forest. 
Meeting springs, there is no change of mind. 
Woodcutters see me, but I ignore them. 
How come the wood master seeks me out? 

Fachang stayed on the mountain. Later, when he was about to move 
deeper into the mountain, he wrote this poem: 

Wearing lotus leaves from this pond—inexhaustible. 
Eating pine nuts from several trees—still more left. 
Having been spotted by people from the world, 
Iam moving my hut further away. 

So he moved his abode. 

Later his teacher Mazu sent a monk to Fachang to ask him, 
“Reverend, when you studied with Mazu, what did you understand 
that led you to live on this mountain?” 

Fachang said, “Mazu said to me, ‘Mind itself is buddha.’ That’s why 
I am living here.” 

The monk said, “Nowadays buddha dharma is different.” 

Fachang said, “How is it different?” 

The monk said, “Mazu says, ‘Beyond mind, beyond buddha.” 

Fachang said, “That old man always confuses people. Let it be 
‘beyond mind, beyond buddha.’ As for me, mind itself is none other 
than buddha.” 

The monk brought Fachang’s response to Mazu. 

Mazu said, “The plum is ripe.” 

This story is widely known among humans and devas. Tianlong is 
Fachang’s excellent student. Tianlong’s heir, Juzhi, is Fachang’s 
dharma grandchild. Jiazhi of Korea transmitted Fachang’s dharma and 
became the first ancestor of his country. All masters in Korea are 
dharma descendants of Fachang. 

While Fachang was alive, a tiger and an elephant attended him 
without contending with each other. After he died, the tiger and 
elephant carried rocks and mud to help erect a tower for him. This 
tower still exists in the Husheng Monastery. 

Fachang’s sustained practice has been admired by teachers both past 
and present. Those who do not appreciate him lack wisdom. To 
suppose that buddha dharma is present in the pursuit of fame and 
gain is a limited and foolish view. 

reflecting on ancient ones abiding under a tree. 

Even though the monks’ hall was still in disrepair, monks in cloud 
robes and mist sleeves from the Four Seas and Five Lakes of China 
wanted to practice in Yangqi’s assembly. We should be joyous 
that there were so many who were immersed in the way. You 
should dye your mind with his words and inscribe them in your 
ears. 

Later, Fayan gave an instruction, saying, “Practice does not go 
beyond thinking. Thinking does not go beyond practice.” 

Take this teaching seriously, thinking of it day and night and 
putting it into practice morning and evening. Do not be like those who 
are blown about by winds from the east, west, south, and north. 

Great Song China still follow the Yellow Emperor’s example. Knowing 
that people in the dusty realms lived humbly, how can home leavers 
be more worldly or more murky than they? 

You practice what cannot be practiced and you speak what cannot be 
spoken. 

Yunju, Great Master Hongjue, investigating Dongshan’s words seven 
or eight ways, said, “At the time of speaking, there is no road of 
practice. At the time of practice, there is no path of speaking.” 

His words show that it is not that there is neither practicing nor 
speaking. At the time of speaking, you do not leave the monastery for 
your lifetime. At the time of practicing, you wash the head and 
request Xuefeng to shave it. You should not waste the time of speaking 
or the time of practicing. 

historical documents have recorded any such means. Not to waste 
time is to contain the passage of days and months within your skin 
bag without leaking. Thus, sages and wise ones in olden times valued 
each moment, each day, and each month more than their own 
eyeballs or the nation’s land. To waste the passage of time is to be 
confused and stained in the floating world of name and gain. Not to 
miss the passage of time is to be in the way for the sake of the way. 

Once you have clarity, do not neglect a single day. Wholeheartedly 
practice for the sake of the way and speak for the sake of the way. We 
know that buddha ancestors of old did not neglect each day’s 
endeavor. Reflect on this every day. Sit near a bright window and 
reflect on this, on mellow and flower-filled days. Sit in a plain 
building and remember it on a solitary rainy evening. Why do the 
moments of time steal your endeavor? They not only steal one day but 
steal the merit of many kalpas. What kind of enemy is the passage of 
time? How regrettable! Your loss of time would all be because of your 
negligence of practice. If you were not intimate with yourself, you 
would resent yourself. 

It is not that buddha ancestors lacked family obligations and 
attachments, but they abandoned them. It is not that buddha ancestors 
were not bound by relationships, but they let them go. Even if you are 
bound by relationships, you cannot keep them. If you do not throw 
away family obligations and attachments, the family obligations and 
attachments will throw you away. If you want to cherish the family 
obligations and attachments, then cherish them. To cherish the family 
obligations and attachments means to be free from them. 

“Speaking about it won’t hit the mark,” expresses his continuous 
practice of eight years. Such continuous practice is rare throughout 
the past and present, aspired to by those who are wise and those who 
are not. 

you thirty blows.” 

Linji heaved a deep sigh. 

Huangbo said, “When you receive my teaching, it will flourish in 
the world.” 

In this way, know that when they planted cedar and pine trees after 
attaining the way, they were carrying hoes in their hands. When you 
receive my teaching, it will flourish in the world is a result of this. 
Transmit person to person and directly point to this ancient example 
of planting trees. Both Huangbo and Linji planted trees. 

In the past Huangbo had the continuous practice of joining the 
workers in the Da’an Monastery and cleaning the halls. He swept the 
buddha hall and the dharma hall. He did not wait for the continuous 
practice of cleaning the mind and cleaning the lamp. It was at this 
time that he encountered Minister Pei. 

beside the waterfall there: 

The water gouges the cliff and pounds the rocks unceasingly. 
Even from a distance we know how high it is. 

Xiangyan was trying to engage Xuan, to see how mature he was. 
Xuan added a verse: 

How can the valley stream be blocked? 
It will end up in the ocean as billows. 

Seeing these lines, Xiangyan realized that Xuan was no ordinary 
person. Later, Xuan went to the assembly of Yanguan, National 
Teacher Qi’an of Hang Region, and served as secretary of the 
monastery. At that time Huangbo was head monk. Thus, Xuan was 
sharing the meditation platform with Huangbo. 

When Huangbo went to the buddha hall and made prostrations to 
the Buddha, the secretary joined him and said, “Seek without being 
attached to the buddha. Seek without being attached to the dharma. 
Seek without being attached to the sangha. Elder, why are you making 
prostrations?” 

In response, Huangbo slapped the novice secretary and said, “‘Seek 
without being attached to the buddha. Seek without being attached to 
the dharma. Seek without being attached to the sangha. Therefore, we 
make prostrations like this.” 

Then Huangbo slapped him again. 

Xuan said, “That’s pretty rough.” 

Huangbo said, “What is right here? How can you say it’s rough?” 
and gave him another slap. 

Xuan was silent. 

After Wu’s reign ended, Xuan returned to the laity and ascended the 
throne. He stopped Wu’s persecution of Buddhism and reinstituted the 
Buddhist teaching. 

Before he was installed as emperor, he left his father’s kingdom and 
traveled widely, practicing the way wholeheartedly. It is said that 
while emperor, he enjoyed practicing zazen day and night. Indeed, 
Xuan had been a pitiable wanderer after his father passed away and 
again after his brother passed away. He was punished and beaten, as 
ordered by his nephew Wu. But his aspiration did not waver and he 
continued his practice. His genuine continuous practice was an 
excellent example, rare in history. 

Xuefeng, Priest Yicun, who would later become Great Master 
Zhenjiao, never slackened in zazen day and night from the time he 
aroused the way-seeking mind. During the long course of traveling 
and visiting various monasteries, he did not discriminate among them, 
but hung up his traveling staff and joined their practice. He did not 
relax his effort and completely perished in zazen. After that, he 
founded an unadorned monastery on Mount Xuefeng, 

When Xuefeng began to study with masters, he traveled to 
Dongshan nine times and to Touzi three times. His effort was so 
outstanding that when teachers nowadays encourage continuous 
practice, pure and solemn, they use “Xuefeng’s lofty aspiration” as an 
example. 

Although Xuefeng’s dullness is not different from others’, his 
brilliance is beyond comparison. This is due to his continuous 
practice. Those of you who follow the way these days should wash 
yourselves with the snow of Xuefeng [Snow Peak]. If you quietly 
reflect on the muscle power of Xuefeng to study at various 
monasteries, you will see that it is no other than the spiritual bone 
power he carried over from former lives. 

dharma aspiration of his continuous practice. Those who don’t study 
or practice will be filled with regret. 

Editing completed on the eighteenth day, the first year of the Ninji Era 
[1243]. [Dogen] 

31B 

Connnuous Practice, Parr Two 

Bopumrarma CAME FROM India to China at the request of his teacher, 

Venerable Prajnatara. How severe the wind and snow was throughout 
his three-year journey! How innumerable the waves of the ocean, 
under clouds and mist, as he sailed toward an unknown country! This 
journey is beyond the imagination of those attached to body and life. 

This continuous practice is due solely to his great compassionate 
determination to transmit dharma and to save deluded beings. It is 
continuous practice because of his dedication to transmitting dharma, 
because of the all-inclusive world where dharma is to be transmitted, 
because the entire world of the ten directions is the true path, and 
because the entire world of the ten directions is the entire world of the 
ten directions. What place is not Bodhidharma’s palace? What palace 
could hinder his practice of the way? 

Thus, Bodhidharma left India. As his vow was to save deluded 
beings, he had no doubt or fear. As what he embodied was the all- 
inclusive practice for saving deluded beings, he had no doubt or fear. 
Bidding farewell to the country of his father, the king, he sailed on a 
large ship through the South Sea and entered the Province of Guang. 
Although there were many people on board, including his attendant 
monks, no record of the voyage has remained. No one knows what 
happened to his entourage. 

On the twenty-first day, the ninth month, the eighth year of the 
Putong Era [527 cx.] of the Kingdom of Liang, Xiaoang, Governor of 
Guang Province, officially welcomed Bodhidharma. Carrying out his 
duty, he reported Bodhidharma’s arrival to Emperor Wu. It was the 
first day of the tenth month. Reviewing the report with delight, 
Emperor Wu sent a messenger to Bodhidharma to invite him to the 
palace. 

Bodhidharma went to the capital city of Jinling and met with Wu, 
who said, “Ever since I became Emperor, I have built temples, copied 
sutras, and approved the ordination of more monks than I can count. 
What is the merit of having done all this?” 

Bodhidharma said, “There is no merit.” 

The Emperor said, “Why is that so?” 

Bodhidharma said, “These are minor achievements of humans and 
devas, which become the causes of desire. They are like shadows of 
forms and not real.” 

The Emperor said, “What is real merit?” 

Bodhidharma said, “When pure wisdom is complete, the essence is 
empty and serene. Such merit cannot be attained through worldly 
actions.” 

The Emperor said, “What is the foremost sacred truth?” 

Bodhidharma said, “Vast emptiness, nothing sacred.” 

The Emperor said, “Who is it that faces me?” 

Bodhidharma said, “I don’t know.” 

The Emperor did not understand. Bodhidharma knew that there was 
no merging [between the two] and the time was not ripe. Thus, 
without a word he left on the nineteenth day of the tenth month and 
traveled north of the River Yangzi. 

He arrived in Luoyang in the Kingdom of Wei on the twenty-third 
day of the eleventh month of the same year. He stayed at the Shaolin 
Temple of Mount Song, where he sat facing the wall in silence day 
after day. But the Emperor [Xiaoming] of Wei was unaware of his 
presence and was not ashamed of being unaware of it. 

Bodhidharma was from the warrior class in southern India, a prince 
of a major kingdom, where sophisticated customs had been developed. 
In contrast, the customs of the minor kingdom of Wei must have 
looked uncivilized in the eyes of Bodhidharma, but it did not affect 
him. He did not abandon the country or people. Although he was 
attacked by the monk Bodhiruchi, he did not defend himself, nor did 
he hate him. He was not resentful of Precept Master Guangtong’s bad 
intention, but simply ignored him. 

Although Bodhidharma did many outstanding things, he was often 
regarded as an ordinary Tripitaka master or a scholar of sutras and 
commentaries because of the lack of understanding and small- 
mindedness of some monks in China. People thought Bodhidharma 
expounded the dharma gate of the Zen School. They saw no difference 
between his true teaching and the teachings of scholarly 
commentators. 

Bodhidharma is the twenty-eighth authentic heir of Shakyamuni 
Buddha. He left the large kingdom of his father to save sentient beings 
of the eastern country. Who can be compared to him? If he had not 
come from India, how could sentient beings of China see and hear the 
Buddha’s true dharma? They would have been stuck with countless 
names and forms. Now, some barbarians like us, who have hair and 
horns, are able to hear the true dharma. Today even farmers and 
village people can see and hear it because of the continuous practice 
of Bodhidharma who voyaged to China. 

China was much less civilized than India. Their customs were not as 
wholesome as those of India. An outstanding sage like Bodhidharma, 
who had received and maintained the treasury of dharma, would not 
have bothered to go, had he not had great patience and vast 
compassion. There was no established place for practice, and few 
people in China who would be able to appreciate a true teacher. 

Bodhidharma stayed on Mount Song for nine years. People called 
him a wall-gazing Brahman. Later historians listed him as a 
practitioner of learning meditation. But that is not the whole truth. 
The ancestor alone transmitted the treasury of the true dharma eye, 
buddha to buddha, heir to heir. 

The Record within the Forest by Shimen [Rock Gate] says: 

Bodhidharma at first visited the Kingdom of Liang and then the 
Kingdom of Wei. He then went to Mount Song and rested his 
traveling staff at the Shaolin Temple, where he simply sat at ease 
facing the wall. It was not a step-by-step practice of learning 
meditation. For a long time people could not guess why he was 
doing it, so they regarded Bodhidharma as a practitioner of 
learning meditation. 

Now, meditation is only one of the many activities of Zen. It 
does not cover the entire practice of the sage. But those who 
recorded the history of that time classified him among 
practitioners of learning meditation and lumped him together 
with those who engaged in the static practice of a decayed tree 
and dead ash. The sage is not limited to meditation, yet does not 
contradict meditation. It is like the practice of [jing [I-ching] not 
being limited to yin and yang, yet not contradicting yin and yang. 

When Emperor Wu of Liang met Bodhidharma, the Emperor 
asked, “What is the primary meaning of the sacred truth?” 
Bodhidharma said, “Vast emptiness, nothing sacred.” The 
Emperor asked further, “Who is facing me?” Bodhidharma said, “I 
don’t know.” Had he not been so familiar with the local language, 
he would not have communicated so well. 

Thus, it is clear that Bodhidharma moved from Liang to Wei. He 
walked to Mount Song and stayed at the Shaolin Temple. Although he 
sat in stillness facing the wall, he was not engaged in so-called 
learning meditation. Although he had not brought even one volume of 
sutra, he was a genuine master who transmitted true dharma. 
However, historians without understanding classified him in the 
section on teachers of learning meditation. This was the utmost 
stupidity, which is lamentable. 

When Bodhidharma arrived on Mount Song, a doglike monk barked 
at him. What a pity! How foolish! With what mind could one ignore 
Bodhidharma’s compassionate gift? How could one fail to repay his 
kindness? In the worldly realm, there are those who do not forget the 
kindness of others. People call them worthy beings. The great kindness 
of Bodhidharma surpasses that of one’s parents. His compassion is 
beyond filial love. 

The lowly birth of Japanese people is amazing, if we think about it. 
Not having been born in the center of the world, we haven’t seen the 
flourishing land. We haven’t known sages nor seen the wise. There has 
been no one who has ascended to heaven from our land, Japan. We 
are all equally immature. From the time our nation was founded, no 
one has guided laypeople. We have never heard of anyone purifying 
the nation, as no one has known what is pure and what is murky. We 
are not familiar with yin and yang, or with heaven, earth, and 
humans. How, then, could we understand the undulation of the five 
types of matter? This ignorance comes from not knowing the sound 
and form before our very eyes. It is the result of not knowing the 
sutras, nor having true teachers with whom to study them. 

Having no true teachers, we do not know how many score of 
volumes, how many hundreds of verses, and how many thousands of 
words the sutras have. We just read the remote aspects of the writing, 
instead of understanding the essential meaning of the thousands of 
verses and myriad words. We come to know the ancient sutras and 
texts as a result of our longing for the authentic teaching. As we long 
for the ancient teaching, the sutras of old come forth. 

The founders of the Han and Wei dynasties in China—Emperors Gao 
and Tai—understood the verses of heaven and transmitted the 
expression of the terrestrial forms. When we clarify their words, the 
fundamentals of heaven, earth, and humans are understood. People 
who have not encountered the guidance of such virtuous leaders do 
not know what it is to truly serve the emperor or to truly serve their 
parents. They are unfortunate subjects of the Emperor and unfortunate 
children of their parents. As subjects or children, they miss a precious 
jewel and waste the passage of time. Born into such a family, they 
have no authority to govern, and cling to petty positions. Thus, the 
nation is murky, rarely known for its purity. Since we have a lowly 
life in such a remote land as Japan where the Tathagata’s true dharma 
is not heard, what is the use of clinging to this bodily life? Why do we 
cling to this bodily life, and to what do we devote ourselves? 

Those who have a worthy and noble life should not cling to it for 
anything, even for the sake of dharma. This is also true for those with 
a lowly life. On the other hand, if those with a lowly life dedicate 

themselves to following the way for the sake of dharma, their life is 
worthier than the life of the heavenly devas, a wheel-turning king, the 
gods of heaven and earth, or sentient beings in the three realms. 

Now, Bodhidharma, the First Chinese Ancestor, was the third son of 
the King of Xiangzhi in southern India. As a prince from a royal 
family, of noble background, he was to be respected. But in the 
remote land of China, people did not know how to respect him. They 
had no incense, flowers, royal cushions, or palace for him. Japan is an 
even more distant steep cliff away, where no one knows how to honor 
a prince from a great nation. Even if we learn the manners, we may 
have difficulty in mastering them. The way to honor a lord is different 
from the way to honor royalty; one way is less formal than the other. 
But here we can’t tell the difference, as we are unaware of the degrees 
of nobility even among ourselves. As we don’t understand the 
difference, we don’t know the degrees of our own nobility. 

Bodhidharma was a dharma heir, twenty-eight generations from 
Shakyamuni Buddha. After he attained the way, his importance 
increased. A great sage, the most venerable one, he followed his 
teacher’s request to transmit dharma for saving beings and did not 
cling to his bodily life. In China they had not seen a buddha child, an 
authentic heir, nor had anyone received person-to-person transmission 
of the ancestral face. No one had met a buddha before Bodhidharma 
appeared. No buddhas other than his descendants emerged in China 
after that. 

It is possible to meet the Buddha when the udumbara blossom is in 
bloom. People count the years looking forward to this. But the coming 
of the First Ancestor from India will never happen again. And yet 
those who call themselves descendants of the ancestors are like the 
one in the Kingdom of Chu who treasured an ordinary green stone, 
thinking it was jade. Unable to tell jade from stone, they think that 
teachers of sutras and treatises are equal to Bodhidharma. It is so 
because of their limited learning and shallow understanding. Those 
who do not recognize the authentic seed of prajna do not become 
descendants of the ancestral path. They wander around in the crooked 
paths of name and concept. How sad! 

Even after the Putong Era of the Kingdom of Liang, there were 
monks who went to India. For what reason? It is quite stupid. Because 
of their unwholesome past actions, they wander around in a foreign 
land. Step by step they go on the crooked paths of slandering dharma. 
Step by step they go farther away from their parental land. What do 
they gain by arriving in India? They merely bear hardships traveling 
through mountains and waters. As they do not know the true meaning 
of teachings brought from India and buddha dharma transmitted 

eastward to China, they get lost in India. 

Although they are supposed to seek for buddha dharma, they lack 
the right aspiration for buddha dharma, and so even in India they do 
not meet a true teacher, but only teachers of treatises and sutras. The 
reason for this is that although there are true teachers in India, seekers 
who lack the right mind to search for true dharma cannot find them. 
We have never heard of people who went to India and met true 
teachers. If they had done so, they would have spoken about it. But 
because they didn’t go, they did not speak about it. 

Also, in China there have been many monks who have depended 
upon sutras and treatises without seeking true dharma, even after 
Bodhidharma came from India. Although they read sutras and 
treatises, they are ignorant about the meaning of them. This dark 
activity comes not only from today’s action but also from 
unwholesome actions of the past. In this lifetime they do not learn the 
true teaching of the Tathagata, are not illuminated by the face-to-face 
transmission of the Tathagata, do not actualize the buddha mind of 
the Tathagata, and do not listen to the wind of the house of all 
buddhaas. It is regrettable. 

There were many people like that in the Sui, Tang, and Song 
dynasties. But even if those who have once nurtured the seeds of 
prajna enter the gate unintentionally, they are freed from counting 
sands and become descendants of Bodhidharma. They are persons of 
excellent roots, the highest of the high, persons of good seeds, while 
those who are ignorant merely lodge forever in the huts of sutras and 
treatises. 

Therefore, we should look up at the profound teaching that 
Bodhidharma brought from India without avoiding or abhorring the 
steep path. For what other purpose should we save our stinky skin 
bags? 

Xiangyan said: 

Hundreds of plans, thousands of means, 

your body is dust in the tomb. 

Don’t say white hair has no words. 

It is a message from the yellow springs [realm of death]. 

Thus, even if you make hundreds of plans and create thousands of 
means to save yourselves, in the end you will turn to dust in the tomb. 
Furthermore, driven by a king of a small nation and his retainers, you 
run around east and west, with thousands of hardships and myriad 
sufferings of body and mind. You give your life over to loyalty, even 
to the extent of following your king to the grave. A future driven by 

worldly obligations is clouds and mists of darkness. Many people since 
olden times have been occupied by minor pursuits and have given up 
their lives. Those human lives might have been saved, as they could 
have become vessels of the way. 

Now that you have met the true dharma, study it even if you have 
to give up the lives of hundreds and thousands of kalpas. Why would 
you give up your life for worthless petty people instead of devoting 
yourself to the broad and profound buddha dharma? Neither those 
who are wise nor those who are not should hesitate in making this 
decision. Think quietly. When the true dharma is not spread, you 
cannot meet it even if you want to give up your life for it. Wish right 
now for the self that meets the true dharma. Be ashamed of the self 
that would not offer your life for the sake of the true dharma. If there 
is anything to be ashamed of, it is this. 

This being so, to appreciate the great gift of Bodhidharma is the 
continuous practice of this day. Do not look back on your bodily life. 
Do not cling to worldly obligations and love that put you lower than 
birds and beasts. Even if you cling to that love, you cannot maintain it 
forever. Do not hold on to the house of the family that is like trash. 
Even if you retreat to that place, it cannot be your ultimate abode. 

The wise buddha ancestors in olden times let go of the seven types 
of treasure and a thousand servants, leaving behind jeweled palaces 
and vermilion towers. They saw these luxuries as drool and manure. 
These actions by the ancient buddha ancestors exemplify their 
kindness. 

Even a sick sparrow remembered the beneficence of someone who 
had cared for it, and presented a jade ring that carried a prediction of 
an auspicious future. A captured tortoise did not forget the 
beneficence of someone who helped release it, and exhibited its 
tortoise figure in all the seals the person commissioned. How sad that 
some with human faces lack the virtue of these creatures! 

Your ability to see buddhas and hear dharma right now is the result 
of the compassionate continuous practice of each buddha ancestor. 
Without the one-to-one transmission of buddha ancestors, how could 
the dharma have reached us today? You should gratefully repay the 
beneficence of having received one phrase, one dharma. How much 
more beneficent is the unsurpassed great dharma, the treasury of the 
true dharma eye? How could you not repay it with gratitude? You 
should vow to surrender to this day your lifetimes, which could be as 
immeasurable as the sands of the Ganges. 

Your corpse of a body, which is dedicated to dharma, should be 
revered with bows and offerings, generation after generation. Such a 
corpse is what devas and dragon kings respect, guard, and admire for 
the obvious reason. There has been a Brahman custom for a long time 

in India to sell and buy skulls, because people there revere the merit 
of the skulls of those who have practiced dharma. If you don’t 
dedicate your bodily life to the way right now, the power of practicing 
dharma will not arrive. To fully engage without sparing your bodily 
life is to mature your practice of dharma. Then your skull will be 
revered. But who would bow to your skull if you do not dedicate 
yourself to the way? Who would want to sell or buy such a skull found 
in a field? You will be regretful when your spirit looks back to this 
day, if you do not dedicate yourself to the way. 

A demon beat the bones of his own corpse for his unwholesome past 
actions, and a deva bowed to his own skeleton for his wholesome past 
actions. Thinking upon the time when your body will turn to dust or 
mud, you should care about the future generations without self- 
concern. Then, those who see your remains will be moved to tears. 
Even if you turn to dust or mud, leaving a skull that people might 
want to avoid, you will be very fortunate if you engage in continuous 
practice of the true buddha dharma. 

Thus, do not fear the suffering from cold. Suffering from cold has 
never crushed the way. Only be concerned about not practicing. Lack 
of practice leaves a person divided and hinders the way. Do not be put 
off by the suffering from heat. Suffering from heat has never crushed 
the way. Only be concerned about not practicing. Lack of practice 
leaves a person divided and hinders the way. 

The Buddha accepted an offering of barley for horses as food for 
himself. Sages of olden times lived on bracken in the mountains. 
These are excellent examples for both buddhas and laity. Do not be 
like a demon looking for blood or milk. A day of fully engaged activity 
is the continuous practice of all buddhas. 

bones are being replaced.” 

Huike told Baojing about his dream. Taking a look at his head, 
which had the appearance of five peaks sticking out, Baojing said, 
“You have an auspicious appearance, which shows that you are 
destined to have realization. The spirit’s message for you to go south 
must mean that Bodhidharma, the great practitioner of the Shaolin 
Temple, is your teacher.” 

The spirit who had spoken to Huike was the guardian deity for his 
endless practice of the way. 

Following Baojing’s instruction, Huike went to see Bodhidharma at 
Shaoshi Peak. It was a severely cold winter night, said to be the ninth 
day of the twelfth month. Even without heavy rain or snow, on such a 
winter night in the deep mountains it would be impossible for a 
person to stand outdoors. It was a horrendous season when bamboo 
cracked. A great snow covered the entire mountain. Huike searched in 
the snow for a trail. Who knows the extent of his hardship? 

Finally Huike reached Bodhidharma’s dwelling, but was not allowed 
to enter. Bodhidharma did not turn around. Throughout the night 
Huike did not sleep, sit, or rest. He stood firmly until dawn. The night 
snow seemed to have no mercy, piling higher and burying him up to 
his waist. Every drop of his tears froze. Seeing his frozen tears, he 
shed even more tears. Looking at his own body, he thought to himself, 
“A seeker in the past crushed his bones, extracted his marrow, and 
squeezed his blood to feed the starving people. Another seeker laid 
down his hair on the muddy road to let the Buddha pass. Another 
threw his body off the cliff to feed a tiger. They were like that. Then 
who am I?” Thus, his aspiration became stronger. 

Those who study nowadays should not forget Huike’s words They 
were like that. Then who am I? If we forget, we will drown for 
numberless kalpas. Thus, Huike addressed himself in this way, 
strengthening his aspiration for dharma. He did not mind being 
covered by snow. When we imagine the hair-raising ordeal of that 
long night, we are struck with terror. 

At dawn Bodhidharma took notice and asked, “What do you seek? 
Why have you stood in the snow for so long?” 

Shedding more tears, Huike said, “All I wish is that you 
compassionately open the gate of sweet dew in order to awaken many 
beings.” 

Bodhidharma said, “The unsurpassed, inconceivable way of all 
buddhas must be practiced hard and consistently for vast kalpas. You 
must bear what is unbearable. But if you wish with small virtue, small 
wisdom, and casual, arrogant mind for the true vehicle, you will toil 
in vain.” 

Then Huike was encouraged. Unnoticed by Bodhidharma, he took a 
sharp knife, cut off his left arm, and offered it to him. 

Bodhidharma knew then that Huike was a dharma vessel, and said, 
“When buddhas first seek the way, they give up bodily form for the 
sake of dharma. Now that I see your determination, you are invited to 
pursue the way here.” 

Thus, Huike entered Bodhidharma’s inner chamber, attending to 
him with great diligence for eight years. Huike was indeed an example 
and a great guide for humans and devas to follow. Such great 
diligence had not been heard of either in India or China. When it 
comes to “smiling,” you should study Mahakashyapa. And when it 
comes to attaining the marrow, you should study Huike. 

Reflecting quietly, we know that even if Bodhidharma had come 
from India thousands of times, without the continuous practice of 
Huike there would not be a great number of students and practitioners 
today. Now, as we see and hear the true dharma, we should express 
our gratitude to Huike. Most ways of expressing gratitude may miss 
the mark. Giving up the life of your body is not enough. A castle is not 
solid enough, as it can be taken by others or given away to a family. 
The life of the body can be given to impermanence, a lord, or a 
crooked way. Therefore, none of these are suitable offerings. 
Continuous practice, day after day, is the most appropriate way of 
expressing gratitude. 

This means that you practice continuously, without wasting a single 
day of your life, without using it for your own sake. Why is it so? Your 
life is a fortunate outcome of continuous practice from the past. You 
should express your gratitude immediately. How sad and shameful to 
waste this body, which has benefited from the continuous practice of 
buddha ancestors, by becoming a slave of family, and surrendering to 
their vanities, without noticing the fall! Or, the body may be 
mistakenly given to that horrendous robber, the demon of fame and 
gain. 

If ever you value fame and gain, then be compassionate to fame and 
gain. If you are compassionate to fame and gain, you will not allow 
them to break the body that can become a buddha ancestor. Being 
compassionate to family and relatives is also like this. Do not think 
that fame and gain are phantoms and illusions, but regard them as 
sentient beings. If you are not compassionate to fame and gain, you 
will accumulate unwholesome actions. The true eye of study should be 
like this. 

Thoughtful people in the world express gratitude for receiving gold, 
silver, or rare treasures. They also express gratitude for receiving kind 
words. Who can forget the great gift of seeing and hearing the 

Tathagata’s unsurpassable true dharma, being aware that this is itself 
a rare treasure of a lifetime? The bones and skulls of those who did 
not turn back from this continuous practice are enshrined in seven- 
treasure pagodas, receiving respect and offerings by humans and 
devas. When you become aware of such a great gift, you should 
attentively repay the mountain of benevolence, without allowing your 
life to disappear like a dewdrop on the grass. This is continuous 
practice. The power of this practice is that you yourself practice as an 
ancestral buddha. 

The First and Second Chinese Ancestors did not found monasteries, 
so they were not occupied by grass cutting. Nor did the Third and 
Fourth Ancestors. Thus they remained free of administrative duties. 
The Fifth and Sixth Ancestors did not build their own monasteries. 
Neither did Qingyuan nor Nanyue. 

rare silk. 

Thus, the continuous practice of Daoxin, who was not attached to 
his bodily life as bodily life and tried to avoid becoming intimate with 
kings and ministers, is something rarely encountered in a thousand 
years. Because Emperor Tai was a just king, Daoxin had nothing 
against him. The Emperor admired Daoxin because he did not spare 
his own bodily life and was willing to die. Daoxin focused on his 
continuous practice, not without reason but with respect for the 
passage of time. Compared with the current tendency in this declining 
age when many people try to find favor with the emperors, Daoxin’s 
refusal of the three imperial requests is remarkable. 

On the fourth day, the intercalary ninth month, the second year of 
the Yonghui Era [651] during the reign of Emperor Gao, Daoxin gave 
instruction to his students, saying, “All things are liberated. You 
should guard your mind and teach future generations.” 

After saying this, he sat at ease and passed away. He was seventy- 
two years old. A stupa was built for him on the mountain. On the 
eighth day of the fourth month of the following year, the door to the 
stupa opened of itself, and inside it, his body looked as if he were 
alive. After that his students kept the door open. 

Know Daoxin’s words: All things are liberated. It is not merely that all 
things are empty or all things are all things, but that all things are 
liberated. Daoxin had continuous practice before and after entering 
the stupa. To assume that all living beings die is a narrow view. To 
assume that the dead do not perceive is a limited idea. Do not follow 
these views when you study the way. There may be those who go 
beyond death. There may be dead people who perceive. 

[Shibei] because of his rigorous practice. 

One day Xuefeng asked, “Where is Ascetic Bei heading?” 

Xuansha said, “He is not misleading anyone.” 

Later, Xuefeng called Xuansha and asked, “Why doesn’t Ascetic Bei 
travel all around to study?” 

Xuansha said, “Bodhidharma didn’t come to China. The Second 
Ancestor didn’t go to India.” 

Xuefeng approved his words. 

When Xuefeng became abbot on Mount Xianggu, later called Mount 
Xuefeng, Xuansha accompanied him as his assistant. Because of their 
collaboration, many excellent students assembled in the monastery. 
Xuansha continued to enter the abbot’s room to receive guidance from 
before dawn till late at night. Students who lacked decisive 
understanding would ask Xuansha to go with them to see Xuefeng. 
Sometimes Xuefeng would say to them, “Why don’t you ask Ascetic 
Bei?” As caring as Xuefeng, Xuansha would not hesitate to respond to 
Xuefeng’s request. 

Without Xuansha’s outstanding continuous practice, such dedication 
would not have been possible. The continuous practice of sitting zazen 
all day long is rare. While there are many who run around after sound 
and form, there are few who sit zazen all day long. Those of you who 
come later should fear wasting your remaining time and endeavor to 
sit zazen the whole day. 

continuous practice, the wheel of air [a layer upon which the world is 
settled] is not upset, the world is not broken, the palace of devas is 
calm, and human lands are maintained. 

Although we are not direct descendants of Guishan, he is an 
ancestor of the teaching. Later, Yangshan went to study and attend 
him. Yangshan, who had studied with Baizhang, was like Shariputra, 
who gave one hundred answers to ten questions. Attending Guishan, 
he spent three years watching over a buffalo. This kind of continuous 
practice has been cut off and not seen in recent years. Such a 
statement by Yangshan as “spending three years watching over a 
buffalo” cannot otherwise be heard. 

Monk Xuantai only wore cotton. Shishuang Qingzhu built a hall 
and practiced with the assembly of those who sat like dead trees 
[without lying down]. What you need to do is let your mind 
perish. 

Touzi Datong asked his students to wash the rice that he 
cooked together with them. Thus, what you need to do is to 
minimize your concerns. This is how the ancient sages 
encouraged themselves. Had they not thought their practices 
worthwhile, they would not have simplified their daily activities. 
Practitioners, if you have realization with your whole body, you 
will be a person of no lack. If you don’t hit the mark, you will 
waste your effort. 

Daokai continued: 

I have become head of this monastery in spite of having achieved 
nothing worth mentioning. How can I sit on this seat and neglect 
the trust of the ancient sages? I want to follow the example of the 
teachers of old who were abbots of monasteries. After consulting 
with all of you, I have decided not to go out of the monastery, 
attend feasts, or ask for donations. We will divide one year’s 
harvest from our fields into three-hundred-sixty-day portions and 
use them accordingly. But we will not reduce the number of 
monks in the assembly. When there is enough rice, we will cook 
rice. When there is not enough, we will make gruel by adding 
water. When there is less rice, we will make watery gruel. When 
we accept new monks, we will serve tea that is nothing special. 
Tea will be made ready in the tea room for all to serve 
themselves. We will do only what is essential, eliminating all the 
rest, in order to concentrate on the endeavor of the way. 

Here, the livelihood is complete and the landscape is not dull. 
Flowers smile and birds sing. Wooden horses whine and stone 
oxen run. Green mountains far away are faint and spring water 
nearby is soundless. Monkeys on the mountain ridges chatter and 
dewdrops wet the midnight moon. Cranes caw in the forests and 
the winds swirl around the dawn pines. When spring wind rises, a 
dead tree roars like a dragon. At the time of falling leaves, the 
shivering forest scatters blossoms. The jewel steps delineate moss 
patterns. Human faces take on shades of mist. Sounds are serene. 
Remote from worldly affairs, this one taste is subtle—nothing in 
particular. 

Today I am supposed to present the gate of the house to all of 
you. This is already off the track. Even so, I go on lecturing and 
giving instructions in the abbot’s room. I take up a mallet and 

swing a whisk. I shout to the east and strike the west. My face 
grimaces as if I were having a seizure. I feel as if I were belittling 
you students and betraying the ancient sages. 

Don’t you see? Bodhidharma came from India, got to the foot of 
Shaoshi Peak, and faced the wall for nine years. Huike stood in 
the snow and cut off his arm. What hardship! Bodhidharma did 
not say a word and Huike did not ask a question. But can you call 
Bodhidharma a person of not doing? Can you regard Huike as not 
seeking a master? Whenever I speak about examples of ancient 
sages, I feel there is no place to hide. I am ashamed that we who 
come later are so soft and weak. 

These days, people make offerings of a hundred flavors to 
others and say, “As I have fulfilled the four types of offerings to 
monks, I feel ready to arouse the aspiration for enlightenment.” 
But I fear that such people do not know how to move their hands 
and legs, and will be separated from the reality of birth and death 
of the world. Time flies like an arrow and their regret may be 
deep. 

There are times when others have awakened me with their 
merit. But I am not forcing you to follow my advice. Have you 
seen this verse by a teacher of old? 

Rice without millet from fields in the mountains, 
yellow pickled vegetables— 

eat as you like. 

Otherwise, leave it to east and west. 

Please, fellow travelers, each of you make an effort. 
Take care. 

These words of Daokai are the bones and marrow of the ancestral 
school, transmitted person to person. Although there are many 
examples of Daokai’s continuous practice, I am only presenting this 
talk. Those of us who come after Daokai should long for and study the 
continuous practice he tempered on Mount Furong. It was the genuine 
form and spirit of Shakyamuni Buddha at Jeta Grove. 

Let me advise you not to go home. 

At home the way is not practiced. 

Old women in the neighborhood 

would call you by your childhood name. 

Respectfully receiving these dharma words, Mazu made a vow not 
to go in the direction of Han Region in this or any other lifetime. Not 
taking one step closer to his old home, Mazu stayed in Jiangxi and 
traveled all over the region. Other than speaking of “Mind itself is 
buddha,” he did not give any words of guidance. However, he was an 
authentic heir of Nanyue, a life vein for humans and devas. 

What is the meaning of not to go home? How does one not go home? 
Returning to east, west, south, or north is no more than the falling and 
rising of the self. Indeed, the way is not practiced by going home. 
Practice continuously, examining whether the way is practiced or not, 
either by going home or not going home. Why is the way not 
practiced by going home? Is the way hindered by not practicing? Is it 
hindered by the self? 

Nanyue did not say, “Old women in the neighborhood might call 
you by your childhood name.” But he did say, Old women in the 
neighborhood would call you by your childhood name. Why did he say 
so? Why did Mazu accept these dharma words? Because when you go 
south, the earth goes south. Other directions are also like this. It is a 
narrow view to deny this point by seeing Mount Sumeru or the great 
ocean as merely large and separate from you, or to miss this point by 
using the sun, the moon, and stars as a measure for comparison. 

nineteen he abandoned scriptural studies and engaged in practice, and 
he did not turn around even at age seventy. When offered a purple 
robe with the title of master from the Emperor Ning in the Jiading Era 
[1208-1224], he sent a letter politely declining it. Monks in the ten 
directions respected him for his action and those, both near and far, 
who were knowledgeable rejoiced over it. The Emperor was extremely 
impressed and sent him an offering of tea. Those who heard of this 
admired it as something rare at the time. Rujing’s action is indeed a 
genuine continuous practice. 

I say this because loving fame is worse than breaking a precept. 
Breaking a precept is a transgression at a particular time. Loving fame 
is like an ailment of a lifetime. Do not foolishly hold on to fame, or do 
not ignorantly accept it. Not to accept fame is continuous practice. To 
abandon it is continuous practice. 

The titles of master for the first six ancestors were all given 
posthumously by emperors. These ancestors did not receive their titles 
out of love of fame. Likewise, you should give up love of fame within 
birth and death, and simply wish for the continuous practice of 
buddha ancestors. Do not be like devouring creatures. To greedily love 
the self, which is of slight significance, doesn’t take you above the 
level of creatures and beasts. To abandon fame and gain is rare for 
humans and devas, but all buddha ancestors have done so. 

Some say, “I seek fame and love gain for the benefit of sentient 
beings.” This is a greatly mistaken view held by heretics within the 
buddha dharma, as well as by a troop of demons who slander the true 
dharma. Does this view mean that the buddha ancestors who do not 
seek fame and gain are unable to benefit sentient beings? What a 
laugh! What a laugh! Not-seeking can benefit beings. How is it so? 
Those who, without understanding this, promote what is not 
beneficial as beneficial are a troop of demons. Sentient beings helped 
by such demons are bound for hell. Such demons should deplore that 
their lives are in darkness. Do not regard such ignorant ones as 
beneficent beings. 

Thus, declining the offer of a title of master has been an excellent 
custom since olden times. This is something that those of us in later 
generations should fully understand. To see Rujing in person was to 
meet that person. 

Leaving home at nineteen, looking for a teacher, Rujing engaged in 
the endeavor of the way, without retreating or turning around. Until 
the age of sixty-five he still had not become close to or even seen an 
emperor, nor become intimate with ministers or government officials. 
Not only did he not accept a purple robe, he did not wear any brocade 
throughout his life. He only wore a black kashaya and a combined 
robe for formal talks and for giving instruction in the abbot’s room. 

Instructing the monks, Rujing said: 

For the practice of Zen in pursuit of the way, maintaining the 
mind of the way is primary. It is deplorable that the ancestral way 
has declined in the last two hundred years. There have been few 
skin bags who have expressed a phrase of understanding. 

At the time when I hung my walking staff at Mount Jing, 
Fuzhao Deguang was abbot. He said in his dharma talk, “Studying 
buddha dharma, the path of Zen, you should not look for phrases 
by others. Each of you should have your own understanding.” 
Thus, he did not oversee the monks’ hall and did not guide the 
many monks who were studying there. Instead, he spent his time 
entertaining visiting dignitaries. Not understanding the working 
of buddha dharma, he was simply greedy for name and loved 
gain. 

If it were enough to merely have our own understanding of 
buddha dharma, why have there always been determined old 
gimlets who traveled around looking for teachers? Indeed, 
Deguang had not yet mastered Zen. Nowadays, the elders of 
monasteries in various places are just like Deguang with their lack 
of way-seeking mind. How can they hold buddha dharma in their 
hands? It is regrettable, indeed! 

Although Rujing said this to the assembly that included many of 
Deguang’s students, none of them were resentful. 

Rujing also said, “To practice Zen is to drop away body and mind. 
You can actualize it by just sitting, without relying on burning 
incense, bowing, chanting Buddha’s name, repentance, or reading 
sutras.” 

In Song China, there are a great many skin bags, not merely 
hundreds, who regard themselves as Zen practitioners, calling 
themselves descendants of the ancestral school. But those who 
encourage just sitting as just sitting are rarely heard of. Within the 
country of Four Seas and Five Lakes [China], Rujing was the only one. 
Elders all over admired him, even though he did not admire them. But 
there are also leaders of large temples who do not know of him. 
Although born in China, they are like a herd of beasts. They have not 
studied what they should have studied, while merely wasting the 
passage of time. What a pity! Those who do not know about Rujing 
mistakenly regard idle chatter and confused talk as the teaching style 
of buddha ancestors. 

Rujing sometimes said in his talk in the dharma hall: 

Since I was nineteen, I have visited monasteries all over but have 

not met teachers to guide humans. Since then, I have not spent 
even one day or night without covering a zazen cushion. Since I 
became abbot, I have not chatted with people from my 
hometown. This is because I feel urgent about the passing of time. 
I have always stayed in the building where I hung my walking 
stick, without going to visit other huts or dormitories of the 
monastery. How could I spend time enjoying the mountainside or 
admiring waterscapes? 

I have been doing zazen not only in the monks’ hall and other 
communal places, but also alone in quiet towers and screened-in 
places. I always carry a cushion so I can sit at the foot of a rock. 
My hope has been to thoroughly penetrate the diamond seat. 
Sometimes my buttocks get raw, but still I sit harder. 

I am now sixty-five. Although my bones are aged and my head 
is dull, I don’t yet understand zazen. But, because I care about my 
fellow practitioners in the ten directions, I live in this monastery 
and transmit the way to the assembly, beginning with dawn 
instruction. I do this because I wonder, where is the buddha 
dharma among the elders of other places? 

He spoke in this way on a teaching seat. Also, Rujing would not 
accept gifts from monks who arrived from other places. 

Superintendent Zhao, a grandson of Emperor Ning, who was a 
commanding military officer and agricultural administrator of Ming 
Region, invited Rujing to the capital to give a dharma talk. At that 
time Zhao presented ten thousand silver coins to him. Rujing thanked 
him and said, “I have come to give a customary lecture on the 
treasury of the true dharma eye, wondrous heart of nirvana. I am 
dedicating the merit to the well-being of your late father. But I will 
not accept the silver coins. Monks have no need of these things. I 
greatly appreciate your kindness, but as usual I must decline your 
offer.” 

Zhao said, “Master, as a relative of His Imperial Majesty, I am 
respected everywhere and I have wealth. On this memorial day of my 
late father I would like to give him support in another world. Why 
can’t you accept my offering? I feel greatly fortunate to have you here 
today. With your great compassion and great kindness, please accept 
my humble gift.” 

Rujing said, “Your Excellency, your request cannot be refused. But I 
have a question. When I expounded dharma, did you understand it?” 

Zhao said, “I was simply delighted to hear it.” 

Rujing said, “You are brilliantly illuminating my words. I am 
honored. I just wish for the happiness of your late father, who was 
invoked today. Please explain to me what I said in my discourse. If 

you can, I will accept the silver. If you cannot, then please keep it for 
yourself.” 

Zhao said, “When I think about it, your composure and movement 
were excellent.” 

Rujing said, “That’s what I did. How about what you heard?” 

Zhao hesitated. 

Rujing said, “Your late father’s happiness is already fulfilled. Your 
gift should be left to his decision.” Thus he bade farewell. 

Zhao said, “I regret that you did not accept my offering. But I 
rejoice in seeing you.” So saying, Zhao saw Rujing off. 

Monks and laity on both sides of the Zhe River [Zhejiang Province] 
admired Rujing. This was recorded in the journal of Attendant Monk 
Ping, who said, “An old master like this is hard to meet. Where else 
could we possibly find someone so accomplished?” 

Who in any direction would decline the offering of ten thousand 
blocks of silver? A teacher of old said, “Gold, silver, and jewels should 
be regarded as excrement. Even if you see them as gold and silver, it is 
customary for monks not to accept them.” Rujing followed this 
teaching; others did not. He would often say, “In the past three 
hundred years there have been few teachers like myself. Therefore, it 
is imperative that you practice diligently with me in the endeavor of 
the way.” 

In his assembly there was someone called Daosheng from Mian 
Region in Shu, who was a Daoist. A party of five practitioners 
including him made a vow: “We will master the great way of buddha 
ancestors in our lifetime. We will not go back to our hometowns until 
we do.” 

Rujing was delighted with their vow and allowed them to join 
walking and sitting meditation with the assembly. In the order of 
seating, he placed them right after the nuns [presumably a low-status 
position]. It was rare for Daoists to practice in a Zen monastery like 
this. 

Also, a monk called Shanru from Fu Region made a vow: “I will not 
take a step toward my home in the south, but will single-mindedly 
study the great way of buddha ancestors.” I personally witnessed 
many students like this in Rujing’s assembly. There are few like them 
in the assemblies of other masters. The continuous practice at Rujing’s 
assembly was outstanding amongst monks of Great Song China. Those 
who do not aspire to practice as they did should be sorrowful. Even 
when we meet the buddha dharma, we don’t necessarily respond to it. 
How much less fortunate is our body and mind if we don’t meet the 
buddha dharma at all! 

Think quietly. Life does not last long. To realize even a few lines of 
the buddha ancestors’ words is to realize the buddha ancestors. How is 

this so? Since buddha ancestors are body and mind as one, one phrase 
or two are the buddha ancestors’ warm body-mind. Their body-mind 
comes forth and realizes your body-mind. At the very moment of 
realization, this realization comes forth and realizes your body-mind. 
This life realizes the life of many lifetimes. By becoming a buddha and 
becoming an ancestor, you go beyond buddha and go beyond 
ancestor. 

32 
Ocean Mbopra Samant 

Buopuas AND ANCESTORS continuously maintain ocean mudra [form] 

samadhi. While swimming in this samadhi, they expound, realize, and 
practice. Traveling through water includes journeying along the ocean 
bottom. This is called “coursing along the bottom of the deepest 
ocean.” 

This ocean differs from the sea of birth and death where buddhas 
vow to guide beings drifting in birth and death to the shore of 
liberation. Each buddha ancestor breaks through the bamboo node 
[intellectual thinking] and passes the barrier individually; this is done 
only through the power of the ocean mudra samadhi. 

coming together; it is elements coming together. A body formed in 
this way is described as this body. 

The Buddha said, At the time of appearing, elements appear. This 
appearing does not leave any mark of appearing; therefore, appearing 
does not enter one’s perception or knowledge. Thus, the Buddha said, 
I do not say “I” appear. It is not that there is someone else who 
perceives or thinks that the person appears; it is just that you see 
beyond, and you drop away your initial understanding. 

As the time [of ocean mudra samadhi] is not other than appearing, 
appearing is the arrival of time. What is it that appears? Appearing 
appears. Because appearing is time, appearing does not fail to fully 
manifest skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. As appearing is a coming 
together, appearing is this body, appearing is “I” appear, appearing is 
all elements coming together. What appears is not merely sound and 
form. All elements appear as “I” appear and as I do not say “I” appear. 

Not say is not “not expressing,” because expressing is not saying. 
The time of appearing [in ocean mudra samadhi] is when elements 
appear, which is not the same as the twelve hours of the day [ordinary 
time]. All elements are the time of appearing, not the time when the 
three realms appear. 

ancestors. In the words [spoken by Huineng], “You are like this,” what 
is not you? All past moments and all future moments are you. When he 
said, “I am like this,” what is not I? Past moments and future moments 
are all I. 

Disappearing has been magnificently expressed as countless hands 
and eyes [of Avalokiteshvara Bodhisattva]. It is unsurpassable 
nirvana. It is called death. It is called freedom from attachment. It is 
called the abiding place. 

Hands and eyes are expressions of disappearing. Not saying I at the 
moment of appearing and not saying I at the moment of disappearing 
appear together, but do not disappear at the same time. There are past 
elements that disappear and future elements that disappear. There are 
elements that are moments in the past and elements that are moments 
in the future. Being is past and future elements. Being is past and 
future moments. Things that are not sequential are being. Things that 
are not aligned are being. 

Talking about things that are not sequential and not aligned 
explains eight or nine out of ten. To regard the four great elements 
and five skandhas as the hands and eyes of disappearing is to take 
them up and pursue understanding. To see four great elements and 
five skandhas as the path of disappearing is going beyond, 
encountering reality. The entire body is hands and eyes, not lacking 
anything. The full range of the body is hands and eyes, not lacking 
anything. Disappearing is the activity of buddha ancestors. 

While the Buddha says not sequential and not aligned, nevertheless 
appearing arises in the beginning, middle, and end. This may be seen 
as Officially not allowing a needle, but unofficially permitting 
carriages and horses to pass. 

In the beginning, middle, and end, disappearing is neither 
sequential nor aligned. Although elements appear all of a sudden 
where past elements disappeared, it is not that disappearing turns into 
appearing, but that elements appear. Because elements appear 
completely, they are neither sequential nor aligned. It does not mean 
that disappearings succeed disappearings or are aligned with 
disappearings. Disappearing is complete disappearing in the 
beginning, middle, and end. Disappearing meets disappearing, with 
nothing taken away; the entire mind knows there is disappearing. 

Although elements disappear all of a sudden where past elements 
appeared, it is not that appearing turns into disappearing, but that 
elements disappear. Because elements disappear completely, they are 
neither sequential nor aligned. 

Whether it is just appearing or just disappearing, in ocean mudra 
samadhi, all elements are as they are. It is not that there is no practice 

and realization, it is just that they are not divided. This is called ocean 
mudra samadhi. 

Samadhi is actualization; it is expression. It is the time of night 
when a hand is reaching back, groping for a pillow. When the hand 
reaches back for a pillow at night, this groping is not limited to 
thousands and millions of eons, but is [as the Buddha says in the Lotus 
Sutra] “I am always in the ocean expounding the wondrous Lotus 
Sutra.” 

The Buddha said, I do not say “I” appear. This means, I am always in 
the ocean. From his front side the Buddha always teaches, “When one 
wave moves, thousands of waves follow.” From his back he teaches 
the Lotus Sutra, expounding “When thousands of waves move, one 
wave follows.” Even if you cast a one-thousand-foot or a ten-thousand- 
foot fishing line, regrettably it only goes straight down. Both front and 
back spoken of here are I am in the ocean. They are just like the front 
and back of the head. The front and back of the head means placing 
one head on top of another. 

It is not that there is a person in the ocean. The ocean of “I am in the 
ocean” is not an abode of people in the world. It is not where sages 
love to be. It is just “I am alone in the ocean.” Thus, the Buddha said, I 
am always in the ocean expounding. 

This ocean does not belong to inside, outside, or in-between. It is 
just I am always expounding the Lotus Sutra. The Buddha does not abide 
in the east, west, south, or north. The whole boat is empty; it returns 
full of moonlight. This return is a true place of settling. Who could call 
it stagnant water? It is actualized in the ultimate dimensions of the 
buddha dharma. This is called the mudra of water mudra. 

Let me speak further. It is the mudra of emptiness. It is the mudra of 
mud. The water mudra of water is not necessarily the mudra of ocean. 
Going beyond is the mudra of ocean mudra. This is called ocean 
mudra, water mudra, mud mudra, and mind mudra. By transmitting 
the mind mudra, you mudra [form] water, you mudra mud, you 
mudra emptiness. 

have stopped breathing do not remain as they are. Why?” 
Caoshan said, “Myriad things stop breathing when they don’t 
function anymore.” 

Caoshan, a dharma brother of Yunju, was right on the mark of 
Dongshan’s teaching. From the scriptures we learn refers to the correct 
teaching of buddha ancestors. It is not the teaching of ordinary sages, 
nor is it a lesser teaching of the buddha dharma. 

The ocean that does not retain corpses is not the open water, an 
enclosed sea, or even one of the Eight Seas. This is not what the monk 
asked Caoshan. The monk understands what is not the ocean as the 
ocean, but also understands the ocean as the ocean. 

A sea is not the ocean. The ocean is not necessarily an abyss of 
water with eight powers or nine trenches of salt water; the ocean is 
where all elements come together. It is not limited to deep water. This 
being so, the monk’s question What is the ocean? refers to an ocean 
that is not known by humans and devas. The one who asked this 
question wanted to shake up fixed views. 

Not retaining corpses is [as Puhua said], “When brightness arises, 
meet it with brightness; when darkness arises, meet it with darkness.” 
A corpse is as indestructible as ash, meaning [as Fachang said], 
“through countless springs, there is no change of mind.” A corpse such 
as this has not been seen before; therefore it is unknown. 

Caoshan’s words That which contains myriad things indicates the deep 
ocean. The point of his words is not about one thing that contains 
myriad things but about just containing myriad things. He did not 
merely mean that the deep ocean contains myriad things, but that 
what contains myriad things is nothing other than the deep ocean. 

Recognized or not, myriad things are just myriad things. 
Encountering the buddha face and the ancestor face is nothing other 
than fully recognizing myriad things as myriad things. Because myriad 
things are all-inclusive, you do not merely stand atop the highest peak 
or travel along the bottom of the deepest ocean. Being all-inclusive is 
just like this; letting go is just like that. What is called the ocean of 
buddha nature or Vairochana’s ocean storehouse is just myriad things. 
Although the ocean surface is invisible, there is no doubt about the 
practice of swimming in it. 

Duofu described a grove of bamboo as “one or two stalks are bent 
and three or four stalks are leaning.” Although he referred to myriad 
things, why did he not say, “One thousand or ten thousand stalks are 
bent”? Why did he not say, “one thousand or ten thousand groves”? 
Do not forget that a grove of bamboo is like that. This is what is 
meant by Caoshan’s words That which contains myriad things. 

The monk’s statement, Those who have stopped breathing do not 

remain as they are. Why? appears to be a question, but it is actually an 
understanding of what it is. When doubt arises, just encounter doubt. 
In investigating thusness, the monk said, Those who have stopped 
breathing do not remain as they are. Why? and The ocean does not retain 
corpses. Why? This is the meaning of his words: The ocean contains 
myriad things, but those who have stopped breathing do not remain as they 
are. Why? Know that containing does not allow things to remain as 
they are. Containing is not-retaining. Even if myriad things were 
nothing but corpses, for ten thousand years the ocean would never 
retain them unchanged. The old monk, who does not remain the same, 
makes his move. 

Caoshan’s words, Myriad things stop breathing when they don’t 
function anymore mean that even if myriad things do or do not stop 
breathing, they do not remain as they are. Even if corpses are corpses, 
the practice of being one with myriad things should be able to contain 
them; the practice should be all-containing. In the past and future of 
myriad things, there is a function that goes beyond not-breathing. 

This is the blind leading the blind. The meaning of the blind leading 
the blind is that a blind one leads a blind one [teacher and student 
merge]; blind ones lead blind ones. When blind ones lead blind ones, 
all things are contained. Containing contains all things. 

In the great way of going beyond, no endeavor is complete without 
being one with myriad things. This is ocean mudra samadhi. 

Written at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery on the twentieth 
day, the fourth month, the third year of the Ninji Era [1242]. 

33 

Conrrmation 

Tue GREAT WAY uniquely transmitted by buddhas and ancestors is 

confirmation. Those who have not studied buddhas and ancestors 
have never dreamed of it. 

At the time of confirmation, even those who have not aroused the 
aspiration for enlightenment are confirmed. Those with no buddha 
nature are confirmed; those with buddha nature are confirmed. Body 
is confirmed, no-body is confirmed. All buddhas are confirmed. All 
buddhas maintain the confirmation of all buddhas. 

Do not assume that you become a buddha after attaining 
confirmation; do not suppose that you attain confirmation after 
becoming a buddha. At the time of confirmation there is becoming a 
buddha; at the time of confirmation there is practice. 

Accordingly, all buddhas have confirmation; buddhas going beyond 
buddhas have confirmation. The self is confirmed. Body and mind are 
confirmed. When you complete study and fully understand 
confirmation, you fulfill your study and fully understand the buddha 
way. 

Before having the body, there is confirmation. After having the 
body, there is confirmation. There is confirmation that is recognized 
by the self, and there is confirmation that is not recognized by the self. 
There is confirmation recognized by others, and there is confirmation 
not recognized by others. 

Know that confirmation actualizes the self. Confirmation is the self 
of actualization. Thus, what has been directly transmitted between 
buddha and buddha, between ancestor and ancestor, is none other 
than confirmation. There is not a single thing that is not confirmation. 
How can it be otherwise for mountains, rivers, earth, Mount Sumeru, 
or great oceans? There is not one, or a half of the third child of Zhang, 
or the fourth child of Li [an ordinary person] who is without 
confirmation. 

Confirmation studied thoroughly in this way is speaking one phrase, 
hearing one phrase; beyond understanding of one _ phrase, 
understanding of one phrase; practicing and discoursing. Confirmation 
causes walking backward, walking forward. Sitting and wearing a 
robe at this moment could not be actualized without authentic 

confirmation. Because actualizing is putting the robe on your head 
and joining your palms together, actualizing is confirmation. 

Xuansha, who would later be Great Master Zongyi, once 
accompanied Xuefeng. Xuefeng pointed to the ground in front of him 
and said, “This piece of rice field would be a good spot for a seamless 
tower.” 

Xuansha said, “How high would it be?” 

Xuefeng just looked up and down. 

Xuansha said, “You do not lack the meritorious reward of human 
and heavenly beings. However, master, you have not dreamed of the 
confirmation on Vulture Peak.” 

Xuefeng said, “How about you?” 

Xuansha said, “Seven or eight feet.” 

Xuansha’s words However, master, you have not dreamed of the 
confirmation on Vulture Peak do not mean that Xuefeng was not 
confirmed on Vulture Peak, nor do they mean that Xuefeng was 
confirmed on Vulture Peak. It means that Xuefeng has not dreamed of 
the confirmation on Vulture Peak. 

The confirmation on Vulture Peak is said from a lofty perspective. It is 
“T have the treasury of the true dharma eye, the wondrous heart of 
nirvana. I now entrust it to Mahakashyapa.” 

this way is not confirmed. 

There is no hindrance in confirming someone who is already 
confirmed, and nothing extra is added in confirming someone who has 
not been confirmed. Having nothing lacking or extra is the way all 
buddha ancestors are confirmed by all buddha ancestors. 

These are not forced but are natural activities of confirmation. There 
is confirmation attained from inside, confirmation attained from 
outside. For thoroughly studying the meaning of inside and outside, 
study about confirmation. Study of the way of confirmation is one rod 
of iron ten thousand miles long. Sitting like a rock in confirmation is 
one moment that is myriad years. 

Receiving it continuously is my body and mind fully rejoice. Continuously 
means I now. It is not concerned with self and other in the past, 
present, and future. It is just hearing from the Buddha and not hearing 
from others. It is not delusion or enlightenment, not sentient beings, 
not grass, trees, or countries, but it is hearing from the Buddha. It is 
magnificent confirmation. It is continuously receiving. 

Continuously means not to stay in one spot even for a moment, but 
to have body and mind fully rejoicing. Receiving it continuously and 
rejoice are no other than studying simultaneously and all-inclusively 
with the body, studying simultaneously and all-inclusively with the 
mind. Furthermore, body is inclusive of mind, and mind is inclusive of 
body. Therefore, it is called inclusive body and mind. This is all- 
inclusive world, all-inclusive direction, all-inclusive body, all-inclusive 
mind. This is extraordinary oneness of rejoicing. When this rejoicing 
lets people clearly rejoice in sleeping and waking, or in delusion and 
enlightenment, this rejoicing is intimate with each of them but not 
separate from any of them. For this reason, this is the magnificent 
confirmation that is received continuously. 

Shakyamuni Buddha said to Bhaishajyaraja Bodhisattva, if there are 
those who come in front of the Buddha who hear one verse or phrase of the 
Sutra of Wondrous Dharma Blossoms, and are delighted even for a 
moment. . . they will attain unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. 

When is after the pari-nirvana of the Tathagata? Is it after forty-nine 
years, after eighty years? For now let us say eighty years. If there are 
those who hear one verse or phrase of the Sutra of Wondrous Dharma 
Blossoms, and are delighted even for a moment—is this to hear it with 
wisdom or without wisdom? Is it to hear it by mistake or not by 
mistake? 

If you explain to others, it is heard by if there are those . .. Do not be 
concerned whether they are those with wisdom or without wisdom. 
Say that when they hear the Sutra of Wondrous Dharma Blossoms, even 
with the immeasurably profound wisdom of all buddhas, to hear is 
one phrase, to hear is one verse, to hear is to be delighted for one 
moment. 

At this moment, they will attain unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. 
There is confirmation—I will confirm them all equally. Do not leave it to 
the ignorant third son of Zhang [ordinary person]. Devote yourself to 
a detailed study of this matter. 

Being delighted even for a moment is those who hear. At this moment, 
there is no room to set skin, flesh, bones, or marrow on your head. 
Being given this confirmation of unsurpassable, complete 
enlightenment means, “My wish is already fulfilled.” Be a skin bag like 
this. Thus, all wishes are fulfilled. In this way, there are people who 
are called those who hear. 

There is confirmation by taking up a pine branch; there is 
confirmation by taking up an udumbara blossom. There is 
confirmation by blinking. There is confirmation by breaking into a 
smile. There is an example of transmitting straw sandals. This is not 
what can be easily thought about or understood. 

There is confirmation of, “My body is thus.” There is confirmation 
of, “Your body is thus.” It means that the past, present, and future are 
confirmation. Because it is the past, present, and future within 
confirmation, it is actualized by confirming the self and by confirming 
others. 

If you say past birth, past birth has already perished. If you say 
future birth, future birth has not come yet. If you say present 
birth, present birth does not abide. The Buddha says, “Bhikshus, 
the present moment is birth, old age, and death.” 

If you say that you receive confirmation in beyond birth, 
beyond birth is the true stage. In the true stage, there is no 
receiving confirmation; there is no attaining unsurpassable, 
complete enlightenment. 

Maitreya, how do you receive confirmation in your lifetime? Do 
you say you receive it in thusness-birth, or do you say you receive 
it in thusness-death? If you say you receive it in thusness-birth, 
thusness does not have birth. If you say you receive it in thusness- 
death, thusness does not have death. 

All sentient beings are like this. All things are like this. All 
sages and wise ones are like this. You are also like this. If you 
receive confirmation, all sentient beings receive confirmation. The 
reason is that thusness is not two, not many. If you attain 
unsurpassable, complete enlightenment, all sentient beings also 
attain it. The reason is that all sentient beings are aspects of 
enlightenment. 

The Tathagata did not deny Vimalakirti’s statement. Accordingly, 
Maitreya’s attaining confirmation is already determined. In this way, 
all sentient beings’ attaining confirmation is also determined. Without 
sentient beings receiving confirmation, there is no confirmation of 
Maitreya. All sentient beings are aspects of enlightenment. Enlightenment 
receives confirmation from enlightenment. 

Receiving confirmation is the life of today. Since all sentient beings 
arouse the aspiration for enlightenment simultaneously with Maitreya, 
this is receiving confirmation together, and attaining the way 
together. 

However, Vimalakirti’s words, In the true stage there is no receiving 
confirmation, show that he did not know that the true stage is itself 
confirmation, and he did not say that the true stage is itself 

enlightenment. 
Vimalakirti also says, “Past birth has already perished . . . future 
birth has not come yet . . . present birth does not abide.” But past has 

not necessarily already perished, future has not necessarily not come 
yet, and present does not necessarily not abide. Even when you regard 
having already-perished, not-yet-come, and not-abiding, as the past, 
future, and present, you should clarify that not-yet-come is itself the 
past, present, and future. Accordingly, confirmation is attained in both 
birth and death. Enlightenment is attained in both birth and death. 
When all sentient beings receive confirmation, Maitreya also 

receives confirmation. Now I ask you, Vimalakirti: Is Maitreya the 
same as sentient beings or different from them? Answer! You said, “If 
Maitreya received confirmation, all sentient beings receive 
confirmation.” If you say Maitreya is not a sentient being, sentient 
beings are not sentient beings, and Maitreya is not Maitreya. How is it 
so? Then, Vimalakirti is not Vimalakirti. If you are not Vimalakirti, 
you cannot make this statement. 

Therefore, you should say: When confirmation causes all sentient 
beings to exist, all sentient beings and Maitreya exist. Confirmation 
causes all things to be as they are. 

Written at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery on the twenty-fifth 
day, the fourth month in summer, the third year of the Ninji Era 
[1242]. 

34 

A\vatoxrresrvara 

Yonvaw, WHO WOULD later become Great Master Wuzhu, asked [his 

senior dharma brother] Daowu, who would later become Great Master 
Xiuyi, “What does the bodhisattva of great compassion do with so 
many hands and eyes?” 

Daowu said, “Like someone reaching back for the pillow at night.” 

Yunyan said, “I got it. I got it.” 

Daowtu said, “What did you get?” 

Yunyan said, “All over the body are hands and eyes.” 

Daowu said, “You have said it well. But it’s eight or nine out of 
ten.” 

Yunyan said, “I am just this. How about yourself, brother?” 

Daowtu said, “Wherever the body reaches, it is hands and eyes.” 

Although there have been a number of statements about 
Avalokiteshvara before and after Yunyan and Daowu, they are not as 
good as the statements made by these two. If you want to study 
Avalokiteshvara, you should thoroughly investigate their words. 

The bodhisattva of great compassion is Avalokiteshvara—“One who 
perceives the cries of the world,” also called “One who has complete 
freedom in perceiving.” This bodhisattva is regarded as the parent of 
all buddhas. Do not assume that this bodhisattva has not mastered the 
way as much as buddhas. In fact, Avalokiteshvara was True Dharma 
Illumination Tathagata in a previous life. 

Study and focus on Yunyan’s words: What does the bodhisattva of 
great compassion do with so many hands and eyes? There are schools [of 
Buddhism] that cherish Avalokiteshvara, and schools that have no 
relationship with this bodhisattva. 

Yunyan had a connection with Avalokiteshvara and pondered the 
bodhisattva together with Daowu. Not only one or two, but hundreds 
and thousands of Avalokiteshvaras are with Yunyan. 

Yunyan and his dharma descendants alone make Avalokiteshvara 
truly Avalokiteshvara. How is this so? The Avalokiteshvara expressed 
by Yunyan is thoroughly expressed, while the Avalokiteshvara 
expressed by others is not. The Avalokiteshvara expressed by others 
merely has twelve faces. Yunyan’s Avalokiteshvara is not like that. 
The Avalokiteshvara expressed by others merely has one thousand 

hands and eyes. Yunyan’s Avalokiteshvara is not like that. The 
Avalokiteshvara expressed by others merely has eighty-four thousand 
hands and eyes. Yunyan’s Avalokiteshvara is not like that. How do we 
know this? 

The so many hands and eyes of the bodhisattva of great compassion 
expressed by Yunyan is not limited to eighty-four thousand hands and 
eyes, not to speak of such numbers as twelve or thirty-two or -three. 
So many means a great many. It is as many as possible, not limited to 
any number. As it is not limited to any number, it is not limited to 
beyond boundary and measure [not limited to the infinite]. Study the 
scale of so many in this way. It even goes beyond the boundary of 
beyond boundary and measure. 

When Yunyan asked this question, Daowu did not disapprove of it. 
He saw deep meaning in the question. 

Yunyan and Daowu studied shoulder to shoulder in Yaoshan’s 
community and journeyed together for forty years. Investigating 
ancient and new cases, they rejected incorrect views and confirmed 
each other’s understanding. Having been together like this, Yunyan 
presented his understanding on that day, and Daowu confirmed it. 

Know that the words many hands and eyes were equally expressed 
by these two ancient buddhas. The words many hands and eyes were 
studied simultaneously by Yunyan and Daowu. 

What does the bodhisattva of great compassion do? This is a question 
directed to Daowu. This question is not the same as that of the 
bodhisattvas of ten stages or three classes. This question brings forth 
an expression of understanding. It brings forth hands and eyes. 

As the question was presented—What does the bodhisattva of great 
compassion do with so many hands and eyes?—there are old buddhas 
and new buddhas who have become buddhas through the power of 
working on this question. The question can be “How does the 
bodhisattva use so many hands and eyes?” “How is it?” “How does the 
bodhisattva manage [so many hands and eyes]?” or “What do you 
say?” 

Daowu said, Like someone reaching back for the pillow at night. He 
meant that it is just like searching for the pillow at night. Reaching 
back means groping for it. At night means in utter darkness. It is as 
clear as “looking at a mountain in the daytime.” 

Using the hands and eyes is like someone reaching back for the pillow 
at night. Study the use of the hands and eyes in this way. Investigate a 
nighttime that is thought of in the daytime, and a nighttime 
experienced in the nighttime. Investigate a nighttime that is neither 
daytime nor nighttime. Someone reaching back for the pillow may not be 
understood as Avalokiteshvara using the hands and eyes, but there is 
no way to escape it. 

Is the so-called someone merely someone? Or is it an ordinary 
person, yet not ordinary? If you understand someone as an ordinary 
person in the buddha way, and do not take it as “merely someone,” 
then there is something to study about reaching back for the pillow. 

The pillow has a point that must be investigated. Night is not merely 
the night of the day and the night of humans and devas. Know that 
what is expressed here is not grabbing, pulling, or pushing the pillow. 

When you investigate Daowu’s words, reaching back for the pillow at 
night, see and don’t miss that there are eyes that can see the night. 
There is no limit to the hand reaching out for the pillow. If the hand 
reaches backward, is there an eye that can see what is behind? Clarify 
the meaning of an eye at night. 

Is this a world of eyes on hands? Is this someone who has eyes on 
hands? Do eyes and hands fly like a roar of thunder? Have the eyes 
and hands been working in one or many ways, from beginning to end? 

If you investigate the use of so many hands and eyes, the 
bodhisattva of great compassion may only appear to be a bodhisattva 
of hands and eyes. If someone questions this, say, “How does the 
bodhisattva of hands and eyes use so many bodhisattvas of great 
compassion?” 

Know that even though the hands and eyes do not hinder each 
other, how you use them is how you let them be used, and how you 
use them as they are. 

In understanding things as they are, the hands and eyes all over are 
never hidden, nor are they waiting for the moment of understanding 
the hands and eyes all over. Even though there are these or those hands 
and eyes that are not hidden, they are not the self, mountains or 
rivers, sun face or moon face, and not “Mind itself is buddha.” 

Yunyen said, I got it, I got it. He did not mean he understood 
Daowu’s words. The I got it, I got it makes his experience of the 
bodhisattva using the hands and eyes a true experience. Daowu used 
his words boundlessly just like this. He entered that very day 
boundlessly just like this. 

Daowu said, What did you get? This means that although Yunyan’s I 
got it does not hinder I got it, Daowu’s response was What did you get? 

Already there was I got it, and you got it. Is it not that the eyes got 
it, and the hands got it? Is I got it actualized or not actualized? 

While it is [true that it was] I who got it, it is [true that it was] you 
who were asked: What did you get? This requires investigation. 

Regarding Yunyan’s words All over the body are hands and eyes, 
when people lecture on reaching back for the pillow, many of them 
explain that there are hands and eyes all over Avalokiteshvara’s body. 
To describe Avalokiteshvara that way may be_ explaining 

Avalokiteshvara, but this is not thoroughly expressing the bodhisattva. 

Yunyan’s words All over the body are hands and eyes do not mean 
that there are hands and eyes all over Avalokiteshvara’s body. Even if 
all over means all over the world, the very body, hands, and eyes [of 
Avalokiteshvara] are not covered by this all over. Even if the body, 
hands, and eyes have the power to cover everything, they are not the 
hands and eyes that would confiscate goods from the marketplace. No 
views, practice, or words can exactly express the power of the hands 
and eyes. 

So many hands and eyes means more than one thousand, ten 
thousand, eighty-four thousand; more than beyond boundary and 
measure. This is not only so for All over the body are hands and eyes, 
but also for expounding dharma to awaken sentient beings, and for 
causing the land to radiate light. 

In this way, Yunyan’s words mean that all over the body are no 
other than hands and eyes. It is not that there are hands and eyes all 
over Avalokiteshvara’s body. Investigate this. Do not be surprised that 
Avalokiteshvara uses and manages the hands and eyes that are no 
other than all over the body. 

Daowu said: You have said it well. But it’s eight or nine out of ten. This 
means that Yunyan’s expression was well presented. You have said it 
well means Yunyan is right, and there is nothing unexpressed. If 
Daowu had meant that Yunyan did not express right understanding, 
he would only have said, It’s eight or nine out of ten. 

Study the true meaning of Daowu’s words. Even when someone 
expresses ten out of ten, if it is without mastery of the way, it is not 
complete. On the other hand, when what should be presented is 
presented, someone expressing eight or nine out of ten should be 
regarded as someone who has expressed ten out of ten. 

The moment of hitting the mark, which can be expressed in one 
hundred, one thousand, or ten thousand ways, Yunyan expressed in 
merely eight or nine out of ten with little effort. Truly, his capacity is 
wondrous. Bringing forth the entire world of the ten directions with 
one hundred, one thousand, or ten thousand efforts is better than 
bringing forth nothing. And yet, bringing it forth with a single effort is 
extraordinary. This is the meaning of You got eight or nine out of ten. 

However, hearing the buddha ancestor’s words—You got eight or 
nine out of ten—people assume that Yunyan expressed only eight or 
nine while he should have expressed ten out of ten. If buddha dharma 
were like that, it would not have reached today. The eight or nine is 
like one hundred or one thousand. It means so many. From one point 
of view, it means beyond eight or nine. You should study the dharma 
talks of buddha ancestors in this way. 

Yunyan said, I am just this. How about yourself? He said just this in 

response to Daowu’s You got eight or nine out of ten. It is like “I leave 
no trace” or “The arms are long but the sleeves are short” [the way as 
it is]. It is not that he said I am just this because he had not expressed 
his understanding well enough. 

Daowu said, Wherever the body reaches, it is hands and eyes. He did 
not mean that the hands and eyes reach as hands and eyes. The hands 
and eyes that reach wherever the body reaches is expressed as 
Wherever the body reaches, it is hands and eyes. 

Thus, Daowu did not say that the [Avalokiteshvara’s] body is hands 
and eyes. While using so many hands and eyes so many times, the 
hands and eyes are invariably Wherever the body reaches, it is hands and 
eyes. 

You might be asked, “How does the bodhisattva use so many bodies 
and minds?” Then you might say, “Wherever the body reaches, it is 
just this.” 

Between Yunyan’s all over the body and Daowu’s wherever the body 
reaches, it is not that one has expressed thoroughly and the other has 
not. Yunyan’s all over the body and Daowu’s wherever the body reaches 
cannot be compared to each other. Each one has expressed it 
thoroughly in regard to so many hands and eyes. 

In this way, the Avalokiteshvara expressed by Old Man Shakyamuni 
has only one thousand eyes, twelve faces, thirty-three bodies, or 
eighty-four thousand manifestations. Yunyan and Daowu’s 
Avalokiteshvara has numberless hands and eyes. However, it is not a 
question of more or less. When you practice the numberless hands and 
eyes of Avalokiteshvara, expressed by Yunyan and Daowu, all buddhas 
experience Avalokiteshvara’s samadhi eight or nine out of ten. 

Presented to the assembly on the twenty-sixth day, the fourth month, 
the third year of the Ninji Era [1242]. 

POSTSCRIPT 

Since buddha dharma was brought from India [to China], many 
buddha ancestors have talked about Avalokiteshvara, but none of 
them match Yunyan and Daowu. That is why I am presenting only this 
case now. 

Yongjia, Great Master Zhenjiao, said, “Not to see even one dharma 
is called a tathagata. This is the one who perceives with freedom 
[Avalokiteshvara].” 

This confirms that the Tathagata and Avalokiteshvara both reveal 
their own bodies, but they are not separate bodies. 

Mayu and Linji had understanding of the true hands and eyes. It is 
one of the many dialogues on Avalokiteshvara. 

Yunmen spoke of Avalokiteshvara who “sees form and clarifies the 
mind, hears sound and realizes the way.” 

Which form or sound does Avalokiteshvara not see or hear? 
Baizhang spoke of Avalokiteshvara “entering reality.” 

In the assembly described by the Shurangama Sutra, there is 
Avalokiteshvara of complete mastery. 

In the assembly described by the Lotus Sutra, there is 
Avalokiteshvara who manifests the universal gate. 

Avalokiteshvaras described by these ancients all work together with 
buddhas, mountains, rivers, and earth. Although working together 
with buddhas, mountains, rivers, and earth, these Avalokiteshvaras 
are still one or two manifestations of countless hands and eyes. 

Presented to the assembly on the twenty-sixth day, the fourth month, 
the third year of the Ninji Era [1242]. 

35 
Aguat 

[IT Is SAID IN the Lotus Sutra:] “An arhat is one who has transformed all 
afflictions, has no more delusion, has driven away self-interest, has 
removed all forms of bondage, and has achieved freedom of mind.” 

This is a great arhat, who has obtained the fourth and final fruit in 
practicing with the Buddha. This is a buddha arhat. 

Afflictions are a broken dipper with a missing handle, used a great 
many times. Has transformed all afflictions means that the entire body 
of the dipper has made a leap. Has driven away self-interest means 
coming in and out of the top of the head. Has removed all forms of 
bondage means nothing is hidden in the world of the ten directions. 
Freedom of mind can be understood as “flat in a high place and flat in a 
low place.” In this way, there are walls, tiles, and pebbles. Freedom 
means the undivided activity of mind that is actualized. Has no more 
delusion is not giving rise to delusions—delusion is obstructed by 
delusion. 

The miraculous powers, wisdom, meditation, dharma expounding, 
guidance, and radiating light of an arhat are not the same as those of 
people outside the way or heavenly demons. An arhat’s vision of one 
hundred buddha worlds is not similar to that of an ordinary person’s. 
One says that barbarians’ hair is red, while the other says that there 
are barbarians with red hair. 

Entering nirvana is an arhat’s practice of entering a fist. Thus, it is 
the wondrous heart of nirvana—there is no place to avoid. One who 
enters a nostril is a true arhat. One who has not entered a nostril is 
not an arhat. 

trees, walls, tiles, and pebbles. Those who sway, fall, prosper, and 
decline, and those who come and go in birth and death, all hear it. We 
will let the Buddha’s enlightened voice be heard by all should not be 
understood to mean merely that the entire world has ears. 

nuns think they have become arhats, attained their final bodies, and 
thoroughly experienced nirvana, so they do not seek unsurpassable, 
complete enlightenment. Such people are arrogant. It is groundless to 
be truly an arhat and not believe in unsurpassable, complete 
enlightenment.” 

To believe in unsurpassable, complete enlightenment is proof of 
being an arhat. To believe in unsurpassable, complete enlightenment 
is to be entrusted with it, to receive transmission of it person to 
person, and to practice and realize it. 

To be truly an arhat is not to attain the final body, or thoroughly 
experience nirvana, for an arhat does seek unsurpassable, complete 
enlightenment. To seek unsurpassable, complete enlightenment is to 
fool with an eyeball, to sit facing the wall, and to open the eye facing 
the wall. Although abiding in the all-inclusive realm, an arhat appears 
like a spirit and disappears like a demon. Although abiding in all time, 
there is a constant tossing back and forth of an insightful flash. 

This is called seeking unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. Thus, 
it is seeking to be an arhat. Seeking to be an arhat is to be satisfied 
with gruel, to be satisfied with cooked rice. 

while confusing common people and ignoring sages, grasping for 
benefit and looking for fame? This would only cause you to fall 
into an unceasing hell. 

Even if you do not have an opportunity to be active in the 
world, if you simply do not create causes that lead you to hell, 
you will be an arhat truly free from the dusty world. 

Thus, a patch-robed monk of genuine form is a true arhat free from 
the dusty world. If you want to know the characteristics of an arhat, it 
is just this. Do not be confused by words of treatises in India. Jiashan 
of China is a buddha ancestor who has received authentic 
transmission person to person. 

36 
Cyeress Tree 

Zinaoznov, WHO WOULD later become Great Master Zhenji, the thirty- 

seventh ancestor from Shakyamuni Tathagata, first aroused the 
aspiration for enlightenment at age sixty-one, and left home to study 
the way. 

At this time he vowed, “I will teach even a hundred-year-old person 
who has less understanding than I. I will inquire about the way even 
from a seven-year-old child who surpasses my understanding.” 

Having made this vow, he journeyed south. While asking about the 
way, he got to Mount Nanquan and bowed to Nanquan, Priest Puyuan. 

Nanquan was lying down in the abbot’s room. When he saw 
Zhaozhou, he asked, “Where are you from?” 

Zhaozhou said, “The Ruixiang [Auspicious Image] Monastery.” 

Nanquan asked, “Is there an auspicious image over there?” 

Zhaozhou replied, “There is no auspicious image, but there is a re 
clining Tathagata.” 

Hearing this, Nanquan sat up and said, “Are you a novice with a 
teacher?” 

Zhaozhou said, “Yes, I am a novice with a teacher.” 

Nanquan asked, “Who is your teacher?” 

Zhaozhou said, “It is still cold in early spring. I respectfully bow to 
you and wish you an auspicious life.” 

Nanquan called the practice coordinator and said, “Take care of this 
novice.” 

From that time, Zhaozhou stayed at Nanquan’s monastery without 
ever leaving. He endeavored in the way for thirty years, avoiding 
inessential activities, not wasting time. 

After receiving transmission of the way, he resided as abbot at the 
Guanyin Monastery in Zhao Region for thirty years. His abbacy was 
unique. One day he said: 

With an empty stomach I look at smoke rising from nearby 
kitchens. 

Having bidden farewell to dumplings and steamed bread last 
year, 

my mouth still waters thinking of them. 

There is little room for mindfulness but much for despair. 
From a hundred neighboring houses, no one gives to the 
monastery. 

Visitors come for tea, 

but not finding a treat, they leave unhappy. 

How pathetic! Zhaozhou’s monastery rarely even fired up its stove 
to boil plain rice. They hadn’t tasted various flavors for more than a 
year. One hundred neighbors came for tea; those who didn’t want tea 
stayed away. Visitors bringing gifts of tea come from outside the 
village. Even though monks were searching for a master, they might 
not be dragons and elephants remembering to bring food offerings. 

At another time Zhaozhou said: 

Reflecting on home leavers in the world, 

I wonder how many abbots like myself 

have only broken bamboo strips on a dirt bed. 

My pillow of woven willow twigs lacks a cover. 

There is no incense to offer to the sacred image. 

Only the smell of cow dung rises from the incense bowl. 

From these words you can feel the purity of Zhaozhou’s monastery. 
Learn from this excellent example. However, he did not have many 
monks, fewer than twenty, because it was difficult to follow such a 
practice. The monks’ hall was small, without front and back sitting 
platforms. No lanterns were lit at night and no charcoal burned in 
winter. You could call it a pitiable life for his old age. The pure 
practice of the old buddha was like this. 

Once, a leg of one of the sitting platforms broke. Zhaozhou replaced 
it with a burned stick that had rope tied around it. It was like that for 
some years. When a monastery officer wanted to repair it, Zhaozhou 
would not allow it. This is an unparalleled example throughout time. 

Usually there was no grain visible in the gruel, and hungry monks 
sat next to drafty windows. He and the assembly often picked nuts for 
their meals. 

Nowadays, we who follow his teaching admire his pure practice. 
Although we cannot come up to Zhaozhou’s standard, we keep it in 
mind, longing for the ancient way. 

Once, he said to the assembly, “I was in the south for thirty years 
engaged wholeheartedly in zazen. Students, if you want to realize the 
single great matter, clarify what is essential through zazen. If you 
practice three years, five years, twenty or thirty years, and still have 
not attained the way, you can cut off this old monk’s head and make a 
urine dipper from it.” 

This was his commitment. Indeed, endeavor in zazen is the straight 
path of the buddha way. Clarify the principle through sitting and 
seeing. 

Later someone commented: “Zhaozhou is an ancient buddha.” 

it is totally immersed. As it is totally immersed, “I have endeavored.” 
Because “I have endeavored,” I am not using an object. Then, with what 
does Zhaozhou teach? “I am like this.” 

such questions as: Is the cypress tree totally immersed in the cypress 
tree? Is buddha nature totally immersed in buddha nature? More than 
a few buddhas have explored these words, but not all those that have 
buddha faces investigate such words. Even among buddhas, there are 
some who can say them and some who cannot. 

The words When the sky falls to the ground do not refer to something 
impossible. Every time the cypress tree becomes buddha, the sky falls. 
Sounds of falling are not hidden, but are louder than hundreds and 
thousands of thunder strikes. The time when the cypress tree becomes 
buddha is provisionally within the twelve hours and yet is beyond the 
twelve hours. The sky that falls is not the same sky seen by ordinary 
people and sages, but an entirety of sky beyond that. Others do not 
see it. Zhaozhou alone sees it. 

The ground the sky falls to is not possessed by ordinary people or 
sages, but there is an entirety of ground beyond that. Light and 
shadow do not reach it. Zhaozhou alone reaches it. At the moment the 
sky falls, even the sun, moon, mountains, and rivers will face it. 

Who says that buddha nature unfailingly becomes buddha? Buddha 
nature is magnificence actualized after becoming buddha. Further, 
there is buddha nature that is born together and practiced together 
upon becoming buddha. 

Thus, the cypress tree and buddha nature are neither different 
sounds nor the same tune. That is to say, not necessarily either. What 
is this? Investigate thoroughly. 

Presented to the assembly of Kannondori Monastery, Uji County, 
Yamashiro Province, on the twenty-first day, the season of Iris 
Festival, the fifth month, the third year of the Ninji Era [1242]. 

37 
Raoiant Licur 

In A FORMAL talk, Changsha, Great Master Zhaoxian, of Hunan, Great 

Song China, said, “The entire world of the ten directions is a 
shramana’s [monk’s] single eye. The entire world of the ten directions 
is a shramana’s everyday speech. The entire world of the ten 
directions is a shramana’s entire body. The entire world of the ten 
directions is the radiant light of the self. The entire world of the ten 
directions is within the radiant light of the self. In the entire world of 
the ten directions, there is not a single person that is not the self.” 

Make sure to endeavor in the practice of the buddha way. Those 
who practice should not be coarse or distant. Even so, there have been 
few practitioners of the way who have mastered this radiant light. 

light of buddha ancestors. Who, then, was even aware of the radiant 
light of the self? Even though people had been carrying the radiant 
light within their heads and encountering it all the time, they still did 
not practice it as their own eyeballs. Thus, they do not clarify the 
shape and function of radiant light. Because they avoided 
encountering the radiant light, their radiant light was missing radiant 
light. Although missing is itself radiant light, they were immersed in 
missing. 

Those stinky skin bags who miss the point think that both buddha 
light and human light are red, white, blue, or yellow, like fire light or 
water light, pearl light or jewel light, the dragon king’s light, or sun or 
moon light. However hard they study with teachers and sutras, if they 
hear about the radiant light and think it must be like the way of a 
firefly, it is not the study with ultimate insight. There have been many 
like that from the Han, Sui, Tang, and Song dynasties until now. Do 
not study with such dharma teachers of letters. Do not listen to such 
confused views of meditation teachers. 

The radiant light of buddha ancestors spoken of here is the entire 
world of the ten directions, as well as all buddhas and all ancestors, 
only buddha and buddha, buddha light, and light buddha. Buddha 
ancestors maintain buddha ancestors as radiant light. They practice 
and realize this radiant light and become buddhas, sit as buddhas, and 
realize buddhas. 

This being so, it is said [in the Lotus Sutra], “This light illuminates 
the eighteen thousand eastern buddha lands.” These words are radiant 
light. This light is buddha light. Illuminating the east is the east 
illuminating. This east is not the east of the common world; it is the 
center of the world of phenomena, in the middle of the fist. Although 
it covers the east, the radiant light is eight ryo [ounces]. Study that 
there is east in this land and in other lands, and that there is east in 
the east. 

In regard to the eighteen thousand, ten thousand is half a fist, half 
this mind. It is not necessarily thousands. It is not tens of thousands or 
one million. The buddha land is within an eyeball. To see and hear the 
words illuminates the eighteen thousand eastern buddha lands, and to 
assume it is like extending a piece of white silk toward the east, is not 
the study of the way. The entire world of the ten directions is just the 
east. The east is called the entire world of the ten directions. This 
being so, there is the entire world of the ten directions. The words that 
express the entire world of the ten directions are heard by the eighteen 
thousand buddha lands. 

Emperor Xiang of the Tang Dynasty was the father of Emperors Mu 
and Xuan, and the grandfather of Emperors Jing, Wen, and Wu. On 
the night when he held a ceremony revering the Buddha’s relics in the 
palace, a radiant light appeared. Xiang was delighted. Most of his 
courtiers congratulated him the following morning. 

But there was a courtier called Han Yu, whose given name was 
Tuizhi, with the posthumous name Lord Wen. He had been studying 
as a lay student of buddha ancestors. He did not express 
congratulations. 

Emperor Xian said, “All other courtiers are congratulating me. My 
lord, why do you alone not do so?” 

Han Yu said, “I have read in Buddhist literature that buddha light is 
not blue, yellow, red, or white. It must have been the light of a 
guardian dragon god.” 

The Emperor said, “What is buddha light?” 

Han Yu was silent. 

Han Yu was a layperson who had a courageous spirit. He was a 
person turning the heavens and turning the earth. To study as he did 
is the beginning study of the way. Not to study in this way is to go 
against the way. Even if one expounds a sutra and causes heavenly 
flowers to rain down, if one does not get to this point, it is a vain 
endeavor. Even if bodhisattvas of the ten stages and three classes 
speak with the same voice as Han Yu, that is the aspiration for 
enlightenment, and that is practice-realization. 

Yet, there is something Han Yu did not understand about Buddhist 
literature. How did he study the words that buddha light is not blue, 
yellow, red, or white? If he had the ability to see that what is blue, 
yellow, red, or white is not buddha light, he should not see buddha 
light as blue, yellow, red, or white. If Emperor Xiang had been a 
buddha ancestor, he would have challenged him in this way. 

Thus, bright radiant light is one hundred grasses. The radiant light 
of one hundred grasses cannot give or take roots, stems, branches, and 
leaves as well as flowers, fruits, light, and colors. 

There is radiant light of the five paths, there is radiant light of the 
six paths. Where there is, how would you talk about the light and the 
radiance? How do the mountains and rivers appear all of a sudden? 

Study closely Changsha’s words, The entire world of the ten directions 
is the radiant light of the self. Study that radiant light is the self of the 
entire world of the ten directions. 

The coming and going of birth and death are the coming and going 
of radiant light. Going beyond ordinary and sacred is the blue and red 
of radiant light. Becoming a buddha and becoming an ancestor are the 
black and yellow of radiant light. It is not that there is no practice- 

realization; it is just defilement [expression] of radiant light. Grass, 
trees, tiles, and walls, as well as skin, flesh, bones, and marrow are the 
red and white of radiant light. Haze, mist, water, and rocks, as well as 
the path of a bird and the profound way, are rotating circles of radiant 
light. 

To see and hear the radiant light of the self are the actual 
realization of encountering buddha, the actual realization of seeing 
the Buddha. 

The entire world of the ten directions is the self. This self is the 
entire world of the ten directions. There is no way to avoid it. Even if 
there is a way to avoid it, it is the vital path of going beyond the self. 
The skull right now is seven feet tall. That is the shape, the form of the 
entire world of the ten directions. The entire world of the ten 
directions practiced and realized in the buddha way is the skull and 
skeleton, as well as skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. 

where each and every radiant light embodies radiant light. There is 
embodiment where each and every embodiment embodies. There is 
each and every where each and every [self] embodies each and every. 

Thus, know that the radiant light that each and every person 
embodies is each and every person that is actualized. It is each and 
every person that each and every light embodies. 

Let me ask you, Yunmen, “What do you call each and every person? 
What do you call radiant light?” 

Yunmen said, Then, what is each and every person’s radiant light? This 
question is radiant light; it is a statement that kills doubt. Thus, each 
and every person who responds to it is a person of radiant light. 

No one in the assembly answered. Even if they had had hundreds and 
thousands of statements to make, they chose to express themselves by 
not responding. This is the treasury of the true dharma eye, the 
wondrous heart of nirvana, authentically transmitted by buddha 
ancestors. 

Yunmen spoke for them: The monks’ hall, the buddha hall, the kitchen, 
and the monastery gate. Spoke for them means Yunmen spoke for 
himself, he spoke for the assembly, he spoke for the radiant light, he 
spoke for the monks’ hall, the buddha hall, the kitchen, and the 
monastery gate. 

However, what did he call the buddha hall, the kitchen, and the 
monastery gate? He may not have called the whole assembly of 
monks, as well as everyone else, the buddha hall, the kitchen, and the 
monastery gate. How many buddha halls, kitchens, and monastery 
gates did he mean? Which is Yunmen, the Seven Original Buddhas, 
the four times seven [twenty-eight Indian ancestors], the two times 
three [the first six Chinese ancestors], the fist, or the nostril? 

Even if the buddha hall, the kitchen, and the monastery gate are 
buddha ancestors, they cannot avoid being each and every person. 
Thus, there is no each and every person [that does not embody radiant 
light]. In this way, there is no buddha in the hall of being buddha, no 
buddha in the hall of being no buddha. There is buddha of being light, 
buddha of no light, no buddha light, and being buddha light. 

aside being in front of the monks’ hall for the moment, at which Land 
View Pavilion or Crow Stone Peak did Xuefeng meet each and every 
person?” 

Ehu quickly walked back to the abbot’s quarters. 

Baofu entered the monks’ hall. 

This is the emergence of an outstanding statement. This is the 
meaning of meeting. This is meeting the monks’ hall. 

Dizang, Great Master Zheying of the Dizang Monastery, said, “The 
tenzo [head cook] enters the kitchen.” 

This statement reaches a time long before the Seven Original 
Buddhas. 

Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery 
at the fourth segment of the third night period, the second day, the 
sixth month, the third year of the Ninji Era [1242]. It has been 
raining for a long time, and raindrops keep dripping from the eaves. 
Where is the radiant light? The assembly must look and break through 
Yunmen’s words. 

38 
Bopy-axo- Mino Srupy OF THE Way 

Wrrnour PRACTICE, THE buddha way cannot be attained. Without 

study, it remains remote. 

Nanyue, Zen Master Dahui, said, “It is not that there is no practice 
and no realization; it is just that they cannot be divided.” 

Not to study the buddha way is to fall into the realm of outsiders 
and those without enlightenment. All preceding and succeeding 
buddhas without exception practice the buddha way. 

two or three bushels. Those who have tampered with it by karma- 
consciousness are thousands and millions of pieces. 

When you study the way in this manner, having merit, the result 
may come of itself; having the result, merit may not arrive. You will 
secretly borrow the nostrils of buddha ancestors and have them 
exhale; taking up the hoof of a donkey, you will have it imprint the 
seal of enlightenment. These are authentic examples of the ancient 
tradition. 

nor nonexistent. To study in this manner—understanding that home is 
no home, abandoning home, and entering the homeless life—is not 
measurable as large or small, near or far. It is beyond beginning or 
end, beyond ascending or descending. Unrolling the matter, it is seven 
or eight feet. Responding immediately, it benefits the self and others. 
All this is nothing but the study of the way. 

“Bits and pieces of straightforward mind” means all the bits and 
pieces moment after moment are straightforward mind. Not only one 
or two pieces, but all bits and pieces. The lotus leaf is completely 
round, round as a mirror. The tip of the water chestnut is extremely 
sharp, sharp as a gimlet. 

Although straightforward mind resembles a mirror, it is bits and 
pieces. Even if it resembles a gimlet, it is bits and pieces. 

body. 

To turn this body around, abandoning the ten unwholesome actions, 
keeping the eight precepts, taking refuge in the three treasures, and 
leaving home and entering the homeless life, is the true study of the 
way. For this reason it is called the true human body. Those who 
follow this must not be like outsiders who hold the view of 
spontaneous enlightenment. 

world in the monks’ hall and the buddha hall. In this way the human 
body is constructed, and such construction comes from the human 
body. This is the meaning of “The entire world of the ten directions is 
the true human body.” Do not follow the mistaken views of 
spontaneous or natural enlightenment. 

Because it is not in the realm of the measurable, the true human 
body is not broad or narrow. The entire world of the ten directions is 
eighty-four thousand dharma-expounding skandhas, eighty-four 
thousand samadhis, and eighty-four thousand dharanis. 

Because the eighty-four thousand dharma-expounding skandhas are 
turning the dharma wheel, the moment the dharma wheel is turned, 
the true human body covers the whole universe and extends 
throughout all time. It is not that the true human body is unlimited; 
the true human body is just the true human body. At this moment it is 
you, at this moment it is I, that is the true human body, the entire 
world of the ten directions. Study the way without missing these 
points. 

Even if you were to renounce the body or accept the body for three 
great eons, for thirteen great eons, or for innumerable eons, by all 
means this is the moment to study the way, to study the way 
backward and forward. 

To bow all the way to the floor and to bow standing is awesome 
presence in motion and stillness. Painting a decayed tree and polishing 
a brick of dead ash continue without stopping. Even though calendar 
days are short and urgent, study of the way in this manner is profound 
and deep. 

Although the life of those who have abandoned home and entered 
the homeless realm may appear bleak and lonely, it should not be 
confused with that of worldly woodcutters. Even if home leavers are 
continually active, their life is not the same as that of farmers. In the 
study of the true human body, do not get caught up in discussions of 
delusion or enlightenment, good or bad. Do not stay in the realm of 
wrong or right, true or false. 

“Coming and going of birth and death is the true human body” 
means that even though birth-and-death is where ordinary people drift 
about, it is where great sages are liberated. Merely going beyond the 
ordinary and surpassing the sage is not the true human body. 
Although there are two or seven kinds of birth and death, when they 
are thoroughly mastered they are not to be feared, as each one of 
them is nothing but birth and death. How is this so? Not abandoning 
birth, you see death. Not abandoning death, you see birth. Birth does 
not hinder death. Death does not hinder birth. 

Neither birth nor death is known by ordinary people. Birth is like a 
cypress tree. Death is like an iron person. Even if a cypress tree were 

to hinder a cypress tree, birth is never hindered by death. Accordingly, 
birth and death are the study of the way. Birth is not like one sheet of 
cloth; death is not like two rolls of cloth. Death is not the opposite of 
birth; birth does not precede death. 

39 
Whi a Dream Exxpressine THE Dream 

Tie PATH of all buddhas and ancestors arises before the first forms 

emerge; it cannot be spoken of using conventional views. This being 
so, in the realm of buddha ancestors there is the active power of 
buddhas going beyond buddhas. Since this realm is not a matter of the 
passage of time, their lives are neither long nor short, neither quick 
nor slow. This cannot be judged in an ordinary manner. Thus, the 
dharma wheel has been set to turn since before the first sign of forms 
emerged. The great merit needs no reward, and becomes the 
guidepost for all ages. Within a dream this is the dream you express. 
Because awakening is seen within awakening, the dream is expressed 
within a dream. 

The place where the dream is expressed within a dream is the land 
and the assembly of buddha ancestors. The buddhas’ lands and their 
assemblies, the ancestors’ way and their seats, are awakening 
throughout awakening, and express the dream within a dream. When 
you meet such speech and expressions, do not regard them as other 
than the buddhas’ assembly; it is buddha turning the dharma wheel. 
This dharma wheel encompasses all the ten directions and the eight 
facets of a clear crystal, and so the great oceans, Mount Sumeru, the 
lands, and all buddhas are actualized. This is the dream expressed 
within a dream, prior to all dreams. 

Every dewdrop manifested in every realm is a dream. This dream is 
the glowing clarity of the hundred grasses. What requires questioning 
is this very point. What is confusing is this very point. At this time, 
there are dream grasses, grasses within, expressive grasses, and so on. 
When we study this, then roots, stems, branches, leaves, flowers, and 
fruits, as well as radiance and color, are all the great dream. Do not 
mistake them as merely dreamy. 

However, those who do not wish to study buddha dharma believe 
that expressing the dream within a dream means speaking of unreal 
dream grass as real, like piling delusion upon delusion. But this is not 
true. When you say, “Within confusion is just confusion,” still you 
should follow the path in the vast sky known as “delusion throughout 
delusion.” You should endeavor to investigate just this thoroughly. 

within a dream. Without expressing dreams, there are no buddhas. 
Without being within a dream, buddhas do not emerge and turn the 
wondrous dharma wheel. This dharma wheel is no other than a 
buddha together with a buddha, and a dream expressed within a 
dream. Simply expressing the dream within a dream is itself buddhas 
and ancestors, the assembly of unsurpassable enlightenment. 
Furthermore, going beyond the dharma body is itself expressing the 
dream within a dream. 

Here is the encounter of a buddha with a buddha. No attachments 
are needed to the head, eyes, marrow, and brain, or body, flesh, 
hands, and feet. Without attachment, one who buys gold sells gold. 
This is called the mystery of mysteries, the wonder of wonders, the 
awakening of awakenings, the head top above the head. This is the 
daily activity of buddha ancestors. When you study this head top, you 
may think that the head only means a human skull, without 
understanding that it is the crown of Vairochana Buddha. How can 
you realize it as the tips of the bright, clear hundred grasses? Who 
knows that this is the head as it is? 

Since ancient times the phrase “the head top placed above the 
head” has been spoken. Hearing this phrase, foolish people think that 
it cautions against adding something extra. Usually they refer to 
something that should not occur when they say, “How can you add a 
head on top of a head?” Actually, isn’t this a mistake? 

The expression of the dream within a dream can be aroused by both 
ordinary people and sages. Moreover, the expression of the dream 
within a dream by both ordinary people and sages arose yesterday and 
develops today. Know that yesterday’s expression of the dream within 
a dream was the recognition of this expression as expressing the 
dream within a dream. The present expression of the dream within a 
dream is to experience right now this expression as expressing the 
dream within a dream. Indeed, this is the marvelous joy of meeting a 
buddha. 

We should regret that, although the dream of the buddha ancestors’ 
bright hundred grass tops is apparent, clearer than a hundred 
thousand suns and moons, the ignorant do not see it. What a pity! The 
head that is “the head placed above the head” is exactly the head tops 
of a hundred grasses, thousands of types of heads, the ten thousand 
kinds of heads, the heads throughout the body, the heads of the entire 
world unconcealed, the heads of the entire world of the ten directions, 
the heads of teacher and student that join in a single phrase, the head 
top of a one-hundred-foot pole. “Placing” and “above” in “placing the 
head top above the head” are both heads. Study and investigate this. 

Thus, the passage “All buddhas and their unsurpassable, complete 

enlightenment emerge from this [Diamond] sutra” is exactly 
expressing the dream within a dream, which has always been the head 
placed atop the head. This sutra, while expressing the dream within a 
dream, brings forth buddhas with their unsurpassed enlightenment. 
These buddhas, with their enlightenment, in turn speak this sutra, 
which is the established expression of the dream within a dream. 

As the cause of a dream is not obscure, the effect of the dream is not 
ignored. This is indeed one mallet striking one thousand or ten 
thousand blows, one thousand or ten thousand mallets striking one or 
half a blow. As it is so, a thing of suchness expresses the dream within 
a dream; a person of suchness expresses the dream within a dream. A 
thing beyond suchness expresses the dream within a dream; a person 
beyond suchness expresses the dream within a dream. This 
understanding has been acknowledged as crystal clear. What is called 
“talking all day long about a dream within a dream” is no other than 
the actual expression of the dream within a dream. 

point. When you attain balanced equilibrium, you will see the balance 
point. Achieving balance does not depend on the objects being 
weighed, on the balancing scale, or on the activity of weighing, but 
just hangs on emptiness. Thus, deeply consider that without attaining 
balance you do not experience solidity. Just hanging on its own in 
emptiness, the expression of the dream within a dream allows objects 
to float free in emptiness. Within emptiness, stable balance is 
manifested. Stable balance is the great way of the balance scale. While 
suspending emptiness and suspending objects, whether as emptiness 
or as forms, expression of the dream within a dream brings level 
balance. 

There is no liberation other than expression of the dream within a 
dream. The dream is the entire great earth; the entire great earth is 
stable. Thus, the inexhaustibility of turning the head and pivoting the 
brain [actualizing freedom] is just your awakening of the dream 
within a dream—identifying with and actualizing the dream within a 
dream. 

one will produce great benefit, 
like the merit just described. 

Study this discourse of the Buddha, and thoroughly investigate this 
buddha assembly of the buddhas [in the Lotus Sutra]. This dream of 
buddhas is not an analogy. As the wondrous dharma of all buddhas is 
mastered only by a buddha together with a buddha, all dharmas 
awakened in the dream are genuine forms. In awakening there is 
aspiration, practice, enlightenment, and nirvana. Within the dream 
there is aspiration, practice, enlightenment, and nirvana. Every 
awakening within a dream is the genuine form, without regard to 
large or small, superior or inferior. 

However, on hearing the words in the passage, In the dream you are 
made king, people in the past and present mistakenly think that, due to 
the power of expounding this foremost dharma, mere night dreams may 
become like this dream of buddhas. Those who think like this have 
not yet clarified the Buddha’s discourse. 

Awakening and dreaming are from the beginning one suchness, the 
genuine reality. The buddha dharma, even if it were an analogy, is the 
genuine reality. As it is not an analogy, made king in the dream is the 
reality of the buddha dharma. 

Shakyamuni Buddha and all buddhas and ancestors each arouse the 
mind, cultivate practice, and attain universal true awakening within a 
dream. This being so, the Buddha’s path of transforming the Saha 
World throughout his lifetime is indeed created in a dream. 

In search of the way, after seven days is the measure of attained 
buddha wisdom. As for what is described, Turning the dharma wheel . . 
. throughout thousands of millions of kalpas . . . liberating innumerable 
sentient beings—these fluctuations within a dream cannot be traced. 

All buddhas, with bodies of golden hue, splendidly adorned with a 
hundred auspicious marks, hear the dharma and expound it for others. 
Such is the fine dream that ever occurs. These words clearly show that 
this fine dream is illuminated as all buddhas. 

There is the ever occurring of the Tathagata’s words; it is not only 
hundreds of years of dreaming. Expounding it for others is manifesting 
the body. Hearing the dharma is hearing sounds with the eye, and with 
the mind. It is hearing sounds in the old nest, and before the empty 
kalpa. 

Since it is said that All buddhas, with bodies of golden hue, splendidly 
adorned with a hundred auspicious marks, we can directly realize 
beyond any doubt that this fine dream is itself all buddhas with bodies. 
Although within awakening the buddhas’ transformations never cease, 
the buddha ancestors’ emergence is itself the creation of a dream 
within a dream. Be mindful of not slandering the buddha dharma. 

When you practice not slandering the buddha dharma, this path of the 
tathagatas is immediately actualized. 

Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery, 
Uji County, Yamashiro Province, on the twenty-first day, the ninth 
month, the third year of the Ninji Era [1242]. 

40 

Expressions 

Au BUDDHAS AND ancestors are expressions. Thus, when buddha 

ancestors intend to select buddha ancestors, they always ask, “Do you 
have your expression?” 

This question is asked with the mind and with the body. It is asked 
with a walking stick or a whisk. It is asked with a pillar or a lantern. 
Those who are not buddha ancestors do not ask this and do not 
answer this, since they are not in the position to do so. 

Such an expression is not obtained by following others or by the 
power of oneself. Where there is a thorough inquiry of a buddha 
ancestor, there is an expression of a buddha ancestor. 

Within the expression, those in the past practiced and became 
thoroughly realized; you in the present pursue and endeavor in the 
way. When you pursue a buddha ancestor as a buddha ancestor, and 
understand the buddha ancestor’s expression, this expression 
spontaneously becomes the practice of three years, eight, thirty, or 
forty years. It makes an utmost effort, and creates an expression. 

affirm the dropping away. When you intend to get to the dropping 
away as an ultimate treasure place, this intention is a manifestation 
[of the expression]. So, at this very moment, an expression is 
actualized without being waited for. Although this is not an effort of 
the mind or the body, a spontaneous expression arises. When it is 
expressed, you won’t feel unfamiliar or suspicious. 

And yet, when you express such an expression, you beyond-express 
a beyond-expression. Even if you recognize that you express within an 
expression, if you do not thoroughly realize beyond-expression as 
beyond-expression, it is not yet the face of a buddha ancestor, nor is it 
a buddha ancestor’s bones and marrow. 

In this way, how can the expression of bowing three times and 
standing in the original position [by Huike] be the same as an 
expression of those who view the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow [as 
separate from one another]? The expression of those who view the 
skin, flesh, bones, and marrow cannot touch or include the expression 
of bowing three times and standing in the original position. An 
encounter of you with other as an encounter of separate beings 
remains an encounter of other with you as an encounter of separate 
beings. 

You have expression and beyond-expression. Other has expression 
and beyond-expression. Expression has you and other. Beyond- 
expression has you and other. 

without speaking is something buddha eyes cannot see, buddha power 
cannot pull away, and buddhas cannot question. 

What Zhaozhou meant is that the expression of beyond-expression 
in steadfast sitting is why buddhas cannot call the person speechless 
or beyond speechless. Thus, not leaving the monastery for a lifetime is 
not leaving expression for a lifetime. Sitting steadfastly without 
speaking for five or six years is expression for five or six years. 

It is not leaving beyond-expression for a lifetime, or expression 
beyond attainment for five or six years. It is cutting through one 
hundred, one thousand buddhas, by sitting. It is one hundred, one 
thousand buddhas cutting through you by sitting. 

This being so, what is expressed by buddha ancestors is not leaving 
the monastery for a lifetime. Even if you are speechless, you have 
expression. Do not assume that a speechless person cannot express. 

It is not that one who can express is not speechless. A speechless 
person can also express. The speechless voice is heard. Listen to the 
speechless voice. 

Without being a speechless person, how can you encounter a 
speechless person, how can you speak with someone who is 
speechless? When you are already a speechless person, how do you 
encounter one, how do you speak with one? Investigate in this way 
and thoroughly study someone who is speechless. 

Be aware of this statement. Xuefeng’s words sound like he would 
not shave the hermit’s head if the hermit had expression. How is it? Is 
it that if the expression was truly expression, Xuefeng would not shave 
the hermit’s head? You should listen to this expression with the power 
of listening. Speak about it to those who have the power of listening. 

Hearing Xuefeng’s words, the hermit washed his head and came 
back to Xuefeng. Is this bringing expression or beyond-expression? 

Xuefeng shaved the hermit’s head. 

This story is indeed like the emergence of an udumbara blossom— 
rare to encounter and rare to hear. It is beyond the realm of seven or 
ten sages. It is beyond the understanding of three or seven wisdom 
beings. Teachers of sutras and treatises or practitioners of supernormal 
powers cannot measure it. To encounter the emergence of a buddha is 
to hear a story such as this. 

Now, what is the meaning of Xuefeng’s words, If you have expression, 
I will not shave your head? When people who have not yet attained 
expression hear this, those with capacity may be astonished and those 
without may be confused. 

Xuefeng did not ask the hermit about a buddha, and the hermit did 
not speak of the way. Xuefeng did not ask him about samadhi, and the 
hermit did not speak of dharani. Although Xuefeng’s words may have 
sounded like a question, they were expression. Examine this 
thoroughly. 

In this situation, when the hermit was challenged by Xuefeng’s 
expression, he was not confused, because he had genuine 
understanding. Without hiding his style of practice, he washed his 
head and came back to Xuefeng. This is a dharma realization that 
even a buddha with buddha wisdom cannot get near. It is emergence 
of a [buddha] body, expounding of dharma, awakening of sentient 
beings, and coming with a washed head. 

If Xuefeng had not been a true person, he would have thrown down 
the razor and burst into laughter. However, he was a true person with 
great capacity, so he shaved the hermit’s head. 

Indeed, if Xuefeng and the hermit had not been “only a buddha and 
a buddha,” it would not have happened this way. If they had not been 
one buddha in two buddhas, it would not have happened this way. If 
they had not been a dragon and a dragon, it would not have happened 
this way. Although a dragon’s pearl is tirelessly spared by the dragon, 
it naturally falls into the hand of a person of understanding. 

Know that Xuefeng checked out the hermit and the hermit 
encountered Xuefeng. With expression and beyond-expression, one got 
his head shaved and the other shaved his head. 

Thus, good friends of expression have a way to visit unexpectedly. 

Friends beyond-expression have a place to be acquainted without 
expectation. Where there is the practice of getting acquainted, 
expression is actualized. 

Written and presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin 
Monastery on the fifth day, the tenth month, the third year of the 
Ninji Era [1242]. 

41 
Pamnne OFA Rice Cae 

Au. BUDDHAS ARE realization; thus all things are realization. Yet, no 

buddhas or things have the same characteristics; none have the same 
mind. Although there are no identical characteristics or minds, at the 
moment of your actualization, numerous actualizations manifest 
without hindrance. At the moment of your manifestation, numerous 
manifestations come forth without touching one another. This is the 
straightforward teaching of the ancestors. 

Do not use the measure of oneness or difference as the criterion of 
your study. Thus, it is said, “To reach one thing is to reach myriad 
things.” 

To reach one thing does not take away its inherent characteristics. 
Just as reaching does not make one thing separate, it does not make 
one thing not separate. To try to make it not different is a hindrance. 
When you allow reaching to be unhindered by reaching, one reaching 
is myriad reachings. One reaching is one thing. Reaching one thing is 
reaching myriad things. 

the ancestors’ teaching; it obscures the words of the buddha ancestors. 
If you do not understand this one buddha’s phrase, who could 
acknowledge that you have thoroughly understood the words of other 
buddhas? 

To say A painting of a rice cake does not satisfy hunger is like saying, 
“to refrain from unwholesome action and do wholesome action.” It is 
like saying, “What is it that thus comes?” It is like saying, “I am 
always intimate with this.” Investigate it in this way. 

There are few who have even seen through this painting of a rice 
cake, and none of them has thoroughly understood it. How is this so? 
When I inquired of a few skin bags in the past, they had never 
questioned or investigated this matter. They were unconcerned with 
it, as if it were someone else’s gossip. 

Know that a painted rice cake is your face after your parents were 
born, your face before your parents were born. Thus, although it is 
neither born nor unborn, the moment when a painted rice cake is 
made of rice flour is the moment of actualizing of the way. Do not see 
this moment as affected by the limited view that a painted rice cake 
comes and goes. 

The paints for painting rice cakes are the same as those used for 
painting mountains and waters. For painting mountains and waters, 
blue and red paints are used; for painting rice cakes, rice flour is used. 
Thus, they are painted in the same way, and they are examined in the 
same way. 

Accordingly, painted rice cake spoken of here means that sesame rice 
cakes, herb rice cakes, milk rice cakes, toasted rice cakes, millet rice 
cakes, and the like are all actualized in the painting. Thus, understand 
that a painting is all-inclusive, a rice cake is all-inclusive, things are 
all-inclusive. In this way, all rice cakes actualized right now are 
nothing but a painted rice cake. 

If you look for some other kind of painted rice cake, you will never 
find it, you will never grasp it. A painted rice cake at once appears 
and does not appear. This being so, it has no mark of old or young, 
and has no trace of coming or going. Just here, the land of painted 
rice cakes is revealed and confirmed. 

The phrase does not satisfy hunger means this hunger, not the 
ordinary matter of the twelve hours, never encounters a painted rice 
cake. Even if you were to eat a painted rice cake, it would never put 
an end to this hunger. Rice cakes are not separate from hunger. Rice 
cakes are not separate from rice cakes. Thus, these activities and 
teachings cannot be given away. Hunger is a single staff maneuvered 
horizontally and vertically through a thousand changes and myriad 
forms. A rice cake is the wholeness of body and mind actualized. A 

rice cake is blue, yellow, red, and white as well as long, short, square, 
and round. 

Yunmen said, “A sesame rice cake.” 

Quietly examine these words. When this sesame rice cake is 
actualized, an ancient teacher gives expression to going beyond 
buddhas and surpassing the ancestors. An iron person asks this 
question and students understand it. Thus, this expression is complete. 
Unrolling the matter and hurling insightful flashes as a sesame rice 
cake is itself two or three painted rice cakes. Yunmen’s is a statement 
that goes beyond buddhas and surpasses ancestors—an activity that 
enters buddhas and enters demons. 

Now, the fluctuations of the tall bamboo and the plantain are a 
painting. Those who experience great awakening upon hearing the 
sound of bamboo, whether they are snakes or dragons [ordinary or 
extraordinary practitioners], are all paintings. Do not doubt it with the 
limited view that separates ordinary from sacred. 

That bamboo pole is just long. This pole is just short. This pole is 
just long. That pole is just short. As these are all paintings, the painted 
forms of long and short always accord with each other. When you 
paint something long, you cannot help painting something short. 
Thoroughly investigate the meaning of this. As the entire world and 
all phenomena are a painting, human existence appears from a 
painting, and buddha ancestors are actualized from a painting. 

42 
Unowwen Acrwiry 

Tue GREAT way Of all buddhas, thoroughly practiced, is emancipation 
and realization. 

“Emancipation” means that in birth [life] you are emancipated from 
birth [life], and in death you are emancipated from death. Thus, there 
is detachment from birth-and-death and penetration of birth-and- 
death. Such is the complete practice of the great way. There is letting 
go of birth-and-death and vitalizing birth-and-death. Such is the 
thorough practice of the great way. 

“Realization” is birth; birth is realization. At the time of realization 
there is nothing but birth totally actualized, nothing but death totally 
actualized. 

Such activity makes birth wholly birth and death wholly death. 
Actualized just so at this moment, this activity is neither large nor 
small, neither immeasurable nor measurable, neither remote nor near. 
Birth right now is undivided activity. Undivided activity is birth right 
now. 

Birth neither comes nor goes. Birth neither appears nor is already 
existing. Thus, birth is totally manifested and death is totally 
manifested. 

Know that there are innumerable beings in yourself, where there is 
birth and there is death. 

Quietly think over whether birth and all things that arise together 
with birth are inseparable or not. There is neither a moment nor a 
thing that is apart from birth. There is neither an object nor a mind 
that is apart from birth. 

Birth is just like riding in a boat. You raise the sails and you steer. 
Although you maneuver the sail and the pole, the boat gives you a 
ride, and without the boat you couldn’t ride. But you ride in the boat, 
and your riding makes the boat what it is. Investigate a moment such 
as this. At just such a moment, there is nothing but the world of the 
boat. The sky, the water, and the shore are all the boat’s world, which 
is not the same as a world that is not the boat’s. Thus, you make birth 
what it is, you make birth your birth. 

When you ride in a boat, your body, mind, and environs together 

are the undivided activity of the boat. The entire earth and the entire 
sky are both the undivided activity of the boat. Thus, birth is nothing 
but you; you are nothing but birth. 

43 
Tu Moon 

Fuity ACTUALIZING MOONS is not limited to “three three before” [moons 

on the first nine days of a lunar-calendar month] or “three three after” 
[moons on the last days of a month]. Moons fully actualized are not 
limited to “three three before” or “three three after.” 

Since this is so, Shakyamuni Buddha said, “Buddha’s true dharma 
body as it is, is open sky. In response to things, forms appear. Thus is 
the moon in water.” 

The thusness of Thus is the moon in water is the moon in water. It is 
water thusness, moon thusness, thusness within, within thusness. Thus 
does not mean “like something.” Thus means exactly. 

Buddha’s true dharma body is the as it is of open sky. This open sky 
is the as it is of buddha’s true dharma body. Because it is buddha’s true 
dharma body, the entire earth, the entire universe, all phenomena, 
and all appearances are open sky. Hundreds of grasses and myriad 
forms—each appearing as it is—are nothing but buddha’s true dharma 
body, thusness of the moon in water. 

The time when the moon appears is not necessarily night. Night is 
not necessarily dark. Do not be limited to the narrow views held by 
human beings. Even where there is no sun or moon, there is day and 
night. Sun and moon are not day and night; each is as it is. 

The moon is not one moon or two moons, not thousands of moons 
or myriads of moons. Even if the moon itself holds the view of one 
moon or two moons, that is merely the moon’s view. It is not 
necessarily the words or understanding of the buddha way. 

Even if you say, “There was a moon last night,” the moon you see 
tonight is not last night’s moon. Thoroughly study that tonight’s 
moon, from beginning to end, is tonight’s moon. Although there is a 
moon, it is neither new nor old, because a moon succeeds in a moon. 

What is said here is that buddha ancestors and buddha heirs always 
have the mind moon, because they make moon their mind. There is no 
mind that is not moon, and there is no moon that is not mind. 

Alone and full means nothing lacking. Beyond two or three is called 
myriad forms. Myriad forms are moonlight, not merely forms. 
Accordingly, Its light swallows myriad forms. Myriad forms completely 
swallow moonlight. Here moonlight swallowing moonlight is called Its 
light swallows myriad forms. That is to say, the moon swallows the 
moon, the moonlight swallows the moon. Therefore, it is said, 
Moonlight does not illuminate objects. Objects do not exist. 

Since this is so, at the moment of awakening others with a buddha 
body, a buddha body comes forth and expounds dharma; at the 
moment of awakening others with the boundless body, the boundless 
body manifests and expounds dharma. This is nothing but turning the 
dharma wheel within the moon. No matter whether the yin spirit or 
the yang spirit illuminates, no matter whether the moon is a fire jewel 
or a water jewel, a buddha body is immediately actualized. 

This mind is the moon. This moon of itself is mind. This is 
penetrating and comprehending the mind of buddha ancestors and 
buddha heirs. 

What is examined here is not yet full and after it is full. Both are the 
moon’s activity. Each of the three or four moons is a complete moon 
that is not yet full. Each of the seven or eight moons is a complete 
moon that is after it is full. 

To swallow is three or four. At this moment, the moon that is not yet 
full is actualized. To spit out is seven or eight. At this moment, after it 
is full is actualized. 

When the moon swallows the moon, that is three or four. In 
swallowing, the moon is brought forth. The moon is swallowing 
actualized. When the moon spits out the moon, that is seven or eight. 
In spitting out, the moon is brought forth. The moon is spitting out 
actualized. 

Thus, there is total swallowing, total spitting out. The whole earth 
and the whole sky are spit out. The whole sky and the whole earth are 
swallowed. Swallow yourself and swallow others. Spit out yourself 
and spit out others. 

The clouds’ flying is not concerned with east, west, south, or north. 
The moon’s traveling has not ceased day or night from ancient times 
to the present. Do not forget this. The boat’s going and the shore’s 
moving are not bound by the past, present, or future, but actualize the 
past, present, and future. This being so, “full and not hungry just now” 
is possible. 

Foolish people think that because clouds run we see the immovable 
moon as moving, and because a boat goes we see the immovable shore 
as moving. But if they are right, why did the Tathagata speak as he 
did? The meaning of buddha dharma cannot be measured by the 
narrow views of human or heavenly beings. Although it is 
immeasurable, buddha dharma is practiced in accordance with the 
listeners’ capacities. Who is unable to take up the boat or shore over 
and over? Who is unable to see through the clouds or moon 
immediately? 

Know that the Tathagata’s words do not make a metaphor of clouds 
for dharma suchness, of the moon for dharma suchness, of the boat for 
dharma suchness, or of the shore for dharma suchness. Quietly 
examine and penetrate this. One step of the moon is the Tathagata’s 
round, full enlightenment. The Tathagata’s round, full enlightenment 
is the motion of the moon. The moon is beyond moving or not 
moving, beyond going forward or backward. The moon’s motion is not 
an analogy. It is the essence of alone and full. 

Know that even though the moon passes quickly it is beyond 
beginning, middle, or end. Thus, there is the first-month moon and the 
second-month moon. The first and the second are both the moon. 
Right practice is the moon. Right offering is the moon. Snapping the 
sleeves and walking away is the moon. 

Round and pointed are not concerned with the cycle of coming and 
going. The moon is beyond coming and going; it goes freely and 
grasps firmly coming and going, beyond coming and going. 
Manifesting wind and streams, the moons are as they are. 

Written at the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery on the sixth day, 
the first month, the fourth year of the Ninji Era [1243]. Monk Dogen. 

44 

Fowers IN THE Sx 

Bopuprarma, HicH ANCcEsTor, said, “One blossom opens five petals. 
Fruit forms naturally.” 

Study the moment of the blossom’s blooming and of its light and 
color. The blossom consists of five petals. The blossoming of the five 
petals is one blossom. The true meaning of this blossom leads to [his 
words]: “I am originally in this land to transmit dharma and save 
deluded sentient beings.” This is a point of study of its light and color. 
It means: “The forming of the fruit is up to you.” This is the meaning 
of Fruit forms naturally. 

Forms naturally means to practice causes and experience the effects. 
There are causes in the common world. There are effects in the 
common world. You practice causes and effects in the common world 
and experience causes and effects in the common world. 

Naturally [self thusness] means of itself. Self is invariably you. It is 
four great elements and five skandhas. Because it is [as Linji said] “let 
it be a true person of no rank,” it is beyond self and other. This being 
so, what is indefinite is called self. Thusness is to accept what is as it 
is. 

Forms naturally is the moment of the blossoming and forming of 
fruit. It is the moment to transmit dharma and save deluded sentient 
beings. It is like the time and place of the unfolding of an utpala [blue 
lotus] blossom that are the time and place of a blazing fire. Sparks of a 
gimlet and flames are all the place of unfolding and the time of 
aligning of an utpala blossom. Without being the time and place of an 
utpala blossom, not even a blink of fire is born, not even a blink of fire 
is activated. 

Know that within a blink of fire, one hundred, one thousand utpala 
blossoms unfold on earth and in the sky. They unfold in the past and 
at present. To see and hear the present moment and present place of 
fire is to hear and see utpala blossoms. Without fail, see and hear the 
time and place of utpala blossoms. 

inside fire.” 

In this way, utpala blossoms definitely unfold in fire. If you want to 
know what is inside fire, it is the place where utpala blossoms unfold. 
You need to exclude human views and deva views, and learn what is 
inside fire. If you would doubt this, you would doubt lotus blossoms 
born in water, or you would doubt the variety of blossoms on 
branches and twigs. If you doubt this, you would also doubt the stable 
ground of material worlds. However, you don’t doubt these. Those 
who are not buddha ancestors do not know that the opening of 
blossoms raises the world. 

The opening of blossoms is three three before, three three after 
[countless]. To fulfill these numbers, all phenomena are gathered and 
make the blossoms colorful. Let this understanding manifest and 
fathom spring and autumn. It is not only that spring and autumn have 
blossoms and fruit, but the time being always has blossoms and fruit. 

Both blossoms and fruit maintain moments. All moments maintain 
blossoms and fruit. This being so, one hundred grasses all have 
blossoms and fruit. All trees have blossoms and fruit. Trees of gold, 
silver, copper, iron, coral, and crystal all have blossoms and fruit. 
Trees of earth, water, fire, air, space all have blossoms and fruit. 
Human trees have blossoms. Decayed trees have blossoms. 

In the midst of these blossoms, the World-Honored One spoke of 
flowers in the open sky [illusory flowers]. But those who hear little 
and see little do not know what kind of color, light, leaves, and 
blossoms the flowers in the sky carry. They only hear the words 
flowers in the sky. 

Know that there are teachings about flowers in the sky in the 
buddha way. People outside the way do not know the teachings about 
flowers in the sky. How can they understand them? 

Only buddhas and ancestors know the opening and falling of 
flowers in the sky [sky blossoms] and earth blossoms, and the opening 
and falling of world blossoms. They alone know that flowers in the 
sky, earth blossoms, and world blossoms are sutras. This is a standard 
of studying buddhas. 

Because what buddha ancestors ride on are flowers in the sky, the 
buddha world and all buddha dharmas are flowers in the sky. But 
mediocre and foolish people think that the obscured eyes in the 
Tathagata’s statement “What is seen by obscured eyes are flowers in 
the sky” means the confused eyes of sentient beings. Because their sick 
eyes are already confused, they think that flowers in the sky are seen 
in pure space. Being attached to this view, they mistakenly see that 
none of the three realms and the six paths, existent buddhas and 
nonexistent buddhas, exist. If such deluded seeing stops, they may 

stop seeing such flowers in the sky and think the Tathagata said that 
in original emptiness there are no flowers. 

What a pity! They do not know from beginning to end the moment 
of flowers in the sky spoken by the Tathagata. The meanings of 
“obscured eyes” and “flowers in the sky” have not been grasped by 
ordinary people and those outside the way. 

Buddha tathagatas practice these flowers in the sky and attain the 
robe, the way of sitting, and entering the room. They attain the way 
and the fruit of buddhahood. 

Taking up a flower and blinking are both the fundamental point 
actualized by obscured eyes and flowers in the sky. That the treasury 
of the true dharma eye, the wondrous heart of nirvana, has been 
authentically transmitted without cutting off is called obscured eyes 
and flowers in the sky. Enlightenment, nirvana, dharma body, self 
nature, and so on are two or three petals of the five petals of flowers 
unfolding in the sky. 

exist due to material worlds. 

They only think that flowers in the sky exist due to obscured eyes. 
And they do not realize that flowers in the sky cause obscured eyes. 

Know that a person with obscured eyes in the buddha way is a 
person of the original enlightenment, of wondrous enlightenment, of 
all buddhas, of the three realms, of buddha going beyond buddha. Do 
not misunderstand that obscuring is illusion. Do not think that there is 
reality other than that. Such a point is a lesser view. If obscurity and 
flowers [in the sky] are illusion, a view such as to create and be 
created is also illusion. If everything is illusion, truth cannot be 
established. If there is no truth to be established, the point that 
obscurity and flowers [in the sky] are illusion cannot be established. 

When enlightenment is obscurity, all things around enlightenment 
are things that adorn obscurity. When delusion is obscurity, all things 
around delusion are things that adorn obscurity. 

Say for the time being that as obscurity and the eyes are equal, the 
sky and flowers are equal. As obscurity and the eyes are beyond birth, 
the sky and flowers are beyond birth. As all things are reality, 
obscurity and flowers are reality. 

Do not discuss the past, present, and future. As flowers in the sky 
are not conditioned by beginning, middle, and end, and as they are 
not obstructed by birth and death, flowers in the sky cause birth and 
death to be birth and death. 

Flowers in the sky are born in the sky and perish in the sky. They 
are born in obscurity and perish in obscurity. They are born in flowers 
and perish in flowers. Further, flowers in the sky are like this in other 
places and times. 

In studying flowers in the sky, there should be a number of ways. 
There are views by obscured eyes, by clear eyes, by buddha eyes, and 
by ancestor eyes. There are views by way-seeking eyes, by blind eyes, 
by three thousand years, by eight hundred years, by one hundred 
eons, by innumerable eons. As all of these see flowers in the sky, the 
sky looks different, flowers appear varied. 

Know that the sky is just one blade of grass. In this sky, flowers 
always bloom. It is like flowers blooming on one hundred blades of 
grass. In order to express this teaching, the Tathagata says that in the 
sky there are originally no flowers. 

Although there are originally no flowers, there are flowers such as 
peach, apricot, plum, and willow. So we say that a plum tree did not 
blossom yesterday, but blossoms in spring. 

Thus, when the time comes, flowers open. This is the moment of 
flowers, the arrival of flowers. At this very moment of flowers 
arriving, there is no other way. Plum and willow flowers unfailingly 
bloom on plum and willow trees. You see the flowers and know plum 

and willow trees. You understand flowers by looking at plum and 
willow trees. Peach and apricot flowers have never bloomed on plum 
and willow trees. Plum and willow flowers bloom on plum and willow 
trees. Peach and apricot flowers bloom on peach and apricot trees. 
Flowers in the sky bloom in the sky in just this way. They do not 
bloom on other grasses or trees. 

Seeing the colors of flowers in the sky, you fathom the limitlessness 
of fruit in the sky. Seeing the opening and falling of flowers in the sky, 
study the spring and autumn of flowers in the sky. The spring of 
flowers in the sky and the spring of other flowers should be the same. 
Just as there are a variety of flowers in the sky, there should be a 
variety of springtimes. This being so, there are springs and autumns in 
the past and present. 

Those who assume that flowers in the sky are not real and other 
flowers are real have not seen or heard the Buddha’s teaching. To hear 
the words that the sky originally had no flowers and assume that the 
flowers in the sky that did not exist do exist now is a lesser view based 
on shallow thinking. Step forward and think deeply. 

Radiant light serenely illuminates the sands of the Ganges. This radiant 
light renews actualizing the monks’ hall, buddha hall, kitchen, and 
monastery gate. The sands of the Ganges are radiant light actualized, 
actualizing radiant light. 

The ordinary and sages, beings with spirits, are equally my home. It is 
not that the difference among the ordinary and sages, as well as 
beings with spirits, does not exist. Just do not slander them because of 
their differences. 

A single moment is beyond birth, actualizing the undivided. Moment 
after moment is a single moment. It is beyond birth. It completely 
actualizes all things. Thus, it is expressed as a single moment is beyond 
birth. 

A subtle movement of the six sense roots shelters the clouds. The six 
sense roots—eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind—are not merely 
two or three, but three and three [in a great variety] before and after. 
Their movement is like that of Mount Sumeru, the earth, the six sense 
roots, and like a subtle movement. As their movement is like that of 
Mount Sumeru, their no-movement is also that of Mount Sumeru. It 
forms clouds, it forms water. 

Removing delusions increases sickness. It is not that there has been no 
sickness. There is buddha sickness, ancestor sickness [desire to be a 
buddha and ancestor]. Removing such sickness with wisdom adds 
sickness, increases sickness. At the very moment of removing sickness, 
there is delusion. Removing sickness and having delusion are 
simultaneous and beyond simultaneous. Delusion always comes with a 
way to remove it. 

Going toward true thusness is also wrong. To go against true thusness 
is a mistake. To go toward true thusness is a mistake. True thusness is 
going against and going toward. There is true thusness in going 
against it and in going toward it. Who knows that such a mistake is 
also true thusness? 

Follow the worldly conditions with no hindrance. The worldly 
conditions follow the worldly conditions. Following and further 
following are worldly conditions. This is called no hindrance. 
Hindrance and no hindrance are covered by the eye that sees through. 

Nirvana and birth-and-death are both flowers in the sky. What is called 
nirvana is unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. It is the abode of 
buddha ancestors and their followers. Birth-and-death is a true human 
body. Although both nirvana and birth-and-death are the way of 
buddha ancestors and their followers, they are flowers in the sky. The 
root, stem, branches, leaves, blossoms, fruit, light, and colors of 
flowers in the sky are all open blossoms of flowers in the sky. Flowers 
in the sky are bound to bear fruit in the sky, dropping seeds in the 
sky. 

Because the three realms we see and hear now are the opening of 
five-petal flowers in the sky, it is not like the three realms seeing the 
three realms. This is the reality of all things, the flower of all things. 
Furthermore, study that all things that cannot be measured are equally 
flowers in the sky, fruit in the sky, which are not different from plum, 
willow, peach, and apricot. 

in the ten directions. 

If you clarify this, the faults belong to the buddhas in the ten 
directions. If you have not clarified this, shravakas dance and 
pratyeka-buddhas dress up. 

Know that it is not that the buddhas in the ten directions are not 
real, but that they are originally flowers in the eye. The buddhas in 
the ten directions abide in the eye. Other than being in the eye, there 
is no abode for the buddhas. 

Flowers in the eye are neither nonexistent nor existent, neither 
illusory nor real; they are just buddhas in the ten directions. 

If you want to know the buddhas in the ten directions, they are not 
flowers in the eye. If you want to know flowers in the eye, they don’t 
seem to be the buddhas in the ten directions. 

This being so, both grasping clearly and not grasping clearly are 
flowers in the eye, the buddhas in the ten directions. Want to know 
and they are not both actualize How splendid! 

The teaching of flowers in the sky and flowers on the earth 
expressed by buddhas and ancestors is as wondrous as this. 

Commentators on sutras and treatises may have heard of flowers in 
the sky, but the life vein [tradition] of flowers on the earth is not seen 
or heard by those who are not buddha ancestors. There is an 
expression by a buddha ancestor who was familiar with the life vein 
of flowers on the earth: 

Shimen, Zen Master Huiche of Mount Shimen, Great Song, was a 
venerated heir of Liangshan. Once a monk asked him, “What is the 
treasure inside the mountain?” The point of this question is just like 
asking, “What is the buddha?” or “What is the way?” 

Shimen replied, “Flowers in the sky emerge from the earth. The 
whole nation has no way to buy them.” 

This statement cannot be seen as secondary to other statements. 
People everywhere usually discuss flowers in the sky as illusory 
flowers and speak of flowers in the sky as being born in the sky and 
perishing in the sky. There have not been people who understand 
flowers that emerge from the sky. How can they know flowers that 
emerge from the earth? Shimen alone understood it. 

Emerge from the earth means from the earth in the beginning, 
middle, and end. Emerge means to open. Flowers in the sky emerge 
from the entire earth, open blossoms, emerging from the entire earth. 

The whole nation has no way to buy them means that it is not that the 
whole nation does not buy them; it is just that there is no way to buy 
them. 

There are flowers in the sky that emerge from the earth. There is 

the entire earth that emerges from the flowers and opens. Thus, know 
that flowers in the sky emerge and open both the earth and the sky. 

Presented to the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery 
on the tenth day, the third month, the first year of the Kangen Era 
[1243]. 

45 
Ow Buppua Mino 

Tue ANCESTRAL TEACHING was transmitted by forty ancestors from the 

Seven Original Buddhas to Huineng of Caoxi. There were forty 
ancestors from Huineng to the Seven Original Buddhas. 

Because the Seven Original Buddhas had the power of going upward 
and going downward, the dharma reached Huineng and it reached the 
Seven Original Buddhas. Because Huineng had the power of going 
upward and going downward, the dharma has been authentically 
transmitted from the Seven Original Buddhas and from Huineng to 
buddhas of later times. 

Buddhas are not only before and after. At the time of Shakyamuni 
Buddha, there were buddhas in the ten directions. At the time of 
Qingyuan, there was Nanyue. At the time of Nanyue, there was 
Qingyuan. Or, at the time of Shitou, there was Mazu of Jianxi. They 
did not obstruct each other, although it is not that they did not 
interact with each other. Study thoroughly that there has been such 
manifestations as these. 

As these forty buddha ancestors are old buddhas, they have bodies 
and minds. They have illumination and land with a timeless past and 
something that never existed in the past. Having something that never 
existed in the past and having a timeless past are equally the 
manifestation of old buddhas. 

To study the way of old buddhas is to realize the way of old 
buddhas—generations and generations of old buddhas. What we call 
old buddhas are old of new and old, but they leap beyond old and 
new. They are directly old and new. 

from Shakyamuni Buddha [Huineng], as Old Buddha. Because Kegqin 
had an old buddha’s splendid illumination, he made such a bow upon 
encountering the old buddha. Thus, chew on the head and tail of 
Huineng and grab hold of the nose of an old buddha. One who grabs 
hold of this is an old buddha. 

Sushan said, “On top of Dayu Peak there is an old buddha shining 
light that reaches here.” 

Know that Sushan had already encountered the old buddha. Do not 
look anywhere else. Where the old buddha can be found is on top of 
Dayu Peak. One who is not an old buddha does not know where the 
old buddha is. One who knows where the old buddha can be found is 
an old buddha. 

Xuefeng said, “Zhaozhou, Old Buddha.” 

Know that although Zhaozhou was an old buddha, if Xuefeng had 
not been given the ability to be an old buddha, he would not have 
mastered the craft of meeting the old buddha. The practice right now 
is to study with an old buddha, which is benefited by the old buddha 
who practices silence responding to questions. 

Old Man Xuefeng is still well. The teaching style of an old buddha 
and the awesome presence of an old buddha cannot be imitated and 
equaled by one who is not an old buddha. This being so, study the 
wholesomeness of the beginning, middle, and end of Zhaozhou and 
experience the timelessness of the old buddha. 

—the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of an old buddha. 

Further, there must be an active buddha with old mind, a realizing 
buddha with old mind, becoming buddha of old mind, becoming mind 
of buddha oldness, as old mind is the mind of oldness. Because mind 
buddha is always old, old mind is a chair, bamboo, and wood. 

[It is as Xuansha said,] “Even if we look in the entire world for a 
single person who understands buddha dharma, it is impossible to find 
one.” “Reverend, what do you call it?” 

At this very moment of causation and in the empty space of the 
dusty world there is nothing other than old mind. To maintain old 
mind and to maintain an old buddha are like maintaining two heads 
on one face or painting two heads on one body. 

Huizhong said, Walls, tiles, and pebbles. This statement shows that 
there is an expression stepping toward walls, tiles, and pebbles. This is 
walls, tiles, and pebbles. It is a straight way of expression. There is 
also an expression by walls, tiles, and pebbles that steps backward 
within walls, tiles, and pebbles. Where these expressions emerge and 
complete, a cliff of one thousand rocks and myriad rocks stands; walls 
all over the earth and all over heaven stand; there is one or half a 
piece of tile; or there is a large or small tip of a pebble. This is not 
only mind, but a body, as well as their environs. 

This being so, ask, “What are walls, tiles, and pebbles?” 

In response, say, “Old buddha mind.” 

Then, investigate further: What are so-called walls? What are called 
walls? What shape are they? Study thoroughly in this way. 

Does making cause walls to appear? Do walls cause making to 
appear? Are walls made or not? Are they sentient or insentient? Do 
they or do they not emerge right here? 

Even if they appear in the deva realm or human realm, in this or 
another world, while you investigate thoroughly, old buddha mind is 
walls, tiles, and pebbles. Old buddha mind and walls, tiles, and 
pebbles have not been separated even by a particle. 

There is not a world that is not a buddha world. Study the entire 
world and how it falls apart. Do not study it in the self. Because you 
don’t study it in the self, the very moment of falling apart is one path, 
two, three, four, or five paths—thus, inexhaustible paths. 

Each path is I would rather not have my body. My body is I would 
rather not have. Value the now, and don’t let yourself fail to be old 
buddha mind. 

Indeed, old buddha mind stands like a wall before the Seven 
Original Buddhas. It sprouted after the Seven Original Buddhas. Old 
buddha mind blossoms before all buddhas. It bears fruit after all 
buddhas. Old buddha mind drops away before old buddha mind. 

Presented to the assembly at the Rokuharamitsu Temple [in Kyoto] on 
the twenty-ninth day, the fourth month of the Kangen Era [1243]. 

46 

Tue Booutsarrva’s Four Merxiops OF Gouwance 

Tue BODHISATTVA’S four methods of guidance are giving, kind speech, 
beneficial action, and identity action. 

“Giving” means nongreed. Nongreed means not to covet. Not to 
covet means not to curry favor. Even if you govern the Four 
Continents, you should always convey the authentic path with 
nongreed. It is like giving away unneeded belongings to someone you 
don’t know, offering flowers blooming on a distant mountain to the 
Tathagata, or, again, offering treasures you had in your former life to 
sentient beings. Whether it is of teaching or of material, each gift has 
its value and is worth giving. Even if the gift is not your own, there is 
no reason to abstain from giving. The question is not whether the gift 
is valuable but whether there is genuine merit. 

When you leave the way to the way, you attain the way. At the time 
of attaining the way, the way is always left to the way. When treasure 
is left just as treasure, treasure becomes giving. You give yourself to 
yourself and others to others. The power of the causal relations of 
giving reaches to devas, human beings, and even enlightened sages. 
When giving becomes actual, such causal relations are immediately 
formed. 

The Buddha said, “When a person who practices giving goes to an 
assembly, people take notice.” Know that the mind of such a person 
communicates subtly with others. This being so, give even a phrase or 
verse of the truth; it will be a wholesome seed for this and other 
lifetimes. Give your valuables, even a penny or a blade of grass; it will 
be a wholesome root for this and other lifetimes. The truth can turn 
into valuables; valuables can turn into the truth. This is all because 
the giver is willing. 

A king [Emperor Tai of the Tang Dynasty] gave his beard as 
medicine to cure his retainer’s disease. A child offered sand to Buddha 
and became King [Ashoka] in a later birth. They were not greedy for 
reward but only shared what they could. To launch a boat or build a 
bridge is an act of giving. If you study giving closely, you see that to 
accept a body and to give up the body are both giving. Making a 
living and producing things can be nothing other than giving. To leave 

flowers to the wind, to leave birds to the seasons, are also acts of 
giving. 

Great King Ashoka was able to offer enough food for hundreds of 
monks with half a myrobalan fruit. People who practice giving should 
understand that King Ashoka thus proved the greatness of giving. Not 
only should you make an effort to give, but also be mindful of every 
opportunity to give. You are born into this present life because you 
originally embodied the merit of giving [in the past]. 

The Buddha said, “If you are to practice giving to yourself, how 
much more so to your parents, wife, and children.” 

Thus, know that to give to yourself is a part of giving. To give to 
your family is also giving. Even when you give a particle of dust, you 
should rejoice in your own act, because you authentically transmit the 
merit of all buddhas, and begin to practice an act of a bodhisattva. 
The mind of a sentient being is difficult to change. Keep on changing 
the minds of sentient beings, from the moment that you offer one 
valuable, to the moment that they attain the way. This should be 
initiated by giving. Thus, giving is the first of the six paramitas 
[realizations]. 

Mind is beyond measure. Things given are beyond measure. And 
yet, in giving, mind transforms the gift and the gift transforms mind. 

exclude mountains, they are mountains and they are high. Because a 
wise lord does not weary of people, his people assemble. “People” 
means the nation. “A wise lord” means ruler of the nation. A ruler is 
not supposed to weary of people. “Not to weary of people” does not 
mean to give no reward or punishment. Although a ruler gives reward 
and punishment, he does not weary of people. In ancient times, when 
people were less complicated, there was neither legal reward nor 
punishment in the country. The concept of reward and punishment 
was different. Even at present, there should be some people who seek 
the way without expecting a reward. This is beyond the understanding 
of ignorant people. Because a wise lord understands this, he does not 
weary of people. 

People form a nation and seek a wise lord, but as they do not 
completely know the reason why a wise lord is wise, they only hope to 
be supported by the wise lord. They do not notice that they are the 
ones who support the wise lord. In this way, the principle of identity 
action is applied to both a wise lord and all people. This being so, 
identity action is a vow of bodhisattvas. 

With a gentle expression, practice identity action for all people. 

47 
Twine Vines 

Ar THE ASSEMBLY on Vulture Peak, only Mahakashyapa, through 

realization, received Shakyamuni Buddha’s treasury of the true 
dharma eye, unsurpassable enlightenment. By a direct transmission of 
authentic realization through twenty-eight generations, it reached 
venerable Bodhidharma. 

Bodhidharma went to China and entrusted the treasury of the true 
dharma eye, unsurpassable enlightenment, to Dazu Huike, who would 
later become Great Master Zhengzong Pujue, and confirmed him as 
the Second Ancestor. Because the Twenty-eighth Ancestor in India 
went to China as the first teacher there, he is also called the First 
Chinese Ancestor. The Twenty-ninth Ancestor is called the Second 
Chinese Ancestor. This is the custom in China. 

Bodhidharma once studied with Venerable Prajnatara and through 
realization directly received the admonitions of the buddha, the bones 
of the way. In realization he attained the source through the source 
and made it the root of branches and leaves. 

Although there are a number of sages who try to study by cutting 
off the root of twining vines [expressions], they do not regard the 
cutting of twining vines with twining vines as “cutting through” [fully 
comprehending]. Also, they do not know entangling twining vines by 
further entangling them. Furthermore, how can they understand 
inheriting twining vines through twining vines? Those who notice that 
inheriting dharma is twining vines are rare. There is no one who has 
learned it, and there is no one who has spoken about it. How is it 
possible for many to have realized it? 

robe. From the beginning, Bodhidharma’s confirmation of each one 
was equal. Although his confirmation was equal, the four views were 
not necessarily equal. However varied the four views are, 
Bodhidharma’s words are just Bodhidharma’s words. In fact, words 
and understanding do not necessarily match. 

For example, Bodhidharma said to the four students, You have 
attained my skin, and so forth. Had he hundreds or thousands of 
students after Huike, he would have spoken hundreds or thousands of 
words. There should be no limit. Because he had only four students he 
spoke of skin... flesh... bones... marrow. But the words not spoken, 
and yet to be spoken, should be many. 

Know that even to Huike, Bodhidharma could have said, You have 
attained my skin. Even saying, You have attained my skin, he could have 
transmitted the treasury of the true dharma eye to Huike as the 
Second Ancestor. It does not go by the superiority or inferiority of 
attaining the flesh or attaining the marrow. 

Even to Daofu, Daoyu, or Zongchi, Bodhidharma could have said, 
You have attained my marrow. Even though they attained the skin, he 
could have transmitted dharma to them. Bodhidharma’s body-and- 
mind is Bodhidharma’s skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. It is not that 
the marrow is close and the skin is far. 

Now, to receive the seal of You have attained my skin by having the 
eye of studying is to fully attain the ancestor. There is an ancestor 
whose full body is skin, an ancestor whose full body is flesh, an 
ancestor whose full body is bones, and an ancestor whose full body is 
marrow. There is an ancestor whose full body is mind, an ancestor 
whose full body is body, an ancestor whose full mind is mind. There is 
an ancestor whose full ancestor is ancestor. And there is an ancestor 
whose full body is “attaining myself,” “attaining yourself.” 

In this way, when these ancestors appear together and speak to 
hundreds and thousands of students, they say, You have attained my 
skin. Even if the ancestors in hundreds and thousands of words 
indicate skin, flesh, bones, and marrow in this way, people outside 
will think superficially about skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. 

If there had been six or seven students in Bodhidharma’s 
community, he would have said, “You have attained my mind,” “You 
have attained my body,” “You have attained my buddhahood,” “You 
have attained my eye,” or “You have attained my realization.” This is 
the moment when you are now an ancestor, and this is the time when 
you are now Huike. 

Examine thoroughly the meaning of have attained. Know that there 
is “You have attained me,” “I have attained you,” “[This is] attaining 
me and you,” and “[This is] attaining you and me.” Upon studying an 

ancestor’s body-and-mind, if you say that inside and outside are not 
one or that the entire body is not the full body, you are not in the land 
where the buddha ancestors appear. 

To attain skin is to attain bones, flesh, and marrow. To attain bones, 
flesh, and marrow is to attain skin, flesh, and face. It is to understand 
not only that all the worlds of the ten directions are the true body, but 
that they are skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. In this way, “You attain 
my robe,” and “You attain the dharma.” 

Thus, words are bits and pieces leaping out; teacher and disciple 
practice mutually. What is heard is bits and pieces leaping out; 
teacher and disciple practice mutually. 

“Teacher and disciple practice mutually” is twining vines of buddha 
ancestors. “Twining vines of buddha ancestors” is the life stream of 
skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. Taking up a flower and blinking are 
twining vines. Breaking into a smile is skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. 

Study further; the seeds of twining vines have the power of 
dropping away body. Branches, leaves, flowers, and fruit of twining 
vines do and do not interpenetrate one another. Thus, buddha 
ancestors appear, and the fundamental point is actualized. 

When you penetrate the moment of Mahakashyapa transmitting to 
Ananda, Ananda hides his body in Mahakashyapa, and Mahakashyapa 
hides his body in Ananda. Thus, at the moment of [teacher and 
student] meeting for transmission, the practice of exchanging face, 
skin, flesh, bones, and marrow cannot be avoided. Because of this, 
Zhaozhou said, Now say! To whom did Bodhidharma transmit? 

When Bodhidharma gives transmission, he is Bodhidharma. When 
the Second Ancestor attains the marrow, he is Bodhidharma. By 
studying the meaning of this, buddha dharma has continued to be 
buddha dharma to this day. If not, buddha dharma would not have 
reached to this day. Quietly pursue and investigate the meaning of 
this point for yourself and others. 

Zhaozhou said, If Bodhidharma means, “Someone who has reached the 
outside attains the skin, someone who has reached the inside attains the 
bones,” then tell me: What does someone who has reached even deeper 
inside get? Directly understand the meaning of outside [essential] and 
inside [essential]. When you discuss outside, skin, flesh, bones, and 
marrow are all outside. When you discuss inside, skin, flesh, bones, 
and marrow are all inside. 

This being so, these four Bodhidharmas altogether mastered 
hundreds and thousands of myriad bits and pieces beyond skin, flesh, 
bones, and marrow. Do not suppose that you cannot go beyond the 
marrow. You can go threefold, fivefold beyond. 

This teaching of Zhaozhou, an ancient buddha, is a buddha’s words. 
It is not what other masters like Linji, Deshan, Guishan, and Yunmen 
either reached or dreamed of. How could they talk about it? Some 
careless elders of recent times do not even know that it exists. If you 
were to tell them about it, they would be shocked. 

It is said that Bodhidharma returned to India. I have learned that 
this is wrong. What Songyun saw on the road as Bodhidharma 
[heading west] could not have been actual. How could Songyun have 
discovered Bodhidharma’s destination? It is correct to learn and 
understand that his ashes were laid to rest in Mount Xionger after he 
passed away. 

Presented at the assembly of the Kannondori Kosho Horin Monastery, 
Uji County, Yamashiro Province, on the seventh day, the seventh 
month, the first year of the Kangen Era [1243]. 

VOLUME TWO 

Monastery Construction Prriop 

48 
Ture Reais Are I nsepaRABLe FROM Mino 

Great MASTER SHAKYAMUNI Said [in the Avatamsaka Sutra], “The three 

realms are inseparable from single mind. There is nothing outside of 
mind. Mind, the Buddha, and sentient beings are not divided.” 

This passage expresses a complete actualization of the Buddha’s life- 
time. A complete actualization of the Buddha’s lifetime is an utmost 
actualization of complete wholeness. Whatever effort it may embody, 
it is an effortless effort. Thus, the Tathagata’s words, The three realms 
are inseparable from single mind, are an entire actualization of the 
entire Tathagata. His whole lifetime is this single passage. 

The three realms are the entire world. This does not mean that the 
three realms are merely mind, because, however many crystal-clear 
facets they may have, the three realms are still the three realms. Even 
if you mistakenly see something outside the three realms, that is not 
correct at all. 

Inside, outside, and in between are all in the three realms. 
Beginning, later, and in between are all in the three realms. 

The three realms are seen just as the three realms. What is not seen 
as the three realms is the three realms seen incorrectly. In the three 
realms what is seen as the three realms are old nests [views] as well as 
new buds [views]. Old nests see the three realms and new buds see 
the three realms. 

Thus, Great Master Shakya said, “Nothing sees the three realms 
better than the three realms.” 

What is seen is no other than the three realms. The three realms are 
just seen as the three realms. 

The three realms are neither originally present nor arising at this 
moment. They neither appear spontaneously nor are they produced by 
causation. The three realms are not a matter of the beginning, middle, 
or end. 

You leave the three realms or you are present in the three realms. 
This is dynamic work encountering dynamic work, twining vines 
growing twining vines. Being present in the three realms, you are seen 
by the three realms. What is seen by the three realms is what is seen 

within the three realms. What is seen within the three realms is 
actualizing the three realms, is the three realms being actualized, and 
is actualizing the fundamental point. 

In this way, you cause the three realms to become actualized as 
aspiration, practice, enlightenment, and nirvana. This means [as the 
Buddha said,] these three realms are all my beings. 

Thus, Great Master Shakyamuni said, “Now these three realms are 
all my beings. All sentient beings in these realms are my children.” 

As these three realms are the Tathagata’s beings, the entire world is 
the three realms. These three realms are the entire world. 

Now these means the past, present, and future. The past, present, 
and future actualized do not hinder now these. Now these actualized 
affect the past, present, and future. 

My beings are the true human body of the entire world of the ten 
directions; a shramana’s single eye of the entire world of the ten 
directions. Sentient beings are the true human body of the entire 
world of the ten directions. Because each sentient being is a living 
being, they are beings. 

My children is the total actualization of the children. Thus, the 
children who receive body, hair, and skin from compassionate parents 
do not harm the body or ignore it and are regarded as the children 
actualized. Right now, it is neither that the parent is before and the 
children are after, nor that the children are before and the parent is 
after, nor that the parent and children stand shoulder to shoulder. This 
is the meaning of my children. 

Without inheriting it, you are [inherently] the Tathagata’s child. 
Without earning it, you are already the Tathagata’s child. It is beyond 
the aspect of coming and going. It is beyond the measure of large and 
small. It is beyond the discussion of old and young. 

Maintain old and young just as old and young of buddha ancestors. 
In this way, the parent is young while the child is old; the parent is 
old while the child is young; the parent is old while the child is old; 
and the parent is young while the child is young. 

One who studies the oldness of the parent is not the child. One who 
has not passed the youth of a child is not the parent. Thoroughly 
investigate the oldness and youth of the child and the oldness and 
youth of the parent. Don’t be negligent. There are a parent and a child 
who are born at the same time. There are a parent and a child who die 
at the same time. There are a parent and a child who are born beyond 
time. There are a parent and a child who die beyond time. 

Without hindering the compassionate parent, a child can be born. 
Without hindering the child, a compassionate parent is actualized. 

There are sentient beings with mind. There are sentient beings with 

no mind. There is a child with mind. There is a child with no mind. 
These children—my children—are all Shakyamuni Buddha’s heirs. 

All sentient beings of the past, present, and future in the entire ten 
directions are buddhas of the past, present, and future in the entire 
ten directions. My children of all buddhas are sentient beings. The 
compassionate parents of sentient beings are all buddhas. 

Thus, the flowers and fruit of one hundred grasses are my beings of 
all buddhas. Rocks and stones, large and small, are my beings of all 
buddhas. Their places of serene abiding are forests and fields. The 
forests and fields are their places of seclusion. 

However, the Tathagata only talked about my children. He did not 
speak about himself as the parent. Study this thoroughly. 

Great Master Shakyamuni said, “The responding, transformed, and 
dharma bodies of all buddhas do not go beyond the three realms. 
There are no sentient beings outside the three realms. Where else 
would the Buddha teach? Thus, I say that an outsider’s theory, in the 
Great Existence Sutra, that there is a storehouse of sentient beings 
outside the three realms is not a teaching of the Seven Original 
Buddhas.” 

Investigate and clarify that the responding, transformed, and 
dharma bodies of all buddhas are always in the three realms. The 
three realms have no outside. The Tathagata is not outside. Walls are 
not outside. 

Because the three realms have no outside, sentient beings are not 
outside. Where else would the Buddha teach without sentient beings? 
What the Buddha teaches are always sentient beings. 

Know that the storehouse of sentient beings is a theory in the Great 
Existence Sutra outside the way. It is not in a sutra by the Seven 
Original Buddhas. 

What is inseparable from mind is not limited to one, two, or three 
realms. It is not outside the three realms. What is inseparable from 
mind cannot be mistaken. It is conceived by consciousness, and yet it 
is not conceived by consciousness. It is walls, tiles, and pebbles. It is 
mountains, rivers, and the great earth. 

Mind is skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. Mind is taking up a flower 
and smiling. There is having mind, and having no mind. There is mind 
with a body, and mind with no body. There is mind before the body, 
and mind after the body. For the birth of a body, there is womb birth, 
egg birth, moisture birth, and transformation birth. For the birth of a 
mind, there is womb birth, egg birth, moisture birth, and 
transformation birth. 

Blue, yellow, red, and white are mind. Long, short, square, and 
round are mind. The coming and going of birth and death are mind. 

Year, month, day, and hour are mind. Dream, phantom, and empty 
flower are mind. Water, foam, splash, and flame are mind. Spring 
flowers and autumn moon are mind. All things that arise and fall are 
mind. 

However, they cannot be destroyed. Thus, there is mind where there 
are all things that are real. There is mind that is experienced only 
between a buddha and a buddha. 

never to be matched. Before he responded in this way, what had it 
been called? Had it been regarded as something made of bamboo and 
wood, crystal clear from beginning, middle, and end? Are Xuansha’s 
words an expression of the three realms inseparable from mind or 
beyond an expression of the three realms inseparable from mind? 

Know that even if Xuansha first spoke of the three realms as a chair, 
as inseparable from mind, or as the three realms, he now speaks of the 
three realms as something made of bamboo and wood. 

Luohan said, I also call it something made of bamboo and wood. This 
response is expressed between teacher and student, face to face, who 
studied together from head to tail. Investigate thoroughly if Xuansha’s 
words something made of bamboo and wood and Luohan’s words I also 
call it something made of bamboo and wood are the same or not, right to 
the point or not. 

Xuansha said, Looking throughout the entire earth, I cannot find a 
single person who understands buddha dharma. Also study these words 
carefully. 

Know that Xuansha simply called the three realms something made of 
bamboo and wood, and Luohan also called the three realms something 
made of bamboo and wood. They did not yet understand the three 
realms inseparable from mind. They did not go beyond understanding 
the three realms inseparable from mind. They did not express the 
three realms. They did not go beyond expressing the three realms 
inseparable from mind. 

Thus, ask Xuansha, “Even if you say, Looking throughout the entire 
earth, I cannot find a single person who understands buddha dharma, tell 
me: What do you call the entire earth?” 

Thoroughly investigate in this way. 

Presented to the assembly on Mount Yoshimine on the first day, the 
intercalary seventh month, the first year of the Kangen Era [1243]. 

49 

Speaxine OF Mino, Spraxine OF Essence 

SuensHan, WHO WOULD later become Zen Master Sengmi, was traveling 

with Dongshan, who would later become Zen Master Wuben. 
Dongshan pointed to a temple near the road and said, “Inside that 
temple someone is speaking of mind, speaking of essence.” 
Shenshan said,” Who is that?” 
Dongshan said, “My dharma uncle, your question has completely 
killed that person.” 
Shenshan said,” Who is speaking of mind, speaking of essence?” 
Dongshan said,” In death, find life.” 

Speaking of mind, speaking of essence is the great foundation of the 
buddha way. It actualizes buddhas and ancestors from there. Without 
speaking of mind, speaking of essence, there is no turning of the 
wondrous dharma wheel, no aspiration and practice, no attaining the 
way together with all beings on earth, no sentient beings beyond 
buddha nature. 

To take up a flower and blink is speaking of mind, speaking of 
essence. To bow and return to the original position is speaking of 
mind, speaking of essence. Bodhidharma going to the kingdom of 
Liang is speaking of mind, speaking of essence. To transmit the robe at 
midnight is speaking of mind, speaking of essence. To take up a staff is 
speaking of mind, speaking of essence. To lay down a whisk is 
speaking of mind, speaking of essence. All the merits of buddhas and 
ancestors are speaking of mind, speaking of essence. 

There is ordinary speaking of mind, speaking of essence. There is 
speaking of mind, speaking of essence by walls, tiles, and pebbles. 

It is said that when mind arises, various things arise, and when 
mind perishes, various things perish. Yet, there is a time when mind is 
no other than speaking, and there is a time when essence is no other 
than speaking. 

However, mediocre people who have not penetrated mind and have 
not mastered essence do not know speaking of mind, speaking of 
essence. They do not know talks on profundity or wonder. So, they say 
and teach that speaking of mind, speaking of essence are not words of 
buddha ancestors. Because they do not know speaking of mind, 

speaking of essence as speaking of mind, speaking of essence, they 
regard speaking of mind, speaking of essence as speaking of mind, 
speaking of essence. This happens because they do not examine 
openings and blockages in the buddha way. 

body. This is not yet freedom from the limited view of the Lesser 
Vehicles. How could he have reached the utmost profundity of the 
Great Vehicle? Further, how could he know the key for going beyond? 
It is impossible to say that Zonggao had consumed the tea and rice of 
buddha ancestors. 

To study with a master and endeavor is no other than thoroughly 
experiencing speaking of mind, speaking of essence at this very 
moment in your body and mind, and studying through before and 
after life. There are not two or three things [other than this single 
matter]. 

following a sutra, you may finally hit a mark. This hitting a mark is 
due to the missing of one hundred marks in the past; it is the maturing 
of missing one hundred marks in the past. 

Listening to the teaching, practicing the way, and attaining 
realization are all like this. Although yesterday’s speaking of mind, 
speaking of essence missed one hundred marks, this missing directly 
hits the mark today. 

Even if you are immature and cannot attain mastery at the 
beginning of practicing the buddha way, you should not give up the 
buddha way and try to attain it by going through other ways. It is 
difficult for those who are not familiar with the process of practicing 
the buddha way to clarify the openings and blockages of the buddha 
way. 

The buddha way is the buddha way even when you first arouse the 
aspiration for enlightenment. It is the buddha way when you attain 
authentic enlightenment. It is the buddha way altogether at the 
beginning, in the middle, and at the end. It is like journeying a long 
distance; one step is within one thousand li, one thousand steps are 
within one thousand li. The first step and the one-thousandth step are 
different, but are equally within the one thousand Ii. 

But extreme fools think that you haven’t reached the buddha way 
while studying it, and that you experience the buddha way only at the 
time of having the fruit [of enlightenment]. They think so because 
they don’t know taking up and expounding the way, taking up and 
practicing the way, taking up and realizing the way. People learn that 
only those who are deluded practice the buddha way and have great 
enlightenment. They do not know or hear that even those who are not 
deluded practice the buddha way and have great enlightenment. So, 
they think such a thing. 

As speaking of mind, speaking of essence before merging with 
realization is the buddha way, you speak of mind, speak of essence, 
and merge with realization. Do not assume that merging with 
realization only means that a deluded person becomes greatly 
enlightened for the first time. A deluded person becomes greatly 
enlightened. An enlightened person becomes greatly enlightened. A 
person who is beyond enlightened becomes greatly enlightened. A 
person who is beyond deluded becomes greatly enlightened. A person 
who has merged with realization merges with realization. 

This being so, speaking of mind, speaking of essence is straight- 
forward buddha dharma. Zonggao did not understand this point and 
advised not to speak of mind, speak of essence. This is not a teaching 
of buddha dharma. Still, there is no one in Great Song China 
nowadays to even come close to Zonggao. 

not yet reached the field [of realization]. If you do not study speaking 
of mind by someone, you have not yet reached the field. Speaking of 
mind studies a person beyond. A person beyond studies speaking of 

mind. Speaking of mind studies the person. The person studies 
speaking of mind. 

being completely killed. It is not that Dongshan pointed to speaking of 
mind, speaking of essence and said that this is the who. 

This who is someone who speaks of mind, speaks of essence. Do not 
assume that this someone cannot expect to be completely killed [fully 
illuminated]. 

Dongshan’s statement In death, find life, actualizes the form and 
sound of someone is speaking of mind, speaking of essence. The completely 
killed includes death that is one or two out of ten [incomplete death]. 
Although life is fully life, it is not that death turns into life. It is life 
that drops away from beginning to end. 

50 
Tue Buppua Way 

Hunene, OLD BUDDHA Caoxi, once instructed the assembly, “From 

myself to the Seven Original Buddhas of the Past, we count forty 
ancestors.” 

When we investigate this statement, there are forty buddhas from 
the Seven Original Buddhas to Huineng. When you count buddhas and 
ancestors, you count in this way. If you count in this way, the Seven 
Original Buddhas are seven ancestors. The thirty-three ancestors are 
thirty-three buddhas. What Huineng says is so. This is the buddha’s 
authentically transmitted instruction. The direct heirs alone 
authentically transmitted this way of counting. 

From Shakyamuni Buddha through Huineng there are thirty-four 
ancestors. The succession of buddhas and ancestors is handed down in 
the same way that Mahakashyapa met the Tathagata and the 
Tathagata attained Mahakashyapa. 

In the same way that Shakyamuni Buddha studied with Kashyapa 
Buddha, masters and disciples exist to this day. In this way the 
treasury of the true dharma eye has been handed down from person to 
person. The essential life of buddha dharma is just this authentic 
transmission. Because buddha dharma is authentically transmitted in 
this way, it is the direct succession of entrusting. 

This being so, the function, the essence, of the buddha way, is 
present with nothing lacking. This has been transmitted from India to 
China for eighteen thousand li. It has been transmitted from Buddha’s 
lifetime to the present day for over two thousand years. 

been such a name as “Zen School.” Those who groundlessly refer to 
themselves in this way are demons who violate the buddha way, 
enemies who are not welcomed by buddhas and ancestors. 

assemblies of Qingyuan and Nanyue. When did this name begin to be 
used and who started it? Possibly some students who were not 
actually students, and surreptitiously destroyed or stole the teaching, 
may have begun using this name. 

For later students to mistakenly use the name “Zen School” is to 
damage the gate of buddhas and ancestors, and is not permitted by 
buddhas and ancestors. It makes you think that there is a teaching 
called the “Zen School” besides the teaching of buddhas and ancestors. 
This is the erroneous way outside the teaching of buddhas and 
ancestors. 

You who are descendants of buddhas and ancestors should study the 
bones, marrow, and face of buddhas and ancestors. Throw yourself 
into the way of buddhas and ancestors. Do not deviate from this and 
study outside the way. That you have a human body and mind is a 
rare thing, which is the result of endeavor in the way from olden 
times. Receiving this gracious result, do not mistakenly become a 
student outside the way; it is not returning gratitude to buddhas and 
ancestors. 

This is the entrusting of I have the treasury of the true dharma eye. 
Our means I have. Dharma gate means the true dharma. Our, I have, and 
my marrow are the entrusting of “You have attained” [as Bodhidharma 
said]. 

Shitou was the heir of Qingyuan, High Ancestor. He alone entered 
Qingyuan’s inner chamber. His head was shaved by Huineng, Old 
Buddha Caoxi. Therefore, Huineng was his ancestor and father. 
Qingyuan was his elder brother and teacher. Shitou alone was a 
person of excellence in the buddha way and occupied the ancestor 
seat. The authentic transmission of the buddha way reached Shitou 
alone. Fruit and branches of the word actualized are completely 
beyond the old of an old buddha, the eternal now of an old buddha. 
Make his teaching the eyeball of the treasury of the true dharma eye. 
Do not compare Shitou to other teachers. Those who do not 
understand compare him to Mazu of Jiangxi, but it is a mistake to do 
sO. 

In this way, know that the buddha way that has been transmitted 
from past buddhas is not called Zen meditation, so how could there be 
the name “Zen School”? Clearly understand that it is an extreme 
mistake to use the name “Zen School.” Those who are ignorant assume 
that there is an “existence school” and an “emptiness school.” They 
feel bad not having a special name as a school, as if there is nothing to 
study. But the buddha way is not like that. It should be determined 
that in the past there was no such name as “Zen School.” 

However, those of mediocre streams in recent times are foolish and 
do not know the authentic teaching. They have not received 
transmission from past buddhas and mistakenly say, “In buddha 
dharma, there are five schools that have various flavors.” This is a 
characteristic of the declining teaching. There is not yet one person or 
one-half a person to crush this view. Rujing, my late master, Old 
Buddha Tiantong, for the first time, took pity on them. This is the way 
things go with human beings and teaching. 

or the eye to see. Given this, is there anyone capable of hearing with 
the entire mind, or hearing through the body? Even if they hear it 
with their entire bodies and minds for billions of eons, they cannot 
take up the entire body and mind of Rujing to hear it, realize it, 
believe it, and drop it away. 

What a pity! People in the ten directions of the land of Great Song 
think that Rujing can be compared shoulder to shoulder with the 
elders of their own monasteries. Do those who think like this have 
eyes, or not? Some of them think that Rujing can be compared 
shoulder to shoulder with Linji or Deshan. I should say that these 
people also have not yet met either Rujing or Linji. 

Before I formally bowed to Rujing, Old Buddha, I was trying to 
thoroughly study the profound teaching of the “Five Schools.” But 
after I formally bowed to Rujing, I understood clearly that the “Five 
Schools” are groundlessly named. 

In this way, when the buddha dharma was flourishing in China, 
there was no such designation as “Five Schools,” and there were no 
teachers of old to expound the teaching using the name of the “Five 
Schools.” After the buddha dharma became shallow and declined, the 
name “Five Schools” groundlessly appeared. This is because people 
have been negligent in study and not intimate in the endeavor of the 
way. 

Those who look for genuine practice in the way of clouds and water 
should neither give it any thought nor bother to remember the 
differences in style of teaching. It is the same with the Three 
Mysteries, the Three Essentials, the Four Positions of Subject and 
Object, the Four Positions of Illumination and Function, and the Nine 
Ties of Teaching. The same can be said of the Three Phrases, the Five 
Ranks, and the Ten Equal Wisdoms. 

The words of Old Man Shakyamuni are not confined to such narrow 
definitions as these, which are not regarded as great. Such theories 
were not spoken or heard at Shaolin or Caoxi. How sad! The bald- 
headed ones who have not heard dharma in this age of decline have 
ignorant eyes in body and mind and consequently talk about such 
things. Those who are descendants of buddha ancestors should not 
speak in such a way. Such confused theories as these have never been 
heard in the abode of buddha ancestors. 

Flatterers in later times did not hear the entire words in buddha 
dharma and did not have complete trust in the ancestors’ words. They 
were ignorant of the original self, became proud of what little they 
had learned, and established names such as the “Five Schools.” Since 
these names were established, childish students have stopped studying 
the way in pursuit of the root and mistakenly follow the branches. 
They have no spirit of longing for the ancient, and their practice is 

mixed with worldly ways. To pay attention to worldly ways is 
admonished even by secular teachers. 

they become buddhas and ancestors? 

The teaching has been directly transmitted from the Seven Original 
Buddhas. How can it be like the Five Divisions of the Precept School 
established in India by those who depend upon letters and interpret 
their meaning? In this way, know that ancestors who regard the true 
life of the buddha dharma as the true life have never said that there 
are various gates such as the “Five Schools.” Those who think that 
there are “Five Schools” in the buddha way are not authentic heirs of 
the Seven Original Buddhas. 

was alive. Guishan never said that buddha dharma should be called 
the “Guiyang [Guishan and Yangshan] School.” Nor did Baizhang say 
that he should abide on Mount Gui and call his teaching the “Guiyang 
School.” Neither Guishan nor his master spoke of it in this way. Thus, 
know that this is a groundless name. 

Do not look to Yangshan as the perpetrator, although the “Guiyang 
School” partly bears his name. If he had the need to call it after his 
name, he would have done that. But since there was no need to, he 
did not name it after himself in the past, nor would he do so in the 
present. 

There is no such name as the “Caoxi School,” the “Nanyue School,” 
the “Xijiang School,” or the “Baizhang School.” Guishan should not be 
different from Huineng of Caoxi. He should not excel Huineng. In fact, 
he should not even reach to Huineng. 

One word or half a phrase spoken by Guishan is not necessarily 
carried equally on one staff with Yangshan. If you establish the name 
of the school, you should call it the “Guishan School” or the “Dagui 
[Great Guishan] School.” But there is no reason and no ground for 
calling it the “Guiyang School.” 

Had it been appropriate to call it the “Guiyang School,” they would 
have done so when the two masters were alive. But they did not name 
it while they were alive. Why did they not do so? Those who go 
against their fathers and ancestors and call their teaching the 
“Guiyang School,” although there was no such name while the two 
masters were alive, are unfilial descendants. This is not the original 
wish of Guishan or the straightforward will of Yangshan. There is no 
such authentic transmission from the true masters. It is clear that 
these names were groundlessly created by those who were mistaken. 
Do not spread it in the ten directions. 

Since this would go against the way of Huangbo, they should have 
refrained from initiating such a name. 

In fact, when Linji was about to pass away, he entrusted Sansheng, 
who would later become Zen Master Huiran, and said, “After I pass 
away, do not let my treasury of the true dharma eye be extinguished.” 

Sansheng said, “How would I let your treasury of the true dharma 
eye be extinguished?” 

Linji said, “If someone asks you about it, how would you respond?” 

Sansheng shouted. 

Linji said, “Who would have guessed that my treasury of the true 
dharma eye has reached as far as this blind donkey and perished?” 

The master and disciple spoke to each other in this way. Linji did 
not say, “Do not let my Zen School be extinguished,” “Do not let my 
Linji School be extinguished,” or “Do not let my school be 
extinguished.” Rather, he just said, Do not let my treasury of the true 
dharma eye be extinguished. Clearly know that the great road 
authentically transmitted by buddhas and ancestors should not be 
called the “Zen School” or the “Linji School.” 

eye was authentically transmitted by Qingyuan alone. Even if 
Qingyuan and Nanyue are acknowledged as excellent students who 
both attained the way, Qingyuan is the only authentic disciple. 
Huineng confirmed his disciple Qingyuan as his heir. Thus, Huineng 
became the father of Qingyuan when Qingyuan became his heir. In 
this way, Qingyuan’s attaining the marrow is clear. The authentic 
heritage of the ancestral teaching is clear. 

As an heir, the fourth generation from Qingyuan, Dongshan 
authentically succeeded in the treasury of the true dharma eye and 
opened the eye to the wondrous heart of nirvana. Other than this, 
there is no transmission or school. He never taught the assembly, 
either with a fist or by blinking, that they should call themselves the 
“Caodong School.” Furthermore, since he had no mediocre stream 
among his students, no student called it the “Dongshan School,” let 
alone the “Caodong School.” 

The name “Caodong School” seems to be a combination of 
Dongshan and Caoshan. If so, Yunju and Tong’an should also be 
added. Yunju is a guiding master of humans and devas, more 
venerable than Caoshan. I suppose that the “Caodong School” is so 
called because skin bags outside presumed that Dongshan was 
someone who could be compared shoulder to shoulder with them. It is 
like floating clouds covering the world beneath the bright sun. 

School,” “Buddha Bones School,” “Buddha Leg School,” or “Buddha 
Land School.” But there are none of these. Therefore, know that the 
“Buddha Mind School” is a false name. 

When Shakyamuni Buddha broadly took up the reality of all things 
in the buddha land of the ten directions, and taught in the buddha 
land of the ten directions, he did not say that he had established a 
school in the buddha land of the ten directions. If the name “school” is 
within the teaching of buddha ancestors, it should exist in the buddha 
land. If it were in the buddha land, the name would form a part of the 
Buddha’s discourses. But it does not, so we know that the name 
“school” is not an accoutrement of the buddha land. The ancestors did 
not speak of the name “school,” so we know that it is not one of the 
furnishings of the ancestors’ abode. This not only is ridiculed by other 
people and prohibited by all buddhas, but is also ridiculed by the self. 
Refrain from using these names. Do not say there are Five Houses in 
the Buddha’s teaching. 

names of the schools in an attempt to establish themselves without 
being concerned with the buddha way. The buddha way is not their 
buddha way. It is the buddha way of all buddhas and ancestors. It is 
the buddha way of the buddha way. 

Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, Yoshida County, 
Echizen Province, on the sixteenth day, the ninth month, the first year 
of the Kangen Era [1243]. 

51 
Tue Reaury OF Au Tunes 

Accruauizine BUDDHA ANCESTORS is reality thoroughly experienced. 

Reality is all things. All things are reality thusness; original nature 
thusness; body thusness; mind thusness; world thusness; cloud and 
rain thusness; walking, standing, sitting, and lying down thusness; 
sadness, joy, motion, and stillness thusness; staff and whisk thusness; 
taking up the flower and smiling thusness; inheriting dharma and 
giving predictions thusness; studying and endeavor of the way 
thusness; pine purity and bamboo joints thusness. 

thusness, original nature thusness. That only a buddha and a buddha 
appear in the world is speaking, practice, and realization of the reality 
of all things. Speaking is can thoroughly experience. Although 
thoroughly, it is can experience, because it is beyond beginning, middle, 
and end; it is reality thusness, original nature thusness. Thus, it is 
described as “wholesome in the beginning, middle, and end.” 

Can thoroughly experience is the reality of all things. The Reality of all 
things is reality thusness. Reality thusness is can thoroughly experience 
original nature thusness. Original nature thusness is can thoroughly 
experience body thusness. Body thusness is can thoroughly experience 
capacity thusness. Capacity thusness is can thoroughly experience 
activity thusness. Activity thusness is can thoroughly experience cause 
thusness. Cause thusness is can thoroughly experience condition 
thusness. Condition thusness is can thoroughly experience effect thusness. 
Effect thusness is can thoroughly experience reward thusness. Reward 
thusness is can thoroughly experience root-branch-and-beyond thusness. 

The words root-branch-and-beyond thusness are indeed thusness 
actualized. This being so, the effect in the buddha stage is beyond an 
effect in cause and effect. Thus, the effect in cause and effect is no 
other than the effect in the buddha stage. Because this effect is 
immersed in form, original nature, body, and capacity, then form, 
original nature, body, and capacity of all things are immeasurably and 
boundlessly reality. Because this effect is beyond form, original 
nature, body, and capacity, then form, original nature, body, and 
capacity of all things are all together reality. When you become one 
with reality, then such words as original nature, body, and capacity— 
immersed in effect, reward, cause, and condition—hit the mark eight 
or nine out of ten. When you become one with reality, then original 
nature, body, and capacity—immersed in effect, reward, cause, and 
condition—hit the mark ten out of ten. 

Reality thusness is not one reality, nor is it one thusness. It is 
thusness immeasurable, boundless, unspeakable, and unfathomable. 
Do not make one hundred or one thousand as a measure. Make all 
things a measure. Make the measure of reality the measure. 

It means that only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly experience 
the reality of all things; only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly 
experience the true nature of all things; only a buddha and a buddha 
can thoroughly experience the true body of all things; only a buddha 
and a buddha can thoroughly experience the true capacity of all 
things; only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly experience the true 
activity of all things; only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly 
experience the true cause of all things; only a buddha and a buddha can 
thoroughly experience the true condition of all things; only a buddha 
and a buddha can thoroughly experience the true effect of all things; 

only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly experience the true reward 
of all things; only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly experience 
the true root-branch-and-beyond of all things. 

of reality.” 

It means: Thus, I practice the mudra [definite expression] of reality. 
Thus, I listen to the mudra of reality. Thus, I realize the mudra of reality. 
Study thoroughly and experience thoroughly in this way. The meaning 
of this is like “A pearl rolls on a board and a board rolls on a pearl” 
[the dynamic interaction of subject and object, practice and 
enlightenment]. 

The Chandra Surya Pradipa Buddha said [in the Lotus Sutra], “I 
have expounded the meaning of the reality of all things to you.” 

Study this statement and know that buddha ancestors unfailingly 
make expounding the meaning of reality a single great matter. Buddha 
ancestors, together with the eighteen realms, unfold the meaning of 
reality. Before body and mind, after body and mind, at the very 
moment of body and mind [in the past, present, and future], they 
expound reality, original nature, body, capacity, and so on. Those who 
do not thoroughly experience, expound, understand, and beyond- 
understand reality are not buddha ancestors; they are demons and 
animals. 

being made to belong are altogether this sutra. At this very moment, 
you realize all bodhisattvas mentioned in this sutra. 

The sutra is neither sentient nor insentient, neither created nor 
uncreated. Yet, upon realizing a bodhisattva, realizing a person, 
realizing reality, and realizing the sutra, the gate of skillful means 
opens. The gate of skillful means is an unsurpassable merit of the 
buddha fruit, things abiding in the world of phenomena, and the 
everlasting reality of the world. 

The gate of skillful means is not a temporary art. It is the study of 
the entire world of the ten directions. It is taking up the reality of all 
things and studying it. Even if this gate of skillful means covers the 
world of the ten directions in the entire world of the ten directions, 
without being all bodhisattvas, this cannot be experienced. 

and let the entire dharma emerge. 

This being so, the unsurpassable enlightenment of the Forty 
Buddhas, Forty Ancestors [from the Seven Original Buddhas to 
Huineng, the Sixth Chinese Ancestor], all belongs to this sutra. 
Enlightenment belongs to this sutra, and this sutra belongs to 
enlightenment. Both the sitting mat and the sounding board that are 
no other than unsurpassable enlightenment belong to this sutra. Taking 
up a flower and smiling, as well as bowing and attaining the marrow, 
belong to this sutra. This sutra belongs to these activities. This is 
opening the gate of skillful means and demonstrating reality. 

Such people [who advocate the accord of the Three Teachings] are 
seeds of those in the Lesser Vehicles or those outside the way. For a 
couple of hundred years there have been such people who don’t know 
even the existence of reality. When they study authentic buddha 
dharma, they only speak of becoming free from birth and death. Also, 
there have been those who don’t know how to study the authentic 
dharma of buddha ancestors. They only understand imitating the 
ancients while living in a monastery. What a pity that the ancestral 
way is in decline! This is what venerable masters who have mastered 
the way deplore. Do not pay attention to the theories of such people. 
Just pity them. 

arousing the mind and moving thoughts during the twelve hours 
[all day]. If you have contact with these moving thoughts, you 
immediately understand what is ungraspable. It is like a great 
void that has no trace of void. Front and back are one. Both the 
knower and the known are invisible. Both implicit and explicit 
perish. Past, present, and future are equal. Upon arriving at this 
state, you are called a leisurely person of no more studying and 
no more doing. 

This is a phrase of Old Man Ying’an’s fully concerted expression. It 
appears that he chased a shadow and did not know the real meaning 
of ceasing. 

Is there not buddha dharma when the front and back are not one? 
What are the front and back? Also, he regards the void with no form 
as a statement of buddha ancestors. What does he regard as the void? 
In my opinion, he did not know or see the void. He did not take up or 
strike the void. 

Ying’an spoke of arousing the mind and moving thoughts. However, it 
is possible to say that the mind does not move. Then, how can you 
arouse the mind during the twelve hours of the day? Mind does not 
move and enter into the twelve hours of the day. The twelve hours do 
not move in twelve [separate] minds. If they did, how could you 
arouse the mind? 

What are moving thoughts? Do thoughts move or not-move? Do 
thoughts not-move or not not-move? What is movement? And what is 
not-movement? What do you call thoughts? Are thoughts in twelve 
hours? Is twelve hours in thoughts? Is there a moment when neither of 
them exists? 

Ying’an said, Get to the place . . . during the twelve hours, and you can 
make understanding easy. What do you call easy understanding? Do 
you say that it is easy to understand the way of buddha ancestors? 
However, as buddha dharma is beyond easy or difficult to understand, 
Nanyue and Mazu both practiced thoroughly with their teacher 
[Huineng]. 

Ying’an said, you immediately understand what is ungraspable. This 
reveals that he had not even dreamed of the buddha ancestors’ way. 
With his ability, how can he speak of understanding easily or not? It is 
clear that he had not yet thoroughly studied the great way of buddha 
ancestors. If buddha dharma were like this, how could it have reached 
this day? 

Even Ying’an was like this. Yet, if we look for someone like him 
among the elders of monasteries nowadays, it is impossible to meet 
one even for long eons. Even if we look piercingly hard, we cannot 
find anyone like Ying’an. Therefore, many people in recent times 

approve of him. However, it is hard to acknowledge that buddha 
dharma had reached him. He was still a latecomer on the monastic 
seats—an ordinary person. At least he had a spirit for knowing a true 
person. But, as they do not know a true person, elders nowadays do 
not know themselves, 

Although Ying’an had not mastered buddha dharma, he had studied 
the way. On the other hand, the elders of monasteries nowadays have 
not studied the way. While Ying’an heard good words, the words did 
not enter his ears and were not seen by his ears; they did not enter his 
eyes and were not heard by his eyes. 

Ying’an was like this in the past, but he must be self-enlightened by 
now. The seniors of monasteries in Great Song China today don’t look 
into the inside and outside of Ying’an, thus, sounds and forms are all 
outside of their realm. Such people do not know whether the reality of 
buddha dharma expressed by buddha ancestors is the words of 
buddha ancestors or not. This being so, none of the elders or other 
clumsy fellows in these two or three hundred years have seen and 
explained reality. 

A reed screen was hanging at the entrance of the Wondrous Plateau 
[abbot’s main quarters]. I heard the faint dharma voice of the great 
abbot priest. At that time Zukun, the practice coordinator from 
Xichuan, arrived and burned incense after me. When we quietly 
looked up at the Wondrous Plateau, we saw a crowd of monks 
standing from the east end to the west end of the hall. Then the 
dharma talk started, which I listened to while standing in the back of 
the crowd. 

Rujing told a story about Zen Master Fachang of Damei, living in 
the monastery. Many monks shed tears when they heard about 
Fachang’s assembly wearing lotus leaves and eating pine nuts. Rujing 
also told a detailed story about Shakyamuni Buddha’s practice period. 
Many listeners shed tears. 

Rujing then said, “A practice period here at Mount Tiantong is 
approaching. It is spring now, not cold and not hot. This is the time 
favorable for zazen. Fellow practitioners, why not do zazen?” 

Thus, he spoke and presented the above verse. After reading this 
verse, he struck the right side of his Zen chair with his right hand and 
said, “Now enter the room.” 

When some of the monks were inside the abbot’s room, Rujing said, 
“A nightingale chirps. Bamboo on the mountain cracks.” He spoke in 
this way but did not say anything more. Although many monks 
entered the room, they remained in silent awe. 

This way of inviting monks to enter the abbot’s room is not 
practiced in other monasteries. Rujing alone practiced in this way. At 
the time of his giving a dharma talk, the assembly of monks would 
stand around chairs and screens. As they kept standing, monks near 
the entrance would enter the room, and those who had finished 
visiting would go out of the gate of the abbot’s quarters as usual. The 
rest of the monks would keep standing, so they could see and hear the 
formal movement of those who entered the room as well as the 
dignified bearing of the abbot priest as he spoke. This format has not 
been found in other monasteries, where the seniors do not practice in 
this way. 

In the usual manner of entering the abbot’s room, monks try to get 
ahead of others, but in this way of entering the room, monks want to 
follow. Be aware of the difference in people’s minds. 

It is the first year of the Kangen Era [1243] now. The passage of 
time is swift, and it has been eighteen years since then. I don’t 
remember how many mountains and rivers I have crossed from Mount 
Tiantong to here, but I have been engraving in my body, mind, bones, 
and marrow his magnificent words and stunning phrases as reality. I 
believe Rujing’s dharma talk and the monks entering his room at that 
time have been memorable for many monks. It was a serene night 

while the faint light of the moon was leaking through the pavilion and 
nightingales were chirping continuously. 

Japan, in the ninth month, the first year of the Kangen Era [1243]. 

52 

Lyrae Lancuace 

Accruauzine THE FUNDAMENTAL point, you realize the great road 

maintained by all buddhas. “You are like this. I am like this. Keep it 
well,” is revealed. 

conceal it. Since there are hundreds and thousands of World-Honored 
Ones, there are hundreds and thousands of Mahakashyapas. Study this 
point without fail, as if cutting through what is impossible to cut 
through. Investigate it in detail little by little, hundreds and thousands 
of times, instead of trying to understand it all at once. Do not assume 
that you understand it right away. Yunju was already a world-honored 
one, so he had intimate language and Mahakashyapa did not conceal 
it. But do not regard the minister’s response to Yunju as intimate 
language. 

Yunju said to the minister, If you don’t understand it, the World- 
Honored One had intimate language. If you understand it, Mahakashyapa 
did not conceal it. 

Aspire to investigate these words for many eons. Yunju’s words If 
you don’t understand it, are a world-honored one’s intimate language. 
Not understanding is not the same as going blank. Not understanding 
does not mean that you don’t know. 

By saying, If you don’t understand it, Yunju is encouraging practice 
without words. Investigate this. Then, Yunju said, If you understand it . 
. . He did not mean that the minister should rest on his understanding. 

Among the gates to the study of buddha dharma, there is a key to 
understanding buddha dharma and to going beyond understanding 
buddha dharma. Without meeting a true teacher, you wouldn’t even 
know there is a key. You might mistakenly think that what cannot be 
seen or heard is intimate language. 

Yunju did not mean that Mahakashyapa had not concealed it just 
because the minister understood it. Not concealing can happen with 
not understanding. Do not think that anyone can see and hear not- 
concealing. Not-concealing is already present. Investigate the very 
moment when nothing is concealed. 

Do not think that the realm you don’t know is intimate language. At 
the very moment when you go beyond understanding buddha dharma, 
there is intimate language. This is when the World-Honored One has 
intimate language. This is when the World-Honored One is present. 

However, those who have not heard the teachings of true masters, 
although they sit in the teaching seat, have not even dreamed of 
intimate language. They mistakenly say: 

The passage, The World-Honored One had intimate language means 
that he held up a flower and blinked to the assembly of 
innumerable beings on Vulture Peak. The reason for this is that 
the teaching by words is shallow and limited to forms, so the 
Buddha used no words, took up a flower and blinked. This was 
the very moment of presenting intimate language. But the 

assembly of innumerable beings did not understand. That is why 
this is secret language for the assembly of innumerable beings. 
Mahakashyapa did not conceal it means that he smiled when he 
saw the flower and the blinking, as if he had already known 
them; nothing was concealed from him. This is a true 
understanding, which has been transmitted from person to 
person. 

There are an enormous number of people who believe in such a 
theory. They comprise communities all over China. What a pity! The 
degeneration of the buddha way has resulted from this. Those who 
have clear eyes should turn these people around one by one. 

If the World-Honored One’s words were shallow, his holding up a 
flower and blinking would also be shallow. Those who say that the 
World-Honored One’s words are limited to forms are not students of 
buddha dharma. Although they know that words have form, they do 
not yet know that the World-Honored One does not have form. They 
are not yet free from ordinary ways of thinking. Buddha ancestors 
drop away all experience of body and mind. They use words to turn 
the dharma wheel. Hearing their words many people are benefited. 
Those who have trust in dharma and practice dharma are guided in 
the realm of buddha ancestors and in the realm of going beyond 
buddha ancestors. 

Didn’t the innumerable beings in the assembly understand the 
intimate language of holding up the flower and blinking? Understand 
that they stand shoulder to shoulder with Mahakashyapa, they are 
born simultaneously with the World-Honored One. The innumerable 
beings are none other than the innumerable beings. Arousing the 
aspiration for enlightenment at the very same moment, they take the 
same path and abide on the same earth. 

The innumerable beings see the Buddha and hear the dharma with 
wisdom that knows and with wisdom that goes beyond knowing. 
Seeing one buddha, they see as many buddhas as the sands of the 
Ganges. At the assembly of each buddha, there are millions and 
billions of beings. Understand that each buddha demonstrates the 
moment when holding up the flower and blinking emerge. What is 
seen is not obscure; what is heard is clear. This is mind eye, body eye, 
mind ear, and body ear. 

Upon seeing Mahakashyapa smile, the World-Honored One said, I 
have the treasury of the true dharma eye, the wondrous heart of nirvana. I 
entrust this to Mahakashyapa. Is this statement words or no words? If 
the World-Honored One avoided words and preferred holding up a 
flower, he would have held up the flower again and again. How could 
Mahakashyapa have understood him, and how could the assembly of 
beings have heard him? Do not pay attention to people’s mistaken 
explanations. 

The World-Honored One has intimate language, intimate practice, 
and intimate realization. But ignorant people think intimate means 
that which is known by the self and not by others. Those east and 
west, past and present, who think and speak this way are not 
following the buddha way. If what they think were true, those who do 
not study would have much intimacy, while those who study would 
have little intimacy. Would those who study extensively have no 
intimacy? What about those who have the celestial eye, celestial ear, 
dharma eye, dharma ear, buddha eye, or buddha ear? Would they 
have no intimate language or intimate heart? 

Intimate language, intimate heart, and intimate action in buddha 
dharma are not like that. When you encounter a person, you 
invariably hear intimate language and speak intimate language. When 
you know yourself, you know intimate action. Thus, buddha ancestors 
can thoroughly actualize this intimate heart and intimate language. 
Know that where there are buddha ancestors, intimate language and 
intimate action are immediately manifest. Intimate means close and 
inseparable. There is no gap. Intimacy embraces buddha ancestors. It 
embraces you. It embraces the self. It embraces action. It embraces 
generations. It embraces merit. It embraces intimacy. 

When intimate language encounters an intimate person, the buddha 
eye sees the unseen. Intimate action is not known by self or other, but 
the intimate self alone knows it. Each intimate other goes beyond 
understanding. Since intimacy surrounds you, it is fully intimate, half 
intimate. 

Clearly study this. Indeed, intimacy comes forth at the place where 
the person becomes [a buddha], at the moment when understanding 
takes place. Such a person is an authentic heir of buddha ancestors. 
Right now is the very moment when you are intimate with yourself, 
intimate with other. You are intimate with buddha ancestors, intimate 
with other beings. This being so, intimacy renews intimacy. Because 
the teaching of practice-enlightenment is the way of buddha ancestors, 
it is intimacy that penetrates buddha ancestors. Thus, intimacy 
penetrates intimacy. 

Xuedou, Old Master, said to his assembly: 

The World-Honored One has intimate language. 
Mahakashyapa does not conceal it. 

Night rain causes the blossoms to fall. 

The fragrant water reaches everywhere. 

Night rain causes the blossoms to fall and The fragrant water reaches 
everywhere, spoken here by Xuedou, are intimate. Study this and 
examine the eyeballs and nostrils of buddha ancestors. This is not 
somewhere Linji or Deshan can arrive. Open the nostrils within the 
eyeballs, and sharpen the nose tip within the ears. With the entire 
body and mind, study the realm where the ear, nose, and eye are 
neither old nor new. This is how blossoms and rain open up the world. 

The fragrant water reaches everywhere, spoken by Xuedou, conceals 
the body and reveals the form. This being so, in the daily practice of 
the buddha ancestors’ school, the passage The World-Honored One had 
intimate language, and Mahakashyapa does not conceal it, is studied and 
penetrated. Each of the Seven Original Buddhas has studied intimate 
language like this. Thus, Mahakashyapa and Shakyamuni Buddha 
have completely manifested intimate language. 

Presented to the assembly of the ancient Yoshimine Temple of Yoshida 
County, Echizen Province, on the twentieth day, the ninth month, the 
first year of the Kangen Era [1243]. 

53 

Buppua Surras 

In THE BUDDHA sutras, there is teaching for bodhisattvas and there is 

teaching for buddhas. Both are instruments of the great way. The 
instruments accompany the master and the master uses_ the 
instruments. 

Because of this, buddhas and ancestors of India and China followed 
the teachers and followed the sutras; there has never been a gap 
between arousing the aspiration for enlightenment, practice, and the 
fruit thereof. Arousing the aspiration for enlightenment depends on 
sutras and teachers. Practice depends on sutras and teachers. The fruit 
of enlightenment is one and intimate with sutras and teachers. 

Before a movement [asking a question] and after the words are 
simultaneous study with sutras and teachers. Within a movement and 
inside the words are also simultaneous study with sutras and teachers. 

moment or place that is not sutras. The sutras are written in letters of 
the supreme principle and of the secular principles. The sutras are 
written in letters of heavenly beings, human beings, animals, fighting 
spirits, one hundred grasses, or ten thousand trees. This being so, what 
is long, short, square, and round, as well as what is blue, yellow, red, 
and white, arrayed densely in the entire world of the ten directions, 
are no other than letters of the sutras and the surface of the sutras. 
Regard them as the instruments of the great way, and as the sutras of 
the buddha house. 

These sutras spread throughout all time and circulate in all lands. 
These sutras open the gate of teaching for people without neglecting 
anyone on the entire earth. These sutras open the gate of teaching for 
the insentient, saving all beings on the entire earth. They teach all 
buddhas and bodhisattvas in all lands throughout the entire world. 
They open the gate of skillful means, and they open the gate of 
abiding in their conditions without abandoning one thing, or even half 
a thing, demonstrating reality. 

Thus, buddhas and bodhisattvas make no contrivance of their own 
by way of thought or no-thought. Each makes a great vow to attain 
the sutras. 

The moment when you determine to attain the sutras is not past or 
present, because past and present are the time when you already 
attain the sutras. What emerges in the face of the entire world of the 
ten directions is the attaining of the sutras. 

When you read, recite, and penetrate the sutras, buddha wisdom, 
spontaneous wisdom, or no-teacher wisdom are manifested prior to 
the mind and prior to the body. At this time there is nothing new or 
extra-ordinary that makes you wonder. That the sutras are held, read, 
and recited by you means that the sutras guide you. Their function 
before the words and outside the phrases, beneath the surface and 
above the knots, is nothing but scattering blossoms and penetrating 
blossoms. 

bowing formally and attaining the marrow, are ancient sutras 
transmitted from master to disciple. [Hongren] Transmitting dharma 
and finally entrusting the robe [to Huineng] is to arrive at the moment 
of entrusting the entire scroll of extensive letters. [Hongren] Tapping 
the mortar three times and [Huineng] sifting the rice three times is to 
cause the sutra to extend its hands, and to cause the sutra to directly 
transmit the sutra. 

Not only that, but, “What has thus come?” is one thousand sutras 
for teaching all buddhas, ten thousand sutras for teaching all 
bodhisattvas.” Speaking about it won’t hit the mark” expounds the 
eighty thousand skandhas and the Twelve Divisions [of sutras]. 
Furthermore, a fist, a heel, a staff, or a whisk, is itself an old sutra, a 
new sutra, an existent sutra, an empty sutra. Endeavor of the way in 
the practicing community, and the practice of sitting zazen, is 
unquestionably a buddha sutra from beginning to end and from end to 
beginning. In this way, you inscribe sutras on bodhi leaves, and you 
inscribe sutras on the surface of the void. 

Rujing, my late master, would say, “In our place, burning incense, 
bowing, chanting the Buddha’s name, repentance, and reading sutras 
are not essential. Just sit, endeavor in the way, and drop away body 
and mind.” 

There are few who clarify the meaning of these words. How is it so? 
If you call reading sutras reading sutras, you get divided. If you don’t 
call reading sutras reading sutras, you are against it. You cannot get it 
with words. You cannot get it without words. Say it quickly. Say it 
quickly. 

Study this point. Because of this essential meaning, a teacher of old 
said, “Reading sutras carries the eye of reading sutras.” Know that 
without sutras in the past and present, such a statement as this would 
not be possible. Study that there is reading sutras while dropping 
away and there is reading sutras for beyond use. 

This being so, one or half a person who studies [dharma] 
unfailingly receives and maintains buddha sutras in order to be a 
buddha child; do not wastefully study the crooked views outside the 
way. As the treasury of the true dharma eye actualized right now is no 
other than buddha sutras, all buddha sutras are the treasury of the 
true dharma eye. They are neither the same nor different, neither the 
self nor other. 

Know that as there are many aspects within the treasury of the true 
dharma eye, you cannot fully clarify it. Yet, the treasury of the true 
dharma eye is expounded. There is no way you cannot have trust in it. 
Buddha sutras are like this. There are a number of them, but what you 
receive with trust is your one verse or your one phrase. Do not try to 
understand eighty thousand verses or phrases. 

Thus, even if you don’t have the mastery of buddha sutras, do not 
mistakenly say that buddha sutras are not buddha dharma. If you see 
through with a true eye what you regard as the bones and marrow of 
buddha ancestors, they may be merely later studies depending on 
letters. It may be the same as receiving and maintaining one verse or 
one phrase, or it may not be as close as receiving and maintaining one 
verse or one phrase. Do not slander the Buddha’s true dharma with 
your shallow understanding. 

There are no voices or forms that are more beneficial than buddha 
sutras. Voices and forms delude you, and yet you tend to seek them 
and be greedy for them. On the other hand, buddha sutras do not 
delude you. Do not slander them with a lack of trust in them. 

couple of hundred years, “Don’t keep the phrases of ancestral teachers 
in mind. Furthermore, don’t take a long look at or use the teachings of 
sutras. Instead, just keep your body and mind like a decayed tree or 
dead ash. Be like a broken wooden dipper or a barrel with no 
bottom.” 

Those who speak in this way are a band of those outside the way, of 
heavenly demons. They take up theories that should not be taken up. 
Because of such people, the buddha ancestors’ dharma has vainly 
become a dharma of crazy confusion. What a pity! How sad! 

Even a broken wooden dipper and a barrel with no bottom are 
ancient sutras of buddha ancestors. There are few buddha ancestors 
who understand the number of scrolls and the contents of such sutras. 
To say that buddha sutras are not buddha dharma is not to observe 
the occasions when buddha ancestors used sutras, not to study the 
occasions when buddha ancestors emerged from sutras, and not to 
know the degree of intimacy between buddha ancestors and buddha 
sutras. 

Hasty people who say such things are as many as stalks of straw, 
flax, bamboo, and reed. They ascend the lion seats and lead 
monasteries all over as teachers of humans and devas. Those who are 
hasty have studied with teachers who were hasty and do not know 
what is hasty. As they do not know it, they do not wish to be 
otherwise. How sad that they follow the ignorant and remain 
ignorant! 

As they lack the body and mind of buddha dharma, they do not 
know how the manner of the body should be and how the state of the 
mind should be. As they have not clarified existence and beyond 
existence, when they are asked questions they merely raise a fist 
without knowing its meaning. As they have not understood the paths 
of right and wrong, when they are asked questions they raise a whisk 
without knowing its meaning. Or, upon guiding students, they take up 
Linji’s “Four Understandings” and “Four Illuminations,” Yunmen’s 
“Three Phrases,” Dongshan’s “Three Roads” and “Five Ranks,” and so 
on, as the standards of studying the way. 

Rujing, my late master, Priest Tiantong, often laughed about it and 
said, “How can buddha study be like that? The great road of buddha 
ancestors often speaks of the body and speaks of the mind. When we 
study it, there is no sufficient time to experience it thoroughly. With 
what leisure could we accept the latecomer’s phrases? Know that 
elders in many places lack way-seeking mind and clearly have not 
studied the body and mind of buddha dharma.” 

This is how Rujing taught the assembly. 

Indeed, Linji is a latecomer in the assembly of Huangbo. After 
receiving sixty blows of a staff, he went to study with Dayu. Upon 
hearing the story about an old woman’s heart, he reflected on his 
practice up until then, and went back to Huangbo. Hearing about this, 
people think that Linji alone succeeded in Huangbo’s buddha dharma. 
They even think Linji excelled Huangbo. This is not true at all. 

Although Linji studied in the assembly of Huangbo, when Venerable 
Chen encouraged him to ask questions, it is said that he did not know 
what to ask. When he had not yet clarified the great matter and 
listened to a dharma discourse as a student of the way, how could he 
be dumbfounded like this? Thus, we know he did not have an 
outstanding capacity to learn. 

Also, Linji never had the aspiration to exceed his teacher. None of 
his statements exceeded his teacher’s. On the other hand, Huangbo 
had statements that exceeded his teacher’s; he had the wisdom that 
exceeded his teacher’s. He spoke words that no other buddhas had 
spoken. He understood the dharma that no other ancestors had 
understood. Huangbo is an old buddha who went beyond past and 
present. He was more venerable than Baizhang, and more brilliant 
than Mazu. 

Linji did not have such excellent spirit. Why not? He did not make a 
statement even in a dream that had never been spoken since olden 
times. It looks as if he understood many while forgetting one, and he 
mastered one while troubled with many. How could we regard his 
“Four Understandings” as having a flavor of the way and use them as 
pointers for studying dharma? 

Yunmen was a student of Xuefeng. He was regarded as a great 
master of humans and devas, but he still had room to study. To regard 
Yunmen as attaining the most essential is sorrowful. 

What did buddha ancestors make the standard of studying the way 
before Linji came and before Yunmen emerged? Know that the work 
of the way was not transmitted to their houses. 

Because people do not have anything to depend upon, they say such 
things [as regarding buddha sutras as not being buddha dharma]. 
These people make out buddha sutras to be desolate. Do not follow 
them. 

If you throw away buddha sutras, you might as well throw away 
Linji and Yunmen as well. If buddha sutras were not meant to be used, 
there would be no water to drink and no dipper with which to scoop 
water. 

The teaching of the “Three Roads” and the “Five Ranks” of 
Dongshan, High Ancestor, are knots and wood grains [theories] and 

are not in the realm to be known by hasty people. His teaching has 
been authentically transmitted, and the buddha work is directly 
pointing. It cannot be compared with the teachings of other schools. 

of the arhats. Further, how can they come close to bodhisattvas whose 
enlightenment is equal to buddhas or bodhisattvas of wondrous 
enlightenment? The teachings of Confucius and Laozi regard the 
insight of sages as great manifestation of the universe. But even in one 
lifetime or many lifetimes they can never clarify the cause and effect 
of great sages. Although they see the motion and stillness of body and 
mind as the doing of not-doing, they are unable to cut through and 
clarify the reality of the entire world of the ten directions. In fact, the 
teachings of Confucius and Laozi are inferior to buddha dharma by far 
more than the distance between heaven and earth. To discuss these 
teachings on the same level groundlessly slanders buddha dharma, 
and slanders Confucius and Laozi. 

Even if the teachings of Confucius and Laozi are fine and subtle, 
how can elders of recent times get a glimpse of them, even in 
countless years, let alone understand their outlines? They have 
instructions and trainings, which are not easily mastered by mediocre 
people nowadays. Yet, there is no one who tries to practice their 
teachings. The particle of one is not the same as that of the other. 
Furthermore, who among later practitioners would grasp the depth of 
buddha sutras? While clarifying none of the teachings, they 
groundlessly speak of the accord of the Three Teachings. 

Such people in Great Song China are awarded the title of Master 
and hold positions as teachers, being shameless in the past and 
present, and confusingly interpret the buddha way. It is hard to admit 
that they have buddha dharma. These elders insist that buddha sutras 
are not the true intention of the buddha way, but that the ancestral 
transmission is the true intention in which extraordinary subtlety has 
been transmitted. These statements represent extreme stupidity 
expressed by mad and confused people. 

In contrast, not one line or half a phrase in the authentic 
transmission of ancestors has anything extraordinary that differs from 
buddha sutras. It is just that buddha sutras and the ancestral way have 
been equally transmitted and spread from Shakyamuni Buddha. 
However, the ancestral transmission has been carried on from heir to 
heir. How else should we know, clarify, and chant buddha sutras? 

body. If you were to cast away buddha body and buddha mind, you 
might as well cast away buddha children. If you were to cast away 
buddha children, you might as well cast away the buddha way. If you 
were to cast away the buddha way, how should you not cast away the 
ancestral way? If you were to cast away the buddha way and the 
ancestral way altogether, you would be like a mere bald-headed 
farmer; who could say that you are not qualified to be beaten with a 
stick? You would not only be driven by kings and ministers, but 
tortured by Old Man Yama [King of Hell]. 

Because elders in recent times merely carry certificates issued by 
kings and ministers, and call themselves the heads of monasteries, 
they speak of such insane things [as ignoring buddha sutras]. But no 
one is able to discern their statements. Rujing, my late master, alone 
laughed at them, while elders in other monasteries were not aware of 
the problem. 

In general, do not assume that monks in other countries must have 
words they have clarified, and that masters of emperors in large 
nations must have something they have mastered. Sentient beings in 
other countries do not necessarily carry the seeds of monkhood. 
Wholesome beings are wholesome, and unwholesome beings are 
unwholesome. In all three realms of the world of phenomena, types of 
sentient beings are similar. 

To be the master of the emperor, a person of the way is not 
necessarily selected. The emperor doesn’t know who is a person of the 
way. He only hears his courtiers’ recommendations and makes an 
appointment. In the past and present, there have been persons of the 
way who have become teachers of the emperor, while there also have 
been persons not of the way who have become teachers of the 
emperor. Those who are appointed in a murky age are not people of 
the way. Those who are not appointed in a murky age are people of 
the way. The reason for this is that there are ages when people of the 
way are recognized and there are ages when people of the way are not 
recognized. 

Do not forget that there was Shenxiu at the time of Huangmei. 
Shenxiu was a teacher of the emperor who expounded dharma facing 
the imperial screen. He was a senior monk among seven hundred high 
monks. Remember also that there was Worker Lu [Huineng] in the 
same assembly. After being a woodcutter, he became a monastery 
worker. He stopped carrying wood and worked at the task of 
pounding rice. Although he was regrettably low in status, he was 
distinguished in laity and excelled in monkhood, attaining dharma 
and receiving the robe. Such a thing had never been heard of even in 
India—a rare outstanding precedent that only occurred in China. The 
seven hundred high monks could not stand shoulder to shoulder with 

Worker Lu; dragons and elephants [excellent practitioners] in the 
nation had no way to find his trace. Truly, Worker Lu succeeded to the 
thirty-third ancestral position as a buddha heir. Had his teacher 
Hongren, the Fifth Chinese Ancestor, not been someone who could 
recognize a true person, it would not have been possible. 

Quietly ponder this point. Do not take it carelessly. Hope to attain 
the power of recognizing true persons. Not to be able to recognize true 
persons is a great sickness of self and other, a great sickness of the 
world. To have broad and great knowledge is not essential. Hurry and 
look for the eye and power to recognize true persons. Without this 
power, you would sink in vast eons. 

54 

Lnsenrent Bies Speak Dauarma 

SpeaKinc DHARMA BY means of speaking dharma actualizes the 

fundamental point that buddha ancestors entrust to buddha ancestors. 
This speaking dharma is spoken by dharma. 

Speaking dharma is neither sentient nor insentient. It is neither 
creating nor not creating. It is not caused by creating or not creating. 
It doesn’t depend on conditions. This being so, just as birds fly in the 
air, speaking dharma leaves no trace. It is just given to Buddhist 
practitioners. 

When the great road is complete, speaking dharma is complete. 
When the dharma treasury is entrusted, speaking dharma is entrusted. 
When a flower is held up, speaking dharma is held up. When a robe is 
transmitted, speaking dharma is transmitted. In this way, all buddhas, 
all ancestors, have maintained speaking dharma since before the King 
of the Empty Eon. Expounding dharma has been their fundamental 
practice since the time before all buddhas. 

Do not think that buddha ancestors alone have brought forth 
speaking dharma. Speaking dharma has brought forth buddha 
ancestors. This speaking dharma is not limited to the teachings of 
eighty-four thousand dharma gates, but opens up the teachings of 
immeasurable, boundless gates. 

Do not think that dharma spoken by earlier buddhas was spoken by 
later buddhas. Just as earlier buddhas don’t become later buddhas, 
earlier speaking dharma does not become later speaking dharma. 
Thus, Shakyamuni Buddha said, “Just as all buddhas in the three 
worlds spoke dharma, I now speak indiscernible dharma.” 

In this way, just as each buddha employs speaking dharma, all 
buddhas employ speaking dharma. Just as each buddha transmits 
speaking dharma, all buddhas transmit speaking dharma. 

Insentient beings’ speaking dharma was transmitted from the 
ancient buddhas to the Seven Original Buddhas, and it has been 
transmitted from the Seven Original Buddhas to the present day. In 
this speaking dharma by insentient beings there are all buddhas, all 
ancestors. Do not think that the dharma I am speaking now is 
something new that has not been transmitted. Do not think that what 
has been transmitted since ancient times is an old pit of demons. 

dharma. If it were so, who would know and hear insentient beings 
speaking dharma? Reflect now: are there grass, trees, and forests in 
the world of insentient beings? Is the world of insentient beings mixed 
with the world of sentient beings? Furthermore, to regard grass and 
trees as insentient beings is not thoroughgoing. To regard insentient 
beings as grass, trees, tiles, and pebbles is not enough. 

Even if you hold a human view that regards grass, trees, and so on 
as insentient, you cannot grasp them by ordinary thinking. The reason 
is that there is a distinct difference between trees in heaven and trees 
in the human world. Those that grow in China and those that grow 
elsewhere are not the same. Plants in the ocean and those on 
mountains are completely different. Furthermore, there are trees that 
spread in space and trees that spread in clouds. Among hundreds of 
grasses and myriad trees that grow in air or in fire, there are those 
that should be understood as sentient, and those that should not be 
seen as insentient. There are grasses and trees that are like humans 
and beasts. They cannot be classified as either sentient or insentient. 
In sorcery, the trees, stones, flowers, fruits, and water are difficult to 
speak of even if you believe what you see. It is impossible to 
generalize about things in all corners of the world only by seeing and 
knowing about grass and trees in Japan. 

Huizhong said, All the sages do. It means that in the assembly where 
insentient beings speak dharma, all sages stand and listen. All sages 
and insentient beings actualize listening and actualize speaking. 
Insentient beings speak dharma for all sages. Is this sacred or 
ordinary? If you experience with your body the way insentient beings 
speak dharma, you will grasp with your body how all sages hear. As 
soon as you grasp this with your body, you can comprehend the realm 
of sages. In this way, you should practice the celestial path of going 
beyond ordinary and going beyond sacred. 

Huizhong said, I don’t hear it. Do not suppose that these words are 
easy to understand. Does he “not hear” as he goes beyond ordinary 
and sacred? Or does he “not hear” because he tears apart the old 
convention of ordinary and sacred? Investigate this and let the words 
come through. 

Huizhong said, This fortunate person doesn’t hear it. If I did, I would be 
equal to all sages. This presentation is not one or two phrases. The 
fortunate person is neither ordinary nor sacred. Is this a buddha 
ancestor? Because buddha ancestors go beyond ordinary and sacred, 
what all sages hear is not the same. 

Huizhong said, Then you could not hear me expound dharma. Work on 
these words and prepare the enlightenment of all buddhas and sages. 
The essence is that insentient beings speak dharma, and all sages hear 
it; Huizhong speaks dharma, and this monk hears it. Day by day and 

month by month, make this matter the focus of your study. Now, ask 
Huizhong, “I am not asking you what happens when sentient beings 
hear it. But what happens at the precise moment when sentient beings 
hear the dharma expounded?” 

assembly of beings, those who hear insentient beings speak dharma 
are insentient, whether they are sentient beings or insentient beings, 
ordinary or sacred. 

With these essentials you should determine if past or present 
teachings are true or false. Even if a teaching was brought from India, 
if it has not been authentically transmitted by genuine masters, do not 
adopt it. Even if the lineage of teaching has lasted for thousands of 
years, if there is not an authentic succession from heir to heir, it’s not 
worth inheriting. Today, authentically transmitted teaching has 
already spread across the eastern lands. You can easily distinguish 
what is genuine or false. 

When you hear, Sentient beings hear sentient beings speak dharma, 
accept this as the bones and marrow of all buddhas and ancestors. 
When you hear the words of Yunyan and Huizhong and wrestle with 
them, the sages who speak what all sages hear are insentient. 
Insentient beings who speak what insentient beings hear are sages. 
Since insentient beings speaking dharma are insentient, what they 
speak is insentient. This is how insentient beings speak dharma. This 
is how speaking dharma is insentient. 

Dongshan responded: Being so, I don’t hear you speak dharma. Being 
so here refers to Yunyan’s words, Insentient beings hear insentient beings 
speak dharma. Because insentient beings hear insentient beings speak 
dharma, Dongshan said, I don’t hear you speak dharma. At this 
moment, Dongshan not only became part of the audience, but also 
revealed his towering determination to speak dharma for insentient 
beings. He not only experienced insentient beings speaking dharma, 
but he thoroughly took hold of hearing and not hearing insentient 
beings speak dharma. From there he experienced sentient beings 
speaking, not speaking, already having spoken, now speaking, and just 
speaking dharma. Furthermore, he clarified the hearing and the not- 
hearing of the dharma spoken by sentient beings and insentient 
beings. 

Actually, hearing dharma is not limited to ear sense and ear 
consciousness. You hear dharma with complete power, complete 
mind, complete body, and complete way from before your parents 
were born, before the Empty Eon, through the entire future, the 
unlimited future. You can hear dharma with body first and mind last. 

Such ways of hearing the dharma are all effective. Don’t think that 
you are not benefited by hearing the dharma if it does not reach your 
mind consciousness. Effacing mind, dropping body, you hear the 
dharma and see the result. With no mind and no body, you should 
hear dharma and benefit from it. Experiencing such moments is how 
all buddha ancestors become buddhas and attain ancestorhood. 

Ordinary people cannot understand that dharma power transforms 

body and mind. The boundary of body and mind cannot be 
encompassed. When the effect of hearing dharma is planted in the 
field of body and mind, it never decays. It is bound to grow and bear 
fruit. 

Foolish people may think that when we hear dharma, if we do not 
advance in understanding and cannot remember the teaching, there 
will be no benefit from it. They say it is essential to learn broadly and 
memorize extensively with our entire body and mind. They think that 
forgetting the teaching, absentmindedly leaving the place of 
instruction, creates no benefit and no accomplishment. They think in 
this way because they have not met a genuine teacher and 
encountered themselves. One who has not received authentic 
transmission face to face cannot be a genuine teacher. A genuine 
teacher is one who has received transmission authentically from 
buddha to buddha. 

Indeed, to memorize in mind consciousness and not to forget is 
exactly how the power of hearing the dharma encompasses the mind 
and encompasses consciousness. At the very moment when this is 
done, you realize the power of encompassing body; encompassing past 
body, encompassing mind; encompassing past mind, encompassing 
future mind; encompassing cause and condition, action and result; 
encompassing form, essence, body, and activity; encompassing 
buddha; encompassing ancestor; encompassing self and other; and 
encompassing skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. The power of 
encompassing speech and encompassing sitting and lying down is 
manifest throughout the entire earth and sky. 

The power of hearing dharma is not easy to know. But when we join 
the great assembly of buddha ancestors, and study their skin, flesh, 
bones, and marrow, there is no instant when the power of speaking 
dharma does not work, and there is no place where the power of 
hearing dharma does not extend. The tides of timelessness bring forth 
sudden or gradual effects. Thus, learning broadly and memorizing 
extensively are not to be abandoned. However, they are not the only 
key. Students should know about this. Dongshan understood it. 

Yunyan replied: You haven’t been hearing me speak dharma. How 
could you hear insentient beings speak dharma? This is how Yunyan 
pulled open the lapels of his own robe and with the bones and marrow 
of the ancestors certified that Dongshan had actualized enlightenment 
on top of enlightenment. You haven’t been hearing me speak dharma. 
Ordinary people can’t say this. He was assuring Dongshan that 
however variously insentient beings speak dharma, Dongshan should 
not be lost in thought about it. The transmission at this moment was 
truly subtle and pivotal. Ordinary sages cannot easily understand it. 

Dongshan responded by presenting this poem: How splendid! How 

wondrous! Inconceivable! Insentient beings speak dharma. Thus, 
insentient beings and their speaking dharma are both difficult to think 
about. What are the so-called insentient beings? Study that they are 
neither ordinary nor sacred, neither sentient nor insentient. Ordinary 
and sacred, sentient and insentient [in a usual sense], may be reached 
by thinking whether they are speaking or not speaking. Now it is 
inconceivable, splendid, and wondrous. What is splendid and 
wondrous cannot be reached by the wisdom and consciousness of the 
ordinary or the sacred. Heavenly beings and ordinary humans cannot 
assess it. 

The ears never hear it. Even with heavenly ears or with dharma ears 
of all realms and all times, it cannot be understood through what is 
heard. Even with an ear on the wall or an ear on a stick, insentient 
beings speaking dharma cannot be heard, because it is not a sound 
that is the object of the ear. It is not that hearing with ears does not 
happen, but that it is impossible to hear even if we try for hundreds 
and thousands of eons. Insentient beings speaking dharma is the 
awesome manifestation of the single way beyond sound and form. 
Insentient beings speaking dharma is beyond the pit that ordinary 
beings and sages fall into. 

Only the eyes do. Some people may think that this statement means 
that the coming and going of grass, trees, flowers, and birds viewed by 
humans are what eyes hear. This view is mistaken. It is not at all 
buddha dharma. There is no such understanding in the buddha 
dharma. 

When we study Dongshan’s words Only the eyes do, it means we 
hear the voice of insentient beings speaking dharma with the eyes. We 
manifest the voice of insentient beings speaking dharma with the eyes. 
Investigate the eyes extensively. Because the voice heard by the eyes 
should be the same as the voice heard by the ears, the voice heard by 
the eyes is not the same as the voice heard by the ears. Do not think 
that eyes have ear organs. Do not think that eyes are ears. Do not 
think that voice appears in the eyes. 

eyes, one thousand tongue eyes, one thousand mind eyes, one 
thousand eyes throughout the mind, one thousand eyes throughout 
the body, one thousand eyes on top of a stick, one thousand eyes on 
the extremities of the body, one thousand eyes on the extremities of 
the mind, one thousand dead eyes in the midst of death, one thousand 
living eyes in the midst of life, one thousand eyes of self, one thousand 
eyes of other, one thousand eyes on top of eyes, one thousand eyes of 
study, one thousand vertical eyes, and one thousand horizontal eyes. 

This being so, even if you study these entire eyes as the entire 
world, still it is not the embodiment of eyes. Urgently investigate 
hearing with the eyes insentient beings speaking dharma. 

The meaning of Dongshan’s words is that insentient beings speaking 
dharma cannot be understood by ears. The eyes can hear the voice. 
Furthermore, there is hearing voice throughout the body and there is 
hearing voice wherever the body can reach. Even if you do not 
embody hearing the voice with the eyes, you should master with your 
body insentient beings hear insentient beings speaking dharma, and let go 
of insentient beings hear insentient beings speaking dharma. 

equally beyond bad-mouthing. Know that insentient beings speaking 
dharma is the totality of buddha ancestors. It is not known by 
followers of Linji or Deshan. Only buddha ancestors penetrate this. 

Presented to the assembly of the ancient Yoshimine Temple, Yoshida 
County, Echizen Province, on the second day, the tenth month, the 
first year of the Kan gen Era [1243]. 

rote) 
Dauarma Nature 

Wren you stupy buddha dharma with a sutra or with a teacher, you 

come to realization without a teacher. Coming to realization without a 
teacher occurs due to dharma nature. 

Even if you have knowledge by birth, you should always look for a 
teacher and inquire about the way. Even if you have beyond- 
knowledge by birth, you should always practice in the endeavor of the 
way. Who does not have knowledge by birth? And yet, study a sutra 
and follow a teacher. 

Know that to encounter a sutra or a teacher and experience dharma- 
nature samadhi is called the knowledge by birth of dharma-nature 
samadhi through encountering dharma-nature samadhi. This is 
acquiring knowledge of a past life, acquiring the three miraculous 
powers, and realizing unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. 

You encounter knowledge by birth and study knowledge by birth. 
You encounter knowledge without a teacher and spontaneous 
knowledge, and authentically transmit knowledge without a teacher 
and spontaneous knowledge. 

Without having knowledge by birth, you cannot hear dharma nature 
and you cannot realize dharma nature even if you encounter a sutra or 
a teacher. The great way is not like someone who drinks water and 
therefore knows whether it is cold or warm. 

All buddhas, all bodhisattvas, and all sentient beings clarify the 
great road of all dharma nature with the power of knowledge by birth. 
That you clarify the great road of dharma nature with a sutra and a 
teacher is no other than clarifying dharma nature by yourself. 

Sutras are dharma nature that is you yourself. A teacher is dharma 
nature that is you yourself. Dharma nature is a teacher. Dharma 
nature is you yourself. Because dharma nature is you yourself, it is not 
you tempted by those outside the way or a group of demons. Dharma 
nature has no outside-the-way and no demons. It is just that you have 
a morning meal, you have a midday meal, and you have tea. 

However, those who call themselves students for two or three 
decades keep being dumbfounded upon hearing a discussion on 
dharma nature; they pass their lives in this way. Those who call 
themselves longtimers in monasteries, who are seated in a bent-wood 

teaching chair, can only climb in and out of a pit of confusion with 
their bodies, minds, and environs when they hear the voice of dharma 
nature and see its form. Their reaction proves that they mistakenly 
think that dharma nature emerges even after the three realms and the 
ten directions we live in collapse. They also mistakenly think that such 
dharma nature is separate from all phenomena in this moment. 

The meaning of dharma nature is not like that. All phenomena and 
dharma nature go beyond arguments about whether they are the same 
or different, about whether they are identical or separate. What is not 
past, present, and future, not permanent or impermanent, not form, 
perception, feeling, inclination, and discernment, is dharma nature. 

ancestor, by means of dharma-nature samadhi. Buddhas and ancestors 
enliven dharma nature without the need to enter it. 

Even though dharma teachers of letters speak of dharma nature, it is 
not the dharma nature spoken of by Mazu. The statement that sentient 
beings who have not come out of dharma nature can never be dharma 
nature may happen to have a point. Yet, such a statement is three or 
four more pieces of dharma nature. Talks and activities to deny 
dharma nature are also dharma nature. 

Days and months in immeasurable eons are the passage of dharma 
nature. Present and future are also like this. Thinking that one is far 
from dharma nature, making the scale of one’s body the scale of body 
and mind is dharma nature. Both thinking and not-thinking are 
dharma nature. Those who think that water does not flow or trees do 
not grow and decay in what is called dharma nature are people 
outside the way. 

is dharma nature,” “Dharma nature is beyond sentient beings,” 
“Dharma nature is released from dharma nature,” or “Sentient beings 
are released from sentient beings.” 

What we hear from Mazu is merely, No sentient beings have the need 
to come out of dharma-nature samadhi. But he did not say, “Dharma 
nature has no need to come out of sentient-being samadhi,” or 
“Dharma-nature samadhi goes in and out of sentient-being samadhi.” 

Furthermore, what is not heard from Mazu are: “Dharma nature 
becomes buddha,” “Sentient beings realize dharma nature,” or 
“Insentient beings do not have the need to come out of dharma 
nature.” 

Now, ask Mazu: “What do you call sentient beings? If you call 
dharma nature sentient beings, it is no other than ‘What has thus 
come?’ If you call sentient beings sentient beings, it is no other than 
‘Your words are close but have not hit the mark.” 

Tell me what it is. Tell me quickly. 

Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, Echizen Province, 
in early winter [the tenth month], the first year of the Kangen Era 
[1243]. 

56 
D HARANI 

I; YOUR EYE of study is clear, your true dharma eye is clear. As your 

true dharma eye is clear, you have a clear eye of study. What 
authentically transmits this essential matter is no other than the 
power to see a great teacher. This is a great matter. This is a great 
dharani [total sustenance]. What is called a great teacher is a buddha 
ancestor. Always serve the buddha ancestor by bringing a towel and a 
water jar [as Yangshan did for Guishan]. 

Thus, the disciple bringing tea and the teacher drinking it actualizes 
the essential heart. It actualizes miracles. The disciple bringing a basin 
of water and the teacher taking a wash is unaffected by the 
surroundings. It is being aware in the adjacent room of what is 
happening [as in the Guishan story]. 

This is not only studying the essential heart of buddha ancestors, 
but encountering one or two buddha ancestors who are immersed in 
the essential heart. It is not only receiving miracles of buddha 
ancestors, but experiencing seven or eight buddha ancestors who are 
immersed in miracles. 

The miracles of all buddha ancestors are thoroughly experienced by 
this bundle of activities [of serving the teacher]. The essential heart of 
all buddha ancestors is thoroughly experienced by this single act. This 
being so, it is not inappropriate to greet your teacher by offering 
celestial flowers and celestial incense. Yet, you are a true descendant 
of buddha ancestors by greeting your teacher and offering the 
wholehearted dharani. 

teacher is someone who has ordained you or has transmitted dharma 
to you. These two may be the same person. You stay with and see 
your root teacher. This is the dharani of making greetings. Be close to 
your teacher without long absences. 

At the beginning and the end of a practice period, on winter solstice 
as well as at the beginning and in the middle of a month, make a point 
to offer incense and bow to your teacher. A good time for this is 
before or after the morning meal. 

Dress formally and go to the teacher’s hall. To dress formally means 
to wear the kashaya, carry the folded bowing cloth, wear clean 
sandals and socks, and carry a stick of incense or a block of 
aloeswood. In this way you meet your teacher and make a greeting 
statement. Then your teacher’s attending monk readies an incense 
burner and lights a candle. If the teacher is seated on a chair, light the 
incense and offer it by setting it in the incense burner. If the teacher is 
behind the screen, set the incense in the burner outside the screen. If 
the teacher is lying down or having a meal, burn and offer the incense 
in the same manner. 

If the teacher is standing, say, “Master, please sit down.” Or say, 
“Master, please make yourself comfortable.” There are many other 
ways to ask your teacher to sit down. After your teacher is seated, you 
make a greeting statement while you bend forward in a formal 
manner. Then, you go to the incense burner in front of you and set 
upright the incense you have brought. 

This is the way for carrying and burning the incense: You carry it 
under the lapel of your robe, inside the robe above the belt, or inside 
a sleeve; this is up to you. After the greeting, you take the incense out. 
If the incense is wrapped in paper, you turn your upper body toward 
the left, take off the paper, hold up the incense with both hands [turn 
back, light it], and set it in the incense burner. Set it upright without 
leaning. After setting it, you turn around to the right in shashu, walk 
in front of your teacher, bow, and make a greeting statement. Then, 
you spread the bowing cloth, and bow. 

You bow nine or twelve times. After the bowing is over, fold up the 
bowing cloth and continue your greeting statement. 

Or, spread the bowing cloth once, make three formal bows, and 
offer seasonal greetings. 

The nine bows I have mentioned means spreading the bowing cloth 
and making three most formal bows; repeat this three times without 
being interrupted by a seasonal greeting. This form has been handed 
down from the Seven Original Buddhas. This essential teaching has 
been authentically transmitted. That is why we follow this form. Such 
greetings have not been abandoned since ancient times. 

Besides these greetings, you bow to the teacher upon receiving 

dharma teachings or asking for materials to study. For example, when 
Huike expressed his understanding to Bodhidharma, he made three 
bows. Upon expressing the essence of the treasury of the true dharma 
eye, Huike made these bows. Know that bowing is the treasury of the 
true dharma eye. The treasury of the true dharma eye is a great 
dharani. 

When asking for instruction, one “hitting bow” has recently been 
practiced. An ancient way is bowing three times: to express gratitude 
for a teaching, three bows or nine bows are not necessarily practiced. 
It can be semiformal bows [bowing down with the face touching the 
fourfold bowing cloth] or six bows. These are both bowing down with 
the head touching the floor. They are called the utmost bowing in 
India. For this you hit the floor with your forehead. You repeat it until 
you start bleeding. The bowing cloth is spread in this case also. For 
one bow, three or six bows, you hit the floor with your forehead. This 
is called hitting bows. 

In the secular world also there are bows, such as nine types of bows. 

When you receive a dharma instruction, you can do indefinite bows. 
That is to bow ceaselessly, one hundred or one thousand times. 

These bows have been practiced in the assemblies of buddha 
ancestors. Follow the instructions of your teacher and practice it 
according to the guidelines. When bowing remains in the world, 
buddha dharma remains. When bowing disappears, buddha dharma 
disappears. 

The five monks—Ajnatakaundinya, Assaji, Mahanaman, Bhadrika, 
and Vappa—were the first ones, after the Tathagata attained the way, 
to spontaneously stand up, face toward the north, and offer him bows. 
When those outside the way and demons give up wrong views and 
take refuge in the Buddha, they always face north and make an 
offering of bows. 

Since then, all those who have joined the assemblies of ancestors of 
the twenty-eight generations in India, and all generations in China, 
and all those taking refuge in the true dharma, without exception have 
bowed toward the north. This has been affirmed by the true dharma 
and not planned by teachers and disciples. This is a great dharani. 

When you bow to ancient buddhas and present buddhas in countless 
billions of eons, it is the moment of being wrapped in Shakyamuni 
Buddha’s robe. 

Once your body is wrapped in a kashaya, you attain Shakyamuni 
Buddha’s flesh, hands and feet, head and eyes, marrow and brains, 
radiant light, and turning of the wheel of dharma. You wear a kashaya 
in this way. This actualizes the power of the robe. You vow and make 
offerings to Shakyamuni Buddha by maintaining, enjoying, protecting, 
and wearing the kashaya. By doing so, the practice of countless eons is 
thoroughly experienced. 

To bow to and make offerings to Shakyamuni Buddha is to bow to 
and make offerings to the root teacher who has transmitted dharma to 
you, and to bow to and make offerings to the root teacher who has 
shaved your head. This is no other than seeing Shakyamuni Buddha, 
offering dharma to Shakyamuni Buddha, offering dharani to 
Shakyamuni Buddha. 

o7 

Face-ro a Face "Transmission 

Once, ON VULTURE Peak in India, in the midst of a vast assembly of 

beings, Shakyamuni Buddha held up an udumbara blossom and 
blinked. Mahakashyapa smiled. Then Shakyamuni Buddha said, “I 
have the treasury of the true dharma eye, the wondrous heart of 
nirvana. I entrust it to Mahakashyapa.” 

This is the meaning of transmitting the treasury of the true dharma 
eye, face to face, from buddha to buddha, from ancestor to ancestor. It 
was authentically transmitted through the Seven Original Buddhas to 
Mahakashyapa. From Mahakashyapa there were _ twenty-eight 
transmissions up to and including Bodhidharma. Venerable 
Bodhidharma himself went to China and gave face-to-face 
transmission to Huike, Great Master Zhengzong Pujue. There were five 
transmissions through to Huineng, Great Master Dajian of Mount 
Caoxi. Then there were seventeen transmissions through Rujing, my 
late master, Old Buddha Tiantong of the renowned Mount Taibai, 
Qingyuan Prefecture, Great Song. 

received this transmission from Kashyapa Buddha and has passed it 
on. There are no buddhas without receiving face-to-face transmission 
from the buddha face. 

Shakyamuni Buddha, by seeing Mahakashyapa, intimately entrusted 
him with the dharma. Ananda or Rahula were not equal to 
Mahakashyapa, who received the intimate entrustment. Nor were all 
the great bodhisattvas, who were unable to sit in Mahakashyapa’s 
seat. 

The World-Honored One and Mahakashyapa sat together on the 
same seat and wore the same robe. This occurred only once in the 
Buddha’s life. Thus, Mahakashyapa received the World-Honored One’s 
transmission directly face to face, mind to mind, body to body, and 
eye to eye. Mahakashyapa respectfully greeted Shakyamuni Buddha 
while making offerings and bowing formally. Thousands of times 
Mahakashyapa had pounded his bones and crushed his body. His face 
was no longer his own. Thus, he received the Tathagata’s face through 
face-to-face transmission. 

generation’s gap until now. This is face-to-face transmission. 

All these authentic heirs are the buddha face; each of them has 
received face-to-face transmission from the original buddha face. 
Bowing formally to this authentic face-to-face transmission is bowing 
to the Seven Original Buddhas, including Shakyamuni Buddha, and 
bowing and making offerings to Mahakashyapa and the rest of the 
twenty-eight Indian buddha ancestors. 

The face and eyeball of buddha ancestors are like this. To see these 
buddha ancestors is to see the Seven Original Buddhas, including 
Shakyamuni Buddha. Exactly at this moment, buddha ancestors are 
intimately transmitting themselves. 

A face-to-face-transmitting buddha transmits to a face-to-face- 
transmitting buddha. A _ face-to-face-transmitting buddha is 
transmitted from vine to vine, without being cut off. Such 
transmission is transmitted from eye to eye, with the eye open. It is 
transmitted from face to face, with the face revealed. 

Face-to-face transmission is given and received in the presence of 
the buddha face. Mind is taken up, transmitted to mind, and received 
by mind. Body is manifested and transmitted to body. In other regions 
or countries, this is regarded as the original heritage. In China and 
eastward, there is face-to-face transmission only within the house of 
authentically transmitted buddha ancestors. Thus, the true eye that 
always sees the Tathagata anew has been transmitted. 

teacher sees the student from within, and the student lowers the top of 
the head; this is authentic face-to-face transmission. 

Venerate this face-to-face transmission. If the traces of mind were 
only projected in the field of mind, they would not be of great value. 
However, if you receive face-to-face transmission by exchanging your 
face, and if you give face-to-face transmission by turning your head, 
the face skin is three inches thick and ten feet thin. 

This face skin is the great round mirror of all buddhas. Because they 
have the great round mirror as their face skin, they are unmarred 
inside and outside. A great round mirror transmits to a great round 
mirror. 

You who rightly transmit the true eye that directly sees Shakyamuni 
Buddha are more intimate with Shakyamuni Buddha than Shakyamuni 
Buddha is with himself. With this eye you see and bring forth 
numerous past and future Shakyamuni Buddhas. Therefore, in order to 
express adoration to Shakyamuni Buddha, you should profoundly 
venerate this authentic face-to-face transmission and with formal bows 
acknowledge the extreme rarity of meeting with it. This is to bow 
formally to the Tathagata and to be given face-to-face transmission by 
the Tathagata. You may wonder if it is the self that now sees the 
unchanging practice of authentic transmission of the face-to-face- 
transmitting tathagatas. Whether it is the self or other that sees this 
transmission, you should treasure and protect it. 

It is taught in the buddha’s house that those who bow formally to 
the Eight Pagodas are liberated from the hindrances of unwholesome 
actions and experience the fruit of the way. These pagodas are the 
actualization of Shakyamuni Buddha’s way. They were built where he 
was born, where he turned the dharma wheel, attained the way, 
entered pari-nirvana, at the city of Kanyakubja, and at Amrapali 
Grove, thus completing the earth and the sky. They were built by way 
of sounds, smells, tastes, touchables, mental phenomena, and forms. 
The fruit of the way is realized by formally bowing to the Eight 
Pagodas. This is a common practice in India performed by laypeople 
and monks, by devas and human beings who devotedly make offerings 
and prostrations. These pagodas are equal to one volume of the 
scripture. 

A buddha scripture is like this. Even beyond that, the practice of the 
thirty-seven wings of enlightenment and attaining the fruit of the way 
in each and every birth is actualized by allowing the trace of 
Shakyamuni Buddha’s practice throughout time. This is to prevail as 
the authentic way everywhere and to be clearly expressed in past and 
present. 

Know that, although wind and rain wear them down, the Eight 
Pagodas, standing layer upon layer through numerous frosts and 
flowers, are not diminished in their merit, remaining in emptiness and 
form. Because of this, even if you have delusion and hindrance, when 
you practice the [fivefold] root, the [fivefold] power, the limbs of 
enlightenment, and the noble path, the power of the Eight Pagodas is 
still vital in your practice and realization. 

The benefaction of Shakyamuni Buddha is like this. Even so, face-to- 
face transmission is incomparably greater than the Eight Pago-das. 
The thirty-seven wings of enlightenment are rooted in the buddha 
face, the buddha mind, the buddha body, the buddha way, the buddha 
nose, and the buddha tongue. The benefaction of the Eight Pagodas is 
also based on the buddha face and so forth. While practicing the vital 
path of penetration, you who study dharma should think deeply day 
and night about this and quietly rejoice. 

ordinary bones and marrow, there is the buddha ancestor’s 
transmission face to face. The face-to-face transmission of great 
enlightenment, the face-to-face transmission of the mind seal, is 
extraordinary. Transmission is never exhausted; there is never a lack 
of enlightenment. 

Now, the great way of buddha ancestors is only giving and receiving 
face to face, receiving and giving face to face; there is nothing 
excessive and there is nothing lacking. Faithfully and joyously realize 
when your own face meets someone who has received this 
transmission face to face. 

death of great master Mazu, Huangbo said that he had not seen 
him. Thus, we know that Huangbo’s view was incomplete. That is 
to say, he had only one eye. But I am not like that. I know great 
master Yunmen, and I have seen great master Yunmen. Therefore, 
I am great master Yunmen’s heir. 

But more than one hundred years have passed since the death 
of Yunmen. Then, how can we say that I have personally seen 
him? Do you understand this? Those who have reached this state, 
I will approve. But those who have dim eyes will produce doubt 
and slander in their mind, so they cannot see and explain it. 
Those of you who have not seen, can you get it now? Please take 
care of yourselves. 

Chenggu, admitting that you know great master Yunmen and have 
seen him, has great master Yunmen seen you or not? If great master 
Yunmen has not seen you, you cannot be great master Yunmen’s heir. 
Because great master Yunmen has not seen you, you cannot say that 
great master Yunmen has seen you. Thus, we know that you and great 
master Yunmen have not yet seen each other. 

In the past, present, and future of the Seven Original Buddhas and 
all buddhas, which of the buddha ancestors have received dharma 
without the teacher and disciple seeing each other? Chenggu, you 
should not say that Huangbo’s view was incomplete. How can you 
evaluate Huangbo’s practice, and how can you evaluate Huangbo’s 
words? Huangbo was an authentic buddha; he thoroughly knew about 
dharma transmission. But you have never dreamed of the meaning of 
dharma transmission. Huangbo received dharma transmission from his 
teacher and he maintained the dharma of this ancestor. Huangbo met 
and saw his teacher. But you have neither seen a teacher nor known 
an ancestor. You neither know the self nor see the self. No teacher has 
seen you, and your eye as a teacher has not yet opened. The truth is 
that your view is incomplete, your succession of dharma _ is 
incomplete. 

Chenggu, do you understand that great master Yunmen is a dharma 
descendant of Huangbo? How can you evaluate the words of Baizhang 
and Huangbo? You cannot even evaluate the words of Yunmen. The 
words of Baizhang and Huangbo are presented by those who are able 
to study and are evaluated by those who have directly experienced 
dropping away. But you do not study and you do not experience 
dropping away; you do not understand and you cannot evaluate it. 

You say that Huangbo did not receive dharma from great master Ma 
[Mazu] although it was less than five years since great master Ma’s 
death. Your understanding is not worth a laugh. If you are to receive 
dharma, you will receive it only after innumerable eons. If not, you 

will not receive it after half a day or even after a moment. You are a 
totally ignorant fool who has not yet seen the sunface moonface 
[various aspects] of the buddha way. 

You say that you are great master Yunmen’s heir although more 
than one hundred years have passed since the death of Yunmen. Have 
you received dharma from Yunmen because you have monumental 
power? You are as ignorant as a three-year-old child. Does this mean 
that someone who receives dharma from Yunmen one thousand years 
later will have a power ten times as great as yours? 

Let me rescue you now. Study these words: Baizhang said, Are you 
great master Mazu’s heir? This does not mean that Huangbo was asked 
to inherit dharma from great master Mazu. You should now study 
these words of the combating lion. By studying the story of a black 
tortoise climbing up a tree backward, you should investigate the vital 
way of moving forward and moving backward. Upon inheriting 
dharma there is this kind of study. Huangbo’s words I fear I will lose 
my descendants cannot be evaluated by you. Do you understand what 
he meant by my and descendants? You must examine this in detail; the 
meaning is already manifested, and nothing is hidden. 

However, someone called Weibai, Zen Master Fuguo, ignorant of the 
dharma heritage of buddha ancestors, listed Chenggu as a dharma heir 
of Yunmen. It is a mistake. Those who study the way later should not 
naively think that Chenggu had mastered the way. 

Chenggu, if dharma heritage can be attained through literature as 
you imply, do all those who reach understanding by reading sutras 
receive dharma from Shakyamuni Buddha? It is never so. 
Understanding by sutras always requires an authentic master’s seal of 
approval. 

Your words show that you have not yet read the recorded sayings of 
Yunmen. Only those who have seen Yunmen’s words have received 
dharma from Yunmen. But you have not yet seen Yunmen with your 
own eyes; you have not yet seen the self with your own eyes. You 
have not seen Yunmen with Yunmen’s eyes; you have not seen the self 
with Yunmen’s eyes. 

There are many people like you who have not thoroughly studied. 
Continually buy straw sandals and seek an authentic master from 
whom to receive dharma. You should not say that you have received 
dharma from great master Yunmen. If you do so, you will enter the 
stream of those outside the way. Even Baizhang would be mistaken if 
he talked like you. 

58 
Russ FOR Zazen 

Practicine ZEN Is zazen. For zazen, a quiet place is suitable. Lay out a 

thick mat. Do not let in drafts or smoke, rain or dew. Protect and 
maintain the place that contains your body. There are examples from 
the past of sitting on a diamond seat and sitting on a flat stone 
covered with a thick layer of grass. Day or night, the place of sitting 
should not be dark; it should be kept warm in winter and cool in 
summer. 

Set aside all involvements and let the myriad things rest. Zazen is 
not thinking of good, not thinking of bad. It is not conscious endeavor. 
It is not introspection. Do not desire to become a buddha. Let sitting 
or lying down drop away. Be moderate in eating and drinking. 
Mindful of the passing of time, engage yourself in zazen as though 
saving your head from fire. On Mount Huangmei, Hongren, the Fifth 
Ancestor, practiced zazen to the exclusion of all other activities. 

When sitting zazen, wear the kashaya and use a round cushion. The 
cushion should not be placed all the way under the legs, but only 
under the buttocks. In this way the crossed legs rest on the [soft] mat 
and the backbone is supported with the round cushion. This is the 
method used by all buddha ancestors for zazen. 

Sit either in the half-lotus position or in the full-lotus position. For 
the full-lotus put the right foot on the left thigh and the left foot on 
the right thigh. The toes should lie along the thighs, not extending 
beyond. For the half-lotus position, simply put the left foot on the 
right thigh. 

Loosen your robes and arrange them in an orderly way. Place the 
right hand on the left foot and the left hand on the right hand, with 
the ends of the thumbs lightly touching each other. With the hands in 
this position, place them close to the body so that the joined thumb- 
tips are at the navel. 

Straighten your body and sit upright. Do not lean to the left or 
right; do not bend forward or backward. Your ears should be in line 
with your shoulders, and your nose in line with your navel. 

Rest your tongue against the roof of your mouth, and breathe 
through your nose. Lips and teeth should be closed. Eyes should be 
open, neither too wide, nor too narrow. Having adjusted body and 

mind in this manner, take a breath and exhale fully. 

Sit solidly in samadhi and think not-thinking. How do you think 
not-thinking? Beyond thinking. This is the art of zazen. 

Zazen is not learning to do concentration. It is the dharma gate of 
great ease and joy. It is undivided practice-realization. 

Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, Yoshida County, 
Echizen Province, in the eleventh month, the first year of the Kangen 
Era [1243]. 

59 

Pium Biossoms 

Ruse, MY LATE master, Old Buddha Tiantong, was the thirtieth abbot 

of the Tiantong Jingde Monastery, renowned Mount Taibai, Qingyuan 
Prefecture, Great Song. He ascended the teaching seat and said to the 
assembly: 

Tiantong’s first phrase of midwinter: 

Old plum tree bent and gnarled 

all at once opens one blossom, two blossoms, 
three, four, five blossoms, uncountable blossoms, 
not proud of purity, 

not proud of fragrance; 

spreading, becoming spring, 

blowing over grass and trees, 

balding the head of a patch-robed monk. 
Whirling, quickly changing into wild wind, stormy rain, 
falling, snow all over the earth. 

The old plum tree is boundless. 

A hard cold rubs the nostrils. 

The old plum tree spoken of here is boundless. All at once its 
blossoms open, and of itself the fruit is born. 

It forms spring; it forms winter. It arouses wild wind and stormy 
rain. It is the head of a patch-robed monk; it is the eyeball of an 
ancient buddha. It becomes grass and trees; it becomes pure fragrance. 
Its whirling, miraculous quick transformation has no_ limit. 
Furthermore, the treeness of the great earth, high sky, bright sun, and 
clear moon derives from the treeness of the old plum tree. They have 
always been entangled, vine with vine. 

When the old plum tree suddenly opens, the world of blossoming 
flowers arises. At the moment when the world of blossoming flowers 
arises, spring arrives. There is a single blossom that opens five petals. 
At this moment of a single blossom, there are three, four, and five 
blossoms, hundreds, thousands, myriads, billions of blossoms— 
countless blossoms. These blossomings are not-being-proud-of one, 
two, or countless branches of the old plum tree. An udumbara blossom 

and blue lotus blossoms are also one or two branches of the old plum 
tree’s blossoms. Blossoming is the old plum tree’s offering. 

The old plum tree is within the human world and the heavenly 
world. The old plum tree manifests both human and heavenly worlds 
in its treeness. Thus, hundreds and thousands of blossoms are called 
both human and heavenly blossoms. Myriads and billions of blossoms 
are buddha ancestor blossoms. In such a moment, “All buddhas have 
appeared in the world!” is shouted; “The ancestor was originally in 
this land!” is shouted. 

enter the chamber whenever I wished, to take refuge in his venerable 
form, and to listen to the dharma words, even though I was someone 
from a remote country? Although I was foolish and ignorant, it is an 
excellent causal relationship that is not at all hollow.” 

When Rujing was giving guidance in Song China, there were those 
who could receive personal guidance from him and those who could 
not. Now that he has left Song China, it is darker than dark night. 
Why? Because there is no old buddha like Rujing—before or after him. 
Therefore, you who study later should think about this upon hearing 
these words. Do not think that human and heavenly beings 
everywhere see and hear this dharma wheel. 

The plum blossoms in snow is the emergence of an udumbara 
blossom. How often do we see the eyeball of the true dharma of our 
Buddha Tathagata but do not smile, missing his blink? Now we 
authentically receive and accept that plum blossoms in snow are truly 
the Tathagata’s eyeball. We take them up and hold them as the eye at 
the top of the head, as the pupil of the eye. 

When we enter into plum blossoms and fully study them, there is no 
room for doubt to arise. They are already the eyeball of “Alone above 
and below the heavens, I am the honored one,” and again, “most 
honored in the world of phenomena.” 

Thus, heavenly blossoms in heaven, heavenly blossoms in the 
human world, mandara blossoms raining from heaven, great mandara 
blossoms, manjushaka blossoms, great manjushaka blossoms, and all 
blossoms of inexhaustible lands in the ten directions are one family of 
plum blossoms in snow. Because they bloom as offerings of plum 
blossoms, billions of blossoms are one family of plum blossoms. They 
should be called young plum blossoms. Furthermore, flowers in the 
sky, flowers on the earth, and flowers of samadhi are all the large and 
small members of plum blossoms’ family. 

To form billions of lands within blossoms and to bloom in the land 
is the gift of plum blossoms. Without the offering of plum blossoms 
there is no offering of rain or dew. The life vein consists of plum 
blossoms. Do not regard plum blossoms merely as snow all over the 
Shaolin Temple of Mount Song. They are the Tathagata’s eyeball 
illuminating overhead and underfoot. Do not regard plum blossoms 
merely as snow of the Snow Mountains or the Snow Palace. They are 
the Old Gautama’s eyeball of true dharma. The eyeballs of the five 
eyes are fully manifested in this place. The eyeballs of one thousand 
eyes are completed in this eyeball. 

Indeed, Old Gautama’s radiant light of body-mind contains not one 
unillumined particle of the reality of all things. Even if there is a 

difference of views between human and heavenly beings, and the 
minds of ordinary and sacred are separate from one another, snow-all- 
over is earth, earth is snow-all-over. Without snow-all-over there is no 
earth in the entire world. The intimate outside-inside of this snow-all- 
over is Old Gautama’s eyeball. 

Know that blossoms and ground are entirely beyond birth. Because 
blossoms are beyond birth, ground is beyond birth. Because blossoms 
and ground are entirely beyond birth, eyeball is beyond birth. 
“Beyond birth” means unsurpassed enlightenment. To see it just this 
moment is plum blossoms in snow just one branch. Ground and 
blossoms, birth permeating birth. This snow, all over means snow 
completely covers outside and inside. 

The entire world is mind ground; the entire world is blossom heart. 
Because the entire world is blossom heart, the entire world is plum 
blossoms. Because the entire world is plum blossoms, the entire world 
is Gautama’s eyeball. 

Here, everywhere, right now is mountains, rivers, and earth. 
Everything, every moment, is realization everywhere of “I am 
originally in this land, transmit dharma, and save deluded minds. One 
blossom opens five petals. The fruit matures of itself [as expressed by 
Bodhidharma].” Although there is the coming [of buddha dharma] 
from India and proceeding east-ward, this is the everywhere of plum 
blossoms right now. 

Realization of this right now is nothing other than become thorn 
branches everywhere right now. A great branch is the right now of old 
branches and new branches. A small twig is the everywhere of old 
twigs and new twigs. Study this place as everywhere and study 
everywhere as now. 

Within three, four, five, or six blossoms is within countless 
blossoms. Blossoms embody deep, vast characteristics of inside, and 
reveal high and vast characteristics of outside. This outside-inside is 
the blooming of one blossom. Because there is just one branch, there 
are no other branches, no other trees. Every place reached by one 
branch is right now. This is Old Man Gautama. Because it is just one 
branch, it is entrusting, heir to heir. 

This being so, “I have the treasury of the true dharma eye. This is 
entrusted to Mahakashyapa” and “You have attained my marrow.” 
This realization everywhere leaves nothing that is not deeply revered. 
Thus, five petals open; the five petals are plum blossoms. 

Accordingly, there are Seven Original Buddha ancestors, twenty- 
eight Indian ancestors, six early Chinese ancestors, and nineteen later 
Chinese ancestors. They are all just one stem opening five petals, five 
petals in just one stem. Practicing thoroughly one branch and 

practicing thoroughly five petals is plum-blossoms-in-snow 
authentically receiving, entrusting, and encountering. Turning body 
and mind inside the ceaseless murmuring of just one branch, clouds 
and moon are one, valleys and mountains are separate. 

However, those who have no penetrating eye say, “‘One blossom 
opens five petals’ means that Bodhidharma brings forth the five early 
Chinese ancestors. Because this line of five ancestors cannot be 
equaled by those coming either before or after, they are called five 
petals.” This statement is not worth criticizing. Those who say so do 
not study with buddhas and ancestors. What a pity! How can the road 
of five petals in one blossom be limited to the five ancestors? Are 
those who came after Huineng, the Sixth Ancestor, not to be 
mentioned? This does not even attain the level of childish talk! Never 
pay attention to such statements. 

One word—precisely! 

The long ages do not move. 
Willow eyes arouse new twigs. 
Plum blossoms fill old branches. 

This means that the endeavor of the way throughout a hundred 
great eons is, from beginning to end, One word—precisely! Practice in 
the moment of a thought is both before and after The long ages do not 
move. 

This causes the new twigs to grow thickly and makes the eyeballs 
clear and bright. Although they are new twigs, they are eyes. 
Although they are nothing but eyes, they are seen as new twigs. 
Penetrate this newness as Myriad things are all new. 

Plum blossoms fill old branches means that plum blossoms are totally 
old branches and pervade old branches: old branches are nothing but 
plum blossoms. In this way blossoms and branches merge. Blossoms 
and branches are born of the same moment. At once blossoms and 
branches are filled. Because blossoms and branches are filled as one, 
“T have the true dharma. This is entrusted to Mahakashyapa.” Each 
face is filled with taking up the flower; each blossom is filled with 
breaking into a smile. 

Spring lies in plum twigs accompanied by snow—cold. 

The story is that King Prasenajit once asked Pindola whether he had 
seen the Buddha or not. To see the Buddha is to become a buddha. To 
become a buddha is to raise the eyebrow. Even if Pindola had realized 
the fruit of an arhat, unless he was a true arhat he could not have seen 
the Buddha. Unless he saw the Buddha, he could not have become a 
buddha. Unless he became a buddha, he could not have raised the 
eyebrow. 

Know that Venerable Pindola was a face-to-face transmission 
disciple of Shakyamuni Buddha and, having realized the four fruits of 
the way, was awaiting the emergence of another buddha—how could 
he not have seen Shakyamuni Buddha? Saw the Buddha is not just 
seeing a buddha but seeing Shakyamuni Buddha as Shakyamuni 
Buddha seeing himself. It has been studied in this way. When King 
Prasenajit opened this eye of study, he met a skilled hand that raised 
the eyebrow. 

Have a penetrating buddha eye that calmly looks into the meaning 
of saw the Buddha in person. This spring lies neither in the human 
world nor in a buddha land, but in plum twigs. How do we know this? 
It is snow and cold, raising eyebrows. 

This was written on the sixth day, the eleventh month, the first year of 
the Kangen Era [1243], at the Yoshimine Temple, Yoshida County, 
Echizen Province. Snow is three feet deep, all over the land. 

POSTSCRIPT 

If a doubt arises and you think that plum blossoms are not Gautama’s 
eye-ball, consider whether anything other than plum blossoms may be 
seen as his eyeball. If you seek the eyeball elsewhere, you will not 
recognize it even though you are facing it, because meeting is not 
consummated. This day is not this day of an individual; it is this day 
of the great house. Realize plum blossoms as the eyeball right now. 
Stop seeking any further! 

60 
Ten Dhrections 

A SINGLE FIST, JUST this, is the ten directions. A sincere heart, just one, 

is simply the ten directions crystal clear. The ten directions squeeze 
out the marrow from the bone. 

known, either. 

Regarding this, Shakyamuni Buddha said to the assembly, “I just 
know the essence. So do the buddhas in the ten directions.” 

Know that I just know the essence is to draw a circle. The drawn 
circle means “That pole is that long. This pole is this long.” 

The Buddha’s words, in the ten directions means: “I just know the 
essence. So does Shakyamuni Buddha.” It is no other than “I just 
realize the essence. So do the buddhas in this direction.” It is I form, 
know form, this form, all form, ten directions form, Saha Land form, 
Shakyamuni Buddha form. 

All these forms are buddha sutras. All buddhas and buddha lands 
are not two. They are neither sentient nor insentient, neither delusion 
nor enlightenment, neither wholesome nor unwholesome, nor neutral, 
neither pure nor defiled, neither forming nor maintaining, neither 
disintegrating nor empty. They are neither permanent nor 
impermanent, neither existent nor nonexistent, neither self nor other. 
They are free from the four views [on existence and nonexistence]; 
they go beyond the one hundred negations. They are just the ten 
directions, just the buddha lands. Thus, the ten directions have a head 
but no tail. 

ocean mouth and a mountain tongue [of the Buddha]. Thus, one 
covers the mouth and covers the ears. This is the true thusness of the 
ten directions. 

[Changsha continued further,] “The entire world of the ten 
directions is the whole body of a monk.” 

One hand points to heaven. This is heaven. One hand points to the 
earth. This is the earth. Thus, “In heaven above and earth below, I 
alone am the honored one.” This is the entire world of the ten 
directions that is the whole body of a monk. The head top, eyes, 
nostrils, skin, flesh, bones, and marrow—each is the monk’s body that 
penetrates the entire ten directions. It does so without disturbing the 
entire ten directions. It takes up the monk’s body of the entire ten 
directions, and sees the monk’s body of the entire ten directions 
without measuring. 

[Changsha continued,] “The entire world of the ten directions is the 
radiant light of the self.” 

The self means nostrils before the birth of your parents. The nostrils, 
being by accident in the hand of the self, are called the entire world of 
the ten directions. Yet, the self is right here, actualizing the 
fundamental point, opening the hall, and seeing the Buddha. 

Although the eyeball has been switched to a black bead by someone 
else, going straight ahead you meet the assembly of a great house. 
Although calling is easy and responding is difficult, when you are 
called, you turn your head. When you turn your head, what use can it 
be? Still, you turn your head toward the person who called. 

A meal waits for you to eat it. A robe waits for you to wear it. What 
a pity you don’t take it while it wants you to. I have already given you 
thirty blows. 

[Changsha continued,] “The entire world of the ten directions is 
within the radiant light of the self.” 

The eyelid, just one piece, is called the radiant light of the self. When 
it opens all of a sudden, it is called within. What you see in the eye is 
called the entire ten directions. This being so, sleeping on the same 
bed, you both know there is an opening in the cover. 

[Changsha continues,] “In the entire world of the ten directions, 
there is no single person that is not the self.” 

Thus, each practitioner, each fist, in the ten directions, cannot help 
but be the self. There are no ten directions that are not the self. Each 
and every self is the ten directions. The ten directions of each and 
every self are intimately immersed in the ten directions. Because the 
life vein of each and every self is altogether in the hand of the self, the 
self passes on the original nourishment to the self. 

How now are Bodhidharma’s eye and Gautama’s nostrils in the 
womb of a bare pillar? Let me say: “They come and go. The ten 

directions leave everything to all ten directions.” 

61 

Sze THE Buppua 

Suaxvamunt BuDDHA sAID [in the Diamond Sutra] to the assembly, 
“When you see forms and beyond forms, you see the Tathagata.” 

You see forms and beyond forms is seeing through [forms and 
beyond] with the body. Thus, you see the Tathagata. When the practice 
of opening the eye to see the Tathagata is actualized, you see the 
Buddha. The vital path of seeing the Buddha is the practice of seeing 
the Buddha. 

When you see buddha-as-self elsewhere and buddha-as-self outside 
of buddha, they may be seen [as indistinguishable] as branches and 
vines. However, when you study seeing the Buddha, understand 
seeing the Buddha, drop away seeing the Buddha, vitally grasp seeing 
the Buddha, and utilize seeing the Buddha, it is [varied] like seeing 
the Sun-Face Buddha and seeing the Moon-Face Buddha. 

These ways of seeing the Buddha are equally seeing the Buddha 
with inexhaustible faces, with inexhaustible bodies, with inexhaustible 
minds, and with inexhaustible hands and eyes. 

From the moment of arousing the aspiration for enlightenment, you 
take steps on the journey in the endeavor of the way. Merging with 
realization and thorough understanding are all the vital eye, bones, 
and marrow that run into seeing the Buddha. This being so, the total 
world of self, the total direction of other, this and that, are all the 
practice of seeing the Buddha. 

In investigating the Tathagata’s statement, When you see forms and 
beyond forms, those who lack the eye of study assume that to see forms 
as beyond forms is itself seeing the Tathagata. They think that since 
forms are beyond forms, they are the Tathagata. Although a part of 
their small view is like this, the meaning of the Buddha’s statement is 
not so. 

Know that to see through forms and to see through beyond forms is 
actually seeing the Tathagata. There is Tathagata, and there is beyond 
Tathagata. 

see that all forms are beyond forms, you don’t see the Tathagata.” 

These words by Fayan are words of seeing the Buddha. When we 
examine these words, they stand out and extend their hands. Listen to 
his words with your ears. Listen to his words of seeing the Buddha 
with your eyes. 

Those who studied the meaning of his words in the past say: 

All forms are Tathagata forms. There is never a single form that 
merges with what is not the Tathagata forms. Never regard forms 
as beyond forms. To do so is to escape from your own parents. 
Because these forms are nothing but the Tathagata forms, Fayan 
said that all forms are all forms. 

However, these words by Fayan are the utmost statement of the 
Mahayana, confirmed by masters in various places. Accept his words 
with trust and practice, and do not take them lightly like feathers 
flying in the east or west wind. See thoroughly that all forms are 
Tathagata forms and not beyond forms. See the Buddha in this way, 
make up your mind, realize trust, and maintain these words. Chant 
these words and become familiar with them. 

Thus, keep seeing and hearing these words with your ears and eyes. 
Have the words drop away in your body, mind, bones, and marrow. 
Have the words seen through your mountains, rivers, and entire 
world. This is the practice of studying with buddha ancestors. 

Do not think that your own words and actions cannot awaken your 
own eye. Turned by your own turning words, you see and drop away 
your own turning of buddha ancestors. This is the everyday activity of 
buddha ancestors. 

In this way, there is a single path to study. No forms are beyond 
forms, beyond forms are all forms. Because beyond forms are all 
forms, beyond forms are indeed beyond forms. Study that forms that 
are called beyond forms, and forms that are called all forms, are both 
Tathagata forms. 

Inside the house of study, there are two types of commentaries— 
those made by seeing the scriptures and those made without seeing 
the scriptures. This is what a vital eye studies. If you have not 
penetrated the scriptures by seeing with the eye, it is not studying 
thoroughly with the eye. Without studying thoroughly with the eye, 
you do not see the Buddha. 

In seeing the Buddha, there is seeing where forms are and seeing 
where beyond forms are. It is [as Huineng said] “I don’t understand 
buddha dharma.” 

In not seeing the Buddha, there is seeing where forms are and 
seeing where beyond forms are. It is [as Huineng said] “There is 

someone who understands buddha dharma.” This is understanding 
Fayan’s words eight or nine out of ten. 

This being so, say further on this matter of grave importance: “If 
you see the reality of all things, that is to see the Tathagata.” 

All of these words have been caused by the teaching of Shakyamuni 
Buddha, and are not the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of any others. 

To enter deep is samadhi. To enter deep is to see buddhas in the ten 
directions. Because of “entering so deep inside that no one can guide 
the person,” to enter deep is to see buddhas in the ten directions. Because 
“Even if you brought it, the person would not accept it” [as Dongshan 
said], buddhas are in the ten directions. 

To enter deep is for a long, long time not to leave. To see buddhas in 
the ten directions is just to see the Tathagata lying down. 

Samadhi is to enter but not to come out. If you are not suspicious 
and fearful of a true dragon, you have no doubts to let go of at the 
very moment of seeing the Buddha. 

Because you see the Buddha by seeing the Buddha, you enter deep 
in samadhi from samadhi. It is not that the experience of samadhi, 
seeing the Buddha, and entering deep was created by a person of 
leisurely practice in the past and has been transmitted to another 
person in the present. Although it is not a newly sprouted bud, it is as 
it is. All transmission of the way, succeeding in the work, is like this. 
Practicing cause and receiving effect is like this. 

Shakyamuni Buddha. When you encourage your body and mind, and 
receive, chant, memorize, practice, and copy the Lotus Sutra, you 
immediately see Shakyamuni Buddha. 

Just like hearing the sutra from the Buddha’s own mouth—who would 
not rush to hear it? Those who do not immediately practice it are 
sentient beings who lack benefaction and wisdom. Know that those 
who study and practice it immediately see Shakyamuni Buddha. 

in the high place, and a low place is vast and flat in the low place. 
Where we are is a lapis lazuli ground. Do not look down on it as 
merely vast and flat. 

The surface of this Saha World is vast and flat, made of lapis lazuli is 
like this. If you don’t see where we are as a lapis lazuli ground, 
Vulture Peak would not be Vulture Peak, Shakyamuni Buddha would 
not be Shakyamuni Buddha. Understanding that where we are is a 
lapis lazuli ground is no other than understanding it with trust in your 
deep heart. It is to see the Buddha. 

Because the Tathagata is determined to maintain this sutra, he 
always recommends this sutra to you. When there are those who 
maintain this sutra, they invariably see Shakyamuni Buddha. Thus, we 
know that if you see the Buddha, you maintain the sutra. Those who 
maintain the sutra see the Buddha. 

Thus, those of you who maintain one verse or one phrase [of this 
sutra] see Shakyamuni Buddha, Prabhutaratna Buddha, and the 
incarnated buddhas. You receive the transmission of the treasury of 
the dharma, the true eye of the Buddha, and you see the life of the 
Buddha. You receive the eye going beyond, the eye on top of the head, 
and the nostril of the Buddha. 

fact has not ceased until now, revealing that Pindola is worthy of 
offerings. Thus, the fact that Pindola had personally seen the Buddha 
cannot be doubted. 

The question Have you personally seen the Buddha? asked by the king 
of three hundred million people [Prasenajit] meant whether Pindola 
had seen the Buddha in this way. It is not seeing the thirty-two marks 
of the Buddha. Seeing the thirty-two marks of the Buddha can be done 
by anybody. 

There are a number of humans, devas, shravakas, and pratyeka- 
buddhas who do not know the meaning of truly seeing the Buddha 
[and say that they haven’t seen the Buddha]. It is just like saying that 
they have hardly seen a whisk being raised [teaching being given], 
although they see a whisk being raised quite often. 

To see the Buddha is to be seen by the Buddha. However hard you 
may try to hide it, your seeing the Buddha comes forth and lets itself 
leak out [be revealed]. This is how seeing the Buddha works. 
Endeavor with your bodies and minds as numerous as the sands of the 
Ganges and investigate thoroughly the meaning of Pindola raising his 
eyebrows. 

Even if you lived together with Shakyamuni Buddha day and night 
for one hundred, one thousand, or ten thousand eons, if you did not 
have the ability to raise your eyebrows, this would not be seeing the 
Buddha. On the other hand, even if you are far away from the Buddha 
by hundreds of thousands of li and by over two thousand years, if you 
personally actualize the ability of raising your eyebrows, you have 
seen Shakyamuni Buddha since the time before the King of the Empty 
Eon. It is seeing one branch of plum blossoms, seeing spring in a 
branch of plum blossoms. 

Thus, personally seeing the Buddha is formally bowing three times, 
greeting with hands joined together, smiling, a fist striking thunder, 
sitting on the cushion in meditation posture. 

Buddha, he was trying to see if the venerable teacher was actually 
venerable. Responding to this question, Pindola immediately brushed 
up his eyebrows. This is to actualize seeing the Buddha in this world. 
This is to personally show having become a buddha. 

Pindola said, When the Dragon King of Anavatapta Lake invited all 
buddhas and offered a feast, I was one of those who were present. Know 
that in the assembly of invited buddhas, the attendees of “only a 
buddha and a buddha” are as numerous as stalks of straw, flax, 
bamboo, and reeds. This is beyond the reach of arhats who have 
attained the four fruits, or pratyeka-buddhas. Even if such 
practitioners come, don’t regard them as members of invited buddhas. 

However, Pindola proclaimed that he was one of those who were 
present when all buddhas were invited. This is a boundless self- 
expression. It is clear that he did see the Buddha. When the Dragon 
King invited all buddhas, not only Shakyamuni Buddha but also 
countless and endless buddhas of the ten directions in the past, 
present, and future were invited. The buddhas who were invited 
personally saw Shakyamuni Buddha without separation. The point of 
seeing the Buddha, seeing the teacher, seeing the self, seeing yourself, is 
also like this. 

Anavatapta Lake is also called Annoktapta Lake, the lake of no 
suffering from heat. 

not having teaching words or having conversational words. It is not 
raising the eyebrows or brushing up the eyebrows, but it is directly 
seeing the eyebrows. Even if Zhaozhou was a genius standing alone, 
he could not have said this without personally seeing Nanquan. 

Zhaozhou said, A giant radish was here in Zhen Region, when he was 
abbot of the Zhenji Monastery in Doujia Garden, Zhen Region. He was 
later given the title Great Master Zhenji. In this way, from the time 
when he practiced opening the eye of seeing the Buddha, he held the 
authentic transmission of the buddha ancestors’ treasury of the true 
dharma eye. When the treasury of the true dharma eye is 
authentically transmitted, the gentle and awesome presence of seeing 
the Buddha is actualized. Right here, see the Buddha enormously and 
magnificently. 

Presented to the assembly at Yamashi Peak on the nineteenth day, the 
eleventh month, the first year of the Kangen Era [1243]. 

62 
Au- Incwusive Srupy 

Tue GREAT way of buddha ancestors is to penetrate the ultimate realm, 

soaring with no strings attached or like clouds arising below your feet. 

This being so, “The world of blossoming flowers arises,” and “I am 
always intimate with this.” Accordingly, sweet melon has a sweet 
stem, bitter gourd has a bitter root. Sweet melon and its stem are 
sweet through and through. Thus, the way has been studied 
thoroughly. 

buddha ancestors in India are also like this.” 

After this, Nanyue praticed all-inclusively for eight more years; 
counting from beginning to end, it was an all-inclusive study of fifteen 
years. 

To thus come is all-inclusive study. To open up the hall and see all 
buddhas and all ancestors where Speaking about it won’t hit the mark is 
all-inclusive study. 

Since entering into and seeing the picture, there have been sixty- 
five hundred thousand myriad billions of turning bodies of all- 
inclusive study. Leisurely entering the monastery and leisurely leaving 
the monastery are not all-inclusive study. Seeing with the entire 
eyeball is all-inclusive study. Getting all the way through is all- 
inclusive study. To understand whether the face skin is thick or not is 
all-inclusive study. 

forth on the Four Seas and Five Lakes is not to allow the Four Seas 
and Five Lakes to study all-inclusively. By treading back and forth, 
you will make the road smooth, the ground beneath your feet will 
become smooth, but all-inclusive study will be lost. 

Because Xuansha studied all-inclusively the understanding of “The 
entire universe of the ten directions is the true human body,” he 
reached the understanding of Bodhidharma did not come to China. 
Huike did not go to India. 

All-inclusive study means “If the top of a stone is large, the bottom 
is large. If the top of the stone is small, the bottom is small.” Without 
changing the top of a stone, you allow the stone to be large or to be 
small. To study a hundred thousand myriad things only as a hundred 
thousand myriad things is not yet all-inclusive study. To turn a 
hundred thousand myriad bodies even in half a statement is all- 
inclusive study. 

For example, “Just hit the earth when you hit the earth” is all- 
inclusive study. Merely hitting the earth once, hitting the sky once, or 
hitting the four directions and eight directions once is not all-inclusive 
study. But Juzhi’s studying with Tianlong and attaining one finger is 
all-inclusive study. Juzhi’s just raising one finger is all-inclusive study. 

headed fellow [himself] on Mount Xuansha, they were sharing study. 

Studying together or not studying together—you should allow 
yourself and others to reflect on this. Old Man Xuansha and Old Man 
Shakyamuni studied together, studied all-inclusively. Together study 
all-inclusively: “With whom did the third son of Xie and Xuansha 
study?” 

If the meaning of all-inclusive study does not appear, then studying 
the self is not attained, studying the self is not complete; studying 
others is not attained, studying others is not complete; studying a true 
person is not attained, studying yourself is not attained; studying the 
fist is not attained, studying the eyeball is not attained; self hooking 
self is not attained, catching the fish without a hook is not attained. 

If you thoroughly experience all-inclusive study, all-inclusive study 
is dropped away. When the ocean is dry, no bottom is visible. When a 
person is dead, no mind remains. “The ocean is dry” means the entire 
ocean is completely dry. The ocean is dry and you cannot see the 
bottom. Not remaining and completely remaining—both are the 
person’s mind. When a person is dead, the mind does not remain. 
When death is taken up, the mind does not remain. This being so, 
know that the entire person is mind, the entire mind is the person. In 
this way, investigate thoroughly from top to bottom. 

four or five thousand avenues of pleasure quarters, two or three 
myriads of wind-and-string pavilions. 

But when the whole body of the great road leaps out, it leaps out 
from the head, not from anywhere else. In the same way, it enters the 
nostrils. Both leaping out and entering are studies of the way. Those 
who have not leaped out of the head or inhaled the body through the 
nostrils are not students of the way or persons of all-inclusive study. 
Study the meaning of all-inclusive study just with Xuansha. 

63 

Evesau 

Urxowpine STUDY THROUGH a billion eons and turning it into a ball is 
eighty-four thousand eyeballs. 

When Dongshan, who would later become Great Master Wuben, was 
at the assembly of Yunyan, he saw Yunyan making straw sandals. 
Dongshan asked him, “Please, may I have an eyeball?” 

Yunyan said, “To whom did you give away yours?” 

Dongshan said, “I did not have one.” 

Yunyan said, “Yes, you did. Where did you put it?” 

Dongshan was silent. 

Yunyan said, “You are asking for an eyeball. Isn’t your asking an 
eyeball?” 

Dogshan said, “It’s not an eyeball.” 

Yunyan clicked his tongue. 

In this way, all-illuminating study is to ask for an eyeball. To engage 
in the endeavor of the way in the cloud hall, to get to the dharma hall, 
to enter the hall for sleeping, are all asking for an eyeball. To join the 
assembly as it arrives and to join the assembly as it leaves is no other 
than asking for an eyeball. It is clear that the eyeball is not self, and 
not other. 

Thus, Dongshan said, Please, may I have an eyeball? From this we 
know that we should not ask someone else for what is self or what is 
other. 

Yunyan instructed: To whom did you give away yours? This is the 
moment of you. This is the point of to whom. 

Dongshan said, I did not have one. This is an eyeball expressing 
itself. Quietly investigate and pursue the meaning of such an 
actualized expression. 

Yunyan said, Where did you put it? The eyeball of this expression is 
that the not of I did not have one is no other than Where did you put it? 
And Where did you put it? means Yes, you did. Understand that this is 
an expression of thusness. 

Dongshan was silent. This does not mean that his mind was clouded. 
His statement shows that he had retreated to the edge of 
consciousness. 

Yunyan said, You are asking for an eyeball. Isn’t your asking an 
eyeball? This is the knot and grain [signs] of glancing with an eyeball. 
It is a vital crushing of an eyeball. What Yunyan showed is that an 
eyeball asks for an eyeball, water draws water, and mountains flow to 
mountains. His statement is an expression [of compassion] for us to 
journey among other types of beings and to be born among the same 
type of beings. 

Dogshan said, It’s not an eyeball. This is an eyeball expounding itself. 
See that a vital eyeball is expressing itself where there are body, mind, 
and thinking beyond an eyeball, as well as words beyond an eyeball. 

Buddhas in the past, present, and future stand and listen to the eye- 
ball turn and expound the great dharma wheel. Inside the chamber of 
investigating thoroughly, buddhas leap into the eyeball and arouse 
aspiration, engage in practice, and realize great enlightenment. This 
eyeball is neither self nor other. As it has no hindrance, these great 
actions are without hindrance. 

A wild fox spirit hides in grass for six years, 

leaps—its entire body is twining vines. 

Smashing the eyeball, there is nothing to seek. 

Deceived, people call it enlightenment at the morning star. 

That the Tathagata was enlightened upon seeing the morning star is 
how outsiders talk about the moment of smashing the eyeball right 
now. This is, however, its entire body is twining vines. Thus, it leaps 
effortlessly. 

There is nothing to seek means that there is nothing to seek in 
actualizing and not yet actualizing. 

64 

Evvervpay Accrwrry 

In THE DOMAIN of buddha ancestors, drinking tea and eating rice are 
everyday activity. Drinking tea and eating rice have been transmitted 
for a long time and are present right now. Thus, the buddha ancestors’ 
vital activity of drinking tea and eating rice comes to us. 

said: 

I have built a grass hut where no coins are kept. 
Having had rice, I am ready for a leisurely nap. 

Having had rice—words come, words go, words come and go, filled 
with buddha ancestors’ thoughts and phrases. Not yet having rice 
means not yet being satisfied. However, the point of having had rice 
and a leisurely nap is actualized before having rice, while having rice, 
and after having rice. To assume that the experience of having rice lies 
only after having had rice is the mere study of four or five sho [small 
amount] of rice. 

When fatigue comes, sleep. 
Furnace and bellows, each covers the entire sky. 

When hunger comes is the vital activity of a person who has had rice. 
A person who has not had rice has not had hunger. Since this is so, a 
person who gets hungry every day is someone who has had rice. 
Understand this completely. When fatigue comes means that there is 
fatigue in the midst of fatigue; it springs forth completely from the 
summit of fatigue. Accordingly, the entire body is completely turned 
right now by the activity of the entire body. 

Sleep is to sleep using the buddha eye, dharma eye, wisdom eye, 
ancestor eye, and pillar-and-lantern eye. 

Discuss the profound, expound the inconceivable—endless. 
I avoid the self-deception of holding up a flower. 

Immediately penetrate this. Wondrous golden form means wearing a 
robe and eating rice. Wearing a robe and eating rice is wondrous 
golden form. Do not wonder who is wearing a robe and eating rice. Do 
not say whose wondrous golden form it is. 

Speaking in this way is complete expression. This is the meaning of 
So I bow to you. Thus “I have already had rice. You have just bowed to 
the rice.” This is because “I completely avoid holding up a flower.” 

someone who has not?” 
Zhaozhou said, “Director.” 
“Yes.” 
Zhaozhou said, “Have some tea.” 

Zhaozhou’s word here does not mean the top of the head, the 
nostrils, or Zhaozhou. Since here leaps off here, a monk said, I have 
been here, and another said, I have not been here. It means: What is 
now? Whatever is here, just say, “I have been here” or “I have not 
been here.” 

65 
Dracon Sone 

Touzi, GREAT MASTER Ciji of Shu Region, was once asked by a monk, 

“Ts there a dragon singing in a withered tree?” 
Touzi replied, “I say there is a lion roaring in a skull.” 

Discussions about a withered tree and dead ash [composure in 
stillness] are originally teachings outside the way. But the withered 
tree spoken of by those outside the way and that spoken of by buddha 
ancestors are far apart. Those outside the way talk about a withered 
tree, but they don’t authentically know it; how can they hear the 
dragon singing? They think that a withered tree is a dead tree which 
does not grow leaves in spring. 

The withered tree spoken of by buddha ancestors is the 
understanding of the ocean drying up. The ocean drying up is the tree 
withering. The tree withering encounters spring. The immovability of 
the tree is its witheredness. The mountain trees, ocean trees, and sky 
trees right now are all withered trees. That which sprouts buds is a 
dragon singing in a withered tree. Those who embrace it one 
hundredfold, one thousand-fold, and one myriadfold are descendants 
of the withered tree. 

The form, essence, body, and power of this witheredness are a 
withered stake spoken of by a buddha ancestor [Sushan Guangren]. It 
is beyond a withered stake. There are mountain valley trees, and 
fields-of-village trees. The mountain valley trees are called pines and 
cypresses in the common world. The fields-of-village trees are called 
humans and devas in the common world. Those that depend on roots 
and spread leaves are called buddha ancestors. They all go back to the 
essence. This is to be studied. This is the tall dharma body of a 
withered tree and the short dharma body of a withered tree. 

Without a withered tree there wouldn’t be the dragon singing. 
Without a withered tree the dragon’s singing wouldn’t be smashed. “I 
have encountered spring many times, but the mind has not changed” 
[a line by Damei Fachang] is the dragon singing with complete 
witheredness. Although the dragon’s singing does not conform with 
gong, shang, jue, zhi, yu [do, re, mi, fa, so], gong, shang, jue, zhi, yu 
are the before and after, two or three elements of the dragon’s singing. 

In this way, the monk’s words, Is there a dragon singing in a withered 
tree? emerge for the first time as a question and a statement for 
immeasurable eons. As for Touzi’s response, I say there is a lion roaring 
in a skull—what could hinder it? It keeps bending self and pushing 
other without ceasing. The skull covers the entire field. 

To ask if anyone has heard it is like asking if there is anyone who has 
not gotten it. In regard to Caoshan’s statement, In the entire world there 
is no one who has not heard it, ask further: “Never mind the fact that 
there is no one who has not heard it; where is the dragon’s song at the 
time when no one in the entire world has heard it? Say it quickly, 
quickly!” 

I wonder if anyone has heard it. Regarding this question, say: “The 
dragon song is howling and humming in muddy water, exhaling 
through the nostrils.” 

No one knows what kind of song the dragon sings is to have a dragon 
in the song. All who hear it lose it [become completely selfless] is 
something we should treasure. 

66 

Serine AND Avrumn 

Donesuan, GREAT MASTER Wuben, was once asked by a monk, “When 

cold or heat comes, how can we avoid it?” 

Dongshan said, “Why don’t you go where there is no cold or heat?” 

The monk said, “What do you mean by ‘where there is no cold or 
heat’?” 

Dongshan said, “When it is cold, cold finishes the monk. When it is 
hot, heat demolishes the monk.” 

This story has often been examined in the past. Many of you should 
also pursue it now. Buddha ancestors have never failed to master this 
matter, and those who have mastered it are buddha ancestors. Buddha 
ancestors in India and China, both past and present, often made this 
issue the face and eye of their realization. To bring forth this face and 
eye is the fundamental point of buddha ancestors. 

This being so, examine in detail the monk’s question When cold or 
heat comes, how can we avoid it? This is to study the very moment 
when cold comes or the moment when heat comes. This cold or heat 
—complete cold or complete heat—is itself cold or heat. Accordingly, 
when either comes, it comes from the summit of cold or the summit of 
heat, and manifests from the eyeball of cold itself or heat itself. This 
summit is where there is no cold or heat. This eyeball is where there is 
no cold or heat. 

Dongshan’s words When it is cold, cold finishes the monk. When it is 
hot, heat demolishes the monk show how it is when the moment arrives. 
Even if there is the expression When it is cold, cold finishes, it is not 
necessary that when it is hot, heat demolishes the expression. Cold 
penetrates the root of cold, heat penetrates the root of heat. Even if 
you try millions of times to avoid cold or heat, it is like trying to put a 
tail where the head is. Cold is the vital eyeball of the ancestral school. 
Heat is the warm skin and flesh of my late master. 

Many of you examine this dialogue and say, “This monk’s 
question already falls into differentiation. Dongshan’s answer 
brings the matter to oneness. The monk understood the meaning 
of Dongshan’s words and entered oneness. Dongshan then entered 
differentiation.” 

To analyze in such a way is to denigrate the ancient sage and 
lower yourself. Can’t you understand these words? When I hear 
your interpretations, the meaning is decorated and seems 
beautiful, but if your interpretations accumulate over time, they 
become a disease. If you, advanced wanderers, want to master 
this matter, you should understand the treasury of the true 
dharma eye of this ancient ancestor Dongshan. Other buddha 
ancestors’ words are just the play of hot water in a bowl. Now, let 
me ask you: in the end, what is the place of no cold or heat? Do 
you understand? 

In the jade pavilion, a kingfisher builds a nest. 
In the gold palace, ducks are enclosed. 

Kumu is a descendant of Dongshan and a distinguished person in 
the ancestral seat. Here he warns many of those who pay homage to 
Dongshan, High Ancestor, Great Master, in the caved house of 
differentiation and oneness. If buddha dharma had been transmitted 
merely through the investigation of differentiation and oneness, how 
could it have reached this day? 

Peasants or stray cats who have never understood the inner 
chamber of Dongshan, and who have not passed the threshold of the 
buddha dharma, mistakenly say that Dongshan guided students with 
his theory of Five Ranks of differentiation and oneness. This is a 
confused view. Do not pay attention to it, but just study thoroughly 
that the ancient ancestor has the treasury of the true dharma eye. 

The great ocean has just dried up. 
Let me tell you, a giant tortoise is lying in front of you. 
It’s funny you are setting up a fishing pole on the sand. 

Suppose there is a game of go; who are the two players? If you say 
that you and I are playing go, it means you have a handicap of eight 
stones. If you have a handicap of eight stones, it is no longer a game. 

What is the meaning of this? When you answer, answer this way: 
You play go with yourself; the opponents become one. Thus, steadying 
your mind and turning your body, examine Hongzhi’s words, If you do 
not respond to my move. That means you are not yet you. Do not 
neglect the words, I’ll swallow you up. Mud is within mud. Wash your 
feet, wash the tassel on your hat. A jewel is within a jewel, 
illuminating other, illuminating the self. 

should be called a mature skin bag. By saying Reaching out your arms is 
climbing the ten-thousand-foot cliff, he seems to show an extraordinary 
mark, but it is not necessarily so. The matter discussed between the 
monk and Dongshan is not necessarily limited to extending the arms, 
not extending the arms, going into the world, or not going into the 
world. Furthermore, why did he emphasize the words differentiation 
and oneness? It seems that Xuedou could not deal with this matter 
without the view of differentiation and oneness. The reason he does 
not grasp this study by the nose is that he has not reached the 
neighborhood of Dongshan and does not see the great house of 
buddha dharma. He should take up his sandals and inquire further. Do 
not mistakenly say that Dongshan’s buddha dharma is the Five Ranks 
of oneness and differentiation. 

Letan Zhantang, Zen Master Wenzhun, said: 

When it is hot, heat prevails; in cold, cold prevails. 

From the beginning, cold and heat do not interfere with each 
other. 

Moving through the heavens, you become well versed in worldly 
affairs. 

On your honorable head you wear a wild boar hat. 

Now, I [Dogen] ask you, “What is not-interfering?” Answer quick, 
quick! 

varies according to sages, learned people, virtuous people, and 
ignorant people. Don’t think that cold and heat in the buddha way are 
the same as the cold and heat that ignorant people talk about. 
Investigate this directly. 

Presented twice to the assembly in a deep mountain of Echizen in the 
second year of the Kangen Era [1244]. At the moment of meeting 
Buddha, the Unicorn Sutra is expounded. An ancestor [Qingyuan 
commenting on Shitou] said, “Although there are many horns, a single 
horn is sufficient.” 

67 

Tue Meanie OF Bopswxarma’s Comme FROM Inora 

Xiuanevan, GREAT MASTER Xideng of the Xiangyan Monastery, whose 

priest name was Zhixian, was a dharma heir of Guishan. 

He once said to the assembly, “What if you are hanging by your 
teeth from a tree branch on a one-thousand-foot cliff, with no place 
for your hands or feet to reach. All of a sudden someone under the 
tree asks you, ‘What is the meaning of Bodhidharma’s coming from 
India?’ If you open your mouth to respond, you will lose your life. If 
you don’t respond, you don’t attend to the question. Tell me, what 
would you do?” 

Then, senior monk Zhao from Hutou came out and said, “Master, I 
will not ask you about being in a tree. But tell me, what happens 
before climbing the tree?” 

Xiangyan burst into laughter. 

Many people have investigated and discussed this case, but few 
have spoken penetrating words about it. Most have been 
dumbfounded. 

However, if we think about this case by taking up not-thinking and 
beyond thinking, we can have the experience of sharing a cushion 
with Old Man Xiangyan. If you sit steadfastly together with Xiangyan 
on the same cushion, you must understand this case thoroughly before 
he opens his mouth. Seeing it thoroughly, you will not only steal 
Xiang-yan’s eyeball, but also take up Shakyamuni Buddha’s treasury of 
the true dharma eye. 

Now, quietly examine the words What if you are hanging by your 
teeth from a tree branch on a one-thousand-foot cliff? What is you? 

Do not see a pillar as separate from a stake. Do not miss 
encountering self and other in the smile of a buddha face, an ancestor 
face. The tree from which you are hanging is neither the entire great 
earth nor the top of a one-hundred-foot pole. It is a one-thousand-foot 
cliff. You drop away within the one-thousand-foot cliff. 

There is time to fall from the tree as well as to climb it. What if you 
are hanging by your teeth from a tree branch on a one-thousand-foot cliff? 
Know that there was the time you climbed it. 

Thus, going up is one thousand feet, going down is one thousand 
feet. Going toward the left is one thousand feet, going toward the 
right is one thousand feet. Here is one thousand feet, there is one 
thousand feet. You are one thousand feet, climbing is one thousand 
feet. The one thousand feet spoken of is just like this. 

Let me ask you: what is the size of one thousand feet? Let me say it 
is just like the size of an old mirror, a furnace, or a seamless tower. 

By your teeth from a tree branch. What are the teeth? Even if you 
don’t know the entire mouth opening, you should first look for the 
branch, check its leaves, and know where your mouth is. What grasps 
the branch are the teeth. Thus, the entire teeth are the branch, the 
entire branch is the teeth. The whole body is the mouth. The whole 
mouth is the whole body. 

The tree steps on the tree. Thus, it is said that the feet don’t step on 
the tree; the feet step on themselves. The branch climbs on itself. 
Thus, it is said that the hands do not climb on the branch; the hands 
climb on themselves. This being so, the heels step forward and 
backward; the hand makes a fist and opens. 

People here and there think that this case is about hanging in 
emptiness. But is hanging in emptiness the same as hanging from a 
tree by your teeth? 

All of a sudden someone under the tree asks you, “What is the meaning 
of Bodhidharma’s coming from India?” This line may suggest that there 
is someone under the tree. It may be a person tree. There is a person 
under a person. Thus, the tree questions the tree. The person questions 
the person. The entire tree is the entire question. This is taking up the 
meaning of Bodhidharma’s coming from India by inquiring, What is 
the meaning of Bodhidharma’s coming from India? 

The one who is inquiring also hangs from the tree by the teeth and 
questions. Without hanging from the tree by the teeth, the questioning 
is not possible, the voice does not fill the mouth, and the mouth is not 
filled with words. When you ask the meaning of Bodhidharma’s 
coming from India, you ask, while hanging by your teeth, the meaning 
of Bodhidharma’s coming from India. 

If you open your mouth to respond, you will lose your life. Now, 
examine intimately the words if you open your mouth to respond. It is 
said that there is a way to respond by not opening your mouth. Then 
you will not lose your life. 

Opening or not opening your mouth does not hinder hanging by your 
teeth from a tree branch. Opening and closing are not necessarily the 
activity of the entire mouth. But the entire mouth opens or closes. 
Thus, hanging by your teeth is the entire mouth’s everyday activity. 
Opening or closing does not hinder the entire mouth. 

Does open your mouth to respond mean to respond by opening the 

branch or by opening the meaning of Bodhidharma’s coming from 
India? If the response does not open the meaning of Bodhidharma’s 
coming from India, it does not respond to the question. The entire 
body maintains life, and we cannot say you will lose your life. If you 
have already lost your life, you cannot respond. 

However, what Xiangyan meant was that you should dare to 
respond and just lose your life. 

Know that when you don’t respond, you maintain life; when you 
respond, you twirl your body and vitalize life. From this we see that 
each person filling the mouth is expression. Respond to another, 
respond to yourself. Ask another, ask yourself. This is hanging on 
expression by the teeth. Hanging on expression by your teeth is hanging 
by your teeth from a tree branch. Responding to another is opening the 
mouth in the mouth. Not responding to another does not attend to the 
other’s question, but it does attend to your own question. 

Thus, know that buddhas and ancestors who respond to the 
question, What is the meaning of Bodhidharma’s coming from India? all 
respond at the very moment of hanging by their teeth from a tree 
branch. Buddhas and ancestors who ask, What is the meaning of 
Bodhidharma’s coming from India? all ask the question at the very 
moment of hanging by their teeth from a tree branch. 

68 

Ubumeara Bossom 

Ar THE ASSEMBLY Of a million beings on Vulture Peak, the World- 

Honored One held up an udumbara blossom and blinked. Then, 
Mahakashyapa smiled. The World-Honored One said, “I have the 
treasury of the true dharma eye, the wondrous heart of nirvana. I 
entrust it to Mahakashyapa.” 

The Seven Original Buddhas and all buddhas equally hold up this 
flower. They realize and manifest holding up the flower of going 
beyond. They break open and clarify holding up the flower right at 
this moment. This being so, going beyond and going within, self and 
other, and the going forward and going back of holding up the flower 
are altogether holding up the entire flower. This is flower dimension, 
buddha dimension, mind dimension, and body dimension. 

No matter how many times a flower is held up, it is transmission 
and entrusting [of the dharma] face to face, heir to heir. The World- 
Honored One’s holding up the flower has not been abandoned. Your 
holding up the flower that the World-Honored One held up is your 
inheriting the World-Honored One. As the moment of holding up the 
flower is throughout time, you are with the World-Honored One, 
holding up the flower. 

Holding up a flower means a flower holding up a flower. The flower 
can be a plum blossom, spring blossom, snow blossom, or lotus. The 
five petals of a plum blossom are three hundred sixty or more 
assemblies, five thousand forty-eight fascicles [of sutras], Three 
Vehicles and Twelve Divisions [of the Buddha’s teaching], as well as 
three types and ten stages of bodhisattvas. And yet, it is beyond the 
understanding of three types and ten stages of bodhisattvas. 

In this flower, there is a great basket [of scriptures], there is 
something extraordinary. This is called “the world of blossoming 
flowers arises.” 

“One flower opens five petals. The fruit matures of itself” [from a 
verse by Bodhidharma] means the entire body upholds the entire 
body. Seeing peach blossoms and smashing the eyeball, or hearing the 
sound of green bamboo and obscuring the ear consciousness, is the 
right now of holding up the flower. Cutting the arm in deep snow, or 

bowing and attaining the marrow, is the unfolding of the blossom of 
itself. Husking rice in the stone mortar and having a robe transmitted 
deep in the night is the flower holding up itself. All these are the life 
root in the hand of the World-Honored One. 

Now, holding up a flower existed before the World-Honored One 
attained enlightenment. It took place at the same time that the World- 
Honored One attained enlightenment. It has taken place after he 
attained enlightenment. In this way the flower attains enlightenment. 
Holding up the flower goes beyond these times. Arousing the 
aspiration for enlightenment and receiving initiation, as well as 
practice, realization, and continuation, all stir up the spring wind of 
holding up the flower. 

Thus, Gautama, the World-Honored One, entered the flower and hid 
in emptiness. He must have held up the nostrils. He did hold up the 
void and called it holding up the flower. Holding up the flower is 
holding it up with the eyeball, with mind consciousness, with the 
nostrils, and with holding up the flower. 

Mountains, rivers, sun, moon, wind, and rain, as well as humans, 
animals, grass, and trees—each and all has been held up. This is 
holding up the flower. The coming and going of birth and death is a 
variety of blossoms and their colors. For us to study in this way is 
holding up the blossom. 

Within this hand is the samadhi of hiding the body, which is called 
the four great elements and the five skandhas. 

I have is entrusting. Entrusting is I have. Entrusting is always 
immersed in I have. I have is the head top. You study I have by 
grasping the measurement of the head top. When you take up I have 
and replace it with entrusting, you uphold the treasury of the true 
dharma eye. 

blossoms. His direct experience should not be doubted. The fallen 
peach blossoms are what Rujing saw. The opening of peach blossoms 
is stimulated by the spring wind. The falling of peach blossoms is 
regretted by the spring wind. However deeply regretted by the spring 
wind, the peach blossoms fall and drop away one’s body and mind. 

Presented to the assembly, while residing at the Yoshimine Temple, 
Echizen Province, on the twelfth day, the second month, the second 
year of the Kangen Era [1244] 

69 

A\ousina THE Aspiration FOR THE Unsurpassas1e 

Tue Hicu Ancestor of India [Shakyamuni Buddha] said, “The Snow 
Mountains [the Himalayas] are like great nirvana.” 

Know that this is a precise analogy, intimate and direct. To take up 
the Snow Mountains is to speak of the Snow Mountains. To take up 
great nirvana is to speak of great nirvana. 

buddha, is called arousing the aspiration for enlightenment. 

Now, the cause for the aspiration for enlightenment does not lie 
anywhere else. The aspiration for enlightenment is aroused by the 
aspiration for enlightenment itself. To arouse the aspiration for 
enlightenment is to pick up a blade of grass and manifest a buddha 
image, to take up a rootless tree and create a sutra. 

To arouse the aspiration for enlightenment is to make an offering of 
sand or rice water to the Buddha. It is to make an offering of a handful 
of food to sentient beings. It is to make an offering of a bouquet of 
flowers to the Buddha. To practice a small virtuous act with the 
encouragement of someone else, or to bow to the Buddha following a 
demon’s deceptive advice, is also arousing the aspiration for 
enlightenment. 

Further, you abandon the household by realizing that your house is 
not a true house. You enter the mountain and practice dharma. You 
create a buddha image and build a stupa. You chant a sutra and recite 
the Buddha’s name. You look for a teacher and inquire about the way. 
You sit in meditation posture. You bow to the three treasures. You 
recite homage to the Buddha. 

Thus, eighty thousand skandhas [all phenomena] become the causes 
and conditions for arousing the aspiration for enlightenment. There 
are those who arouse the aspiration for enlightenment in a dream and 
attain the way. There are those who arouse the aspiration for 
enlightenment and attain the way while intoxicated. There are those 
who attain the way when they see flowers flying or leaves falling. 
Others attain the way among peach blossoms or green bamboo. Some 
attain the way in a deva realm or in the ocean. They all attain the 
way. 

All these cases arouse the aspiration for enlightenment within 
arousing the aspiration for enlightenment, in body and mind, in the 
bodies and minds of all buddhas, in the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow 
of all buddhas. 

This being so, building stupas, creating buddha images, and other 
practices right now are exactly arousing the aspiration for 
enlightenment, the aspiration for directly becoming a buddha. This 
should not be abandoned along the way. Such practices are called 
merit beyond purpose, merit beyond making. This is visualizing true 
thusness, visualizing dharma nature. This is integrating the samadhis 
of all buddhas. This is attaining the dharani of all buddhas. This is the 
heart of unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. This is the fruit of an 
arhat. This is the actualizing of a buddha. Other than this, there is no 
dharma beyond purpose and beyond doing. 

However, foolish people in the Lesser Vehicles say, “Creating 
images of the Buddha or building stupas is work of purposeful doing; 
this should be avoided. To give rest to thinking and focus the mind is 
free of doing. Not producing anything and not making anything is 
genuine practice. Visualizing dharma nature and its reality is a 
practice beyond doing.” 

To speak in this way has been a custom in India and China from 
ancient times to the present. Consequently, while people commit 
grave and serious crimes, they do not create buddha images or build 
stupas. While they are lost in a forest of delusion, they do not recite 
the Buddha’s name or read sutras. They not only destroy the seeds of 
[rebirth as] humans or devas but also deny their own buddha nature, 
their own tathagata nature. How sad! 

Although they have encountered the time of the buddha, dharma, 
and sangha, they have turned into the enemies of the buddha, 
dharma, and sangha. Although they have climbed the mountain of the 
three treasures, they return empty-handed. Although they have 
entered the ocean of the three treasures, they return empty-handed. 
That means they have encountered the emergence of a thousand 
buddhas and ten thousand ancestors, but they do not have the 
opportunity to cross over [to the shore of enlightenment], and miss 
the direction to arouse the aspiration for enlightenment. This occurs 
because they follow those outside the way and do not follow the 
sutras and true teachers. 

Quickly abandon the view that building stupas and other practices 
do not arouse the aspiration for enlightenment. Cleanse your mind, 
body, ears, and eyes, and disregard such views. Just follow the 
buddha sutras, follow true teachers, take refuge in true dharma, and 
study buddha dharma. 

purpose, beyond desire. 

Know and trust that building stupas and related practices are no 
other than the aspiration for enlightenment. From this the vow of 
practice grows and does not decay for a billion eons. This is called 
seeing the Buddha and hearing the dharma. 

Know that creating buddha images and building stupas by 
assembling wood and stone, piling up dirt, collecting gold, silver, and 
the seven treasures, is no other than creating buddha images and 
building stupas by assembling the one mind. This is creating buddha 
images by collecting emptiness on top of emptiness. This is creating 
buddha images by taking up mind on top of mind. This is building 
stupas by laying stupas on top of stupas. This is creating buddha 
images by actualizing buddhas on top of buddhas. 

This being so, a sutra [the Lotus Sutra] says, “When this is 
contemplated, all buddhas in the ten directions emerge.” 

Know that when one contemplating buddha emerges, ll 
contemplating buddhas in the ten directions emerge. When one thing 
becomes a buddha, all things become buddhas. 

one thousand billion people is not other than arousing one aspiration. 
Arousing the aspiration for enlightenment one time is arousing the 
aspiration for enlightenment one thousand times, one billion times. 
Practice, realization, and the turning of the dharma are also like this. 

If you are not grass and trees, how can you have body and mind? If 
you are not body and mind, how can you be grass and trees? It is so 
because you cannot be grass and trees without being grass and trees. 

Zazen, the endeavor of the way, is arousing the aspiration for 
enlightenment. Arousing the aspiration is neither one nor many. Zazen 
is neither one nor many, neither two nor three. It cannot be divided, 
either. Thoroughly investigate each and every zazen in this way. 

If the process of assembling grass, trees, and the seven treasures to 
build a stupa and create a buddha image were a purposeful activity 
and not attaining the way, then the thirty-seven wings of 
enlightenment would also be a purposeful activity; endeavoring in the 
practice with the bodies and minds of humans and devas of the three 
realms would also be a purposeful activity and would not enable you 
to arrive at the ultimate ground of enlightenment. 

Grass, trees, tiles, and pebbles, as well as the four great elements 
and the five skandhas, are all equally inseparable mind, equally marks 
of reality. The entire world of the ten directions, the buddha nature of 
thusness, is equally things abiding in their conditions. 

How can there be grass, trees, and so on within the buddha nature 
of thusness? How can grass, trees, and so on not be buddha nature? 
All things are neither created nor not created, but are reality. Reality 
is reality as it is. 

Thusness is the body and mind right now. Arouse the aspiration 
with this body and mind. Do not avoid stepping on water and stepping 
on stones. To take up just one blade of grass and create a sixteen-foot 
golden body, or to take up a particle of dust and build a stupa shrine 
of an ancient buddha, arouses the aspiration for enlightenment. It is to 
see buddha and hear buddha. It is to see dharma and hear dharma. It 
is to become buddha and practice buddha. 

other than offering the flesh, skin, bones, and marrow of themselves, 
their spouses, or their children. By doing so, they are already in the 
meritorious ocean of the three treasures. They are in one community. 
As they are in one community, they are with the three treasures. The 
virtue of the three treasures is actualized in the skin, flesh, bones, and 
marrow of their spouses and children. This is diligent endeavor of the 
way. 

Right now, take up the essence and form of the World-Honored One 
and grasp the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of the buddha way. This 
faithful offering arouses the aspiration. How can monks who receive 
such an offering not diligently practice from beginning to end? 

Thus, when a particle arouses the aspiration, one mind follows and 
arouses the aspiration. When one mind follows and arouses the 
aspiration, one emptiness follows and arouses the aspiration. When 
you, whether learned or not learned, arouse the aspiration, you 
acquire the seed of one buddha nature. 

When you turn the four great elements and the five skandhas and 
practice sincerely, you attain the way. When you turn grass, trees, 
tiles, and walls, and practice sincerely, you attain the way. It is so 
because the four great elements and the five skandhas, as well as 
grass, trees, tiles, and walls, practice together with you. They have the 
same nature, the same mind and life, the same body and capacity as 
you. 

This being so, many of those who come from the assembly of 
buddha ancestors endeavor in the way of taking up grass and having 
the heart of trees. This is how it is with arousing the aspiration for 
enlightenment. 

practice, which cannot be defiled by dust,” is not the Buddha’s words. 
If you say that a stupa will turn to dust, then what is beyond birth will 
also turn to dust. If what is beyond birth does not turn to dust, a stupa 
will not turn to dust. What is this place of dust? Do you call it 
purposefully made or not? 

70 

Aouswe THE Asspration FOR Ewuicurenment 

"There ARE THREE types of consciousness: One is chitta, which is called 

“discerning mind.” Another is hridaya [heart], which is translated as 
“srass and tree consciousness.” The last is vriddha [center, essence], 
which is translated as “essential assembling consciousness.” 

Among these types of consciousness, discerning mind is used for 
arousing the aspiration for bodhi [bodhichitta]. Bodhi [enlightenment] 
is an Indian word, translated into Chinese as dao [way or 
enlightenment]. Chitta is also an Indian word, meaning in this case 
“discerning mind.” Without discerning mind, the aspiration for 
enlightenment cannot be aroused. It is not that discerning mind is the 
aspiration for enlightenment, but that the aspiration for enlightenment 
is aroused with discerning mind. 

Arousing the aspiration for enlightenment is making a vow to bring 
all sentient beings [to the shore of enlightenment] before you bring 
yourself, and actualizing the vow. Even a humble person who arouses 
this aspiration is already a guiding teacher of all sentient beings. 

This aspiration is neither originally existent nor does it emerge all of 
a sudden. It is neither one nor many. It is neither spontaneous nor 
formed gradually. This aspiration is not in yourself, nor are you in it. 

This aspiration is not pervasive in this world of phenomena. It is 
neither before nor after. It is neither existent nor nonexistent. It is 
neither self nature nor other nature. It is neither common nature nor 
causeless nature. 

Yet, in response to affinity [between the teacher and the student], 
the aspiration for enlightenment arises. It is not given by buddhas or 
bodhisattvas, and it is not created by yourself. The aspiration arises in 
response to affinity, thus it is not spontaneous. 

This aspiration for enlightenment has been aroused mostly by 
humans who live in the Southern Continent, Jambudvipa. It has also 
been aroused by those who abide in the eight difficult situations [to 
attain enlightenment], but not by most of them. 

After arousing the aspiration for enlightenment, bodhisattvas 
practice for many eons, for one hundred great eons. They practice for 
countless eons, become buddhas, awaken, and benefit sentient beings 

through this bodhisattva determination. Or, they practice for countless 
eons for the benefit of sentient beings, enjoying their bodhisattva 
determination to help sentient beings cross over before they 
themselves cross over and become buddhas. 

The meaning of the aspiration for enlightenment is to endeavor 
without ceasing—in body, speech, and thought—to help all sentient 
beings to arouse the aspiration for enlightenment. This leads them 
into the buddha way. To provide sentient beings merely with worldly 
pleasure is not beneficial to them. 

Arousing such aspiration, and the practice-realization of it, goes far 
beyond the boundary of practice and realization, delusion and 
enlightenment. It excels in the three realms and is outstanding among 
all things. It is not anything that shravakas and pratyeka-buddhas can 
reach. 

[The Lotus Sutra says:] “I [the Tathagata] always hold in mind how 
to help sentient beings enter the unsurpassable way and immediately 
attain buddha bodies.” 

This is exactly the timeless activity of the Tathagata in his 
aspiration, practice, and fruit of realization. 

To benefit sentient beings is to help them arouse the aspiration to 
awaken other sentient beings before awakening themselves. Do not 
think of yourself as becoming a buddha by helping people to arouse 
the aspiration to awaken others before awakening themselves. Even 
when your merit for becoming a buddha has matured, you turn it 
around and dedicate it to others so that they may become buddhas, 
attaining the way. 

This aspiration is not self, not other, and does not come from 
somewhere else. However, after arousing this aspiration, when taking 
up the great earth, all of it turns into gold; when stirring the great 
ocean, it immediately turns into nectar. After arousing this aspiration, 
if you hold mud, stones, or pebbles, they also take up the aspiration 
for enlightenment; if you practice splashes of water, bubbles, or 
flames, they intimately bring forth the aspiration for enlightenment. 
Thus, the offering of land, castles, spouses, children, men and women, 
the seven treasures, heads, eyes, marrow, brains, bodies, flesh, and 
limbs, is crowded with arousing the aspiration for enlightenment, the 
vital activity of the aspiration for enlightenment. 

Although chitta is neither near nor far, neither self nor other, if you 
are unremitting in the aspiration for awakening others first with this 
chitta, this is arousing the aspiration for enlightenment. Thus, the 
offering of grass, trees, tiles, pebbles, gold, silver, and the rare 
treasures that sentient beings cling to as their own possessions, to the 
aspiration for enlightenment—is this not also arousing the aspiration 
for enlightenment? 

It is not without cause that minds and all things, self and other, 
come together; therefore, at the moment you arouse the aspiration for 
enlightenment, myriad things become conditions that increase this 
aspiration. At each moment, all aspirations for enlightenment and 
attainments of the way are born and perish. If they were not born and 
did not perish at each moment, the unwholesome actions of the past 
moments would not go away. If the unwholesome actions in the past 
moments did not go away, wholesome actions in their future moments 
would not manifest at this moment. 

The scale of this moment can only be known by the Tathagata. “The 
mind of this moment manifests one word. The word of this moment 
expounds one letter” [as in the Abhidharma Mahavibhasha Shastra]. 

This can only be done by the Tathagata, and not by other sages. 

There are sixty-five moments when a strong person snaps the fingers 
and the five skandhas are born and perish. Ordinary people are not 
aware of it. 

Ordinary people know about the moments as uncountable as the 
sands of the Ganges. But they are not aware that there are six billion 
four hundred million ninety-nine thousand nine hundred eighty 
moments within one day and night when the five skandhas are born 
and perish. Because they are not aware of this, they do not arouse the 
aspiration for enlightenment. Those who do not know and do not 
believe in buddha dharma do not believe in birth and death at each 
moment. On the other hand, those who clarify the Tathagata’s 
treasury of the true dharma eye, the wondrous heart of nirvana, 
believe in this principle of birth and death moment by moment. 

You now encounter the Tathagata’s teaching and appear to clarify 
matters, but you may only know moments for being as uncountable as 
the sands of the Ganges and may believe that time works in this way. 
You may not understand the entire teaching of the World-Honored 
One, just as you may not know the scale of a moment. Those of you 
who study should not be proud of yourselves. You may not know what 
is extremely small or extremely large. 

If sentient beings rely on the Tathagata’s ability of the way, they see 
one billion worlds. From the present existence you reach an 
intermediary existence, and from an intermediary existence you reach 
a future existence, passing through moment by moment. In this way, 
beyond your intention, you pass through birth and death driven by 
your karma, without stopping even for a moment. 

With the body and mind that migrate through birth and death, you 
should arouse the aspiration for enlightenment to awaken others first. 
Even if you spare your body and mind from the way of arousing the 
aspiration for enlightenment in the course of birth, aging, sickness, 
and death, you cannot in the end keep them as your own possessions. 

back. When they are about to shoot, a fast runner comes up to them 
and says, ‘Shoot your arrows all at once. I will catch all of them 
without dropping a single one to the ground.’ What do you think of 
this man? Is he not fast?” 

The monk said, “Yes, World-Honored One, he is very fast.” 

The Buddha said, “This man is not as fast as a demon who runs on 
the ground. This demon is not as fast as a flying demon. This flying 
demon is not as fast as the Four Deva Kings. These deva kings are not 
as fast as the sun and the moon. The sun and the moon are not as fast 
as the devas who pull the cart of the sun and the moon. These devas 
fly around very fast. However, the change of life through birth and 
death is faster than these devas. It flows moment by moment without 
stopping.” 

How our life changes moment by moment, flowing through birth 
and death, is like this. You practitioners should not forget it for even 
an instant of thought. If you arouse the thought of bringing others 
across first while in this swift change through birth and death, a 
timeless life span is immediately actualized. 

All buddhas of the ten directions in the past, present, and future, 
including the Seven Original Buddhas, the World-Honored Ones; the 
twenty-eight ancestors of India; the six early ancestors of China; as 
well as other ancestors who transmit the Buddha’s treasury of the true 
dharma eye, the wondrous heart of nirvana, have all maintained the 
aspiration for enlightenment. Those who have not aroused the 
aspiration for enlightenment are not ancestors. 

themselves monks or robe wearers but don’t know who they are. What 
a pity that the ancient ancestral way has declined! 

However, whether you are a layperson, a home leaver, a deva, or a 
human, whether you are suffering or in bliss, you should quickly 
arouse the aspiration for bringing others across before yourself. 
Although the realm of sentient beings is neither bounded nor 
boundless, you should arouse the aspiration for bringing others across 
before yourself. This is the aspiration for enlightenment. 

Before descending to the Jambudvipa Continent, a bodhisattva who 
is a candidate to be a buddha gives the final discourse in Tushita 
Heaven and says, “The aspiration for enlightenment is a gate of 
clarifying dharma; it does not cut off the three treasures.” 

We clearly know in this way that not cut off the three treasures is the 
power of the aspiration for enlightenment. After arousing the 
aspiration for enlightenment, guard it tightly without relenting. 

don’t meet authentic teachers, they don’t listen to true dharma. If they 
don’t listen to true dharma, they deny cause and effect, emancipation, 
the three treasures, and all things in the present and future. Then, 
they are wastefully attached to the five desires of the present moment 
and lose the possibility of enlightenment in the future. 

In order to distract a practicing bodhisattva, Demon Papiyas or 
someone like him disguises himself as the Buddha or a parent, 
teacher, relative, or deva, approaches the bodhisattva, and makes up a 
statement like:” The buddha way is long, far away, and painful, which 
is most worrisome. It’s best to become free from birth and death first, 
then bring across sentient beings.” Hearing these words, practitioners 
turn away from their aspiration for enlightenment and _ their 
bodhisattva practice. 

Know that such words are a demon’s statement. Bodhisattvas should 
be aware of this and not follow such words. Never give up the vow of 
practice to awaken other sentient beings first. Know that any words 
that are against this vow are a statement of demons, those outside the 
way, or unwholesome friends. Do not pay attention to such words. 

boundless mind. This is called the “discernment skandha.” 

“Demons of death” means that, because of the impermanence of 
all things, the life span of the five skandhas, as well as the three 
matters—consciousness, warmth, and life that has lasted thus far 
—are destroyed. This is why they are called “demons of death.” 

The “celestial king of demons” is the lord of the desire realm. 
As he is deeply attached to worldly pleasures and the love of 
possessing things, he arouses crooked views and is jealous of the 
practice of all sages’ path of nirvana. This is called the “celestial 
king of demons.” 

Mara (demon) is an Indian word. In China it is translated as 
“Taker of Life.” Although demons of death can take people’s lives, 
other demons can also take life, as well as the life of wisdom. This 
is why they are called “Killers.” 

Question: The demons of the five skandhas include three other 
types of demons. Why are they classified as four types of demons? 

Answer: They are indeed one type of demon. But in order to 
show [their] various aspects, they are explained as four types. 

These are Ancestor Nagarjuna’s explanations. You practitioners 

should be aware of them and study them diligently. Do not be 
tempted by demons and lose your guard, turning away from the 
aspiration for enlightenment. This is called guarding the aspiration for 
enlightenment. 

Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, Yoshida County, 
Echizen Province, on the fourteenth day, the second month, the second 
year of the Kangen Era [1244]. 

71 

Taruacata’s Ennre Bopy 

Once, ON VULTURE PEAK in Rajagraha, Shakyamuni Buddha said to 
Bhaishajyaraja Bodhisattva Mahasattva: 

Bhaishajyaraja, wherever a sutra is expounded, read, chanted, 
copied, or kept, a seven-treasure stupa, tall, wide, and solemn, is 
erected, but do not enshrine the Buddha’s relics in it. The reason 
is that a stupa embodies the Tathagata’s entire body. Make 
offerings of all sorts of flowers, incense, jewels, canopies, banners, 
music, and chanting verses to respect, revere, and admire the 
stupa. When people see this stupa, bow, and make offerings to it, 
they know that they are closer to unsurpassable, complete 
enlightenment. 

In this way, a sutra is expounded, read, chanted, and copied. A sutra 
is reality. To build a seven-treasure stupa is to build reality. The stupa’s 
height and breadth are the scale of reality. A stupa embodies the 
Tathagata’s entire body means a stupa is the Tathagata’s entire body. 

Thus, expounding, reading, chanting, copying, and so on, are the 
Tathagata’s entire body. Make offerings of all sorts of flowers, incense, 
jewels, canopies, banners, music, and chanting verses to respect, revere, 
and admire the stupa. Or, offer heavenly flowers, heavenly incense, and 
heavenly canopies, and so on. These are all marks of reality. Or, offer 
excellent flowers, excellent incense, renowned robes, and renowned 
garments of the human realm. These are all marks of reality. 

A stupa is erected, but do not enshrine the Buddha’s relics in it: from 
this we know that a sutra is the relics of the Tathagata, the entire 
body of the Tathagata. 

There is no greater merit than seeing and hearing golden words 
uttered by the Buddha. Hurry up and accumulate effort and virtue. 
When you see people bow and make offerings to the stupa, know that 
they are closer to unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. When you see 
the tower, sincerely bow and make offerings to it. Thus, all come 
closer to unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. Closer to is not come 
close to or go close to. Unsurpassable, complete enlightenment is all 
closer to. 

Right now, when you see those who receive, chant, elucidate, and 
copy a sutra, you are seeing this stupa. Rejoice that all are close to 
unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. 

This being so, a sutra is the Tathagata’s entire body. To bow to a 
sutra is to bow to the Tathagata’s entire body. To encounter a sutra is 
to encounter the Tathagata’s entire body. 

A sutra is the relics of the Tathagata. So, the relics of the Tathagata 
are a sutra. Even if you know that a sutra is the relics of the 
Tathagata, if you don’t know that the relics of the Tathagata are a 
sutra, it is not the buddha way. 

The reality of all things right now is a sutra. Human realms, deva 
realms, ocean, empty space, this land, and other lands are the reality 
of all things, a sutra, relics. Hold, chant, elucidate, and copy the relics 
and unfold enlightenment. This is to follow a sutra. 

There are relics of ancient buddhas, present buddhas, pratyeka- 
buddhas, wheel-turning kings, and lions [kings of dharma], and there 
are relics of wooden buddhas and painted buddhas. There are also 
relics of humans. Nowadays, among buddha ancestors in China, there 
are those who manifest relics while they are alive, and there are many 
who manifest relics after being cremated. Such relics are all sutras. 

rigorous practice through innumerable eons is the Buddha’s womb and 
abdomen activities, the Buddha’s skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. This 
is spoken of as ceaselessly. He makes further effort after attaining 
buddhahood. He goes further and further, giving guidance to the 
billion worlds. This is the activity of the Tathagata’s entire body. 

Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, Yoshida County, 
Echizen Province, on the fifteenth day, the second month, the second 
year of the Kangen Era [1244]. 

72 

Kune OF Samaputs 

To TRANSCEND THE world directly, to manifest the magnificence of the 

buddha ancestors’ house—this is sitting in the meditation posture. To 
leap over the heads of outsiders and demons, and become a true 
person inside the buddha ancestors’ room—this is sitting in the 
meditation posture. To sit in the meditation posture is to transcend the 
deepest and most intimate teaching of buddha ancestors. Thus, 
buddha ancestors practice this way without needing to do anything 
else. 

Know that the world of sitting practice is far different from other 
worlds. Clarify this for yourself, then activate the aspiration, practice, 
enlightenment, and nirvana of the buddha ancestors. Study the world 
at the very moment of sitting. Is it vertical or horizontal? At the very 
moment of sitting, what is sitting? Is it an acrobat’s graceful 
somersault or the rapid darting of a fish? Is it thinking or not 
thinking? Is it doing or not doing? Is it sitting within sitting? Is it 
sitting within body-mind? Is it sitting letting go of sitting within 
sitting, or letting go of sitting within body-mind? Investigate this in 
every possible way. Sit in the body’s meditation posture. Sit in the 
mind’s meditation posture. Sit in the meditation posture of letting go 
of body-mind. 

sitting, and so there is no one else who upholds buddha dharma as 
buddha dharma. 

Thus, there is sitting with the mind, which is not the same as sitting 
with the body. There is sitting with the body, which is not the same as 
sitting with the mind. There is sitting letting go of body-mind, which 
is not the same as sitting letting go of body-mind. To experience this is 
to merge the practice and understanding of the buddha ancestors. 
Maintain this insight. Investigate this awareness. 

Thus, we clearly know that sitting in the meditation posture is itself 
the king of samadhis. It is itself entering realization. All other 
samadhis serve the king of samadhis. 

73 

Tharry-seven Wines OF Ewuichrenment 

‘Tue FUNDAMENTAL POINT. set by ancient buddhas is the teaching, 

practice, and realization of the thirty-seven wings of enlightenment. 
Climbing and descending its classifications like twining vines is 
further twining vines [dynamic interaction] of the fundamental point. 
This is calling and actualizing buddhas, calling and actualizing 
ancestors. 

Study in this way: When a demon becomes a buddha, you take up a 
demon and turn the demon into a buddha. When a buddha becomes a 
buddha, you take up a buddha, paint a buddha, and turn the buddha 
into a buddha. When a person becomes a buddha, you take up a 
person, prepare the person, and turn the person into a buddha. Study 
thoroughly that at the place of taking up, the path unfolds right where 
you are. 

This is like washing the robe. The water is defiled by the robe and 
the robe is soaked by the water. While you wash with water and with 
some more water, you use the water. This is washing the robe. If you 
don’t see cleanness at the first or second washing, you keep washing. 
After the water goes, you get some more water. Even when the robe is 
clean, you keep on washing. You use the water of all beings, which is 
suitable for washing the robe. When the water is soiled, you know 
there are fish. 

You wash the robe together with the robes of various beings. 
Endeavoring in this way, the fundamental point of washing the robe is 
actualized. Thus, you understand purity. It means that dipping the 
robe in water is not necessarily the original intention; to defile the 
water with the robe is not necessarily the original intention. However, 
washing the robe with defiled water is the original intention of 
washing the robe. 

Furthermore, there is a way to wash the robe with fire, air, earth, 
water, and space. There is a way to wash earth, water, fire, air, and 
space with earth, water, fire, air, and space. 

The meaning of visualizing the body as impure is also like this. 
Thus, to cover the body, to cover visualizing, to cover impurity, is no 
other than the kashaya wrapped around the body born from the 
mother. If the kashaya were not wrapped around the body born from 
the mother, buddha ancestors would not have used it. How can this 
understanding be limited to Shanavasin [whose lay clothes turned into 
a buddha robe]? Keep this principle in mind and study thoroughly. 

“Visualizing perception as suffering” means suffering is perception. 
Perception is not perception of self, other, existence, or nonexistence. 
It is perception of the living body, suffering [bitterness] of the living 
body. 

“Visualizing perception as suffering” means seeing that the living 
body turns from a sweet melon into a bitter gourd. Thus, skin, flesh, 
bones, and marrow are bitter. Those with mind and those without 
mind are both bitter. To realize this is a part of the practice-realization 
of miracles—the miracle of leaping out of the calyx [of a sweet melon] 
and leaping out of the roots [of a bitter gourd]. 

“Tt is said that sentient beings are suffering. Furthermore, suffering 

is sentient beings.” [Words spoken by Jingqing Daofu.] Sentient 
beings are not self, not other. This statement—Furthermore, suffering is 
sentient beings—cannot fool others. 

Although a sweet melon is sweet all the way to the calyx, and a 
bitter gourd is bitter all the way to the root, bitterness [suffering] 
cannot be easily grasped. So, ask yourself: what is suffering? 

In regard to “visualizing mind as impermanent,” Huineng, Old 
Buddha of Caoxi, said, “Impermanence is no other than buddha 
nature.” 

In this way, all types of impermanence understood by various 
beings are buddha nature. 

Yongjia, Great Master Zhenjiao, said, “All phenomena are 
impermanent and everything is empty. This is the great, complete 
enlightenment of the Tathagata.” 

In this way, “visualizing mind as impermanent” is no other than the 
great, complete enlightenment of the Tathagata—the Tathagata of the 
great, complete enlightenment. Even if the mind tries not to visualize 
this, as mind changes with all things, where there is mind, there is 
visualization. Arriving at unsurpassable, complete enlightenment, 
actualizing unsurpassable, complete enlightenment, is impermanence, 
visualizing mind. 

Mind, which is not necessarily permanent, is free of the four basic 
modes of discernment and beyond the one hundred types of negation. 
This being so, walls, tiles, and pebbles, large and small stones, are 
mind. They are impermanence. This is visualizing. 

“Visualizing that things are without a permanent and independent 
self” is “A tall person has a tall dharma body, a short person has a 
short dharma body.” 

As the self is activities actualized, it is not a permanent and 
independent self. A dog has no buddha nature; a dog has buddha 
nature. No beings have buddha nature; no buddha nature has beings. 
No buddhas have beings; no buddhas have buddhas. No buddha 
nature has buddha nature. No beings have beings. 

Thus, study “no beings have things” as visualizing that things are 
without a permanent and independent self. Know that the entire body 
leaps out of twining vines [entanglement] of the self. 

In this way, all buddhas and bodhisattvas make these four abodes of 
mindfulness their sacred womb. Know that it is the sacred womb of 
bodhisattvas of enlightenment equal to that of buddhas, and it is the 
sacred womb of bodhisattvas of wondrous enlightenment. 

Buddhas who are beyond the stage of bodhisattvas of wondrous 
enlightenment also make the four abodes their sacred womb. 
Bodhisattvas who leap beyond the bodhisattvas whose enlightenment 
equals that of buddhas, and those of inconceivable enlightenment, 
also make these four abodes of mindfulness their sacred womb. 
Indeed, the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of all buddhas and all 
ancestors are just these four abodes of mindfulness. 

has not yet arisen, but rather you should call it something that has 
already arisen. 

You should study not arousing an unwholesome action that has not 
arisen without following the views of those outside the way. An 
accumulated unwholesome action that fills the sky [whole world] is 
called an unwholesome action that has not arisen. That is not arousing 
an unwholesome action. Not arousing is “speaking of the permanence of 
all things yesterday and speaking of the impermanence of all things 
today” [beyond the discussion of permanence and impermanence]. 

In regard to “stopping an unwholesome action that has arisen,” has 
arisen means entirely arisen. Entirely arisen means half arisen. Half 
arisen is rising right now. Rising right now is fully immersed in rising, 
leaping beyond the top of rising. 

Stopping an unwholesome action that has arisen is Devadatta falling 
into hell while being alive, and Devadatta receiving a prediction of 
enlightenment while being alive. It is entering into a donkey womb 
while being alive, becoming a buddha while being alive. 

Take up the meaning of this teaching and study about stopping. 
Stopping is stopping by leaping beyond and going through stopping. 

“Arousing a wholesome action that has not arisen” means being 
filled with your face before your parents are born, clearly taking up 
the matter before things emerge, understanding what is before the 
King of the Empty Eon. 

In regard to “allowing a wholesome action that has arisen to 
increase,” it is not that you increase a wholesome action that has 
arisen, but that you allow a wholesome action that has arisen to 
increase. It is seeing the morning star and letting others see the 
morning star. It is the eye becoming the morning star. 

It is like [Mazu] saying, “For thirty years after the barbarians’ 
invasion, the monastery has not been short of salt and vinegar.” 
Because you let a wholesome action increase, it has already arisen. 
Thus, the valley is deep and the dipper handle is long. Because he 
[Bodhidharma] was, he came [to China]. 

become a buddha, to sleep well, to be the self, and to bow to you. 

The supernormal power of desire is not limited to the causes and 
conditions of body-mind. Rather, it is like a bird flying in the 
boundless sky, or a fish swimming at the bottom of deep water. 

The supernormal power of mind is walls, tiles, pebbles, mountains, 
rivers, and the great earth. It is every part of the three realms. It is a 
brilliant red bamboo or wooden chair. 

Because we cannot exhaust using the supernormal power of mind, 
there is buddha ancestor mind, mind of the ordinary and sages, mind 
of grass and trees, and the mind that changes. Fully exhausting mind 
is the supernormal power of mind. 

The supernormal power of effort is walking straight ahead on top of 
a one-hundred-foot bamboo pole. Where is the top of a one-hundred- 
foot bamboo pole? It is beyond straight ahead and beyond grasping. 

It is not that there is no one walking straight ahead. Where is right 
here? You speak of stepping forward and stepping backward. At the 
very moment of the supernormal power of effort, the entire world of 
the ten directions arrives, following the supernormal power of effort; 
the entire world of the ten directions reaches, following the 
supernormal power of effort. 

In regard to the supernormal power of contemplation, all buddha 
ancestors have vast karma consciousness and are not based in any 
particular place. There is body contemplation, mind contemplation, 
perception contemplation, straw sandal contemplation, the self before 
the Empty Eon contemplation. 

The supernormal power of contemplation is also called the four 
aspects of the fulfillment of wishes. It means no hesitation. 

Shakyamuni Buddha said, “Arriving without moving forward is 
called the fulfillment of wishes.” 

Thus, the supernormal power of contemplation is as pointed as the 
tip of a gimlet, and as sharp as the blade of a chisel. 

follows and is followed by the stage of the buddha fruit. Without 
being at the stage of the buddha fruit, trust is not actualized. 

So, it is said [in the Treatise on Realization of Great Wisdom], “Trust 
makes it possible to enter the great ocean of buddha dharma.” Where 
trust is actualized, buddha ancestors are actualized. 

The root of effort is to reflect on just sitting. Ceasing is unable to 
cease, being greatly occupied and yet not being occupied. Occupied 
and not occupied are the first month, the second month. 

Shakyamuni Buddha said, “I always make an effort. That is why I 
have attained unsurpassable, complete enlightenment.” 

Always make an effort is the entire past, present, and future, from 
head to tail. I always make an effort is I have attained unsurpassable, 
complete enlightenment. I have attained unsurpassable, complete 
enlightenment, therefore I always make an effort. 

If not so, how would it be always make an effort? If not so, how 
would it be I have attained? Teachers of treatises and scriptures do not 
see or hear the meaning of this. How could they have studied it? 

The root of mindfulness is the red flesh ball of a decayed tree. A red 
flesh ball is called a decayed tree. A decayed tree is the root of 
mindfulness. 

What the self has searched for is mindfulness. There is mindfulness 
at the time of having a body. There is mindfulness at the time of 
having no mind. There is mindfulness with mind. There is mindfulness 
with no body. 

The life root of the entire earth person is the root of mindfulness. 
The life root of the entire ten directions buddha is the root of 
mindfulness. 

There are multiple persons in a single mindfulness. There are 
multiple mindfulnesses in a single person. However, there is a person 
with mindfulness, and there is a person without mindfulness. 

It is not that a person always has mindfulness. It is not that 
mindfulness is always hanging on a person. May it be so, there is 
virtue in maintaining the root of mindfulness and thoroughly 
experiencing the root of mindfulness. 

The root of samadhi is refraining from touching the eyebrows and 
brushing up the eyebrows. Thus, it is beyond obscuring cause and 
effect, and beyond falling into cause and effect. 

From this root of samadhi, you enter the donkey’s womb, the 
horse’s womb. 

It is like a stone wrapped around a jade. Do not say the entire stone 
is a jade. It is also like the earth topped with the mountain. Do not say 

the entire earth is the mountain. Even so, you leap out and leap in 
from the top of the mountain. 

The root of wisdom is not known beyond the knowledge of buddhas 
in the past, present, and future. But it is known by badgers and white 
cows. Do not say why this is so. This cannot be explained. It is just 
like breath going through nostrils or a fist having fingertips. 

A donkey remains a donkey. A well sees a well. Thus, a root 
succeeds in a root. 

The meaning of this phrase is that the river crossing cannot be 
separated from a boat. That the river crossing does not hinder the 
river crossing is called a boat. Spring is long and ice melts. 

that are about to arise. The self pokes the self’s nostrils. The self grabs 
the rope [through the nostrils], and the self pulls the rope. Thus, you 
get to tame a single water buffalo. 

In regard to the mindfulness limb of enlightenment, a pillar walks in 
the sky. The mouth looks like an oak leaf and the eyes are like 
eyebrows. In the candana [incense] tree forest, candana is burned. In 
the lion’s cave, a lion roars. 

the way, entering a mountain and attaining realization. 

Shakyamuni Buddha said, “The thirty-seven wings of enlightenment 
are a monk’s action.” 

A monk’s action is neither the Great Vehicle nor the Lesser Vehicles. 
Among monks, there are buddha monks, bodhisattva monks, shravaka 
monks, and so on. 

Those who have not left the household do not succeed in the right 
action of buddha ancestors, nor do they authentically transmit the 
great way of buddha dharma. Although laypeople study the way as 
laymen and laywomen, there is no precedent for their mastering the 
way. At the time of mastering the way, people invariably leave the 
household. How can those who cannot bear to leave the household 
succeed in the rank of buddhas? 

Nevertheless, many of those who call themselves Zen monks in 
Great Song China have said for a couple of hundred years that the 
study of the way by the laity and the study of the way by home 
leavers are the same. Those who say such things are dogs who take in 
the urine and excrement [property] of laypeople. 

At times they say to kings and ministers that there is no difference 
between the minds of rulers and the minds of buddha ancestors. The 
kings and ministers, without knowing authentic speech and true 
dharma, rejoice greatly and grant them the titles of masters, and so 
on. 

Monks who make such statements are Devadattas. In order to eat 
the saliva and mucus of kings and ministers, they utter such childish, 
crazy words. How deplorable! They are not family members of the 
Seven Original Buddhas, but are beasts and demons. They are like this 
because they don’t know the body-mind study of the way, don’t study, 
and don’t have the body-mind of leaving the household. They are like 
this because they are ignorant about kings and ministers governing 
with dharma, and they do not even dream of the great way of buddha 
ancestors. 

Layman Vimalakirti, although he personally encountered the 
Buddha, had much he did not express and study. Layman Pangyun 
studied with some ancestors, but was not allowed to enter Yaoshan’s 
chamber and was not as good as Mazu of Jiangxi. He stole the credit 
for studying but did not possess the fruit of it. 

Other laity, including Li Fuma and Yang Wengong, regarded 
themselves as having filled up with study, but they hadn’t even eaten 
a milk rice cake. How could they have eaten the painting of a rice 
cake? Even further, how could they have eaten buddha ancestors’ 
gruel? They did not have eating bowls yet. What a pity that the skin 
bags of their lifetime were wasted! 

Let me advise everyone—heavenly beings, human beings, dragon 
beings, and all other beings—to long for the Tathagata’s dharma, 
quickly leave the household, practice the way, and succeed in the 
ranks of buddha and ancestor. 

Do not listen to the words of unaccomplished Zen masters and 
others. They speak like this because they do not know the body and 
they do not know the mind. Or they say so because they do not have 
compassion for sentient beings. These human-faced dogs, human- 
skinned dogs who have turned into unwholesome dogs, have no 
intention of guarding buddha dharma; they just want to consume the 
urine and excrement of laypeople. 

Do not sit with, speak with, or rely on such home leavers. They 
have already fallen into the animal realm while having human bodies. 
If these home leavers possess abundant urine and excrement, they 
may regard it as outstanding. They think so because they are not as 
good as beasts. 

There is no mention in more than five thousand scrolls [of the entire 
Buddhist canon] and there is no trace of the statement for over two 
thousand years that the mind of the laity and the mind of home 
leavers are the same. There are no such words by fifty buddha 
ancestors of over forty generations. 

Even a monk who breaks the precepts or keeps no precepts, with no 
dharma and no wisdom, excels a layperson who has wisdom and 
maintains the precepts. This is so because a monk’s action is wisdom, 
enlightenment, and dharma. 

A layperson may have a fair share of merit for having a wholesome 
root but may ignore acquiring the merit of having the wholesome root 
of body-mind. This being so, during the lifetime of the Buddha, no one 
attained the way as a layperson. The reason is that there are so many 
obstacles that home is not a practice place for studying the buddha 
way. When we investigate the bodies and minds of those who say that 
the minds of rulers and the minds of buddha ancestors are the same, 
we see that their bodies and minds are not the body-mind of buddha 
dharma. They do not transmit the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of 
buddha ancestors. How pitiful it is that although they have 
encountered the true buddha dharma, they have become beasts! 

This being so, Huineng, who would later be Old Buddha of Caoxi, 
all of a sudden bade farewell to his mother and started looking for a 
teacher. This was right action. Before arousing the aspiration for 
enlightenment upon hearing a passage of the Diamond Sutra, he was a 
house-holder and woodcutter. When he was permeated by the power 
of buddha dharma upon hearing this passage, he let go of his heavy 
obligation and left home. 

Know that when you have buddha dharma in your body-mind, you 
cannot help leaving home. This has been so with all buddha ancestors. 

The crimes of those who tell others not to leave their households are 
heavier than capital offenses, worse than Devadatta’s. Do not speak 
with such people, keeping in mind that they are more guilty than the 
groups of the six monks, the six nuns, and the eighteen monks [of 
ancient times]. Our life span is too short to waste a moment speaking 
with such demons and beasts. 

Furthermore, we have received our human body and mind due to 
the seed of seeing and hearing the buddha dharma in our past life. 
Our body and mind are like equipment in the common area [of the 
monastery]. We should not become a member of the demon clan. We 
should not associate with the demon clan. Without forgetting the 
benefaction of buddha ancestors, protect the nurturing of dharma milk 
and pay no attention to the howling of unwholesome dogs. Do not sit 
and eat with them. 

When Bodhidharma, High Ancestor, Old Buddha of Mount Song, left 
the Buddha’s country of India and traveled all the way to the remote 
nation of China, he personally brought the authentic dharma of 
buddha ancestors. Without his leaving the household and attaining the 
way, this would not have happened. Before Bodhidharma came from 
India, beings in the human and deva realms in the eastern land of 
China had never seen or heard the true dharma. In this way, know 
that the authentic transmission of the true dharma eye is just the 
benefaction of leaving the household. 

Great Teacher Shakyamuni Buddha graciously left the palace and 
did not succeed in the position of his father king. It is not because the 
throne was not precious, but because he intended to succeed in the 
most precious buddha rank. 

The buddha rank is the monk’s rank. It is the position that all 
heavenly beings and human beings in the three realms revere. This 
position is not shared by Brahma or Indra. Even further, the buddha 
rank cannot be shared by human kings, or dragon kings in the lower 
realms. 

It is a rank of unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. This rank 
expounds dharma, awakens beings, radiates light, and manifests 
miracles. Actions of this home leaver rank are right actions, embracing 
actions of all buddhas, including the Seven Original Buddhas. 

These actions cannot be thoroughly experienced by those who are 
not “only buddha and buddha.” Those who haven’t left the household 
should serve, bow, and make offerings by dedicating their body and 
life to those who have left the household. 

cause them to become a buddha in vast eons. 

Don’t you see? If Old Man Vimalakirti were to leave the house-hold, 
we should see Monk Vimalakirti as more excellent than Layman 
Vimalakirti. 

Today we see Subhuti, Shariputra, Manjushri, and Maitreya [in the 
Vimalakirti Sutra], but we don’t see even half of Vimalakirti. Then, 
how can we see three, four, or five Vimalakirtis? If we don’t see and 
know three, four, or five Vimalakirtis, we don’t yet see, know, and 
acknowledge even one Vimalakirti. If we don’t see, know, and 
acknowledge even one Vimalakirti, we don’t see Vimalakirti Buddha. 

If we don’t see Vimalakirti Buddha, there is no Vimalakirti 
Manjushri, no Vimalakirti Maitreya, no Vimalakirti Subhuti, and no 
Vimalakirti Shariputra. Then, how can there be Vimalakirti 
mountains, rivers, and earth? How can there be Vimalakirti grass, 
trees, tiles, and pebbles; wind, rain, water, and fire; or past, present, 
future? 

The reason why Vimalakirti has not seen the power of radiant light 
is that he has not yet left the household. If he had been a home leaver, 
he would have experienced such virtue. 

Zen masters of the Tang and Song dynasties, however, without 
understanding this principle, mistakenly think that Vimalakirti got the 
point and say that Vimalakirti expressed the point. What a pity! These 
fellows who did not know the teachings by words were ignorant of 
buddha dharma. 

There are also a number of those who think and say that the words 
by Vimalakirti and Shakyamuni Buddha are equal. They do not yet 
know and cannot access buddha dharma, the ancestral way, and even 
Vimalakirti. 

Such people say that Vimalakirti remained silent and showed no 
words to all bodhisattvas and that this is equal to the Tathagata’s 
words, “I teach people with no words.” 

I say that such people are quite ignorant of buddha dharma and lack 
the capacity to study the way. The Tathagata’s words are different 
from those of others. His no words cannot be the same as the no words 
of other beings. Thus, the single silence of the Tathagata and the 
single silence of Vimalakirti cannot be compared. 

If we investigate the capacity of those who imagined that even if 
speeches are different silence is the same, they cannot be regarded as 
those who are close to buddhas. How sad! They have not even seen 
and heard form and sound. How can they have the radiant light of 
leaping away from form and sound? 

Furthermore, they don’t know about studying the silence of silence 
and are not aware of such a thing. All beings have different ways of 

moving and being still. How can we discuss whether Shakyamuni 
Buddha and all beings are or are not the same? Those who have not 
studied inside the chamber of buddha ancestors speak in this way. 

A number of mistaken people think and say that speeches and 
movements are temporary phenomena while silence and stillness are 
real. To speak in this way is not buddha dharma. This is a conjecture 
by those who have heard the scriptures of Brahma and Indra. How 
should buddha dharma be determined by movement or stillness? 
Investigate thoroughly whether buddha dharma does or does not have 
movement or stillness, whether buddha dharma touches movement or 
stillness, or is touched by movement or stillness. Latecomers to study 
nowadays should not be lax in this investigation. 

When I see today’s Great Song China, it appears that those who 
have studied the great way of buddha ancestors are extinct. It is not 
that there are even two or three such people. All people think that 
Vimalakirti is genuine by having a single silence, and that not having 
a single silence falls short of Vimalakirti. This is no vital path of 
buddha dharma. 

There are also those who think that the single silence of Vimalakirti 
is no other than the single silence of Shakyamuni Buddha. This is not 
the radiant light of discernment. I should say that those who speak in 
this way have never seen and heard buddha dharma. Do not regard 
this as buddha dharma although it happens in Great Song China. 

This principle is easy to clarify. Right actions are monks’ actions. 
This is not known by teachers of treatises and scriptures. 

Monks’ actions are endeavor in the cloud hall [monks’ hall], bowing 
in the buddha hall, and cleansing in the wash house. Further, putting 
palms together, greeting, burning incense, and boiling water are all 
right actions. It is not replacing the tail with the head, but replacing 
the head with the head, replacing the mind with the mind, replacing 
the buddha with the buddha, and replacing the way with the way. 
This is the right action path limb. 

If you go astray and try to fathom buddha dharma other than this, 
your eyebrows and beard will fall out and your face will break up. 

The right livelihood path limb is having the morning meal in early 
morning and the midday meal at midday, playing with the spirit in 
the monastery, and pointing directly from the teaching chair. Old Man 
Zhaozhou’s assembly with fewer than twenty monks was right 
livelihood actualized. Yaoshan’s assembly with fewer than ten monks 
was a life vein of right livelihood. Fenyang’s assembly with seven or 
eight monks lived right livelihood. This is because they were free from 
a variety of crooked livelihood. 

Shakyamuni Buddha said, “Shravakas have not attained right 
livelihood.” 

In this way, shravakas’ teaching, practice, and realization are not 
yet right livelihood. But nowadays people in mediocre schools say that 
shravakas and bodhisattvas should not be distinguished, and that the 
guidelines and precepts of both schools should be used. They judge 
the bodhisattva guidelines in comparison with the guidelines for 
shravakas in the Lesser Vehicles. 

Shakyamuni Buddha said, “Ashravaka’s keeping the precepts is a 
bodhisattva’s breaking the precepts.” 

In this way, what shravakas regard as keeping the precepts is 
breaking the precepts in light of the bodhisattva precepts. The rest of 
the three learnings—samadhi and wisdom—are also like this. 

Although the aspects of not killing and so on appear to be common 
between shravakas and bodhisattvas, they are certainly different, 
more apart from each other than heaven from earth. Even further, 
how is it possible that the teaching authentically transmitted by 
buddhas and ancestors could be the same as the teaching of 
shravakas? 

There is not only right livelihood but also pure livelihood. Studying 
with buddha ancestors alone is right livelihood. Do not adopt the 
views of teachers of treatises. 

Because they have not attained right livelihood, theirs is not genuine 
livelihood. 

Right effort path limb is the activity of plucking out the entire body. 
It is plucking out the entire body and hitting a human face with it. It 
is to ride the buddha hall upside down and move in a circle. Because 
you ride two, three, four, and five times, it is nine times nine equals 
eighty-one circles. It is one thousand and ten thousand greetings. It is 
changing the heads freely, changing the faces freely. It is entering the 
abbot’s room, ascending the teaching seat. It is meeting at the Land 
View Pavilion, meeting at Crow Stone Peak. It is an encounter in front 
of the monks’ hall, an encounter inside the buddha hall. It is two 
mirrors facing each other creating three reflections. 

The right mindfulness path limb is to be fooled by oneself and 
achieve eight or nine out of ten. To think that from mindfulness comes 
the aspiration for wisdom is to abandon your own father and escape 
[to a foreign land]. To think that within mindfulness there is the 
aspiration for wisdom is an extreme trap. To say that having no 

mindfulness is the right mindfulness is to be a person outside the way. 

Also, do not regard spirits of earth, water, fire, and air as 
mindfulness. Do not call confusion of consciousness mindfulness. 
Indeed, “You have attained my skin, flesh, bones, and marrow” is 
itself the right mindfulness path limb. 

The right samadhi path limb is dropping away buddha ancestors, 
dropping away right samadhi. It is letting someone else take it up. It is 
drilling the head top and making nostrils. It is holding up an 
udumbara blossom within the treasury of the true dharma eye. It is 
hundreds and thousands of Mahakashyapas smiling inside an 
udumbara blossom. It is using this activity for a long time and 
breaking a wooden dipper. Thus, weeds keep dropping for six years 
and blossoms open overnight. Tremendous fires blaze and a billion 
worlds crumble and disappear all of a sudden. 

74 
Turnine THE Dauarma Ware. 

Ruse, MY LATE master, Old Buddha Tiantong, ascended the teaching 
seat and declared: 

The World-Honored One said, “When one person opens up reality 
and returns to the source, all the space in the ten directions 
disappears.” 

My teacher [Xuedou Zhijian] said, “Since this is a statement by 
the World-Honored One, it cannot help being an extraordinary 
formulation.” I, Rujing, would say it otherwise: when one person 
opens up reality and returns to the source, a mendicant smashes 
his rice bowl. 

Wuzu Fayan said, “When one person opens up reality and returns to 
the source, pounding and crackling resounds throughout the space in 
the ten directions.” 

Fuxing Fatai said, “When one person opens up reality and returns to 
the source, the space in the ten directions is just the space in the ten 
directions.” 

Keqin, Zen Master Yuanwu of Mount Jia, said, “When one person 
opens up reality and returns to the source, in the space throughout the 
ten directions flowers are added on brocade.” 

I, Daibutsu, say, “When one person opens up reality and returns to 
the source, the space throughout the ten directions opens up reality 
and returns to the source.” 

The words When one person opens up reality and returns to the source, 
all the space in the ten directions disappears come from the Shurangama 
Sutra. This saying has been commented on by these several buddha 
ancestors. It is indeed the bones, marrow, and eyeballs of buddha 
ancestors. 

There is a debate whether the Shurangama Sutra, which is composed 
of ten scrolls, is apocryphal or not. The argument has lasted until now. 
Among the existing translations, the newest one from the Xinlong Era 
[705-707] is particularly suspect. 

However, Fayan, Fatai, and Rujing have all commented on this 

saying. Thus, these words have already been turned by the dharma 
wheel of buddha ancestors. The buddha ancestors are turning this 
dharma wheel. In this way, these words turn the buddha ancestors, 
and these words have already expounded the buddha ancestors. 
Because these words have been turned by buddha ancestors and have 
turned buddha ancestors, even if this sutra is spurious, it has become a 
genuine buddha sutra and ancestor sutra, an intimate and familiar 
dharma wheel. Even a tile or a pebble, a fallen leaf, an udumbara 
blossom, or even a brocade robe, when taken up and turned by 
buddha ancestors, is the buddha dharma wheel and the buddha 
treasury of the true dharma eye. 

Know that when sentient beings leap beyond and attain true 
awakening, they are buddha ancestors, disciples and teachers of 
buddha ancestors, and the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of buddha 
ancestors. They are no longer the siblings of any ordinary sentient 
beings, but the siblings of buddha ancestors. 

Likewise, even if the words in the ten-scroll Shurangama Sutra are 
inauthentic, the saying discussed above is an extraordinary buddha 
saying and ancestor saying that cannot be compared with usual words. 
However, even if these words go beyond, do not regard the entire text 
of the sutra as buddha words and ancestor words; do not regard the 
entire text as the eyeball of study. 

There are many reasons that this saying should not be compared 
with usual words. I will present some of the reasons. What is called 
turning the dharma wheel is the activity of buddha ancestors. There 
have been no buddha ancestors who do not turn the dharma wheel. 
How the dharma wheel is turned is by taking up sound and form and 
smashing sound and form, by leaping out of sound and form and 
turning the dharma wheel, by plucking out the eyeball and turning the 
dharma wheel, or by raising a fist and turning the dharma wheel. The 
dharma wheel also turns by itself when the nostrils are grabbed and 
empty space is grasped. Taking up the saying discussed above at this 
immediate moment is taking up the morning star, nostrils, peach 
blossoms, or empty space. This is no other than taking up buddha 
ancestors and taking up the dharma wheel. This is the essence of 
clearly turning the dharma wheel. 

Turning the dharma wheel is to practice without separating from 
the monastery for a whole lifetime, to ask for instructions, and to 
whole-heartedly engage the way on the sitting platform. 

Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, Echizen Province, 
on the twenty-seventh day, the second month, the second year of the 
Kangen Era [1244]. 

79 
S ELF~ Reauzation S AMADHI 

Wraar nas Been authentically transmitted by all buddhas, including 
the Seven Original Buddhas, is self-realization samadhi. It calls for 
following a teacher and following a sutra. This is the eyeball of 
buddha ancestors. 

have seen through others are not limited to then or now. 

When you follow a sutra, you thoroughly experience your skin, 
flesh, bones, and marrow. When you drop away your skin, flesh, 
bones, and marrow, all of a sudden the emergence of the eye of 
[seeing] peach blossoms is encountered; the roaring sound of bamboo 
is heard in your ear consciousness. 

When you follow and study a sutra, it emerges. A sutra means the 
entire world of the ten directions—mountains, rivers, the earth, grass, 
trees, self, and others. It is having a meal, putting on a robe, and 
engaging in activities. When you study the way, following a sutra, 
thousands and myriads of sutras that have never existed emerge and 
become present. 

There are phrases that clearly affirm. There are verses that 
completely deny. By encountering these phrases and studying them 
with the entire body and mind, however long the eons you exhaust, 
and however long the eons you take up, there is always a place where 
you arrive with full mastery. By studying the letting go of body and 
mind, even if you pluck out the beginningless eon and fly beyond the 
beginningless eon, you will always achieve the experience of receiving 
and maintaining the sutra. 

At the present time there are less than half a myriad of scrolls of 
scriptures translated from Sanskrit into Chinese. There are the Three 
Vehicles, the Five Vehicles, the Nine Divisions, and the Twelve 
Divisions among these scriptures. These are sutras to follow and study. 
Even if you try to avoid and not follow them, it will not be possible. 
This being so, they become the eye, and “my marrow.” Their heads 
are right. Their tails are right. 

When you receive a sutra from someone and give it to someone else, 
it becomes the vital emergence of the eye, dropping away self and 
other. It is just the entrusting of “my marrow,” penetrating self and 
other. Because the eye, or “my marrow,” is not self and not other, 
buddha ancestors have authentically transmitted it since olden times 
and have entrusted it from right now to right now. 

face, a sun face, or a moon face, you actualize the practice of 
following sutras. 

Thus, both following a teacher and following a sutra are following 
yourself. A sutra is no other than a sutra as yourself. A teacher is 
invariably a teacher as yourself. This being so, to visit teachers 
everywhere is to visit yourself everywhere. To take up one hundred 
grasses is to take up yourself. To take up myriad trees is to take up 
yourself. Study yourself that always endeavors thus. In this study, 
drop away, merge with, and realize yourself. 

birth after birth and practice it body after body. Because you actualize 
dharma birth after birth, and make body after body into dharma, you 
bring forth a single particle, as well as the entire world of phenomena, 
and help them to realize dharma. 

This being so, if you hear a phrase from someone in a far-eastern 
region, speak it for another in a far-western region. Endeavor in 
hearing and speaking equally with a single self. Practice and realize an 
east self and a west self. 

Rejoice, hope for, and have the aspiration for bringing buddha 
ancestors’ dharma, the ancestral way, closer to your body and mind. 
Extend this practice from one hour to one day, then to one year and to 
one life-time. Make buddha ancestors’ dharma the essential spirit and 
play with it. This is to live your life meaningfully. 

So, do not think that you should not speak of dharma to others until 
you master it. If you wait until you master it, it will not be possible for 
countless eons. Even if you have mastered human buddhas, you need 
to master celestial buddhas. Even if you have mastered the heart of 
mountains, you need to master the heart of waters. Even if you have 
mastered the dharma of birth with causation, you need to master the 
dharma of birth beyond causation. Even if you have mastered the 
realm of buddha ancestors, you need to master going beyond buddha 
ancestors. Trying to speak to others after mastering all of these in one 
lifetime is not an endeavor of a person, and it is not the study. 

Studying the way of buddha ancestors is to raise the aspiration as 
high as heaven for speaking to others from the moment of studying 
one dharma and one procedure. Thus, you drop away [become free 
from] self and others. Further, studying yourself thoroughly is 
studying others thoroughly. Studying others thoroughly is studying 
yourself thoroughly. 

This practice of buddhas cannot be experienced with the body 
without receiving it from a teacher, even if you have knowledge by 
birth. Knowledge by birth does not know knowledge beyond birth, 
and beyond knowledge beyond birth. Even those who have knowledge 
by birth would not know the great way of buddha ancestors unless 
they study it. 

To experience yourself with the body and to experience others with 
the body is the great road of buddha ancestors. Just turn the study of 
your beginner’s mind and study simultaneously with others’ beginners’ 
minds. When self and others study together with the beginner’s mind, 
you arrive together at the ultimate realm. In this way, your own 
endeavor encourages the endeavor of others. 

However, hearing the words “self-realization” and “self- 
enlightenment,” foolish people think that this is receiving transmission 
without a teacher and that one only needs to study by oneself. This is 

a great mistake. Those who make a crooked interpretation of self- 
realization without receiving instructions from a teacher are the same 
as those outside the way in India who believed in spontaneous 
enlightenment. How can those who do not understand this be 
considered practitioners of the buddha way? 

Furthermore, those who hear the word “self-realization” and assume 
that this is the accumulation of the five skandhas are simply abiding 
in the practice of “self-control” in the Lesser Vehicles. There are many 
of those who do not understand the Great and Lesser Vehicles who 
call themselves descendants of buddha ancestors. Who with clear eyes 
would be fooled by them? 

Zonggao said, “It is studying at Mount Baofeng.” 
Zhantang said, “A coarse Zen student.” 

Later, when Zonggao was reading a sutra, Zhantang asked, “What 
sutra are you reading?” 

Zonggao said, “The Diamond Sutra.” 

Zhantang said, “Dharma is equal with nothing high and nothing 
low. How come Mount Yunju is high and Mount Baofeng is low?” 

Zonggao said, “Dharma is equal with nothing high and nothing 
low.” 

Zhantang said, “You have become a lecturer.” 

Another day, seeing the images of the Ten Kings [of Hell] being 
decorated, Zhantang asked senior monk Zonggao, “What is the family 
name of these officials?” 

Zonggao said, “Liang.” 

Zhantang rubbed his head and said, “My family name is also Liang. 
How come I am not wearing a headdress?” 

Zonggao said, “You are not wearing a headdress, but your nostrils 
look like theirs.” 

Zhantang said, “A coarse Zen student.” 

Another day, Zhantang said to Zonggao, “Senior Monk Gao, you 
have understood Zen in my place all at once. When I ask you to speak, 
you speak. When I ask you to practice, you practice. When I ask you 
to make a commentary, make a verse commentary, give an 
unscheduled talk, give a talk to the assembly, or ask questions, you 
can do any of those things. But there is one thing missing. Do you 
know what it is?” 

Zonggao asked, “What is missing?” 

Zhantang said, “You don’t understand this one point. Indeed, this is 
the point you don’t understand: When I am at the abbot’s quarters and 
speak to you, there is Zen. But as soon as you step out of the abbot’s 
quarters, it disappears. When you are clearly thinking, there is Zen. 
But when you are asleep, it disappears. If so, how can you grab hold 
of birth and death?” 

Zonggao said, “That is exactly what I am questioning.” 

Some years later, Zhantang showed a sign of illness. 

Zonggao said, “After your death, whose help should I get to 
complete my clarifying the great matter?” 

Zhantang said, “There is someone called Qinbazi [Keqin of Ba 
Region]. I haven’t met him. But if you meet him, you will certainly 
complete your study. After meeting him, do not wander around 
anymore. You will certainly bring out the fruition of your study.” 

When we examine these stories, we see that Zhantang did not yet 

approve Zonggao. Although Zonggao often tried to open up for one 
phrase of enlightenment, he was lacking a single experience. He could 
not take hold of or drop away from this single experience. Earlier, 
Daowei did not give Zonggao a document of heritage and encouraged 
him to try harder. Daowei’s observation of his student was clear and 
trustworthy. 

Indeed, Zonggao did not thoroughly study, drop away, and crush 
the point of doubt. He did not have a great doubt. He was not 
immersed in doubt. His request for transmitting a document of 
heritage groundlessly was a coarse action—an extreme example of 
having no aspiration for the way, not following the authentic 
procedure. It was a lack of deep consideration. He was not a vessel of 
the way and was completely ignorant of the study. He tried to invade 
the inner chamber of buddha ancestors with the intention of grabbing 
fame and loving benefit. How pitiful that he did not understand the 
phrases of buddha ancestors! 

Because Zonggao did not understand that learning from the ancients 
is self-realization, and he did not hear and study that to examine 
myriad generations is self-enlightenment, he made such a mistake and 
had such self-delusion. Thus, among students of Zonggao, there is not 
one or even half a person who is truly worth grabbing by the nose. 
Many of them are expedient teachers. They do not understand buddha 
ancestors’ dharma and do not go beyond understanding buddha 
ancestors’ dharma in this way. Monks nowadays should study this in 
detail without neglect. 

After Zhantang passed away, Zonggao followed his recommendation 
and went to study with Keqin, Zen Master Yuanwu of the Tianning 
Monastery in Dongjing. One day, Yuanwu ascended the teaching seat. 
Zonggao said he had a divine enlightenment and presented it to 
Yuanwu. 

Yuanwu said, “Not yet. You understand in this way, but you haven’t 
clarified the great matter.” 

Another day, Yuanwu ascended the teaching seat and explained 
Wuzu Fayan’s words “having a phrase” and “having no phrase.” 
Hearing this, Zonggao immediately said that he had attained the 
dharma of great ease and bliss, and presented his understanding. 

Yuanwu said, “I do not want to fool you.” 

These are stories of Zonggao studying with Yuanwu. He served as 
secretary in Yuanwu’s community. But from beginning to end, he did 
not seem to have a unique point of understanding. He did not show 
any point of understanding in his own lectures or talks. Know that the 
recorder of his words mentioned that he had had divine 
enlightenment or dharma of great ease and bliss, but did not admit 

that he had actually had realization. Do not take him seriously. He 
was merely a student. 

Yuanwu was an old buddha, most revered in the ten directions. 
After Huangbo there had not been a venerable teacher like Yuanwu. 
He was an old buddha, rare in any world. But few humans and devas 
in this Saha Land know this. It is pitiable. 

If we take up Yuanwu’s words and examine senior monk Zonggao, 
we see that he did not have wisdom close to that of his teacher and he 
did not have wisdom equal to his teacher. Furthermore, it seems that 
he had never dreamed of wisdom beyond his teacher. Thus, know that 
Zonggao had less than half the capacity of his teacher. He only 
memorized lines from the Avatamsaka Sutra and the Shurangama Sutra 
and spoke about them. He was not yet the bones and marrow of 
buddha ancestors. 

Zonggao regarded the views expressed by various hermits who 
follow the spirits abiding in grass and trees as buddha ancestors’ 
dharma. Because he thought in this way, we know that he had not 
thoroughly studied the great road of buddha ancestors. After studying 
with Yuanwu, Zonggao did not wander around and visit teachers. 
Groundlessly, he became the abbot of a large monastery and led 
monks. The words he left cannot come close to great dharma. 

However, ignorant people think that Zonggao was not less than 
earlier masters. But those who see and know agree that he did not 
have clear understanding. Without clarifying the great dharma, he 
merely chattered groundlessly. We know that Daowei did not make 
the mistake of acknowledging him and thus became an example for 
later generations. Students of Zonggao still resent Daowei. But Daowei 
just did not accept his understanding. Even further, Zhantang did not 
accept his understanding. Whenever Zhantang saw Zonggao, he 
scolded him. How shameful it is that those in the past and present 
have resented Zhantang for that! 

There are a number of people in Great Song China who call 
themselves descendants of buddha ancestors. But there are few who 
study the truth, and there are few who teach the truth. This can be 
understood through these stories. It was like this in the Shaoxing Era. 
It is worse nowadays. These times cannot be compared. Today, those 
who do not know the great way of buddha ancestors have become 
leaders of monks. 

Know that the Qingyuan Line has the authentic transmission of a 
document of heritage through buddhas and ancestors in both India 
and China. From the Qingyuan Line, the Dongshan Line started. The 
rest of the world has not seen it. All those who have this realization 
are descendants of Dongshan, and are highly regarded among monks. 

Zonggao did not understand the words “self-realization,” and “self- 

enlightenment” when he was alive. Then, how could he have 
examined other cases thoroughly? Even more so, how can descendants 
of old Zonggao understand the word “self-enlightenment”? 

Thus, in the words of buddha ancestors, for themselves and for 
others, there is always the body-mind of buddha ancestors, and the 
eye of buddha ancestors. Because these words [“self-realization” and 
“self-enlightenment”] are the bones and marrow of buddha ancestors, 
their skin cannot be grasped by mediocre people. 

Presented to the assembly while residing at the Yoshimine Temple on 
the twenty-ninth day, the second month, the second year of the 
Kangen Era [1244]. 

76 
Great Practice 

Barzsanc, ZEN MASTER Dazhi of Mount Baizhang, Hao Region, was the 

dharma heir of Mazu. His priest name is Huaihai. When Baizhang gave 
teachings to the assembly, an old man would often appear and listen 
to his dharma talks. The old man usually left after the talks, but one 
day he remained behind. 

Baizhang asked, “Who are you?” 

The old man said, “I am not actually a human being. In ancient 
times, at the time of Kashyapa Buddha, I lived and taught on this 
mountain. One day a student asked, ‘Does a person who has cultivated 
great practice still fall into cause and effect?’ I said to him, ‘No, such a 
person does not fall into cause and effect.’ Because of this I was reborn 
as a wild fox for five hundred lifetimes. Venerable Master, please say a 
turning word and free me from this body of a wild fox.” Then he 
asked Baizhang, “Does a person who has cultivated great practice still 
fall into cause and effect?” 

Baizhang said, “Do not ignore cause and effect.” 

Immediately the old man had great realization. Bowing, he said to 
Baizhang, “I am now liberated from the body of a wild fox. Master, 
will you perform for me a funeral service for a deceased monk? You 
will find the body of a dead fox in the mountain behind the 
monastery.” 

Baizhang asked the practice coordinator to hit the han and inform 
the assembly that funeral services for a monk would be held after the 
midday meal. The monks asked one another, “What’s going on? 
Everyone is well; there is no one sick in the Nirvana Hall [infirmary].” 
After their meal, Baizhang led the assembly to a large rock behind the 
monastery and pointed out with his staff the body of a dead fox. Then, 
following the customary procedure, they cremated the body. That 
evening during his lecture in the dharma hall Baizhang talked about 
what had happened during the day. 

Huangbo asked him, “A teacher of old gave a mistaken answer and 
was reborn as a wild fox for five hundred lifetimes. What if he hadn’t 
given a mistaken answer?” 

Baizhang said, “Come closer and I will tell you.” 

Huangbo approached and slapped Baizhang’s face. 

Laughing, Baizhang clapped his hands and said, “I thought only 
barbarians had red [extraordinary] beards, but you too are a red- 
bearded barbarian.” 

The fundamental point actualized now is great practice. According 
to the old man, there was already a Mount Baizhang of Hao region in 
the distant past at the time of Kashyapa Buddha, and during the 
present era of Shakyamuni Buddha there is also a Mount Baizhang of 
Hao region. This is a turning word actualized. 

Now, Mount Baizhang in the distant past of Kashyapa Buddha and 
Mount Baizhang in the present era of Shakyamuni Buddha are not one 
and not two; neither three three before nor three three after [not 
many in the past or future]. It is not that Mount Baizhang in the past 
has become Mount Baizhang of the present; nor is it that Mount 
Baizhang right now was the Mount Baizhang at the time of Kashyapa 
Buddha. Yet there is the fundamental point of I lived and taught on this 
mountain. 

My response to you would be exactly like what the present 
Baizhang said. What you should ask should be exactly like what the 
old man asked. If you take up one, you cannot take up another. If you 
neglect one, you fall into the secondary. 

One day on Mount Baizhang a student asked, “Does a person who has 
cultivated great practice still fall into cause and effect?” Indeed, this 
question is not easily understood. For the first time since the buddha 
dharma was introduced to China during the Yongping Era [58-67] of 
the later Han Dynasty and since Bodhidharma transmitted the 
teaching from India in the Pudong Era [520-527] of the Liang 
Dynasty, this former student’s question had been heard through the 
words of this old fox. It had never been heard before. Thus, this is rare 
indeed. 

Investigating great practice is nothing but cause and effect itself. 
Because cause and effect are invariably comprehensive and completely 
full, they are beyond a discussion of falling or not falling, or 
considerations of ignoring or not ignoring. If not falling into cause and 
effect is a mistake, not ignoring cause and effect may also be a 
mistake. Whenever mistakes surpass mistakes, there is falling into a 
wild fox body and there is liberation from a wild fox body. It is 
possible that not falling into cause and effect was a mistake during the 
time of Kashyapa Buddha but not a mistake during the time of 
Shakyamuni Buddha. It is also possible that even though there is 
liberation from a wild fox’s body during the present time of 
Shakyamuni Buddha, during the time of Kashyapa Buddha a different 
principle was actualized. 

Regarding the old man’s words I was reborn as a wild fox for five 
hundred lifetimes, what does it mean to be reborn as a wild fox? It is 
not that there was originally a wild fox and it lured the earlier 
Baizhang to fall into cause and effect, nor is it possible that the earlier 
Baizhang was originally a wild fox. To say that the earlier Baizhang’s 
spirit went out and became a wild fox’s skin bag is a statement of 
someone outside the way. It is not that a wild fox came and suddenly 
swallowed the earlier Baizhang. If you say the earlier Baizhang fell 
into the body of a wild fox, then there must be the liberation of the 
earlier Baizhang’s body for the fox to fall into. And yet, Baizhang may 
fall into the body of a wild fox again, later. It is not that Baizhang was 
transposed into a wild fox’s body. 

How could it be that cause and effect are like this? Cause and effect 
are not original existence, and do not begin just now. It is not that 
cause and effect that are inactive wait for someone. Even if the answer 
does not fall into cause and effect is a mistaken response, it is not that 
the one who says so always falls into a wild fox’s body. If such a 
response to a student’s question necessarily causes a teacher to fall 
into the body of a wild fox, then recent teachers like Linji, Deshan, 
and their descendents would have become thousands of foxes. Careless 
elders of the last two or three hundred years would have become wild 
foxes. However, we have never heard that they have become wild 
foxes. If there were many such cases, we certainly would have heard 
about them. Although there are few who give such answers, there are 
many whose answers are far more confused than does not fall into 
cause and effect. There are quite a few who should not even be allowed 
within the neighborhood of buddha dharma. Those who have the eye 
of practice can discern this point. Those without it do not understand. 

Thus, we know. We do not say that one becomes a wild fox because 
of a mistaken answer, and one does not become a wild fox because of 
a correct answer. In this story there is no mention of what happens 
after becoming free of the body of a wild fox, but presumably there is 
a pearl wrapped within the [wild fox’s] skin bag. 

Regarding this, those who have not seen or heard the buddha 
dharma say, “Becoming free of the wild fox body, he returns to the 
essential ocean of original enlightenment. As a result of delusion he 
became a fox for a while, but after his great enlightenment the wild 
fox body returned to the original essence.” 

This view of returning to the original self is not buddha dharma, but 
from outside the way. This is not buddha dharma. To say that a wild 
fox is not original nature and does not have original enlightenment is 
not buddha dharma. To say that after great enlightenment the wild 
fox body is discarded is not the wild fox’s great enlightenment. This 

merely belittles the wild fox. Do not speak in such a way. 

The story states that because of the turning word of the current 
Baizhang, the former Baizhang—an old fox for five hundred lifetimes 
—immediately became liberated from the body of a fox. Understand 
the meaning of this story. If you assert that a turning word by an 
outsider can liberate a wild fox, then there must be innumerable 
turning words by mountains, rivers, and the great earth from the 
incalculable past. However, to say that there had never been the 
liberation from a wild fox body in the past, but the current Baizhang’s 
turning words alone liberated the wild fox, is to deny the way of the 
ancestors. To say that mountains, rivers, and the great earth have 
never uttered a single turning word is to say that there is no place for 
the current Baizhang to even open his mouth. 

It has also been asserted by many teachers, one after another, that 
not falling into cause and effect is not different from ignoring cause 
and effect. But they have never realized the bodily experience of 
falling into or not ignoring cause and effect within the stream of those 
very words. They consequently neither experience the skin, flesh, 
bones, and marrow of falling into the body of a wild fox, nor 
experience the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of being liberated from 
the body of a wild fox. When the beginning is not right, the end is 
never right. 

In the old man’s words, Since then I have fallen into the body of a wild 
fox for five hundred lifetimes, who has fallen and into what has he 
fallen? In the very moment of falling into the body of a wild fox, what 
form and color does the world continuing from the past have at 
present? Why five hundred repetitious births? Where did the dead 
body of the wild fox come from? 

To say Such a person does not fall into cause and effect is to fall into 
the body of a wild fox. To hear Do not ignore cause and effect is to be 
liberated from the body of a wild fox. These instances of falling into 
and being liberated are just the cause and effect of the wild fox. 

Nevertheless, since ancient times people have said, “Because such a 
person does not fall into cause and effect is an expression which seems to 
refute cause and effect, the speaker falls down.” This assertion is 
without reason, spoken by those who are ignorant. Even if the former 
Baizhang said, Such a person does not fall into cause and effect, his great 
practice would not delude others and he would not refute cause and 
effect. 

It has also been said, “The meaning of Do not ignore cause and effect 
is that because great practice transcends cause and effect, it liberates 
the body of a wild fox.” Truly, this is realization eight or nine out of 
ten of the eye of practice. 

Thus, in the time of Kashyapa Buddha the old man lived on this 

mountain. In the time of Shakyamuni Buddha he is living on this 
mountain. Former body and present body—sun face and moon face 
[in either case]—he covered the spirit of a wild fox, and manifested 
the spirit of a wild fox. 

How could the wild fox know its life for five hundred lifetimes? If 
you say that it knows five hundred lifetimes with the intelligence of a 
wild fox, the wild fox’s intelligence does not even know the matter of 
a single lifetime, much less a life rammed into a wild fox’s skin bag. 
That a wild fox knows its falling down in five hundred lives is the 
fundamental point actualized. While it does not completely know the 
whole of one life, there are things that a wild fox knows and things it 
does not know. Even if the body and intelligence were permanent, the 
fox could not count five hundred lifetimes. As there is no way of 
counting so many rebirths, the words five hundred lifetimes may be a 
fiction. 

If someone says that a wild fox knows by using the intelligence 
other than a wild fox’s intelligence, then it is not the wild fox’s 
knowing. What person can know these five hundred lives on behalf of 
the wild fox? Without having a clear path of realization through 
knowing and not knowing, you cannot speak of falling into the body of 
a wild fox. If there is no falling into the body of a wild fox, it is 
impossible to become liberated from the body of a wild fox. If there is 
no falling into and becoming liberated from a wild fox body, there can 
be no former Baizhang. If there is no former Baizhang, there can be no 
current Baizhang—this cannot be conceded at random. Investigate this 
matter in great detail with a discerning eye and crush the incomplete 
theories so prevalent throughout the Liang, Chen, Sui, Tang, and Song 
dynasties. 

The old nonhuman said to the current Baizhang, Will you perform for 
me a funeral service for a deceased monk? This is not an appropriate 
thing to ask. Ever since the time of Baizhang there have been 
numerous teachers who have not been surprised at this statement and 
who have never doubted it. The fact of the matter is: how can a dead 
fox be regarded as a deceased monk without having received the 
precepts, without having participated in summer practice periods, 
without having awesome presence, and without the status of a monk? 
If one were to groundlessly perform a funeral service in the manner of 
one for a deceased monk for such a being, all those who have never 
left the household—lay men and women—should also be accorded the 
rites of a deceased monk. If we look for such precedents, there has 
never been anything like it. It is unheard of and such a case has not 
been authentically transmitted in the buddha way. Even if one wanted 
to perform such a ceremony, it would not be possible to do so. 

It is said that Baizhang cremated the body of the wild fox following 

the customary procedure. This is not clear; perhaps there is a mistake. 
Know that funeral services for a deceased monk, from the moment of 
entering the Nirvana Hall to the practice of arriving at the Bodhi 
Garden [place of death], all have set procedures and cannot be 
changed at random. Even if the wild fox lying at the foot of a cliff 
claims it is the former Baizhang, how could this be the practice of a 
great monk, the bones and marrow of buddha ancestors? Who could 
clearly testify that this was the former Baizhang? Do not groundlessly 
regard the transmogrification of a wild fox spirit as authentic, and do 
not make light of the dharma standards of buddha ancestors. 

As descendents of buddha ancestors, value the excellence of their 
dharma standards. Do not go along with such an inappropriate request 
as it appears Baizhang did. A single matter, a single dharma, is rare to 
encounter. Do not be affected by worldly customs and human 
sentiments. In this country of Japan, the form and manner of the 
buddhas and ancestors are hard to encounter and difficult to hear. As 
you now have the rare opportunity of hearing and seeing them, 
treasure them more than a pearl in the topknot. Those without such 
great fortune do not have the opportunity to honor them. This is sad 
indeed. Without realization of the lightness and gravity of matters, 
they lack the wisdom of five hundred years, the wisdom of a thousand 
years. 

Thus, it is necessary to encourage yourself and others. Receiving the 
authentically transmitted tradition from the buddha ancestors—even 
one prostration or a single upright sitting—is rare indeed; greatly 
rejoice and celebrate this great fortune. Those who lack this heart will 
not possess a single virtue or acquire any benefit even if they were to 
encounter the emanation of a thousand buddhas. There are people 
outside the way who have mistakenly been entrusted with the buddha 
dharma. Though they may sound like they are learned in the buddha 
dharma, the buddha dharma they expound lacks the fruits of 
realization. 

This being so, if kings and ministers, or even Brahma or Indra, who 
are not monks, come to you and ask for a funeral service of a deceased 
monk, do not permit it. Tell them that they should leave the 
household, receive the precepts, cultivate the life of a monk, and then 
return. If those who are attached to karmic results in the three realms, 
and do not aspire to actualize the life within the three treasures, bring 
forth ten thousand dead skin bags and try to disregard the funeral 
precedent for a deceased monk, do not permit it. That would not be 
conducive of any merit. If they wish to establish a favorable 
connection with the merit of buddha dharma, they should 
immediately leave the household, receive the precepts according to 

buddha dharma, and undertake to cultivate the life of a monk. 

That evening the current Baizhang ascended the teaching seat and 
talked about what had happened during the day. The point of his talk 
is highly unclear. What did he talk about? It seems he said that the old 
man, having already completed five hundred lifetimes as a fox, 
became liberated from the body of the past. Are the five hundred 
lifetimes spoken of here counted in terms of the human world or in 
the manner of a wild fox? Or are they counted in the manner of the 
buddha way? Furthermore, how could the eyes of the old wild fox 
catch a glimpse of Baizhang? What is seen through the eyes of a wild 
fox must be the spirit of a wild fox. What is seen through the eyes of 
Baizhang are buddha ancestors. 

answers and the answers beyond mistake spoken by buddhas and 
ancestors. Understand that in this story the former Baizhang did not 
mention a mistaken answer, nor did the current Baizhang. 

Even so, using five hundred skins of a wild fox three inches thick, 
the former Baizhang lived and taught on the mountain for the benefit 
of practitioners, and expressed his understanding to a student. Because 
the pointed strands of hair on the wild fox skin dropped off, the 
current Baizhang is one stinky skin bag. I presume that this is 
dropping off half a wild fox’s skin. This is freedom from falling, which 
at every moment is beyond mistakes. This is cause and effect, which at 
every moment speaks for another. This is bright and clear, great 
practice with great intention. 

If Huangbo were to appear right now and ask, What if he hadn’t 
given a mistaken answer? say, “He would still fall into the body of a 
wild fox.” If Huangbo should ask, “How is this so?” say, “You spirit of 
a wild fox!” 

Nevertheless, this is neither a mistake nor not a mistake. Do not 
concede that Huangbo’s question was well asked. Again, if Huangbo 
were to ask, “What would he have become?” say, “Have you grasped 
the skin of your own face, or not?” Further say, “Have you become 
free of the wild fox’s body?” Also say, “Can you answer students 
saying, does not fall into cause and effect?” 

When Baizhang said, Come closer and I will tell you, he already 
answered the question, What if he hadn’t given a mistaken answer? 
Huangbo went closer, having forgotten about the past and being 
oblivious of the future, and slapped Baizhang. This slap is Huangbo 
being possessed by countless transmogrifications of wild foxes. 

Laughing, Baizhang clapped his hands and said, I thought only 
barbarians had red beards, but you too are a red-bearded barbarian. This 
expression lacks the vitality of being ten out of ten; it is only eight or 
nine out of ten complete realization. Even if we were to admit that it 
is eight or nine out of ten, this is still not eight or nine out of ten. Even 
admitting that it is ten out of ten, there is not more than eight or nine 
out of ten complete realization. 

So, say, “Baizhang’s words pervade the ten directions, though he is 
not yet out of the wild fox’s cave. Huangbo’s heels touch the ground, 
though he is still stuck on the [narrow] path of a praying mantis. 
Slapping and clapping hands are one, not two. The red-bearded 
barbarian is a barbarian with a red beard.” 

Presented to the assembly of the Yoshimine Temple, Echizen Province, 
on the ninth day, the third month, the second year of the Kangen Era 
[1244]. 

Dasutsu Monastery Prniop 

LT 
Space 

Provoxen BY THE question “What is right here?” the way actualizes 

and buddha ancestors emerge. The actualization of the buddha 
ancestors’ way has been handed down heir by heir. Thus, the whole 
body of skin, flesh, bones, and marrow hangs in empty space. 

Space is not classified within the twenty types of emptiness. Indeed, 
emptiness is not limited merely to the twenty types of emptiness. 
There are eighty-four thousand types of emptiness and more. 

Xitang responded, How do you grasp it, elder brother? Thus, Xitang 
wanted Shigong to speak, not depending on him to say it all. 

Shigong poked his finger in Xitang’s nostril and yanked his nose. 
Know that Shigong hid his body in Xitang’s nostril. This is the same as 
Shigong poking his own nostril. Thus, space is one ball which bounces 
here and there. 

Xitang grunted in pain and said, You’re killing me! You tried to pull 
off my nose. He thought he had met another person, but right there he 
actually met himself. At this moment, isolating himself was not 
possible. This is how you should study yourself. 

Shigong said, You can grasp it now. This is certainly a way to grasp 
space. It is not that Shigong and another Shigong reached out together 
with one hand; it is not that one space and another space reached out 
together with one hand. No effort was needed [for grasping space]. 

There is no gap in the entire world to let space in, but this story has 
been a peal of thunder in space. From the time of Shigong and Xitang 
there have been many practitioners regarded as masters of the Five 
Schools, but few of them have seen, heard, and understood space. 
Some of those before and after Shigong and Xitang tried to play with 
space, but there are few who have reached it. Shigong took up space 
but Xitang did not see it. 

Let me respond to Shigong. You grabbed Xitang’s nose. If this was to 
grasp space, you should have grasped your own nose. You should have 
grasped your own finger with a finger. You have some understanding 
of grasping space. Even if you have a good finger to grasp space, you 
should penetrate the inside and outside of space. You should kill space 
and give life to space. You should know the weight of space. You 
should trust that the buddha ancestors’ endeavor of the way in 
aspiration, practice, and enlightenment through challenging dialogues 
is no other than grasping space. 

Mazu said, “The heart is like a main actor. The will is like a 
supporting actor. The six types of consciousness are like their 
company. How do they understand your teaching of the sutra?” 

Liang said, “If the heart doesn’t understand it, does emptiness 
understand it?” 

Mazu said, “Yes, it does.” 

Liang flipped his sleeves and started to walk away. 

Mazu called, “Lecturer.” 

Liang turned his head around. 

Mazu said, “Just this, from birth till death.” 

At this moment Liang had realization. He hid himself at Mount Xi, 
and no one heard about him any longer. 

In this way buddha ancestors all expound sutras. What expounds 
sutras is empty space [boundlessness]. Without being empty space, no 
one can expound even one single sutra. Expounding the Heart Sutra 
and expounding the body sutra are both done with empty space. With 
empty space, thinking is actualized and beyond thinking is actualized. 
Empty space is wisdom with a teacher, wisdom without a teacher, 
knowing by birth, knowing by learning. Becoming a buddha, 
becoming an ancestor is also empty space. 

the Kangen Era [1245]. 

78 
Eanne Bow. 

Tue AUTHENTIC TRANSMISSION has been conveyed from beyond the Seven 

Original Buddhas to the Seven Original Buddhas, from within the 
Seven Original Buddhas to the Seven Original Buddhas, from the total 
Seven Original Buddhas to the total Seven Original Buddhas, from the 
Seven Original Buddhas to the twenty-eight Indian ancestors. 
Bodhidharma, the Twenty-eighth Ancestor, went to China and gave 
authentic transmission to Huike, the Second Chinese Ancestor, Great 
Master Zhengzong Pujiao. This was handed down through six 
generations and reached Huineng. 

Thus, in India and China, the teachers of all fifty-one generations 
transmitted the treasury of the true dharma eye, the wondrous heart 
of nirvana—the robes and the eating bowls. Earlier buddhas 
maintained the authentic transmission of the earlier masters. Thus, 
authentic transmission has been conducted from buddha to buddha, 
from ancestor to ancestor. 

Accordingly, those who study with buddha ancestors with skin, 
flesh, bones, and marrow, with fist and eyeball, have their own 
expressions. Some understand that the eating bowls are the body and 
mind of buddha ancestors. Some understand that the eating bowls are 
the rice eating bowls of buddha ancestors. Some understand that the 
eating bowls are the eyeball of buddha ancestors. Some understand 
that the eating bowls are the radiant light of buddha ancestors. Some 
understand that the eating bowls are the true body of buddha 
ancestors. Some understand that the eating bowls are the treasury of 
the true dharma eye, the wondrous heart of buddha ancestors. Some 
understand that the eating bowls are the place of turning the body of 
buddha ancestors. Some understand that the eating bowls are the 
mouth and bottom of the eating bowls of buddha ancestors. The 
essential understanding of those who study in this way is expressed 
differently, but there can be further understanding. 

Tiantong, ascended the teaching seat and said: 

I remember that Bhaizhang was asked by a monk, “What is 
extraordinary?” 

Bhaizhang said, “To sit alone on Daoxiong Peak. You cannot 
move this person. Let the person sit through for the moment.” 

Now, someone may come up and ask me, “What is 
extraordinary?” 

I would reply, “The eating bowls of Jingci [where I was abbot] 
have moved to Tiantong and eat meals.” 

Know that what is extraordinary happens to an extraordinary person; 
an extraordinary utensil is used for an extraordinary thing. This is an 
extraordinary moment. Thus, where what is extraordinary is 
actualized, there are extraordinary eating bowls. 

Thus, the Four Deva Kings protect the eating bowls and all dragon 
kings guard them. This is a profound procedure of the buddha way. 
This being so, we dedicate eating bowls to buddha ancestors and are 
entrusted with eating bowls by buddha ancestors. 

Those who have not studied inside the chamber of buddha ancestors 
say that the buddha kashaya is made of silk, cotton, or celestial 
thread. They also say that the buddha eating bowls are made of stone, 
slate, or iron. They say this because they have not yet obtained the 
eye of study. 

The buddha kashaya is the buddha kashaya; it should not be viewed 
as silk or cotton. To view it as silk or cotton is to fall into a 
conventional view. The buddha eating bowls are the buddha eating 
bowls. Do not call them stone, slate, iron, or wood. 

The buddha eating bowls are not made. They neither arise nor 
perish, neither come nor go, neither gain nor lose. They are not 
limited to new or old, ancient or present. 

Although the eating bowls of buddha ancestors are actualized by the 
assembling of clouds and water [monks], they are not limited to 
clouds and water. Although they are actualized by the assembling of 
grass and trees, they are not limited to grass and trees. 

Water is water as a compound of all things. Clouds are clouds as a 
compound of all things. Clouds are assembled as clouds and water is 
assembled as water. The eating bowls are eating bowls as a compound 
of all things. The eating bowls are assembled as all things. The total 
mind is assembled as the eating bowls. The empty space is assembled 
as the eating bowls. The eating bowls are assembled as the eating 
bowls. The eating bowls are immersed in the eating bowls, and 
divided by the eating bowls. 

The eating bowls transmitted to monks now were dedicated to the 
Buddha by the Four Deva Kings. The bowls wouldn’t exist had they 
not been dedicated by the Four Deva Kings. The eating bowls, 
authentically transmitted by buddha ancestors of all directions who 
have transmitted the treasury of the true dharma eye, are eating bowls 
that leap beyond ancient and present. 

Thus, these eating bowls penetrate the old views of an iron person, 
and are not bound by the analysis of a wooden stalk [stagnant 
thinker]. They go beyond the sound and form of tiles and pebbles. 
They are not hindered by the experience of stone or jade. Do not call 
them stone or tile. Do not call them wooden stalks. 

Thus it has been understood. 

Presented to the assembly of the Daibutsu Monastery, Echizen 
Province, on the twelfth day, the third month, the third year of the 
Kangen Era [1245]. 

79 

Pp RACTICE Pp ERIOD 

In AN INFORMAL talk to open the summer practice period, Rujing, my 
late master, Old Buddha Tiantong, presented this poem: 

Piling up bones in an open field, 

gouging out a cave in empty sky, 

break through the barrier of dualism 

and splash in a bucket of pitch-black lacquer. 

To grab hold of this spirit, to train constantly for thirty years, eating 
meals, sleeping, and stretching your legs—this requires unstinting 
support. The structure of the ninety-day summer practice period 
provides such support. It is the head and face of buddhas and 
ancestors. It has been intimately transmitted as their skin, flesh, 
bones, and marrow. You turn the buddha ancestors’ eyes and heads 
into the days and months of the ninety-day summer practice period. 
Regard the whole of each practice period as the whole of the buddhas 
and ancestors. 

From top to bottom, the summer practice period is buddha 
ancestors. It covers everything without an inch of land or a speck of 
earth left out. The summer practice period is an anchoring peg that is 
neither new nor old, that has never arrived and will never leave. It’s 
the size of your fist and takes the form of grabbing you by the nose. 
When the practice period is opened, the empty sky cracks apart and 
all of space is dissolved. When the practice period is closed, the earth 
explodes, leaving no place undisturbed. 

When the koan of opening the summer practice period is taken up, 
it looks as if something has arrived. When the fishing nets and birds’ 
nests of the summer practice period are all thrown away, it looks as if 
something has left. However, those who participated intimately in the 
practice period have been covered with opening and closing all along. 
An inch of grass has not appeared for ten thousand miles, so you 
might say, “Give me back the meal money for these ninety days.” 

Priest Sixin of Mount Huanglong said, “My pilgrimage of more than 
thirty years amounts to one ninety-day summer practice period, not a 
day more, not a day less.” 

Thus, after a pilgrimage of more than thirty years you develop an 
eye that sees summer itself as a ninety-day practice period. Even if 
you try to stretch it or contract it, the ninety days will always bounce 
back and be just ninety days. You yourself cannot leap over the 
boundary of ninety days, but if you use the ninety days as your hands 
and feet, you can make the leap. Although the ninety-day summer 
practice period serves as a support for us, the buddha ancestors did 
not create it on our behalf. They only handed it down to us from the 
past, heir to heir, authentically. 

This being so, to experience a summer practice period is to 
experience all buddhas and all ancestors. To experience a summer 
practice period is to see buddhas and ancestors directly. Buddhas and 
ancestors have been produced by the summer practice period for a 
long, long time. Although the ninety-day summer practice period is 
only as long as your forehead, it is beyond time. One kalpa, ten 
kalpas, one hundred, one thousand, or innumerable kalpas cannot 
contain it. Although ordinary events can be contained within one 
thousand or innumerable kalpas, the ninety days contain one hundred, 
one thousand, or innumerable kalpas. Even if the innumerable kalpas 
experience the ninety days and see the buddhas, the ninety days are 
still free of innumerable kalpas. 

To become fully immersed in the liveliness of the summer practice 
period is to be free of the liveliness of the summer practice period. 
Although it has origination and cause, it has not come from another 
place or another time, nor has it arisen here and now. When you grasp 
for the origination of the ninety-day period, it immediately appears. 
When you search for the cause of the ninety-day period, it’s 
immediately right here. Although ordinary people and sages use the 
ninety-day period as their abode and sustenance, it is beyond the 
boundary of ordinary and sacred. It is also beyond the reach of 
discernment and nondiscernment, and even beyond beyond the reach 
of discernment and nondiscernment. 

ninety days of summer in sitting practice. If people should come to ask 
about the dharma, please give them your explanation on my behalf. 
All things are beyond birth, beyond death.” 

Then he closed the entrance to his meditation chamber and sat. It 
has been two thousand one hundred ninety-four years since then. 
Today is in the third year of the Kangen Era [1245]. 

Those who haven’t entered the inner chamber regard the World- 
Honored One’s retreat in the country of Magadha as proof of 
expounding the dharma without words. These confused people think, 
“The Buddha’s closing off his chamber and spending the summer in 
solitary sitting shows that words and speech are merely skillful means 
and cannot indicate the truth. Cutting off words and eliminating 
mental activity is therefore the ultimate truth. Wordlessness and 
mindlessness is real; words and thoughts are unreal. The Buddha sat in 
the closed chamber for ninety days in order to cut off all human 
traces.” 

Those who say such things are greatly mistaken about the World- 
Honored One’s true intention. 

If you really understand the meaning of cutting off words, speech, 
and mental activity, you will see that all social and economic 
endeavors are essentially already beyond words, speech, and mental 
activity. Going beyond words and speech is itself all words and 
speech, and going beyond mental activity is nothing but all mental 
activity. So it is a misunderstanding of this story to see it as 
advocating the overthrow of words, speech, and mental activity. 
Reality is to go into the mud, enter the weeds, and expound dharma 
for the benefit of others; turning the dharma and helping all beings is 
not something optional. If people who call themselves descendants of 
the Buddha [leaders in the monastery] say that the Buddha’s ninety 
days of solitary summer sitting means that words and speech are cut 
off, you should demand a refund for those ninety days of summer 
sitting. 

Also, do not misunderstand the Buddha’s further words to Ananda, 
Please give them your explanation on my behalf. All things are beyond 
birth, beyond death. Since the Buddha’s closing the room and sitting 
through the summer is not merely an activity without words and 
speech, ask the World-Honored One, in Ananda’s place, “What is the 
meaning of all things are beyond birth, beyond death and how do we 
practice it?” In light of your question, examine the World-Honored 
One’s teaching. 

This story about the Buddha contains the primary truth and the 
primary beyond-truth of his expounding and turning the dharma. It is 

a mistake to use it as proof that the Buddha taught abandonment of 
words and speech. If you see it that way, it is like taking a three-foot 
dragon-fountain sword and hanging it up on the wall of a potter’s 
shop [to be used as a shaping knife]. 

Thus, sitting for ninety days of summer is an ancient method used 
by authentic buddha ancestors for turning the dharma wheel. The 
important part of this story is just the Buddha announcing his 
intention to go into a summer retreat. This makes it quite clear that 
sitting the ninety-day summer practice period is something to be done 
without fail. Not to practice in this way is to be outside the way. 

When the World-Honored One was alive he held the summer 
practice period in Tushita Heaven, or he held it with five hundred 
monks in a hall on Vulture Peak. It didn’t matter to him which of the 
five parts of India he was in; he always held a summer practice period 
when the time came. Buddha ancestors for generations up to the 
present have been practicing it as the essential matter; it is the 
unsurpassable way of practice and enlightenment. In the Indra’s Net 
Sutra the winter practice period is mentioned, but that tradition has 
not been passed on; only the ninety-day summer practice period has 
come down to us, authentically transmitted for fifty-one generations 
up to the present. 

complete enlightenment. Both Mahayana and Hinayana have fine 
teachings and practices; these are all branches, leaves, flowers, and 
fruits of the ninety-day practice period. 

In such-and-such monastery on such-and-such mountain in such- 
and-such province of such-and-such country, the names in the 
ocean assembly forming the summer practice period are [for 
example] as follows: 

Venerable Ajnatakaundinya [the first disciple of the Buddha], 
Chief Monk, Priest __, Abbot 

Ordained in the first year of the Kempo Era 
__, Senior monk 

__, Librarian 

__, Senior monk 

__, Senior monk 

Ordained in the second year of the Kempo Era 
___, Former abbot 

, Ino 

__, Head monk 

__, Senior monk 

___, Bathhouse keeper 

Ordained in the first year of the Kenreki Era 
__, Work leader 

__, Attendant monk 

__, Head monk 

__, Head monk 

__, Guest coordinator 

__, Lay contact monk 

__, Senior monk 

___, Tenzo 

__, Infirmary manager 

Ordained in the third year of the Kenreki Era 
___, Secretary 

__, Senior monk 

__, Former abbot 

__, Head monk 

__, Senior monk 

__, Senior monk 

I respectfully present this preliminary list. Please notify me if 
there is a mistake. 

Sincerely yours, monk [so-and-so], Ino 
The third day, the fourth month, the year __. 

This is calligraphed in formal script on a white sheet of paper. 

Cursive or decorative script is not used. This list is fastened to a 
paperboard with a flax string, about the thickness of two grains of 
rice, and hangs like a screen. It is removed at the end of the break 
from zazen on the fifth day of the fourth month. 

worship the shrine of spirits, and chant the great names of myriad 
virtues, dedicating offerings to the deities enshrined here. We 
pray for protection and for the complete accomplishment of the 
practice period. 

Now we invoke the venerable ones (after each of the following 
names a small bell is struck): Pure Dharmakaya Vairochana 
Buddha, Complete Sambhogakaya Vairochana Buddha, 
Uncountable Nirmanakaya Shakyamuni Buddhas, Future Maitreya 
Buddha, All Buddhas throughout space and time, Great Sacred 
Manjushri Bodhisattva, Great Sacred Samantabhadra Bodhisattva, 
Great Compassion Avalokiteshvara Bodhisattva, All Venerable 
Bodhisattva Mahasattvas, Maha Prajna Paramita. 

We dedicate the merit of our chanting and offerings to the 
dragon deities of the earth who protect the true dharma. May the 
wondrous light illuminate and activate this merit so that pure 
enjoyment and selfless happiness will arise. We again invoke All 
Buddhas throughout space and time, All Venerable Bodhisattva 
Mahasattvas, and Maha Prajna Paramita. 

The drum is hit and the monks go for ceremonial tea in the monks’ 
hall. Serving the tea is the responsibility of the monastery 
administrator. The monks enter the hall with a _ formal 
circumambulation and sit in their positions facing the center of the 
hall; the officer in charge opens the ceremony with an incense 
offering. The Guidelines for Zen Monasteries says, “This ceremony is 
usually conducted by the monastery administrator but the practice 
coordinator may substitute.” 

Prior to the chanting ceremony the officer in charge writes an 
announcement of invitation to the tea ceremony and presents it to the 
head monk in the following manner: The officer, wearing the kashaya 
and carrying the folded bowing cloth, faces the head monk, spreads 
the bowing cloth twice [on the floor, spreading it in two folds, 
standing up, folding it up, and spreading it again] and makes three 
formal bows, then presents the announcement to the head monk. The 
head monk responds by bowing in the same way. The invitation is 
placed on a fine silk cloth spread over [the lid of] a box. This box is 
carried ceremonially by an assistant. The officer bringing the 
invitation is escorted into, and later, out of the hall, by the head 
monk. The invitation reads: 

This evening I will serve tea in the monks’ hall for the head monk 
and everyone in the assembly to initiate the practice period. 
Please kindly attend. 

Respectfully yours, 

Monk so-and-so, 

Monastery Administrator 

The fourteenth day of the fourth month, the third year of the 
Kangen Era 

This is signed with the first ideograph of the administrator’s name. 
After presenting the invitation to the head monk, the administrator 
has his assistant post it in front of the monks’ hall. There is a 
varnished bulletin board to the south of the front entrance, to which 
envelopes for announcements are fastened with bamboo pegs. The 
envelope for tea invitations is posted next to them. There is a 
traditional format for writing such an invitation. The size of 
ideographs should not exceed five bu [approximately half an inch]. On 
the front of the envelope, write: “Attention: Head Monk and Assembly. 
From Monastery Administrator.” This announcement is removed after 
tea is served. 

the beginning of the summer, and the days are gradually getting 
warmer. This is the time of year when the Dharma King first 
established a practice period. We are all grateful that you now enjoy 
good health in motion and stillness. This is very auspicious.” Then 
they make three semiformal bows and remain silent. The abbot 
returns the bows each time. 

The abbot replies, “We are extremely fortunate to be able to have 
this practice period together. I hope that Head Monk so-and-so, 
Monastery Administrator so-and-so, and other leaders will support one 
another so as to prevent any disturbance from arising.” 

The head monk and the assembly of monks then come forward and 
repeat the same process of greeting with the abbot. At this time the 
head monk, officers, and other monks all face north and bow. The 
abbot alone faces south and stands in front of the dharma seat steps. 
The abbot’s bowing cloth is spread on the main bowing mat. 

Then the head monk and the entire assembly spread their bowing 
cloths twice, making three formal bows to the abbot. As they do this, 
those who are not fully participating in the practice period, including 
the junior monks, the attendant monks, the senior dharma associates, 
as well as the novices, stand to the side along the east wall of the 
dharma hall. However, if there are strips of paper with donors’ names 
on the east wall, they should stand near the big drum [in the northeast 
corner] or along the west wall. 

After these bows, the officers go to the kitchen and stand in the 
ceremonial location. The head monk leads the assembly there and 
greets the officers with three semiformal bows. During this time the 
junior monks, the attendant monks, and the senior dharma family 
members all pay their respects to the abbot in the dharma hall in the 
following manner: Senior dharma family members spread _ their 
bowing cloths twice and make three formal bows. The abbot returns 
their bows. The junior monks and attendant monks make nine formal 
bows. The abbot does not return their bows. Novices may make nine 
or twelve bows. The abbot responds to these bows by merely putting 
his palms together. 

After the ceremony in the kitchen, the head monk and the assembly 
proceed to the monks’ hall. The head monk stands outside on the 
north side near the entrance, facing south toward the monks who are 
gathered outside. The monks make three semiformal bows to the head 
monk. 

Then the head monk enters the monks’ hall followed by the 
assembly in the order of ordination seniority, and _ they 
circumambulate the hall. After this, the monks stand in their 
respective positions. The officers enter the hall, spread their bowing 

cloths fully open on the floor [without folding them], and make three 
most formal bows to the enshrined image. They get up and make three 
semiformal bows in front of the head monk [to the assembly]. The 
assembly returns their bows. The officers circumambulate the hall 
once, go to their positions, and stand with their hands folded. 

The abbot then enters the hall, offers incense to the enshrined 
image, fully spreads the bowing cloth, makes three most formal bows, 
and stands. During this time, the junior monks [who have entered the 
hall after the assembly] are standing behind the enshrined image, 
while the senior dharma family members are standing behind the 
assembly. The abbot goes to the head monk and makes three 
semiformal bows, then goes to the abbot’s seat, stands facing west, 
and makes three semiformal bows. These bows are returned by the 
head monk and the assembly. 

The abbot circumambulates the hall and then exits. The head monk 
stands at the south side of the doorway of the hall in order to bow to 
the abbot as he leaves. Then the head monk and the assembly face 
each other, make three bows, and say, “We now have the good fortune 
to participate in this practice period. May unwholesome karma of 
body, speech, and thought not arise, and may we practice with 
compassion for one another.” These bows are done after spreading the 
bowing cloths. 

The head monk, secretary, head of the storehouse, and other officers 
go back to their offices. The monks who live in the monks’ residence 
hall make three semiformal bows to the hall director and the head 
monk of the hall, and make the same statement that was made in the 
monks’ hall. 

followed by the monks in the study hall. Thus, various monks join the 
procession in turn each at the place associated with their duties. This 
is called “the procession of amassing the assembly.” 

The abbot then proceeds to his quarters, ascends the stairs to the 
west, and stands in front of the main building, facing south in formal 
shashu posture. The assembly and the officers all face north, toward 
the abbot, and make a standing bow to him. This standing bow should 
be particularly formal and deep. The abbot returns their bow, and the 
assembly retires. Rujing, my late master, did not bring the assembly to 
the abbot’s quarters; instead he brought the assembly into the dharma 
hall and stood in shashu in front of the steps of the dharma seat, 
facing south. The assembly made a standing bow to him and then 
retired. This is also an authentic tradition. 

Then, the monks greet one another in various ways, according to 
their relationships. “Greet” here means that they bow to one another. 
For example, groups from the same home region greet one another 
with a feeling of celebration, appreciating the opportunity to share the 
same practice period together. Tens of monks make these greetings in 
the Hall of Light [study hall]; others greet one another along the 
hallways. The monks may use the greeting phrases used in the monks’ 
hall ceremony, or they may say something spontaneous. When 
disciples meet their root teachers, they greet them with nine formal 
bows. The dharma family members of the abbot greet him by 
spreading their bowing cloths twice and making three formal bows, or 
by spreading their bowing cloths fully and making three most formal 
bows. Monks accompanying the dharma family members make their 
greeting in the same way. Among others who should be greeted 
formally are dharma uncles, those who sit nearby on the meditation 
platform, and those who have practiced together in the past. Those 
monks who live in the private quarters, the head monk, the secretary, 
the librarian, the guest coordinator, and the bath master as well as the 
treasurer, monastery administrator, practice coordinator, tenzo, work 
leader, former abbots of other monasteries, senior nuns, and Daoist 
practitioners should visit one another’s quarters and offer greeting 
bows. 

If the entrances to the common quarters become crowded with 
monks so that it is difficult to enter, a note is left attached to the 
doorway. The note, on a small piece of white paper about one sun 
[about 1 inch] wide and two suns tall, should read, “Monk so-and-so 
of such and such quarters offers greetings,” or the note may be from 
several monks: “Monks Soun, Esho (and others if there are any), offer 
greetings.” Other options for the note are “Salutations from Monk so- 
and-so,” “Respectful greetings from Monk so-and-so,” “With greetings 

from Monk so-and-so,” or “With bows from Monk so-and-so.” These 
are several examples, but there are many other ways this card can be 
written. It is not unusual for there to be many cards attached to the 
doorways, always on the right-hand side, never on the left [considered 
the higher side], to be respectful. The director of each of the quarters 
removes the cards after the mid-day meal. On this day all the living 
quarters, large and small, have their entrance screens rolled up. 

Traditionally, at this point the abbot, monastery administrator, and 
the head monk in turn serve tea; however, in remote monasteries, on 
distant islands, or in the deep mountains, this custom may be omitted. 
Retired elders and those who have been head monks serve tea for 
officers and heads of crews in their own quarters. 

Yours respectfully, 
Monk so-and-so, Administrator 

Also, the chant at the shrine for the earth-guarding deities is 
presented as follows: 

The golden wind blows over the fields and the god of autumn 
begins to govern the four quarters. Now it is time to release the 
practice period of the King of Enlightenment; on this day the 
dharma year is complete. The ninety days have passed without 
obstruction and the assembly is at ease. We chant the high names 
of all buddhas and make offerings to the enshrined spirits. The 
assembly of monks chants these words with deep respect. 

The invocation of buddhas’ names that follows is the same as at the 
beginning of practice period. 

participated in the practice period, but deluded people outside the 
way have never engaged in it. Because it is the original heart of the 
single great matter of buddha ancestors, this teaching of practice 
period is the content of what is expounded from the morning of the 
Buddha’s attaining the way until the evening of pari-nirvana. There 
are Five Schools of home leavers in India, but they equally maintain a 
ninety-day summer practice period and without fail practice it and 
realize the way; and in China none of the monks in the Nine Schools 
have ever ignored the summer practice period. Those who have never 
participated in the summer practice period in their lifetimes cannot be 
called buddha disciples or monks. Practice period is not only a causal 
factor; it is itself practice-realization, it is itself the fruit of practice. 
The World-Honored One, the Great Enlightened One, practiced and 
realized without missing one summer practice period in his whole 
lifetime. Know that summer practice period is buddha realization 
within the fruit of enlightenment. 

This being so, those who call themselves descendents of buddha 
ancestors without engaging in the practice realization of a ninety-day 
summer practice period should be ridiculed. In fact, ridicule would be 
more than they deserve! Simply pay no attention whatsoever to them: 
do not speak with them, do not sit with them, and do not walk in the 
same paths with them. In buddha dharma the ancient way to cure 
those with such mistaken views is simply to shut them out with 
silence. 

Understand and maintain a ninety-day summer practice as the 
buddha ancestors themselves. The authentic transmission of the 
practice period tradition was handed down from the Seven Original 
Buddhas to Mahakashyapa, and through him it was authentically 
transmitted heir to heir to Bodhidharma, the Twenty-eighth Indian 
Ancestor. He in turn went to China and authentically transmitted it to 
Huike, the Second Ancestor, Great Master Zhengzong Pujiao, who 
authentically transmitted it heir to heir down to the present day. Thus, 
the tradition of practice period entered China and has been 
authentically transmitted in the assemblies of buddha ancestors, and 
accordingly it has been authentically transmitted to Japan. 

By sitting zazen in the ninety-day summer practice period within 
this assembly of authentic transmission, you authentically receive the 
dharma of summer. Living with a true teacher and fully participating 
in the practice period makes the practice period a true practice period. 
Because the tradition of practice period has been transmitted face to 
face, heir to heir, directly from the practice periods practiced during 
the Buddha’s own lifetime, it is the authentic and _ personal 
transmission of buddha face, ancestor face, the complete merging with 
the realization of buddha ancestors’ body and mind intimately and 

immediately. 

Therefore, to see a practice period is to see buddha; to realize a 
practice period is to realize buddha; to practice a practice period is to 
practice buddha; to hear a practice period is to hear buddha; and to 
study a practice period is to study buddha. Now, a ninety-day practice 
period is the inviolable dharma of all buddha ancestors. This being so, 
even kings of the human world, the Indra world, or the Brahma world 
should make an effort to participate in a practice period as monks 
even for one summer; to do so is to actually see buddha. Humans, 
devas, or dragons should participate in a ninety-day practice period as 
monks or nuns even if it is only once in a lifetime: to practice this 
practice period is to actually see buddha, and all those who have 
joined the assembly of buddha ancestors to practice a ninety-day 
practice period have seen buddhas. 

If we are fortunate enough to practice a summer practice period 
before our dew-like life drops down, whether in the realm of humans 
or devas, we will surely replace our skin, flesh, bones, and marrow 
with the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of buddha ancestors. During 
every practice period it is the buddha ancestors who come to practice 
with everyone, and everyone who participates in the practice period 
practices as a buddha ancestor. Because of this, those who engage in a 
practice period are called “one thousand buddhas and ten thousand 
ancestors.” The reason for this is that a practice period is the skin, 
flesh, bones, and marrow as well as the mind, consciousness, and body 
of buddha ancestors. Practice period is the top of the head, the eye, 
the fist, the nostrils, and the buddha-nature circle drawn in the air, as 
well as the whisk, the wooden staff, the bamboo stick, and the sitting 
mat of buddha ancestors. Practice period is neither creating something 
new nor reusing something old. 

equanimity and the freedom of nirvana are without boundary; I 
pay homage to them. Without being influenced by the opinions of 
the world, I will engage in the three-month practice period with 
all the tathagatas and great bodhisattvas of the ten directions. 
Because I am now embarking on the practice of the great cause of 
the unsurpassable, wondrous enlightenment of all bodhisattvas, I 
am free of the bondage of the world. Good people, this is a 
practice period that manifests bodhisattvas. 

Thus, when monks, nuns, laymen, or laywomen participate in a 
three-month practice period, they invariably practice the great cause 
of unsurpassable, wondrous enlightenment together with tathagatas 
and great bodhisattvas in the ten directions. Note that it is not only 
monks and nuns who participate in the practice period; laymen and 
laywomen also participate. 

The place of this practice period is great, complete enlightenment. 
This being so, Vulture Peak and Jeta Grove are equally tathagatas’ 
temples of great, complete enlightenment. Hear and understand the 
World-Honored One’s teaching that tathagatas and great bodhisattvas 
of the ten directions practice together with you in the three-month 
practice period. 

won’t ring; an unbeaten drum won’t sound. Mahakashyapa made it to 
the ferry station; Manjushri’s sitting rides the waves through unlimited 
space. This is an excellent enactment of the buddha scene, but 
unfortunately Mahakashyapa missed one move. He should have 
responded to Old Man Shakyamuni’s question by striking the sounding 
block; then he would have seen how the old one destroys the whole 
world at once.” 
Keqin added a capping verse to this: 

A great elephant doesn’t play in a rabbit hutch. 

Swallows and sparrows don’t have the heart of an eagle. 

Careful precision, yet flowing with the wind, 

hitting the mark and biting off the arrowhead. 

The entire world is Manjushri. 

The entire world is Mahakashyapa. 

Solemnly they face each other— 

who can be punished by Mahakashyapa? 

One good swing—the Golden Ascetic [Mahakashyapa] dropped it. 

Thus, although the World-Honored One practiced a practice period 
in one place while Manjushri practiced in three places, Manjushri was 
not a nonparticipant in the practice period. Those who are 
nonparticipants in the practice period are nonbuddhas and 
nonbodhisattvas. There are no descendents of buddha ancestors who 
are nonparticipants in practice period. Know that all practice period 
participants are always descendents of buddha ancestors. 

80 
Sree Onnzrs Mhnos 

Huzrions, NATIONAL TEACHER Dazheng of the Guangzhai Monastery in 

Xijing, was from Zhuji, Yue Province. His family name was Ran. After 
receiving the mind seal, he resided in Dangzi Valley, Mount Boya of 
Nanyang, for over forty years without going out of the monastery 
gate. 

His practice was known in the imperial capital [of Chang’an]. In the 
second year of the Shangyuan Era [761] of the Tang Dynasty, 
Emperor Su dispatched Sun Zhongjin as his messenger, invited 
Huizhong to the palace, and asked him to be his teacher. The emperor 
appointed Hui-zhong abbot of the Xichan Temple of the Qianfu 
Monastery. 

Later, Emperor Dai visited Huizhong and asked him to be abbot of 
the Guangzhai Monastery, where Huizhong resided for sixteen years, 
expounding dharma on occasion. 

There was a man called Tripitaka Master Daer from India. He 
claimed that he had mastered the power of seeing others’ minds. 
Emperor Dai asked Huizhong to test him. 

Daer saw Huizhong, bowed to him, and stood on the right side of 
him. 

Huizhong said, “Have you mastered the art of seeing others’ 
minds?” 

Daer said, “Not really.” 

Huizhong said, “Tell me where this old monk is.” 

Daer said, “You are the teacher of the nation, reverend. Why are 
you in the West River enjoying the racing boats?” 

Huizhong paused for a while and said, “Tell me where this old 
monk is now.” 

Daer said, “You are the teacher of the nation, reverend. Why are 
you on the Tianjin Bridge watching monkeys play?” 

Huizhong again said, “Tell me where this old monk is at this very 
moment.” 

Daer tried to see for some time but could not see where Huizhong 
was. 

Huizhong yelled: “You are possessed by the spirit of a wild fox. You 
don’t have the power of seeing others’ minds.” 

Daer remained silent. 

minds in buddha dharma. 

If Daer had understood buddha dharma, he would have had a way 
to go beyond discriminatory thoughts or would have had a means to 
directly experience thusness when Huizhong asked this question. 

Huizhong’s question, Tell me where this old monk is, was like saying, 
“Who am I?” Asking, Tell me where this old monk is, was asking, “What 
is the time right now?” Tell me where is no other than asking, “Where 
is this?” It is just like inquiring, “What do you call this old monk?” 
Hui-zhong is not necessarily the old monk. The old monk is a fist [an 
accomplished practitioner]. 

Although Daer was from India, he did not see through Huizhong’s 
mind because he had not understood buddha dharma. He had only 
studied views of ordinary people or of the Two Lesser Vehicles. 

Huizhong said again, Tell me where this old monk is now. For this 
Daer presented another fruitless statement. 

Huizhong finally asked, Tell me where this old monk is at this very 
moment. Daer thought about it for some time but did not say anything. 
He was dumbfounded. Then Huizhong scolded him and said, You are 
possessed by the spirit of a wild fox. You don’t have the power of seeing 
others’ minds. But Daer could not say anything. He had no way to 
penetrate the way. 

Regarding this case, all of the five masters thought that Huizhong’s 
criticism indicated that Daer knew where he was the first two times 
but he did not the third time. 

It is not so. Huizhong scolded Daer that he had not even dreamed of 
buddha dharma. It is not that Daer knew where he was the first two 
times but he did not the third time. Huizhong scolded Daer for being 
unable to see through others’ minds though he claimed to be able to 
do so. 

Huizhong’s first point was to test Daer by asking if there was the 
power of seeing others’ minds in buddha dharma. Daer said Not really, 
but, in fact, he meant there was. 

Then Huizhong thought that Daer would be right if he said there 
was the power of seeing others’ minds in buddha dharma and let the 
power be manifested in buddha dharma. But if he could not prove 
what he said, this would not be buddha dharma. 

Even if Daer had a right answer the third time, what he said the 
first two times was not right expression; he should be scolded 
altogether. The reason why Huizhong asked him three times was to 
see if Daer had understood the true meaning of the question. 

Secondly, I say that these five masters did not understand 
Huizhong’s mind. The reason is this: The body and mind of Huizhong 
were not easily known and understood by Daer. They cannot be 

reached by bodhisattvas of the ten stages or three classes, or known by 
bodhisattvas whose enlightenment is equal to buddhas’, being close to 
becoming buddhas. How could an ordinary person like Daer know the 
entire body of Hui-zhong? Clearly understand this. 

Be sure of this. To say that the body and mind of Huizhong can be 
known by a scholar of the Tripitaka is to slander buddha dharma. To 
think that Huizhong is only equal to a master of sutras and treatises is 
extreme confusion. Do not assume that those who have the power of 
seeing others’ minds can tell Huizhong’s whereabouts. 

does not know it. 

Thus, those who have mastered five or six miraculous powers in 
India do not come up to those who cut weeds and work on rice fields 
in this country. Such miraculous powers are useless. Because they are 
not essential, the earlier teachers in China and eastward never favored 
or practiced such powers. 

A foot-wide jade may be more useful than such powers. And yet, a 
foot-wide jade is not a treasure. A moment of time is most essential. 
Who, among those who value each moment, has time to practice such 
powers? Thus, remind yourself that the power of seeing others’ minds 
does not come close to the realm of buddha wisdom. 

Nevertheless, the five masters all thought that Daer had known 
where Huizhong was the first two times. It is a great mistake. 
Huizhong was a buddha ancestor. Daer was an ordinary person. How 
could they understand each other? 

Huizhong first said, Tell me where this old monk is. There is nothing 
hidden in this question. It was not Daer’s fault that he did not 
understand its true meaning. But it was a mistake that the five masters 
could not hear and see it. 

Huizhong’s question was Tell me where this old monk is. He did not 
say, “Tell me where my mind is,” or “Tell me where my thought is.” 
This is the point that one needs to notice and examine. But the five 
masters did not notice and examine this point. Because of that, they 
did not understand Huizhong’s body and mind. The one who has the 
point of this teaching is Huizhong, and the one who does not is not 
Huizhong. 

The five masters could not know Huizhong, as his body and mind 
were neither large nor small, neither self nor other. It seems that they 
forgot that Huizhong had a head top and nostrils. Although he 
practiced continuously, how could he have intended to become a 
buddha? Thus, one should not take up a buddha and give dualistic 
interpretations. 

Huizhong did have the body and mind of buddha dharma. Do not 
try to understand him with the practice of miraculous powers. Do not 
discuss him by emptying thought and forgetting relationships. He was 
not where discernment and beyond discernment could hit the point. 

Huizhong neither had buddha nature nor did not have buddha 
nature. He was not the body of void. The body and mind of Huizhong 
were ungraspable. In the assembly of Huineng at Caoxi, beside 
Qingyuan and Nanyue, only Huizhong, National Teacher Dazheng, 
was a buddha ancestor. 

The five masters’ views should be altogether seen through: 

Zhaozhou said, Huizhong was on top of Daer’s nostrils, so he could not 
see Huizhong. This statement did not hit the point. How could Hui- 
zhong be on top of Daer’s nostrils? Daer didn’t have nostrils. Had he 
had nostrils, Huizhong would have had a true encounter with him. 
Had Huizhong had a true encounter with him, it would have been 
nostrils seeing nostrils. Daer, however, did not have a true encounter 
with Huizhong. 

Xuansha said, Because he was too close. Daer was not even close. He 
was not in Huizhong’s neighborhood. How could Xuansha say too 
close? He did not know what was too close, and he did not practice 
what was too close. Although he knew that what is too close is not 
true encountering, he did not know that true encountering is too 
close. I should say that Xuansha was far, far away in buddha dharma. 
If he meant that Daer was too close only at the third time, the first 
two times would be much too close. 

Let me ask Xuansha now: What do you regard as too close? A fist? 
An eyeball? From now on, do not say what is too close is not worth 
examining. 

Yangshan said, The first two times Daer was dealing with an object of 
mind. But later, Huizhong entered receptive samadhi. That’s why Daer 
could not see him. Although his fame as Small Shakyamuni prevailed in 
India, his statement is completely wrong. It is not that merging with 
the object of mind and receptive samadhi are different. So he should 
not have said that Daer had not seen Huizhong because merging with 
the object of mind and receptive samadhi are different. Thus, although 
Yangshan presented a reason why Daer had not seen Huizhong the 
third time, his statement was not yet a [correct] statement. 

If one did not see another in receptive samadhi, receptive samadhi 
would not manifest and actualize receptive samadhi. If Yangshan 
assumed that Daer had known Huizhong’s whereabouts the first two 
times, he could be someone who understood buddha dharma. 

Daer did not know or see Huizhong’s whereabouts the third time, or 
the first two times. As Yangshan made such a statement, neither Daer 
nor Yangshan knew Huizhong’s whereabouts. 

Let me ask Yangshan: where is Huizhong now? When Yangshan is 
about to speak, I will give him a shout. 

Xuansha criticized Daer by saying, Did you actually see Huizhong the 
first two times? This statement appears to express what needs to be 
expressed. But Xuansha ought to examine his own statement. This is a 
good statement. But it is like seeing without seeing. Thus, it is not 
right. 

Xuedou, Zen Master Mingjiao, said upon hearing Xuansha, You lost. 
You lost. Xuedou should have said so if he had approved Xuansha. He 
should not have said so if he did not. 

Haihui Shouduan said, If Huizhong was on top of Daer’s nostrils, why 
was it difficult to see? Because Daer did not know that Huizhong was 
inside his eyeball. He only discussed the third time. He should have 
denied Daer’s seeing of Huizhong the first two times, but he didn’t. 
How could he know that Huizhong was on top of Daer’s nose or inside 
his eyeball? 

As Haihui said this, we should say that he did not hear Huizhong. 
Daer did not have nostrils or an eyeball. Even if he had his eyeball 
and nostrils, if Huizhong had entered Daer’s eyeball and nostrils, they 
would have exploded. If they had exploded, they would not have been 
Hui-zhong’s cave or basket [abode]. 

None of these five masters was clear about Huizhong’s teaching. 
Huizhong is a buddha who excelled in his time, a tathagata of the 
world. He had clarified and authentically received transmission of the 
Buddha’s treasury of the true dharma eye. Certainly maintaining the 
soapberry-pit [complete] eye, he transmitted dharma to himself, who 
was buddha, and to others who were buddhas. 

Although Huizhong practiced simultaneously with Shakyamuni 
Buddha, he also practiced simultaneously with the Seven Original 
Buddhas. He attained the way before the King of the Empty Eon, after 
the King of the Empty Eon, and at the very time of the King of the 
Empty Eon. 

Naturally, Huizhong abides in the Saha World, but his Saha World is 
not necessarily in the world of phenomena, or in the entire world of 
the ten directions. Shakyamuni Buddha, who presides over the Saha 
World, will not take away or hinder Huizhong’s land. It is just like 
buddha ancestors from the past and future who will not rob or hinder 
each other. This is so, because attaining the way of buddha ancestors 
from the past and future is totally immersed in attaining the way. 

criticized him for what Daer had guessed. 

Huizhong’s intention was to criticize Daer for never knowing his 
whereabouts, his thoughts, his body and mind, these three times. He 
criticized Daer for not having seen, heard, or studied buddha dharma. 
Because of this intention, Huizhong asked the same question three 
times. 

First Daer said, You are the teacher of the nation, reverend. Why are 
you in the West River enjoying the racing boats? But Huizhong did not 
utter words. He did not admit that Daer knew his whereabouts. He 
just kept asking the same question. Without knowing the true meaning 
of his intention, for hundreds of years after Huizhong, masters of 
various places have mistakenly expressed their opinions. 

None of these five masters’ statements express Huizhong’s intention, 
nor do they fit the meaning of buddha dharma. What a pity that the 
old gimlets before and after are all mistaken! 

81 
Kune Wants THE Sampuava 

Exxeressinc WITH worDs and without words is like a wisteria vine 

entwined around a tree, herding a donkey and a horse, or penetrating 
water and cloud. 

Thus, the World-Honored One said in the Great Maha Pari-nirvana 
Sutra: 

It is like a great king telling his courtiers to bring the saindhava. 
The word saindhava indicates any of four things: water, salt, cup, 
or horse. These four things are called by the same name. 

A wise courtier understood this word well. When the king was 
about to wash his hands and wanted the saindhava, the courtier 
would bring water. When the king was about to have a meal and 
wanted the saindhava, the courtier would bring some salt. When 
the king finished eating and asked for the saindhava so he could 
have a drink, the courtier would bring the cup. When the king 
desired to go out and requested the saindhava, the courtier would 
bring the horse. 

This wise courtier thoroughly understood the great king’s subtle 
use of this word. 

This story of the king wanting the saindhava and the courtier 
bringing it has been handed down for a long time. It has been 
transmitted just like a dharma robe. 

As the World-Honored One did not fail to bring it up, his 
descendants often quoted him. I suspect that those who practice 
together with the World-Honored One journey with the saindhava. 
Those who do not practice together with the World-Honored One 
should buy sandals and take one step of the journey to understand it. 

The saindhava subtly permeates the house of buddha ancestors, just 
as it did in the house of the great king. 

A monk asked Zhaozhou, ‘What about the moment the king wants 
the saindhava?’ 

Zhaozhou bent his body forward and held his hands together. 

Xuedou later commented: “When the king wanted salt, the 
courtier brought the horse.” 

Xuedou established a house one hundred years ago. Zhaozhou 
was an old buddha who lived for one hundred twenty years. If 
Zhaozhou was right, Xuedou was not right. If Xuedou was right, 
Zhaozhou was not right. 

Say it now. Ultimately, what is this? 

I cannot help adding comments. If there is a hairbreadth of 
discrepancy, I would miss it by ten thousand Ii. 

Even if you understand it, it is like scaring a snake by hitting 
the grass. Even if you don’t understand it, it is like burning paper 
coins to attract the spirit of the dead. If you don’t plow an 
unattended field, it will be like Old Monk Juzhi [who would 
always hold up one finger]. I just let my hand take it up. 

When Rujing, my late master, ascended the teaching seat, he would 
often mention Old Buddha Xuedou. The only one who encountered 
Xuedou was Rujing, my late master, Old Buddha. At the time of Xue- 
dou, there was someone called Zonggao, Zen Master Dahui of Mount 
Jing, a remote descendant of Nanyue. People all over Song China 
think he equaled or even excelled Xuedou. This mistake was made 
because monks and laypeople in Song China are shallow in their 
studies and their eyes are not clear; they do not discern true persons, 
nor do they have the power to discern themselves. 

Hongzhi’s words expressed the true heart. Thus, study the meaning 
of Zhaozhou bent forward and held his hands together. At this very 
moment, is it the king wanting the saindhava, or is it the courtier 
bringing the saindhava? 

Study Xuedou’s words, When the king wanted salt, the courtier brought 
the horse. Wanting salt and bringing the horse are also the king 
wanting the saindhava and the courtier wanting the saindhava. 

The World-Honored One wanted the saindhava and Mahakashyapa 
smiled. Bodhidharma wanted the saindhava and his four disciples 
brought the horse, the salt, the water, and the cup. Study the key 
point that when the horse, the salt, the water, and the cup want the 
saindhava, the horse is brought and the water is brought. 

One day Nanquan saw Deng Yinfeng coming. He pointed to a water 
jar and said, “That jar is an object. There is water in it. Bring me the 
water without moving the object.” 

Deng Yinfeng brought the jar and poured out the water in front of 
Nanquan. 

Nanquan shut up. 

When Nanquan wanted water, the ocean dried out to the bottom. 
When Deng Yinfeng brought the jar, he tilted it and poured out the 
water. Thus, investigate water in an object and an object in water. 
Water has not moved, the object has not moved. 

Xuedou Zhongxian, Zen Master Mingjiao, commented on this story: 
“In the assembly of sages, only masters know that the dharma of the 
Dharma King is not like that. If there had been a person of the 
saindhava in the assembly, how would Manjushri have struck the bell 
with his mallet?” 

Thus, Xuedou suggested in this statement that if this single mallet is 
entirely without fault, both striking and not striking are dropped away 
without fault. If it is so, a single striking of the mallet is the saindhava. 

If you are a person of thusness, you are a person of the saindhava in 
the assembly [of the Buddha]. This being so, the dharma of the 
Dharma King is thus. Activating the twelve hours of the day is to want 
the saindhava. Being activated by the twelve hours of the day is to 
want the saindhava. Want a fist and bring a fist. Want a whisk and 
bring a whisk. 

Those who are called elders in monasteries in China, however, have 
never dreamed of the saindhava. How painful! How terrible that the 
ancestral way is declining! Don’t be negligent in your endeavor of the 
way. Receive and maintain the buddha ancestors’ life vein. 

For example, ask, “What is buddha?” Or say, “Mind is itself 
buddha.” What does it mean? Is it not the saindhava? 

Thoroughly investigate who is “Mind is itself buddha.” Who knows 
the poundings and cracklings of the saindhava? 

Presented to the assembly of the Daibutsu Monastery on the twenty- 
second day, the tenth month, the third year of the Kangen Era 
[1245]. 

Eur Monastery Prniop 

82 

Instructions ON Korcuen Worx 

Presented to the assembly on the sixth day, the eighth month, the 
fourth year of the Kangen Era [1246]. 

Regarding the method of serving meals to the community of monks, it 
is said [in the Guidelines for Zen Monasteries], “Make respect the 
essence of this pure practice.” 

The method that has been authentically transmitted from faraway 
India to neighboring China, after the pari-nirvana of the Tathagata, is 
to serve the offerings from the devas to the Buddha and monks, and to 
dedicate the kingly meals to the Buddha and monks. In addition, there 
are meals offered from the households of wealthy families and lay 
practitioners, and also from the households of those in the merchant 
and untouchable classes. 

Such offerings should be equally respected and handled with utmost 
care. The deepest bows and the most venerated words among humans 
and devas should be employed for serving the food. Even on a deep 
and remote mountain the authentic manner and speech found in the 
monastery kitchen should be maintained. This is how humans and 
devas learn the buddha dharma. 

Call the morning meal onkayu [the honorific form of kayu], and do 
not bluntly call it kayu. Call the midday meal ontoki [the honorific 
form of toki], and do not call it toki. Call the midday meal time saiji 
[in a formal way]. 

Say “Yone mairaseyo” or “Shirome maira seyo” [“Please serve the 
rice” in a formal way], and don’t say “Yone tsuke yo” [“Put the rice 
on” in a disrespectful way]. Say “Jomai shi maira seyo” [“Please clean 
the rice” in a formal way], and do not say “Yone kase” [“Wash the 
rice” in a disrespectful way]. 

Say “Osai wo eri maira seyo” [“Please select vegetables (in the 
honorific form) for cooking”], and don’t say “Sai ere” [“Pick 
vegetables”]. Say “Oshiru no mono, shi mairase yo” [“Please cook the 
soup” in a respectful way], but don’t say “Shiru niyo.” Say “On 
atsunomono shi mairase yo,” [“Make hot vegetables,” in the honorific 
form] and don’t say “Atsumono seyo.” 

Say “Ontoki [or] onkayu wa mumase sase tamai taru” (“The midday 

meal or the morning meal is fully cooked” in an honorific form). All 
the materials being prepared for the midday or morning meals should 
be referred to with respect in this way. Being disrespectful to 
materials causes disaster and brings forth no merit. 

When you prepare the midday or morning meal, don’t blow onto 
the rice, vegetables, or any other food. Do not let the sleeves of your 
work clothes touch any food, even food that is dry. 

Do not touch the utensils or food for the midday or morning meal 
with the hand you have used to touch your head or face; first wash 
your hands. From the time you select good rice grains until the time 
you cook the rice and vegetables, always wash your hands if you 
happen to scratch yourself. 

When you cook, chant lines from a sutra or words of a buddha 
ancestor. Do not make worldly or unnecessary conversation. 

Use honorific forms of verbs for describing how to handle rice, 
vegetables, salt, and soy sauce; do not use plain language for this. 

When passing by food prepared for the morning or midday meal, 
monks and workers should make a standing bow toward the food with 
hands joined together. Dropped grains of rice or pieces of vegetables 
should be used later. Do not disrupt the meal serving [by picking them 
up and trying to use them right away]. 

Carefully protect the tools for cooking meals, and do not use them 
for anything else. Do not let those from lay households touch the tools 
before they have washed their hands. Purify unwashed vegetables and 
fruit from lay households with water, incense, and fire before you 
offer them to the three treasures and the assembly of monks. 

Nowadays, in monasteries on various mountains of Great Song 
China, when bean cakes, milk cakes, or steamed cakes are brought 
from lay households, they are steamed again and then offered to the 
assembly of monks. This is to purify the food; without this procedure 
the food is not offered to the monks. 

These are some of the many guidelines. Grasp the essential meaning 
of them and practice them in the kitchen. Do not be negligent. 

These guidelines are the life vein of buddha ancestors, the eyeball of 
monks. Those who are outside the way do not know them. Heavenly 
demons do not bear them. Only children of the Buddha receive 
transmission of them. The officer in charge of the kitchen should 
understand these guidelines clearly and not ignore them. 

Instructed by Dogen, Founding Monk. 

POSTSCRIPT 

To the officers of the Eihei Monastery: From now on, if you happen to 
receive meal offerings from donors to the monastery, hold them until 
the following day. However, noodles, cakes, and various kinds of gruel 
should be distributed in the evening. These are medicinal snacks 
[supper] in the assemblies of buddha ancestors. There are excellent 
precedents for such practice in Great Song China. Just as the 
Tathagata permitted the wearing of double clothes in the Snow 
Mountains [Himalayas], medicinal snacks during the time of snow are 
permitted in this monastery. 

Founding monk of the Eihei Monastery, Kigen [Dogen]. 

83 

Lavine THE Houssroi 

Tue GUIDELINES FOR Zen Monasteries says: 

It is taught that all buddhas in the past, present, and future leave 
the household and attain the way. The twenty-eight ancestors in 
India and the six early ancestors in China who transmitted the 
Buddha’s mind seal were all monks. They are distinguished in the 
three realms by strictly observing the precepts. Thus, precepts are 
primary for practicing Zen in pursuit of the way. How can one 
become a buddha ancestor without becoming free from faults and 
preventing wrongdoing? 

In preparation for receiving the precepts you should have three 
types of robes, eating bowls and utensils, and new and purified 
clothes. If new clothes are not available, use freshly washed 
clothes. Do not borrow clothes or eating bowls for stepping onto 
the platform to receive the precepts. Concentrate your mind and 
do not be concerned with other matters. To take a form of the 
Buddha, to embody the precepts of the Buddha, and to acquire 
what the Buddha received are not a trifle. You should not be 
casual about it. If you borrow someone’s robes and bowls, you do 
not actually receive the precepts, even if you step onto the 
platform and receive them. Without actually receiving the 
precepts, you will be one without precepts, mistakenly associated 
with the gate of emptiness [buddha dharma] and _ falsely 
accepting faithful donations. 

Beginning practitioners may not be familiar with the 
guidelines. Without a teacher’s advice, they may make such 
mistakes. So, here is some advice. Keep it in mind. 

If you have already received the bhikshu precepts, receive the 
bodhisattva precepts. This is the beginning of entering the 
dharma. 

Clearly know that the attainment of the way by all buddhas and 
ancestors is only accomplished by leaving the household and receiving 
the precepts. The life vein of all buddhas and ancestors is no other 
than leaving the household and receiving the precepts. None of those 

who have not left the household are buddha ancestors. To meet a 
buddha and to meet an ancestor is to leave the household and receive 
the precepts. 

house-hold and receiving the precepts. Attaining unsurpassable 
enlightenment in turn actualizes the day of leaving the household. 

Know that the day of leaving the household goes beyond one or 
many. On the day of leaving the household, you practice and realize 
countless eons. On the day of leaving the household, you cross over 
the boundless ocean of eons and turn the wondrous dharma wheel. 

The day of leaving the household is not the length of a mealtime. It 
is not sixty small eons. It goes beyond the past, present, and future. It 
drops away from the top of the head. The day of leaving the 
household goes beyond the day of leaving the household. This being 
so, by crushing baskets and traps, the day of leaving the household 
becomes the day of leaving the household. The day of attaining the 
way becomes the day of attaining the way. 

when he asked his monks to shave their heads and faces, helping them 
to leave the household and receive the precepts, the procedure of 
leaving the household and receiving the precepts was immediately 
complete. 

Know that when Mahakashyapa accepted the Buddha’s teaching in 
his body and mind, his hair dropped spontaneously from his head and 
his body was wrapped by a kashaya. Without the permission of 
buddhas, his hair and beard would not have been shaved off, his body 
would not have been wrapped by the kashaya, and he would not have 
received the precepts. Thus, leaving the household and receiving the 
precepts are no other than being personally given the prediction of 
enlightenment by buddha tathagatas. 

84 
Eicur Awaxenwes OF Great Bucs 

Au BUDDHAS ARE great beings. What great beings practice is called the 
eight awakenings. Practicing these awakenings is the basis for nirvana. 
This is the last teaching of our original teacher Shakyamuni Buddha, 
which he gave on the night he entered pari-nirvana. 

who know how much is enough. This is called ‘to know how 
much is enough.” 

The third awakening is to enjoy serenity. This is to be away 
from noise and confusion, and stay alone in a quiet place. Thus, it 
is called “to enjoy serenity in seclusion.” 

The Buddha said, “Monks, if you want to have the joy of serene 
nondoing, you should be away from the crowds and stay alone in 
a quiet place. A still place is what Indra and other devas revere. 
By leaving behind your relations as well as others’, and by living 
in a quiet place, you may contemplate the conditions of suffering. 
If you are attached to the crowds, you will receive suffering, just 
like a tree that attracts a great many birds and gets killed by 
them. If you are bound by worldly matters, you will drown in 
troubles, just like an old elephant who is stuck in a swamp and 
cannot get out. This is called ‘to enjoy serenity in seclusion.” 

The fourth awakening is diligent effort. It is to engage 
ceaselessly in wholesome practices. That is why it is called 
“diligent effort.” It is refinement without mixing in other 
activities. You keep going forward without turning back. 

The Buddha said, “Monks, if you make diligent effort, nothing 
is too difficult. That is why you should do so. It is like a thread of 
water piercing through a rock by constantly dripping. If your 
mind continues to slacken, it is like taking a break from hitting 
stones before they spark; you can’t get fire that way. What I am 
speaking of is ‘diligent effort.” 

The fifth awakening is not neglecting mindfulness. It is also 
called maintaining right mindfulness. This helps you to guard the 
dharma so you won’t lose it. It is called “to maintain right 
mindfulness” or “not to neglect mindfulness.” 

The Buddha said, “Monks, for seeking a good teacher and good 
protection, there is nothing like not neglecting mindfulness. If you 
practice this, robbers of desire cannot enter you. Therefore, you 
should always maintain mindfulness in yourself. If you lose it, 
you will lose all merits. When your mindfulness is solid, you will 
not be harmed even if you go into the midst of the robbers of the 
five-sense desires. It is like wearing armor and going into a 
battlefield, so there is nothing to be afraid of. It is called “not to 
neglect mindfulness.” 

The sixth awakening is to practice meditation. To abide in 
dharma without being confused is called “stability in meditation.” 

The Buddha said, “Monks, if you gather your mind, it will abide 
in stability. Then, you will understand the birth and death of all 
things in the world. You will continue to endeavor in practicing 
various aspects of meditation. When you have stability, your 

mind will not be scattered. It is like a house where water is used 
sparsely, or an embankment that holds water. You practitioners 
are like this. Because you have the water of wisdom, you practice 
stability and the water of wisdom is not wasted. This is called 
‘stability in meditation.” 

The seventh awakening is “to cultivate wisdom.” It is to listen, 
contemplate, practice, and have realization. 

The Buddha said, “Monks, if you have wisdom, you are free 
from greed. You will always reflect on yourself and avoid 
mistakes. Thus, you will attain liberation in the dharma I am 
speaking of. If you don’t have wisdom, you will be neither a 
follower of the way nor a lay supporter of it, and there will be no 
name to describe you. Indeed, wisdom is a reliable vessel to bring 
you across the ocean of old age, sickness, and death. It is a bright 
lamp that illuminates in the darkness of ignorance. It is an 
excellent medicine for all who are sick. It is a sharp ax to cut 
down the tree of delusion. Thus, you can deepen awakening 
through the wisdom of listening, contemplation, and practice. If 
you are illuminated with wisdom, even if you use your physical 
eyes, you will have clear insight. This is called ‘to cultivate 
wisdom.” 

The eighth awakening is not to be engaged in hollow 
discussions. It is to experience realization and be free from 
discriminatory thinking, with the thorough understanding of the 
reality of all things. It is called “not to be engaged in hollow 
discussions.” 

The Buddha said, “Monks, if you get into hollow discussions, 
your mind will be scattered. Then, you will be unable to attain 
liberation even if you have left the household. So, you should 
immediately leave behind a scattered mind and _ hollow 
discussions. If you wish to attain the joy of serenity, you need to 
cure the sickness of hollow discussions. This is called ‘not to be 
engaged in hollow discussions.” 

These are the eight awakenings. Each awakening contains all eight, 
thus there are sixty-four awakenings. When awakenings are practiced 
thoroughly, their number is countless. When they are practiced in 
summary, there are sixty-four. 

These are the last words of the Great Teacher Shakyamuni Buddha, 
the ultimate admonition of the Mahayana teaching. He said at 
midnight of the fifteenth day of the second month, “Monks, always 
endeavor wholeheartedly to search for the way of liberation. All 
things in the world, whether they are in motion or not, are insecure 
and bound to decay. Now, all of you be still and do not speak. Time is 

passing and I am going to cross over. This is my last admonition to 
you.” Without expounding dharma any further, the Buddha entered 
pari-nirvana. 

All disciples of the Buddha should study this teaching. Those who 
don’t learn or know about it are not his disciples. Indeed, this is the 
Tathagata’s treasury of the true dharma eye, the wondrous heart of 
nirvana. However, there are many who do not know about this 
teaching, as there are few who have studied it. Many may have been 
confused by demons, and those who have few wholesome conditions 
from the past do not have the opportunity to see or hear this teaching. 

In the Ages of True Dharma and Imitation Dharma, all disciples of 
the Buddha knew about this teaching and practiced it. But nowadays, 
less than one or two out of a thousand monks seem to know about it. 
How regrettable! The world has declined since those times. While the 
true dharma prevails in the billion worlds and the Buddha’s pure 
teaching is still intact, you should immediately practice it without 
negligence. 

Fascicuzs Nor Darep BY Docen 

85 
Karma IN THE "Turse Prniops 

Vanerapie KUMARALABDHA, THE Nineteenth Ancestor, journeyed to 

Central India, where he met a seeker called Jayata, who asked him, 
“My parents follow the path of the three treasures, but they have been 
sick and nothing they do goes well. Our next-door neighbors have 
been engaged in the low practice of slaughtering animals, yet they are 
healthy and content. How come they are happy while we are so 
unfortunate?” 

Kumaralabdha said, “Why should you doubt? The results from our 
wholesome and unwholesome actions take effect in the three periods. 
But people only see that the peaceful die young and the violent live 
long, or that the unrighteous prosper and the righteous decline. They 
deny the law of cause and effect and say that our sins and good deeds 
are without consequences. They do not know that the shadows and 
echoes follow our actions without a hairbreadth gap. The results of 
our actions don’t get worn away even in one hundred, one thousand, 
or ten thousand eons.” 

Hearing these words, Jayata was freed from his doubt. 

Kumaralabdha is the nineteenth-generation ancestor who was 
entrusted with the dharma. His name was predicted by the Tathagata. 
He not ony clarified and authentically transmitted Shakyamuni 
Buddha’s dharma, but also illuminated the dharma of all buddhas of 
the past, present, and future. 

After posing this question, Jayata studied the Tathagata’s true 
dharma with Kumaralabdha and became the Twentieth Ancestor. It 
was also foretold that he would be the Twentieth Ancestor by the 
World-Honored One. 

deeds. 
What Kumaralabdha meant by the results from our wholesome and 
unwholesome actions take effect in the three periods is: 

One: the result received in this lifetime. 
Two: the result received in the next lifetime. 
Three: the result received in a lifetime after the next. 

These are called the three periods. From the beginning of learning 
the way of buddha ancestors, we study and clarify the principle of the 
effects of karma in the three periods. If we don’t, many of us will 
make a mistake and fall into crooked views. Not only do we fall into 
crooked views, we get into unwholesome realms and experience 
suffering for a long time. When we do not maintain wholesome roots, 
we lose a great deal of merit and are obstructed for a long time from 
the path of enlightenment. Would this not be regrettable? 

return your kindness?” 

The bear said, “I don’t want anything in particular from you. But 
you could protect me just as I have protected you.” 

The woodcutter promised to do so and climbed down the mountain 
carrying wood. 

Then he met two hunters who asked, “Have you seen any birds or 
animals?” 

The woodcutter said, “I didn’t see any birds or animals except a 
bear.” 

The hunters asked him to show them where the bear was. 

The woodcutter said, “I will show you if you give me two-thirds of 
what you get.” 

The hunters agreed. The three men went together, killed the bear, 
and divided the meat three ways. 

When the woodcutter was going to pick up his share of meat, his 
unwholesome action caused both of his arms to drop off like a broken 
necklace or cut-off lotus roots. The hunters were shocked and asked 
him what made this happen. Fully ashamed, the woodcutter 
explained. 

The hunters scolded him and said, “How could you dare to do such 
an evil thing to the bear who had been so kind to you? It is amazing 
that your body has not completely rotted.” 

The three men together donated the meat to a Buddhist temple. A 
senior monk there with his wondrous wisdom entered samadhi and 
observed the meat. Then he understood that it was the meat of a great 
bodhisattva who brings forth benefit to all beings. The monk came out 
of samadhi and told people about it. They were awed, gathered 
together fragrant firewood, and burnt the meat. They built a stupa to 
enshrine the remaining bones, and held ceremonies of dedication. 

One receives the results of such an unwholesome action either 
immediately or soon after the action. 

This is called “receiving the results of an unwholesome action in 
this lifetime.” 

If you receive kindness, aspire to return the kindness. If you give 
kindness, do not expect the kindness to be returned. It is also true 
nowa-days that if you harm someone who has been kind to you, you 
will certainly receive the results of the unwholesome action. 

Sentient beings should never have an intention like this woodcutter. 
Outside the forest he bade farewell in gratitude to the bear and asked, 
What can I do to return your kindness? But upon meeting the hunters at 
the foot of the mountain, he wanted two-thirds of the bear’s meat. 
Pulled by his greed, the woodcutter harmed that great kind being. 

Both laity and home leavers should never exercise such 

forgetfulness. The power of an unwholesome action cuts the arms 
faster than a sword. 

Here is an example of making a wholesome action and receiving the 
results in this lifetime: 

Long ago there was a eunuch who was managing the court affairs 
for King Kanishka of the country of Gandhara. When he went outside 
the city, he saw as many as five hundred oxen entering the city. He 
asked the man who was driving the herd, “What are you going to do 
with these oxen?” 

The man said, “I am going to have them neutered.” 

The eunuch said to himself, “Because of my past unwholesome 
karma, I have received an emasculated body. Now I want to use my 
resources to save these oxen from their misfortune.” 

So the eunuch paid the man and freed all the oxen. This wholesome 
deed transformed the eunuch into having a male body. He was 
delighted and went back to the city. He stood at the palace gate, sent 
a messenger to the king, and asked for his audience. The king called 
him in and asked what had happened. The former eunuch reported 
the incident to the king. The king was amazed, awarded him with 
treasures, gave him a high position, and had him manage external 
affairs. 

One receives the results of such a wholesome action either 
immediately or soon after the action. 

From this story we clearly know that those who help the well-being 
of oxen, usually not regarded as valuable, receive immediate 
wholesome effects. How much more so for those who honor the fields 
of kindness [parents] and the fields of virtue [buddha ancestors] and 
practice various wholesome actions! This is called “receiving 
wholesome results in this lifetime.” 

Examples of receiving wholesome and unwholesome results are 
countless, and it is impossible to speak about them. 

in the next lifetime. Some others fall into hell in the life after the next 
one if they are bound to do so. But those who commit one of the five 
types of avichi crimes will certainly fall into Avichi Hell in the next 
life-time. The five types of avichi crimes are: killing one’s father, 
killing one’s mother, killing an arhat, causing a buddha body to bleed, 
and harming the community of practitioners of the dharma wheel. 

Those who commit any of these crimes inevitably fall into Avichi 
Hell in the next lifetime. Some of them commit all five crimes, like 
Monk Padmottara at the time of Kashyapa Buddha. Some commit one 
crime, like King Ajatashatru, who killed his father at the time of 
Shakyamuni Buddha. Some others commit three crimes, like Ajata, 
who killed his father, his mother, and an arhat when he was a layman. 
Later he was allowed to leave the household. 

Devadatta, also known as Dipadaduo or Dipadadou [in Chinese], 
meaning “Heavenly Heat,” committed three types of avichi crimes: 
harming the community of practitioners of the dharma wheel, causing 
a buddha body to bleed, and killing an arhat. 

Devadatta talked five hundred ignorant novices into climbing to the 
top of Mount Gaya to conduct a new type of ceremony. This is the 
crime of harming the practicing community. Shariputra detested this 
crime and made him sleep deeply. Maudgalyayana led the group of 
novices and they climbed down the mountain. When Devadatta woke 
up, he swore to take revenge. He picked up a rock thirty hasta long 
and fifteen hasta wide, and threw it at the World-Honored One, trying 
to kill him. The rock was blocked by a mountain spirit and crushed. A 
small broken piece flew and struck a toe of the Tathagata, which 
caused the toe to bleed. According to this story, Devadatta’s crime of 
harming the community preceded causing the Buddha to bleed. There 
are other versions, and it is unclear which crime he committed first. 

He also struck Nun Utpalavarna, who was a great arhat, with his fist 
and killed her. This was the crime of killing an arhat. Thus, it is said 
that Devadatta committed three avichi crimes. 

There are two types of crime that harm the practicing community: 
breaking the rituals and breaking the dharma wheel. Breaking the 
rituals of the practicing community can take place in the Three 
Continents but not in the Northern Continent [where buddha dharma 
is not practiced]. This has happened from the time when the 
Tathagata lived in this world until today. Breaking the dharma wheel 
of the practicing community took place only when the Tathagata lived 
in this world. In other times it has happened only in the Southern 
Continent, and not in the other Three Continents. This is the more 
serious crime. 

Because Devadatta committed these three grave crimes, he fell into 
Avichi Hell in the next lifetime. There are people who commit all five 

grave crimes. Others commit one. Devadatta committed three. All 
these people fall into Avichi Hell. One grave crime should result in 
being in Avichi Hell for one eon. Those who commit the five avichi 
crimes should fully receive the result of the five types of punishment 
in one eon, in addition to before and after. 

An earlier teacher said, “Both in the Agama Sutra and in the Pari- 
nirvana Sutra, there is equally one eon. But the fires [of punishment] 
vary.” The teacher also said, “There is just increasing suffering.” 

As Devadatta committed three grave crimes, he was bound to 
receive suffering three times as much as those who committed one 
grave crime. But at the end of his life, he became slightly free from his 
unwholesome heart by saying, “I take refuge.” It is regrettable that he 
did not fully say, “I take refuge in the Buddha.” In Avichi Hell, 
however, he did say, “I take refuge in the Buddha.” His wholesome 
effect is not far in the future. 

Further, there were [four] Devadattas at the time of the four 
Buddhas. Monk Gokal was among the one thousand members of the 
Shakya Clan who left the household [at the time of Shakyamuni 
Buddha]. When he and Devadatta left the city, the horses they were 
riding suddenly fell down, so they were thrown off and their hats 
went flying. People who saw this predicted that these men would not 
be benefited by buddha dharma. Later, Kokalika falsely accused 
Shariputra and Maudgalyayana of grave crimes. The World-Honored 
One gently advised him to take it back, but he would not. The 
heavenly king Brahma also advised him, but he would not stop. For 
this false accusation, Kokalika fell into hell in the next lifetime. He has 
not yet encountered a condition to have a whole-some root. 

Also, the Monk of the Fourth-Stage Meditation slandered the 
Buddha at the end of his life. Because of this, the intermediary realm 
for the fourth stage of meditation disappeared; instead, a vision of 
Avichi Hell emerged. He fell into Avichi Hell after his life ended. 

Such cases are called “receiving the effect in the next lifetime.” 

The five effects of avichi [ceaseless] crimes are as follows: 

Taking the effect is without cease, therefore it is called “ceaseless.” 
As the effect is received in the next lifetime after the present body is 
given up, it is called “ceaseless.” 

Receiving the effect is without cease, therefore it is called 
“ceaseless.” As the five grave crimes cause birth in Avichi Hell, with 
continuous suffering for one eon without having pleasure, it is called 
“ceaseless.” 

The amount of time is without cease, therefore it is called 
“ceaseless.” As life in Avichi Hell is never cut off during the eon, it is 
called “ceaseless.” 

The life span is without cease, therefore it is called “ceaseless.” As 
the life span of one who has committed grave crimes and is born in 
Avichi Hell is never cut off, it is called “ceaseless.” 

The body shape is without limit, therefore it is called “ceaseless.” 
One who committed grave crimes is born in Avichi Hell. It is eighty- 
four thousand yojana wide and long. When even one person enters, 
the hell is full. When all people enter, it is full and they do not hinder 
one another. Thus, it is called “ceaseless.” 

So he meditated on the wholesome deed he had created and 
aroused deep joy. As the thoughts of excellent wholesomeness became 
present, the realm intermediate to hell disappeared, and, in its place, 
the realm intermediate to the deva realm appeared. Thus, when his 
life ended, he was reborn in the deva realm. 

This person realized that he was carrying unwholesome karma and 
had to receive the results. But, he further thought of the results of his 
wholesome action. That is why he aroused deep joy. As _ his 
concentrated thought was sincere, the realm intermediate to hell 
disappeared and the realm intermediate to the deva realm appeared so 
that he could attain birth in the deva realm. 

If he had been an unwholesome person and had to face the realm 
intermediate to hell on his deathbed, he would have thought: “The 
wholesome actions I have practiced have no effect. Otherwise, why 
am I facing the realm intermediate to hell?” Then he would deny 
causation, and slander the three treasures. In that way he would have 
fallen into hell. Because this man was not like that, he was reborn in 
the deva realm. Clarify this principle. 

The one who practiced unwholesomeness faced the realm 
intermediate to the deva realm on his deathbed because of the 
wholesome results he was going to receive in the lifetime after his 
next life. 

Then, he said to himself, “I have been practicing unwholesomeness 
and have never created wholesome deeds. I ought to be reborn in hell. 
Why am I facing the realm intermediate to the deva realm?” 

He then aroused crooked views and denied various fruits of whole- 
some and unwholesome actions. Because of his crooked views, the 
realm intermediate to the deva realm disappeared and the realm 
intermediate to hell appeared. His life ended, and he was reborn in 
hell. 

This person not only kept on taking unwholesome actions without 
taking a single wholesome action in his lifetime, but also failed to 
recognize on his deathbed the results he was going to receive in a life- 
time after the next. So, he said to himself: “Although I have been 
taking unwholesome actions throughout my life, I am going to be 
reborn in the deva realm. From this I assume that there is no 
difference between wholesome and unwholesome actions.” 

Because of his wrong views that denied the difference between 
wholesome and unwholesome actions, the realm intermediate to the 
deva realm disappeared and the realm intermediate to hell appeared. 
So, he fell into hell after his life ended. 

Thus, you practitioners should not hold crooked views. Study in 

detail until you clarify the difference between wrong views and right 
views. 

To deny cause and effect, to slander buddha, dharma, and sangha, 
to deny the past, present, and future, and to deny emancipation are all 
crooked views. Know that you do not have two or three selves in this 
lifetime. Isn’t it regrettable if you fall into wrong views and 
unfortunately receive unwholesome results by doing so? You receive 
unwholesome results by creating unwholesomeness and denying it, 
although you may hope that there will be no unwholesome results. 

point that karma does not disappear, and so he asks about its effect in 
the future birth. 

Changsha’s mistake was that when he was asked what essential 
emptiness is, he said, “The hindrance of karma.” This is grossly wrong. 
How can the hindrance of karma be originally empty? If karma is not 
created, there is no hindrance of karma. If karma is created, it is not 
originally empty. What has been created [unwholesome karma] 
should not have been created. Not removing the carrier of the 
hindrance of karma, and calling it emptiness, is a view of those 
outside the way. 

Sentient beings who believe in the original emptiness of the 
hindrance of karma and create karma in self-indulgence would have 
no moment of emancipation. If there were no time for emancipation, 
there would be no emergence of buddhas. If there were no emergence 
of buddhas, Bodhidharma would not have come from India. If 
Bodhidharma had not come from India, there would be no Nanquan. If 
there were no Nanquan, who would replace your eye of study? 

Responding to the question What is the hindrance of karma? by 
saying It is essential emptiness appears to be a traditional tautology. 
However, it seems to me that Changsha answered Haoyue with a lack 
of capacity; without completing the study, he uttered such an 
outrageous statement. 

Then Changsha said in a verse, Nirvana and paying debt—one nature 
with no significant difference. 

What is one nature? How does it fit with the three natures [the 
whole-some action nature, the unwholesome action nature, and the 
neutral nature]? I suspect Changsha did not know one nature. 

What are Nirvana and paying debt? What kind of nirvana is it—that 
of shravakas, pratyeka-buddhas, or buddhas? Whichever it might be, 
nirvana is not the same as paying debt. What Changsha says is not the 
buddha ancestors’ expression. He should buy straw sandals and travel 
in search of the way. 

Venerable Simha [the Twenty-fourth Indian Ancestor, 
Simhabhikshu] and Huike [the Second Chinese Ancestor] were killed 
by rascals. But this should not be the cause of doubt [on the effect of 
karma]. What they had was not final lives or life existing in nothing. 
How would they not receive effects in their future birth? As the effects 
they are bound to receive later are already maturing, have no doubt 
about their future lives. Thus, it is clear that Changsha had not 
clarified karma in the three periods. 

Those who study buddha dharma should clarify the karma of the 
three periods just as Kumaralabdha did. This is the essential teaching 
of karma in the ancestral school. Do not neglect it. 

86 
Four Honsss 

Ons DAY SOMEONE Outside the way asked the World-Honored One, “I 

am not asking you for a teaching with words, or a teaching without 
words.” 

Then the World-Honored One sat silently for some time. 

The person outside the way bowed and admired him: “How 
splendid is the World-Honored One! With great compassion you have 
cleared out the cloud of delusion and helped me to enter realization.” 
Then he bowed and left. 

After the person outside the way was out of sight, Ananda asked the 
Buddha, “What caused that man to say that he had entered realization 
and praise you before he left?” 

The World-Honored One said, “He is like a good horse that runs 
upon seeing a shadow of the whip.” 

instead of the common tendency to follow the wrong path. 

When you follow a master and encounter a true person, there is no 
place a guiding phrase is not presented; there is no moment when you 
don’t see a shadow of the whip. Whether you see a shadow of the 
whip right away, or after immeasurable eons, you are able to enter the 
right path. 

According to the Maha Pari-nirvana Sutra, the Buddha said: 

Good person, there are four ways to command a horse: touching 
the hair, touching the skin, touching the flesh, and touching the 
bones. The horse always follows the rider’s command according 
to where it is touched. 

The Tathagata likewise subdues sentient beings in four ways. 
First, the Buddha speaks of birth for sentient beings, who accept 
his words just as the horse follows the rider’s command by being 
touched on the hair. Second, the Buddha speaks of birth and old 
age for sentient beings, who accept his words just as the horse 
follows the rider’s command by being touched on the hair and the 
skin. Third, the Buddha speaks of birth, old age, and sickness for 
sentient beings, who accept his words just as the horse follows the 
rider’s command by being touched on the hair, skin, and flesh. 
Finally, the Buddha speaks of birth, old age, sickness, and death 
for sentient beings, who accept his words just as the horse follows 
the rider’s command by being touched on the hair, skin, flesh, 
and bones. 

Good person, there is no fixed way for a rider to command the 
horse. The way the Tathagata, the World-Honored One, guides 
sentient beings is never in vain. Thus, the Buddha is called the 
Excellent Tamer. 

This is called “the Nirvana Sutra’s four types of horses.” There are no 
students who do not study this teaching. There are no buddhas who 
do not speak of it. 

You follow the Buddha and hear about this teaching. You see the 
Buddha, make offerings to the Buddha, and hear about it. For eons, 
every time you transmit buddha dharma to sentient beings, you 
explain this teaching without negligence. Even after arriving at the 
buddha fruit, just at the time of arousing the beginner’s mind, you 
speak of this teaching to the assemblies of bodhisattvas, shravakas, 
humans, and devas. In this way, the seeds of the buddha-dharma- 
sangha treasure are not destroyed. 

Thus, these teachings of the Buddha [in the early scriptures] are 
rather different from that of Bodhisattva Nagarjuna [in the Mahayana 
scriptures]. 

Know that there are four ways for a rider to command the horse—to 
touch the hair, the skin, the flesh, or the bones. It appears not clear 
what touches the hair, but teachers who transmit dharma interpret it 
as a whip. 

However, sometimes a whip is used and sometimes a whip is not 
used for commanding a horse. Commanding is not limited to using a 
whip. 

What is called Dragon Horse is said to be eight feet high. There are 
few humans who can ride it. What is called One-Thousand-Li Horse 
can travel one thousand li in a day. It sweats blood while going the 
first five hundred li, then it begins to be fresh and runs fast. There are 
also few humans who can ride and command it. There is no such 
horse in China, but it exists in a foreign land. It does not appear that 
frequent whipping is needed for such horses. 

On the other hand, an ancient teacher said, “Commanding a horse is 
always done with a whip. Without a whip, commanding a horse is not 
possible.” This is normally how to command a horse. It is done by 
touching the hair, the skin, the flesh, and the bones. 

You cannot touch the skin without touching the hair. You cannot 
touch the flesh and bones without touching the hair and skin. Thus, 
we know that a whip should be used. 

The description of commanding a horse is not sufficient without 
mentioning a whip. There are a number of insufficient descriptions in 
sutras. 

Tamer. 

On a summer practice day of the seventh year of the Kencho Era 
[1255], I have copied my late master’s draft. Ejo. 

87 
Virruz OF Home Lavine 

Acccorpine TO NAGARJUNA Bodhisattva [in the Treatise on Realization of 
Great Wisdom]: 

Question: It is taught that those who receive lay precepts will be 
born in the deva world, attain the bodhisattva way, and 
experience nirvana. What, then, is the use of receiving the 
precepts for home leavers? 

Answer: Those who receive both types of precepts become 
awakened. But one type is difficult and the other is easy. 
Laypeople engage in various works. If they wish to concentrate on 
the dharma of the way, their business declines. If they are focused 
on their business, their activity of the way declines. Without 
choosing one and abandoning the other, laypeople need to 
practice dharma. This is difficult. Those who have left the 
household can be free from worldly affairs, distant from 
confusion, and practice the way wholeheartedly. So, this is easy. 

Further, laypeople are noisy and confused while being occupied 
in many things. The roots of their driving forces are the center of 
all unwholesome actions. That is why lay practice is difficult. 
Leaving the household is similar to going out into an empty field 
where there are no people. They can keep their minds unified and 
free from thinking. As their thoughts inside retreat, their affairs 
outside also disappear. It is said in a verse: 

Sitting leisurely among trees, 

quietly letting go of all unwholesome actions, 
and attaining a single mind free from desire— 
this is pleasure beyond a deva’s bliss. 

People seek wealth, profit, fame, 

and desire comfortable clothes and furniture. 
Such pleasure is not true comfort, 

wanting profit brings no satisfaction. 

While begging food in a patched robe, 

in motion or stillness the mind is always unified. 
The eye of wisdom observes the reality of all things. 

Within various dharma gates, all equally enter this insight. 
The wisdom of understanding is serene, 
incomparable in the three realms. 

In this way we know that maintaining the home leaver’s 
precepts is very easy. 

Also, if you leave the household and maintain the precepts, you 
attain immeasurable wholesome merit, which is fulfilled. For this 
reason, laypeople should leave the household and receive all of 
the [home leaver’s] precepts. 

On the other hand, leaving the household is difficult from the 
beginning. 

Once Brahmans of the Jambudvipa World asked Shariputra, 
“What is most difficult in the buddha dharma?” 

Shariputra said, “Leaving the household is most difficult.” 

They asked, “What is difficult about being a home leaver?” 

Shariputra said, “Enjoying the life of a home leaver is difficult.” 

They asked, “What is difficult in enjoying the life of a home 
leaver?” 

Shariputra said, “Practicing all types of wholesome deeds is 
difficult. That is why it is good to leave the household.” 

Now, when someone leaves the household, the Demon King 
says in lamentation, “This person wants to reduce the urge of 
desire, will certainly attain nirvana, and will join a group of the 
sangha treasure.” 

Again, even if those who have left the household in the buddha 
dharma break the precepts and commit a crime, they can be 
liberated after the crime is over. It is like a story told in the Sutra 
on the Former Birth of Nun Utpalavarna: 

[Nagarjuna continues:] At the time when the Buddha was in 
this world, Nun Utpalavarna attained six miraculous powers and 
became an arhat. She visited noble householders and talked about 
the life of home leavers. She encouraged noble women to become 
nuns. 

They said, “We are young and beautiful. It would be hard to 
keep the precepts.” 

Utpalavarna said, “It’s all right to break the precepts. Leave the 
household first.” 

The women said, “If we break the precepts, we will fall into 
hell. How can we do that?” 

Utpalavarna said, “Then go ahead and fall into hell.” 

They laughed and said, “We would be punished in hell. How 
can we allow ourselves to fall into hell?” 

Utpalavarna said, “Reflecting on my former life, I was an 

entertainer, putting on various costumes and speaking memorized 
lines. Once I put on a nun’s clothes for a joke. As a result of this 
action, I was reborn as a nun at the time of Kashyapa Buddha. 
Because of my high status and proper conduct, I grew arrogant 
and broke a precept. I fell into hell and experienced various 
punishments. In my next birth I met Shakyamuni Buddha, left the 
household, attained six miraculous powers, and became an arhat. 
From this I know that if you leave the household and receive 
precepts, even if you break a precept, you can become an arhat 
because of the merit of the precepts you received. But you cannot 
attain the way if you only create unwholesome deeds without 
receiving the precepts. I was once a criminal falling in and out of 
hell. If a mere criminal dies and enters hell, no merit has been 
attained. So, you should know that even if you break a precept, 
you can receive the fruit of the way. 

Also, when the Buddha was at Jeta Grove, a drunken Brahman 
went up to him and requested that he be made a monk. The 
Buddha asked Ananda to shave the Brahman’s head and let him 
put on a dharma robe. When the Brahman became sober, he was 
so shocked he had become a monk that he ran away. 

The disciples asked the Buddha, “Why did you make that 
Brahman a monk?” 

The Buddha said, “He would otherwise never have the 
aspiration for leaving the household, even for immeasurable eons. 
He aroused a faint aspiration because he was drunk. Due to such 
causes and conditions, he will leave the household and attain the 
way in the future. The merit of these causes and conditions and 
leaving the household is immeasurable. 

Thus, holding the five precepts as a layperson does not equal 
leaving the household. [Thus said Nagarjuna. ] 

The World-Honored One allowed a drunk Brahman to leave the 
household and receive the precepts. He regarded this as planting the 
first seed for attaining the way. From this we clearly know that since 
olden times sentient beings without the merit of leaving the household 
have not been able to attain enlightenment—the buddha fruit—for a 
long time. Because this Brahman was drunk, he aroused a faint 
aspiration, had his head shaved, received the precepts, and became a 
monk. Although he became sober soon after that, he could preserve 
his merit and nurture the wholesome root of attaining the way. This is 
the golden admonition that expresses the World-Honored One’s 
profound intention, the original meaning of the emergence of the 
Tathagata into this world. 

All sentient beings should clearly receive this teaching with trust 

and practice it in the past, present, and future. Indeed, arousing the 
aspiration and attaining the way always take place in one moment. 
This Brahman’s merit of momentarily leaving the household is like 
this. How much more so is the limited and unlimited merit for a 
human being who leaves the household and receives the precepts! 
How can the merit be less than that of this drunken Brahman? 

One of the wheel-turning kings emerged when he was over eighty 
thousand years old and, decorated with seven treasures, presided over 
the Four Continents. These continents were like a Pure Land. The 
kings’ pleasure cannot be described in words. It is said that one of the 
kings presided over a billion worlds. There are wheels made of gold, 
silver, copper, and iron for presiding over one, two, three, or four 
continents. The bodies of those who turn these wheels are not defiled 
by the ten unwholesome actions. 

A wheel-turning king is filled with such privileges. When he finds a 
strand of white hair on his head, he gives the throne to his crown 
prince and immediately leaves the household. He puts on a kashaya, 
practices in a mountain or forest, and when his life ends, is invariably 
reborn in the world of the Brahma King. The white strand of his hair 
is put into a silver box treasured at his palace. This is transmitted to 
the next wheel-turning king. When the next wheel-turning king 
becomes old, he does the same as the previous king. 

The life span of a wheel-turning king after leaving the household is 
so long that it cannot be compared to that of humans in our time. It is 
said that the life span of a wheel-turning king is over eighty thousand 
years and his body is equipped with the thirty-two marks, to which 
people today cannot come close. However, seeing white hair and 
knowing the impermanence of life, a wheel-turning king leaves the 
household without fail and practices the way in order to engage in 
pure conduct and accomplish merit. 

Kings nowadays are not like the wheel-turning kings. If they waste 
the passage of time in greed without leaving the household, they may 
regret it in the next lifetime. Furthermore, this is a small country in a 
remote land, where there is a king who lacks the virtue of a king. 
People are greedy without end. If they leave the household and 
practice the way, all devas will protect them with delight. The dragon 
god will revere and guard them. The buddha eye of all buddhas will 
clearly confirm them with joy. 

Without having faith, the courtesan put on a nun’s robe for a joke. 
She was perhaps at minor fault for this action, but with the power of 
wearing this robe she encountered the buddha dharma in her next life- 
time. A nun’s robe means a kashaya. As a result of wearing a kashaya 
for a joke, she left the household, received the precepts, and became a 
nun called Utpalavarna at the time of Kashyapa Buddha. Although she 

broke precepts and fell into hell for punishment, her merit did not 
perish, and finally she encountered Shakyamuni Buddha. She saw the 
Buddha, listened to the dharma, aroused the aspiration for 
enlightenment, and practiced. Thus, she became free from the three 
realms and became a great arhat. She had mastered the six miraculous 
powers, including the three extraordinary types of knowledge. She 
was certainly unsurpassable in the way. 

If so, the growing merit of those who have trust from the beginning 
and receive a kashaya with the pure heart of faith for the sole sake of 
unsurpassable enlightenment should be more immediate than the 
merit of this courtesan. Even further, the merit of those who arouse 
the aspiration for enlightenment, leave the household, and receive the 
precepts for the sake of unsurpassable enlightenment should be 
immeasurable. Without having a human body, it is rare to achieve this 
merit. 

Although there are a great number of bodhisattvas and ancestors, 
whether they are householders or home leavers in India and China, 
none of them come close to Ancestor Nagarjuna. He particularly took 
up the stories of the drunken Brahman and the courtesan to encourage 
sentient beings to leave the household and receive the precepts. 
Ancestor Nagarjuna’s enlightenment was predicted by the golden 
mouth of the World-Honored One. 

merit of leaving the household. The reason is that an evil, stupid 
person can destroy a stupa of seven treasures but cannot destroy 
the merit of leaving the household. This being so, if you teach 
men and women, let go of servants, pardon criminals, and let 
yourself leave the household—entering the way—the merit is 
immeasurable. 

Thus, the World-Honored One let the amounts of merit be known 
and compared them. Shrivaddhi heard this, and, although he was one 
hundred twenty years old and frail, he determined to leave the house- 
hold and receive the precepts. He sat on a seat lower than youths, 
practiced, and became a great arhat. 

Know that, through causes and conditions, a human body in this 
lifetime is a temporary assemblage of the four great elements and the 
five skandhas. It always contains eight sufferings. Further, it is born 
and perishes moment by moment without ceasing. It is born and 
perishes at each of the sixty-five moments contained within one finger 
snap, but because of ignorance we don’t notice it. There are six 
billion, four hundred million, ninety-nine thousand, nine hundred 
eighty moments in a day and night, and the five skandhas are born 
and perish at each moment, but we don’t notice it. What a pity that 
although we are born and perish at each moment, we don’t notice it! 
The amount of births and deaths at each moment is known only by the 
Buddha—the World-Honored One—and Shariputra. There are many 
other sages, but none of them know it. With this law of birth and 
death in each moment, sentient beings create wholesome and 
unwholesome actions. Also, with this law of birth and death in each 
moment, sentient beings arouse the aspiration for enlightenment and 
attain the way. 

What is born and perishes in this way is the human body. Even if 
you cling to it, it will not stay where it is. Since olden times there has 
not been a single person who clung to the body and made it stay. 
Thus, the human body does not belong to the self. Yet, if you turn 
around, leave the household, and receive the precepts, you realize 
unsurpassable, complete enlightenment, realized by buddhas of the 
past, present, and future, which is the indestructible diamond buddha 
fruit. Who among the wise would not joyously seek this? 

This being so, all the eight children of the Chandra Surya Pradipa 
Buddha in the past gave up their monarchy of ruling the world of the 
four directions and left the household. 

All sixteen children of Maha Abhijna Jnana Abhibhu Buddha also 
left the household. When this buddha was in samadhi, he expounded 
the Lotus Sutra for all beings, and now he is a tathagata of the ten 
directions. All the eight trillion beings led by the wheel-turning king, 

the father of this buddha, saw the king’s sixteen children leave the 
household and asked the king for permission to leave the household. 
The king gave all of them permission to do so. 

Also, King Shubhavyuha’s two children, as well as his father and 
queen, all left the household. 

Know that when great sages emerge it is an authentic custom for 
them to leave the household. No one can say that they do so out of 
ignorance. If you learn that they leave the household out of their 
wisdom, you should wish to do the same. 

In this present time span of Shakyamuni Buddha, Rahula, Ananda, 
and others all left the household. One thousand, or it is also said 
twenty thousand, members of the Shakya Clan also left the household. 
Their actions are indeed excellent precedents. From the Five Monks to 
Subhadra [the Buddha’s first disciples to the last], those who took 
refuge in the Buddha all left the household. Know that the virtue is 
immeasurable. 

This being so, if people care about their children and their 
grandchildren, let them leave the household as soon as possible. If 
they care about their parents, encourage them to leave the household. 

Thus, it is said in a verse: 

If there had been no past world, 

there would have been no past buddhas. 
If there had been no past buddhas, 
there would have been no home leaving 
and precept receiving. 

This is a verse of all buddha tathagatas. It denies the negation of the 
past world spoken of by those outside the way. So, know that home 
leaving and precept receiving are the dharma of all buddhas in the 
past. As we have the fortune of encountering the time of home leaving 
and precept receiving, which are the wondrous dharma of all buddhas, 
how could we wastefully miss the opportunity to leave home and 
receive precepts? It would be difficult to understand the hindrance to 
doing so. Attaining the highest merit with the lowliest body is the 
highest achievement in the Jambudvipa World or in the three realms. 
Do not fail to leave the household and receive the precepts before the 
Jambudvipa’s human body perishes. 

household excel householders who maintain the precepts. For this 
reason, the kindness of those who expound a sutra and encourage 
others to leave the household is difficult to repay. Those who 
encourage others to leave the household help them practice 
venerable actions. The reward they receive excels that of King 
Yama, the Wheel-Turning King, and Indra. For this reason, the 
kindness of those who expound a sutra and encourage others to 
leave the household is difficult to repay. Encouraging others to 
receive the precepts of supporting the dharma [lay practice] is 
not as valuable. To stay in laity is not recommended in sutras. 

In this way, know that even if they break the precepts, those who 
have left the household excel householders who maintain the 
precepts. Taking refuge in the Buddha, leaving the household, and 
receiving the precepts are always excellent. The reward for 
encouraging others to leave the household excels that of King Yama, 
the Wheel-Turning King, and Indra. Even common people or 
untouchables who have left the house-hold excel the nobles. They 
even excel King Yama, the Wheel-Turning King, and Indra. Receiving 
lay precepts is not like this. Therefore, leave the household. 

Know that the immeasurable teachings of the World-Honored One 
were extensively collected by the World-Honored One and the five 
hundred great arhats [in the Abhidharma Mahashastra Treatise]. From 
this we know, indeed, that principles are clear in the buddha dharma. 
Ordinary teachers of recent times cannot fathom one arhat’s wisdom, 
three types of extraordinary knowledge, or six miraculous powers. 
Then, how can they understand the wisdom of the five hundred 
arhats? Although these arhats knew what ordinary teachers of recent 
times didn’t know, saw what they didn’t see, and mastered what they 
didn’t master, it is not that the arhats didn’t know what ordinary 
teachers of recent times know. Therefore, do not compare the ignorant 
and foolish theory of these ordinary teachers with the words of arhats 
and three types of outstanding knowledge. 

Among the five hundred great vows of Shakyamuni Buddha, his one 
hundred thirty-seventh vow says, “May I attain a true awakening in 
the future and may people who want to leave the household in my 
dharma have no hindrance—such as being lazy, forgetful, crazy, 
arrogant, lacking reverence and wisdom, being driven by many 
desires, or having scattered minds. Until this is achieved, I will not be 
fully awakened.” 

His one hundred thirty-eighth vow says, “May I attain a true 
awakening in the future, and may women who want to leave the 
household in my dharma, study the way, and receive the great 
precepts accomplish their wishes. Until this is achieved, I will not be 
fully awakened.” 

His three hundred fourteenth vow says, “May I attain a true 
awakening in the future, and if there are sentient beings who have 
little wholesome roots but arouse enjoyment in these wholesome 
roots, may I let them leave the household and study the way in the 
buddha dharma in their future lifetime, and let them abide at ease in 
the ten pure precepts. Until this is achieved, I will not be fully 
awakened.” 

Know that all the good men and good women who have left the 
household now have been helped by the power of the World-Honored 
One’s great vows in the past, have left the household, and received the 
precepts without hindrance. The Tathagata made these vows and 
caused them to leave the household. They clearly know that this is a 
great merit, most venerable and unsurpassable. 

and so you will fill the three unwholesome paths.” 

such virtue as this. 

Dhitika said, “I want to leave the household, but not for my 
body or mind.” Upagupta said, “Who leaves the household if not 
for the benefit of body or mind?” 

Dhitika said, “A home leaver does not have a self or self- 
possession. Because of having no self or self-possession, the mind 
is not born and does not perish. Not to have the mind that is born 
or perishes: this is an unchanging dharma. All buddhas practice 
this way. Neither their minds nor their bodies have marks.” 

Upagupta said, “You are greatly enlightened and your mind has 
been illuminated. You should take refuge in the buddha, dharma, 
sangha and nurture the sacred seed [of buddhahood].” 

Thus, Upagupta allowed Dhitika to leave the household and 
receive the precepts. 

Now, to encounter the dharma of all buddhas and leave the 
household is the supreme result. The dharma is not for the self or self- 
possession. It is not for body or mind. It is not that you leave the 
household for the benefit of body or mind. This is the meaning of 
leaving the household is not for body or mind. Because it is not for the 
self or self-possession, it is the dharma of all buddhas. This is the way 
of all buddhas. Because this is the way of all buddhas, it is not for the 
self or self-possession, and not for the body or mind. 

There is nothing equal to this in the three realms. Thus, leaving the 
household is the supreme dharma. It is not sudden, not gradual, not 
permanent, not impermanent. It is not coming, not going, not abiding, 
not making. It is not wide, not narrow, not large, not small. It is not 
becoming, and not not-becoming. There are no ancestors transmitting 
buddha dharma person to person that have not left the household or 
have not received the precepts. 

This is how Dhitika first met Venerable Upagupta and asked about 
leaving the household. In this way, Dhitika left the household, 
received the precepts, practiced with Upagupta, and finally became 
the Fifth Ancestor. 

Veneration to my blood mother. 
I now wish to leave the household, 
begging you to kindly accept my plea. 

But his parents insistently discouraged him. So, the prince 
refused to eat. Finally, his parents allowed him to leave the 
household while staying in the palace. They named him 
Sanghanandi and asked monk Dhyanartha to be his teacher. For 
nineteen years Sanghanandi didn’t tire of his practice. He said to 
himself daily, “While living at home, how can I be a home 
leaver?” 

One night he saw a heavenly light descending all of a sudden 
and illuminating a straight road. Without noticing, he walked 
slowly on the road for ten li. When he came to a grotto in front of 
a huge rock, he went inside and sat quietly. Knowing that his son 
had left, the King expelled Dhyanartha and searched all over the 
country, looking for the prince. But he could not find him. Ten 
years later, Sanghanandi attained dharma, had his enlightenment 
confirmed, became a wandering teacher, and got to the country of 
Madhya. 

This is the first time that becoming a home leaver while being at 
home has been heard of. However, with the help of his wholesome 
action in the past, he found a straight way in the heavenly light. Then, 
he left his palace and got to the grotto. Indeed, it is an excellent 
precedent. One who detests worldly pleasure and is cautious about 
common dust is a sage. One who loves the five desires and does not 
reject them is an ordinary fool. 

done to practice the way to become free from birth. There is nothing 
that excels this in the deva and human worlds.” 

The way to become free from birth is the true dharma of the 
Tathagata. Thus, it is excellent in the deva and human worlds. In the 
deva worlds, there are six deva worlds in the desire realm, eighteen 
deva worlds in the form realm, and four types of worlds in the no- 
form realm. None of them excel the path of home leavers. 

Panshan, Zen Master Baoji, said, “Virtuous practitioners of Zen, 
studying the way in our school is like the earth holding mountains 
without knowing how steep they are, or a stone containing a jewel 
without knowing how flawless it is. One who practices like this is 
called a home leaver.” 

The true dharma of buddha ancestors is not necessarily concerned 
with knowing or not knowing. As leaving the household is the true 
dharma of buddha ancestors, its merit is clear. 

When the Tathagata was entering pari-nirvana, Kashyapa 
Bodhisattva said to him, “World-Honored One, the Tathagata, you 
understand all the roots [potentials] of human beings. You must 
have known that Sunakshatra was going to cut off his wholesome 
roots. Then, why did you allow him to leave the household?” 

The Buddha said: 

Good disciple, in the past, after I left the household, my brother 
Nanda, my cousins Ananda and Devadatta, and my son Rahula all 
followed me, left the household, and practiced the way. If I had 
not allowed Sunakshatra to leave the household, he would have 
succeeded to his father’s throne. Using his authority, he would 
have destroyed buddha dharma. For this reason, I permitted him 
to leave the household and practice the way. 

Good disciple, if Sunakshatra had not left the household, he 
would have lost his wholesome roots and would have received no 
benefit in the uncountable lifetimes. As he has left the household, 
even if he has lost his wholesome roots now, if he maintains the 
precepts, venerates and makes offerings to old, senior, and 
virtuous ones, and practices the first to fourth stages of 
meditation, these will be wholesome causes. Wholesome causes 
give rise to wholesome dharma. If wholesome dharma rises, the 
way is practiced. If the way is practiced, unsurpassable, complete 
enlightenment is attained. That is why I allowed Sunakshatra to 
leave the household. 

Good disciple, if I hadn’t allowed Sunakshatra to leave the 
household and receive the precepts, people would not be able to 
call me the Tathagata who embodies the ten powers. 

Good disciple, the Buddha observes the wholesome and 
unwholesome potential sentient beings carry with them. Although 
they have these two types of potential, some of them quickly cut 
off all wholesome roots and maintain unwholesome roots. Why 
so? Because such people do not associate with wholesome friends, 
do not listen to the true dharma, do not think of wholesome 
things, and do not act according to dharma. For this reason, they 
lose wholesome roots and maintain unwholesome roots. 

From this, know that although the Tathagata, the World-Honored 
One, clearly knows that some sentient beings are going to lose their 
wholesome roots, he allows them to leave the household for the sake 
of giving them wholesome causes. This is great compassion. Losing 
wholesome roots is caused by not associating with wholesome friends, 
not listening to the true dharma, not thinking of wholesome things, 

and not acting according to dharma. Students nowadays should 
always associate with wholesome friends. Wholesome friends say that 
there are buddhas and teach that there are crimes and beneficial 
activities. Those who do not deny cause and effect are wholesome 
friends and wholesome teachers. What is explained by these people is 
the true dharma. To think of this principle is wholesome thinking. To 
act in this way is wholesome action. 

This being so, encourage sentient beings to leave the household and 
receive the precepts whether you are close to them or not. Do not 
reflect on their future relapsing or not. Do not worry about their 
practicing or not. This is indeed the true dharma of Shakyamuni 
Buddha. 

ministers, intimate friends, servants, family members, or rare treasures 
can help you. You go to the Yellow Spring [the underworld of the 
dead] by yourself. The only things that accompany you are 
wholesome and unwholesome karmas. Also, when you are about to 
lose your human body, you will probably have a deep desire to 
maintain your human body. If so, while you have your human body, 
leave the household as soon as possible. This is indeed the true 
dharma of all buddhas in the past, present, and future. 

encouraged him to leave the household. Thus, know that home 
leaving is the most venerable dharma. As the World-Honored One’s 
primary disciple with thorough practice and as the field of benefaction 
for sentient beings, Rahula still abides in this world, not having 
entered nirvana. 

Among the ancestors who transmitted the treasury of the true 
dharma eye in India, there are a number of princes who left the house- 
hold. Bodhidharma, the First Ancestor of China, was the third prince 
of the king of the Xiangxi Kingdom. Not regarding kingship as 
weighty, Bodhidharma transmitted authentic dharma to China. 

Know clearly that home leaving is most precious. While you need to 
leave the household quickly, how can you wait for tomorrow, leading 
a life that is not close to the lives of these princes? Your exhalation 
will not wait for your inhalation. It is wise to leave the household as 
soon as possible. Also know that the benefaction of your teacher at the 
time of your home leaving and receiving the precepts equals that of 
your father and mother. 

A day during the summer practice period, the seventh year of the 
Kencho Era [1255]. [Copied by Ejo.] 

88 

Maine Orrenunes TO Buppuas 

Tue BUDDHA SAID, “Without the past worlds, there would be no past 

buddhas. Without past buddhas, there would be no leaving home and 
receiving the precepts.” 

Clearly know that there are always buddhas in the past, present, 
and future. Do not say that past buddhas had a beginning or did not 
have a beginning. To fall into such theoretical discussion is not the 
study of buddha dharma. Instead, to make offerings to past buddhas, 
leave the household, and follow them is a crucial way to become 
buddhas. 

You become buddhas by the merit of making offerings to buddhas. 
How can a sentient being who has not made offerings to even one 
buddha become a buddha? There is no becoming a buddha without 
cause. 

four types of offerings to tathagatas and shravakas, and served 
and venerated them. The four types of offerings included clothes, 
food, bedding, medicine, banners, canopies, flowers, and incense. 
But at that time those Buddhas did not predict: “You will attain 
unsurpassable, complete enlightenment and become the Knower 
of the World, the Teacher of Devas, and the Buddha, the World- 
Honored One.” 

Maudgalyayana, in my vision of a past life, I became a wheel- 
turning king and encountered three hundred million buddhas. 
They all had the same name and were called Pusya. I made four 
types of sufficient offerings to tathagatas and shravakas, and 
served and venerated them. But at that time those buddhas did 
not predict: “You will become a buddha.” 

Other than this, Shakyamuni Buddha in his former lives made 
offerings to a number of buddhas. A wheel-turning king presides over 
the Four Worlds. So, he must have had abundant things to offer. A 
great wheel-turning king must preside over a billion worlds. It is 
impossible nowadays for ordinary people to fathom the amount of his 
offerings. Even the Buddha himself would be unable to measure them 
completely. 

Shariputra, in my vision of a past life, I met sixty thousand 
buddhas. They were all called Prabha. I became a wheel-turning 
king and made sufficient offerings of clothes, food, bedding, and 
medicine to the buddhas and their disciples throughout my 
lifetime. I did this in search of unsurpassable, complete 
enlightenment. And yet, those buddhas did not predict: “You will 
become a buddha in the next lifetime.” Why not? Because I had 
done so with a grasping mind. 

Shariputra, in my vision of a past life, I met three hundred 
million buddhas. They were all called Pusya. I became a wheel- 
turning king and made sufficient offerings to the buddhas and 
their disciples throughout my lifetime. And yet, those buddhas 
did not predict: “You will become a buddha in the next lifetime.” 
Why? Because I did my practice with a grasping mind. 

Shariputra, in my vision of a past life, I met eighteen thousand 
buddhas. They were all called Parvataraja. The eon was called 
High Eight. At the place of the eighteen thousand buddhas I 
shaved my head and practiced for unsurpassable, complete 
enlightenment. And yet, those buddhas did not predict: “You will 
become a buddha in the next lifetime.” Why? Because I was doing 
my practice with a grasping mind. 

Shariputra, in my vision of a past life, I met five hundred 
buddhas. They were all called Padmottara. I became a wheel- 
turning king and offered everything to the buddhas and their 
disciples throughout my lifetime. I did this in search of 
unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. And yet, no buddhas 
predicted that I would be enlightened, because I did my practice 
with a grasping mind. 

Shariputra, in my vision of a past life, I met five hundred 
buddhas. They were all called Prabhava. I offered everything to 
them. And yet, none of them gave me a prediction of 
enlightenment, because I did my practice with a grasping mind. 

Shariputra, in one vision of a past life, I met two thousand 
buddhas. They were all called Kaundinya. I became a wheel- 
turning king and offered everything to these buddhas. And yet, 
none of them predicted that I would be enlightened, because I did 
my practice with a grasping mind. 

Shariputra, in my vision of a past life, I met nine thousand 
buddhas. They were all called Kashyapa. I made four types of 
offerings to these buddhas and their disciples. And yet, none of 
them predicted that I would be enlightened, because I did my 
practice with a grasping mind. 

Shariputra, in a vision I had of a past life, there were no 
buddhas for myriad eons. Then, for the next five hundred eons 

there were ninety thousand pratyeka-buddhas. I offered clothes, 
food, bedding, and medicine to all of them, and venerated and 
praised them. In the next five hundred eons I made four types of 
offerings to eighty trillion pratyeka-buddhas, and venerated and 
praised them. 

Shariputra, after these one thousand eons, there were no more 
pratyeka-buddhas. I died in the Jambudvipa World and was born 
in the Brahma Heaven and became King Brahma. For the next five 
hundred eons, I transmigrated in the Brahma Heaven and was 
always born as King Brahma, without being born in the 
Jambudvipa World. After that, I was born in the Jambudvipa 
World and presided over it. When my life ended, I was born in 
the Heaven of the Four Deva Kings. After that, I was born in 
Tushita Heaven and became Indra. I transmigrated in this way for 
five hundred eons. Then I was born in the Jambudvipa World. 
After another five hundred eons, I was born in the Brahma 
Heaven and became King Brahma. 

Shariputra, for the next nine thousand eons, I was always born 
in deva worlds, except once in the Jambudvipa World. When the 
eon was exhausted and the world exploded, I was born in 
Abhasvara Heaven. After the next world was formed, I went back 
to the Brahma World. I was never born in the human realm in 
these nine thousand eons. Shariputra, during this time there were 
no buddhas and pratyeka-buddhas. A number of sentient beings 
fell into unwholesome paths. 

Shariputra, after more than ten thousand eons, a buddha 
emerged who was called Universal Protection Tathagata, Worthy 
of Offering, True Encompassing Knower, Clear Walker, Well 
Gone, Knower of the World, Unsurpassable Warrior, Excellent 
Tamer, Teacher of Humans and Devas, and Buddha, the World- 
Honored One. I had just finished a life as the Brahma King and 
was born in the Jambudvipa World to be a wheel-turning king 
called Heaven Sharer. I was ninety thousand years old in human 
age. Throughout my time I made offerings of excellent things to 
the Buddha and nine billion monks. I was in search of 
unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. But Universal Protection 
Tathagata did not predict: “You will become a buddha in the next 
lifetime.” Why not? Because at that time I was not able to 
understand the reality of all things but only had a mind greedy 
for attainment. 

Shariputra, in these eons one hundred buddhas with different 
names emerged. Every time, I became a wheel-turning king and 
made offerings through my lifetime to the buddha and his 
disciples of that time, in pursuit of unsurpassable, complete 

enlightenment. But none of these buddhas predicted, “You will 
become a buddha in the next lifetime,” because I had a mind 
greedy for attainment. 

Shariputra, in a vision I had of a past life, I met one thousand 
Buddhas in the seven hundredth uncountable eon. They were all 
called Jambunada. I made four types of offerings to them, but 
none of them predicted that I would be enlightened, because I 
had a mind greedy for attainment. 

Shariputra, in my vision of a past life, I met six million two 
hundred thousand Buddhas in the seven hundred uncountable 
eons. They were all called Sarvarthadarsha. I became a wheel- 
turning king and made all types of comfortable offerings to these 
Buddhas and their disciples throughout my lifetime, but none of 
them predicted that I would be enlightened because I had a mind 
greedy for attainment. 

Shariputra, in one vision I had of a past life, I met eighty-four 
Buddhas in the seven hundred uncountable eons. They were all 
called Indra Ketu. I became a wheel-turning king and made all 
types of splendid offerings to these Buddhas and their disciples 
throughout my lifetime, but none of them predicted that I would 
be enlightened, because I had a mind greedy for attainment. 

Shariputra, in my vision of a past life, I met fifteen Buddhas in 
the seven hundredth uncountable eon. They were all called 
Suryarashmi. I became a wheel-turning king and made all types of 
comfortable offerings to these Buddhas and their disciples 
throughout my lifetime, but none of them predicted that I would 
be enlightened, because I had a mind greedy for attainment. 

Shariputra, in my vision of a past life, I met sixty-two Buddhas 
in the seven hundredth uncountable eon. They were all called 
Shanta. I became a wheel-turning king and made all types of 
splendid offerings to these, but none of them predicted that I 
would be enlightened, because I had a mind greedy for 
attainment. 

In this way I transmigrated and saw Dipankara Buddha and 
attained patience beyond birth. Dipankara Buddha predicted, “In 
the next life after passing uncountable eons, you will become a 
buddha and be called Shakyamuni Tathagata, Worthy of Offering, 
True Encompassing Knower, Clear Walker, Well Gone, Knower of 
the World, Unsurpassable Warrior, Excellent Tamer, Teacher of 
Humans and Devas, and Buddha, the World-Honored One. 

From the time of meeting three billion Shakyamuni Buddhas and 
making offerings to them until the time of meeting Dipankara Buddha, 
the bodhisattva [former life of Shakyamuni Buddha] always took the 

form of a wheel-turning king and made offerings to Buddhas. Many 
wheel-turning kings are said to live more than eighty thousand years. 
During the lifetimes of eighty or ninety thousand years, he made his 
splendid offerings. Dipankara Buddha is the same as Lamp-Burning 
Tathagata. The Sutra of Buddha’s Original Practice and the Buddha’s 
Treasury Sutra also talk about his meeting three billion Shakyamuni 
Buddhas. 

said: 

Good people, in my vision of a past life, countless and boundless 
trillion eons ago, there was a world called Saha. There was a 
buddha called Shakyamuni Tathagata, Worthy of Offering, True 
Encompassing Knower, Clear Walker, Well Gone, Knower of the 
World, Unsurpassable Warrior, Excellent Tamer, Teacher of 
Humans and Devas, and Buddha, the World-Honored One. This 
Buddha expounded the Maha Pari-nirvana Sutra for various 
beings. At that time, while at a good friend’s place, I heard that 
the Buddha was expounding this sutra. I rejoiced and wanted to 
make offerings. 

Since I was poor and had nothing where I lived, I wanted to be 
hired, but unfortunately no one wanted to hire me. On my way 
home I met someone and said, “I want to offer myself. Will you 
please hire me?” 

The man said, “No one can bear the work in my house. But if 
you are willing to do it, I will hire you.” 

I asked, “What kind of work is it?” 

The man replied, “I have a very bad disease. My doctor says the 
cure is to eat three ounces of human flesh every day. If you agree 
to give me three ounces of your flesh every day, I will give you 
five coins.” 

Hearing this, I rejoiced and said to the man, “Please give me 
the money and let me have seven days. When I am done with 
what I need to do, I will get to work.” 

The man said, “Seven days are not possible. If you want to do 
this, I will let you have one day.” 

Good people, I got the money, went to the Buddha, bowed at 
his feet by putting my head to the ground, and offered him all of 
my possessions. After doing this I sincerely listened to the sutra. 
Although I heard the sutra, I was stupid and could only receive 
this verse: 

The Tathagata realizes nirvana. 

Forever he becomes free from birth and death. 
If you listen with utmost sincerity, 

you will attain immeasurable bliss. 

After receiving this verse, I went to the sick man’s house. 

Good people, although I gave three ounces of my flesh to the 
sick man every day, my mind was concentrated on this verse and 
I did not feel pain. This continued every day until a month had 
passed. 

Good people, because of this endeavor, the man was cured. I 
was healed and did not possess a single scar. Furthermore, I 
aroused the aspiration for unsurpassable, complete 
enlightenment. 

The power of one verse is like this. How much more so if you 
completely receive the sutra and chant it? Seeing that this sutra 
has such power, I further aroused the aspiration for 
enlightenment, and vowed to attain the buddha way and be 
called Shakyamuni Buddha in the future. 

Good people, because of the power of my connection to this 
verse, I am moved to expound this sutra in this assembly of devas 
and humans. 

Good people, as you see in this story, the Maha Pari-nirvana 
Sutra is beyond thinking and brings forth immeasurable, 
boundless merit. This sutra is a storehouse of very profound 
secrets of all buddha tathagatas. 

The bodhisattva who offered himself became Shakyamuni Buddha 
in the next life. According to other sutras, this was the beginning of 
the first set of uncountable eons when the bodhisattva made offerings 
to the ancient Shakyamuni Buddha. The bodhisattva was a slate roofer 
and his name was Mahaprabha. In venerating the ancient Shakyamuni 
Buddha and his disciples, he made three kinds of offerings: grass 
cushions, sugar water, and candles. He also made a vow: “May my 
land, title, long span of life, and disciples all be equal to the present 
Shakyamuni Buddha.” This vow has been fulfilled to the present day. 

Thus, when you make offerings to the Buddha, don’t say you are 
poor, and don’t say your family is poor. To offer oneself and make 
offerings is the true dharma of Great Master Shakyamuni. Who will 
not rejoice for him? For this practice, he met a master who took three 
ounces of flesh from him daily. This is something other people could 
not have endured, however advanced their practice might be. But with 
the help of the deep aspiration to make offerings, he was able to 
receive this merit. 

Now we hear the Tathagata’s true dharma. This is to receive a share 
of the bodhisattva’s past practice of scarifying his flesh. This verse of 
four lines cannot be purchased with five coins. This is what those 
buddhas and this buddha have realized without regard to receiving or 
letting go of birth for countless, boundless eons. Indeed, this verse has 
unthinkable power. Disciples of the dharma left by the Buddha should 
deeply bow to, receive, and maintain it. The Tathagata explained the 
power of this verse in this way. This teaching is, indeed, vast and 
profound. 

offerings to buddhas for vast eons. Do not doubt that you will certainly 
become a buddha. It is determined. What Shakyamuni Buddha 
explained was also like this. 

[Ancestor Nagarjuna also said,] “A small cause can bring forth a 
large effect. A small condition can bring forth a large result. If you 
seek the buddha way, recite one verse of praise, chant one refuge, and 
burn a pinch of incense, then you will certainly become a buddha. 
Furthermore, if you learn and understand that the reality of all things 
is not beyond birth, beyond death, beyond beyond birth, beyond 
beyond death, and practice the act of causation, you will never miss 
it.” 

This is a clear teaching of the World-Honored One, authentically 
transmitted by Ancestor Nagarjuna. This golden expression of truth 
has been authentically transmitted and received. As this was a 
statement by Nagarjuna, it could not be compared to the statements of 
other teachers. Thus, you have encountered an authentic transmission 
and spreading of the World-Honored One’s teaching. Rejoice. Do not 
compare this sacred teaching to the false statements of mediocre 
teachers in China. 

conducted various meritorious deeds and practiced wholesome 
actions without seeking reward. Because we venerate his merit, 
we make offerings.” 

When the Buddha was in this world, there was a blind monk. 
Without seeing, he used his hands to sew a robe. When a thread 
came off from the needle, he said to himself, “Who is going to 
benefit me by threading the needle?” 

Then the Buddha went to him and said to the blind monk, “I 
love beneficial merit. So, let me thread the needle for you.” 

Noticing that the voice was the Buddha’s, the blind monk 
quickly put on his robe, bowed at the Buddha’s feet, and said, 
“The Buddha is complete with merit. How come you say you love 
beneficial merit?” 

The Buddha said, “Although I am already complete with merit, 
I deeply understand the cause, effect, and power of merit. The 
reason why I excel most among all sentient beings is because of 
this merit. Therefore, I love beneficial merit.” 

After praising merit for the sake of this blind monk, the Buddha 
spontaneously expounded dharma. Then the monk attained the 
pure dharma eye and also became able to see with his eyes. 

I was told this story in an evening talk by Rujing, my late master. 
Later, I compared it with the Treatise on Realization of Great Wisdom. 
The admonition by Rujing, the dharma transmitting ancestor, had 
been correct with nothing lacking. This passage is found in the tenth 
chapter of the Treatise on Realization of Great Wisdom. Thus, it is clear 
that all buddhas regard the reality of all phenomena as their great 
teacher. Shakyamuni Buddha also realized the permanent dharma of 
all buddhas. 

To regard the reality of all phenomena as their great teacher means 
to venerate and make offerings to the three treasures—buddha, 
dharma, and sangha. Buddhas in countless eons accumulate a great 
deal of merit—the wholesome root—without seeking reward, and only 
venerate and make offerings. Even after the Buddha reached the rank 
of having enlightenment—the buddha fruit—still he loved minor 
merits, and so he threaded the needle of a blind monk. If you want to 
clarify the merit of the buddha fruit, this story clearly demonstrates it. 

In this way, the merit of enlightenment—the buddha fruit—and the 
principle of the reality of all phenomena are not like what ordinary 
people nowadays think they are. They think that creating 
unwholesomeness is the reality of all phenomena and that only those 
who are greedy for attainment can reach the buddha fruit of 
enlightenment. Those who have such a crooked view may know about 
eighty thousand eons but will not be able to escape the view of 

original eons and declined eons. How can they understand the reality 
of all phenomena, which is thoroughly understood by “only a buddha 
and a buddha”? The reason is that what is thoroughly understood by 
“only a buddha and a buddha” is the reality of all phenomena. 

The monks said, “Why two buddhas?” 

The Buddha replied, “When he bowed to me, there was a stupa 
of Kashyapa Buddha below his cane.” 

The monks said, “We would like to see the Kashyapa Buddha’s 
stupa.” 

The Buddha said, “Follow this Brahman and look under the 
ground.” 

So, the monks dug up the ground and looked for the tower 
under the guidance of the Brahman. When they found it, the 
World-Honored One allowed a seven-treasure stupa of Kashyapa 
Buddha to appear. It was one yojana high and half a yojana wide. 

Seeing this, the Brahman said to the Buddha, “World-Honored 
One, my family name is Kashyapa. This is my Kashyapa stupa.” 

The World-Honored One went to the Brahman’s house and 
started building a stupa of Kashyapa Buddha. 

Then, monks said to the Buddha, “World-Honored One, may we 
bring some dirt?” 

“Yes, you may.” Then the Buddha spoke this verse: 

Transporting hundreds of cartfuls of genuine gold 
and making offerings do not equal 

bringing a lump of dirt with a venerating heart 
to build a stupa for the Buddha. 

After this, the Buddha completed a stupa of Kashyapa Buddha. 
Its ground story was square with a railing around it. The two 
stories above it were round with the roof joints sticking out from 
the four sides. Banners and canopies stood above these stories, 
and the wheel of space [symbolizing one of the five great 
elements] was added on top. 

The Buddha said, “This is how to build a stupa.” Then, the 
Buddha bowed respectfully to Kashyapa Buddha of the past. 

The monks said, “World-Honored One, may we also bow?” 

“Yes.” And the Buddha said this verse: 

Transporting hundreds of cartfuls of genuine gold 
and making offerings do not equal 

respectfully bowing to a buddha tower 

with a single wholesome heart. 

Hearing that the World-Honored One had built a stupa, people 
in the world brought incense and flowers and gave them to him. 
The Buddha received them and respectfully offered them to the 
tower of Kashyapa Buddha of the past. 

The monks said, “May we make offerings?” 
“Yes.” And the Buddha recited this verse: 

Transporting hundreds of cartfuls of genuine gold 
and making offerings do not equal 

the offering of flowers and incense to a stupa 
with a single wholesome heart. 

A multitude of people assembled like clouds. 
The Buddha said to Shariputra, “I will expound dharma for 
these people.” Then he recited this verse: 

Hundreds of Jambudvipa Worlds filled with 
the offerings of genuine gold 

do not equal the offering of one dharma 

to be followed and practiced. 

In this assembly there were those who had attained the way. 
The Buddha said in a verse: 

Hundreds of Jambudvipa Worlds filled with 
offerings of genuine gold 

do not equal the offering of one dharma 
followed by the realization of truth. 

Then, the Brahman attained indestructible trust and made a 
meal offering to the Buddha and monks in front of the stupa. 

Hearing that the World-Honored One had a stupa built for 
Kashyapa Buddha, King Prasenajit brought seven hundred cartfuls 
of slate to the Buddha, bowed to the Buddha’s feet by putting his 
face to the ground, and said, “World-Honored One, I wish to 
make this stupa larger. May I do so?” 

“Yes.” Then the Buddha said to the king, “In the past, when 
Kashyapa Buddha entered pari-nirvana, there was a king called 
Gridra. He wanted to build a seven-treasure stupa. One of the 
courtiers said to the king,’ In the future there may be people who 
break laws and want to destroy the stupa. I suggest that we build 
the stupa with slate and cover it with gold and silver. Then, even 
if the gold and silver are taken away, the slate of the stupa will 
remain intact.’ 

“The king followed the courtier’s advice and had the stupa built 
with slate covered with gold. It was one yojana high and half a 
yojana wide. The balcony railing was made of bronze. It took 
seven years, seven months, and seven days to complete it. Then 

he made offerings of incense and flowers to the Buddha and 
monks.” 

King Prasenajit said to the Buddha, “That king must have been 
very wealthy and had many rare treasures. What I am going to 
build may not be as good.” Then he built the stupa in seven 
months and seven days. After its completion he made offerings of 
incense and flowers to the Buddha and monks. 

The way to build a stupa is to have the ground story square 
with a railing around it. The two higher stories are round with 
the joints of the roof sticking out from the four sides. Banners and 
canopies stand above these stories. The wheel of space is added 
on top. If you say, “The World-Honored One spoke of himself as 
having become free from greed, hatred, and delusion, then why 
would he need such a stupa?” then this would break the precept 
[of not slandering the three treasures]. Such an offence is serious 
and prohibited according to the stupa principles. 

The stupa principles require selecting a suitable site when 
constructing a temple building. A stupa should be in the east or 
north of the temple compound but not in the south or west. The 
monks’ quarters should not be in the Buddha’s quarters [stupa], 
and the Buddha’s quarters should not be in the monks’ quarters. If 
the site of the stupa is close to a place for leaving corpses, build a 
fence so dogs don’t pollute the ground by scattering bones. The 
monks’ quarters should be built in the west or south of the 
temple. Water from the monks’ quarters should not flow to the 
Buddha’s quarters, but may flow from the Buddha’s quarters to 
the monks’ quarters. Therefore, the stupa should be built on 
higher ground. [At the site of the stupa] Do not wash clothes, 
wear sandals, cover the head or shoulders, or spit on the ground. 
If you say, “The World-Honored One spoke of himself as having 
become free from greed, hatred, and delusion, then why would he 
need such a stupa?” this would break the precept. The result of 
this action [insulting the Buddha or a stupa for him] is serious 
and prohibited according to the stupa principles. 

In regard to stupa altars, King Prasenajit went to see the 
Buddha, bowed to the Buddha’s feet by putting his face to the 
ground, and said, “World-Honored One, I have built a stupa for 
Kashyapa Buddha. May I make altars?” 

“Yes.” The Buddha said, “In the past when Kashyapa Buddha 
entered pari-nirvana, King Gridra built a stupa for the Buddha. He 
built altars with balconies that had railings on all four sides, and 
images of lions and various paintings above them. In those 
balconies there were places for flowers. Inside the altars, banners 
and canopies were hung. If you say, ‘The World-Honored One 

speaks of himself as having become free from greed, hatred, and 
delusion, but he gets himself decorated and receives bliss,’ this 
would break the precept. The result of this action is serious. These 
are called stupa altar principles.” 

Thus, we clearly know that to build a stupa for an ancient buddha 
and make offerings in veneration of enlightenment, the buddha fruit, 
are customs for buddhas. There are many precedents like this, but I 
am only presenting this for the time being. 

In buddha dharma the teaching of the Sarva Asti Vada School is 
outstanding. The Maha Sangha Precepts is the most basic teaching of 
the school. Monk Faxian went to India by clearing a way through wild 
lands. He climbed Vulture Peak and brought this teaching to China for 
the first time. The teaching transmitted from ancestor to ancestor 
corresponds to that of the Sarva Asti Vada School. 

you attain extremely great merit. If you combine making offerings by 
yourself and others, you attain the greatest merit. 

of the Three Vehicles, the chaitya, images, and shrines, as well as to 
ordinary monks.” 

89 

Tanne Reruce IN Bupvua, Dharma, AND Sancna 

Tue FIRST OF one hundred twenty questions in the Guidelines for Zen 

Monasteries says, “Do you revere buddha, dharma, and sangha, or 
not?” 

Thus, it is clear that what the buddhas and ancestors in India and 
China have authentically transmitted is reverence to buddha, dharma, 
and sangha. Without taking refuge, there is no reverence. Without 
reverence, there is no taking refuge. 

The act of taking refuge in buddha, dharma, and sangha is achieved 
through mutual affinity and interaction. Whether you are in a deva 
realm, a human realm, hell, a demon realm, or an animal realm, when 
you have mutual affinity and interaction with buddha, dharma, and 
sangha, you invariably take refuge in them. 

Taking refuge in the three treasures, you nurture yourself wherever 
you are, birth after birth, world after world. You accumulate merit, 
assemble virtue, and attain unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. 
Even if you are misled by unwholesome friends, obstructed by 
demons, cut off from your wholesome roots, and become an 
icchantika, in the end you will regain your wholesome roots and 
increase merit. The power of taking refuge in the three treasures will 
never decay. 

I have taken refuge in Buddha, 
I have taken refuge in Dharma, 
I have taken refuge in Sangha. 

Initiate this vow aspiring for enlightenment, the fruit of 
buddhahood. Even though your body-mind is born and dies moment 
by moment, your dharma body surely grows and _ attains 
enlightenment. 

the sangha treasure of precepts, including shaving the head, wearing a 
dyed robe, and following the precepts and dharma procedures. 

The three treasures that function as teaching are: the buddha 
treasure of Shakyamuni Buddha, the World-Honored One; the dharma 
treasure transmitted as the turning of the dharma wheel, the 
spreading of sacred teaching; and the sangha treasure of the Five 
Monks [who listened to the Buddha’s first discourse], including 
Ajnatakaundinya. 

The three treasures that are the essence of reality are: the buddha 
treasure of the five types of dharma body; the dharma treasure of 
nirvana that is beyond change; and the sangha treasure of the merit of 
learning what is beyond learning. 

The three treasures as one treasure are: the buddha treasure of fully 
realizing reality; the dharma treasure of being pure and free of 
defilement; and the sangha treasure of living in accord with reality, 
being harmonious, and being free from stagnation. 

You take refuge in these three treasures. Those unfortunate ones 
who lack virtue do not even hear the name of the three treasures; how 
can they take refuge in them? 

The World-Honored One said: 

Many of you are fearful of suffering and take refuge in mountains, 
in gardens, in forests, under trees, or in shrines. This refuge is 
neither excellent nor valuable. You cannot be liberated from 
suffering by taking refuge in them. 

On the other hand, if you take refuge in buddha, and if you 
take refuge in dharma and sangha, you can always abide in the 
four noble truths. With this wisdom, you always observe and 
understand suffering and the arising of suffering, you know how 
to go beyond suffering forever. You know the eightfold path. This 
refuge is the most excellent and most valuable of all. You will 
certainly become free from all suffering by taking this refuge. 

The World-Honored One clearly taught all sentient beings not to 
take refuge in mountain deities, demon spirits, and so on, or in shrines 
of those outside the way, with their fear of suffering. It is not possible 
to be liberated from various sufferings by taking refuge in those. 
People follow the crooked teachings of those outside the way, and 
follow the ways of cows, deer, demons, those who practice not 
speaking, those who practice not hearing, dogs, chickens, peacocks, or 
those who put ash on their bodies, grow long hair, sacrifice sheep on 
the seasonal rites after chanting mantras, worship the fire for four 
months, or bow to the wind for seven days. They dedicate numerous 
flowers to devas and pray for attaining what they desire. There is no 
reason why these practices would cause liberation. Thus, people suffer 
in vain without receiving whole-some results. This is not 
recommended by those who are wise. 

Thus, make sure that you don’t mistakenly fall into such crooked 
paths. Do not take refuge in any practices that are similar to these. 

Human birth is difficult to acquire and buddha dharma is rarely 
encountered. Do not spend your life in the company of demons and 
waste many lifetimes among those who have crooked views. This 
would be deplorable. Instead, immediately take refuge in the three 
treasures of buddha, dharma, and sangha, and not only be liberated 
from all suffering but also attain enlightenment. 

The four worlds means the Eastern, Western, Southern, and Northern 
Continents. The Northern Continent is where the teaching of the Three 
Vehicles cannot reach. To teach beings there and help them to become 
arhats would be an extraordinary thing. The merit, however, is not 
even close to the merit of teaching and helping one person to take 
refuge in the three treasures. Also, the six heavenly realms of devas 
are where there are few who attain the way. Even if you would help 
them to attain the four fruits, it cannot compare with the great and 
deep merit of helping one person take refuge in the three treasures. 

refuge in all three treasures and practice wholesomeness single- 
heartedly. As a result, you will be able to meet the final buddha 
named Ruchi Buddha in this present kalpa. Your sins will 
disappear during this buddha’s time.” 

Upon hearing these words, all the dragons received and 
maintained the three treasures with utmost sincerity until their 
lives ended. 

Thus, when the Buddha rescued the dragons, he used no other 
methods or techniques than just presenting the three treasures. 
Although in their past lives these dragons had left the household and 
received the three treasures, because of their unwholesome karma 
they became hungry dragons and there was no other way for the 
Buddha than to offer them refuge in the three treasures. 

Know that the merit of taking refuge in the three treasures is 
venerable, unsurpassable, inconceivable, and profound. The World- 
Honored One already proved this. Sentient beings should receive them 
with trust. 

Without having the dragons chant the names of buddhas in the ten 
directions, the World-Honored One just encouraged them to take 
refuge in the three treasures. Who can fathom the depth of his 
intention? Thus, sentient beings nowadays should immediately take 
refuge in the three treasures instead of chanting various buddhas’ 
names. Do not miss this great merit through stupidity and ignorance. 

affairs even more than a drunkard would. Although I was a home 
leaver, I could not follow the dharma. I would spread a mat in the 
temple and often engaged in impure conduct. In satisfaction of 
my desire, I had much carnal pleasure. Also, I was greedy for 
possessions and undeservedly received excessive donations from 
believers. Because of all this, I have been continuously in the 
three unwholesome realms and have received all kinds of burning 
tortures. Even after ninety-one kalpas I cannot receive a deva 
body.” 

The Buddha inquired further, “Then, after this kalpa is over, 
what are you going to be born into?” 

Hearing these words, the dragon said, “As the result of this past 
karma, even if I were to be born into a better world, when that 
karma is exhausted, a wind of unwholesome karma will blow, and 
I will be born in this place once again.” Then the dragon said, 
“Great compassionate World-Honored One, please, please save 
me.” 

The Buddha scooped up water with his hands and said, “I call 
this wish-granting water. I will speak the truth to you. In the past 
I gave up my life in order to save a dove. I had no doubt and did 
not hold on to myself with the mind of self-clinging. If what I say 
to you is true, all your unwholesome sickness will be healed.” 

Then, the World-Honored One put the water in his mouth and 
sprayed it over the blind dragon’s body. Instantly, all her sickness 
was healed. 

The dragon said to the Buddha, “I wish to take refuge in the 
three treasures from you.” 

Thus, the World-Honored One gave her refuge in the three 
treasures. 

This dragon had been a nun in the dharma of Vipashyin Buddha. 
Although she had broken the precepts, she was familiar with buddha 
dharma. Seeing Shakyamuni Buddha in person, she asked for and took 
refuge in the three treasures. This is certainly nurturing the 
wholesome root. 

The benefaction of seeing the Buddha undoubtedly depends on 
taking refuge in the three treasures. Even though you are not a blind 
dragon and do not have an animal body, if you have not encountered 
the Tathagata and taken refuge in the three treasures, you are far 
away from seeing the Buddha; you should be pitied. 

The World-Honored One himself gives refuge in the three treasures. 
Know that the merit of taking refuge in the three treasures is both 
profound and immeasurable. 

Indra bowed to a wild fox and took refuge in the three treasures. 
This is all due to the unequaled merit of taking refuge in the three 
treasures. 

and she destroyed pots in the potter’s house. The owner of the pots hit 
her, injuring her body and breaking open her womb. Thus, Indra 
returned to his body. Hearing the Buddha’s words, he received the 
first fruit. This is due to the merit of taking refuge in the three 
treasures. 

In this way, to be free from the suffering of the world and realize 
unsurpassable enlightenment is undoubtedly due to the merit of 
taking refuge in the three treasures. With the power of taking refuge 
in the three treasures, Indra not only became free from the three 
unwholesome realms, but he also returned to his body. He not only 
received the reward of being in the deva realm, he also became a sage, 
a stream enterer. Indeed, the ocean of merit of the three treasures is 
immeasurable and boundless. 

When the World-Honored One was alive, humans and devas had 
great fortune. What can humans and devas do during the last set of 
five hundred years after the Tathagata’s pari-nirvana [the period of 
decline of the dharma]? However, the Tathagata’s images, relics, and 
so on are still present in the world. By taking refuge in them, you can 
still receive merit. 

have skillful means? I see a fox, but you must be a bodhisattva 
with something valuable to teach. Would you please expound 
essential dharma for us devas?” 

The fox looked up and replied, “You are the king of devas but 
do not behave well. The dharma teacher is down here and you 
are up there. You are asking for essential dharma without 
expressing respect. The dharma water is pure and capable of 
saving beings. Why do you regard yourself as higher?” 

Hearing this, Indra was greatly ashamed, while the 
accompanying devas were surprised and said in laughter, “The 
king of devas came down with no effect.” 

Indra said to them, “Don’t be surprised. I have been stubborn 
and without virtue. I need to ask about essential dharma.” Then, 
he hung down his celestial robe, picked up the fox, and got him 
out. The devas prepared the food of nectar for the fox, who took 
it and regained vitality. Unexpectedly meeting good fortune in the 
midst of calamity, the fox rejoiced immeasurably and expounded 
essential dharma for Indra and devas. 

This is called the story of Indra taking an animal as a teacher. In 
this way we clearly learn that the names of buddha, dharma, and 
sangha are rarely heard. Thus, Indra took the fox as his teacher. 

manuscripts. He would have made some additions and deletions in the 
process of editing. Since this is no longer possible, I have preserved his 
draft. Ejo. 

90 

Loenrrvinc WITH Cause AND Evrecr 

Every TIME BAIZHANG, Zen Master Dazhi, gave a dharma talk, an old 

man would come to listen. He usually left after the talk, but one day 
he remained behind. Baizhang asked, “Who is there?” 

The man said, “I am not actually a human being. I lived and taught 
on this mountain at the time of Kashyapa Buddha. One day a student 
asked me, ‘Does a person who practices completely still fall into cause 
and effect?’ I said to him, ‘No, such a person does not fall into cause 
and effect.’ Because I said this, I was made to be reborn as a wild fox 
for five hundred lifetimes. Reverend master, please say a turning word 
for me and free me from this wild fox body.” Then he asked Baizhang, 
“Does a person who practices completely still fall into cause and 
effect?” 

Baizhang said, “Do not ignore cause and effect.” 

Immediately the man had great realization. Bowing, he said, “I am 
now liberated from the body of a wild fox. I will stay in the mountain 
behind the monastery. Master, could you perform the usual services 
for a deceased monk for me?” 

Baizhang asked the practice coordinator to inform the assembly that 
a funeral service for a monk would be held after the midday meal. The 
monks asked each other, “What’s going on? Everyone is well; there is 
no one sick in the Nirvana Hall.” 

After their meal, Baizhang led the assembly to a large rock behind 
the monastery and showed them a dead fox at the rock’s base. 
Following the customary procedure, they cremated the body. 

That evening during his lecture in the dharma hall, Baizhang talked 
about what had happened that day. 

Huangbo asked him, “A teacher of old gave a wrong answer and 
became a wild fox for five hundred lifetimes. What if he hadn’t given 
a wrong answer?” 

Baizhang said, “Come closer and I will tell you.” 

Huangbo went closer and slapped Baizhang’s face. 

Laughing, Baizhang clapped his hands and said, “I thought it was 
only barbarians who had red beards. But you too have a red beard!” 

This story is in the Tiansheng Extensive Record of the Lamp. Still, 

students do not understand the principle of causation and mistakenly 
deny cause and effect. What a pity! Things are deteriorating and the 
ancestral way has degenerated. Those who say does not fall into cause 
and effect deny causation, thereby falling into the lower realms. Those 
who say Do not ignore cause and effect clearly identify with cause and 
effect. When people hear about identifying with cause and effect, they 
are freed from the lower realms. Do not try to escape this. Do not 
doubt this. Many contemporaries who consider themselves students of 
Zen deny causation. How do we know? They confuse not ignore with 
not fall into. Thus, we know that they deny cause and effect. 

unwholesome action and not necessarily a seed of enlightenment. The 
World-Honored One has cautioned us in detail about such a point. Not 
to understand it reflects a lack of study. Regrettably, to know as many 
as one thousand or ten thousand lifetimes is not necessarily to 
understand buddha dharma. There are those outside the way who 
remember eighty thousand eons, but do not understand buddha 
dharma. Compared with such capacities, this fox who could recall five 
hundred lifetimes is not significant. 

The most serious mistake made by those who study Zen in China is 
to believe that a person who practices completely does not fall into 
cause and effect. What a pity! There have been an increasing number 
of those who deny cause and effect, even though they witness the 
Tathagata’s true dharma being transmitted from ancestor to ancestor. 
So, those who study the way should urgently clarify this teaching. The 
point of Baizhang’s words Do not ignore cause and effect is that we 
should not be ignorant of causation. 

Thus, the significance of practicing cause and realizing effect is 
clear. This is the way of buddhas and ancestors. Those who themselves 
have not yet clarified buddha dharma should not superficially explain 
it to humans and devas. 

true teachers should abandon mistaken views which deny causation. 
Have faith in and pay respect to the compassionate teaching of 
Ancestor Nagarjuna. 

become free from a wild fox’s body, but it does not say whether he 
was then born in the world of humans, devas, or elsewhere. This 
makes people wonder. If the old man is reborn in a wholesome realm, 
free from a wild fox’s body, it must be the realm of either devas or 
humans. Otherwise, he would be reborn in one of the four 
unwholesome realms. There is no shortage of locations for rebirth. But 
those outside the buddha way mistakenly believe that sentient beings 
return to the ocean of permanence or to the great self after death. 

this story. Not one of them understands the saying a person of complete 
practice does not fall into cause and effect as a denial of causation. What 
a pity! Such people waste their lives by not clarifying cause and effect. 
In studying buddha dharma you should first understand causation. By 
denying causation, you generate outrageously crooked views and cut 
off wholesome roots. 

91 

Monk OF THE Fourrs- Sracz Meorrarion 

Nacarsuna, THE FOURTEENTH Ancestor, said [in the Treatise on 
Realization of Great Wisdom]: 

There was a monk among the Buddha’s disciples who experienced 
the fourth stage of meditation, grew arrogant, and said that he 
had attained the fourth fruit. 

Prior to that, upon experiencing the first stage of meditation, he 
said he had attained the fruit of entering the stream. Upon 
experiencing the second stage, he said he had attained the fruit of 
returning once. Upon experiencing the third stage, he said he had 
attained the fruit of no return. And, upon experiencing the fourth 
stage, he said he had attained the fruit of being an arhat. 
Believing this, he became proud and stopped practicing further. 

When his life was about to end, the monk saw an image of the 
realm intermediate to the next life, formed a mistaken view, and 
said, “There is no such thing as nirvana [with no more rebirth]. 
The Buddha has deceived me.” Because of this mistaken view, the 
image of the intermediary realm disappeared and an image of the 
realm intermediate to Avichi Hell appeared. When he died, he 
was reborn in Avichi Hell. 

His fellow monks asked the Buddha, “Where was that monk of 
solitary practice born after his life ended?” 

The Buddha said, “He was born in Avichi Hell.” 

The monks were surprised: “How could this happen to someone 
who practiced meditation and kept the precepts?” 

The Buddha answered, “This happened because he grew 
arrogant. Upon experiencing the fourth stage of meditation, he 
said he had attained the fourth fruit. At the end of his life, he saw 
an image of the intermediary realm, formed a mistaken view, and 
thought, ‘There is no nirvana. I am an arhat, but I am about to 
move on to another life. The Buddha has given a false teaching.’ 
Then, he saw an image of the realm intermediate to Avichi Hell, 
and he fell into Avichi Hell.” 

Then the Buddha spoke in verse: 

Learning extensively, keeping the precepts, 

and practicing meditation are not yet being free of delusion. 
They all have merit, 

but it is hard to have trust in them. 

Falling into hell is due to slandering the Buddha 

and has nothing to do with the fourth stage of meditation. 

This monk is called the Monk of the Fourth-Stage Meditation or the 
Monk of No-Learning. One is cautioned not to confuse the experience 
of the fourth stage of meditation with attaining the fourth fruit, and 
not to slander the Buddha. All humans and devas in the great 
assembly know this. From the time when the Buddha was alive to this 
day, in western and eastern lands, one is cautioned not to be attached 
to what is not correct as correct. This is ridiculed as mistaking the 
fourth stage of meditation for the fourth fruit. 

monk’s way, Upagupta magically made robbers and five hundred 
traders appear. The robbers attacked and slaughtered the traders. 
The monk was frightened by the scene and said to himself, “I am 
not an arhat. I have merely experienced the third fruit.” 

After the monk left the traders, he saw one of their daughters. 
She said to him, “Please, reverend, take me with you.” 

The monk said, “The Buddha wouldn’t allow me to travel with 
a woman.” 

The woman said, “I will follow you and keep you in sight.” 

The monk pitied her and let her follow him. Upagupta then 
made a wide river appear. The woman said, “Reverend, would 
you please cross the river with me?” 

So the monk went into the river downstream and the woman 
went in upstream. She fell into the water and cried, “Reverend, 
please help me.” 

The monk took her hand and pulled her out. As he thought of 
her delicate body, his carnal desire was aroused. As a result, he 
realized that he hadn’t attained the third fruit of no return. He 
was extremely attracted to the woman, led her to a secluded 
place, and was about to make love to her when the monk realized 
that it was his own master [creating an illusion]. Fully ashamed, 
he stood up quickly and made many bows. 

Upagupta said to him, “You thought you were an arhat. How 
come you are doing such an awful thing?” 

Upagupta took the monk to the assembly, made him repent, 
expounded essential dharma, and caused him to be an arhat. 

Although this monk had a self-generated mistaken view, he was 
frightened by the scene of slaughter and realized that he was not an 
arhat. But he thought he had experienced the third fruit. Later he 
thought of the delicate body of the woman, aroused carnal desire, and 
realized that he had not experienced the fruit of no return. He did not 
arouse the thought of slandering the Buddha, did not intend to slander 
the dharma, and did not have the thought of going against the sacred 
teaching. He was not the same as the Monk of the Fourth-Stage 
Meditation. Rather, because of the power of having studied the sacred 
teaching, he realized that he was not an arhat and had not 
experienced the fruit of no return. 

Nowadays, because those of no learning do not know what arhats 
and buddhas are, they do not realize that they are not arhats or 
buddhas; they groundlessly think and say that they are buddhas. This 
is a great mistake. It is a deep offense. Those who study the way 
should first learn what buddhas are. 

An ancient teacher [Zhanran] said, “Those of you who study the 

sacred teaching should know what comes next. Even if you try to skip 
stages, you would come to know the truth.” 

How true this ancient teacher’s words are! Even if you have a 
mistaken view about the next birth, you will not deceive yourself or 
be deceived by others if you study buddha dharma even a little bit. 

have repented for his mistake and realized that it was not the fourth 
fruit. How could he have thought that the Buddha had deceived him 
and formed a notion that nirvana did not actually exist? This is the 
fault of not learning and the fault of slandering the Buddha. In effect, 
an image of the realm intermediate to Avichi Hell appeared, and he 
fell into Avichi Hell after his death. 

How can even a sage of the fourth fruit be equal to the Tathagata? 
Shariputra was a sage of the fourth fruit for a long time. If you 
assemble all the wisdom that is found in the billion worlds, except for 
that of the Tathagata, make it one portion, and compare it with one- 
sixteenth of Shariputra’s wisdom, the former does not come close to 
the latter. However, when Shariputra heard the Tathagata expound 
the dharma that had never been spoken, he did not think that the 
Tathagata’s teaching was different from past and future buddhas’ 
teachings, and that the Tathagata was deceiving him. Even the demon 
king praised the Tathagata’s teaching by saying that such a teaching 
did not exist in the demon world. The Tathagata awakened the old 
man Shrivaddhi, but Shariputra did not awaken Shrivaddhi. 

The enormous difference between the fourth fruit and the buddha 
fruit is like this. Even if Shariputra and other disciples like him 
[shravakas who have attained the four fruits] were to fill the world of 
the ten directions, none of them could measure the Buddha’s wisdom. 

Indeed, when he was alive, even those who had left the household and 
received the precepts but did not listen to his teachings could not 
escape having self-generated views. Then, in the last five hundred 
years of the three periods [of five hundred years each] after the pari- 
nirvana of the Tathagata, in a remote and lowly land, aren’t there 
mistakes? Those who have entered the fourth stage of meditation are 
like this. Even more so, those who sink vainly in their greed for name 
and love of benefit, and those who enjoy official positions and worldly 
paths without having entered the fourth stage of meditation, are not 
worth mentioning. 

human nature? There are the words “seeing through human nature” in 
the Sixth Ancestor’s Platform Sutra. It is an apocryphal text and not a 
text by someone who was entrusted with the dharma treasury. “Seeing 
through human nature” are not words by Huineng. This is not a text 
to be depended upon by descendants of buddha ancestors. Because 
Zhengshou and Zhiyuan did not know about even one part of buddha 
dharma, they believed in the wrong view of one bowl with three legs. 

If we follow this explanation, it is even clearer that buddha dharma 
is different from the teachings of Confucius and Laozi. [This 
apocryphal sutra says that] Confucius and Laozi are regarded as 
bodhisattvas. However, bodhisattvas’ achievements are not the same 
as the buddha fruit. 

The practice of softening the light [of wisdom, becoming close to 
sentient beings] and emerging as regional sages is only done by 
buddhas and bodhisattvas of the past, present, and future. This cannot 
be done by ordinary people in the dusty world. How can ordinary 
people who participate in worldly activities have the power to 
transform themselves into regional sages? 

Confucius and Laozi did not talk about [buddhas and bodhisattvas] 
transforming into regional sages. Furthermore, they did not know 
about earlier causes [from past lives] and their effects in this lifetime. 
They merely made loyalty to the lord and governing the family 
essentials of their teachings. They never talk about the future life. 
They must be part of the group of people who believe in views of 
annihilation. The one [Zhanran] who excluded Zhuangzi and Laozi 
and said that they did not know the Hinayana, and even further the 
Mahayana, is a clear master of the ancient time. 

Those who advocate the accord of the Three Teachings are Zhiyuan, 
Zhengshou, and ignorant ordinary people of the later times of decline. 
With what brilliance do they put down an earlier master of ancient 
times and groundlessly say that buddha dharma is equal to the 
teachings of Confucius and Laozi? Their view is short of covering the 
buddha dharma. They should wear a traveling basket on their 
shoulders and look for masters of clear understanding. Zhiyuan and 
Zhengshou knew neither Hinayana nor Mahayana teachings. It is more 
ignorant than experiencing the fourth stage of meditation and 
regarding it as the fourth fruit. How deplorable that there are so many 
little demons when the wind of decline blows! 

worldly teachings. The teachings by the Three Kings and the Five 
Emperors do not come close to that of a wheel-turning king, and 
should not be compared with words by Brahma and Indra. Their 
realms and the effects of their past actions are far inferior to those of 
Brahma and Indra. Therefore, wheel-turning kings, Brahma, and Indra 
do not come close to a monk who has left the household and received 
the precepts. How can they be equal to the Tathagata? 

Books by Confucius and Lord Zhou cannot get close to the Eighteen 
Large Brahmanist Texts of India, and, in particular, cannot be 
compared with the Four Vedic Scriptures among them. However, 
Brahmanism in India is not the same as the Buddha’s teaching; it does 
not even equal the Hinayana, which is the teaching for shravakas. 
What a pity that in the remote, small country of China there is a 
mistaken view called the accord of the Three Teachings! 

Someone said: 

Because buddha tathagatas broadly realize the world of 
phenomena, the realm of a minute particle is all that is realized 
by buddhas. Thus, both effects [of actions]—the subject and its 
environs—are what is realized by tathagatas. In this way, 
mountains, rivers, the great earth, the sun, the moon, and the 
stars, as well as the three poisons and four confusions are all that 
is realized by tathagatas. To see mountains and rivers is to see 
tathagatas. The three poisons and four confusions cannot escape 
being buddha dharma. Seeing a minute particle is the same as 
seeing the world of phenomena. Even a casual, temporary 
experience is unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. This is 
called great emancipation, directly pointing to the ancestral way 
transmitted from person to person. 

There are numberless people, both officials and commoners, who 
speak in this way in Great Song China. However, it is not clear whose 
descendants they are. Altogether, they don’t know the way of buddha 
ancestors. Even if mountains, rivers, and the great earth are what is 
realized by buddhas, it is not the view of mountains, rivers, and the 
great earth of ordinary people. Those who speak in this way have not 
studied and learned what is realized by buddhas. 

They say that seeing a minute particle is the same as seeing the 
world of phenomena. It is like saying that the subjects of a king are 
equal to the king. Why, then, don’t they say that seeing the world of 
phenomena is equal to seeing a minute particle? If you would regard 
the view of these people as the great way of buddha ancestors, 
buddhas and ancestors would not have emerged in this world, and 
sentient beings would not be able to attain the way. Even if they 
might have experienced birth as beyond birth, their view would not 
be correct. 

like the central country of India. 

the same as the teachings of Confucius and Laozi is a heavier crime 
than slandering the Buddha throughout one’s lifetime. You, students, 
should quickly throw away such a mistaken view. In the end, those 
who maintain this view without giving it up will fall into an 
unwholesome realm. 

You, students, should clearly know that Confucius and Laozi did not 
know the teaching of the past, present, and future. They did not know 
the principle of cause and effect. They did not know about the 
peaceful establishment of One Continent. Then, how can they know 
about the peaceful establishment of the Four Continents? They did not 
know about the six heavens of the desire realm; then how could they 
know about the three realms and the nine grounds? They do not know 
about the thousand worlds; how can they see and know about the 
million worlds or the billion worlds? 

A subject of a king cannot be compared with the Tathagata, who is 
the king of the billion worlds. The Tathagata is the one who is 
honored and served day and night by Brahma, Indra, wheel-turning 
kings, and others, and is requested by them to expound dharma. 
Confucius and Laozi did not have such virtue; they were ordinary 
people who floated around [in birth and death] and did not know the 
path of leaving the world and becoming emancipated. Then, how 
could they thoroughly experience the reality of all things? If they 
hadn’t thoroughly experienced it, how could they be equal to the 
World-Honored One? As Confucius and Laozi lacked the inner virtue 
and outer facility, they did not come close to the World-Honored One. 
How could people express the wrong view of the accord of the Three 
Teachings? 

Confucius and Laozi did not understand the world’s boundary and 
beyond boundary. They did not know and see what is broad and what 
is vast, and did not see an extremely minute form and know the length 
of a split second. On the other hand, the World-Honored One clearly 
saw an extremely minute form and knew the length of a split second. 
Thus, how can we regard him as equal to Confucius and Laozi? 
Confucius, Laozi, Zhuangzi, and Huizi are mere ordinary people. They 
cannot even come close to stream enterers of the Lesser Vehicles. 
How, then, can they come close to those who have attained the second 
or the third fruit, or to arhats who have attained the fourth fruit? 

Nevertheless, some students are ignorant enough to regard them as 
equal to buddhas. It is delusion on top of delusion. Not only do 
Confucius and Laozi not know the past, present, and future, as well as 
multiple eons, they also do not know a single thought and a single 
mind. They cannot be compared with the sun, the moon, or the sky. 
They cannot come close to the Four Great Deva Kings or all devas. To 
compare them with the World-Honored One is to confuse those in and 

beyond the worldly realm. 

effects of their actions and fall into hell in their next lifetime. Even if 
Laozi talked groundlessly about the void, those who harm their 
parents cannot help receiving these effects in their next lifetime. 

[According to Zhanran:] 

When the Tathagata was alive in this world, there was a man 
outside the way called Debate Power [Vivadabala]. Since he 
thought of himself as having an unmatchable capacity in debate, 
he called himself Debate Power. Having received a donation from 
five hundred members of the Vaishali Clan, he selected five 
hundred difficult questions with which to challenge the World- 
Honored One. He went to see the World-Honored One and asked, 
“Is the unsurpassable way one or many?” 

The World-Honored One said, “The unsurpassable way is one.” 

Debate Power said, “Each of our teachers speaks of the 
unsurpassable way. Those outside the way all regard their own 
teachings as correct and put down others’. In this manner they 
speak of right and wrong. Thus, there are many ways.” 

By that time the World-Honored One had taught Migasisa and 
helped him to realize the fruit of no more learning. Migasisa was 
standing near the Buddha. Buddha asked Debate Power, “Among 
the many ways, who is the most advanced?” 

Debate Power said, “Migasisa is.” 

The Buddha said, “If Migasisa is the most advanced, how come 
he gave up his own way, became my disciple, and entered into 
my way?” 

Debate Power understood, was fully ashamed, made bows, took 
refuge, and entered the way. 

Then, the Buddha expounded the principle with a verse: 

All are attached to their own teachings, 
calling theirs unsurpassable, 

claiming they are right and others are wrong. 
But none of their teachings are unsurpassable. 
They go into debate 

trying to clarify the meaning of nirvana, 
speaking of right and wrong, 

while agonizing in competition. 

The winners fall into the pit of pride 

and the losers fall into the hell of agony. 

So, wise ones are not stuck 

to either side. 

Debate Power, you should know 

the teaching for my disciples 

is neither false nor true; 

which do you seek? 

If you want to destroy my discourse 

there is no way to do it, 
and no wisdom can clarify it; 
you will end up destroying yourself. 

The golden words of the World-Honored One are like this. Ignorant 
sentient beings in China should not go against the Buddha’s teaching 
and say that there are ways that are equal to buddha dharma. That 
would be slandering the Buddha and slandering the dharma. India’s 
Migasisa, Vivadabala (Debate Power), or Brahman Dirghanakha, or 
Brahman Shrenika were people of extensive studies. There has not 
been anyone like that in China. Confucius and Laozi cannot be 
compared with them. 

These Brahmans all gave up their own paths and took refuge in the 
buddha way. Even those who listen to the comparison between 
buddha dharma and common people like Confucius and Laozi will be 
at fault. Furthermore, even arhats and pratyeka-buddhas will be 
bodhisattvas in the end, and none of them will remain in the Lesser 
Vehicles. How can you regard Confucius and Laozi, who have not yet 
entered the buddha way, as equal to buddhas? This is a greatly 
crooked view. 

The fact that the Tathagata, the World-Honored One, is far beyond 
all beings, has been known and honored by buddha tathagatas, great 
bodhisattvas, Brahma, and Indra. This has been known by the twenty- 
eight ancestors in India and the six early ancestors in China. All those 
who have the ability to study know this. Those who are born in this 
later time should not accept the insane theory of the accord of the 
Three Teachings advocated by ignorant people of the Song Dynasty, 
which is the result of a lack of study. 

Copied from a draft [by Dogen] during the practice period of the 
seventh year of the Kencho Era [1255]. Ejo. 

92 

Ony A Buppua AND A Buppua 

Buopua DHARMA CANNOT be known by a person. For this reason, since 

olden times no ordinary person has realized buddha dharma; no 
practitioner of the Lesser Vehicles has mastered buddha dharma. 
Because it is realized by buddhas alone, it is said [in the Lotus Sutra], 
“Only a buddha and a buddha can thoroughly master it.” 

When you realize buddha dharma, you do not think, “This is 
realization just as I expected.” Even if you think so, realization 
inevitably differs from your expectation. Realization is not like your 
conception of it. Accordingly, realization cannot take place as 
previously conceived. When you realize buddha dharma, you do not 
consider how realization came about. Reflect on this: what you think 
one way or another before realization is not a help for realization. 

Although realization is not like any of the thoughts preceding it, this 
is not because such thoughts were actually bad and could not be 
realization. Past thoughts in themselves were already realization. But 
since you were seeking elsewhere, you thought and said that thoughts 
cannot be realization. 

However, it is worth noticing that what you think one way or 
another is not a help for realization. For this reason, you become 
cautious not to be small-minded. Indeed, if realization came forth by 
the power of your prior thoughts, it would not be trustworthy. 

Realization does not depend on thoughts, but comes forth far 
beyond them; realization is helped only by the power of realization 
itself. Know that then there is no delusion, and there is no realization. 

When you have unsurpassed wisdom, you are called a buddha. 
When a buddha has unsurpassed wisdom, it is called unsurpassed 
wisdom. Not to know what it is like on this path is foolish. What is it 
like being undivided? To be undivided does not mean that you try 
forcefully to exclude intention or discrimination, or that you establish 
a state beyond intention. Being undivided cannot be intended or 
discriminated at all. 

Being undivided is like meeting a person and not considering what 
the person looks like. Also, it is like not wishing for more color or 
brightness when viewing flowers or the moon. 

Spring has the feeling of spring, and autumn has the look of 
autumn; there is no escaping it. So when you want spring or autumn 
to be different from what it is, notice that it can only be as it is. Or, 
when you want to keep spring or autumn as it is, reflect that it has no 
unchanging nature. 

That which is accumulated is without self, and no mental activity 
has self. The reason is that not one of the four great elements or the 
five skandhas can be understood as self or identified as self. Therefore, 
the form of the flowers or the moon in your mind should not be 
understood as being self, even though you may think it is self. Still, 
when you clarify that there is nothing to be disliked or longed for, 
then the original face is revealed by your practice of the way. 

buddha body. In the midst of awakening sentient beings, do not 
pursue manifestation. Seeing manifestation, do not doubt awakening. 

Understand that in the midst of awakening sentient beings, the 
buddha dharma is totally experienced. Explain it and actualize it this 
way. Know that it is the same with manifestation and having the 
buddha body. 

This is so because a buddha manifests a buddha body and awakens 
sentient beings. This principle is clarified from the morning of 
attaining the way until the evening of pari-nirvana; it is expounded 
freely, without words getting in the way. 

mistaken to say that this eye is one of many eyes of a buddha, just as 
it is not mistaken to understand that a buddha has only one eye. A 
buddha, indeed, has many kinds of eyes—three eyes, one thousand 
eyes, or eighty-four thousand eyes. Do not be surprised to hear that 
there are eyes such as these. 

Also, learn that the entire earth is itself the dharma body. 

To seek to know the self is always the wish of living beings. 
However, those who see the true self are rare. Only buddhas know the 
true self. People outside the way regard what is not the self as the self. 
On the other hand, what buddhas call the self is the entire earth. 
Thus, there is never an entire earth that is not the self, with or without 
our knowing it. On this matter, refer to the words of the ancient 
buddhas. 

buddha teaches that your birth is not separate from mountains, rivers, 
and earth. 

Again, all buddhas of the past, present, and future have already 
practiced, attained the way, and completed realization. How should 
we understand that those buddhas are practicing together with us? 
First of all, examine a buddha’s practice. A buddha’s practice is to 
practice in the same manner as the entire earth and all beings. If it is 
not practice with all beings, it is not a buddha’s practice. This being 
so, from the moment of arousing the aspiration for enlightenment to 
the moment of attaining enlightenment, all buddhas realize and 
practice the way together with the entire earth and all beings. 

You may have doubts about this. But the ancient buddha’s word was 
expounded in order to clarify your confused thinking. Do not think 
that buddhas are other than you. According to this teaching, when all 
buddhas of the past, present, and future arouse the aspiration for 
enlightenment and practice, they never exclude our body-and-mind. 
Understand this. To doubt this is to slander buddhas of the past, 
present, and future. 

When we reflect quietly, it appears that our body-and-mind has 
practiced together with all buddhas of the past, present, and future, 
and has aroused the aspiration for enlightenment together with them. 
When we reflect on the past and future of our body-and-mind, we 
cannot find the boundary of self or others. With what delusion do we 
believe our body-and-mind is apart from all buddhas of the past, 
present, and future? Such delusion is groundless. How, then, can 
delusion hinder the arousing of the aspiration for enlightenment and 
practice of the way by all buddhas of the past, present, and future? 
Thus, understand that the way is not a matter of your knowing or not 
knowing. 

However, when you do not understand, the pervasive voice of 
dharma does not reach your ears; in the midst of the voice your ears 
remain idle. But when you understand, the voice has already reached 
your ears; samadhi has emerged. 

Do not think that understanding is small and that beyond 
understanding is large. 

Know that beyond understanding cannot be discerned by a self; the 
dharma king’s understanding is just like this. 

In the dharma king’s body the eye is just like the body, and the 
mind is the same as the body. There is not the slightest gap between 
mind and body; everything is fully revealed. Similarly, understand 
that in illumination and discourse the dharma king’s body is revealed. 

buddhas’ trace. Accomplishing this is buddha dharma. 

93 
Birr AND Dearn 

As A BUDDHA is in birth and death, there is no birth and death.” It is 

also said, “As a buddha is not in birth and death, a buddha is not 
deluded by birth and death.” 

These statements are the essence of the words of the two Zen 
masters Keqin [Jiashan] and Dingshan. Never neglect them, as they 
are the words of those who attained the way. 

Those who want to become free from birth and death should 
understand the meaning of these words. If you search for a buddha 
outside of birth and death, it will be like trying to go to the southern 
country of Yue with your spear heading toward the north, or like 
trying to see the Big Dipper while you are facing south; you will cause 
yourself to remain all the more in birth and death, and miss the way 
of emancipation. 

Just understand that birth-and-death is itself nirvana. There is 
nothing such as birth and death to be avoided; there is nothing such 
as nirvana to be sought. Only when you realize this are you free from 
birth and death. 

mere form of a buddha. Only when you don’t avoid birth-and-death or 
long for it do you enter a buddha’s mind. 

However, do not analyze or speak about it. Just set aside your body 
and mind, forget about them, and throw them into the house of the 
buddha; then all is done by the buddha. When you follow this, you are 
free from birth and death, and become a buddha without effort or 
scheme. Who, then, remains in the mind? 

There is a simple way to become a buddha: When you refrain from 
unwholesome actions, are not attached to birth and death, and are 
compassionate toward all sentient beings, respectful to seniors and 
kind to juniors, not excluding or desiring anything, with no thoughts 
or worries, you will be called a buddha. Seek nothing else. 

94 
Heart OF THE Way 

In SEEKING THE buddha way, make the heart of the way primary. Those 

who know how the heart of the way should be are rare. Inquire of 
those who clearly know it. 

There are those in the world who have a heart of the way but in fact 
lack the true heart of the way. There are also those who have a true 
heart of the way but are not known by others. Thus, it is hard to know 
whether one does or does not have the heart of the way. 

Above all, do not listen to and trust those who are unwholesome. 
Also, do not make your desire primary, but make the dharma 
expounded by the Buddha primary. Keep well in mind, day and night, 
how the heart of the way ought to be. Wish and pray by all means to 
realize genuine enlightenment in this world. 

In this declining world, there is a general lack of those who have 
the true heart of the way. However, for the time being, keep your 
mind on impermanence; do not forget that this world is transient and 
that human life is precarious. But do not be preoccupied with 
reflecting on the impermanence of the world. Determine to regard the 
dharma as weighty, and your body and life as lightly weighted. For 
the sake of dharma, do not withhold any part of your body and life. 

Then, deeply respect the three treasures—buddha, dharma, and 
sangha. Vow to respect and dedicate yourself to the three treasures 
even if your life or body changes. Asleep or awake, think of the merit 
of the three treasures. Asleep or awake, chant the three treasures. 

Sangha.” 

After passing through the intermediary realm, when you approach 
your parents to be conceived, resolve to maintain authentic wisdom. 
Keep chanting refuge in the three treasures in your mother’s womb. 
Do not neglect chanting while you are being born. Resolve deeply to 
dedicate yourself to chant and take refuge in the three treasures 
through the six sense roots. 

When your life ends, your eyesight will suddenly become dark. 
Know that this is the end of your life, and be determined to chant, “I 
take refuge in the Buddha.” Then, all buddhas in the ten directions 
will show compassion to you. Even if, due to conditions, you are 
bound to an unwholesome realm, you will be able to be born in the 
deva realm or in the presence of the Buddha. Bow and listen to the 
Buddha. 

After darkness arises in your eyes, continue to chant refuge in the 
three treasures until you enter the intermediary realm and further. 

95 

Recenwine THE Precepts 

Tue GUIDELINES FOR Zen Monasteries says: 

It is said that all buddhas in the past, present, and future have left 
the household and accomplished the way. The twenty-eight 
ancestors of India and the six early ancestors of China who 
transmitted the seal of buddha mind were all monks. Their strict 
observance of the precepts made them excellent models in the 
three realms. Thus, in practicing Zen in pursuit of the way, 
observing the precepts is a prerequisite. If you do not refrain from 
making mistakes and avoid taking wrong actions, how can you 
become a buddha, become an ancestor? 

To receive the precepts, you should first prepare bowls and 
clean, new robes. If you cannot get new robes, you should have 
freshly washed and purified robes. Do not borrow someone else’s 
bowls for receiving the precepts at the platform [site of 
ceremony]. Be single-minded, unconcerned with other matters. 
Taking the form of the Buddha, embodying the precepts of the 
Buddha, and maintaining the receptive samadhi of the Buddha 
are no small matter. How can you take it lightly? 

If you were to borrow someone else’s robes and bowls, you 
would not actually receive the precepts you are given at the 
platform. Without receiving them, you would be a person of no 
precepts all your life who has mistakenly entered the gate of 
emptiness and falsely received gifts from faithful donors. 

When you enter the way as a beginner, you may not fully 
remember the guidelines and precepts. If the teacher does not 
caution the student, the student may fall into a mistake. This is 
my advice. Please keep this in mind. 

After receiving the bhikshu precepts, receive the bodhisattva 
precepts. This is the beginning of entering the way. 

In the western and eastern lands where buddha ancestors have 
transmitted dharma, entering dharma is always receiving the precepts. 
Without receiving the precepts, one is not a disciple of buddhas, not a 

descendant of ancestors. “Refrain from unwholesome action” is no 
other than practicing Zen in pursuit of the way. The words observing 
the precepts is a pre-requisite are indeed the treasury of the true dharma 
eye. 

Because becoming a buddha and becoming an ancestor is no other 
than transmission of the treasury of the true dharma eye, ancestors 
who authentically transmit the treasury of the true dharma eye always 
receive and maintain the buddha precepts. There can be no buddha 
ancestors who do not. Whether they practice with the Tathagata or 
with his disciples, they receive and maintain the buddha precepts. 
This is receiving the life vein. 

The buddha precepts authentically transmitted up to today from 
buddha to buddha, from ancestor to ancestor, were originally 
transmitted to China by Bodhidharma, the First Ancestor of Mount 
Song, and reached Huineng, the High Ancestor of Caodong, through 
five transmissions. The authentic transmission through Qingyuan and 
Nanyue is still being maintained, but there are some ignorant elders 
who are not aware of it. This should be most pitied. 

Receive the bodhisattva precepts. This is the beginning of entering the 
way. Those who practice the way should know about this. The 
procedure of receiving the bodhisattva precepts is invariably 
transmitted to those who study in the inner chamber of buddha 
ancestors. This is not received by those who are coarse and negligent. 

I take refuge in the Sangha. 

I take refuge in the Buddha as the most venerable one among 
two-legged beings. 

I take refuge in the Dharma as the most venerable teaching that 
frees me from clinging. 

I take refuge in the Sangha as the most venerable of all 
assemblies. 

I have taken refuge in the Buddha. 
I have taken refuge in the Dharma. 
I have taken refuge in the Sangha. 

The Tathagatha with true, unsurpassable enlightenment is my 
great teacher. I have now taken refuge in him. I will not take 
refuge in evil spirits or those outside the way. 

May you be compassionate. 
May you be compassionate. 

[The officiate says:] 

Good person. You have given up incorrect views and taken refuge 
in the true teaching. The precepts surround you. 
Now, take the three universal pure precepts. 

(The officiate asks the recipient each of the following questions 
three times. The recipient affirms it each time.) 

One: The precept of observing guidelines. 
Will you maintain this precept from now until you attain a 
buddha body? 

Yes, I will maintain it. 

Two: The precept of taking wholesome actions. 

Will you maintain this precept from now until you attain a 
buddha body? 

Yes, I will maintain it. 

Three: The precept of benefiting all beings. 

Will you maintain this precept from now until you attain a 
buddha body? 

Yes, I will maintain it. 

None of these three universal pure precepts should be violated. 
Will you maintain them from now until you attain a buddha 
body? 

Yes, I will maintain them. 

Please maintain them. 

(The recipient makes three formal bows and kneels.) 
[The officiate says: ] 

Good person, you have received the three universal pure precepts. 
Now receive the ten [prohibitory] precepts. These are the great 
pure precepts of all buddhas and bodhisattvas. 

(The officiate asks the recipient each of the following questions 
three times. The recipient affirms at each time.) 

One: Not to kill. 

Will you maintain this precept from now until you attain a 
buddha body? 

Yes, I will maintain it. 

Two: Not to steal. 

Will you maintain this precept from now until you attain a 
buddha body? 

Yes, I will maintain it. 

Three: Not to misuse sex. 

Will you maintain this precept from now until you attain a 
buddha body? 

Yes, I will maintain it. 

Four: Not to make false statements. 

Will you maintain this precept from now until you attain a 

buddha body? 

Yes, I will maintain it. 

Five: Not to sell or buy alcohol. 
Will you maintain this precept from now until you attain a 
buddha body? 

Yes, I will maintain it. 

Six: Not to discuss the faults of other home-leaver bodhisattvas. 

Will you maintain this precept from now until you attain a 
buddha body? 

Yes, I will maintain it. 

Seven: Not to praise yourself and insult others. 

Will you maintain this precept from now until you attain a 
buddha body? 

Yes, I will maintain it. 

Eight: Not to withhold dharma or treasure. 

Will you maintain this precept from now until you attain a 
buddha body? 

Yes, I will maintain it. 

Nine: Not to be angry. 

Will you maintain this precept from now until you attain a 
buddha body? 

Yes, I will maintain it. 

Ten: Not to slander the three treasures. 

Will you maintain this precept from now until you attain a 
buddha body? 

Yes, I will maintain it. 

None of these ten precepts should be violated. Will you 
maintain them from now until you attain a buddha body? 

Yes, I will maintain them. 
Please maintain them. 

(The recipient makes three formal bows.) 
(The officiate makes three formal bows.) 

[The officiate says: ] 

These three refuges, three universal pure precepts, and ten 
prohibitory precepts have been maintained by all buddhas. Will 
you or will you not maintain these sixteen precepts from now 
until you attain a buddha body? 

Yes, I will maintain them. 

Please maintain them. 

(The recipient makes three formal bows.) 
The recipient sings the Sanskrit song “Living in This World,” then 
chants: 

I take refuge in the Buddha. 
I take refuge in the Dharma. 
I take refuge in the Sangha. 

(Finally the recipient leaves the practice place.) 

96 
Onz Honorep Encur Garss OF Reauzine Dauarma 

[THE Sutra of the Buddha’s Practices in Former Lives says:] 

Bodhisattva Realization Protector [a former life of Shakyamuni 
Buddha] was in Tushita Heaven at a celestial palace called High 
Banner that spread in a square sixty yojana on each side. At 
various times, the bodhisattva expounded essential dharma there. 

Once, he meditated on the place of his birth in his next life [in 
the human realm]. Then, sitting in the palace, he called to the 
devas of Tushita Heaven: 

I want all of you to assemble here because I am going to descend 
to the human realm soon. I would like to offer a teaching that is 
called “the gates of skillful means for entering all aspects of 
dharma.” This will be the last time I offer you guidance. This is 
for you to memorize. Rejoice when you hear me and learn about 
these dharma gates. 

Hearing his call, a great number of devas with all of their 
family members, including jeweled women of heaven, assembled 
together. 

Before expounding this dharma, Bodhisattva Realization 
Protector made a new palace appear and placed it on top of the 
High Banner Palace. It was high and broad, decorated with 
jewels, and it covered the entire world. Its magnificence was 
incomparable. There was nothing like it among palaces in the 
desire realm. Devas in the form realm saw that this illusory palace 
was like a kingly tomb. 

Bodhisattva Realization Protector had conducted valuable 
practices, planted wholesome roots, accomplished benevolence in 
the past, and possessed great merit. When he was seated on the 
high lion seat, innumerable treasures were spread around him in 
glory. Various celestial robes were laid out on his seat, and all 
types of wondrous scents permeated the air. Incense was burnt in 
countless incense bowls, and petals of fragrant flowers were 
sprinkled on the ground. Rare treasures surrounded the high seat, 
and hundreds, thousands, and millions of splendid rays 

illuminated the palace. 

Jeweled nets were spread above and below the palace walls. 
Golden bells hanging from them rang with exquisite sound. This 
great jeweled palace radiated innumerable kinds of radiant light. 
Thousands of banners and canopies reflecting hues of wondrous 
colors covered the palace, which was adorned with all types of 
swinging tassels. 

Each of the hundreds, thousands, and millions of celestial 
women held seven types of treasures, played tunes, and sang their 
admiration of the boundless merit of the bodhisattva’s practice in 
the past. Hundreds, thousands, and millions of the four types of 
protectors of the world stood on the right and left sides, guarding 
the palace. Thousands of Indras bowed to the palace, and 
thousands of Brahmas paid homage. Countless bodhisattvas 
guarded the palace, and all buddhas in the ten directions 
protected it with mindfulness. Their practices, realizations, and 
beneficial results from hundreds, thousands, and countless eons in 
the past were actualized. The causes and effects were completed, 
and their benefit increased day and night. Immeasurable merit 
was adorned in this way, which is impossible to explain. 

The bodhisattva sat on the high lion seat of great splendor and 
said to all the devas: 

Now, Devas, those of you bodhisattva mahasattvas who abide in 
Tushita Heaven and are about to be born in the human realm 
should expound to other devas the one hundred eight gates of 
realizing dharma. You should leave this teaching for them, let 
them memorize it, and then make your descent. 

Now, Devas, listen and accept the truth wholeheartedly. I am 
going to explain it: 

What are the one hundred eight gates of realizing dharmas? 

Right trust is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps determined 
aspiration from breaking. Pure heart is a gate of realizing dharma; 
it is not defiled. Rejoicing is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps 
the mind calm and at ease. Love of enjoyment is a gate of 
realizing dharma; it keeps the heart pure. 

Right practice of the body is a gate of realizing dharma, for the 
three actions [of body, speech, and thought] are kept pure. Pure 
practice of speech is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps us from 
the four types of unwholesomeness. Pure practice of mind is a 
gate of realizing dharma; it keeps the mind from the three types 
of poison. 

Mindfulness of the Buddha is a gate of realizing dharma; it 
visualizes the buddha in purity. Mindfulness of dharma is a gate 

of realizing dharma; it visualizes dharma in purity. Mindfulness of 
sangha is a gate of realizing dharma; it makes attaining the way 
sustained. 

Mindfulness of giving is a gate of realizing dharma; it makes 
you free from wanting a reward. Mindfulness of the precepts is a 
gate of realizing dharma; it fully contains all vows. Mindfulness of 
heaven is a gate of realizing dharma; it arouses vast aspiration. 

Compassion is a gate of realizing dharma; it encompasses 
wholesome roots in all realms of birth. Grieving is a gate of 
realizing dharma; it keeps you from harming sentient beings. Joy 
is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps you from all joyless 
matters. Letting go is a gate of realizing dharma; it frees you from 
the five types of desire. 

Visualizing impermanence is a gate of realizing dharma; it 
illustrates the desires of the three realms. Visualizing suffering is 
a gate of realizing dharma; it frees you from all wishes. 
Visualizing no-self is a gate of realizing dharma; it frees you from 
the self. Visualizing serene samadhi is a gate of realizing dharma; 
it keeps your heart and mind from being stirred. 

Repentance is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps your inner 
mind in serene samadhi. Shame is a gate of realizing dharma; it 
destroys outer unwholesomeness. Realness is a gate of realizing 
dharma; it does not deceive devas and humans. Truthfulness is a 
gate of realizing dharma; it does not deceive you. Practice of 
dharma is a gate of realizing dharma; it engages the practice of 
dharma. Taking refuge in the three [treasures] is a gate of 
realizing dharma; it purifies the three unwholesome paths. 

Knowing another person’s kindness is a gate of realizing 
dharma; it keeps the wholesome roots from being abandoned. 
Repaying another person’s kindness is a gate of realizing dharma; 
it does not ignore the debt. Not deceiving yourself is a gate of 
realizing dharma; it does not allow you to praise yourself. 

Helping sentient beings is a gate of realizing dharma; it does 
not allow you to slander others. Helping dharma is a gate of 
realizing dharma; it lets you practice in accordance with dharma. 
Being aware of time is a gate of realizing dharma; it does not 
allow you to speak lightly. Being patient is a gate of realizing 
dharma; it fulfills wisdom. Not arousing unwholesome intention is 
a gate of realizing dharma; it protects the self and others. Not 
being hindered is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps your mind 
free from doubt. Understanding with trust is a gate of realizing 
dharma; it clarifies the matter of primary significance. 

Visualizing impurity is a gate of realizing dharma; it abandons 
the desire for defilement. Not fighting is a gate of realizing 

dharma; it keeps you from anger and argument. Not being 
ignorant is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps you from killing. 

Enjoying the meaning of dharma is a gate of realizing dharma; 
it seeks the meaning of dharma. Love of realizing dharma is a 
gate of realizing dharma; it leads to realizing dharma. Seeking 
extensive learning is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to right 
awakening to aspects of dharma. Right skillful means is a gate of 
realizing dharma; it embodies right action. Knowing names and 
forms is a gate of realizing dharma; it removes various 
hindrances. 

Removing the views of causes is a gate of realizing dharma; it 
leads to emancipation. The intention not to resent those close to 
you is a gate of realizing dharma; it creates the heart of oneness 
in the midst of resenting those who are close. Subtle skillful 
means is a gate of realizing dharma; it knows all forms of 
suffering. A great sense of equality is a gate of realizing dharma; 
it leads to freedom from all things that are composed. Entering is 
a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to the practice of the right 
path. Not having to arouse patience is a gate of realizing dharma; 
it realizes the truth of eliminating [causes of suffering]. 

The ground of mindfulness of the body is a gate of realizing 
dharma; it leads all things to serenity. The ground of mindfulness 
of perception is a gate of realizing dharma; it frees all 
perceptions. The ground of mindfulness of the mind is a gate of 
realizing dharma; it sees the mind as not different from a 
phantom. The ground of mindfulness of dharma is a gate of 
realizing dharma; it leads to wisdom with no obscuration. 

The four types of right effort are a gate of realizing dharma; 
they prevent all unwholesome actions and lead to wholesome 
actions. The four types of fulfillment are a gate of realizing 
dharma; they lead to lightness of body and mind. 

The root of trust is a gate of realizing dharma; it does not 
follow others’ words. The root of effort is a gate of realizing 
dharma; it attains various types of wisdom. The root of 
mindfulness is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to various 
wholesome actions. The root of samadhi is a gate of realizing 
dharma; it keeps the mind pure. The root of wisdom is a gate of 
realizing dharma; it sees all things as they are. 

The ability to trust is a gate of realizing dharma; it excels all 
demonic power. The ability to make effort is a gate of realizing 
dharma; it is not remitting. The ability of mindfulness is a gate of 
realizing dharma; it does not blindly go along with others. The 
ability of samadhi is a gate of realizing dharma; it becomes free 
from all thoughts. The ability of wisdom is a gate of realizing 

dharma; it goes beyond dualism. 

Branches of mindfulness are a gate of realizing dharma; they 
are like wisdom about all things. Branches of awakening with 
dharma are a gate of realizing dharma; they illuminate all things. 
Branches of making effort are a gate of realizing dharma; they 
perceive well. Branches of joy are a gate of realizing dharma; they 
lead to various types of samadhi. Branches of letting go are a gate 
of realizing dharma; they discern actions. Branches of samadhi 
are a gate of realizing dharma; they know the oneness of all 
things. Branches of letting go are a gate of realizing dharma; they 
become secluded from all living things. 

Right view is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to exhaustion 
of desire and attainment of the noble path. Right thinking is a 
gate of realizing dharma; it leads to freedom from thinking and 
beyond thinking. Right speech is a gate of realizing dharma; it 
knows that all names, sounds, and phrases are mere echoes. Right 
livelihood is a gate of realizing dharma; it prevents all 
unwholesome paths. Right action is a gate of realizing dharma; it 
leads you to the other shore. Right mindfulness is a gate of 
realizing dharma; it leads to freedom from thoughts on all things. 
Right samadhi is a gate of realizing dharma; it attains undivided 
concentration. 

The aspiration for enlightenment is a gate of realizing dharma; 
it keeps the three treasures from being cut off. Dependence [on 
enlightenment] is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps you from 
desiring the Lesser Vehicles. Right trust is a gate of realizing 
dharma; it leads to attaining the most excellent dharma. 
Improvement is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads to attaining 
all wholesome roots. 

The realization of giving is a gate of realizing dharma; it leads 
to attaining a joyful appearance each moment, embellishing the 
buddha land, and freeing sentient beings from greed. The 
realization of precepts is a gate of realizing dharma; it keeps away 
the hindrance of unwholesome paths and guides sentient beings 
who have broken the precepts. The realization of patience is a 
gate of realizing dharma; it lets go of all anger, pride, flattery, 
and amusement, and guides sentient beings who are filled with 
such emotions. The realization of making effort is a gate of 
realizing dharma; it attains all wholesome things and guides lazy 
sentient beings. The realization of meditation is a gate of realizing 
dharma; it attains all types of meditation and miraculous actions, 
and guides sentient beings whose minds are scattered. The 
realization of wisdom is a gate of realizing dharma; it cuts off the 
darkness of ignorance and attachment to all views, and guides 

foolish sentient beings. 

Skillful means is a gate of realizing dharma; it manifests 
guidance in accordance with the awesome presence viewed by 
sentient beings, and accomplishes the dharma of all buddhas. The 
four methods of guidance are a gate of realizing dharma; they 
include all sentient beings, help them to be enlightened, and offer 
them dharma. Teaching sentient beings is a gate of realizing 
dharma; it does not bring unwholesome pleasure and indulgence. 
Accepting true dharma is a gate of realizing dharma; it transforms 
the delusions of sentient beings. Assembling benefaction is a gate 
of realizing dharma; it benefits sentient beings. 

Practice of meditation is a gate of realizing dharma; it fulfills 
the ten types of abilities. Serene samadhi is a gate of realizing 
dharma; it accomplishes and maintains the samadhi of the 
Tathagata. Insight of wisdom is a gate of realizing dharma; it 
accomplishes and fulfills wisdom. 

Entering unhindered understanding is a gate of realizing 
dharma; it acquires and completes the dharma eye. Entering all 
types of practice is a gate of realizing dharma; it acquires and 
completes the buddha eye. 

Accomplishing dharani is a gate of realizing dharma; it hears 
and maintains the dharma of all buddhas. Attaining unhindered 
understanding is a gate of realizing dharma; it causes all sentient 
beings to rejoice. 

Practicing patience is a gate of realizing dharma; it accords 
with the dharma of all buddhas. Attaining patience beyond birth 
is a gate of realizing dharma; it attains the prediction of 
enlightenment. 

The ground of unremitting practice is a gate of realizing 
dharma; it embodies the dharma of all past buddhas. Following 
and reaching the ground of wisdom are a gate of realizing 
dharma; it sprinkles wisdom water on the head and achieves all 
wisdom. The ground of sprinkling wisdom water on the head is a 
gate of realizing dharma; it brings forth birth, leaving the 
household, and unsurpassable, complete enlightenment. 

Thus, Bodhisattva Realization Protector finished expounding 
this dharma and said to all the devas, “Devas, these are the one 
hundred eight gates of realizing dharma, which I offer to you. 
Accept and maintain them. Always keep them in mind and do not 
forget them. 

[Dogen says: ] 

These are the one hundred eight gates of realizing dharma. It is 
customary in the buddha world that when bodhisattvas who 
taught throughout their lives in Tushita Heaven are about to 
descend to the Jambudvipa Continent [where humans abide], 
they expound this teaching to devas. 

Bodhisattva Realization Protector is the name of Shakyamuni 
Buddha when he was a bodhisattva teaching throughout his life 
in the Fourth Heaven. When Li Fuma compiled the Tiansheng 
Extensive Record of the Lamp, he added “One Hundred Eight Gates 
of Realizing Dharma” to the title of the book. 

Not many of those who study know about this teaching. Those 
who are unaware of it are as many as straws, flax, bamboo, and 
reeds. 

I am showing this teaching to beginners and latecomers. Those who 
may ascend to the lion seat and become teachers of humans and devas 
should study this thoroughly. Those who do not teach throughout 
their lives in Tushita Heaven [before descending to the human realm] 
are not buddhas. Practitioners, do not be proud of yourselves. The 
bodhisattvas who teach throughout their lives do not have 
intermediary realms [before rebirth into the human realm]. 

AFTERWORD 

APPENDIX 1 
Recommending Zazen to All People 

Dogen 

foot, and the left hand on the right hand, with the tips of the thumbs 
lightly touching each other. 

Sit straight up without leaning to the right or left and without 
bending forward or backward. The ears should be in line with the 
shoulders and the nose in line with the navel. Rest the tongue against 
the roof of the mouth, with lips and teeth closed. Keep the eyes open 
and breathe gently through the nose. 

Having adjusted your body in this manner, take a breath and exhale 
fully, then sway your body to left and right. Now sit steadfastly and 
think not-thinking. How do you think not-thinking? Beyond thinking. 
This is the essential art of zazen. 

The zazen I speak of is not learning meditation. It is simply the 
dharma gate of enjoyment and ease. It is the practice-realization of 
complete enlightenment. Realize the fundamental point free from the 
binding of nets and baskets. Once you experience it, you are like a 
dragon swimming in the water or a tiger reposing in the mountains. 
Know that the true dharma emerges of itself, clearing away 
hindrances and distractions. 

When you stand up from sitting, move your body slowly and rise 
calmly, without haste. We understand from past precedents that going 
beyond ordinary and sacred, where sitting and standing are effortless 
and boundless, depends solely on the power of zazen. 

Furthermore, bringing forth the turning point by using a finger, a 
pole, a needle, or a mallet, or leading people to enlightenment with a 
whisk, a fist, a stick, or a shout, cannot be understood by 
discriminatory thinking. How can it be understood by the use of 
supernatural powers? Zazen is an awesome presence outside form and 
color. How is it not the path preceding concept? 

Thus, do not be concerned with who is wise and who is stupid. Do 
not discriminate the sharp from the dull. To practice wholeheartedly 
is the true endeavor of the way. Practice-realization is not defiled with 
specialness; it is a matter for every day. 

Now, in this world and in other worlds, in India and China, buddha 
ancestors equally carry the buddha seal and teach to sit immersed in 
steadfastness. Although circumstances may vary in a thousand ways, 
wholeheartedly practice Zen, giving yourself fully to the way. Why 
give up the sitting platform of your own house and wander uselessly 
in the dust of a remote land? Once a wrong step is taken, you depart 
from the way. 

Having received a human life, do not waste the passing moments. 
Already upholding the buddha way, why would you indulge in the 
sparks from a flint? After all, form is like a dewdrop on the grass. 
Human life is like a flash of lightning, transient and illusory, gone in a 
moment. 

Honored practitioners of Zen, please do not grope for the elephant 
or try to grasp the true dragon. Strive to hit the mark by directly 
pointing. Revere the mind that goes beyond study and surpasses all 
doings. Experience the enlightenment of the buddhas, correctly 
inheriting the samadhi of the ancestors. Practice thusness 
continuously, and you will be thus. The treasury will open of itself for 
you to use as you wish. 

Written at the Kannondori Monastery on the fifteenth day, the 
midyear [seventh month], the first year of the Tempuku Era [1233]. 

APPENDIX 2 

Dogen’s Life and Teaching 

Keizan Jokin 

was eight years old. People said, “Although there was one year’s 
discrepancy, the astronomer’s prediction was right.” 

Earlier than that, in the winter of his fourth year, Dogen read one 
hundred poems by Li Jiao while sitting on his grandmother’s lap. In 
the autumn of his seventh year he copied out a poem from the Shu 
Dynasty and presented it to his grandfather. Those who were learned 
regarded the child as extraordinary and called him a genius. 

Dogen was deeply saddened by the loss of his mother. Seeing the 
incense smoke during the funeral at the Takao Temple [in Kyoto], he 
realized the impermanence of birth and death, and aroused the 
aspiration for enlightenment. 

In the spring of his ninth year, Dogen read Vasubandhu’s 
Abhidharma Kosha Treatise. Mature practitioners said that Dogen was 
like Manjushri, a great vessel of Mahayana. At a young age he 
memorized ancient teachings and studied hard. 

There was a man called Lord of the Pine Palace who served as 
Regent of the nation, and his retired name was Zenjo Kaku (Dhyana 
Hall). He was the most respected courtier in the country and an 
exemplary figure for kings and ministers. He adopted Dogen as a child 
and transmitted to him the essentials of both family affairs and 
governing. When Dogen was thirteen years old, the lord wanted to 
hold a ceremony for him to assume manhood, and put him on the 
path to becoming a key retainer of the imperial court. 

However, Dogen quietly left the lord’s residence on Mount Kobata 
and went to the foot of Mount Hiei. He visited a monk called Ryokan, 
a senior member of the [Tendai School] community and a teacher of 
Exoteric and Esoteric Buddhism, who was a secular uncle of Dogen’s. 
Dogen entered his chamber and asked him for ordination. Much 
surprised, Ryokan asked, “You are about to reach manhood. If you 
leave the household, your father and foster father will be upset. What 
do you think about that?” 

Dogen said, “Before my mother died, she asked me to leave the 
household and study the way. This is also what I want to do instead of 
being mixed with secular dust. In order to repay the kindness of my 
mother, grandmother, and nursing mother, I want to become a monk.” 

Ryokan was moved to tears, agreed to give Dogen instructions, and 
allowed him to stay at the Senko Temple of the Shuryogon Monastery 
in Yokawa [at Mount Hiei]. On the ninth day, the fourth month, the 
first year of the Kempo Era [1213], Dogen bowed formally to Bishop 
Koen, the head monk of the Tendai School, and got his head shaved. 
On the following day, Dogen received the bodhisattva precepts at the 
Precept Platform Temple of Mount Hiei and became a monk. From 
that time on, he studied the shamatha [quieting the mind] and 
vipashyana [insight] practices of the school, as well as esoteric 

teachings from India. At age eighteen he began to read through the 
entire Buddhist canon. 

Soon after that, Dogen asked Bishop Koin of the Mii Monastery, a 
famed dharma teacher and also a secular uncle of his, about an 
essential teaching of the Tendai School, the reason why Buddhas of 
the three times practice even though they are already enlightened. 

Koin said, “What you are asking now is the most advanced question 
of our school. This theme has been passed on orally from generation 
to generation by great masters Dengyo [Saicho] and Jikaku [Ennin]. I 
cannot fully elucidate it, but I hear that Bodhidharma transmitted the 
buddha seal from India to China; his teaching prevails all over China 
now and it is called the Zen School. If you want to have a definite 
answer to your question, you should enter the chamber of Bishop Eisai 
of the Kennin Monastery [in Kyoto] and ask him. You should also go 
to China in search of the way.” 

Thus, at age eighteen, on the twenty-fifth day, the eighth month, 
the fifth year of the Kampo Era [1217], Dogen joined the assembly of 
Priest Myozen, Bishop Eisai’s successor at the Kennin Monastery. 
Earlier, when Bishop Eisai had been teaching, he had allowed students 
to wear a priest’s robe only after three years of study. However, when 
Dogen joined, Myozen allowed Dogen to wear a priest’s robe in the 
ninth month, and then he allowed Dogen to wear a great robe in the 
eleventh month, regarding him a vessel of dharma. 

Myozen was the only dharma heir of Eisai, receiving the 
transmission of the three teachings—Exoteric, Esoteric, and Buddha 
Heart (Zen) teachings. According to a record in the Kennin Monastery, 
Eisai said, “I entrust the treasury of dharma to Myozen alone. Those 
who want to inquire of my dharma should see Myozen.” 

Dogen entered Myozen’s inner chamber and received the bodhi- 
sattva precepts again, as well as the robe and eating bowl. Earlier, 
Dogen had mastered the Esoteric rites for one hundred thirty-four 
deities and the transmission of the fire ceremonies [of the Tani Sect of 
Esoteric Buddhism]. He had also studied the precepts as well as 
shamatha and vipashyana. Now he heard the teaching of the Rinzai 
School for the first time and received an authentic transmission of 
Exoteric, Esoteric, and Buddha Mind teachings. Thus, Dogen became 
the sole successor of Myozen. 

Seven years later, at age twenty-four, on the twenty-second day, the 
second month, the second year of the Teio Era [1223], Dogen bade 
farewell to Eisai’s tomb at the Kennin Monastery. He went to China 
and hung his traveling stick at the Tiantong Monastery. It was the 
sixteenth year of the Jiading Era [1223] of the Song Dynasty. 

In China, while visiting various monasteries, he met Priest Ruyan of 
Mount Jing, who said, “When did you arrive?” 

Dogen said, “In the fourth month of last year.” 

Ruyan said, “Did you come with others?” 

Dogen said, “No, I didn’t come with others. How is it to come?” 

Ruyan said, “You have already come with others.” 

Dogen said, “How is it to have come with others?” 

Ruyan clapped his hands and said, “There is someone who talks a 
lot.” 

Dogen said, “If there is not someone who talks a lot, how is it?” 

Ruyan said, “Sit down and have some tea.” 

Later, Dogen visited Xiaocuiyan in Tai Region, met Priest Sizhuo, 
and asked, “What are buddhas?” 

Sizhuo said, “Those in the hall.” 

Dogen said, “If they are in the hall, how is it that they are 
everywhere in the countless worlds?” 

Sizhuo said, “They are just in the countless worlds.” 

Dogen said, “Your words are accompanying them.” 

After having such conversations with various masters, Dogen 
became proud of himself, thinking that he was matchless in Japan and 
China. So, he planned to return to Japan, when a monk called Laojin 
said, “The only person in Great Song China who has a dharma eye is 
Old Man Rujing. You would certainly get something from him.” 
However, more than a year passed before Dogen found the 
opportunity to study with Rujing. 

Then, Wuji Liaopai left the abbacy of Tiantong, and Rujing moved 
in as abbot. Dogen thought this was an auspicious karmic turning 
point unfolding from the past. Therefore, he went to ask Rujing 
questions, and his spearhead was immediately broken. Thus, Dogen 
became a student of Rujing’s. With the hope of studying more deeply, 
Dogen wrote to him: 

When I was young I aroused the aspiration for enlightenment and 
visited various monasteries in my country. I had some 
understanding of the principle of cause and effect; however I was 
not able to clarify the real source of buddha dharma. I was only 
seeing the outer forms, the marks and names. Later, I entered the 
chamber of Eisai, Zen Master Senko, and for the first time heard 
the teaching of the Linji School. Now I have accompanied Monk 
Myozen to Great Song and entered your dharma assembly. This is 
the fortunate result of my wholesome roots from the past. 

Great Compassionate Teacher, grant me permission to ask you 
about the way. 

Rujing wrote back: “Dogen, you can come informally to ask 
questions anytime, day or night, from now on. Do not worry about 

formality; we can be like father and son.” 

After that, Dogen entered Rujing’s inner chamber day and night and 
intimately received essential teachings. 

At one point, Rujing asked Dogen to be his attendant monk. Dogen 
declined, saying, “I am from a foreign country. If I am given the honor 
of being your attendant at this great monastery in this great nation, 
people in the monastic community may become jealous. I only wish to 
study with you day and night.” 

Rujing said, “You are very modest and what you say has a point.” 

In this way, Dogen received instructions from Rujing by continuing 
to ask questions. 

One day during the late evening zazen time, Rujing entered the hall 
and cautioned the assembly against dozing: “Practicing Zen is 
dropping away mind and body. It is not pivotal to offer incense, bow, 
chant buddhas’ names, make repentance, or read sutras. Just 
wholeheartedly sit so you will attain what you are pursuing.” 

Hearing this, Dogen immediately had great realization. This is the 
occasion that I mentioned earlier. 

After the first encounter with Rujing, Dogen endeavored to practice 
the way day and night ceaselessly, not veering off even for a moment 
and without lying down. Rujing often said to him, “Your practice is as 
pure as that of ancient buddhas. You will extensively spread the 
ancestral way. I have you with me just as Shakyamuni Buddha had 
Mahakashyapa.” 

Thus, in the first year of the Baoqing Era [1225], which corresponds 
to the first year of the Karoku Era, Rujing installed Dogen as the fifty- 
fifth ancestor. 

Entrusting dharma to Dogen, Rujing said, “Return to your country 
as soon as possible and widely spread the ancestral way. Retreat and 
live in a deep mountain and keep nourishing the sacred womb.” 

In addition to practicing with Rujing in this way, Dogen had 
opportunities to see documents of heritage of the Five Houses: 

First, when Dogen met Visiting Abbot Weiyi [at Mount Tiantong], a 
former abbot of the Guangfu Monastery, Weiyi said, “Ancient scrolls 
that are worth seeing are treasures of humankind. How many of them 
have you seen?” 

Dogen said, “I have not seen any.” 

Then Weiyi said, “I have a scroll of old writing. I will show it to 
you.” He brought it to Dogen. It was a document of heritage of the 
Fayan lineage that he had obtained from items left behind by an old 
master; so it was not what Weiyi himself had received. It was written 
in a certain format, but I won’t explain this now. 

At another time, Dogen was shown a document of heritage of the 

Yunmen lineage by elder Zongyue, who was filling the position of 
head monk at Mount Tiantong. Dogen asked Zongyue, “Reverend, 
there is some difference among the Five Schools in the arrangement of 
names on the documents of heritage. Why is that so? If it came 
directly from India, why is there such a difference?” 

Zongyue said, “Even if there is a vast difference, just understand 
that buddhas of Mount Yunmen are like this. For what reason is the 
venerable Shakyamuni revered? He is revered for his way of 
awakening. For what reason is great master Yunmen revered? He is 
revered for his way of awakening.” 

Upon hearing these words, Dogen had some understanding. 

Earlier, there had been a priest named Chuan, a descendant of 
Qingyuan, the Zen Master Fuyan of Longmen. This Chuan, a librarian, 
also had a document of heritage. At the beginning of the Jiading Era 
[1208-1224], when librarian Chuan was sick, senior monk Ryuzen, a 
Japanese man, took good care of him. Because Ryuzen worked hard, 
librarian Chuan, grateful for help during his illness, took out his 
document of heritage and let Ryuzen see it, saying, “This is a thing not 
commonly shown, but I will let you pay homage to it.” 

Some years after that, in the autumn of the sixteenth year of the 
Jiading Era [1223], when Dogen first came to Mount Tiantong, 
Ryuzen cordially requested that librarian Chuan show this document 
of heritage to Dogen. This was one transmitted in the Yangqi Line [of 
the Linji School]. Also, on the twenty-first day, the first month, the 
seventeenth year of the Jiading Era [1224], Dogen saw the document 
of heritage of priest Wuji Liaopai of the Tiantong Monastery. Wuji 
said, “Few people know about this, and now you do, elder. This is a 
fulfillment of your practice of the way.” Dogen was very pleased. 

Dogen visited Mount Tiantai and Mount Yadang later in the Baoqing 
Era [1225-1227] and got to the Wannian Monastery of Pingtian, on 
Mount Tiantai. The abbot there was priest Yuanzi of Fu Region. Upon 
first greeting him, Yuanzi talked about the teaching of the buddha 
ancestors. When he mentioned Yangshan’s dharma succession from 
Great Guishan, he said, “You haven’t seen the document of heritage 
here in my quarters, have you?” 

Dogen replied, “No, unfortunately I haven’t.” 

Abbot Yuanzi got up, took out the document of heritage, and, 
holding it up, said: 

Following the dharma admonition of buddha ancestors, I have not 
shown this even to a close disciple or an old attendant monk. But 
when I went to the city to see the governor and stayed there as I 
occasionally do, I had a dream. In this dream a distinguished 

priest who seemed to be Zen Master Fachang of Mount Damei 
appeared, holding up a branch of plum blossoms. He said, “If a 
true person comes who has disembarked from a boat, do not 
withhold these flowers.” And he gave me the plum blossoms. Still 
in the dream, I exclaimed, “Why shouldn’t I give him thirty blows 
before he leaves the boat?” Then, before five days had passed, 
you came to meet me, elder. Of course you have disembarked 
from a boat, and this document of heritage is written on brocade 
that has a design of plum blossoms. Since you must be the one 
Damei was referring to, in accordance with the dream I have 
taken this document out. Do you wish to inherit dharma from 
me? I will not withhold it if you do. 

Dogen could not help being moved. Although he could have 
requested to receive a document of heritage from him, Dogen only 
offered incense, bowed, and paid homage to him with deep respect. At 
that time there was present an incense attendant named Faning. He 
said that it was the first time he had ever seen the document of 
heritage. 

Dogen said to himself, “This event indeed could not have happened 
without the invisible help of buddha ancestors. As a foolish man from 
a remote country, by what fortune have I been able to see a document 
of heritage once again?” Tears wet his sleeves. 

Later, Dogen stayed at the entry hall of the Husheng Monastery, on 
Mount Damei. At that time he had an auspicious dream that the 
ancestor Damei came to him and gave him a branch of plum blossoms 
in full bloom. 

Indeed, as Dogen opened his eye of the way as the ancient sages had 
done, he was able to view several ancient documents of heritage and 
was acknowledged by various masters. 

Having received Rujing’s seal of enlightenment, Dogen realized the 
great matter and received the teachings from generations of ancestors. 

At age twenty-eight, in the third year of the Baoqing Era in China— 
the first year of the Antei Era in Japan [1227]—Dogen returned to 
Japan. He temporarily got settled at the Kennin Monastery of his late 
teacher [Myozen] and practiced for some time. 

He visited near and far and examined thirteen properties his 
supporters offered as places for retreat, but none of them satisfied 
him. When he was thirty-four years old, he moved to the side of the 
Gokuraku Temple in Fukakusa, Uji County, near Kyoto. His teaching 
style gradually became known, and monks gathered and formed a 
community of over fifty. After staying there for ten years, Dogen 
moved to Echizen Province. 

He went deep into the mountains in the region of Shihi, where he 

cleared away thorn bushes, built a thatched-roof hall, hauling dirt and 
stones, and upheld the ancestral way. This is the present-day Eihei 
Monastery. 

Earlier, when Dogen resided at the Kosho Monastery, divine spirits 
received the precepts and joined every repentance ceremony. At the 
Eihei Monastery, a dragon god came and asked to receive the eight 
pure precepts and have them chanted in dedication to him daily. So, 
Dogen wrote the eight pure precepts and chanted them to the dragon 
god every day. This is still practiced at the Eihei Monastery without 
fail. 

Now, Dogen raised true dharma for the first time in the seven 
hundred years since buddha dharma came to Japan. In the past, 
buddha images were brought to Japan from the [Korean] kingdom of 
Shila in the thirteenth year of Emperor Kimmei’s reign [551], one 
thousand five hundred years after the pari-nirvana of the Buddha. In 
the following year, two scrolls of buddha images were enshrined. 
Then, the miraculous power of buddha dharma began to reveal itself. 
Eleven years later, in the third year of Emperor Yomei’s reign, Prince 
Shotoku was born holding the Buddha’s relics in his hand. After he 
lectured on the scriptures, including the Lotus Sutra and Shrimala Devi 
Sutra, the teachings of names and forms spread all over Japan. 

At the request of former empress Tachibana, a successor of National 
Teacher Qi’an came to Nara, but only a monument remains. As he has 
no more dharma descendants, his teaching has not been transmitted in 
Japan. Later, Kakua Katsudo became an authentic heir of Zen Master 
Fuyan Qingyuan and brought his teaching from China to Japan, but 
his teaching did not flourish. Also, Bishop Eisai succeeded Donglin 
Huaichang and intended to spread the teaching as the eighth- 
generation master of the Huanglong lineage [of the Linji School]. He 
wrote a text called “Raising Zen to Protect the Nation” and presented 
it to the emperor. But he was opposed by Buddhists in Nara and 
Kyoto, and could not keep his teaching purely Zen. Instead, he taught 
three types of ways: Exoteric, Esoteric, and Buddha Mind practices 

Dogen mastered the Linji style of Zen as a direct dharma descendant 
of Eisai, and yet he also studied with Rujing, realized his life’s quest, 
returned home, and widely spread the true dharma. This is indeed 
good fortune for the nation and brings happiness to the people. Just as 
Bodhidharma, the Twenty-eighth Indian Ancestor, entered China and 
became the First Chinese Ancestor, so Dogen became the Fifty-first 
Chinese Ancestor and the First Ancestor in Japan. Thus, Dogen is 
revered as the Founding Ancestor of our gate. 

Although China was full of authentic teachers, if Dogen had not met 
a true master and penetrated his study, how could we have unfolded 
and clarified his treasury of the true dharma eye? 

In this age of decline and in the last era of dharma, the buddha 
dharma has been degraded and true masters are rarely encountered in 
China. Although Wuji Liaopai and Ruyan Zheweng were the abbots of 
famed monasteries, there was something they had not reached. Dogen 
thought there was nobody who could teach him, and he wanted to 
return to Japan. Then, Rujing, who maintained the authentic vein of 
ancestors as the twelfth-generation heir of Dongshan, but had not 
revealed his mystery to others, intimately transmitted to Dogen the 
entire ancestral teaching, withholding nothing. This is unique and 
extraordinary. 

Further, for me to be a [third-generation] dharma heir of Dogen is 
as fortunate as it was for Dogen to encounter the Third and Fourth 
Ancestors of China. The essential teaching has not fallen away. 
Although the teaching has journeyed through three countries, what 
has been transmitted has not changed at all. What you need to 
penetrate is no other than this: you need to clarify your mind. 

Dogen first attained the way with Rujing’s words of encouragement: 
“To practice Zen is to drop away body and mind.” Thus, in practicing 
Zen, abandon your body and become free from your mind. Without 
being liberated from body and mind, what you practice is not the way. 

You might think that the body is skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. If 
you examine closely, not even a particle of them belongs to you. 

You see two types of mind. One is discriminatory mind. You might 
think this discernment is the mind. The other is serene and immovable 
consciousness, clear and vast. You might think this is the mind, 
without knowing that you are not free from the root of consciousness. 
Ancient teachers call it a clear, vast, and immovable place. However, 
you should not remain in this place or regard it as mind. 

When you start to examine, you see three types of mind. 
Discriminating mind likes and dislikes. It judges right and wrong. 
Feeling knows hot and cold, pain and itch. Awareness does not divide 
right and wrong, nor does it feel pain or itch. It is like wood, stone, or 
a wall. This awareness experiences serenity, with no eyes and ears. 
When you speak with this awareness, you are like a wooden person or 
an iron person. Although you have eyes, you don’t see. Although you 
have ears, you don’t hear. In this awareness, speech and thought don’t 
prevail. This awareness is deeper than feelings of hot and cold, pain 
and itching. Our discriminating mind [as opposed to awareness] 
operates right here. But do not regard this discriminating mind as the 
original mind. 

Do not think that studying the way is limited to body and mind. To 
study the way is to drop away discrimination, feeling, and awareness. 
Beyond them there is something mysteriously radiant, timeless, and 
firm. Investigate thoroughly, and make sure to experience it. If you 

clarify this awareness, body and mind cannot take over and the selves 
of all things do not get hold of you. Thus, it is said that body and 
mind drop away. 

If you look from this place, even if you look around with one 
thousand eyes, there is not a particle of skin, flesh, bones, and 
marrow, and there is nothing separated as discernment, feeling, or 
awareness. Then, how do you know hot and cold, or feel pain and 
itching? How do you judge right and wrong, or likes and dislikes? 
Thus, it is said that even if you look, there is not one thing. 

When Dogen reached this precise point, he said, “I have dropped 
away body and mind.” Rujing said in approval, “You have dropped 
away your body and mind. Your body and mind have been dropped 
away.” Then he said, “Dropping away has dropped away.” 

Get to this field and be like a basket with no bottom or a bowl with 
a hole drilled in the center. What pours out does not cease, and what 
goes in does not fill. When you get there, you drop away the bottom 
of the barrel. 

However, if you think that you are enlightened by even a 
hairbreadth or that you have attained something, it is not the way. It 
is merely the activity of a fooling spirit. 

All of you, fully realize this point and practice thoroughly. 
Understand that you have a body that has no skin, flesh, bones, or 
marrow. Even if you try to become free from this body, it is not 
possible. Even if you try to throw away this body, it is not possible. 
Thus, this place is described as the place where all things are 
exhausted and there is emptiness that cannot be grasped. 

If you fully clarify this, you will have no doubt about what is 
spoken by the old priest of the world as well as buddhas of the past, 
present, and future. How is this? Listen! 

Bright and clear, no inside and outside. 
Have you dropped away body and mind? 

APPENDIX 3 

Dogen’s Editions of the Book 

Kobutsu Shin 
Daigo 

Zazen Gi 
Zazen Shin 
Kai'in Zammai 
Kage 

Komyo 
Gyoji, Jo 
Gyoji, Ge 
Immo 

Kannon 
Kokyo 

Uji 

Juki 

Zenki 

Tsuki 

Gabyo 

Keisei Sanshoku 

SEVENTY-FIVE-FASCICLE VERSION 

Old Buddha Mind 

Great Enlightenment 

Rules for Zazen 

The Point of Zazen 

Ocean Mudra Samadhi 
Flowers in the Sky 

Radiant Light 

Continuous Practice, Part One 
Continuous Practice, Part Two 
Thusness 

Avalokiteshvara 

Old Mirror 

The Time Being 
Confirmation 

Undivided Activity 

The Moon 

Painting of a Rice Cake 
Valley Sounds, Mountain Colors 

Our 
VERSION 

39 

SEVENTY-FIVE-FASCICLE VERSION 

Bukkojo Ji 
Mucha Setsumu 
Raihai Tokuzui 
Sansuikyo 
Kankin 

Shoaku Makusa 
Den’e 

Dotoku 
Bukkyo 

Jinza 

Arakan 

Shunja 

Katto 

Shisho 
Hakujushi 
Sangai Yuishin 
Sesshin Sessho 

Going Beyond Buddha 

Within a Dream Expressing the Dream 
Receiving the Marrow by Bowing 
Mountains and Waters Sutra 

Reading a Sutra 

Refrain from Unwholesome Action 
Transmitting the Robe 

Expressions 

The Buddhas’ Teaching 

Miracles 

Arhat 

Spring and Autumn 

Twining Vines 

Document of Heritage 

Cypress Tree 

Three Realms Are Inseparable from Mind 
Speaking of Mind, Speaking of Essence 

Our 
VERSION 

43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
$s 
$2 
33 
34 
33 
56 
37 
58 
$9 
60 

SEVENTY-FIVE-FASCICLE VERSION 

Shohé Jiss6 
Butsud6 
Mitsugo 
Mujé Seppo 
Bukkyo 
Hossho 
Darani 
Semmen 
Menju 
Busso 

Baika 

Senjo 

Jippo 
Kembutsu 
Henzan 
Ganzei 
Kajo 
Sanjashichi Hon Bodai 
Bumpo 

The Reality of All Things 

The Buddha Way 

Intimate Language 

Insentient Beings Speak Dharma 
Buddha Sutras 

Dharma Nature 

Dharani 

Washing the Face 

Face-to-Face Transmission 
Buddha Ancestors 

Plum Blossoms 

Cleansing 

Ten Directions 

Seeing the Buddha 

All-Inclusive Study 

Eyeball 

Everyday Activity 

Thirty-seven Wings of Enlightenment 

Our 
VERSION 

SEVENTY-FIVE-FASCICLE VERSION 

Rytgin 
Soshi Sairai I 

Hotsu Mujé Shin 
Udonge 

Nyorai Zenshin 
Sammai Ozammai 
Temborin 

Dai Shugy6 
Jisho Zammai 
Koka 

Hou 

Ango 

Tashin Tsa 

Osaku Sendaba 
Shukke 

Dragon Song 

The Meaning of Bodhidharma Coming 
from India 

Arousing the Aspiration for the Unsurpassable 
Udumbara Blossom 
Tathagata’s Entire Body 
King of Samadhis 

Turning the Dharma Wheel 
Great Practice 
Self-Realization Samadhi 
Space 

Eating Bowl 

Practice Period 

Seeing Others’ Minds 

King Wants the Saindhava 
Leaving the Household 

Our 
VERSION 

TWELVE-FASCICLE VERSION 

Shukke Kudoku 
Jukai 

Kesa Kudoku 
Hotsu Bodai Shin 
Kuyo Shobutsu 
Kie Bupposd 

Shinjin Inga 

Sanji Go 

Shime 

Shizen Biku 

Ippyakuhachi Hémyd Mon 
Hachi Dainin Gaku 

Virtue of Home Leaving 

Receiving the Precepts 

Power of the Robe 

Arousing the Aspiration for Enlightenment 
Making Offerings to Buddhas 

Taking Refuge in Buddha, Dharma, 
and Sangha 

Identifying with Cause and Effect 

Karma in the Three Periods 

Four Horses 

Monk of the Fourth-Stage Meditation 

One Hundred Eight Gates of Realizing Dharma 
Eight Awakenings of Great Beings 

Our 
VERSION 

APPENDIX 4 
Lineage of Chinese Zen Ancestors 

Niutou Farong wee we we ew ew ew ew ewe ew ew ew ew ew ew ew ew ew ew ew ee = Nioke Daclin 

Nanyve Huairang —— Mazu Daoyi 

_NANYUE LINE 

Biandan Niaoliao 

a ix Yuquan Shenxiv Xinchang 

Daman Hongren Dajian Huineng 

Yongyia Xuanjiao 

Nanyang Huizhong 

QINGYUAN LINE | 

Qingyuan Xingsi —— Shitou Xigian 
Caoxi Lingdao 

Fada 

Deng Yinfeng Dingshan Shenying 

Shigong Huizang Yangshan Haji —— 
Fuguang Ruman ————— Ba Zhuyi Xiangyan Zhixan ——— 
Guishan Lingyou - Lingyun Zhigin 
GUIYANG SCHOOL) Jingzhao Mihu 
‘SMazu Daoyi> Baizhang Muzihai Huangbo Xiyun Linji Yixuan — 
Xitang Zhizang ‘-E Muzhou Daoming 
Panshan Baoji Daci Huanzhong Pei Xiu 
Tanzhou Longshan Changging Daan oo Dasui Pazhen 
it Hangzhou Tianlong —— Jinhua Juzhi 
Damei Fachang Jazha 
Yanguan Qi'an Emperor Xuan 
Mayu Baoche Riis Gaoan Dayw = Moshan Liaoran 
Guizong Zhichang Furong Lingxun Haoyue 
Pangyun, Layman Bits Changsha Jingcen Zhu 

Nanquan Puyuan Zhaozhou Congshen —— Duofu 
Xishan Liang 
Danxia Tianran i i Cue Wuxue = - = Touzi Datong 
Daowy Yuanzhi ee Shishuang Qingzshu = 
Junyuan Zhongxing 
<Shitou Xigian> Yaoshan Weiyan Yunyan Tansheng Dongshan Liangjie —— 
‘a Shenshan Sengni 
Gao 
Choanzi Decheng ~~ Jiushan Shanhui 

i Han Yu 
Dadian Baotong Sanping Yizhong 

Tunhuang Daown —— Longtan Chongxin —— Deshan Xuanjan —— 

<i> 9 10 " 

— Miaoxin 
—— Hutou Zhao 
Guanxi Zhixian 
Sansheng Huiran 
Xinghua Cunjiang = Nanywin Huiyong = Fengxuc Yanzhyo == Shoushan Xingnian 
Zhiyi Kefu LLINJL SCHOOL | 

Nanyue Xuanrai 
Zhang Zhuo 
Yunju Daoying = ——— Tong’an Daopi 

Caoshan Benji CAODONG SCHOOL 

—_ Daogian) —— Tong’an Changcha 

Tong'an Guanzhi ——— Liangshan Yuanguan 

Longya Judun 

Dongshan Shiqian 

Jingzhao Xiupng 

Sushan Guangreen = “" Yunding Defi 

Yuezhou Qianfeng Taiyuan Fu pm Dizang Guichen Fayan Wenyi 
Xuansha Shibei Guotai Hongtao \FAYAN SCHOOL | 

Xuefeng Yieun Jingqing Daofi 

Changqing Huileng 

Eh Zhi [YUNMEN SCHOOL) 

Baofu Congzhan Baling Haojan 

Yunmen Wenyan (Shuangquan Renyu) — Deshan Huiyvan 
Yantou Quanhuo ———— Luoshan Daoxian e* jiantu Chenggu 

(Gantan Zio) Baizhao Zhiyuan {Xianglin Chengyuan) = Zhimen Guangzuo 

Langye Huijiao (Xingjiao Tan) — 

Changshui Zixcuan 
<Shoushan Xingnian> “> Fenyany Shanzhao Ciming Chuyuan Huanglong Huinan—— 
Sheaan Guixing |HUANGLONG ORDER 
(Guyin Yuncong) —— Li Fuma (Ciyan Kejing) 

(Yuanlian) Yang Wengong 

Furng Dak -— 

<Liangshan Yuanguan> Le —— Touri Yiging 
Shimen Huiche 

<Fayan Wenyi> Baoen Xuanze 

<Deshan Huiyuan> —— (Kaixian Shanxian) = Fuyin Liaoywan 
(yu xiv) 
<Zhimen Guangzuo>—— Xucdou Zhongxian == (Tianyi Yilwai) sees eee roees 

<15> 4% 17 ih 

—— Ruizhu Shaoli 
Jiaofan Huihong 

(Zhenjing Kewen) Zhantang Wenzhun 
(Huitang Zuxin ) (Lingyuan Weiging } Changling Shouzhuo = - -~ =" --- == 
Sian Wuxin Feng Yi 
Zhagjno Changzong =~ Su Dongpo Fuyan Qingyuan ea a 
— (Jingyin Jicheng) —— Yefu Daochuan Tevyang Fashun 
Hi Haihui Shouduan ——— Wuzu Fayan Taiping Huiqin ——— Heshan Shouxun 
Baoning Renyong 
Dahui Zonggao 
Yuanwu Keqin Fuxing Fata 
(Huqm Shaolong) 

Kuma Facheng 
+ Danxia Zichun “LC Changlu Qinghiao —— Tiantong Zongyue ——— =Xucdou Zhan 

Dongshan D. Hongzhi Zhengjiao 

—— Fuguo Weibai 
= = Len Zhengshou 

eee = = = = [Myoan Eisai) —— [Bussuju Myozen] 
[RINZAI SCHOOL) 

ees ese == Can 

<Dahui Zonggao> —— Zhuoan Deguang ——— Wup Liaopai Xuechuang Zongyue 

<Huqiu Shaolong> —— Ying'an Tanhua (Wazhun Shifan) —— Huanxi Weiyi 
Dehui 

<Xuedou Zhijian> ——— Tiantong Rujing ———— [Eihei Dogen] 
[SOTO SCHOOL] 

<22> 23 24 23 

APPENDIX 5 

Maps Related to the Text 

f Chinese Zen Sites 

scope 

.e : ., 
ate ce ewt : 
Na “s 
* - BS Pus me 
Pr rod te 
OS. HEBEL 
Pe meee” : 
o/s rm 3 ’ 
ye, : SHANXE 
ets tt owe! 
5 a . Taiyuan © 
‘ 7 
+ 3 ee : 
- a 7a} Bteryacg Fs ’ 
sete & 7 
Coe.et) AN De 
— ar ther 
_ S ‘ 3 Monger fengyus a . Be a panes 
- Chang'an + Re HENAN : ae 
” Dragan ses Dania ¢ "’ 
Ove a’ Peers Asm ie —_ 
ees <3 4 9, eee “., ANHUI OSS 
: 3 + Wedang *. aXSnavag. sets langye o° ge tne 
ee, 8 Xisag@ 3S * | 
Adew ‘ “7, Tepangesa, Pre 2 — 
HUBEI oo te ante ti 
SICHUAN rte 
TT aie dog snempiens 5" 
: Yess / . 
* oe > RI _ —_ e. F 
y = ee mans onc g 8” AMESANG 
eee . -, "* Lang poeg = 50 : (Seep. 999) 
ei a. Perey aN 
*., ‘Sdee if ratte) ‘ cy 
of e sat, 2° HANGNI oe 
op" ** e Shishuonp * (See 9 98) Py te « 
ve . _o HUNAN se Ke ae ee 
GUIZHOU its. " q 
or, s . Heeg my Ye - Lingyoe 4 Xa 
ry ° Yoryon + . 
* Wantan +, tthe 4 * FUUIAN sane 
F 4 ete ‘ : Poria® 5 ngs 
. #1 a® - 2 2 pen 
* ate ee : Peer t®, : Dinage 
ee " "e J veoke .* . | Sane 
me : often Tete kt ate Ate 
Me . *Yuens _& ” 
“. GUANGXI ’ (oni 1 oem 
4% . ling * 
age * GUANGDONG rs 
r has ° 
* 9 Xin 

*. 
*. 
° 
* 
. 
° 
. 
. 
. aM 
* bd 
ay 
2 4 Yengy 
. 
. 
“ 
. 
. 
* 
* 
%. 
° 
Bh 4 Yang 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
: 
. 
* 
tp 
* 
. 
. 
*. 
. 
. 
: 
: 
. 
* 
: 
: 
‘ 
. 
° 
: 
e 
Ps 
° 
we al 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
° 
Ps 
. 
. 
. 
. 
oe 
* 
Soy a 
ee. Se <e 

° 
Dhongling 
° 
Rui 
Aa™ 
wa : 
. 
* 
* 
* 
Adveong 
o 
. 
ingy aan 6 - 
oe 
at 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
: 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
- 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
‘icv 

Jiangxi, China 

scO@pD 

Moungain 
“iy 

Regice 
Monastery 

Zhejiang, China 

Necdouy 

Dene 2 

Ningte 
VD 
ewe 

Tiashong 

a Mountan 
® Cry 

o Regie 

oe Monastery 

HONSHE 

4 Mountain 
12] Cin 
. Monastery 

Japan, Sites Related to Dogen 

APPENDIX 6 

Eihei-ji Presumed Original Layout 

the 1752 map of the reconstructed buildings. It has been modified in 
accordance with Dogen’s accounts in “Practice Period,” which imply 
the approximate location of other buildings: east side, south of the 
kitchen—infirmary; west side, south of the monks’ hall (from north)— 
the offices of the ino and the head monk, monks’ private quarters. 

APPENDIX 7 

Monks’ Hall 

Standards for the Zen Community”). 

APPENDIX 8 
Time System 

Mid-Horse-Hou, 

Mid-Rat-Hovt 

Summer 

Mid-Rat-Hovt 

Winter 

GLOSSARY 

chief of a Zen monastery. (Later, in large Japanese monasteries, the 
latter function became independent from the abbotship.) 

abbot, former: F§'= [seid6], literally, west hall. Also, visiting abbot. 

abbot’s quarters: Fi3xt [hdjo], literally, ten feet square. Room or 
building in a Zen temple or monastery. Later it became a large 
structure in a Zen monastery. 

abbot’s room, plaque signaling permission to enter the: \2}# [nisshitsu 
hai]. 

abbot’s room, receive guidance in the: A [nisshitsu]. Enter the inner 
chamber (of the master). 

Abhdasvara Heaven: 3#{&% [K0’on Ten]. A heaven Shakyamuni Buddha 
was born into in one of his former lives. 

Abhidharma Mahavibhdsha Shastra: fe] Bi=BA Bi [Abidatsuma 
Daibibasha-ron]. An ancient Indian compilation of pre-Mahayana 
treatises. 

abide (in): {£749 [jiji-sul. 

abide in each moment: See abide in one’s condition. 

abide in one’s condition: {E;4(w [ja hoi), EZ [ji], literally, abiding in 
(dharma) position(s). Abide in each moment; at each moment. 

ability: 1} [rikiryo]. Power; understanding. 

abode, ancestors’: #0434 [soiki]. 

abundance and lack: 248 [hoken]. Affirmation and negation; dualism 
and monism. 

acacia powder: B& [soky6]. Used as soap. 

accept: KH (F) [jOtd(-su)]. Realize; hit the mark; exact point. 

accept what is as it is: #85F [choko], literally, listen and allow. 

accept with trust: See trust, accept with. 

accomplishment, gain: #7) [tokuriki], literally, attain power. 

accord, imperceptibly: =F [meisu]. 

achieve, finally: FORE [kukyo no kajol], literally, ultimate fruit. 

acquired enlightenment: See enlightenment, acquired. 

action: {JHX [gydshu], literally, action taken. #)#& [doyd], literally, 
state of movement. 

action(s), pure: #47 [bongy6]. 

action, beneficial: #|{J [rigy6]. One of a bodhisattva’s four methods of 
guidance. 

action, dark: #3 [kokug6]. Unwholesome action. 

action, deluded: = [m6g6]. 

action, do wholesome. See also Refrain from unwholesome actions. 

action, increasing power of: #3857) [gozojo riki]. 438 _F [gozojo). 
Increasing effect of action. 

action, monk’s: {43 [sdg6]. 

action, past: #48 [hochi], literally, ground of reward (effect). 

action, refrain from unwholesome: #Ei@BAIE [rika bohi], literally, 

separating from mistakes and preventing violation (of the way). See 
also Refrain from unwholesome actions. 

action, unwholesome: #33¢ [akug6]. 

action, wholesome past: 74 [shukuzen]. 

action(s) that nurture different types of effect(s): #822743 [soi juku go]. 
For example, situation where a wholesome or unwholesome action 
creates a neutral effect. 

activities: }E3ti4S [kakkei shdsoku], literally, activity, disappearing 
and resting. 

activities, daily: #<#R [sahan], literally, tea and rice. 

activities, everyday: &¥i [kyoshi], literally, go away or get on. 

activities, three:=3¢ [sango]. Body, speech, and thought. 

activities of the (buddha) house: R3# [kago], literally, work of the 
house. 

activity: & FS [un’i]. Natural activities; literally, words and actions. # 
4 [kikan], working; dynamic work; undivided activity. Also, # 
[ki]. Capacity; potential; person. ;4at(9) [kakkei(-su)]. Everyday 
activity; vital activity; experience; activate; struggle; carry on; think 
superfi-cially; theme. j83% [shdsoku], fluctuation; fluctuating 
circumstances; how it is; personal correspondence, literally, 
disappearing and resting. 1@7K [zOji], action; happening; making; 
work; behavior; thoughts; literally, making next. 12/8 [un’yo], 
literally, carry and use. 

activity, celestial: ##1%1% [shinkyOtsi], literally, mastering celestial 
state. 

activity, engage in: 1&/K@)% [zoji doy], literally, behavior and 
movement. 

activity, inessential: ##FA [zoyo], literally, trivial function. 

activity, mental: LT [shingyO], literally, mind movement. 

activity, mutual: ifj}43 [tsi shdsoku], literally, to encompass 
disappearing and resting. 

activity, undivided: @# [zenki]. & [zen]: entire, whole, together. # 
[ki]: possibility, capacity, response, function, working, total 
experience. 

activity, unsurpassable: | EM [jojo no kil, literally, highest of high 
activity. 

actualization: s&8% [shoken], literally, realization proof. 

actualization, complete: 227) [koriki], literally, total strength; complete 
effort. #7) [jinriki], literally, entire strength. 

actualization, utmost: £ [zenko], literally, totally raise. 

actualize: RAK(S) [genjo(-su)], literally, appear and complete. 
Appear; let appear; realize; manifest; complete. Z HES [sahai-su], 
literally, exclude discrepancy. #9 [shGde-sul], literally, realize and 
understand. 

aE a 

actualize, fully: EAS [enjo-su]. HHT [kukyo-sul, literally, actualize 
the ultimate realm. 

actualize, immediately: 3RFE [sokush6]. 

actualize expression: j43%AX [do genjo]. 

actualize the fundamental point: ifk23€ [genjd koan]. See also 
actualize; koan. 

Actualizing the Fundamental Point: 3if¥23§ [Genjd Koan]. Third 
fascicle of this book. 

Adbhuta-dharma. See also Divisions, Twelve. 

add a little to a lot: 3 fei#x#2-F [tasho ten shasu]. 

add eyelids on top of eyelids: FREE 2w—*X [gampi jo koten ichimai 
hi]. 

administrator. See also officers, six. 

admonition: ‘i [seikai]. 

admonition, golden: ssi / EH [jotai no kongon], literally, sincere and 
truthful golden words. 

adoration: #3 [rembo]. 

advanced: &X [rédail], literally, old and great. 

affairs, secular: t#4% [se’en], literally, world connection. 

affirm: 8% [konen]. 

afflictions, all: #4 [shoro], literally, various leakings (desires). 

Agama: Pali, Skt. fe] [Agon], fas [Agytima]. Early Buddhist 
teaching, literally, that which comes (from the source). 

Agama Midiaka Sitra: 8] 4% [Chi Agon Ky6]. The Sanskrit version 
of one of the early sutras, Agama. 

Agama School(s): Ba ## [Agyiima Ky6d]. Early Buddhist school(s), 
later called Hinayana by Mahayana practitioners. 

Agama Siitra(s): 8] 4% [Agon Kyo]. Early Buddhist siitra(s). Many of 
the Sanskrit versions were translated into Chinese. 

age of declining dharma. See also three periods. 

Ajata: Pj#z [Aitta]. Official for King of Kaushala, ancient India. 
Later he was allowed to leave the household by the Buddha. 

Ajfidtakaundinya: Skt. BA tShRY [Anyakydjinnyo], KRW [Jinnyo 
Sonja]. Kaundinya, {390 [Kyojinnyo]. One who was enlightened 
first among the five earliest disciples of Shakyamuni Buddha. 

Akshobhya. See also Buddhas, Five. 

aligned. See also arise ae Gaara 

alike, all worlds are. #3} [kai to]. 

all are. See also buddha nature. 

all-inclusive: & [t6], literally, equal. 

all-inclusive study: ### [henzan]. 1. Visiting and studying with masters 
in various places. 2. In Dogen’s usage, realizing the entire teaching 
of the buddha by penetrating a single dharma. 

All-Inclusive Study: #2 [Henzan]. Sixty-second fascicle of this book. 

all over China: 71 [kushi], literally, nine lands (of China). 

all things. See also dharma. 

aloeswood: i® [jink6], literally, sinking incense. Fine incense made 
of hardwood that sinks in water. Related to daphne shrub. 

Alone above and below the heavens, I am the honored one: KEX FER 
4823 [tenjO tenge yui ga dokuson]. Birth verse of Shakyamuni 
Buddha. According to legend, when he was born he took seven steps 
in each of the four directions, raised his right hand, and spoke these 
words. 

altar, stiipa: 18% [togan]. 

Amitabha. Buddha of Infinite Light. See Buddhas, Five. 

Amitdyus. Buddha of Infinite Life, another name for Amitabha. See 
also Buddhas, Five. 

Amoghasiddhi. See Buddhas, Five. 

Amrapdli Grove: Skt. 224344 [Anrae Rin]. Grove of myrobalan (also 
translated as mango) fruit in the city of Vaishali, central India. 
Known as a place where Shakyamuni Buddha often gave discourses. 

amulet of protection: 54} [goshin fusu]. 

analyze: = [takury6], literally, measure degree. 

Ananda: (j##h— [Ananda], ba# [Anan]. A cousin of Shakyamuni 
Buddha. Became his disciple and attendant. Known as the foremost 
learner of the Buddha’s teaching, who remembered and narrated the 
stitras after the Buddha’s death. Dharma heir of Mahakashyapa, and 
regarded as the Second Ancestor in the Zen tradition; and 
Mahakashyapa; and Nanda; and Rahula; and Shakyamuni Buddha. 

Anavatapta Lake: 8a] #§ji#it8 [Anokudatsu Chi], fo] AB2i2ith [Anabadatsu 
Chi]. A lake at the center of the world in Buddhist cosmology. 
Described in siitras as always cool and refreshing without scorching 
heat. 

Anavatapta Lake, Dragon King of: PARA 82 [Anabadatsuta Ryti 
O]. 

Anavatapta Lakes, four: VUpe]#§i#it# [shi Anokudatsu Chi]. Mystic lakes 
in the Northern Continent of Uttarakuru. 

ancestor: #4 [so]. 4HBf [soshi], literally, ancestor [so] teacher. An 
earlier teacher of the dharma lineage, who inherits and transmits 
dharma. Also called buddha ancestor. Sometimes translated as 
“patriarch.” 

Ancestor: #86 [Soshi]. Sometimes indicates Bodhidharma. 

ancestor, go beyond: See go beyond ancestor. 

ancestor sickness: 4474 [soby6]. Hindrance of attachment to becoming 
a buddha and ancestor. 

ancestors, five early Chinese: Rih Aft [tochi go dai]. 

ancestors, surpassing the: #&4#H [osso]. See also go beyond ancestor. 

ancient teaching: H# [kokyd]. 

Aniruddha: f]## [Anaritsu]. One of the ten major disciples of 
Shakyamuni Buddha. A grandson of King Simhahanu, he left the 
household life with other members of Shakya Clan. Scolded by the 
Buddha for dozing while listening to discourse, he made a vow not 
to sleep and lost his eyesight, but attained celestial eyes. 

annihilation: Efi [dametsu], literally, cut off and destroy. Freedom 
from desire. 

antagonist nods and smiles, even an: 283552498 [onke sh6 tentd]. 

apparent. See also Ranks, Five. 

appear spontaneously: #1hk [shinjo], literally, newly formed. 

appears like a spirit and disappears like a demon: ##tH 9272 [shinshutsu 
kibotsu], literally, spirits emerge and demons vanish. 

approve: &t®J [kyoka]. 

area, back: #38 [goka]. Added area behind the monks’ hall; sink 
behind the hall. Later meaning, toilet. 

arhat: Also arhant. Skt., literally, worthy or venerable one. Ba zj% 
[arakan], #2)% [rakan]. A follower of the Buddha’s path who has 
attained nirvana. Among the four fruits (achievements) of the way, 
arhatship was the ultimate goal in early (pre-Mahayana Buddhism). 

Arhat: {| #7 [Arakan]. Thirty-fifth fascicle of this book. 

arhat fruit: Bo] #@;#52 [arakan ka]. See arhat. 

arise and fall, things that: iS)RBA7h [zoji tempail], literally, creating 
next and stumbling. Casual, temporary experience. 

arise at this moment: 44 [kon’u], literally, currently existing. 

arise sequentially: #479 [sOtai(-su)], literally, wait for each other. 
Aligned; to be separate; face one another. 

arm is cut off: tt [dampi]. See also Dazu Huike. 

armband: #8 [hiko]. 

arms are long but the sleeves are short: &#24H#8 [hi cho sanshi tan]. 

arms, extend one’s: #£ [suishu]. Reach out to guide (others). 

Arousing the Aspiration for Enlightenment: 24% t=2:0) [Hotsu Bodai Shin]. 
Seventieth fascicle of this book. 

Arousing the Aspiration for the Unsurpassable: 2£#£ 1% [Hotsu Mujo 
Shin]. Sixty-ninth fascicle of this book. 

arrive: 2!) [to]. To have complete experience. 

arrive, not: 4X2!) [futd]. AZ!) [mito], literally, have not yet arrived. 1. 
To be not yet realized or experienced. 2. In Dogen’s usage, not seen 
as different from arriving or having already arrived. To be free from 
arriving. 

arrowhead and the shaft crush each other: §i%#+8+£ [sempo sdshu]. A 
situation of being completely blocked. 

art, excellent: #)43 [mydjutsu]. Splendid method. 

as: B¥6fi [jisetsu], literally, when . . . For example, “As all things are 
buddha dharma, there are delusion, realization, practice, birth and 

death, buddhas and sentient beings” (“Actualizing the Fundamental 
Point”). The first word in other translations is usually when. But for 
Dogen, “when...” can mean “all the time.” 

as it is: # [nii]. Just as it is without changing anything; just as they 
are. 9] @ [nyoze]. Thusness. 

ascetic practices, twelve: +_$8B¢E [jini zuda]. Skt., dhita. Types of 
asceticism. See also fascicle 31a, “Continuous Practice, Part One.” 

ash, cold. See also ash, dead. 

ash, dead: ¥%E7K [shikai]. Meditation in complete stillness. i¢7K 
[reikai], literally, cold ash. 

Ashoka, (Great) King: bi] B= [Aiku O], b]BAZ [Aiku Daid]. Third 
king of Maurya Empire in India, reigning ca. 270-230 B.cz. After 
waging a brutal conquest, he realized the misery of war and stopped 
violent aggression. Ruled as a great supporter of Buddhism and sent 
missionaries to foreign lands. Shakyamuni Buddha’s year of birth 
and pari-nirvana are counted back from Ashoka’s coronation dates 
according to the Pali chronicles. Known through legendary 
biography of him, King Ashoka Sutra, in premodern times. 

Ashvaghosha: & [Memy6]. Twelfth Ancestor of the Zen tradition in 
India. Born into a wealthy home in Varanasi but became a monk. 
The Awakening of Faith in the Mahayana, a very important text in 
East Asian Buddhism, though apocryphal, is mythically attributed to 
him. 

ask for a turning word: See turning word, ask for a. 

aspiration: %&& [shiiki], literally, spirit of determination. 

aspiration for enlightenment: See enlightenment, aspiration for. 

aspiration, initial: 4] —*& [shoichinen]. 

aspiration, joyful: FR [gonku]. 

asura: Skt. Ba){Z# [ashura]. Fierce and wrathful deity or fighting 
spirit. Three heads and eight arms, =%8/\@ [sanzu happi]. See also 
paths, six; guardians, eight types of. 

Assaji: Br]; 2 [Ashippi]. See also monks, five. 

assembly: & [e]. Community of dharma practitioners. %& [shu], —&& 
[isshu]. Literally, gathering. 

assembly, harmonious: #IG# [wagodju], literally, harmonious and 
united gathering. 

assembly, good: 34 [shoken], literally, wise ones. 

atman: See soul. 

attached to, something to be: fa [aisho], literally, place to love. 

attachment: #'t& [aijaku]. 

attain, directly: EN4$() [sokutoku(-su)]. 

attain buddhahood. See also buddha, become a. 

attain liberation: EARS [dodatsu-su]. 

attain the way: See way, attain the. 

attendant, incense: }#8($4& [shoko jisha]. Assists the officiant in 
ceremonial offering of incense. 

attendant monk: {#& [jisha]. A monk high in seniority who works for 
the abbot as a secretary and sometimes as an assistant teacher. 

authenticated: IF}R1§ [shoketsu wo ul]. 

authenticity: tf [tekii], literally, mind of (authentic) heir. 

authenticity, determine the: iR4#T [ketsujaku-su]. 

autumn, god of: See god of autumn. 

Avadana. See also Divisions, Twelve. 

Avalokiteshvara: Skt. #4 [Kannon], literally, observer of voices; #itt 
= f= [Kanzeon Bosatsu], bodhisattva who is observer of voices 
(cries of suffering) in the world; HB, [Kanjizai Bosatsul], 
bodhisattva who sees freely; AX&#=BE [Daihi Bosatsu], bodhisattva 
of great compassion. Sometimes described as having one thousand 
hands and eyes. Also, the name of a monastery and the title of the 
Thirty-fourth fascicle of this book. 

Avatamsaka School: Skt. ##f&5: [Kegon Shi]. (Chinese) Huayan 
School. Established by Fazang, it flourished during the Tang 
Dynasty along with the Tiantai School before the Zen School 
became dominant in China. Provided a theoretical background for 
much of Zen thought. The teaching is based on the principle in the 
Avatamsaka Sutra of all things interacting with one another without 
obstruction. As the Kegon School in Japan, it became one of the six 
schools of Buddhism in the Nara Period (710-794). 

Avatamsaka Sitra: #24 [Kegon Kyo]. A major Mahayana sitra, 
known for its magnificent cosmic view of all things interreflecting, 
centering on Vairochana Buddha. 

avatar: Skt. avatara. #24 [gonsha]. Manifestation of a Buddhist deity 
as a god in local religion. 

aversion: 324% [kiken]. Hatred or avoidance. Opposite of attachment. 

avichi crimes, five types of: H#&IS= [go mugeng6]. Killing one’s father, 
killing one’s mother, killing an arhat, causing a buddha body to 
bleed, and harming the community of dharma. Those who commit 
any of these crimes will fall into Avichi Hell in the next lifetime. 

Avichi Hell: Skt. Transliteration: [J [Abi]. Translation: fj 
[Mugen], literally, no interval. The hell of unceasing suffering, the 
worst of all hells. 

avoid, no place to: ##i88# f [muehisho]. 

awaken others: {th [kakuta]. 

awaken sentient beings, expound dharma to: B+#4i% [dosh seppo]. 

awakening: & [kaku], enlightenment. [do], bringing (sentient 
beings) across the ocean of birth and death to the shore of 
enlightenment; saving (sentient beings). 

awakening, have thorough: &2A¢ L CATES [katsunen to shi te daigo- 

su]. 

awakening is seen within: 38 [shochi kensho], literally, in 
realization seeing realization. 

awakening of the way: '8ji& [god6]. 

awakening, ocean of: #7 [bukkai], literally, buddha sea. 

awesome manifestation: E{# [iigi]: Awesome presence; dignified form; 
noble conduct. Expression of buddha dharma through a home 
leaver’s posture and behavior. 

Awesome Presence of Active Buddhas: {7#&i(% [Gydbutsu Tigi]. 
Twenty-fourth fascicle of this book. 

awesome virtue: B44 [itoku]. 

bad. See also unwholesome. 

Baiyun Shouduan: See Haihui Shouduan. 

Baizhang Huai Hai: 8 XC'#78 [Hyakujo Ekai]. 749-814, China. Dharma 
heir of Mazu Daoyi, Nanyue Line. Many of Huaihai’s students from 
all over built a monastery on Mount Daxiong in Hao Region 
(Jiangxi). Even when he was older he always participated in 
communal labor and is known for his words “A day of no work is a 
day of no eating.” As compiler of the first known Zen monastic 
guidelines, he contributed greatly to the establishment of monastic 
practice suited to Chinese seekers. He produced outstanding 
students including Guishan Lingyou and Huangbo Xiyun. His 
posthumous name is Zen Master Dazhi, A#S##EM [Daichi Zenji]. 

Bai Zhuyi: AEA [Haku Kyoi]. 772-846, China. Bo Letian (Bai Jui). 
One of the most reknowned poets of the Tang Dynasty. He lived in 
the suburb of the capital city Luoyang (Henan) accompanied by 
poetry, wine, and lute. He worked as a government official and 
called himself Layman Xiangshan. Studied with Niaoke Daolin of 
the Niutou School. 

Baizhao Zhiyuan: AIRE) [Hakucho Shien]. Ca. ninth-tenth century, 
China. Also called Qinfeng. Dharma heir of Gantan Ziguo, Qingyuan 
Line. Taught at Zhugan Monastery, Mount Bozhan, An Province 
(Hubei). Qingfeng was the first teacher of Baoen Xuanze. When 
Xuanze asked him, “What is the self of a Zen student?” Qingfeng 
replied, “The fire spirits are here to look for fire.” Later, when he 
studied with Fayan, Xuanze understood Qingfeng’s meaning. His 
posthumous name is Great Master Xianjiao #AAXABM [Kenkyd 
Daishi]. 

balanced equilibrium: *F [hei]. 

balancing scale: ##-F [hydsu]. 

Baling Haojian: E8&883% [Haryo Kokan]. Ca. ninth-tenth century, 
China. Dharma heir of Yunmen Wenyan, Yunmen School. Taught at 
Xinkai Monastery, Baling, Yue Region (Hunan). Called Multiple 

Mouth Hao for his eloquence. 

ball, red flesh: 7A] [shaku nikudan]. Bare human body. 

ball (you are holding a): —HF [ichi dansu]. 

bamboo, tall: {@1T [shichiku]. 

bamboo node: i fi [hasetsu]. Become free from dualistic thinking. 

bamboo pipes, breaking: ‘fai [chikut6]. 

bamboo pole, top of a one-hundred-foot: See pole, top of a one-hundred- 
foot bamboo. 

bandits: *#8% [shuzoku]. 

banner: 2% [hydshiki]. Identifying symbol raised in a temple or 
monastery. 

banner, wind and the. See also wind and the banner. 

banner pole: #|== [sekkan]. 

Banyan Grove: Skt., Nyagrodha Vana. Jetafé** [Nikuda Rin]. Located 
in Kapilavastu. This is where the Buddha stayed when he visited his 
hometown. 

Baoche: See Mayu Baoche. 

Baoen Xuanze: #, 228i) [HO’on Gensoku]. Ca. ninth-tenth century, 
China. First studied with Qingfeng and then with Fayan Wenyi, 
Fayan School. He was enlightened as a student of Fayan Wenyi and 
became his dharma heir. Taught at Baoen Monastery, Jinling 
(Jiangsu). 

Baofu Congzhan: (R#87tF2 [Hofuku Jiten]. d. 928. Dharma heir of 
Xuefeng Yicun, Qingyuan Line. He became a student of Xuefeng at 
fifteen and was ordained at eighteen. Founded Baofu Monastery, 
Zhang Region (Fujian), where he always had more than seven 
hundred students. When he became ill at the end of his life, he 
refused medicine, told his monks his time had come, crossed his 
legs, and passed away. 

Baoji: See Panshan Baoji. 

Baojing: See Xiangshan Baojing. 

Baoning Renyong: {*={_H [Honei Nin’yi]. Ca. eleventh century, 
China. Dharma heir of Yanqi Fanghui, Linji School. As a young man 
he was dignified and intelligent. He traveled on pilgrimage for more 
than twenty years and studied with many Zen teachers. Eventually 
he settled and taught at Baoning Monastery, Jinling (Jiangsu). 

Baotong: See Dadian Baotong. 

barbarian, when a: #AR#AT [korai kogen]. 

barbarian, red-bearded: 7#4%A [shakushu ko]. 

barbarians’ invasion: #A®L [uron]. 

barbarians with red beards: #A2475 [koshu shaku]. 

barrel with no bottom: Bie 4% [dattei to]. 

Barrier Station Officer: fi [Kanreishi]. Book by Xi, Lord Zhou, a 
follower of Laozi. 

barrier, arrive at a: 342A [shi to rdkan], literally, begin to arrive at 

a prison gate. 

barrier, pass through the: See pass through the barrier. 

barrier, penetrate the: i&f| [tokan]. Become free from dualistic 
thinking. 

base, true: IEA [shohon]. 

basket, great: Ais [daizd]. Buddhist canon. 

beads: #k#X [juzu], literally, jewels for counting. Most commonly, 
rosaries of beads are used for subduing that many kinds of 
delusions. Used in some schools of Buddhism for counting mantras 
or prostrations. 

become a buddha: See buddha, become a. 

bee inside the sleeves, holding a stinging: € TORAIC#EDB') [sode no 
naka ni hachi ari]. To have sharp understanding within. 

before and after, born together: #4#4E [zengo sho]. 

before and after, independent of: BI BRE [zengo sai dan], literally, 
past (zensai) and future (gosai) are cut off (from the present). 
Dogen’s view of time is not that it is a simplistic sequence of past, 
present, and future. He explains that every moment of the present is 
inclusive of the entire period of time. Thus, there is no past or 
future separate from the present moment. 

before form arose: AKJKGBI [chincho izen], AKJIKABA [chinchd mibd], 
ARIEA #7 [chincho fuda], 3AALABY [mibod izen]. Timeless 
beginning. 

begging: 2 [kotsujiki], literally, begging food. Walking and asking 
for donation, an important practice of home leavers. 

beginner: #1: [shoshin], beginner(s), literally, beginner’s mind. Ji) 
44 [shoshin shigaku], literally, beginner’s mind; one who starts to 
study. 

beginning, middle, and end: 4) 4% [sho chi go]. 

beginning, middle, and end, independent from one another: #) PEE 
[sho chi go sai dan]. See also before and after, independent of. 

being: @ [ul]. 

being, a temporal: {Fz [keu]. 

being, embryonic: 48% [shiu]. 

being, great! KA [dainin]. Buddha, bodhisattva, or mature 
practitioner of dharma. 

being, imaginary: &#& [mou]. 

being, inconceivable: ¥9# [myou]. 

being, insentient: E'S [hijo], ##ts [mujo]. A being that does not have 
feelings, for example, a plant, stone, or cloud. 

beings, all: #£#8 [gunrui], literally, various groups. 

beings, many: ##44 [gumbon], literally, group of things. 

beings, myriad: A8 [hyakut6], literally, one hundred heads. 

beings, sentient: 34£ [shuj6], literally, assembly of (those with) life. 
Also, ordinary unenlightened beings, as opposed to buddhas. @t& 
[ujo], those who have feelings. 4 [sh6], living beings. 

beings, various: ## [gunjo], literally, group of (those with) life. 

beings with spirits: 322 [ganrei], literally, holding spirit. Living beings. 

Beita Guangzuo: See Zhimen Guangzuo. 

bend forward in a formal manner: #859034 [kyokukyi nyohd], literally, 
arching in accordance with dharma. 

bend self and push others without ceasing BOA AMA [kutsuko 
suinin ya mikyt]. 

Bends, Nine Great: 7uiif [kytisetsu]. The Huang River, which in its 
entirety, is said to have nine great curves. 

beneficence: > |EU» [uruoi], literally, moisturizing (by rain). 

beneficence: i [on]. Kindness (by someone senior or in a higher 
position); worldly obligation to return kindness. 

beneficial action: See action, beneficial. 

Benji: See Caoshan Benji. 

beyond: #£ [mu], #% [fu], JE [hi], literally, no, not, non-. Also 
represents transcendental negation; such as “not one, not many.” 

beyond, inquire: [| KOFI [kojo no monjaku], literally, question in 
going beyond. 

beyond buddha, go: See go beyond buddha. 

beyond birth: 4\£ [fush6], literally, no birth. 

beyond consciousness, realm: 4E%8 [hisd]. 

beyond death: 7\i#, [fumetsu], literally, no destruction. 

beyond deluded, person who is: 4\j4&% [fumei sha], literally, one who is 
not deluded. 

beyond enlightenment. See also enlightenment. 

beyond grasping: 7\4$ [futoku]. 

beyond knowing: 7558 [fushiki], literally, not knowing. 

beyond knowledge: 4.40 [fuchi]. 

beyond perception: 4 [fukaku]. 

beyond purpose, merit: # AOI [mui no kudoku], literally, virtue of 
not doing. 

beyond thinking: See thinking, beyond. 

beyond this buddha: 7.2 # [fuzebutsu]. 

beyond this mind: 4\:t) [fuzeshin]. 

beyond this object: #742) [fuzemotsu]. 

beyond unconsciousness, realm: 4E4E%S [hi hisd]. 

beyond understanding: 7\& [fue]. 

beyond words and speech: 5s3i8Ef [gongo dodan], literally, words that 
cut through expression. 

beyond-express a beyond-expression: 7B {$78 [fuddtoku wo fud6]. 

beyondness: —¥%] [ichinyo], literally, one thusness. A state beyond 

dualism. Going beyond. 

Bhadrapdla: #&h6## ([Batsudabara]. Bodhisattva, regarded as a 
dharma descendant of Prajnatara, Bodhidharma’s teacher. 

Bhadrika: ##2 [Batsudai], 22 [Badai]. One of the five monks who 
practiced with the Buddha after he left the palace. The second one 
(after Ajfiatakaundinya) who was enlightened upon hearing the 
Buddha’s first discourse. A grandson of King Simhahanu. 

Bhaishajyardja Bodhisattva: #£—#§ [Yaku O Bosatsu], literally, 
Medicine King Bodhisattva. 

Biandan Xiaoliao: |mi2f [Hentan Gyodryd]. Ca. seventh-eighth 
century, China. Student of Sixth Ancestor Huineng. Taught at Mount 
Biandan (Zizhiou). It is said he picked acorns for his meals. 

billion worlds: A> [daisen kai]. Billion worlds of phenomena, 
literally, great thousand realms. A7Fj&¥# [daisen hokkail], literally, 
great thousand dharma worlds. Also called=Ftt% [sanzen sekai], 
literally, three thousand (but meaning, one thousand cubed) worlds. 
Saha Worlds. 

binding the self with no rope: #248448 [mujo jibaku]. Although there is 
in reality nothing to bind the mind with, one is bound up with one’s 
own delusions. 

bird: Often represents freedom. 

bird’s path: Fsi8 [chodo]. 

birth, beyond: 4\4£ [fush6], #24 [mushd], literally, unborn. 

birth, egg. See also birth, four forms of. 

birth, four forms of: QU [shish6]. Ways in which living beings are 
born: womb birth, f@4 [taishd]; egg birth, 984 [ranshd]; moisture 
birth, #44 [shissho]; and transformation (magical) birth, {¢4£ 
[keshoO]. Devas born as a result of karma are classified in the last 
category. 

birth, moisture. See also birth, four forms of. 

birth, previous: EVE [shukush6]. 

birth, those who already have understanding at: #1 [shochi]. 

birth, transformation. See also birth, four forms of. 

birth, womb. See also birth, four forms of. 

birth after birth: = [shdsh6]. 

birth and death: E¥E [shdji]. Life and death. Life is seen as a number 
of births and deaths at each moment of a person. That is why “life” 
is often called “birth” in Buddhism. 1. The ongoing cycle of birth, 
death, and rebirth, which in Buddhism is viewed as suffering. 2. Life 
viewed as a continuous occurrence of birth and death moment by 
moment. 3. Birth as a complete, independent experience in the 
present moment without reference to other moments; death in the 
same manner. 

birth-and-death: Birth and death seen as not separable. 

Birth and Death: E¥€ [Shoji]. Ninety-third fascicle of this book. 

birth and death, coming and going of: EEA [shdji korai]. 

birth-and-death, detachment from: WE [shutsu shoji]. Literally, 
leaving birth-and-death. 

birth-and-death, let go of: #®EE [sha shoji]. 

birth and death, pass through: ii#8E5E [ruten shdji]. 

birth-and-death, penetration of: A“E3€ [nisshdji]. Literally, entering 
birth-and-death. 

birth and death, sea of: A cycle of transmigration seen as continuous 
suffering. A way toward the shore of enlightenment. 

birth-and-death, vitalize: BEVE [do shdji], literally, bringing birth-and- 
death (to the other shore of enlightenment.). 

birth and death at each moment: #\ABE i, [setsuna shometsu]. 

bits and pieces: FR [hempen]. HA(&&% [hempen jojo], literally, 
pieces and strips. Sometimes means moment-by-moment actualizing 
practice. 

bitter gourd has a bitter root: S3i2tRS [kuka renkon ku]. 

black stone tortoise: See tortoise, black stone. 

blind one leads a blind one: —&5|—& [ichimo in ichim6]. Blind leads 
the blind: —B5|22B [ichimo in shumo]. 

blink. See also treasury of the true dharma eye. 

bliss, dharma: See dharma bliss. 

blood vein: Mfik [kechimyaku]. Continuation of the dharma and 
precept lineage. 

blossom: # [hana]. 

blossom, spring: #2 [shunka]. 

blossom, wondrous: ¥# [myodke]. 

blows, thirty: = [sanjiibo]. Hitting with a stick thirty times, as a 
means to awaken a student. 

blue-eyed: 2288 [hekigan]. Bodhidharma. 

board rolls on a pearl: 827E¥ [ban so jul. 

boar hat, wild: 44 n¢ [chohi kan]. 

boat, treasure: #3€ [hojo]. 

bodhi. See also enlightenment; way, attain the. 

bodhi tree: The tree under which the Buddha attained enlightenment. 

bodhi tree, glorious one under the: &#=E [kakuju’6], literally, bodhi 
tree king. 

Bodhidharma: Skt. #4212 [Bodaidaruma]. Ca. fifth-sixth century, 
India and China. Reportedly a prince of 82 Xiangxi Kingdom, of 
which the Sanskrit name is unknown. Regarded as the Twenty- 
eighth Indian Ancestor and the First Chinese Ancestor in the Zen 
tradition. Dharma heir of Prajfiatara, India. According to legend, he 
had a dialogue with Emperor Wu of the southern kingdom of Liang, 
but Wu did not understand him. Then he went to the northern 

kingdom of Wei and sat at Shaolin Temple, Shaoshi Peak, Mount 
Song (Henan). He taught Huike, Daoyu, Daofu, and the nun 
Zongchi. The dharma lineage of Huike, the Second Chinese 
Ancestor, has flourished. 

Bodhidharma School: 325% [Daruma Shi]. A Japanese Zen school 
founded by Dainichi Nonin in the late twelfth century. 

Bodhiruchi: #23732 [Bodairushi]. Ca. fifth-sixth century, China. An 
Indian monk who arrived in Luoyang (Henan) in 508 and engaged 
in translation of stitras into Chinese. Purportedly one of the monks 
who accused and attempted to oppress Bodhidharma. 

bodhisattva: Skt. Transliteration: =feh2t# [bodaisatta]. Abbreviated as 
= [bosatsu]. 1. In early Buddhism, a former life of the Buddha 
who endeavors to become a buddha in a future birth. 2. Later in 
Mahayana Buddhism, a seeker of enlightenment (bodhi) who 
dedicates his or her life to awakening others and practicing the 
paramitas (realizations), and who is destined to become a buddha. 
The bodhisattva in this sense is regarded as an ideal practitioner of 
dharma. 

Bodhisattva, Moonlight Ax’ ([Gakko Bosatsu]. Skt, 
Chandraprabha. Commonly known as attendant of Medicine 
Buddha. 

Bodhisattva, Prajfia Kita: 748% [Chishaku Bosatsu]. A speaker in 
the Lotus Sitra who had dialogue with Manjushri. 

Bodhisattva, Pure Light: 3ti#2£% [KOjoO Bosatsu]. Skt., Prabhasvara. 
Identified as Confucius in the Satra of Pure Dharma Conduct. 

Bodhisattva, Vajragarbha: #8 [Kongozo Bosatsu]. A deity who 
conveys Vairochana’s universal enlightenment to sentient beings 
who raise the thought of enlightenment. Regarded as dharma heir 
of Vairochana, and as Second Ancestor of Esoteric Buddhism. 

bodhisattva mahasattva: Skt. i278 ([botatsu makasatsu). 
Bodhisattva who is a great being. 

bodhisattva of great compassion. See also Avalokiteshvara. 

bodhisattva precepts: 87% [bosatsu kai]. Mahayana precepts. 

Bodhisattva Realization Protector: 4A [Gomy6 Bosatsu]. A former 
life of the Buddha. 

Bodhisattva Vehicle. See also Vehicles, Three. 

bodhisattva who is a candidate to be a buddha: *i(@)=8Z [fusho (no) 
bosatsu], literally, bodhisattva at the place (status) of replacement. 
‘iS [fusho togaku], literally, one whose enlightenment is 
equal (to buddha’s) at the place of standing by. —4##(O)EK 
[issho fusho (no) bosatsu], literally, bodhisattva standing by only 
one lifetime (to be a buddha next lifetime). 

Bodhisattva’s Four Methods of Guidance: #2 8#1#0Q)tm;& [Bodaisatta 
Shi Shoho]. Forty-sixth fascicle of this book. 

bodhisattvas, countless: ABFA{#22 [nayuta shu], literally, niyuta people. 
Skt. niyuta: ten to the eleventh power. 

bodhisattvas of the last ten stages approaching buddha’s enlightenment: + 
ih @ ([jitchi togaku], literally, ten grounds and _ equal 
enlightenment. See also bodhisattvas of the ten stages and three 
classes. 

bodhisattvas of the ten stages and three classes: -32= [jissho sangen], 
literally, ten stages and three wise ones. According to Tiantai and 
Huayan doctrines, bodhisattvas are classified into the forty-two 
stages based on their maturity. The beginning thirty degrees are 
called three classes (ten stages of abiding, ten stages of practice, ten 
stages of dedication). The more advanced ten degrees are called the 
ten stages or the ten grounds. That makes forty stages. There are yet 
two more stages before becoming a buddha: stages of enlightenment 
equal to the Buddha’s and of inconceivable enlightenment. 

bodies crushed and shattered: *}### [funsai goshin]. 

bodies of all buddhas: #4 #82 [sho buttai]. 

bodily presences, four: PU{% [shigi]. The noble forms in everyday 
practice: walking, standing, sitting, and lying down. 

body: & [shin]. 1. The material structure and substance of a human 
being. 2. Buddha body. 3. Truth itself. 

body, all over the: #5 [henshin]. 

body, cast off the: Aik#= [dattai]. Drop away the body; become free from 
the body. 

body, drop: 832 [shimbotsu], literally, disappear body. 

body, drop away the: #3 [kishin-su]. To become free of attachment 
and preconceived ideas. 

body, entire: }#5 [konshin]. 

body, final: &4##§ [saigoshin]. The state of being free from rebirth. 
Body of an arhat; or in Mahayana, of a bodhisattva whose 
enlightenment is equal to Buddha’s. 

body, form of the: 48 [shinso]. 

body, forthright: B& [jiki shin]. 

body, hiding the: #& [zdshin]. Dropping away body and mind; 
complete identity of teacher and student. 

body, mind, and environs: {IE [esho]. k#R [eho], literally, 
dependence reward; plusiE#k [shoho], literally, right reward. The 
“dependence reward” is something the body and mind depend 
upon; land and the world. The “right reward” means body and 
mind. 

body, place of turning the: #5} 8& [tenshin sho]. 

body, practice with the: #234(¢9) [taikyi(-su)]. Embody or thoroughly 
take hold of what is essential. 

body, see through with the: #512(9) [taitatsu(-su)]. Realize through 

bodily experience. 

body, short dharma: #2;4§ [tan hosshin]. Dharma body is truth itself, 
which is manifested in the unique characteristics (such as shortness 
or tallness) of each person. 

body, tall dharma: 345) [cho hosshin]. Dharma body is truth itself, 
which is manifested in the unique characteristics (such as shortness 
or tallness) of each person. 

body, three parts of female: Anus, vagina, and mouth. Organs used for 
sexual activities according to the Precept Scripture. 

body, true: #8 [jittai]. True form. & #8 [shinjitsu tai]. 

body, true dharma: &j# [shin hosshin]. 

body, true human: && A # [shinjitsu nintai]. See also buddha body. 

body, turn: #85 [tenshin]. Become free of stagnation; have a 
breakthrough. 

body, twirl one’s: #154 [honshin]. 

body, two parts of a male: Anus and penis. Organs used for sexual 
activities according to the Precept Scripture. 

body, unconditioned: #475 [sh6jo shin], literally, pure body. 

body and capacity, same: A) la) #& [doshin doki]. 

body and flap the brain, freely turn the: See turn the body and flap the 
brain, freely. 

body and mind: IE#k [shoho], literally, right reward. Pursued and 
fortunate effect from past action, meaning body and mind. 

body and mind, drop away: Si8i38S [shinjin datsuraku-su]. To 
become fully liberated. 

body and mind, fully engage: 3is@#2¢ [shinjin wo agu]. Literally, 
upholding body and mind. 

body and mind are not separate: &its—4] [shinjin ichinyol, literally, 
body and mind one thusness. 

Body-and-Mind Study of the Way: §it\438 [Shinjin Gakud6]. Thirty- 
eighth fascicle of this book. 

body born from the mother: %#E [josho], literally, young woman birth. 

body dimension: 3 [shinry6]. 

body first and mind last: 35¢:04% [shinsen shingo]. 

body is straight: 4B [shinjiki]. 

body-mind: 5 it) [shinjin]. Body and mind experienced as inseparable. 

body reaches, wherever the: 345 [tstishin]. 

bones and marrow: he [kotsuzui]. 

born together: [=| [ddshd]. 

bound: #932 (tt 5 3) [koken(-se raru)]. 

boundary: 327% [hempy6], literally, superficial (views). = [henry6], 
literally, limited amount. i128 [henzai], environ. BRR [saigen], 
literally, limited bound. 

boundlessness: 28 [ki], literally, sky, emptiness. 

bow: #2## [raihai]. Prostrating oneself. 

bow, hitting: t2S#= [tonshu hai]. 

bow, spread the bowing cloth and: R44 FFT [ten zagu raihai-su]. 

bow, standing: fajafl [monjin], literally, inquiring or greeting. Bowing 
with hands together in front of the chest while standing. Ha5o 
[kyokkyi-su]. literally, bend the body. 

bowed to, one who is: Fff# [shorei]. 

bowing, utmost: mt [saijorei]. Bowing by hitting the floor with 
one’s head. 

bowing cloth: 44 [zagu]. A rectangular patched cloth spread fully or 
half folded on the floor or bowing mat by an ordained person for 
full bowings (prostrations). It is folded into a strap and carried over 
the left forearm under the robe when not spread during a ceremony. 

bowing cloth, fully spread the: AF [daiten], literally, great spread. The 
most formal way to make prostrations. 

bowing cloth twice and make three formal bows, spread the: See spread the 
bowing cloth twice and make three bows. 

bowing down with the head touching the floor: #4 #¥ [keishu hai]. 

bowing mat: ##) [haishiki/hasshiki]. A straw mat placed on the floor 
in front of the altar, on which the officiant of a ceremony or service 
makes full bows to the enshrined image. 

bowl, monk’s: Kam [hou/hatsuu]. 

bowl, same: —ih [ichi u], literally, one bowl. 

bowls and utensils, eating: #1 [hogu]. Used for meals and begging 
practice. 

bows, indefinite: 7{£## [fuji hai]. 

bows, make three formal: =% [sanrai]. 

bows, nine formal: 7.## [kythai]. Most formal bow on the floor over 
the spread bowing cloth. 

bows, one who: #£% [norei]. 

bows, semiformal: ff# [sokurei]. Placing the bowing cloth cross-folded 
on the floor and making a bow by touching the mat with forehead. 

bows, spread the bowing cloth twice and make three: See spread the 
bowing cloth twice and make three bows. 

Boxiang: See Wang Boxiang. 

Brahma Heaven: #X [Bon Ten]. tt [Bonse], literally, Brahma 
World. Heaven where Brahma resides. Heaven of purity. 

Brahma, King: See King Brahma. 

Brahma World. See also Brahma Heaven. 

Brahman: Skt. Transliteration: P49 [baramon]. A priest of the priest 
caste in Brahmanism or Hinduism. #%& [bonshil], literally, seeker of 
Brahman, the Absolute. 

Brahman, a drunk: #22#P4 [sui baramon]. 

Brahman, Dirghanakha: JR [Choso Bonshi], literally, Long Nail 

Brahman. Uncle of Shariputra. As a Brahman he made a vow not to 
cut his nails until he attained the way. He became one of the ten 
great disciples of the Buddha. Named Kushinagara, he was known 
as the best debater. 

Brahmanism: ##@P4# [Baramon Kyo]. Religious practice related to 
Vedas, prevalent in ancient India. 

Brahmanist Texts, Eighteen Large: +/\A4%§ [jtihachi daikyo]. Four 
Vedic scriptures, six supplementary scriptures, and _ eight 
commentaries. 

brain, freely turn the body and flap the: See turn the body and flap the 
brain, freely. 

branches and vines: 3*% [manshi]. 

breaking an eggshell by pecking from the inside and outside at once: VAIK 
Ox [sottaku no jinki], literally, swift timing of spitting and 
pecking. 

break away: Hist [shutsuri]. 

break open. See also illuminate and break open. 

breathing in: A‘ [nissoku]. 

breathing out: 1/3 [shussoku]. 

breezes, freely circulates like the flowing: ®§ alii [ten fiiryi]. 

brick, polishing a: #218 [masen]. Just as polishing a brick does not 
make it into a mirror, sitting zazen with a desire to become a 
buddha will not make a person a buddha. Based on a story about 
Nanyue Huairang and Mazu Daoyi. 

brightness comes meet it with brightness, when: BASE3REASAT] [meito rai 
meit6 da]. Puhua’s words. Brightness represents duality. 

brilliance and obscure traces, hide: #43¢23Hh [toko kaiseki]. 

bring: #43RS [shorai-su], literally, pull and come. 

bring across. See also awakening. 

bring forth: #43K [nenrai]. Take up; touch; quote. 

bring here, take away: ##3R#2H% [tanrai tanko]. 

brings forth: #£Wi9 [suishutsu-su], literally, push out. 

brush, take up the: #%# [empitsu]. 

Budai: Gan Budai 27648 [Kan Hotei], literally, Heavy Cloth Bag. d. 
916, China. A fat-bellied person from Ming Region (Zhejiang). 
Wandering about and begging with all his possessions in a cloth 
bag, he later became a symbol of freedom and was regarded as an 
incarnation of Maitreya Bodhisattva. 

buddha: Skt., literally, awakened one. {# [butsu; hotoke]. One who has 
attained unsurpassable, complete enlightenment and teaches others. 
One of the three treasures. 

Buddha: 1. See Buddha, Shakyamuni. 2. An enlightened being described 
in scriptures. 3. Mythological or deified personification of 
enlightenment, i.e., Vairochana Buddha. 

Buddha, accept: f(a [butsu shinju], literally, trust and accept 
Buddha. 

buddhas, active: {7{# [gyobutsu]. See also Awesome Presence of Active 
Buddha. 

buddha, become a: hk [jobutsu]. fF [sabutsu], literally, create a 
buddha. Attain buddhahood. 

Buddha, bondage to: (#8 [butsubaku]. 

Buddha, Dipankara: 34% [JOk6 Butsu], literally, Solid Light Buddha. 
SANE YN3K [Nentd Nyorai], literally, Lamp-Burning Tathagata. A 
mystic Buddha said to be the first one to give a prediction of 
enlightenment to a bodhisattva, one of the former lives of 
Shakyamuni Buddha. 

buddha, earlier: §i\(# [zembutsu]. 

Buddha, eighty appearances of the: /\+-###¥ [hachijisshu kG]. 

buddha, enter the realm of: #/C AS [butsu ni iru]. 

buddha, everyone’s mind becomes: /0\fF ## [zeshin sabutsu]. 

buddha, go beyond: See go beyond buddha. 

Buddha, Kanakamuni: #9 #83 le [Kunagon’muni Butsu]. #1 
[Konjiki Sen], literally, Golden Sage. Fifth of the six mythological 
Buddhas among the Seven Original Buddhas. 

Buddha, Kashyapa: iw [Kasho Butsu], W085} [Kashoha Butsu]. 
Bk 3é [Inko], literally, Drinking Light. Sixth and last of the 
mythological Buddhas among the Seven Original Buddhas. 
Regarded as the dharma teacher of Shakyamuni, the seventh 
Original Buddha. 

buddha, kill: #%4# [satsubutsu]. Go beyond buddha. 

Buddha, Krakucchanda: +947" ([Kuruson Butsu]. #(il|A [Kin 
Sennin], literally, Golden Wizard. Fourth of the six mythological 
Buddhas among the Seven Original Buddhas. 

Buddha, Maha Abhijfid Jfiand Abhibhi: AjiBSASH ([Daitstii Chishd 
Butsu]. Buddha described in the Lotus Satra. 

Buddha, Moon-Face: Affit# [Gachimen Butsu]. See also Buddha, Sun- 
Face. 

buddha, not-: 4E(# [hibutsu]. Beyond buddha. 

buddha, old: 4% [kobutsu]. Ancient buddha. 

Buddha, Ratnakosha: ii [HoOzd Butsu]. One of the Buddhas to 
whom Shakyamuni Buddha made offerings in his former lifetime. 

buddha, realized: 53% [shobutsu]. 

buddha, reward-body: See buddha body. 

Buddha, Ruchi: #222 [Roshi Butsu]. Last Buddha of the present eon. 

Buddha, Shakyamuni: Ca. 566-ca. 486 B.c.E., according to Western and 
Indian scholarship. Many contemporary Japanese scholars support 
the dates ca. 448-ca. 368 B.cE., based on the northern textual 
tradition. Dogen’s understanding of the Buddha’s dates is 908-828; 

B.C.E. (Fascicle 23, “Buddha Nature,” gives a clue to the year of the 
Buddha’s attaining the way, which is calculated to be 878 B.cE. 
Fascicle 31a, “Continuous Practice, Part One,” says the Buddha was 
thirty years old then and entered pari-nirvana fifty years later.) 

The founding teacher of Buddhism who taught in the plain 
along the Ganges, central to eastern part of northern India. Dogen 
refers to him in a number of ways: Skt. Shakyamuni, ##WI4/E 
[Shakamuni], literally, practitioner of silence from Shakya Clan. 
Family name, Gautama, #2 ([Kudon]. Royal title, Prince 
Siddhartha, #i#A f [Shidda Taishi]. Also in Buddhism, 
Shakyamuni Tathagata, #01 Jeg [Shakamuni 
Nyorai];Venerable Shakya, ##4 [Shakuson]. Particularly in Zen, 
Great Master Shakya, ##i02X6 [Shaka Daishi]; Old Man Shakya, 
f2wIEF [Shaka Roshi]; #2WIZj% [Shaka ROkan]; Old Gautama, 
##2 [RO Kudon]. His honorary titles include: the Buddha, 
Tathagata, and the World-Honored One. 

Born in Kapilavastu (present-day central southern Nepal) as son 
of King Shuddhodana and Queen Maya. Married Princess 
Yashodhara and had a son named R&hula. Left the palace to seek 
the way, visited Brahman teachers, sat alone and attained the way 
in Buddhagaya (currently called Bodhgaya), in the western part of 
the kingdom of Magadha. As the Buddha, he gave his first 
teaching (turn-ing of the dharma wheel) at Deer Park in Varanasi, 
the central city of Brahmanism, located in the northwest of 
Buddhagaya. For almost five decades he taught monks and nuns 
as well as laypeople of all kinds. His summer retreats took place 
at Jeta Grove, Shravasti, in the kingdom of Kaushala. Vulture 
Peak in Magadha is often described in scriptures as the place 
where he gave dharma discourses. He entered pari-nirvana in 
Kushinagara in the northwest of Magadha at age eighty. 

After the Buddha’s death, his teachings were recalled and 
collected by his disciples and dharma descendants; centuries later 
these were recorded as scriptures. Buddhist scriptures developed 
in response to the needs of practitioners in each era. However, 
until modern scholarship started to develop in the nineteenth 
century, it was common for Buddhists, including Dogen, to 
believe that all Buddhist siitras were direct discourses of the 
Buddha himself. 

In the Mahayana Buddhist tradition, the Buddha’s becoming 
enlightened simultaneously with the awakening of all sentient 
beings is emphasized. His enlightenment is seen as the result of 
his search in former lifetimes as a variety of beings called 
bodhisattvas. It is also seen as an inheritance of the universal 
enlightenment transmitted by his earlier buddhas; Shakyamuni is 

regarded as the last of the Seven Original Buddhas, six of whom 
are mythological. Inspired by his teaching, different types of 
deified Buddhas and their iconographic images, along with other 
deities, evolved in the Buddhist pantheon. According to the Zen 
tradition, he transmitted dharma to Mahakashyapa, the First 
Ancestor. 

Buddha, Sun-Face: Him [Nichimen Butsu]. According to the 
Buddhas’ Names Siitra, Sun-Face Buddha lives for 1,800 years, while 
Moon-Face Buddha lives for one day and night. These Buddhas 
represent immeasurable time and short moments. 

buddha, true: 8 (# [shimbutsu]. 

Buddha, Universal Protection: 35F903R [Fushu Nyorai]. One of the 
Buddhas to whom Shakyamuni Buddha made offerings in his former 
lifetime. 

Buddha, Vairochana: Skt. BEi##B [Birushana Butsu], E2& [Biru]. 
Vairochana Tathagata, EZ ASYU2R [Birushana Nyorai]. BE AH 
[Rushana Butsu]. The dharma body buddha, manifestation of reality 
of the uni-verse; literally, illumination buddha. Called Maha 
Vairochana Buddha in Esoteric Buddhism. See also Buddhas, Five; 
dharma body. 

buddha, vicinity of: #32 [buppen]. Realm of buddhas. 

Buddha, Vipashyin: Transliteration: F222 [Bibashi Butsu]. 
Translations: f%#% [Shokan], literally, Excellent Observation; JAH 
[KOsetsu], literally, Boundless Discourse. First of the six 
mythological Buddhas among the Seven Original Buddhas. 
(Shakyamuni is the seventh Buddha.) 

buddha activity/activities: #23 [butsuji]. 

buddha ancestor: An earlier awakened teacher of the dharma lineage. 

buddha ancestor, forthright: Ei #48 [jiki busso]. 

buddha ancestor, grasp the: $4448 [nentoku busso]. 

buddha ancestor, mature: 820 #48H [sambo no busso]. 

Buddha Ancestors: {#48 [Busso]. Sixteenth fascicle of this book. 

buddha ancestors, activity of: 4E(% [busso gil]. 

buddha ancestors, powers as: 46487) [busso riki]. 

buddha ancestors, realm of: #48 [ubusso sho]. 

buddha ancestors, realm of going beyond: #%4%48%: [mubusso sho]. 
literally, place of no buddha ancestors. 

buddha ancestors, turning of: [ten busso] #2 (24H. 

buddha ancestors’ perception: {4H [butsuryO sory6], literally 
buddha thinking, ancestor thinking. 

buddha and a buddha, only between a: MEG£3% [yuibutsu yobutsu]. A 
buddha together with a buddha. 

buddha body: Skt., buddha kaya. #5 [busshin]. Three bodies or 
aspects of buddha: (1) Dharma kaya, 4 [hosshin]—dharma body, 

which is the absolute aspect of truth, equal to the whole universe of 
phenomena. (2) Sambhoga kaya, ##[hojin]—reward, enjoyment, 
bliss, or purified body, associated with the fruit of practice. (3) 
Nirmana kaya, JS [djin]—manifestation body that appears in the 
world and acts for the benefit of beings. The buddha body that has 
these three aspects is also known as the true human body. 

buddha cause: {#4 [butsuin]. 

buddha dharma: Skt. #;& [buppo]. Truth taught by a buddha; reality 
experienced by an awakened one. 

buddha dharma, authentic: BBO #/& [shinjitsu no buppo]. 

buddha dharma, essential: KOI [tenshin no buppdl], literally, 
natural and true buddha dharma. 

buddha dharma, matter of: i412 [buppo henji]. 

buddha dharma, pure, single: #1— © #% [jun’itsu no buppo]. 

buddha dimension: (# [butsury6]. 

buddha effect. See also buddha fruit. 

Buddha entrusting the dharma: ‘##) [butchoku]. 

buddha eyes. See also eyes, five. 

buddha fruit: #58 [bukka]. Also, buddha effect. 

buddha ground: (#63t1 [butchi]. 

buddha hall. {8X [butsuden]. Building in a monastery where the main 
buddha image is enshrined and services take place. 

buddha hall upside down and move in a circle, ride the. See also ride the 
buddha hall upside down and move in a circle. 

buddha heir: {#6-f [busshi], literally, buddha child. 

buddha heritage: (f=) [busshi]. 

buddha house: (23% [bukke]. 1. Practicing community of buddha 
dharma. 2. Practitioner of buddha dharma. 

buddha kashaya: (#222 [butsu kesa]. 

buddha knowledge: #2 #405 [butsu no chiken]. 

buddha land: (E [bukkoku], ##EJ-- [bukkokudo]. A land where a 
Buddha has appeared. 

buddha land, southern: FAAEI [nampo bukkokudo]. Southern 
Continent, Jambudvipa. See also Continents, Four. 

buddha light: #36 [bukk6]. #3¢BA [butsu komy6], literally, buddha 
illumination. 

buddha mind: ‘#1¢) [busshin]. Mind that is inseparable from the great 
activity of the universe. 

Buddha Mind School: ##t\5& [Busshin Shi]. A name for the Zen school. 

buddha name, chanting: &/# [nembutsu]. 

buddha nature: {#4 [bussh6]. 1. The capacity for becoming a buddha, 
which is inherent in all sentient beings according to Mahayana 
Buddhist teaching. 2. Dogen interprets Mahd Pari-nirvana Sitra’s 
statement “All sentient beings have buddha nature,” —(JR4E88 

#14 [Issai shujd shitsu u busshd], as “Living beings all are buddha 
nature.” (He reads “all have” #% [shitsu u] as “all are.”) 

Buddha Nature: ‘#£ [Bussh6]. Twenty-third fascicle of this book. 

buddha-nature circle: E\*8(#'t+ [ensd bussh6]. 

buddha nature, does a dog have: 7 fi2 8 YER [kushi kan’u bussho 
ya mukushi ni mata bussho ari ya nashi ya]. Famous koan of 
Zhaozhou Congshen. 

buddha nature, ocean of: (#67 [bussh6 kai]. 

buddha nose: {#2 [bussen], literally, buddha pointed. 

buddha oldness: #4 [bukko]. 

buddha precept: (7% [bukkai]. 

buddha procedure: ‘#{% [butsugi]. Buddha practice; buddha guidelines. 
Also, stories about the Buddha. 

buddha radiance: (#7¢8A [bukkomy6]. 

buddha rank: (#6{iZ [butsui]. 

buddha robe: {#%K [butsue]. 

buddha seal: {#6E[) [butchin]. Unchanging reality experienced by a 
buddha. Also, recognition of the buddha mind and entrustment of 
the teaching. (#/0E[] [busshin ‘in], literally, buddha mind seal. 

buddha seed: {#48 [busshu]. 

buddha sickness: {#74 [butsuby6]. Driven by the desire to become a 
buddha. 

Buddha Siitras: {#%% [Bukky6]. Fifty-third fascicle of this book. 

buddha tathdgata. See also tathdgata. 

buddha thought: {= [butsuryo]. 

buddha tongue: (#5 [butsuzetsu]. 

Buddha Vehicle. See also Vehicle, One. 

buddha virtue: (4% [buttoku]. 

buddha way: ‘#38 [butsud6]. Also called the great way of all buddhas, 
#4 #®@®AjE [shobutsu no daidd]. The path of awakened ones, 
which is actualized through each person’s practice. This term is 
often used in contrast to scriptural studies. 

buddha way, contemplate the: FAYE#=iB [shiyui butsudo]. 

Buddha Way, The: {#318 [Butsud6]. Fiftieth fascicle of this book. 

buddha wind: (#/\ [buppii]. Buddha’s style of teaching. 

buddha wisdom: {#0 [butchi], #78 [butchie]. 

buddha words: {#58 [butsugo]. 

buddha work: (#3€ [butsug6]. 

Buddha’s abdomen: (##& [buppuku]. 

Buddha’s birthday: Shakyamuni Buddha’s birthday is traditionally 
celebrated on the eighth day of the fourth month in East Asia. 

buddha’s enlightenment, equal to: %# [togaku], literally, equal 
enlightenment. See also bodhisattva who is a candidate to be a 
buddha. 

buddha’s form: {#48 [buss6]. 

buddha’s heir buddha: ‘#9 [butsushi butsu]. 

buddha’s instruction: {#3)l| [bukkun]. Admonitions of the Buddha. 

Buddha’s life: —{& [ichidai], literally, one lifetime. 

Buddha’s life span: {#3 [butsu juryo]. 

buddha’s mudra: ‘Ef [butsuin/butchin]. 1. A hand gesture of a 
buddha. 2. The mind of a buddha, that is unchangeable. See also 
mudra. 

Buddha’s Pari-nirvana Admonition Outline Sitra: (ERIE S208 it AGE 
[Busshi Hatsu Nehan Ryakusetsu Kyokai Kyo]. Also called Buddha’s 
Willed Teaching Siitra, IBAA [Butsu Yuikyo Gyo). 

Buddha’s teaching was transmitted eastward: #i%58 #f [buppo tdzen]. 

buddha’s transformation: {#{t, [bukke]. Buddha’s teaching. 

Buddha’s womb: ‘A [buttai]. 

buddha-as-self: A [jbutsu]. 

buddhas: ### [shobutsu]. 

buddhas, enter: A [nyiibutsu]. 

Buddhas, Five: if ([Gobutsu]. Maha Vairochana, Akshobhya, 
Prabhita-ratna, Amitayus (Amitabha), and Amoghasiddhi. The 
manifestations of the fourfold wisdom of Maha Vairochana in 
Vajrayana (Esoteric) Buddhism is represented by the four other 
Buddhas. 

Buddhas, Four: PU(# [Shibutsu]. Shakyamuni Buddha, plus three 
preceding Buddhas: Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni, and Kashyapa. 

buddhas, incarnated: {¢,4# [kebutsu]. Incarnate-body buddhas. Buddhas 
taking forms of others to guide beings. 

buddhas, miracle: ##i8% [jinzi butsu]. 

buddhas, presence of all: i #@ t#{% [shobutsu no butsugi]. 

buddhas, self-manifested: B+ [jish6 shin butsu]. 

Buddhas, Seven Original: Cf [Shichi Butsu]. Succession of six 
mythological buddhas before Shakyamuni Buddha, plus 
Shakyamuni Buddha. See fascicle 16, “Buddha Ancestors.” 

Buddhas’ Teaching, The: (## [Bukky6]. Twenty-fifth fascicle of this 
book. 

buddhas, throughout: 8 [gobutsu]. 

buddhas and ancestors: {#134848 [butsubutsu soso]. 

buddhas and ancestors, form and manner of the: 1{#48{% [butsugi sogi]. 

buddhas as many as the sands of the Ganges: ‘874% [gosha butsu]. 

buddhas before Shakyamuni Buddha: j&2;07%4% [kako no shobutsu], 
literally, past buddhas. 

buddhas manifested from others: {th [tashoshin butsu]. 

Buddhist practitioners: (#3 [busshu], literally, buddha assembly. 

Butsuju Myozen: (4s{BR. 2) [Zen KO], literally, honorable Myozen. 
1184-1225, Japan. Dharma heir of Myoan Eisai. As abbot of the 

Kennin Monastery, Kyoto, he taught Rinzai Zen to Dogen. He took 
Dogen to China but died at the Tiantong Monastery during his 
study. 

cage and snare: #2#2 [rora]. Traps of words and concepts. 

cage or a fishing net, bird: #2#¢ [rora]. Being confined by delusion. 

calf: +52 [gyiiji]. 

call and actualize: W&{F [kansa]. 

calmness, place of: $£#2tth [heion chi]. 

candle, blew at a: WRik4K 3 [suimetsu shishoku]. 

canon, rotate the: #§XAjixx€ [ten daizd kyo]. Ceremoniously and 
symbolically chant the entire body of sitras. 

Caodong School: #5 [Soto Shi]. One of the Five “Houses” of Zen in 
China. The dharma lineage derived from Dongshan Liangjie. 
Sometimes his successor Caoshan Benji is regarded as cofounder. 
There is also a theory that the name of this school is a combination 
of Caoxi, where the Sixth Ancestor Huineng lived, and Dongshan 
Liangjie. Dogen brought this teaching to Japan and is regarded as 
founder of its Japanese form, the Soto School. 

Caoshan Benji: SUAS [Sdzan Honjaku]. 840-901, China. Dharma 
heir of Dongshan Liangjie. Sometimes regarded as cofounder of 
Caodong School along with his teacher, Dongshan. Studied 
Confucianism as a youth and entered Lingshi Monastery in Fuzhou 
at nineteen. After becoming Dongshan’s dharma heir, he started a 
monastery at Mount Cao, Fu Region (Jiangxi). He used Dongshan’s 
“Five Ranks” as a method of instruction, thereby widening its use. 
He was known for his commentary on the verses of the poet 
Hanshan. His posthumous name is Great Master Yuanzheng 7cREX 
fi! [Gensho Daishil]. 

Caoxi: See Dajian Huineng. 

Caoxi Lingdao: Si 4 [Sokei Reitd]. 666-760, China. Dharma heir 
of Sixth Ancestor Huineng. Tended to the stiipa that enshrined 
Huineng’s robe after his death, declining imperial invitations. His 
posthumous name is Zen Master Daxiao, ABE##hi [Daigy6 Zenji]. 

capacity, excellent: E#R [jokon], literally, high root. 

capacity, great: A# [daiki], literally, large function. 

capacity, human: A} [ninkon], literally, person’s root. 

capacity, in accordance with the listener’s: K&#% [zui ki]. Eh¥% [fuki]. 

capacity, minor: /|\ ORR [shoryo no kikon]. 

capacity, sharp: ¥|#® [rikon]. 

capacity, true: 87) [jitsuriki]. True power. 

capping verses: 4874 [juko]. Commentary verses on a koan. 

careless: #t#% [zusan]. 

cart, white-ox: A4-& [byaku gossha]. 

carts, three types of: = [sansha]. Carts pulled by a sheep, a deer, and 
an ox, representing the Three Vehicles. The One Vehicle is 
symbolized by a great white-ox cart. This analogy is told in the 
Lotus Sutra. 

cases, master: #8!) [gokusoku]. To master koans. 

cast away: #1 [hoOkyaku]. Hurl away. Kyaku is a suffix indicating 
emphasis. 

cast off: BX FCS) [hoge(-su)]. See also body, cast off the. 

causal beings: 4% [en’u]. 

causal conditions: #%#2 [engi]. 

causal relations, power of the: [Al#%7) [innen riki]. 

causal relationship, excellent: #4—4% [ketsu ryden], literally, forming 
good conditions. 

causation, imaginary: 524% [moengi]. 

causation, produced by: Al#xE [innen sho]. Arise through causes and 
conditions. 

causation, this very moment of: | \& BFE Al4# [ima no jisetsu innen]. 

causation, twelvefold: + —###z [jini rinden], +—Al4# [jini innen]. 
The chain of the “dependent origination” [innen] of pain and 
despair in the cycle of birth, death, and rebirth: ignorance; karma- 
forma-tions; consciousness; name-and-form (corporeality); six sense 
fields (the spheres of sense activities); contact; feeling (sensation); 
craving (thirst); grasping (clinging); becoming (action); birth 
(rebirth); and decay (old age, sickness) and death. The logical 
formula is as follows: “Ignorance is the cause of karma-formations. 
Karma-formations are the cause of consciousness,” and so on to 
“decay and death.” 

cause and effect: AIR [inga]. 

cause and effect over time: R¥6fi[Al4% [jisetsu innen]. Also for Dogen, 
this moment of enlightenment. 

cause and effect, deny: #4##AR [hatsumu inga]. 

cause and effect, not fall into: 738A [furaku inga]. 

cause and effect, not ignore: 7*PRAIR [fumai inga], literally, not 
obscure cause and effect. 

cause, true: #Al [jitsuin]. 

causes and conditions: Al## [innen]. Also, an explanation of causes; 
story for studying; materials to study. 

causes and conditions, cease through: l4%i# [innen metsu]. 

causes, practice: (2A) [shuin]. 

cave and basket: #2 [kutsur6]. Limited dualistic views. 

celestial activity. See also activity, celestial. 

celibate: \38;2Q [kodoku keppaku], literally, solitary and pure. 

ceremony, chanting: 75M [nenju]. 

chair, bent-wood teaching: HH7A\M JA [kyokumoku no sh6]. Cross-legged 

chair, 3¢49 [k6i]. Foldable chair with a bent piece of wood for the 
back and arm rest. 

chaitya: Skt. Transliteration: 3242 [shidai], f!]% [seita]. Shrine, tower. 
Sometimes indicates stiipa. 

Chanda: #& [Shanoku]. Chariot driver of King Shuddhodana in 
Kapilavastu. He escorted Prince Siddhartha out with a horse, 
brought back his clothing and possessions, and reported the prince’s 
leaving the household to the king. 

Chandra Surya Pradipa Buddha: A AYSBA [Nichigatsu Tomyo Butsu], 
literally, Sun and Moon Lamp Buddha. Described in the Lotus Sutra 
as one who expounded the siitra incalculable eons ago. 

Changcha: See Tong’an Changcha. 

change, not subject to: #82 [mu’u hen’yakul]. 

changes, one thousand: - [sempen]. 

Changling Shouzhuo: 22% [Chorei Shutaku]. 1065-1123, China. 
Dharma heir of Lingyuan Weiqing, Linji School. Taught at Tianning 
Wanshou Monastery, Dongjing (Henan). 

Changlu Qingliao: Hi f [Choro Seiryd]. 1089-1151, China. Also 
called Zhenxie Qingliao. Dharma heir of Danxia Zichun, Caodong 
School. Changlu became a monk at eleven. After passing his exam 
on the Lotus Sutra at eighteen, he visited famous teachers and sacred 
mountains. He taught at a number of monasteries, including 
Changlu Monastery, Jiangning (Jiangsu), until the downfall of the 
Northern Song Dynasty and the ensuing social unrest caused him to 
become itinerant again. His posthumous name is Zen Master 
Wukong, t222%8 Bil [Gokii Zenji]. 

Changging Da’an: RA [Chokei Daian]. 793-883, China. Dharma 
heir of Baizhang Huaihai, Nanyue Line. Called the Second Guishan. 
Also called Lazy An. As a young man he traveled in search of truth 
until he met Master Baizhang and ended his search. Da’an’s dharma 
brother was Guishan Lingyou, who established a temple at Mount 
Gui, Tan Region (Hunan). After Guishan Lingyou’s death, Da’an was 
invited to become abbot there. He taught the importance of staying 
still and training the mind. Later taught at the Changqing 
Monastery, Fu Region (Fujian). His posthumous name is Zen Master 
Yuanzhi, B® ##4 [Enchi Zenji]. 

Changqing Huileng: Ei [Chokei Eryd]. 854-932, China. Dharma 
heir of Xuefeng Yicun, Qingyuan Line. Taught at Chanqing 
Monastery, Quan Province (Fujan). His posthumous name is Great 
Master Chaojiao, #& Ahi [Chokaku Daishi]. 

Changsha Jingcen: &7)R4 ([Chdsha Keishin]. Ca. eighth-ninth 
century, China. Dharma heir of Nanquan Puyuan, Qingyuan Line. 
Taught at Luyuan Monastery, Changsha (Hunan). Once, he saw 
Yangshan Huiji and kicked him right away. Since Yangshan 

remarked Jingcen was as rough as a tiger, he was called Tiger Cen 
4a [Shin Daichi]. Jingcen encouraged students to take one step 
from the top of a hundred-foot pole. His posthumous name is Great 
Master Zhaoxian## Ab [Shoken Daishi]. 

Changshui Zixuan: &7K$38 [Chésui Shisen]. d. 1038, China. Dharma 
heir of Langye Huijiao, Linji School. Taught in Changshui, Shen 
Region (Zhejiang). Wrote a commentary on Shirangama Sutra. 

Changzong. See also Zhaojiao Changzong. 

chant quietly: 2a [mokuju]. 

Chaozhou Dadian: See Dadian Baotong. 

chase the self. See also self and make it into things, chase the. 

check (a person) out: #3} [kanka-su]. 

Chen, Venerable. See also Muzou Daoming. 

Chenggu: See Jianfu Chenggu. 

Chenggui: hk# [Jokei]. Ca. thirteenth century, China. Guest 
coordinator of Ayuwang Mountain Guanli Monastery (Zhejang), 
when Dogen visited. 

China: ##7}E]/ 2 [Shintan Kokul], literally, country of China. Bit 
[tochi], literally, eastern land. 

Chinese person comes a Chinese person appears, when a: j23Rj#iR 
[kanrai kangen]. 

Chinese person learns a Chinese way of walking: BA HBE [tonin 
shakkyaku gaku toho], literally, Chinese person learns barefooted 
Chinese walking. 

chitta: Skt. it) [shin]. Seat of mental and emotional activities. 

Chongjing: See Liu Chongjing. 

Chongxin: See Longtan Chongxin. 

chop down: #33 [bokuraku]. Same as, drop away. 

Chuan: {% [Den]. Ca. thirteenth century, China. Librarian at Tiantong 
Jingde Monastery when Dogen visited. A descendant of priest 
Qingyuan, Zen Master Fuyan of Longmen. 

Chuanzi Decheng: fat ak [Sensu Tokujd]. Ca. eighth-ninth century, 
China. Studied with Yaoshan Weiyan, Qingyuan Line, for thirty 
years and became one of his heirs. Under the persecution of 
Buddhism by Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty, he disguised 
himself as a boatman on Wu River, in Huating (Jiangsu), and 
taught. After transmitting dharma to Jiashan Shanhui, he turned 
over the boat and disappeared into the water. 

Chuyuan: See Ciming Chuyuan. 

Ciming Chuyuan: 248A#4(B) [Jimyo Soen]. 987-1040, China. Dharma 
heir of Fenyang Shanzhao, Linji School. Also called Shishuang 
Chuyuan. Ciming trained assiduously, jabbing himself in the leg 
with an awl if he ever felt sleepy during evening meditation. Taught 
at Mount Shishuang, Tan Region (Hunan). Teacher of Huanglong 

Huinan and Yangqi Fanghui, regarded as founders of the two major 
orders of the Linji School. 

circle: [EJ#4 [ens6], literally, circle form. Represents enlightenment. 
[danran], literally, circle round. Represents intimacy. 

circle of the way: i&3g [dokan], literally, way ring. For Dogen, each 
person’s practice of the way at each moment encompasses 
aspiration (for enlightenment), practice, enlightenment, and 
nirvana. Also, each person’s practice is actualized by the practice of 
all buddhas throughout time, and at the same time actualizes the 
great way of all buddhas. Thus, the circle of the way has its micro 
aspect (the former) and macro aspect (the latter). 

circle, creating a: $]—[B]4# [da ichi enso]. 

circle, draw a: {F— [B48 [sa ichi ens6]. 

circle, rotating a: [|g [kaikan]. 

circulate: JAli@$ [shtisen-su]. 

circumambulation: i= [jundo]. Greeting circuit in the monks’ hall. 

circumstances: B#§z [jisho], literally, time and place. 

circumstances, turn: #818 [tenky6]. 

clarifying dharma, gate of: ;ABAPS [homyo mon]. 

class, warrior: #%|*& [setsuri shu]. 

cleaning monk: 7#98 [jinji]. 

Cleansing: #4i# [Senjo]. Seventh fascicle of this book. 

clear: i [reir6], literally, crystal clear. 

cloud: % [un/kumo]. Represents freedom of moving about, not having 
a fixed abode. Often indicates a monk’s life. Also represents the 
realm of nonduality. 

cloud and water: =fi7K{ [unko suiko]. f [ko] is a suffix with no 
additional meaning. 

cloud hall. See also monks’ hall. 

cloud or a waterweed, wander about like a: See wander about like a cloud 
or a waterweed. 

cloud robes and mist sleeves: =4#4234% [unn6d kabei]. Monk who wears 
Buddhist robes. 

Clouds and moon are one, valleys and mountains are separate: = A/a) 
RLF Hl [ungetsu zedd, keizan kakubetsu]. The Buddha’s original 
teaching is one but it is expressed and experienced in myriad ways. 

clouds arising below one’s feet: HF [sokka unsh6]. 

coin: © [hobail], literally, treasure shell. 

cold/heat. 2 [kansho]. Represents birth/death. 

come forward, not: 75 [fushin]. 

coming and going: &3K [kyorai]. 1. Conventional way of viewing birth 
and death, past and future, as coming from somewhere and going 
somewhere else. 2. In Dodgen’s usage, total experience of the 
continually arising moment of now. 

comment: ft [nenko], literally, take up ancient (words). 
Commentary. “8th [juko], literally, poem on ancient (words); 
commentary in verse. 

commentaries and verses: #84444 [juko nenko]. 

commentary: #8% [tenshaku], literally, interpreting text. Hit# 
[soshaku], literally, clarification and interpretation. Si [shdso], 
literally, clarification. 

common people and sages: LEZ [bonshd]. 

community: @ F [eka], literally, under the assembly. 

compassion: 2&3%§ [jihi]. Identification with those who are suffering 
(Skt., karuna) and sharing wisdom and joy with them (maitri). 

compassionate admonition: 7458 [jikai]. 

Compiled Precepts in Ten Sections for Chanting: iff [Jiju Ritsu]. 
Collection of precepts of Sarvastivadin School, one of the twenty 
early Buddhist schools of India. 

Complete Enlightenment Bodhisattva: |= [Engaku Bosatsu]. One 
who receives the Buddha’s teaching in the Sutra of Complete 
Enlightenment. 

completion: 1B] [zen’en], literally, entire circle. 

composure: ¥E# [yoyo]. 

composure, magnificent: #12%'= = [gigi dodo]. 

comprehension: f #1] [rydchi]. 

conceal: i [z0]. Also, treasure; treasury. 

concentration, learn to do: #44 [shiizen]. A process of gradual 
attainment through increasingly advanced stages employing various 
methods of meditation. 

condition: #% [en]. Circumstance. {« [e], literally, dependence: j#{Z 
[hoi]. State of each thing, literally, dharma position. 

condition, abide in one’s: See abide in one’s condition. 

condition, true: 84% [jitsuen]. 

condition complete this moment: DEEZ OD< 56/—hFOW [hitotoki 
no kurai], literally, position of one time. Dharma position or state of 
being itself, j4{i2 [hdi], at each moment which carries all time. An 
entire period of itself. The unique, nonrepeatable stage of a thing’s 
existence at any given moment. 

conditioned by karma: 34#k [gopp6], literally, reward of karma; 
unwholesome karma. 

conditions: 22% [shuen]. 

conditions that increase: 18 £4% [zdjo en]. 

conditions, gate of abiding in: {EMP [jai mon]. 

conditions, one who enters with ripened: (4% A%& [jiien nissha]. 

conditions, pressing: 348i 524% [genzen no shuen], literally, conditions 
that are present. 

conditions, worldly: tt 2%. 

confirm: §24A [shomy6]. Confirmation. Also, clarification. 

Confirmation: ##3¢ [Juki]. Thirty-third fascicle of this book. 

confirmed, those who have not yet: AR [mishdko sha]. 

Confucius: #L [Koshi]. Kongzi. Ca. sixth-fifth century B.c.£., China. 
Social thinker, writer, and educator. Author of Analects. 

confused: 8) [ddjaku]. Move, sway. &€# [gijaku], literally, doubt. # 
#| [doshi], literally, move and be attached. 

confusions, four: PU{Z| [shitd], literally, four fallings. To be attached to 
permanence, bliss, self, and purity. 

Congshen: See Zhaozhou Congshen. 

Congzhan: See Baofu Congzhan. 

consonants and vowels: & [jimo], literally, mother letters (vowels). 

contemplate the buddha way: See buddha way, contemplate the. 

contemplation, straw sandal: #£\£ [sai shiyui]. 

Continents, Four: QU; [shisha]. According to siitras, the world consists 
of Eight Seas among Nine Mountains that lie around Mount Sumeru. 
Four Continents lie in the Eight Seas. Among them, the Great 
Northern Continent, Uttarakuru, is where inhabitants live for one 
thousand years and don’t know suffering. Therefore, they indulge in 
the pleasure of the present moment. The Southern Continent, 
Jambudvipa, is our world on earth, where we humans live with 
suffering, but where there is the potential for awakening. 

Continuous Practice: {J## [Gy6ji]. Thirty-first fascicle of this volume 
(Parts One and Two). 

continuous practice, solid: {74##24] [gyoji kengo]. 

Continuous Transmission of the Lamp: See Jianzhong Jingguo Continuous 
Transmission of the Lamp. 

control: BS [kan-su]. 

cooking monk: ¢744@K(% [gyd shukuhan so / an shukuhan s6], literally, 
monk who works on breakfast and midday meal. 

cotton, fine: Skt., karpasaka JHE) [kutsujun]. Cloth of core cotton 
threads. 

Cotton Robe Tai: See Nanyue Xuantai. 

country: #J-f [setsudo]. Transliteration of Skt. kshetra [setsu], “field,” 
plus ideograph for “land” [do]. 

craving: [ai], literally; love, attachment. See also causation, 
twelvefold. 

cream: BKB [soraku]. Hz [daigo]. 

create or measure, attempt to: @/F#® = [usa ury6]. 

creating, not-: #£(F [musa]. Beyond doing. 

crime, grave: Skt., parajayika. Transliteration: }£#@3 [harai]. Offenses 
to the practicing community. Cause for being expelled from the 
sangha. 

crimes, one who commits serious: ##A. [gyakunin], literally, upside 
down person. 

criticize: #)% [kampal], literally, discern and crush. See also respond 
and discern; turn around. 

cross over, help: #E [tokudo], literally, attain and help arrive (at the 
shore of enlightenment). M79 [watasu]. 

Crow Stone Peak: F424 [Useki Rei]. Located in Mount Xuefeng, Fu 
Region (Fujian), China. Known for its excellent view. See also Land 
View Pavilion. 

crown: J&_E [chojo], literally, headtop. 

crush (one’s) bones: *}'3 [funkotsu], literally, pound (one’s own) bones 

to powder. 

crush: $J4& [daha], literally, beat and break. 

crush underfoot: FX [tojaku]. 

crushing, vital: 751% [kassai]. 

crystal: KAR} [hari ju]. 

crystal, eight facets of clear: /\fHii@i# [hachimen reir6]. Eight facets, /\ 
fH [hachimen]. Crystal clarity like an eight-faceted jewel. 

cuckoo: #t¥ [tou]. 

Cuiwei Wuxue: 22 (##& [Suibi Mugaku]. Ca. eighth-ninth century, 
China. Dharma heir of Danxia Tianran, Qingyuan Line. Taught at 
Cuiwei Monastery, Mount Zhongnan (Shanxi). Given the title of 
Great Master Guangzhao, l#&A fil [Kosho Daishi] by the Emperor. 

cult: #38 [torui]. 

Cunjiang: See Xinghua Cunjiang. 

cushion: 4438 [zafu]. A round padded seat placed under the buttocks 
for sitting zazen. 

custom, authentic: 4{# [kogi], literally, old form. K&B [kojitsul, 
literally, old truth. 

customary in the dharma: %;# [nyoho], literally, as it is in dharma. 
i& [johG], literally, permanent method. 

cut off arm: Ef [dampi]. 

cut through: #XEf [saidan], literally, chop off. ##f [tokudan], literally, 
achieve cutting. B® [jikisetsu], literally, cut straight. 

cut to the original source: thi #i@i SF [kongen wo saidan-su]. 

Cypress Tree: #84#81-— [Hakujushi]. Thirty-sixth fascicle of this book. 
[shi] is a suffix with no special meaning. 

Da’an: See Changqing Da’an. 

Daci Huanzhong: ABA [Daiji Kanchi]. 780-862, China. Dharma 
heir of Baizhang Huaihai, Nanyue Line. Returned to laity during the 
persecution of Buddhism by Emperor Wu, but later became a monk 
and taught at Mount Daci, Hang Region (Zhejiang). Huanzhong 
means “Boundless World.” His posthumous name is Great Master 
Xingkong, fEZ A [Shokii Daishi]. 

Dadian Baotong: K#AHj6 [Daiten Hotsi]. 732-824, China. Also called 
Chaozhou Dadian, #)A8E [Chdshi Daiten]. Dharma heir of 
Shitou Xiqian, Qingyuan Line. Taught at Mount Ling, Chao Region 
(Guangdong). 

Daer, Tripitaka Master: KH=iei [Daini Sanzo]. Ca. eighth century. 
Known for his debate with Huizhong after arriving in China from a 
western country. Named Dae (Large) Er (Ears) for his large ears. 

Daguang: A3é [Daiko]. Ca. twelfth-thirteenth century, China. Abbot 
of Ayuwang Monastery (Zhejiang), when Dogen visited. Biography 
unknown. 

Dahui Zonggao: KR [Daie SOkG]. 1089-1163, China. Dharma heir 
of Yuanwu Kegqin. Attacked Caodong Zen as “silent-illumination 
Zen” and advocated a formal koan Zen practice, especially for 
laypeople. Revived the teaching at Mount Jing, Hang Region 
(Zhejiang), and was regarded as the restorer of the Linji School. 
Author of Treasury of the True Dharma Eye, not to be confused with 
Dogen’s book of the same title. In some writings Dogen strongly 
criticized him. His posthumous name is Zen Master Dahui, ABA##6 
[Daie Zenji]. 

Daibutsu: A. Dogen referred to himself by this name when he 
resided in the Daibutsu Monastery. 

Daibutsu Monastery: X= [Daibutsu-ji]. “Great Buddha” Monastery. 
After moving to Echizen Province, Japan, in 1243, Dogen founded 
this monastery in the following year. Renamed Eihei Monastery in 
1246. 

daily activities: see activities, daily. 

Dajian Huineng: A#KABE [Daikan End]. 638-713, China. Also called 
Laborer Huineng, S#E{T4H [End Anja]; Worker Lu, B{7#4& [Ro 
Anja]; Sixth Ancestor, 7\% [Rokuso]; Caoxi, 23% [Sdkei]; Old 
Buddha Caoxi, 2414‘ [Sokei Kobutsu]. Born into a poor family of 
Xin Region (Guangdong). Sold firewood for a living. At age twenty- 
four he joined Fifth Ancestor Hongren’s community. After cleaning 
rice for eight months, he secretly received dharma transmission 
from Hongren and escaped angry senior monks by fleeing to the 
south. Hid in a hunter’s house for four years and then became a 
monk. Taught at Baolin Monastery, Caoxi, Shao Region 
(Guangdong). While Hongren’s senior student, Shenxiu, emphasized 
gradual enlightenment in northern China, Huineng emphasized 
immediate enlightenment. As a teacher, he produced a group of 
excellent students who transmitted his teaching, called the Southern 
School of Zen. Some of his stories and dharma discourses are 
included in the Sixth Ancestor’s Platform Sitra, although this text is 
considered spurious, both by Dogen and modern scholars, especially 
the story about the poetry contest Huineng supposedly won to gain 
dharma transmission. His posthumous name is Zen Master Dajian X 
$84H6 [Daikan Zenji]. 

Daman Hongren: XAiis54% [Daiman KO6nin]. 688-761, China. Also 
called Huangmei. Dharma heir of Fourth Ancestor Dayi Daoxin. As 
Fifth Chinese Ancestor of the Zen School, taught at Mount 
Huangmei, later called Mount Wuzu (Mount Fifth Ancestor), Qi 
Region (Hubei). He had two outstanding students, Shenxiu and 
Huineng. Hongren is regarded as the one who established the 
Dongshan (East Mountain) School [Tozan Shi] (not to be confused 
with Dongshan Liangjie’s Caodong School), in contrast to the 

contemporary Niutou School. His posthumous name is Zen Master 
Daman Aim¢#h [Daiman Zenji]. 

Damei Fachang: X*#i&B [Daibai Hojo]. 752-839, China. Grew up in 
Xiangyang (Hubei). Enlightened in the community of Mazu Daoyi, 
Nanyue Line, and became one of his dharma heirs. Secluded in 
Mount Damei (Great Plum Mountain), Ningbo (Zhejiang), for forty 
years, and praised Mazu’s “This very mind is buddha.”At Mount 
Damei he founded Husheng Monastery, where more than six 
hundred monks practiced. 

Danxia Tianran: Ft#ZKA [Tanka Tennen]. 739-824, China. Dharma 
heir of Shitou Xiquan. Tianran spent his youth as a scholar and 
hoped to work as a civil servant, but on his way to take the exam he 
met a Zen monk in an inn and decided to study Buddhism instead. 
He practiced with both Mazu and Shitou. His iconoclastic way 
included outrageous behavior such as climbing onto a sacred statue 
in one temple, and burning a wooden Buddha to warm himself in 
another. He taught at Mount Tianran, Nanyang (Henan). His 
posthumous name is Zen Master Zhitong #$i8##6 [Chitsti Zenji]. 

Danxia Zichun: F}#27 [Tanka Shijun]. 1064-1117, China. Dharma 
heir of Furong Daokai, Caodong School. Taught at Mount Danxia, 
Nanyang (Henan). Teacher of Hongzhi Zengjiao. 

Daochuan: See Yefu Daochuan. 

Daofu: See Jingqing Daofu. 

Daofu: j&#!) [Dofuku]. Ca. sixth century, China. A disciple of 
Bodhidharma. Biography unknown. 

Daoying: See Yunju Daoying. 

Daoism: 32% [D6 Ky6]. Also, Taoism. 

Daoist: }4-£ [dodshil], literally, Daoist practitioner. jJARi7i [ddkaryi], 
literally, follower of the Daoist House. 

Daokai: See Furong Daokai. 

Daolin: See Niaoke Daolin. 

Daoming: See Muzhou Daoming. 

Daopi: See Tong’an Daopi. 

Daosheng: j4#+ [Dosho]. Ca. thirteenth century, China. A Daoist 
studying Zen with Rujing at Tiantong Monastery when Dogen 
stayed there. Biography unknown. 

Daowei: See Dongshan Daowei. 

Daowu: 320. See also Tianhuang Daowu. 

Daowu Yuanzhi: }&4 318% [Dogo Enchi]. 769-835, China. Dharma heir 
of Yaoshan Weiyan, Qingyuan Line. Also called Daowu Zongzhi. He 
studied with Baizhang Niepan and received ordination from him 
before practicing with Yaoshan. Traveled for many years to various 
Zen monasteries, then resided and taught at Mount Daowu, Tan 
Region (Hunan). Biological and dharma brother of Yunyan 

Tansheng. A number of dialogues between them remain, and were 
commented on by Dégen. Posthumous name, Great Master Xiuyi {2 
—X 6 [Shichi Daishi]. 

Daowu Zongzhi: See Daowu Yuanzhi. 

Daoxian: See Luoshan Daoxian. 

Daoxin: See Dayi Daoxin. 

Daoxuan, Precept Master: i8&{#fi? [Dosen Risshi]. 596-667, China. 
Regarded as founder of the Precept School in China. Taught at 
Mount Zhongnan, also called Mount Nan. 

Daoyi. See also Mazu Daoyi. 

Daoyu: i388 ([Dodiku]. Ca. sixth century, China. A disciple of 
Bodhidharma. Biography unknown. 

dark action: See action, dark. 

darkness: i338 [antd]. Also, night, which often represents the realm of 
nonduality. 

darkness arises meet it with darkness, when: FR 383KAS38F) [anto rai anto 
da]. Puhua’s words. Darkness represents nonduality. 

Dasui Fazhen: K*Sj}4SB [Daizui Hoshin]. 834-919, China. Dharma heir 
of Changqing Da’an, Nanyue Line. He experienced great 
enlightenment while quite young. Traveled extensively and studied 
with various teachers (in addition to his dharma father, Guishan,) 
including Dongshan Liangjie. Taught at Mount Dasui (Sichuan), 
where he lived for more than ten years in a large hollow tree. His 
posthumous name is Great Master Shenzhao ##28AAii [Shinsho 
Daishi]. 

Datong: See Touzi Datong. 

Daxiong Peak: Ki## [Daiyi HO], literally, Great Hero Peak. Another 
name for Mount Baizhang. Located in Nanchang (Jianxi), China. 
(“Great Hero” is a name of the Buddha.) Cf.: A monk asked Baizang, 
“What is extraordinary?” Baizang said, “Sitting alone on Daxiong 
Peak.” 

Daxiu: See Tiantong Zongjue. 

day of no work is a day of no eating, a) —HAVE—HA [ichinichi 
fusa ichinichi fujiki]. A saying of Baizhang Huaihai. 

Dayang: See Furong Daokai. 

Dayang Jingxuan: KkzZZX [Taiyo Kyogen]. 942-1027, China. Dharma 
heir of Liangshan Yuanguan, Caodong School. Taught for thirty 
years at Mount Dayang, Ying Region (Hubei). His posthumous name 
is Great Master Ming’an, FR&AEM [Myoan Daishi]. His lineage was 
passed posthumously to Touzi Yiqing by Dayang’s friend, the Linji 
School teacher Fushan Fayuan. 

Dayi Daoxin: X#i81(5 [Daii Doshin]. 580-651, China. The Fourth 
Ancestor, PU4H [Shiso], of the Zen School. Also called Shuangfeng, 
¥XUZ [Soho]. Dharma heir of the Third Ancestor, Jianzhi Sengcan. 

Taught for thirty years at Mount Shuangfeng (Twin Peaks 
Mountain), also called West Mountain or Broken Top Mountain, 
Huangmei, Qi Region (Hubei). Had five hundred students, the first 
large assembly in Zen Buddhism. His posthumous name is Zen 
Master Dayi A878 6 [Daii Zenji]. 

Dayu. See also Gaoan Dayu. 

Dazu Huike: X44") [Taiso Eka]. 487-593. Monk name: Shenguang, 
4# 3¢ [Jinko]. Dharma heir of Bodhidharma. The Second Ancestor 
of Chinese Zen. According to legend, when he visited Bodhidharma 
at Shaolin Monastery and asked for instruction, Bodhidharma would 
not reply. Finally, while standing in the snow, Huike cut off his arm 
and gave it to Bodhidharma as a sign of his sincerity. Thus, he 
received instruction. Later, taught in the northern capital of Ye 
(Hebei). His posthumous names are Great Master Zhengzong Pujiao 
TERS Afi [Shoshti Fukaku Daishi], and Zen Master Dazu. 

dead or alive: #%35@W#%# [shakkatsu no innen], literally, cause and 
condition of being dead or alive. 

death, demons of: 9E [shima]. 

death, temporal: (Fai, [kemetsu]. 

death find life, in: 344%; [shichi toku katsu], literally, in death 
attain vitality. 

Debate Power: See Vivadabala. 

debt, pay: {B{& [shosai]. 

decadent, groups of those who are: 1&5 [haraku to]. 

decay, five signs of: A= [gosui]. Signs that appear before a deva dies. 

decayed teaching: See also three periods. 

decayed tree: {42 [koboku]. A tree that has been chopped down with 
just the trunk remaining—-sitting upright like someone doing zazen, 
never lying down. Sitting zazen with no seeking mind. 

deception: fj [man]. 

Decheng: See Chuanzi Decheng. 

decline of the dharma: See three periods. 

decline, last age of: A{C#St [matsudai akuse], literally, last era, 
unwholesome world. 

deepest and most intimate teaching: 724 [goku shi goku], literally, 
extreme of extremes. 

deeply impressed with this: }R9AZ [jinnen shi]. 

defilement: 34475 [zenna]. Also, divided. 

Defu: See Yunding Defu. 

Deguang: See Zhuoan Deguang. 

Dehui: #44 [Tokki]. Ca. twelfth century, China. A monk trained at the 
monastery of Ying’an Tanhua, Linji School. 

deluded action: See action, deluded. 

deluded thought, recognizing the shadow of: i& 383232 [meitd nin’yd]. 

delusion: Not enlightened. Viewing enlightenment as separate from 
practice. 7% [mei], KEU [madoil], literally, being lost. (ANS 
[bonn6], translation of Skt. klesha, consisting of greed, hatred, and 
ignorance. 3, [wakushi], literally, worrying and attachment. im 
[ro], literally, leaking. 

delusion and enlightenment: i&''% [meigo]. 

delusion, become free from: f®% [dan’waku]. Literally, cutting of 
delusion. 

delusions, demons of: {i [bonno mal]. 

delusions, five: Hi%4 [goketsu]. Greed, anger, pride, jealousy, and 
stinginess. 

demon: [& [ma]. Abbrevriated transliteration of Skt. mara, literally, 
killer. # # [rasetsu], transliteration of Skt. rakshasa, eater of 
humans. 

demon, heavenly: Ki [temma]. See also Papiyas. 

demon, outsider: 4b [mage]. 

demon, statement of: Hz [masetsu]. 

Demon School: f= [Mato]. 

demon’s cave on the black mountain: BU = [kokuzan kikutsu ri]. 

demons, celestial king of: K-f& [tenshima]. 

demons, enter the realm of: A [nytima]. 

demons, place of heavenly: KF [temma kai]. 

demons of delusions: See delusions, demons of. 

demons of the five skandhas: 3k [goshuma]. 

DengYinfeng: =8§32 [To Impo]. Ca. eighth-ninth century, China. 
Dharma heir of Mazu Daoyi, Nanyue Line. Deng is his family name. 
He was eccentric, known for dying while standing on his head. 
Yinfeng is a peak at Mount Wutai (Shanxi). 

Denguang: See Zhuoan Deguang. 

deny the way of the ancestors: #214 36 [gisetsu kosen], literally, doubt 
and kill the ancient. 

depend upon letters and interpret their meaning: {K<f##s [emon gegil]. 

dependences, five: Aiffk [goe]. Devadatta tried to establish these 
practices in an attempt to alter home leavers’ four dependences 
taught by the Buddha. 

dependences, four: PUK [shie]. Types of practices for home leavers: (1) 
Sitting under trees for a lifetime. (2) Wearing a robe of excrement- 
cleaning cloths for a lifetime. (3) Begging food for a lifetime. (4) 
Taking medicine made of urine and excrement in case of sickness 
for a lifetime. 

descendant: 54% [jison], literally, child and grandchild. 

descendant, dharma: j#&f% [hGson], literally, dharma grandchild. 
Dharma heir of a dharma heir of a master, or further down. Dharma 
offspring. 

describe roughly or in detail: si 4MaiLRE [sessai sesso]. 

Deshan Xuanjian: #8 [Tokusan Senkan]. 780-865, China. He was 
a well-known commentator on the Diamond Sitra and was called] 
< fiJ Diamond King Chou after his family name. Unable to 
answer a rice-cake seller’s simple question, he became a Zen 
student. Later he became a dharma heir of Longtan Chongxin, 
Qingyuan Line. Taught at Mount De, Ding Region (Hunan). Known 
for teaching by shouting and striking his students. His posthumous 
name is Great Master Jianxing 4A fi [Kensho Daishi]. 

desire: 4m [uro], literally, have leaking. 

desire, freedom from: See miraculous powers, six. 

desire, wisdom of: @i## [uro chi]. 

desire realm. See also realms, three. 

desires, remove: mz [rojin], literally, exhaust leaking. 

desires in the three realms, free of: =FR@keHfS [sangai yoku wo 
danzu], literally, cut off desires of the three realms. 

destiny of the nation, turn the: i1@X% [kaiten], literally, turn heaven (or 
change the mind of Emperor). 

determination: B* [igy6], literally, will and wish. See also mind art. 

determination, towering: #1KG [shdten-su], literally, thrust heaven. 

deva: Skt. X [ten]. Celestial being, in the highest of the six paths of 
transmigration. Dharma teaching is often given to humans and 
devas. See also paths, six. 

deva kings: K= [tenn6]. 

Deva Kings, Four: VX [Shi Tenno]. Lords of the Heaven of Four 
Kings on Mount Sumeru, serving Indra. Guardians of the four 
directions in Buddhism. Dhritarashtra (east), Viridhaka (south), 
Virtipaksha (west), and Vaishravana (north). 

Deva Kings, Six: 7\X [Roku Ten]. Lords of Six Heavens in the desire 
worlds. 

Deva Vehicle: The teaching for celestial beings. See also Vehicles, Five. 

deva worlds, eighteen: -/\K [jihachi ten]. Heavens in the form realm: 
three heavens in each of the first to third stages, plus nine heavens 
in the fourth stage of meditation. 

deva worlds, six: 7\X% [reku ten]. Six heavens of the desire realm. 

Devadatta: #222322 [Daibadatta], 2% [Datta], j= [Chodatta]. A 
grandson of King Simhahanu, Shakya Clan. Elder brother of 
Ananda, he was a cousin of Shakyamuni Buddha. Became a student 
of the Buddha along with other members of the clan and practiced 
hard for twelve years but could not become enlightened. Jealous of 
the Buddha’s reputation, he tried to split the community but failed. 
He then attempted to kill the Buddha but could only slightly injure 
him. Because of these grave crimes, it is said that he fell into 
unceasing hell. 

devas who pull the cart: {JKF [Kengyo Tenshi], literally, solid going 
deva(s). 

dewdrop: 1% [miro], literally, abundant dew. 

dhamma: ##& [damma]. Pali equivalent of Skt. dharma. 

dharani: Skt. Transliteration: Bé#/E [darani]. Translation: 484% [soji], 
literally, maintaining all. 1. Magical verses chanted in Esoteric 
Buddhism. 2. In Dogen’s usage, bowing and offering respect to the 
teacher, which is no other than bowing to the Buddha. 

Dharani: be #Fe [Darani]. Fifty-sixth fascicle of this book. 

dharani, teachers of: Uri#b [jujutsu shi]. 

dharani nurtured in the past: fa 58h ##E [shukujiki darani]. 

dharma: Skt. j& [h6]. 1. Ultimate law, reality, or truth. 2. Teaching of 
truth. One of the three treasures. 3. A thing, all things or 
phenomena. 4. Procedure. 5. Custom. 

dharma, against: 4E}& [hihd]. 

dharma, awakening with: ;&E [hatto]. 

dharma, buddha: See buddha dharma. 

dharma, enter: Aj& [nippo]. 

dharma, essential: ;4# [hoy6]. 

dharma, hue of: \¥2 [fusai]. 

dharma, inconceivable: %}& [myoh6o]. Wondrous dharma. 

dharma, indiscernible: #£57 5!i% [mufumbetsu ho]. 

dharma, inherit: faj#% [shiho]. 

dharma, inquire about: Fij& [momb6]. 

dharma, marrow of the: ;4#€@ [hozui]. 

dharma, rooted: }&4 [hdhon]. 

dharma, slander: #4i% [boppo]. 

dharma, true: 1E;% [shobd]. Authentic teaching; correct teaching. Bj% 
[shimpo]. 

dharma, wondrous. See also dharma, inconceivable. 

dharma admonition: ;#3)ll [hokun]. 

dharma associates: }&& [hakken]. 

dharma beyond condition: #{£;% [mujiho], literally, dharma of no 
abiding. 

dharma bliss: }&#% [horaku]. 

dharma blossoms: }&# [hokke]. Lotus blossoms symbolizing dharma. 
Also, Lotus Stitra. 

dharma blossoms, turn: #3j4# [ten hokke]. 

dharma blossoms, turned by: ;4###§ [hokke ten]. 

Dharma Blossoms Turn Dharma Blossoms: j###8j&# [Hokke Ten 
Hokke]. Eighteenth fascicle of this book. 

dharma body. See also buddha body. 

dharma body, go beyond the: }4§14)_F 3 [hosshin k6jo ji]. 

dharma body, short: #24 [tan hosshin]. A particular manifestation of 

reality itself. 

dharma body, tall: &;& [cho hosshin]. A particular manifestation of 
reality itself. 

dharma brother: £&{# [konchi], literally, intimate brother. 

dharma child: }&- [hassu]. 

dharma descendant: ;&fA [hasson], literally, dharma grandchild. ff 
[onson], literally, remote offspring. 

dharma eye, true: See true dharma eye. 

dharma eyes. See also eyes, five. 

dharma gate: j4P4 [homon]. Entrance to teaching. Teaching of 
dharma. 

dharma gates, complete assemblage of eighty-four thousand: /\&BUOFi&PS 
#8 [hachiman shisen homon’on], literally, heaps of eighty-four 
thousand dharma gates. 

dharma gates, eighty thousand: /\#3;4P4 [hachiman homon]. 

dharma gates, eighty-four thousand: /\%20-FP4 [hachiman shisen mon]. 
/\& #8 [hachiman shisen bu], literally, eighty-four thousand 
sections (books). Entire Buddhist scriptures. 

dharma hall: ;&= [hatt6]. One of the main buildings of a Zen 
monastery, where formal dharma talks are given. 

dharma heir: ;&#-l [hassu]. Immediate and certified dharma successor. 

dharma instruction: j4im [hoyaku], literally, dharma benefit. 

Dharma King: }&= [h6o’6]. Shakyamuni Buddha. 

dharma king’s body: }4= [ho’6 shin]. 

Dharma King’s teaching: ;A;}KS [hO’O horei], literally, Dharma King’s 
law. 

dharma nature: j&'£ [hossh6]. The reality of all phenomena. 

Dharma Nature: ;&4£ [Hossh6]. Fifty-fifth fascicle of this book. 

dharma of impermanence: 7X7E;& [fujoho], literally, dharma of things 
not fixed or stable. 

dharma of the manifested buddha body: 12 3 siti% [genshin seppd]. 

dharma procedure: j&##% [hogi]. 

dharma standard: }&3% [homo]. 

dharma talk: 1835 [dowal, literally, talk of the way. #$3i [fusetsu], 
literally, extended talk. An informal talk presented by a dharma 
teacher. 

dharma teacher: ;&6ii [hosshi]. 

dharma teaching, receive: jRm@HD‘D5\S [hoyaku wo koburul, 
literally, be allowed to receive dharma benefit. 

dharma thought: }&# [hory6]. 

dharma transmission: (2; [dempd]. Acknowledgment of mastery and 
entrustment of buddha dharma from teacher to disciple; also, the 
inheritance of the dharma. Dogen emphasizes that this transmission 
remains unique and unchanged throughout all generations of 

buddha ancestors. 

dharma treasure: ;}&84 [hozai]. Precious dharma. 

dharma treasury, entrusted with the: {ti&#% [fuhozo]. 

dharma uncle: &fi{8 [shihaku]. Dharma brother of the teacher. 

dharma vessel: }&#§ [hoki]. Holder of dharma or one who has potential 
for dharma. 

dharma way: j&i8 [hodo]. 

dharma wheel: ;&# [horin]. The full, continuous, and dynamic 
teaching of the Buddha. The wheel is a symbol of a monarch in 
ancient India, representing justice and the crushing of hindrances. 

dharma wheel, break the: tki%##18 [ha horin sd]. Destroy the teaching 
and practice of a sangha. 

dharma words: j&3% [hogo). 

Dharmapada: Skt. j4#)# [Hokku Ky6]. An early Buddhist scripture. Its 
Pali counterpart is Daammapada. 

Dharmaratna: “j%f4 [Jiku Horan]. Ca. first century, cz. A monk from 
central India who introduced Buddhism to China together with 
Kashyapamatanga in 67 c.z., during the reign of Emperor Xiaming of 
the Later Han Dynasty. Also pioneered translation of Sanskrit 
scriptures into Chinese. Dharmaratna’s Chinese name is Zhu Falan. 
(Zhu in this case means “of India.”). 

Dhitika: #22 1 [Daitaka]. Monk from the kingdom of Mathur§, central 
northern India. Taught in central India as the Fifth Ancestor of the 
Zen tradition. 

dhyana: ###§ [zenna]. See also Zen; paramitds, six. 

dhyana, realization of: See paramitas, six. 

Dhydnartha: *#%|2 [Zenrita]. Monk who taught the young 
Sanghanandi in the palace of his father the king. 

diamond samadhi: See samadhi, diamond. 

diamond seat: See seat, diamond. 

difficult situations, eight: /\##% [hachi nanjo], literally, eight difficult 
places. Places or situations where attaining enlightenment is 
hindered: hell, realm of hungry ghosts, realm of animals, devas of 
very long life, those in remote places, those with sense defects, 
those who are attached to wrong views, and time before and after 
the time of buddhas. 

Dingshan Shenying: 7E L4##28 [JOzan Shin’ei]. Ca. eighth—ninth century, 
China. Guiyang School. Dharma heir of Guishan Lingyou. Taught at 
Mount Ding, Chu Region (Anhui). 

Dipankara Buddha: See Buddha, Dipankara. 

dipper with a missing handle, broken: j2*AKR7X*) [moppei ha 
mokushaku]. 1. A useless thing. 2. In Dogen’s usage, body and mind 
dropped away. 

dipper, wooden: 7X#) [mokushaku]. 

direct: mb) [tanteki]. 1. Direct expression; direct understanding 
beyond words or thoughts. 2. Essential meaning. 3. Straightforward 
teaching. 

direct way: Bi& [jikido]. 

directions are all-inclusive: 77%} [h6td). 

directly point: Bt§ [jikishi]. Experience without words and concepts. 

directly point to the human mind: B#§ Aw [jikishi ninshin]. 

director. See also officers, six. 

director of the guesthouse: fi@ht= [kai’in ju]. 

director of the monks’ hall. See also officers, six. 

Dirghanakha: See Brahman Dirghanakha. disappear, both: {283 [kuin]. 

discernment: 3}%!) [fumbetsu]. B75!) [shiryo fumbetsu], literally, 
discrimination and discernment. j& [shiki], literally, knowable, 
consciousness. See also skandhas, five. 

discourses: [5% [kogo], literally, broad words. 

discrimination: 9X [shusha], literally, take and throw away. 

discussion, philosophical: smi [rongil]. 

distinction: [=] F!) [ddbetsu], literally, same or different. 

divided: [=\ffj [ddkaku], literally, same or separate. 

divided, not: #£2)!) [mushabetsu], literally, not discriminated. 

divine heads: ##98 [jinzu]. 

Divisions, Nine: 7U#8 [kubu]. Classification of scriptures: 1. Siitra. 2. 
Gatha. 3. Itivrittaka. 4. Jataka. 5. Adbhuta-dharma. 6. Nidana. 7. 
Avadana. 8. Geya. 9. Upadesha. See also The Buddha’s Teaching; 
Divisions, Twelve. 

Divisions, Twelve: -+—5}# [jini bunkyd], +28 [jini bul. 
Classifications of the Buddhist scriptures: (1) Sitra—a scripture in 
prose. (2) Geya—a teaching to be sung. (3) Vyakarana—a 
prediction of enlightenment. (4) Gatha—a verse. (5) Udana—a 
teaching expounded not in response to a question. (6) Nidana—an 
explanation of causes [of unwholesome things]. (7) Avadana—a 
parable. (8) Itivrittaka—a past life [of a disciple of the Buddha]. (9) 
Jataka—a past life [of the Buddha]. (10) Vaipulya—a broad 
teaching. (11) Adbhuta-dharma—an unprecedented [magical] story. 
(12) Upadesha—a philosophical discussion. 

Dizang Guichen: thigt=ER [Jizd Keichin]. 867-928, China. Also called 
Luohan Guichen #)24£3 [Rakan Keichin]. Dharma heir of Xuansha 
Shibei, Qingyuan Line. From early childhood, he spoke very well 
and chose not to eat meat. At first he followed the teachings of the 
precepts with Wuxiang, but then he declared that adhering to the 
precepts was not enough. He studied with Xuefeng Yicun and then 
with Xuefeng’s disciple, Xuansha, who brought him to full 
awakening. He taught at Dizang Monastery and later at Luohan 
Monastery, in Zhang Region (Fujian). His teaching style was down- 

to-earth, unmasking those who used fancy words. Teacher of Fayan 
Wenyi, founder of the Fayan School of Zen. His posthumous name is 
Great Master Zheying 'S/&A&iM [Shin’o Daishi]. 

do: See way, expression. 

Document of Heritage: fi] [Shisho]. Seventeenth fascicle of this book. 

dog: 4-f [kushi]. A person who does not practice the way. 

dog have buddha nature?, does a: See buddha nature?, does a dog have. 

Dogen: See Eihei Doge. 

doing, purposeful: &F& [ui]. 

donation, give a: hfi7#87 [se jozai], literally, give pure material. 

Dongpo: See Su Dongpo. 

Dongshan Daowei: jai [Tozan Dobi]. Ca. eleventh-twelfth 
century. Dharma heir of Furong Daokai, Caodong School. Taught at 
Mount Dong, Rui Region (Jiangxi). 

Dongshan Liangjie: WALL Eft [Tozan Rydkai]. 807-869, China. Became 
a monk in childhood, studied extensively with teachers including 
Nanquan and Guishan. Later became dharma heir of Yunyan 
Tansheng, Qingyuan Line. Taught at Mount Dong, Rui Region 
(Jiangxi). Author of “Song of Precious Mirror Samadhi,” Baojing 
Sanmeike [HokyO6 Zammaika], the text that established the Five 
Ranks of the teaching, the philosophical underpinning of Caodong 
practice. Regarded as a founder of the Caodong School, one of the 
Five Schools of Chinese Zen. His posthumous name is Great Master 
Wuben, 'S2XAfii [Gohon Daishi]. 

Dongshan School: #5 [Tozan Shi]. 

donkey, blind: 8282 [katsuro]. 

donkey and horse, herd: £8 ¢255 [iro iba]. 

donkey comes before and horse comes after: §25i 7% [rezen bago (no) 
kan], literally, one who is in front of a donkey and behind a horse. 
One who is not oneself. 

donkey has not left, yet the horse has arrived: BAAR BE RK [roji 
miko baji torai]. Also reads: BBBWECSEIL5 SNCtRSMRST 
[roji imada owara zare domo baji torai su]. While delusion has not 
left, enlightenment has arrived. Doing two things at once. Being 
inclusive and not divided. 

donkey, fins of a: §2A% [rosai]. That which is invisible or impossible. 

donkey, hoof of a: S25 @filii [roba no kyakutei]. Freedom from 
intellect and hierarchy. 

donkey womb, enter into a: +5 A%#Aa [shoshin nya rotai]; ASgAa 
[nya rotai], literally, be reborn with a body in the womb of a 
donkey. 

donor: fifi=E [seshu]. 

dormitory, head of the: #= [rydshu]. 

doubt: B& [jimal], literally; self demon, self-killer. 

doubt, ground of no: 7\¥€Z tH [fugi no chi]. 

doubt, have a great: K¥€F [daigi-su]. 

doubtful: 4§{5 [fushin]. Lacking in trust. 

dragon: #2 [ryt]. Often represents an enlightened person. Same as true 
dragon. 

dragon, blind female: B#@X [moryiinyo]. 

dragon, true: (#2 [shinryii]. True practitioner of dharma. 

Dragon Gate: #2P4 [Rytimon]. Rapids midway up the Huang River, 
where fish who pass are said to turn into dragons. 

dragon head, snake tail: G25A%¢F [ryiito dabi]. Usually meaning the 
beginning is not matched by what follows. For Dogen a snake tail 
can be as powerful as a dragon head. 

dragon king: #€ = [ryiio]. 

dragon replaces, bones a: H2O#S A'S [ryt no kauru ga hone]. 

dragon song: Fresh, joyous, and vast awareness. 

Dragon Song: #254 [Ryiigin]. Sixty-fifth fascicle of this book. 

dragons, hungry: #i#2 [garyi]. 

dragons and elephants: #2& [rytizO]. Excellent practitioners of dharma. 

dream: 1. Illusory vision. 2. In Dogen’s usage, direct and nondual 
experience of reality. 

dream, actualize the: = [shomu]. 

dream, phantom, and empty flower: [mugen kiige] #4) 2 

dreams, direct: $ [muchoku]. 

drift: i7t7& [rurd). 

drink tea and eat rice: #8 #R [sahan], literally, tea and rice. 

drop away: fii3$(9) [datsuraku(-su)]. Let go; be released. To 
experience complete freedom beyond delusion and enlightenment, 
with nonattachment to body and mind. 

¥@8a [rakushol], literally, place of dropping. 1. To be stagnant, to be 
stuck with narrow views. 2. To be in a state of complete freedom. 

drop off facility: $4{@'B [raku bengi]. Drop away initial understanding. 

drops off completely, skin: BwehR3S2 ([hifu datsuraku jin]. 
Experiencing freedom from body. 

drum, big: 48% [hoku]. literally, dharma drum. 

dualism, barrier of: ) EA [ryojakan], literally, heavy barrier of two. 

duck: #2 [en’6]. 

dullness: ESP [kommai]. 

dumbfounded: 39% [bdzen]. Astonished; gone blank. 

Duofu: 2#a [Tafuku]. Ca. ninth century, China. Dharma heir of 
Zhaozhou Congshen, Nanyue Line. Taught in Hang Region 
(Zhejiang). 

dushkrita: Skt. Transliteration: 2 4# [tokira]. Light wrongdoing, for 
which repentance may be made to oneself or another sangha 
member. 

dust, extra speck of: &E [kakujin]. Delusion that comes from outside. 

dust, red: ALEE [kOjin]. Worldly matter. 

dusts, six: 7\EZ [rokujin]. Objects of the six senses: form, sound, smell, 
taste, touch, and mind. 

dynamic work. See also activity. 

ear, celestial. See also miraculous powers, six. 

early morning zazen: #8 [chdsan]. 

earth deity, shrine of the local: =ci8'S* [tochi do]. 

earth, emerge from the: See emerge from the earth. 

earthworm: 4h 45| [kyiin]. 

east mountains travel on water: See water, east mountains travel on. 

Eating Bowl: $4mq [Hou]. Seventy-eighth fascicle of this book. 

effect(s): See action(s) that nurture different types of effect(s). 

effect, realize: EX [kanka]. Experience the effect. 

effect, true: BR [jikka]. 

effective: im ®') [tokuyaku aril], literally, having benefit. 

effort 6A‘5 [chikara], literally, strength, power. JNX ([kufi]. 
Practice. *ai [shojin]. Vigor. 

effort, accumulate: #43) [shakku]. 

effort, complete:. See also actualization, complete. 

efforts, four right: PU1E%) [shishogon]. Not arousing an unwholesome 
action that has not arisen, stopping an unwholesome action that has 
arisen, arousing a wholesome action that has not arisen, and 
allowing a wholesome action that has arisen to increase. 

Ehu Zhifu: @i#A#84 [Gako Chifu]. Ca. ninth-tenth century, China. 
Student of Xuefeng Yicun, Qingyuan Line. Biography unknown. 

Eight Awakenings of Great Beings: /\A A‘ [Hachi Dainin Gaku]. 
Eighty-fourth fascicle of this book. 

eight or nine out of ten are accomplished before questioning: #&5EQ /\ FLAK 
®') [kisen no hakkujo ari]. 

eight- or sixteen-foot body: 3¢7</\R [joroku hasshaku]. Shakyamuni 
Buddha is characterized as being sixteen feet tall when standing and 
eight feet tall when sitting. 

eight precepts: See precepts, eight. 

Eight Seas: See Seas, Eight. 

eight types of karma: /\¥#O [hasshu no go]. Each of the following 
four types of karma is divided into two categories: matured result is 
definite and indefinite. (1) Effect received in this lifetime. (2) Effect 
received in the next lifetime. (3) Effect received in the lifetime(s) 
after next. (4) Effect received in an indefinite lifetime. 

eighteen items: See items, eighteen. 

Eighteen Large Brahmanist Texts: See Brahmanist Texts, Eighteen Large. 

eightfold noble path: See path, eightfold noble. 

eighty-four thousand: /\AYU-F [hachiman shisen]. A commonly used 
number in Buddhism to indicate a great many. 

Eihei: 7K*#. Dogen referred to himself as Eihei after the Daibutsu 
Monastery was renamed Eihei (Eternal Peace) Monastery in 1246. 
Eihei Dogen: 7K*#i87c. See also Editor’s Introduction and “Texts in 
Relation to Dogen’s Life” for Dogen’s biography and main writings: 
Treasury of the True Dharma Eye: IE;KARX [Shobd Genzd]. (See also 
Treasury of the True Dharma Eye.) Other major writings of Dogen’s 
are: 1. “Recommending Zazen to All People,” 2)44¢#(% [Fukan 
Zazen Gi] (see appendix 1). 2. Extensive Record of Priest Eihei Dogen, 
7K-FiB sc AM fa/AEX (Eihei Dogen Osho Koroku), also called Eihei 
Koroku. A collection of Dogen’s monastic guidelines, lectures, 
words, and poems compiled soon after his death by his students 
Sen’e, Ejo, and Gien. Published in 1672. 3. Monastic Guidelines of 
Eihei, 7K*4 +438 (Eihei Shingi), formally called Monastic Guidelines of 
Dogen Zenji, First Ancestor of the Soto School, Japan. A collection of 
six texts of monastic rules, published in 1667. 4. Journal of My Study 
in China. Commonly known as Record of the Baoging Era, =Bac 
[Hokyo Ki], a draft record of Dogen’s study with his teacher, Rujing. 
Discovered and edited by Ejo after Dogen’s death. 5. Treasury of the 
True Dharma Eye, Record of Things Heard: iE KRG sC [Shobo 
Genzo Zuimon-ki]. A collection of Dogen’s informal evening talks 
recorded by Ejo during Katei Era (1235-1238), probably edited 

later by one of Ejo’s students. 

Eihei Monastery: 7K*#3 [Eihei-ji]. Named in 1246. Formerly called 
Daibutsu Monastery. Zen training center in Shibi County, Echizen 
Province (present Fukui Prefecture), Japan, founded by Dogen. 
Eihei—literally, eternal peace; Japanese transliteration of Yongping, 
an era in the Later Han Dynasty, 58-75, when Buddhism was 
officially introduced to China. Its “mountain name” is H##uJ 
[Kichijo Zan], literally, Auspicious Mountain. 

Eisai: See Myoan Eisai. 

Ekottarika Agama Sutra: 18—fe]# [Zodichi Agon Kyo]. Sanskrit 
version of one of the Agama Sitras—early Buddhist scriptures. 
Translated into Chinese. Ekota means increasing by one. In this 
sutra, ungrouped terms, as well as those classified in groups of two, 
three, and so on, up to eleven, are explained. 

elder: 2-2 [ginen roshuku], literally, elderly person, old teacher. 

elements or objects: AEE [daijin], literally, great dust. Four great 
elements, plus five skandhas. 

elements, five: Hitt [gogyd]. BA[gosai]. Ancient Chinese 
classification: wood, fire, soil, metal, and water. 

elements, five great: HX [godai]. Ancient Indian classification: earth, 
water, fire, air, and space. 

elements, four great: JX [shidai]. Ancient Indian classification: earth, 
water, fire, and air. 

elements, six great: 7\X [rokudai]. Ancient Indian classification: earth, 
water, fire, air, space, and consciousness. 

elements, three: =A [sansai]. Ancient Chinese classification: heaven, 
earth, and humans. 

elucidate: f#5i, [gesetsu]. 

emancipated right where one is: & Be fFAR [tojo gedatsu]. 

emancipation: ff#A, [gedatsu]. Liberation. Freedom from bondage, like 
a fish escaping the net. Liberation from delusion or suffering. 

emancipation, eight types of: /\f#Ait [hachi gedatsu]. Steps of 
meditation toward freedom from attachment: (1) See all things as 
impure and reduce desire. (2) Reduce attachment to external 
phenomena. (3) Avoid giving rise to illusion. (4) Contemplate 
boundless space transcending all form. (5) Contemplate boundless 
consciousness. (6) Contemplate nonsubstantiality. (7) Contemplate 
the state beyond thought. (8) Attain a state where all mental 
activity ceases. 

emancipation, gate of: f#AKPS [gedatsu mon]. Also translated as gate of 
liberation. 

emancipation, state of great: Af#AtH [daigedatsu chi]. 

embody, originally: AAS [hongu-su]. 

emerge from the earth: ti [chiyi]. 

emotion: }+32% 0 [karida shin]. Transliteration of Skt. hridaya, heart. 

emotions arise wisdom is pushed aside, while: (§—E #8) [josh6 chikyaku]. 

Emperor Dai: {tu [Daisd]. Eighth emperor of the Tang Dynasty, 
China. Reigned 762-779. 

Emperor Gao: fax [K6s6]. Third Emperor of Tang Dynasty, China. 
Reigned 649-683. 

Emperor Guangwu: 3¢1t75 [Kobu KOtei]. First Emperor of the Later 
Han Dynasty, China. Reigned 25-57. 

Emperor Jing: @X5 [Keiso]. Thirteenth emperor of Tang Dynasty, 
China. Reigned 824-826. 

Emperor Kimmei: 2A [Kimmei TennO]. 509-571, Japan. Reigned 
539-571. Buddhism was officially introduced shortly before or 
during his reign. 

Emperor Mu: #23: [Bokus6o]. Twelfth emperor of Tang Dynasty, China. 
Reigned 820-824. 

Emperor Ning: #3 [Neiso]. 1168-1224, China. 3722+ [Katei 
Shoshu] /##£®7 [Katei no K6tei], meaning Emperor in the 
Jiading Era. Fourth emperor of the Southern Song Dynasty, China. 
Reigned 1194-1224. Ning is his posthumous name; named after the 
era of his reign, as customary in East Asia. 

Emperor of Wei: = [Gi Shu]. The ruler of Wei when Bodhidharma 

arrived in the northern country of Wei was Emperor Xiaoming 
(reigned 516-528). 

Emperor Ren: {—3:=7 [Jinsd Kotei]. Fourth emperor of Northern 
Song Dynasty, China. Reigned 1022-1063. 

Emperor Shomu: 2K [Shomu Tennd], 2H [Shomu Kotei]. 
701-756, Japan. Reigned 724-749. A great supporter of Buddhism. 
Sponsored the construction of Todai Monastery with the gigantic 
image of Vairochana Buddha in Nara. 

Emperor Shun: 3€ [Shun]. A legendary virtuous ruler of ancient China. 
Regarded as the successor of Emperor Yao. 

Emperor Shun: |l@5 [Junso]. Tenth emperor of the Tang Dynasty 
China. Reigned in 805. 

Emperor Su: #45 [Shukusd]. Seventh emperor of the Tang Dynasty, 
China. Reigned 756-762. 

Emperor Tai: AR [Taisd]. 598-649, China. Second emperor of the 
Tang Dynasty. Reigned 626-649. Supported the translation project 
of the Buddhist canon from Sanskrit to Chinese, headed by 
Xuanzong, who had traveled to India and brought back a number of 
scriptures. 

Emperor Tai: A%8 [Taiso]. 155-220, China. Called Caocao while alive. 
Founder of the northern kingdom of Wei. His successor, Emperor 
Wen, the first monarch of Wei, gave him this posthumous title. Also 
called Emperor Wu. 

Emperor Wen: 3C3x [Bunsd]. Fourteenth emperor of Tang Dynasty, 
China. Reigned 826-840. 

Emperor Wu: im: [Bus6]. Fifteenth emperor of Tang Dynasty. Reigned 
840-846. Oppressed Buddhism during his reign. 

Emperor Wu of Liang: it [Ryo Butei]. Founder of the southern 
kingdom of Liang. Reigned 502-549. Regarded as one who had a 
dialogue with Bodhidharma upon his arrival in China. 

Emperor Xian: a5 [Kensd]. Eleventh emperor of Tang Dynasty, 
China. Reigned 805-820. 

Emperor Xiaoming: #—R=74 [Komei Kotei]. Second emperor of Later 
Han Dynasty. Reigned 57-75. He sent a messenger to India to invite 
monks, which resulted in the first official introduction of Buddhism 
to China in 67. 

Emperor Xuan: FR [Senso]. Sixteenth emperor of Tang Dynasty. 
Reigned 846-859. Treated brutally by his brother Emperor Wu, he 
left the palace and became a wanderer. As Monk Dazong, he studied 
with Xiangyan Zhixian, Guiyang School. After ascension, he 
abolished Wu’s persecution of Buddhism. 

EmperorYang of the Sui Dynasty: (AO [Zui no Yodai]. Second 
emperor of the Sui Dynasty, China. Reigned 604-618. 

Emperor Yao: #2 [Gy6]. Legendary virtuous ruler of ancient China. 

Emperor Yomei: FAERK& [Yomei Tenno]. d. 587, Japan. Reigned 585- 
587. There was a major conflict among his retainers whether to 
support Buddhism or stay with the indigenous belief, Shintoism. 

Emperor Zong: A [Chisd]. Fourth and seventh emperor of Tang 
Dynasty, China. Reigned 683-684 and 705-710. 

Emperor, Yellow: #77 [Kotei]. Legendary ruler of ancient China. 
Regarded as creator of the calendar, music, literature, and medicine. 

Emperors, Five: iti [gotei]. Heavenly rulers of four directions, plus 
Yellow Emperor in the center. The four rulers are: Green Emperor 
(east, in charge of spring), Red or Flame (south, summer), White 
(west, autumn), and Black (north, winter). There are other lists, too. 

emptiness: = [ki], literally, sky. Skt., shinyata, literally, zeroness. 
Formless, boundless, and nonseparate nature of all things. Space, 
void. Also, illusory. 

emptiness, a piece of rock hanging in: See rock hanging in emptiness, a 
piece of. 

emptiness, flower of: 222 [kage]. Also, flower in the sky. 

emptiness, gate of: 2=P4 [kimon]. 

emptiness, twenty types of: —+% [nijukki]. Aspects of emptiness 
(shiinyata): (1) Internal emptiness. (2) External emptiness. (3) 
Internal and external emptiness. (4) Emptiness of emptiness. (5) 
Great emptiness (that of the four noble truths and twelvefold 
causation). (6) Lesser emptiness (that of four fruits). (7) Emptiness 
of truth. (8) Emptiness of conditional form. (9) Emptiness of 
unconditional elements. (10) Absolute emptiness. (11) Unoriginated 
emptiness. (12) Caused form emptiness. (13) Unchangeable form 
emptiness. (14) Original nature emptiness. (15) Self-form emptiness. 
(16) Common form emptiness. (17) All existences emptiness. (18) 
Unobtainable emptiness. (19) Non-nature emptiness. (20) Self- 
nature emptiness. 

empty, originally: £224 [sho kiijaku], literally, (self) nature is empty 
and serene. 

empty and serene: 2 #X [kijaku]. 

Empty Eon, King of the: &&= [lon O], REL [Ion O Butsu]. The 
four stages in a world cycle are: becoming, abiding, decaying, and 
empty. The buddha who appears in the Empty Eon is called the 
King of the Empty Eon or King of Emptiness, 23 [Ki O], king of 
beginningless kalpa #4) [kiigo]. Regarded as symbol of the original 
face. 

encompass: 7si 9 [fukuzo-su], literally, cover and store. & [gail], 
literally, cover. #44 [nokatsu], literally, bag and bind. 

encompass, fully: IE‘ 7sie, [shoto fukuzo], literally, exactly covering 
and treasuring. 

encounter: #4&(S) [shdken(-su)], literally, seeing each other. 463% 

[soho], literally, meeting each other. 1. Dualistic opposition. 2. 
Meeting between teacher and disciple. 3. Understanding. 

encountering Buddha: {@# [chi butsu]. 

encourage: #818) [kairei]. 

end of the break from zazen: HX##€ [hdsan ha]. 

end of the practice for the day: KX [hodsan]. Also, a day of rest from 
scheduled monastic activities. 

endeavor of the way, concentrated: See way, concentrated endeavor of the. 

endeavor, conscious: it\=a% [shin’ishiki]. 

enemy: 23% [shiike]. 

enjoyment and ease: K& [dai anraku], literally, great ease and bliss. 

enjoyment, four practices of: W#%{F [shi anraku gyo]. Taught in Lotus 
Sutra. (1) Wholesome action by the body. (2) Wholesome action by 
speech. (3) Wholesome action by mind. (4) Vow to awaken sentient 
beings. 

enlighten: 7&() [sho(su)]. 

enlightened, naturally: tt [shokaku]. 

enlightenment: Skt. bodhi. Awakening. Transliteration: #2 [bodai]. 

Translation: ‘ [kaku] (awakening); B/& &!) [go/satori] 

(enlightenment, realization); 7 [sho] (enlightenment, realization); 
12 [do] (way, enlight-enment). 1. Shakyamuni Buddha’s great 
realization under the bodhi tree. 2. Original manifestation of 
buddha nature, inseparable from practice. 3. Fundamental 
awareness of reality beyond dualism. 4. Sudden and direct 
experience of reality, which is often sought as a goal separate from 
practice. Dogen emphasizes that one must go beyond enlightenment 
in this sense. 

enlightenment, acquired: %A@ [shikaku]. Enlightenment attained by 
becoming free of delusion; initial enlightenment. 

enlightenment, arousing the aspiration for: 22%=#2:.) [hotsu bodai shin]. 
Having the thought of enlightenment. See also enlightenment, 
aspiration for; enlightenment, thought of. 

enlightenment, aspects of: #248 [bodai so]. 

enlightenment, aspiration for: #20) [bodai shin]. Skt. bodhi chitta. The 
wish and quest for enlightenment that establishes one’s 
determination to practice. 

enlightenment, attain: EXz% [shush6]. 

enlightenment, attain authentic: hXIE [jo shogaku]. 

enlightenment, complete: Transliteration: =2#2 [sambodai]. Skt., 
sambodhi. Translation: [J [engaku]. See also enlightenment, 
unsurpassable, complete. 

enlightenment, depend upon: {Fx [kego]. 

enlightenment, equal to buddha’s: See bodhisattva who is a candidate to be 
a buddha; bodhisattvas of the ten stages and three classes. 

enlightenment, filled with great: &#2A% [sambo daigo]. 

enlightenment, go beyond: See go beyond enlightenment. 

enlightenment, gradual: ift§ [zengo]. A method of practice or 
cultivation that leads step by step to enlightenment. 

enlightenment, great: AlB [daigo], A [daigaku], A#=#z [daibodai]. 

enlightenment, great, complete: KIS [dai engaku]. 

enlightenment, immediate realization of: Bix#=4z [jikisho bodai]. 

enlightenment, inconceivable: [mydkaku]. The highest stage of 
bodhisattvas. See also bodhisattvas of the ten stages and three classes. 

enlightenment, letting-go limb of: ##23z [sha kakushi]. 

enlightenment, mistaken views of spontaneous or natural: B9AKIAO BAR 
[jinen tennen no jaken]. 

enlightenment, original: A [hongaku]. Enlightenment that is intrinsic 
to each person, that is actualized by practice. 

enlightenment, painting of: = [shoga]. 

enlightenment, play with: #18 [rdgo]. 

enlightenment, prediction of: #2ic [juki]. Confirmation of present or 
future enlightenment. 

enlightenment, retreat limb of: (R23% [jo kakushi]. 

enlightenment, seven limbs of: C232 [shichi to kakushi). 

enlightenment, spontaneous: K¥%A [tennen]. “Claimed enlightenment” 
without practice or verification from an authentic teacher. AYA 
[jinen],& %&R [jinen ken], literally, (view of) natural 
enlightenment. 

enlightenment, sudden. *&'t§ [tongo]. Immediate realization of buddha 
nature without going through a series of stages. 

enlightenment, take up: #4t% [nengo]. 

enlightenment, thirty-seven wings of: =1-Can##t27;% [sanjiishichi hon 
bodai bumpd]. =1C#8 [sanjiishichi bu], =t-CGA [sanjishichi 
hon]. Thirty-seven bodhipakshikas, or conditions favorable to 
enlightenment: four applications of mindfulness, four right efforts, 
four elements of supernormal power, fivefold controlling power, 
fivefold moral power, seven limbs of enlightenment, and eightfold 
noble path. 

enlightenment, those without. See also icchantika. 

enlightenment, thought of: i&%& [donen]. The aspiration for 
enlightenment. 

enlightenment, trace of: t8i [goshaku]. 

enlightenment, unfold: fA'tZ [kaigo]. 

enlightenment, unsurpassable, complete: Skt., anuttara samyak sambodhi. 
Transliteration: [li§24=323=Bh [anokutara sammyaku 
sambodai]. fa#$#t2 [anoku bodai]. #E#=#2 [mujo _bodail], 
literally, bodhi (that has) nothing higher. 

enlightenment, without: #2 [mukaku]. 

enlightenment, wondrous: ¥)& [myogaku]. 

enlightenment thought: \&%= [gory6]. 

entangle: #2 [ten]. Entangled, “#442 [ketten], literally, tied and 
entangled. 

entangled vines, slash: Sin ®) [katto dan kul], literally cut off phrases 
that are like twining vines. 

enter homeless life: 3% [shukke]. Become a monk or nun. 

enter so deep inside that no one can guide the person: RA RBBABR 
[jinnytri kyo munin sekkyo]. 

enter the chamber: 8 [dd], literally, deep inside the hall. To receive 
personal instruction in the abbot’s room. See also abbot’s room, 
receive guidance in the. 

entire body: 25 [konshin]. 

entire body upholds the entire body: #3025 [konshin ze i ka 
konshin]. 

entire sky collapses: Bih#¥5% [gaichi bokuraku]. 

entire world of the ten directions: #1 Fi tt ¥ [jinjuppo sekai]. 

entrust: BYE [fuju]. 

entrust, intimately: #2 [shimpu]. 

entrusted of the dharma treasury: See dharma treasury, entrusted of the. 

entrustment, intimate: #{t [mippu]. 

entry hall: See hall, entry. 

environs: See body, mind, and environs. 

eon, last: }|AA FERRE) [kako shogen go]. 

eon, present: #2784) [genzai kengd]. This present kalpa: Biv 
[kengo]. 

eons, countless: Skt. tri kalpa asankhyeya. =Ba{##K#) [san’asdgi kd], 
literally, three [san] plus, (Skt.) kalpa [ko] asankhyeya [asogi]. 
Also, =Ba] {46 [san’asdgi]. Three stages of countless kalpas for 
bodhisattvas to become buddhas. f]{$7H8 [asdgiya] means, 
incalculable. Also, =#hH # [sangi hyakko], literally, three 
countless, one hundred kalpas. 

eons, dormant for boundless: Hé)7R8A [kogo mimy6]. 

eons, great: K#) [daiko]. 

eons, many: Z# [tago]. 

eons, one hundred million: Skt. niyuta kalpa. Transliteration: ABA tHE 
[nayuta ko]. Niyuta is ten to the eleventh power. 

ephemeral: [£7 LU [hakanashil]. 

equal: *#% [byodo]. —¥ [itto], literally, one and the same. 
Inseparable. 

Equal Wisdoms, Ten: +[—]i# [ji doshinchi]. Ten types of wisdom for 
a Zen teacher for guiding a student, taught by Fenyang Shanzhao. 
(1) Oneness between teacher and student. (2) Equal great matter. 
(3) Total study with all phenomena. (4) Equal genuine wisdom. (5) 

Equal universal understanding. (6) Equal embodiment (of buddha 
nature). (7) Common gain and loss (in practice). (8) Shared life and 
death. (9) Shared voice. (10) Nondual entering. 

Esoteric Buddhism: 243% [mikkyo]. The ultimate development in 
Mahayana Buddhism, which views the universe as a manifestation 
of Maha Vairochana Buddha. The practice is based on rituals 
involving mudras, mantras, and visualizations of various deities. See 
also Mantra School; Tendai School. 

essence: 8) & [tekishi], literally, target meaning. Att [jisho], literally, 
self nature. 

essence and form: 44 [shds6]. Also, essential. 

essence, marks, substance, and activity: t£*#8827) [sh6so tairiki]. 

essential, most: #4 [ydsi], literally, central pivot. 

essential, not: 4\FA%$ [yo futokul], literally, not usable. 

Essentials, Three: = [san’yo]. Classification of words by Linji: (1) 
Unintended words. (2)Words that lead one thousand students into 
profundity. (3) Words that are beyond words. 

Etatsu: 32. Ca. thirteenth century, Japan. Practitioner of chanting 
the Lotus Sutra. Then a student of Dogen at Kosho Horin Monastery. 
Further biography unknown. 

evenly and broadly: + f= [heiten]. 

everyday activity: RH [kajo], literally, normal thing in the (buddha) 
house. 

Everyday Activity: RR [Kajo]. Sixty-fourth fascicle of this book. 

everyday speech: R338 [kajo go]. 

evil. See also unwholesome. 

exact point. See also accept. 

exactly: [ze], literally; be correct. 

examine: ## [benk6], literally, clarify and affirm. #232 [sankyi], 
study all the way, investigate thoroughly. 

example, excellent: [8% [shochoku]. 

excellence, a person of: 4A RORLE [soseki no eiyi], literally, hero on 
the ancestral seat. 

Excellent Tamer: AMA [Chogyo Jobu]. One of the ten principal 
titles of the Buddha. 

existence, future: BA [td hon’u], literally, future original existence. 

existence, original: A. [hon’u]. Originally present; original possession. 

existences, twenty-five: —-H® [nijigo uJ]. Types of beings in the 
three worlds: fourteen in the desire world, seven in the form world, 
and four in the formless world. See also realms, three. 

expectation, without: #£[8] [muto]. 

experience, thorough ancestral: 4277 [so gijin]. 

experience, thoroughly: Fza(9) [gijin(-su)]. Fully investigate; 
thoroughly practice; fully understand; penetrate the essential 

matter. 

expound: }#s [enzetsu], literally, present and explain. 6§j# [kaien], 
literally, open and present. #3 [setsujaku], literally, explain. Gt# 
[setsujin], literally, expound fully. 

express thoroughly: 18 {$8 [dotoku jin]. 

expressed beyond: [8)_E|ci8X [kojo ni doshul], literally, expression in 
going beyond. 

expression: j& [d6]. The Chinese dao (on which the Japanese term is 
based), usually means “way.” But in this case it means “word,” 
“speak,” or “express.” 144 [dotoku] literally, expression competed. 
Complete expression; true expression. Coming up with one phrase. 
Presenting a case. Thorough expression of realization. Statement. j& 
EX [doshu], literally, expression taken. {j& [kand6], literally, 
holding words in mouth. &8:4 [gowa], words; statement. 

expression, complete: 18% [dojaku]. Saying a word. Statement. 

expression, ultimate: Fi Fiat, [kuky6 setsu]. 

Expressions: j8§ eto Fortieth fascicle of this book. 

expressions in the past: {i8BX [so dodshu], literally, having spoken 
before. 

expressions of dharma, amassing of: sti&#8 [seppd’on], literally, 
assemblage of speaking dharma. 

Extensive Record of the Lamp: See Tiansheng Extensive Record of the 
Lamp. 

extra: ®j& [jdhG], literally, leftover thing. 

extraordinary: $318 [tokuchi]. tH [chi] is a suffix meaning “that which 
is.” 

extremely fine: fi [gokumi]. 

extremely large is small: t[A)/|\ [gokudai do sho]. 

extremely small is large: fii/|\[AJX [gokusho do dai]. 

eye: —f [gen]. True seeing, understanding, or experience. Often 
represents awakening. 

eye, a single: —€S8R [ichi sekigen]. 

eye, authentic: IEAR [shogen]. 

eye, blossoms in an: fF [gan chi ke]. 

eye, celestial. See also miraculous powers, six. 

eye, covered: ARBE [genge]. 

eye, half an: += 4 [han sekigen]. 

eye, hear with the: A&R &f&l# [gensho monsho]. 

eye, open: jE [katsugen], literally, vital eye. 

eye, shramana’s single: #F4(@)— SAR [shamon (no) isseki gen]. 

eye, tip of the: ARTES [ganto sen], literally, the head of the eye is 
pointed. 

eye, true dharma: See true dharma eye. 

eye becomes lofty through the entire world: fR—t# [ganko isse]. 

eye of practice. See also eye of study. 

eye of seeing the Buddha: 52 (#8 [kembutsu gen]. 

eye of study: BAR [sangaku gen]. #28487] [sangaku ganriki], 
literally, eye power of study. Also, eye of practice. (For Dogen, 
“study” often means practice.) 

eyeball: ffs ([ganzei]. That which represents true seeing or 
understanding; hence, buddha ancestor. Also, essence. 

Eyeball: BRAS [Ganzei]. Sixty-third fascicle of this book. 

eyeball, crush the: ¥] KARE [dashitsu ganzeil. 

eyeball, diamond: &fa/ARAS [kongo ganzeil]. 

eyeball, fool with an: ##BRES [roganzei]. Seeing through. 

eyeball, pluck the: #RUiBRES [kesshutsu ganzei]. Annihilate and 
transcend views or understanding. 

eyeball, vital: ;SERES [katsu ganzeil]. 

eyeball has been switched to a black bead by someone else: BREStE 5!) At& 
AIAEF [ganzei hi betsunin kankyaku mokkansu]. Represents 
being blinded, going beyond discrimination. 

eyebrows, raise one’s: #4 [yobil. 

eyes, blind: fZ8R [katsugen]. 

eyes, five: FAR [gogen]. Fleshly eyes, heavenly eyes, wisdom eyes, 
dharma eyes, and buddha eyes. Heavenly or celestial eyes are those 
of devas. Wisdom eyes are those of shravakas and pratyeka- 
buddhas. Dharma eyes are those of bodhisattvas. 

eyes, obscured: S3—R [eigen]. 

eyes, one thousand: FBR [sengen]. Avalokiteshvara, the great 
bodhisattva of compassion who hears the cries of the world, is 
sometimes described or portrayed as having one thousand arms, 
with an eye on each hand. 

eyes, wisdom: See eyes, five. 

face: HA [memmoku], literally, face and eye. Original face, or 
buddha nature, which is inherent in every sentient being. 

face, demon: 94M [kimen]. 

face, demon’s horned: 921] 2tf8 [kimen no taikaku]. 

face, deva: Af [temmen]. 

face, exchange: #&1H] [kammen]. To turn the ordinary face into the 
original face. 

face, human: AM [ninmen]. 

face, luminous: H13¢ [menk6]. 

face, original: AME [hommemmoku], literally, original face and eyes. 
A3k HE [honrai (no) memmoku], literally, face and eyes 
originally come. Same as original self. Buddha nature, or compete 
and nondual reality, inherent to each person. 

face, serene: HA #28 [memmoku yoyd]. 

face, skin, flesh, bones, and marrow, to exchange: @MARAB# [kan 
memmoku hiniku kotsuzui]. To turn the ordinary self into the 
original self. 

face after one’s parents were born, one’s: &Ff+OmE [bumo shoshd 
no memmoku]. Represents timelessness of the present moment. 

face before one’s parents were born, one’s: 2&4 OMA [bumo mishd 
no memmoku]. See also face. 

face skin is ten feet thin: &3#— 3 [mempi haku ichi jo]. 

face skin is three inches thick: HZ/2= [mempi ko san zun]. 

face-to-face transmission: See transmission, face-to-face. 

Face-to-Face Transmission: f#% [Menju]. Fifty-seventh fascicle of this 
book. 

Fachang: See Damei Fachang; Kumu Facheng. 

facility, achieve: ##{#H [toku bengi]. 

Fada: ;#3# [HOtatsu]. Ca. seventh-eighth century, China. Originally a 
practitioner of chanting Lotus Sutra. Dharma heir of Sixth Ancestor 
Huineng. Taught at Nanhua Monastery, Shao Region (Guangdong). 

fall off the straight line: HBVA#EZ=9) [kozen joboku gail], literally, far out 
of the line (drawn) with an inked string. 

fame and gain: 4%! [myori]. 

family member: &&% [kenzoku]. 

fan: f& [ogi]. 

Fang Xuanling: See Minister Fang. 

Fanghui: See Yangqi Fanghui. 

farewell: 33 [chinch6], literally, treasure (yourself). 

Farong: See Niutou Farong. 

Fatai: See Fuxing Fatai. 

fathom: ‘ & [bokutaku], literally, guess and measure. 

fault: 4F [hi]. 

Faxian: ;4##8 [Hodken]. 340-420?, China. After becoming a monk, 
realized the incomplete knowledge of precepts in China. Left for 
India in 399 and journeyed for ten years. Brought and translated 
into Chinese Maha Sangha Precepts and Maha Pari-Nirvana Sitra. 

Fayan: See Wuzu Fayan. 

Fayan School: ;&BRG [Hogen Shi]. The lineage of Fayan Wenyi. One 
of the Five Schools of Chinese Zen Buddhism. 

Fayan Wenyi: j&—R3C% [Hogen Mon’eki/Bun’eki]. 885-958, China. 
Dharma heir of Dizang Guichen, Qingyuan Line. Abbot of Baoen 
Monastery, Jinling (Jiangsu). Author of many poems and 
commentaries, including the Ten Admonitions for the Zen School. His 
posthumous name is Zen Master Great Fayan, AjAAR+#6N [Daihogen 
Zenji]. Regarded as founder of the Fayan School. 

Fazhen: See Dasui Fazhen. 

feature: #4 [so]. Also form, essence. 

feeling. See also skandhas, five. 

fellow, bald-headed: 78; [tokutd kan]. 

Fengxue Yanzhao: J&\7\3£88 [Fiketsu Ensho]. 896-973, China. Dharma 
heir of Nanyuan Huiyong, Linji School. Taught at Mount Fengxue, 
Ru Region (Henan). Later taught for twenty years at Guanghui 
Monastery, Ying Region (Hubei), where he had over one thousand 
students. The subsequent Linji lineage descended from him. 

Fenyang Shanzhao: *5}k%#=88 ([Fun’yO Zensho]. 947-1024, China. 
Dharma heir of Shoushan Xingnian, Linji School. Fenyang traveled 
widely and studied with many teachers before receiving the mind 
seal of Shoushan. He refused invitations to assume the abbacy of 
eight well-known monasteries, but when his teacher Shoushan died, 
he was persuaded to become abbot of Mount Fenyang, Fen Region 
(Shanxi), where he taught for thirty years. Fenyang is known for his 
use of Zen stories in his teaching and for developing the first koan 
collections, which were included in the Recorded Sayings of Zen 
Master Fenyang Wude. Although he was of the Linji School, he had 
also studied in the Caodong lineage, and he introduced the Five 
Ranks into the Linji teaching. Stories from all the Zen schools were 
included in his texts, along with verses. Later on, commentaries 
were added, and the koan collections we know today, like the Blue 
Cliff Record, came into being. His posthumous name is Zen Master 
Wude, #248486 [Mutoku Zenji]. 

field, reach the: 2!) FA tt8 [t6 denchi], literally, arrive at a rice field. 

field of benefaction: #%4 [fukuden], literally, rice field of good fortune. 

fighting spirits. See also paths, six. 

file a file. See also mistake after mistake. 

fill: B€8(9) [samb6(-su)]. Also, filled, satisfied. 

final body: See body, final. 

fine: 334 [batsu’yu], literally, oil for punishment. Monks are asked to 
pay for a small portion of oil for the lamps, when they make 
careless mistakes. 

finger, raise one: 8—4§ [ju isshi]. Tianlong and his successor Juzhi 
raised one finger whenever asked a question. 

fingers, snap: 5#4§ [danshi]. Gesture for warning, awakening, approval, 
or cleansing. 

fire on one’s head, brush off the: 38% |£5 15, [zunen wo harau]. 

fire, blink of: #‘X [seika], literally, star fire. 

fire, raging: 4&/X [moka]. 

firewood, carry: #%3€ [hansai]. 

fist: 258 [kent6]. $8 [to] is a suffix. 

fist, a single: 2598—€ [kento isseki]. 

fist, blow of a: 1228 [kikken], literally, receiving a fist. 

fist, enter a: A#BIAR [nyt kento ri]. 

fist, held-up: {42258 [nenkento]. 

fist, raise a: #@9B&@22%29 [kentd wo koki-su]. Expresses direct 
understanding. 

fist, vital: E2258 [katsuketo]. 

fists, stinky: 523858 [shikento]. 

fists and nostrils: #98FL [kento biki]. Teachers and elders. 

fit exactly: fh [tekit6], literally, hit the mark. 

Five Buddhas: See Buddhas, Five. 

Five Gates. See also Schools, Five. 

Five Houses. See also Schools, Five. 

Five Houses, different flavors of the: HAXPIEL [goke mompi]. 

five monks: See monks, five. 

Five Ranks. See Ranks, Five. 

Five Schools: See Schools, Five. 

five skandhas: See skandhas, five. 

Five Vehicles: See Vehicles, Five. 

fivefold power: H7) [goriki]. The power of: trust, effort, mindfulness, 
samadhi, and wisdom. Included in the thirty-seven wings of 
enlightenment. 

five sense organs: See organs, five sense. 

flame: ‘Xi [kaen]. 

flavors, hundred: Fl*IS #4 [hyaku mi chinshi], literally, one hundred 
tastes and rare delicacies. 

flaws, free of: #i§ [mro]. 

flesh, lump of red: 7; AH) [shakuniku dan]. Body. 

flow: &2(S) [kyoraku(-su)], literally, passing through or continuous 
passage. For Dogen, experience of all time—past, present, and 
future—as the present moment. 

flower canopy: #2 [kegai]. 

flower in the sky: &252# [kokiige]. Illusory flowers; illusory vision. See 
also emptiness, flower of. 

flower, heavenly: K# [tenge]. 

Flowers in the Sky: 433 [Kiige]. Forty-fourth fascicle of this book. 

flowery words: 5 # [gonka]. 

fluctuation. See also activity. 

fly beyond: ##@#€ [chohi]. 

flying, activity of: #€2 [hik6]. 

follow all the way through: fié{th2; [zui ta ko]. 

force: §%F [goi]. Forcefully assert, wield authority. 

force, vital: a [myo]. 

foretell: 329 [ki-su]. Predict one’s enlightenment. 

form: © [shiki]. Translation of Skt. ripa: color, form, or phenomena. 
& [sho], literally, shape. 

form, color, and measurements: #2 [tai shiki ry6]. 

form, conceal the body and reveal the: #53 3258# [zoshin yo miro]. 

form, essence, body, and power: *8'£827] [sdsh6 tairiki]. 

form, fixed: 7£ 48 [j6s6]. 

form, genuine: Af [honjiki], literally, original color. IE{® [shdgil, 
authentic procedure. 

form, no: #£4§ [mus6]. 

form, original: AX#% [hon’y6]. 

form, perception, feeling, inclination, and discernment: 48{73% [shiki 
ju so gyo shiki]. Five skandhas. 

form, venerable: &{% [songil]. 

form is emptiness: 8728 [shiki soku ze ki]. 

form is revealed: 323% [roei], literally, image is revealed. 

form realm. See also realms, three. 

formless realm: See realms, three. 

forms, beyond: 4E48 [his6], literally, not form. 

forms, myriad: BR [manzo]. 

forthright practice-realization: H(i [jiki shush6]. 

foundation, master the: 32 [tappon]. 

four bodily presences: See bodily presences, four. 

Four Continents: See Continents, Four. 

four dependences: See dependences, four. 

Four Deva Kings: See Deva Kings, Four. 

four fruits: See fruits, four. 

four groups of practitioners: See practitioners, four groups of. 

Four Horses: DUF5 [Shime]. Eighty-sixth fascicle of this book. 

four noble truths: See truths, four noble. 

four right efforts: See efforts, four right. 

four stages of meditation: See meditation, four stages of. 

four types of practice: {T;KlCM# [gyoho ni shishu]. See also 
dependences, four. 

Four Understandings: See Understandings, Four. 

four worlds: See worlds, four. 

Fourth Heaven: VUX [daishi ten]. Fourth of the six heavens in the 
desire realm. Tushita Heaven. 

fourth stage of meditation: See meditation, four stages of; Monk of the 
Fourth Stage of Meditation. 

fox, spirit of a wild: ®}3M*#8 [yako zei]. 

fox, wild: #¥-F [yakan]. 

free, float: #22(S) [yuke(-su)]. Free oneself. 

free, not yet: AAR [midatsu], literally, not yet off. 

freedom: AA [jizai], literally, being oneself. 

freedom from attachment: #\%ef [shui dan], literally, cut off 
attachment. 

friend and enemy: 283% [onshin]. 

from beginning to end: 381FFe1F [zushin bishin], literally, head correct 
and tail correct. 

from head to toe: #2FUM5R [habi shito], literally, grabbing tail and 
taking head. 

from root to twig: #487. 7K [kohon shimatsu]. 

front of oneself, in: TH [tomen], literally, hitting face. 

fruit, first: See fruits, four. 

fruit, realize the: §£58 [shoka]. Fruits of realization. See also fruits, four. 

fruit of no returning: P78 [anagon ka]. Skt., anagamin, literally, 
one who does not return. Transliteration: f]#8[anagon]. Third of 
the four fruits of shramanas, wandering monks. See also fruits, four. 

fruits, four: VU58 [shika]. The four stages of shramanas (wandering 
monks) in the progression of becoming an arhat. Achievements of a 
practitioner as: a stream enterer who has become free from 
delusions; once-returner and never-returner who have become free 
from desires; and one who has no more need to study. The last stage 
is called the fruit of an arhat. 

Fu: See Taiyuan Fu. 

Fuguang Ruman: #3¢90 ii [Bukko Nyoman]. Ca. eighth—ninth century. 
Dharma heir of Mazu Daoyi, Nanyue Line. Abbot of Fuguang 
Monastery, Luoyang (Henan), the capital city of dynasties including 
Tang. Renowned poet Bai Jui was a lay student of his. 

Fuguo Weibai: #E)£A [Bukkoku Ihaku]. Eleventh-twelfth century. 
Dharma heir of Fayun Faxiu, Yunmen School. Compiled Jianzhong 
Jingguo Continuous Transmission of the Lamp (Continuous 
Transmission of the Lamp). 

full moon, shape of a: iA # [mangetsu rin]. 

full-lotus position: #431#k44 [kekka fuza]. Sitting with both legs crossed 
over each other. 

fully manifest: #3 [dokuro]. 

Fuma: See Li Fuma. 

function: I} [kudoku], literally, effort and virtue. Ability, possibility, 
active power, activity, aspect, characteristics, merit, effect, value, 
virtue. J) [ko]. 

function, great: KF [daiyi]. 

function, transformative: {t# [keki]. 

fundamental point. See also koan. 

furnace: ‘Xz [karo]. 

furnace and bellows: ## [rohai]. 1. The practice place where the 
master trains the students, like tempering a furnace. 2. Entire daily 
activity. 

furnishing: 34. [kagu]. Furniture. #4 [chddo]. Accoutrement, 
equipment, instrument, utensil. Things needed for the daily 
activities of the buddha house. 

Furong Daokai: ®AjSts [Fuyo Dokai]. 1043-1118, China. Dharma 
heir of Touzi Yiqing, Caodong School. Also called Dayang, Ala 
[Taiyo]. Before he studied Zen, he engaged in Daoist sorcery. He 
taught at Mount Dayang, Ying Region (Hubei), and later at Lake 
Furong, (Shandong). His reputation as a teacher led Emperor Hui to 
offer Furong favors and demand that he teach near the palace, but 
Furong refused on both counts, incurring the Emperor’s wrath. 
Later, the Emperor forgave him and built him a temple at Furong, 
where he moved and taught many students for the rest of his life, 
revitalizing the monastic standards of the Caodong School. 

Furong Lingxun: %#223)ll [FuyO Reikun]. Ca. ninth century, China. 
Dharma heir of Guizong Zhichang, Nanyue Line. Taught at Mount 
Furong, Fu Region (Fujian). His posthumous name is Great Master 
Hongzhao, 5488 AB [Kosh Daishi]. 

future: 7_E [matsuj6], literally, upward-pointing twigs. 

Fuxing Fatai: (@t£;&Z= [Bussho Hotai]. Ca. eleventh-twelfth century, 
China. Dharma heir of Yuanwu Kegin, Linji School. Abbot of Mount 
Gui (Dagui), Tan Region (Hunan). His posthumous name is Zen 
Master Fuxing, (#88486 [Bussho Zenji]. 

Fuyan Qingyuan: ‘ARjSi% ([Butsugen Seion]. 1067-1120, China. 
Dharma heir of Wuzu Fayan, Linji School. Taught at Longmen 
Monastery, near Luoyang (Henan). Given the title of Zen Master 
Fuyan, (HR4# 6 [Butsugen Zenji], by the Emperor. 

Fuyin Liaoyuan: El) 7c [Butchin Rydgen]. 1032-1098, China. 
Dharma heir of Kaixian Shanxian, Yunmen School. Taught at many 
monasteries, including Mount Yunju, Hong Region (Jiangxi). His 
posthumous name is Zen Master Fuyin, ‘#E[]##Efi [Butchin Zenji]. 
Known for his association with Su Dongpo. 

Fuzhao: See Zhuoan Deguang. 

Gandhara: f#5X##E] [Kendara Koku]. An ancient kingdom northwest 
of India, in present-day Pakistan and Afghanistan. 

gandharva. See also guardians, eight types of. 

Ganges: Skt., Ganga. 875] [goga]. A river in northern India, flowing 
from the Himalaya Mountains generally eastward through a vast 
plain. Buddhism rose and developed along this river. Sacred to 
Brahmanism in ancient times and Hinduism in later times up to the 
present day. 

Ganges, sands of the: t€j=]¥> [goga sha], '8%> [gosha]. ja j>BX [goga 
shasii], literally the number of the sands of the Ganges. An 
innumerable amount. 

Gao, novice: fi)‘ [KO Shami]. Ca. eighth-ninth century. A student of 
Yaoshan Weiyan, Qingyuan Line. After leaving Mount Yaoshan, he 
lived in a hut and taught passersby. 

Gaoan Dayu: S&ARS [Koan Daigu]. Ca. ninth century, China. 
Dharma heir of Guizong Zhichang, Nanyue Line. He taught in 
Gaoan, Rui Region (Jiangxi), where his teaching was instrumental 
in the enlightenment of Linji Yixuan, founder of the Linji School. He 
was also the teacher of Moshan Liaoran, the most prominent female 
teacher in the early Zen School. 

gardenia bush: #&2)®*# [sempuku no rin]. 

garuda. See also guardians, eight types of. 

gassho: J.. G#. Gesture of placing palms together in front of the 
chest, expressing respect. Often accompanied with bowing, it is used 
for greeting, chanting, and offering or receiving something. 

gate, ancestral: #4P5 [somon]. 

gate, front: IEP4 [shomon]. Front entrance, #i/P4 [zemmon]. 

gate, hammer open the: 2 [kyakukan]. Pound open a barrier. 

gate, universal: #3P4 [fumon]. 

Gates, Five: See also Schools, Five. 

gatha: Skt. {lB [kada]. Verse for chanting. One of the Twelve 
Divisions of the teaching. See also Divisions, Twelve. 

Gautama: See Shakyamuni Buddha. 

Gaya, Mount: {i186 [Gaya San]. Located near Vulture Peak in the 
country of Magadha, ancient India. This is where Devadatta tried to 
cause a split in the Buddha’s practicing community. 

Gayashata: {lH [Kayashata]. Monk from Madhya, northern India. 
Family name, Uddaka-Ramaputta. Dharma heir of Sanghanandi. 
Eighteenth Ancestor of the Zen tradition in India. 

generosity: pits [fuse]. See also giving. 

genius: 8&7 [issai]. 

gentle curving: E)Beett [en dadachi]. H4[chi] is a suffix. 

genuineness: '&{% [shingi], literally, true or false. 

get all the way through: $]#$%K [datoku tetsu]. $] [da] is a prefix for 

emphasis. 

get into: #2A [tonyi], literally, push in. 

geya: Skt. #7 [giya]. Teaching reiterated in verse. One of the Twelve 
Divisions of the teaching. 

giant radish: K#2)98 [dairafu to]. $8 [to] is a suffix with no special 
meaning. 

gift, great: AK [dai’on]. 

gimlet, old: B&H [rd kosui]. Sharp, penetrating Zen master. B##E 
[kotsu rissui], literally, bone discipline awl. Strong, determined 
practitioner. 

give and take: £4 [yodatsu]. Also, give or take. 

giving: *hffi [fuse]. One of the six paramitas. Also, one of the 
bodhisattva’s four methods of guidance. 

giving, act of: #hi8OtBE [fuse no dando], literally, paramita (& [do]) 
of giving (4hif [fuse], #8 [dan]). 7iiMIN# [fuse no kugo], 
literally, meritorious action of giving. 

giving, paramita of: 2:22 [dan haramitsu]. 

go and study all over. See also all-inclusive study. 

go back and forth: #251826 [shimpo taiho]. 

go beyond: 41§ [shusshin], literally, bringing out one’s body. Emerge, 
leap beyond, leave bondage behind. ##(¢) [chO’otsusu(-su)], 
transcend. 

go beyond ancestor: #%4H [osso], literally, surpass ancestor. 

go beyond buddha: 414) _E [bukk6jo], literally, buddha going up. Also 
translated as buddha going beyond; ongoing buddhahood. Acting 
freely and concretely within practice-and-enlightenment without 
attachment to it. Cf. “Going beyond buddha means that you reach 
buddha, and going further, you continue to see buddha” (“Going 
Beyond Buddha”). #84#% [chobutsu], literally, transcending buddha. 

go beyond enlightenment: t&t4 [goshutsu], literally, exit enlightenment. 

go beyond the dharma body: See dharma body, go beyond the. 

go downward: [4] F [koge]. 

go game: &# [chaku ki]. The second ideograph is often pronounced 
go in Japanese. 

go through: { [tetsu]. 

go toward: #X[4)(F) [shuk6(-su)]. Intention, trying to. 

goal, true: AHA [hongo], literally, original expectation. 

goat, mountain: ##=# [reiy6]. 

god of autumn: AiG [Hakutei], literally, White Emperor. Deity of the 
western direction. See also Emperors, Five. 

god of spring: 4 [Tokun]. Deity of the eastern direction, in charge of 
spring. See also Emperors, Five. 

god of summer: #4 [Entei], literally, flame emperor. One of the five 
heavenly rulers. Resides in the southern heaven. See also Emperors, 

Five. 

god’s head and a demon face: ##38 52H) [jinzu kimen]. 

Going Beyond Buddha: ([a) ES [Bukkojo Ji], literally, matter of 
buddha going up. Twenty-ninth fascicle of this book. 

golden body, sixteen-foot: X7\(O)#H [joroku (no) konjin]. 

gong, shang, jue, zhi, yu: C. =F) FAHA [kyt sho kaku chi u]. Notes of a 
musical scale. 

goo goo wa wa: Isl *0F1 [tatawawa]. Baby talk. 

good: See wholesome. 

good, not thinking of: =t87\2= [zen ya fu shiry6]. 

gourd: #8 [koro]. Twining vine; succession of the dharma lineage. 

gourd, bitter: See bitter gourd has a bitter root. 

grasp: BX [shu], literally, take. #4 [k6], literally, trap. }22£ [hajo], #2 
J ([joha ry6d], literally, grab solidly. #489 [sakuha-su], }E# 
[hasoku], literally, catch. 

grasp, easy to: 3 AS [koisan]. 

grasp, reach over to: #2HX [taishu], literally, take with the body. 

grasp, vitally: #474 [tokukatsu]. 

grasp cases through words: [4] PEXAl [ko gonchi shusoku]. 

grasp clearly: BAY [myotoku]. 

grass, drop: +8] [rakusd]. Become free of delusions; to be 
emancipated. 

grass, hold up: $4 [nens6]. 

grass, one blade of: —#:& [ikkyoso]. —& [isso]. 

grasses, one hundred: 8 & [hyakus6]. Infinite phenomena, all things. 

grass, trees, and forests: 7XZ84% [somoku sorin]. 

grass, trees, land, and earth: 7X EJ-£ [somoku kokudo]. 

grass for ten thousand miles, not an inch of: B##T& [banri mu 
sunso]. 

grasses are bright and clear, one hundred: BREA & [meimei hyakuso]. 

Great Collection of Siitras:KS#% [Daishii Kyo]. Korean collection of 
Mahayana sitras, rendered in Chinese by different translators. 

great death:X3E [daishi]. A death met with complete readiness for 
death, thereby being free from death. Termination of ignorance or 
delusion, leading to liberation. 

great elements, five: HX [godai]. Four great elements (earth, water, 
fire, and air), plus space. 

great enlightenment: Enlightenment without leaving a trace of it. 

Great Enlightenment: A'% [Daigo]. Twenty-seventh fascicle of this 
book. 

great enlightenment is black: ATE3AR [daigo to koku]. 5H [td] is a 
suffix with no special meaning. 

great enlightenment is white: ATS3HA [daigo to haku]. 58 [td] is a 
suffix with no special meaning. 

great house: KR [taike/taika], literally, big house. Assembly, audience 
of the master’s lecture. 

great matter. See also matter, single essential. 

great matter, break open the: KF] fA [daiji dakai]. 

great matter of the way, settle the: See settle the great matter of the way. 

Great Practice: AtE{J [Dai Shugyo]. Seventy-sixth fascicle of this 
book. 

Great Sangha Precepts [Scripture]: HAR(S#{# [Maka Sogi Ritsu]. 
Collection of precepts from the Mahasamghika School, one of the 
eighteen early Buddhist schools of India. This school became an 
early source of Mahayana Buddhism. 

Great Vehicle: See Vehicles, Three. 

great way of all buddhas: See also buddha way. 

Great Wisdom, Treatise on Realization of: See Treatise on Realization of 
Great Wisdom. 

greed: & [ton]. 

green mountains are always walking: S| #iZ2 [seizan jo umpo]. 

greeting circuit: «= [jund6]. The abbot or practice leader goes around 
inside the monks’ hall to greet all practitioners. Circumambulation. 

greeting, formal: A [ninji], literally, human matter. 1. Greetings in 
monastery. 2. Gift. 3. Ninji also means worldly affairs. 

grip: #87£ [hajo]. Hold, take hold. 

grope for: #28 [mosaku]. Look for. 

grotto hut: 256 [kuttaku]. Cave, abode. 

ground: #238 [roji], literally, bare earth. 

grounds, nine: FLtt [kuchi/ kytichi]. Also, nine types of existences. One 
ground in the desire realm, and four grounds each in the form and 
no-form realms. 

gruel, satisfied with: $2 [shuku soku]. 

Guangcheng: [hk [Kosei]. Legendary sorcerer of ancient China who 
taught the Yellow Emperor. 

Guangren: See Sushan Guangren. 

Guangtong Huiguang: #648356 [Kozu Eko]. 468-537, China. Precept 
Master who advocated precepts that are classified in four divisions. 
Purportedly one of the monks who accused and attempted to 
oppress Bodhidharma. 

Guangzuo: See Zhimen Guangzuo. 

Guanxi Zhixian: #27%75—4 [Kankei Shikan]. d. 895, China. Dharma heir 
of Linji Yixuan, Linji School. Taught at Guanxi, Changsha (Hunan). 

Guanzhi: See Tong’an Guanzhi. 

Guanzi: [Kanshi]. A book by Guanzhong (d. 645 B.c.£.), prime 
minister of Qi Kingdom. 

guard: 527% [goji]. 

guardian spirit of the monastery buildings: (N1E5## [gogaran jin]. 

guardians, eight types of: A deva, dragon, yaksha (flying demon), 
gandharva (heavenly musician), asura (fighting spirit), garuda (bird 
god), kinnara (heavenly singer), and mahoraga (land dragon). Often 
revered as protectors of dharma. 

guest and host: B= [hinju]. Student and teacher. 

guest office: #%4§ [settai]. 

Guichen: See Dizang Guichen. 

guidance: {¢4 [ked6], literally, transform and guide. 

guide other: F{t# [ita], literally, make other. 

guide the person: #%28 [sekkyo], literally, touch the person. 

guideline, pure: 7a*& [shingi], literally, pure regulation. 

Guidelines for Zen Monasteries: C. Chanyuan Qinggui, #2583438 [Zennen 
Shingi], literally, pure rules for Zen gardens. Compiled by Changlu 
Zongze of Yunmen School, eleventh-twelfth century, China. 
Published in 1103. The oldest extant collection of monastic 
guidelines, as most of the earlier guidelines, attributed to Baizhang, 
had been lost. Basis for later monastic guidelines. 

guidelines, what are the: | \A\%R S#FEDG S [ikanaru kiku ka aru]. 

guidepost: #8 [bdyo]. Example. #2(% [hydbd]. Standard. 

guiding a person: BAA [inn setsunin], literally, making and 
touching a person. 

Guishan Lingyou: iL) #%4 [Isan Reiyti]. 771-853, China. Dharma heir 
of Baizhang Huaihai, Nanyue Line. Along with his co-student 
Huangbo Xiyun, Guishan was a renowned Zen teacher of Tang 
Dynasty China. Taught at Mount Gui, Tan Region (Hunan). He had 
forty-one roomentering (senior) students, one of whom was 
Yangshan Huiji. Guishan and Yangshan are regarded as cofounders 
of the Guiyang School, the first of the Five Schools of Chinese Zen 
to come into existence. His posthumous name is Zen Master Dayuan 
Ah [Daien Zenji]. 

Guixing: See Shexian Guixing. 

Guiyang School: ACIS [Igy Sha]. One of the Five Schools of Chinese 
Zen Buddhism. Regards Guishan Lingyou and Yangshan Huiji as its 
founders. 

Guizong Zhichang: ##s5R@8 7 [Kisu Chijo]. Ca. eighth century, China. 
Dharma heir of Mazu Daoyi, Nanyue Line. Taught at Guizong 
Monastery, Mount Lu (Jiangxi). His teaching was well known, and 
he was frequently visited by the famous Tang Dynasty poet and 
statesman Bai Zhuyi. At the end of his life he was known as Red- 
Eyed Guizong because the medicine he used for cataracts turned his 
eyes red. His posthumous name is Zen Master Zhizhen 21 %#6 
[Shishin Zenji]. 

Guotai Hongtao: Ed285434 [Kokutai Koto]. Ca. ninth-tenth century, 
China. Dharma heir of Xuefeng Yicun, Qingyuan Line. Taught at 

Anguo Monastery, Fu Region (Fujian). His posthumous name is 
Great Master Mingzhen, 8A i Afi [Myoshin Daishi]. 

Gushan Zhiyuan: fi\L§[] [Kozan Chien]. Dates unknown, China. His 
theory of the Three Teachings as one is quoted in the preface of the 
Record of the Universal Lamp. 

Ha!: 0& [nii]. 

Haihui Shouduan: }825fim [Kaie Shutan]. 1025-1072, China. Also, 
Baiyun Shouduan. Dharma heir of Yangqi Fanghui, Linji School. 
Taught at Haihui Monastery on Mount Baiyun, Shu Region (Anhui). 

hair breathing in the vast ocean, tuft of: 27 [m6 don kokai]. 

hairbreadth: 2 [gori]. 

half-lotus position: + i)1#k44 [hanka fuza]. Sitting with one leg crossed 
over the other. 

hall, auxiliary cloud: B= [ji’und6]. A hall for zazen, eating, and 
sleeping, attached to the main monks’ hall. 

hall, entry: Bi [tangary6], literally, passing the dawn dormitory. 
Special building or quarters for those seeking entry to the 
monastery or staying overnight. Visitors’ room. 

hall, meditation: 4442 [zazend6]. 

hall, monks’: (2% [sdd6]. == [undo], literally, cloud hall, because a 
monk who wanders about in search of the way is called #7K 
[unsui], meaning cloud and water. This hall is where monks engage 
in zazen, have morning and midday meals, and sleep. 

hall, relic: & # EX [shari den]. 

hall, study: 3 [shury6], literally, dormitory of assembly. 58% 
[shdd6], literally, illumination hall, hall of light. A [honryd], 
literally, main dormitory. A building in the Zen monastery where 
monks read, drink tea, and have evening meals. 

hall for sleeping: #2 [shindo]. 

han: J. hk / #%. A hanging wooden board struck by a wooden mallet as 
a signal in a monastery. 

Han Dynasty: }@ [Kan]. Former Han, 202-28 3.c.z. Later Han, 25-220 
CE. 

Han Yu: 88% [Kan’yu]. 768-828, China. Government official and 
outstanding writer, exiled and pardoned twice. Studied with Dadian 
Baotong, Qingyuan Line. His posthumous name is Lord Wen. 

hands and eyes, countless: Referring to one thousand arms and one 
thousand eyes of Bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara. 

hang on emptiness: 2(|C‘A\S [kt ni kakaru]. 

hang up traveling staff: #4 [kashaku]. Stay at a monastery. 

Hangzhou Tianlong: tn)NX#E [Koshi Tenryt]. Ca. eighth-ninth 
century, China. Dharma heir of Damei Fachang, Nanyue Line. His 
teaching was always raising one finger, known as Tianlong’s One 

Finger Zen, which was famously taken up by his student Juzhi. 

Haojian: See Baling Haojian. 

Haoyue, Imperial Attendant: #EAK2 [Kogetsu Gubu]. Ca. eighth- 
ninth century, China. Student of Changsha Jingcen, Qinguan Line. 
Biography unknown. 

hasta: Skt. AY [chai]. Measuring unit. The length from elbow to middle 
fingertip. 

hat, wild boar: See boar hat, wild. 

have some tea: 12784 [kissa ko], literally, go and drink tea. 

head, shave the: #!/§8 [teitd]. To become a monk or nun. 

head, turn one’s: See turning one’s head. 

head as it is: 52 [zu nii]. 

head but no tail, one who has: @38 #8 &3# [utd mubi kan]. 

head monk: EE [shuso], literally, head seat. One who assists the 
abbot in teaching during one practice period as part of the training. 

head monks, those who have been: 17{4® E [risso no shuso]. 

head of the garden: A538 [enjii]. 

head on top of another, placing one: #8 (298 [zuj6 anzu]. Head above 
headtop. 

head to tail, from: 38iFFE1F [zushin bishin], literally, the head is 
correct and the tail is correct. 

heads, divine: ##98 [jinzu]. 

heads are right, their: 3AfA1E [zukaku shin], literally, head horn is 
correct. 

heads of work crew: $24 [choshu]. 

hear sounds with entire eye: ##ERf&i# [mangen monshd]. 

Heart of the Way: i41% [Doshin]. Ninety-fourth fascicle of this book. 

heaven: K'= [tend6], literally, heavenly halls. Heavenly world. 

Heaven of No Thought: #48 [musoten]. Skt., Asamjiika. The realm 
of meditation where all mental activity is stopped. 

heaven of purity: See also Brahma Heaven. 

Heaven of Shining Banner: 7¢AAnSt# [Komyo Ban Sekai]. 

Heaven of Thirty-three Devas: == [Sanjiisan Ten]. One of the six 
heavens of the desire world above Mount Sumeru. Indra is 
surrounded by thirty-two other devas—eight in each of the four 
directions. Also called Tushita Heaven. 

Heaven Share: #X [Kuten]. King, one of the former lives of 
Shakyamuni Buddha. 

Heaven, Tushita: See Tushita Heaven. 

heavenly beings: Kz [tenshu]. Devas. 

heavenly eyes: See eyes, five. 

heels have not yet touched the ground: Ril#RARB4tH7E [kyakkon mitten 
chi zai].. 

heir, direct: #4$mea [shin tekishi], literally, intimate heir. 

heir, new: #ii@) [shishi]. 

heir to heir: 4% [tekiteki]. 

heir-buddha: f(s [shibutsu]. Same as buddha’s heir [busshi]. Holder 
of an authentic dharma heritage. 

hell: Skt., niraya. Transliteration: €22 [nairi]. Translation: tak 
[jigoku], literally, underground prison. 

help invisibly: 2 [mydshi], 2B) [mydjo]. 

helper, young: #¢J [zunnan]. Young worker or youth who is not yet 
ordained. 

herbs, three types of: = [sans6]. Classification in the Lotus Sitra. 
Excellent herbs: Bodhisattva Vehicle. Medium herbs: Shravaka and 
Pratyeka-buddha Vehicles. Lesser herbs: Human and Deva Vehicle. 

here, it is right: R¥:&R [shi zai shari]. 

here, right: kz [tojo]. 

here, what is right: 72+ AEE [shari ze jimosho zai]. 

heretic thinkers, six types of: 7\##78 [rokugun tokushi]. See monks, 
group of the six. 

heritage, document of: f= [shisho]. A genealogical record given by a 
teacher to a disciple as a proof of dharma transmission. The names 
of the buddha ancestors and the new heir are written by the heir, 
and the teacher adds words of approval with a signature and seals. 

heritage, mutual: #8] [sOshi]. Realization outside of time; beyond, 
before, and after. In the merged realization of teacher and disciple, 
disciple inherits dharma from the teacher, and the teacher inherits 
dharma from the disciple. (Document of Heritage: “Shakyamuni 
Buddha inherited dharma from Kashyapa Buddha. . . . Kashyapa 
Buddha inherited dharma from Shakyamuni Buddha.”). 

heritage, our: 5P4 [shimon], literally, spiritual gate. 

hero: GE [eiyt]. 

Heshan Shouxun: {*J.J5F#) [Kazan Shujun]. Ca. eleventh—-twelfth 
century, China. Dharma heir of Taiping Huiqin, Linji School. Taught 
at Mount He (Zhejiang). His posthumous name is Zen Master 
Fudeng ##t&4#6 [Butto Zenji]. 

hidden in the entire world, nothing is: See world, nothing is hidden in the 
entire. 

hidden, apparent, existent, or not existent: SB#47#32 [onken zommotsu]. 

high ancestor: fat [kdso]. For Dogen, high ancestor refers to an 
outstanding ancestor, such as Yunyan or Dangshan. 

High Banner Palace: fal@43XE [Koto Hon Tengi]. 

High Eight: E/\ [Johatsu]. 

Himalayas: Described in siitras as the place where Shakyamuni Buddha 
practiced in his former life. See also Snow Mountains. 

Hinayana. See also Vehicles, Three. 

hindrance: 2Bt(S) [keige(-su)], # [ge]. 1. Hinder, obstructing, being 

sheltered, contradicted, covered. Separation from reality. 2. For 
Dogen, being completely covered, immersed, undivided. Being one 
with reality. 

hindrance in the study of the way: (#3 [shod]. 

hindrances of unwholesome actions: 3Ef% [zaisho]. 

Hinokuma Shrine: H#u*t [Hinokuma Sha]. Shinto shrine in Akitzuki, 
Kii Province (present Wakayama Prefecture), Japan. Enshrines Great 
Deity of Hinokuma [Hinokuma Okami]. 

hiro: J. . Measuring unit. Sixty sun. 

hit the mark: —' [itt6], literally, one strike. 

Hojo, Tokiyori: 1227-1263. Became the head of the Kamakura 
government as Regent of Japan in 1246. His monk name is Dosii 
SaimyOji. He invited Dogen to give dharma discorses in Kamakura. 

hold on fully: {28 [tan shakul], literally, only be attached. 

hold up a flower and blink: }42#848 [nenge shummoku]. See also 
treasury of the true dharma eye. 

hold up grass: #4= [nens6]. Have realization. 

hollow discussion: [Xm [keron]. Theoretical discussion, groundless 
theory. 

homage to: #@& [keishu], literally, lower the head (to the ground). 

home leaver: th [shukke]. Monk or nun. WA.A [shukkenin], person 
who has left his or her household to join the sangha. 

home leaving and entry into the practice of the way: WAIEZiIE [shukke 
shudo]. 

home leavers, Five Schools of: HZ8O{#2 [gobu no sdshu]. 

Hongren: See Daman Hongren. 

Hongtao: See Guotai Hongtao. 

Hongzhi Zhenjiao: %#1E [Wanshi Shdgaku]. 1091-1157, China. 
Dharma heir of Danxia Zichun, Caodong School. When he was abbot 
at Mount Tiantong, his monastery flourished with as many as 
twelve hundred monks in residence. In a period when Zen practice 
was in decline, he revived the Caodong tradition. Regarded as 
leader of “silent-illumination Zen,” he was a prolific writer who 
poetically articulated Caodong meditation practice. Author of 
Hongzhi’s Capping Verses, which became the basis of the Book of 
Serenity. His posthumous name is Zen Master Hongzhi, “#5 +#8 
[Wanshi Zenji]. 

honorarium: &#% [hydsen], literally, straw bag full of coins. 

Honored One: X¥llial [dai osh6], literally, great priest. 

horizontally and vertically, maneuver: ta}#2248 [Otan jutan]. 

horn on the head, break a: $874" [zukaku shokusetsu]. 

horn on the head, grow a: 8874 [zukaku sh6]. Arouse desire. 

horn, painted: 2F4 [gakaku]. 

horns, hide the body but expose the: #3 #244 [zoshin rokaku]. 

horse, beak of: #4 [bashi]. Something that does not exist. 

horse, command a: 3&5 [choba]. 

horse’s womb, enter the: A. ®5A8 [nya batai]. 

host: =X [shujin], literally, main person. 

hours of Horse and Sheep: Horse is the seventh hour of the day. Sheep 
is the eighth hour of the day. 

hours of the day, twelve: --__B¥ [jini ji]. In East Asia a day was divided 
into twelve hours. See also Time System (appendix 8). 

house where water is used sparsely: 't#7K7Z RR [sekisui no ie]. 

house, burning: 5 [kataku]. 

house, in one’s own: BRE [jike okuri]. 

house, in the: 3 [oku ri]. Domain, teaching of the buddha house. 

household, merit of leaving the: WAIN [shukke kudoku]. 

Houses, Five: See Schools, Five. 

how: BR / TlifeS< [teitaraku]. 1. How it is, how it works. 2. 
Meaning (of a word or phrase). 

How does this expression of thusness emerge?: See thusness emerge?, How 
does this expression of. 

how to maintain them, how not to violate them, how to be open to them, 
and how to control oneself: ##3L68i [jibon kaisha]. Ways to work on 
precepts. 

Huaihai: See Baizhang Huaihai. 

Huairang: See Nanyue Huairang. 

Huangbo Xiyun: 3%74j2 [Obaku Kiun]. d. 850, China. Dharma heir of 
Baizhang Huaihai, Nanyue Line. Born in Fu Region (Fujian) and 
ordained on Mount Huangbo of the region. After attaining deep 
insight with Baizhang and teaching for some time, he moved to a 
mountain at Zhongling (Jiangxi) at invitation of Minister Pei Xiu 
and called it Huangbo after his place of ordination; his teaching 
flourished there. Known for striking with a staff as a teaching 
device. Linji Yixuan was one of his successors. Pei Xiu compiled 
Huangbo’s words, Transmission of Heart, Essential Dharma. His 
posthumous name is Zen Master Duanji, BfRR¢#6M [Dansai Zenji]. 

Huangbo’s striking with a staff: 5£0{7## [Obaku no gyobd], literally, 
Huangbo’s practice stick. 

Huanglong Huinan: #24 [Oryi Enan]. 1002-1069, China. Dharma 
heir of Shishuang Chuyuan, Linji School. His teaching with the use 
of koans flourished at Mount Huanglong (Jiangxi). Regarded as 
founder of the Huanglong Order of Linji School. His posthumous 
name is Zen Master Pujiao, #¢#6) [Fugaku Zenji]. 

Huangmei: Hongren of; Mount. See also Daman Hongren. 

Huanxi Weiyi: f2i%'fE— [Kankei lichi]. 1202-1281, China. Dharma 
heir of Wuzhun Shifan, Linji School. Abbot of several renowned 

training centers, including Ruiyuan Monastery and Tiantong Jingde 
Monastery, both in Ming Region (Zhejiang). A visiting abbot of 
Jingde Monastery when Dogen visited. 

Huanzhong: See Daci Huanzhong. 

Huayan School: Also called Avatamsaka School. In China, it developed 
profound dialectic of Mahayana philosophy that was the basis for 
much Zen thought. 

hub: = [y6]. Center of a folding fan. 

Huiche: See Shimen Huiche. 

Huiguang: See Guangtong Huiguang. 

Huiji: See Yangshan Huiji. 

Huijiao: See Langye Huijiao. 

Huike: See Dazu Huike. 

Huileng: See Changqing Huileng: 

Huinan: See Huanglong Huinan. 

Huineng: See Dajian Huineng. 

Huiqin: See Taiping Huiqin. 

Huiran: See Sansheng Huiran. 

Huisi: See Nanyue Huisi. 

Huitang Zuxin: Pg=480) [Kaidd Soshin]. 1025-1100, China. Dharma 
heir of Huanglong Huinan, Linji School. He traveled back and forth 
for seven years between Yunfeng Wenyue and Huanglong before 
attaining clarity with Huanglong. He taught at Mount Huanglong 
(Jiangxi), emphasizing clear seeing and self-understanding. His 
posthumous name is Zen Master Baojiao B= 7h [HOgaku Zenji]. 

Huiyan Zhizhao: See Zhicong. 

Huiyong: See Nanyuan Huiyong. 

Huizang: See Shigong Huizang. 

Huizhong: See Nanyang Huizhong. 

Human and Deva Vehicles: \K3€ [ninden jd]. See also Vehicles, Five. 

human stupidity is deadly: #1%%A [donchi satsunin]. 

humans and devas: AX [ninden]. See also deva. 

humans, things, body, and mind: A490) [nimmotsu shinjin]. 

hunger: Jl [ki]. 1. Hunger as opposed to satisfaction. 2. In Dogen’s 
usage, emptiness or ultimate truth. 

hungry ghost: §&52 [gaki]. See also paths, six. 

hunting dog: 4%4) [ryokul. 

hurl insightful flashes: See unroll the matter and hurl insightful flashes. 

hut: 2 [an]. 

hut, grass-roof: 2 [soan]. 

hut, pounding: HEF [taibd]. 

Hutou Zhao: 3888 [Koto Sho]. Ca. ninth-tenth century. A student of 
Xiangyan Zhixian. Biography unknown. 

huts, residential: #W [annai]. 

I am always intimate with this: BFE [go jo o shi setsu]. 

I am originally in this land: BARE [go honrai shi do]. 

icchantika: Skt. Abbreviated transliteration: fz [sendai] 1. Someone 
who is unable or does not wish to become a buddha. 2. In Dogen’s 
usage, a buddha who goes beyond buddha. 

identify with and actualize: 4§%2{7T [shinju bugy6], literally, accept 
dharma with trust and practice. 

Identifying with Cause and Effect: *R{S AR [Shinjin Inga]. Ninetieth 
fascicle of this book. 

identity action: [AJ [dodji], literally, same thing. One of the 
bodhisattva’s four methods of guidance. See also fascicle 46, 
“Bodhisattva’s Four Methods of Guidance.” 

if the top of a stone is large, the bottom is large: GIAAIEX [seki td dai 
tei dai]. 

if the top of the stone is small, the bottom is small: 458/\\/F&/)\ [seki to 
sho tei sho]. 

ignorance: Skt., avidya, #£88 [mumy6]. See also causation, twelvefold. 

ijing/Tjing: C. Ax [eki kyO/ Eki Kyo]. Also, i-ching. Ancient Chinese 
philosophy on change and human actions, including methods of 
making predictions. Originally, Book of Changes. 

illuminate: KABAS [kaimei-su], literally, open and clarify. 

illuminate, auspiciously: M7tIRAFm [hoko genzui]. 

illuminate all the ten directions, broadly: ##°35<+-F [henshé o jipp6]. 

illuminate and break open: 524 [shoha]. 

illumination: [kOmy6] J¢8A. See also Radiant Light. 

illumination, splendid: 44X32 [shogon komy6]. 

Illumination and Function, Four Positions of: VU88FA [shishoyi]. Linji’s 
teaching on Serenity—#X88 [jakusho] (essence) and its function: (1) 
Serenity first. (2) Function first. (3) Serenity and function are not 
simultaneous. (4) Serenity and function are simultaneous. 

illusion: %i% [mohd], literally, illusory dharma (thing). 

illusion, no: 548 [maku m6z6]. 

images, sacred: F#4R [gy6zo]. 

imagine: 481% [so’oku]. 

immature: #4% [miren], literally, not yet kneaded. 

immature person, foolish: /\\ek- [shdgaisu], literally, small, stupid 
person. 

immediate: BF [jikige]. Directly beneath one’s feet. 

immediately: 74% [kotsuji]. #48 [makuchi]. tt [chi/ji] is a suffix with 
no special meaning. 

immersed: ft [ge]. See hindrance. 

immersed, totally: #2325 [maibotsu-su], literally, buried. 

immovability: 74¥8#)& [fudojaku]. 4 [chaku/jaku] is a suffix with no 
special meaning. 

imperial advisor: {{# [gubu]. 

impermanence of all things: sA{T##%# [shogyO mujol, literally, 
everything that is created (shogy6; Skt., sanskara) is impermanent. 

impermanent: #3 [mujo]. 

impulse. See also skandhas, five. 

incarnate body: {t& [keshin]. A buddha body attained by miraculous 
power. 

incense burner, portable: = [shuro]. 

incense offering: ### [shok6], literally, burn incense. 

incense sticks: #2 [senk6]. 

incense, distribute to the monks: {7# [ank6]. Making a gift to monks 
during a meal offering. 

inclination. See also skandhas, five. 

inclination skandha: {7#& [gyOdshu], literally, inclination assembly. See 
also skandhas, five. 

inclusion: #44 [zenshi], literally, totally including. 

inconceivable: 7\"] Bz [fukashigi]. 24 [mitsu’u], literally, intimate 
being. 

inconceivable cause, inconceivable effect: #)Al¥!52 [mydin myodka]. 

incorrect views: 4\72K& [fuzesho], literally, point that is not right. 

indefinite: 7\W [fuhitsu], literally, not necessarily. 

independent of before and after: See before and after, independent of. 

indestructible: 22- [kenr6], literally, solid and firm. 

indestructible body: 7485 [fueshin]. 

India: K™ [Tenjiku]. “87% [Jikuken]. FAX [Saiten], literally, Western 
Heaven. 

India and China: #2 [Ken TO]. 

Indian sounds: #$& [bon’on]. 

Indra: Skt., Shakra Devanam Indra, literally, Shakra (mighty one), who 
is the lord of devas. Transliteration: #21¢2t8/ABE# [Shaka Daikan 
Indara]. (Dogen refers to this deity in the following ways.) 
Abbreviated: ###248(4 [Shaku Daikan In]. Also, Deva Lord Shakra, 
KAGE [Ten Taishaku]; Lord Shakra, 7# [Taishaku]; Deva Lord, X 
mm [Ten Tei]; Shakra Deva, ##% [Shaku Ten]; Shakra King, ##= 
[Shaku O]. Originally a Vedic deity, regarded in Buddhism as a 
main guardian deity of dharma. Resides in the Heaven of Thirty- 
three Devas (Tushita Heaven) above Mount Sumeru. 

Indra Ketu: 548 [Taiso], literally, King Form. Shakyamuni Buddha 
made offerings in his former lifetime to many Buddhas with this 
name. 

Indra’s Cave: [A\)E1 [Inshakyii Shitsu]. The cave on Mount Veda in 
the ancient Indian kingdom of Magadha. Known as the first place 
the Buddha had a summer retreat. 

Indra’s Net Siitra: $4446 [Bommo Kyo]. 

Indra’s Net Bodhisattva Precepts Sutra, #*482=(27%2% [Bommo Bosatsu 
Kai Kyo]. Mahayana sutra, revered for its elucidation of the 
bodhisattva precepts. 

inessential activity: See activity, inessential. 

infirmary: 32% $x [enju in], literally, hall for prolonging longevity. 

inherit, individually: #{#%¢ [tanden-su]. Also, transmit person to 
person. 

initial enlightenment: See also enlightenment, acquired. 

inner chamber: 2 [okuri], literally, inside the house. 2A [d6’6], 
literally, deep inside the hall. fal82 [kon’6], literally, deep inside the 
threshold. Domain. Teacher, or inner meaning of the teaching. 

inner chamber, enter the: See also abbot’s room, receive guidance in the. 

innumerable eons: A AEE’ [gohyaku jinten], literally, five hundred 
particle (eons). 

inquire: 4a] [shimon-su]. 

insentient beings: See being, insentient. 

Insentient Beings Speak Dharma: ##t8aiti& [Mujo Seppo]. Fifty-fourth 
fascicle of this book. 

inseparable, close and: #42 [shimmitsu], literally, parent intimate. 

insight into others’ minds: See also miraculous powers, six. 

insightful flashes: See unroll the matter and hurl insightful flashes. 

insightful flashes at each other, hurl: B#8#k#% [gokan toki]. Tossing 
back and forth of deep understanding. 

insightful response, launch the: #24 [toki]. 

instruction: -£2% [keihatsu], literally, guide and express. 

instruction for zazen practice: {2{7JOFAL [shugyo no yojin], literally, 
use of mind for practice. 

instruction, compassionate: 2464876 [jihi shiji]. 

instruction, give: 7R(F) [iji(-su)]. 

Instructions on Kitchen Work: 7K2Be3< [Ji Kuin Mon]. Eighty-second 
fascicle of this book. 

instructor: Skt. acharya. Transliteration: f]#)3% [ajari], 3 [jari]. 
Reverend, teacher. 

intellect: Skt. (possibly), vriddha, literally, expanded (traditionally 
interpreted as, accumulated mind). Transliteration: 32% 
[iriddha]. Translation: ita [shinshiki], literally, mind and 
knowing. &#l [ryochi], literally, thinking and knowing. A 
[uchi], literally, having wisdom. 

intellect and awareness: F022 [ryochi nengaku]. 

intellectual: ##3%= [gigiry6], literally, discuss measurement. 

intention, considerate: @%& [roshil], literally, old person’s thought. 

intention, true: IES [shdi]. 

intentionally: #01 [chini], literally, knowing and then. 

interact with, not: 7\%t [fuge]. 

interchangeable and not interchangeable: HIa%)4H [ego fu ego]. 
Interpenetrating and beyond interpenetrating one another. 

interfere, not: 4\-F [fukan]. 

intermediary realm: }® [chi’u]. In-between realm, intermediary 
existence. A realm between this life and the next life. FAfE%8 
[chiv’inso], literally, in-between invisible form. 

interpretation: ## [shaku]. 

intimate: ##t]] [shinsetsu], ## [shin], literally, parent. t)) [shin], 
literally, close, deep. #% [mitsu], literally, tight, secret. 
[shinzo], literally, parent ever. Immediate experience. Close and 
inseparable. 

intimate, fully: 32% [zenkomitsu], literally, totally close and secret. 

intimate attention, with: 4##2 [memmitsu], literally, (woven) cotton 
tight secret. 

Intimate Language: #58 [Mitsugo]. Fifty-second fascicle of this book. 

intimate with or remote from: #£R [shinso]. Shin means intimate, and so 
means distant. 

intimately observe: B#i(9 ) [tokan(-su)], literally, see right in front. 

introspection: 734824 [nensokan], literally, memory, recollection [nen]; 
thought, ideas [so], and observation or insight [kan]. Dogen 
indicates that zazen is not visualization, insight, or analytical 
observation. 

investigate: f=(F) [shdry6(-su)], literally, discuss and measure. A= 
[kyokury6], literally, border measure. Analyze. *#24 [kenten], 
literally, examine. 

investigate, thoroughly: NABH, [kufi sankyi], literally, endeavor and 
study all the way. 

involvements, various: 342% [shoen], literally, various relationships. 
Outside conditions. 

iron, a single rail of: —‘&#X [ichijo tetsu]. Solid rail of iron, one 
straight rod of iron. 

iron, one rod of: See one rod of iron, ten thousand miles long. 

iron person: #j# [tekkan]. Person of determination, or someone who 
has attained the way. 

iron tree blossoms: #i43}#2 64 [tetsuju kekai]. 

Ise Shrine: F344# [Ise Jingu]. Primary Shinto shrine of Japan, 
located in Ise Province (present-day Mie Prefecture). Consists of 
Kotai Jingti (Inner Shrine) and Toyouke Jingii (Outer Shrine). The 
former enshrines Sun Goddess [Amaterasu Okami] and the latter, 
Harvest God [Toyouke Okami]. 

items, eighteen: +-/\*#4) [jihachi shu motsu]. What a home leaver 
carries for engaging in ascetic practice or traveling: a willow twig, 
washing powder, three robes, a jar, bowls, a sitting mat, a walking 
stick, an incense bowl, a water bag, a towel, a knife, a flint stone, 

tweezers, a straw mat, siitras, a precept book, a Buddha image, and 
a bodhisattva image. 
Itivrittaka: See also Divisions, Twelve. 

Jambudvipa: Skt. See Continents, Four. 

Jambunada: f#i7#48 [Embudan], literally, Jambu Wood Platform. 
Shakyamuni Buddha made offerings in his former lifetime to many 
buddhas with this name. 

Jaradhara Garjita Ghosha Susvara Nakshatra Raja Sankusumitabhijna 
Buddha: Z=SBBL2EH [Unrai On Shuku O Kechi Butsul, 
literally, Cloud Thunder Constellation King Flower Wisdom Buddha. 
Described in Lotus Sitra as the buddha who, an incalculable time 
ago, expounded the siitra to King Subhavyiha. 

Jataka. See also Divisions, Twelve. 

Jayata: 7 [Shayata]. Monk from northern India. Twentieth 
Ancestor of the Zen tradition in India. 

Jeta Grove: *HI/#&#8 [Gion], literally, Je Garden. [Kodoku On], 
Garden of Solitude. In the south of the city of Shravasti, Kaushala 
Kingdom, central northern India. According to sutras, this is where 
Shakyamuni Buddha’s community practiced together in the 
monastery during the rainy season. Donated by Prince Jeta, a son of 
King Prasenajit of Kaushala. 

Jeta, Prince: Son of King Prasenajit of Kaushala Kingdom, India. He 
donated the Jeta Grove to Shakyamuni as a site for a monastery. 

jewel: #238 [yoraku]. Jeweled ornament. 

jewel in the banded hair, bright: 2 AOA [keichi no meiju]. 
According to the Lotus Sutra, a precious jewel that a wheel-turning 
king wore in his tied-up hair and gave to a retainer for his 
meritorious service. 

jewel, Bian’s giant: - 2 [Ben peki]. Bianhe (Bian), #0 [Benka] of the 
country of Chu in Zhou Dynasty, found a large jade stone and 
dedicated it to two successive kings. Each time he was punished for 
making a false statement, but finally the third king had it polished 
and a most precious jewel emerged. 

jewel, to attract a: See tile to attract a jewel, hurl a. 

jewel, wish-granting: BEER [mani ju]. 

jewels, four: PU [shiho]. Also called Pek [shizo], literally, four 
treasuries. Siitras, precepts, treatises, and dharanis. 

Jiaofan Huihong: #882374 [Kakuhan Ek6o]. 1071-1128, China. Also 
called Shimen (Rock Gate). Dharma heir of Zhenjing Kewen, Linji 
School. Taught at Qingliang Monastery, Rui Region (Jianxi) but was 
falsely accused by other monks and imprisoned four times. After 
being pardoned, he lived in Xiangxi (Hunan) and concentrated on 
writing. Author of books including Record within the Forests. 

Jianfu Chenggu: #a7K4 [Sempuku Shoko]. d. 1045, China. Studied 
with Nanyue Liangya, Yunmen School. Had realization when he 
heard about Yunmen’s words. Claimed to have received dharma 
transmission from Yunmen without actually meeting him. Taught at 
Jianfu Monastery, Mount Jianfu, Rao Region (Jiangxi). 

Jianyuan Zhongxing: YiR{F}Hk [Zengen Chiko]. Ca. eighth—ninth 
century, China. Dharma heir of Daowu Yuanzhi, Qingyuan Line. 
Taught at Mount Jianyuan, Tan Region (Hunan). His posthumous 
name is Zen Master Zhongxing, {#82 [Chiko Daishi]. 

Jianzhi Sengcan: $##9(83% [Kanchi Sdsan]. d. 606, China. Third 
Chinese Ancestor of Zen School. Dharma heir of Second Ancestor 
Dazu Huike. Due to harsh government persecution of Buddhism, 
Sengcan lived in hiding as a homeless wanderer for much of his 
teaching life, and was a leper who was eventually cured. 
Nevertheless, Sengcan was found by Dayi Daoxin, who came to him 
as a fourteen-year-old novice, attained enlightennment, served as 
Sengcan’s attendant for many years, and became his successor, the 
Fourth Ancestor. Later, Sengcan taught at Mount Sikong, Shu 
Region (Anhui). Regarded as the author of a poem titled “Engraving 
of Trust Mind” [Shinjinmei]. Sengcan died standing up. His 
posthumous name is Zen Master Jianzhi, $2946 [Kanchi Zenji]. 

Jianzhong Jingguo Continuous Transmission of the Lamp: Jianzhong 
Jingguo Xudeng-lu #@PisElateex [Kincht Seikoku Zokutoroku]. 
Compiled by Foguo Weibai of Yunmen School and dedicated to the 
Emperor in the first year of Jianzhong Jingguo Era (1101). 
Organized historical Zen masters according to their dharma 
lineages. 

Jiashan Shanhui: 3) [Kassan Zenne]. 805-881, China. First 
taught at Zhulin Monastery, Jingkou, Run Region (Jiangsu). Then 
he became a dharma heir of “the boatman” Chuanzi Decheng, 
Qingyue Line, before the latter disappeared in the river. After that, 
Jiashan dwelt deep in the mountains for thirty years before teaching 
at Mount Jia, Feng Region (Hunan). His posthumous name is Great 
Master Chuanming, {#88 A&M [Demmyo Daishi]. 

Jiatai Record of the Universal Lamp: Jiatai Pudeng-lu, #2 }S3% [Katai 
Futo-roku]. Compiled by Leian Zhengshou. Dedicated in the fourth 
year of Jiatai Era (1204) to the Emperor, who allowed it into the 
Buddhist canon. Unlike earlier collections of historical Zen 
materials, it includes stories of nuns, kings, officials, and 
commoners. 

Jiazhi: W#§ [Kachi]. Ca. eighth—-ninth century, Korea. Dharma heir of 
Damei Fachang. Taught in Korea. 

jin: C. FF [kin]. Measuring unit. 596.82 grams (1.31 pounds) in Tang 
and Song dynasties. Sometimes we translate it as “pound.” 

Jingcen: See Changsha Jingcen. 

Jingde Record of Transmission of the Lamp: Jingde Chuandeng-lu, #1 
{28Ex [Keitoku Dentoroku]. Compiled in the first year of Jingde 
Era (1004), probably by Yong’an Daoyuan of Fayan School. A 
primary collection of words and deeds of 1,701 masters. A common 
Zen expression, “1,700 koans,” derives from this number. 

Jingqing Daofu: #343848 [Kyosho Dofu]. 864-937, China. Dharma heir 
of Xuefeng Yicun, Qingyuan Line. Taught at Jingqing Monastery, 
Yue Region (Zhejiang). Honorary title: Great Master Shunde |lA##~A 
Bi? [Juntoku Daishi]. 

Jingxuan: See Dayang Jingxuan. 

Jingyin Facheng: See Kumu Facheng. 

Jingzhao Mihu: IkAHA [Kyocho Beiko]. Ca. eighth—-ninth century, 
China. Guiyang School. Dharma heir of Guishan Lingyou. Mihu 
means “foreigner.” Jingzhao taught in the ancient Chinese capital 
city of Jingzhao. He said, “If there’s a Buddha to be seen, it’s not 
other than all beings.” He was known for his wonderful beard. 

Jingzhao Xiujing: RIK [Keichd Kyijo]. Ca. ninth century, China. 
Dharma heir of Dongshan Liangjie, cofounder of the Caodong 
School. Taught at Jingzhao Huayan Monastery, Mount Zhongnan, 
south of the city of Chang’an (Shanxi). Also called Huayan Xiujing. 
His posthumous name is Great Master Baozhi #@XAhii [Hochi 
Daishi]. 

Jinhua Juzhi: €22{8 AR [Kinka Kutei/Gutei]. Ca. ninth century, China. 
Dharma heir of Hangzhou Tianlong, Nanyue Line. Juzhi always 
responded to dharma questions by simply raising his finger. Old 
Monk Juzhi, E{2 AK [Ro Kutei]. 

join palms together. See also gassho. 

journey among other types of beings: #234A4{T [irui chi gyo]. Walk in 
the midst of various beings. 

joy, boundless: #24##£ [fukutoku mur6], literally, immeasurable bliss 
and virtue. 

Judun: See Longya Judun. 

Jui: See Bai Jui. 

Jufidnaprabha: #§3¢ [Chiko]. Monk student of Shakyamuni Buddha. 
Formerly a wealthy man in a small country far away in the 
northeast of Rajagriha. 

just as they are: £4 [huni], literally, dharma thus. 

just now: fi [nikon]. 

just sit: #J44 [taza]. Ta is a prefix for emphasis. Za means “sit” or 
“sitting.” ABFA /AR BITS [shikan taza], literally, single-minded 
sitting: practice of zazen with no attempt to solve questions or 
expectation of attainment or enlightenment, and without either 
repressing or holding on to thoughts and feelings. Sometimes 

contrasted to meditation with koan studies. 
just this: 
Juzhi: See Jinhua Juzhi. 

kalpa: Skt. Transliteration: #)3& [koha], #) [ko]. Eon; an incalculable 
span of time. f##) [ryakuk6], literally, passing many kalpas. 

kalpa, this present: Skt., bhadra kalpa, literally, good _ kalpa. 
Translation: B# [gengo / keng6], literally, kalpa of sages. 

kalpas, limitless: 4) [chog6], literally, long kalpas. Timeless eon. 

Kanadeva: WAkt2# [Kanadaiba], literally, One-Eyed Deva. Originally 
a Brahman from southern India. Fifteenth Ancestor of Zen tradition 
as successor of Nagarjuna. Resented and killed by those outside the 
way. 

Kanakamuni Buddha: See Buddha, Kanakamuni. 

Kannondori-in: See Kosho Horin Monastery. 

Kanyakubja: #42ci [Kyokunyo Jo]. A city on the upper part of the 
Ganges in central northern India (Uttar Pradesh). Sometimes 
regarded as the place where Shakyamuni Buddha descended from 
the Heaven of Thirty-three Devas (Tushita Heaven) above Mount 
Sumeru. 

Kapilavastu: WIE2## [Kabirae], literally, town of Kapila, center of 
Shakya Clan’s region (present-day central southern Nepal, bordering 
India). Siddhartha’s father, King Shuddodana, ruled this region. 
Lumbini Garden, where Siddhartha was born, is in the western side 
of the town. 

Kapimala: w0E2/2# [Kabimara/Kabimora]. Monk from Magadha. As 
Thirteenth Ancestor of the Zen tradition, he taught in southern and 
western India. Regarded as Nagarjuna’s teacher. 

karavinka: Skt. Also, kalavinka. WIf&58(il [karyObinga], Aff] [binga]. 
Mythical bird who sings with celestial voice. 

karma: Skt. 3 [g6]. Action; visible or invisible effect of action. 

karma, collective: 5|3€ [ingo]. Karma that brings forth a common form, 
such as a human being. 

karma, driven by: #|c US [go ni hikaru], literally, pulled by karma. 

karma, hindrance of: 3#f& [gossh6]. 

karma, individual: j#3¢ [mango]. Karma that brings forth individual 
differences. 

karma, practice, body-mind, and environs: ##ji8(KiE [god6 esho]. 18 
[godo], literally, karma way. See also body, mind, and environs. 

karma consciousness: 3#i8 [gosshiki]. Action consciousness; 
consciousness resulting from past deluded action; total ignorance. 

karma consciousness, vast: 3#583t.3-. [gosshiki bobo]. 

Karma in the Three Periods: =f#3= [Sanji GO]. Eighty-fifth fascicle of 
this book. 

karma-formations: See causation, twelvefold. karmic results: #% [kaho], 
literally, effect reward. 32#k [goho], literally, karma reward. 

kdshdaya: Skt. Transliteration: 323e [kesa]. 6 382¢ [okesa], an honorific 
Japanese spoken expression. We [nde], literally, patched robe. A 
patched robe worn over one shoulder by a Buddhist monk or nun. 
Shoulder robe. Also represents a monk or nun. 

kashaya, three types of: =% [sanne]. =j&%K [sanhG’e], three dharma 
robes. (1) Great robe, most formal robe; Skt., sanghati, (8(M2R* 
[sogyari’e]. A 323 [daikesa]. Consists of nine to twenty-five 
panels. (2) Formal robe; Skt. uttarasangha: MBMBZE gk 
[uttarasogya’e]. Consists of seven panels. (3) Indoor robe, informal 
robe, minor robe; Skt. antarvasa, &Bé%*K [anda’e]. Consists of five 
panels. F24%K [chiijaku’e]. See also fascicle 46, “Power of the 
Robe.” 

kdshdya, wear the: #§382e [takkesa]. To put on the Buddhist shoulder 
robe. 

Kadshyapa Bodhisattva: wwl2= = [Kasho Bosatsu]. Mahakashyapa. 

Kadshyapa Buddha: See Buddha, Kadshyapa. 

Kaundinya: '§6R90 [Kydjinnyo]. 1. Ajfatakaundinya, one of the first 
disciples of the Buddha. 2. Shakyamuni Buddha made offerings in 
his former lifetime to many Buddhas with this name. 

Kaushala: Skt. $4)§£2@E] [Kosara Koku / Kyosatsura Kokul], literally, 
country of Kaushala or Kosala. A large ancient kingdom on the 
Ganges, in central northern India near Nepal (Uttar Pradesh). West 
of the kingdom of Maghada; northwest of the kingdom of Kashi; 
southwest of the region of the Shakya Clan. Shravasti was its 
capital, where King Prasenajit ruled during Shakyamuni Buddha’s 
time. Jeta Grove, where the Buddha’s community retreated in 
summer, is in the south of Shravasti. 

Kausika: til [Kyoshika]. Another name for Indra. 

keep it in mind: )3&T [jinjutsu to su], literally, make it mind art. 

keep precept: ##7X [jikai]. One of the six paramitas. 

Kefu: See Zhiyi Kefu. 

Keqin: See Yuanwu Kegin. 

Kewen: See Zhenjing Kewen. key to this barrier: RA#R() [kanrei(su)]. 
Key point, essential matter, mechanism of time. 

kind speech: #33 [aigo]. One of the bodhisattva’s four methods of 
guidance. See also fascicle 46. “Bodhisattva’s Four Methods of 
Guidance.” 

kindness, fields of: R{FA [onden]. 

King Ajatashatru: Batt [Ajase O]. Son of King Bimbisara of 
Maghada, one of the sixteen kingdoms of India during the time of 
Shakyamuni Buddha. Ajatashatru became king by poisoning his 
father, who later died in prison. He agonized over his crime but 

reached peace of mind by taking refuge in the Buddha’s teaching. 
He supported the first assembling of the siitras soon after the 
Buddha’s pari-nirvana. 

King Brahma: 7£= [Bonn6d]. Brahma Deva #£X [Bon Ten]. Great 
Brahma King, ARH [Dai Bonno]. Highest god of Brahmanism. 
Regarded as one of the former lives of the Buddha, an initial listener 
of the Buddha’s discourse, and a guardian deity who protects 
Buddhist teachings. 

King Gridra: SH¥RJE [Kitsuri O]. Mythological king at the time of 
Kashyapa Buddha. 

King Kanishka: w0fa\2W1 [Kanishika O]. Ca. second century, India. 
King of Gandhara. A great supporter of buddha dharma. Studied 
with Parshva and Ashvaghosha, ancestors of Zen. 

King of Samadhis: =—K= =k [Sammai O Zammail. Literally, samadhi 
that is king of samadhis. Seventy-second fascicle of this book. 

King Prasenajit: }#f = [Hashinoku O]. Monarch of Kaushala, a large 
nation in central northern India near Nepal, who lived in the city of 
Shravasti. About the same age as the Buddha, he was a devoted 
follower and great supporter of Shakyamuni Buddha and _ his 
community. But he was ousted by his son Prince Viridhaka and 
died in misery while the Buddha was alive. 

King Ratnabyuha: @¥t#R [Hoshdgon O]. King in Shravasti of the 
ancient Indian kingdom of Kaushala. Father of Sanghanandi, the 
Seventeenth Ancestor. 

King Shuddhodana: ## R= [Jobonnd]. Monarch of the Shakya Clan, 
based in Kapilavastu (present-day central southern Nepal, bordering 
India). The first son of King Simhahanu. Father of Siddhartha by 
Queen Maya. He is also the father of Nanda by Queen 
Mahaprajapati, whom he married after the death of Maya. 

King Simhahanu: ffif#4 [Shishikyo O]. Monarch of Shakya Clan, 
based in Kapilavastu, ancient India. Father of King Shuddhodana. 
Grandfather of Siddhartha. 

King Subhavyiha: *)¥£i&=E [Mydshdgon O], literally, Wondrously 
Adorned King. One who was told about his former life story in the 
Lotus Siitra by Jaradhara Garjita Ghosha Susvara Nakshatra Raja 
Sankusumitabhijiia Buddha. 

King Wants the Saindhava: £262 [O Saku Sendaba]. Eighty-first 
fascicle of this book. 

King Wen: 3+ [Bunn6]. Ca. eleventh century B.c£., China. Xibai 
Chang, 74{4& [Seihaku Sh6]. Xibai is his title as head of lords in 
western China. After his death, his son King Wu defeated Empire of 
Yan and founded Zhou Dynasty. His posthumous name is King Wen 
of Zhou. 

king, wheel-turning/King, Wheel-Turning: #2% 2 ([tenrinnd]. = 

[rinnd]. See dharma wheel. #$%j32-F [tenrin jo-6], literally, wheel- 
turning sacred king. 

kingfisher: 3522 [hisui]. 

Kings, Three: = [sank6]. Mythological rulers of China—emperors of 
heaven, earth, and humans. 

kinnara: Skt. See also guardians, eight types of. 

kitchen: #8 [kuin], literally, storehouse. 8faly [kojaku kyokul, 
literally, place of accumulating fragrance. 

kitchen assistant: Ba##{2i& [baisen ekis6], literally, assisting to cook 
and serve up. 

kneeling: fife [choki], literally, kneeling tall. 

knot and wood grain: &i§ [setsumoku]. Also, nodes in bamboo or 
knots in wood. Concepts and theories. 

know, intuitively: #2309 [reichi-su], literally, know with spirit. 

know and trust: jRIE(SRET [ketsujo shinge-su], literally, determine 
and resolve with faith. 

Knower of the World: t#iff# [Seken Ge]. One of the ten primary names 
of the Buddha. 

knowing, beyond: 7a [mishiki], literally, not yet know. 

knowing, correct pervasive: 1F #0 [shohin chi]. 

knowing, seeing, understanding, and merging: 70 Af#@ [chiken ge’e]. 

knowledge: #1 [chiken], literally, knowing and seeing. 

knowledge, excellent: # #0 [zenchishiki]. Also, teacher. 

knowledge, three types of. See also miraculous powers, six. 

koan: J. 238. 1. Fundamental point, first principle, truth that is 
experienced directly. 2. An exemplary story pointing to this 
realization. 3. Story used to lead students to experience this 
realization. Dogen uses this word mainly in the first sense. Koan is a 
Japanese transliteration of the Chinese gongan, which referred to 
official records or cases. The ideogram gong represents “official” or 
“public,” and an represents “a case at law” or “legal records.” Often 
Dogen’s commentators interpret the first syllable as “universal” and 
the second as “particular.” 

koan, a: —4l)2$3 [issoku koan]. A kdan case. 

Koen: 2(B). Ca. twelfth-thirteenth century, Japan. Seventieth Head 
Priest (Zasu) of Tendai School, based on Mount Hiei, in 1213. 
Around this time, Dogen studied both Esoteric and Exoteric 
Buddhism with him. 

Koin: 2/4l. d. 1216, Japan. Bishop and Head Priest of Onjd Monastery, 
Tendai School, Omi Province, east of Kyoto. In his young age, 
Dogen received instruction from him. 

Kokdlika: {®()l#é [Gukari/Kukari]. An associate of Devadatta. He 
became a follower of the Buddha along with Devadatta and other 
members of Shakya Clan. Later he tried to split the practicing 

community and fell into unceasing hell. 

Kosala: Pali. See Kaushala. 

Kodsho Horin Monastery: 422 *4= [Kosho Horin-ji]. Originally a 
temple called Kannond6ri-in #138) fk, existed on the remains of 
An’yo-in @BP, a part of Gokuraku Monastery #2835 [Gokuraku- 
ji], located in Fukakusa, just south of Kyoto. Dogen moved into this 
temple in added some buildings, and renamed it Kosho Horin-ji in 
1236. He retained the original name as its mountain name, or first 
name, so its full name became Kannondori K6osho Horin-ji HBS) 
HUE? E>. (He also used 32H] [Gokoku], meaning “Protecting 
Nation,” as one of the monastery titles.) Dogen lived there for 
eleven years until his community moved to Echizen. Since 1649, the 
site of this temple has been in Uji, further south of Fukakusa. 

Koun Ejo, Japan. #M1R3t After studying Zen with Kakuan of the 
Japan Daruma School, he became Dogen’s student in 1234 and, 
later, the first head monk. As the most advanced student, he assisted 
Dogen, edited many of his writings, and became his dharma heir. 
He was appointed second abbot of the Eihei Monastery by Dogen in 
1253. 

Krakucchanda Buddha: See Buddha, Krakucchanda. 

Kuangren: See Sushan Guangren. 

Kumaralabdha: \§##:2 ([Kumorata]. Originally a Brahman, he 
became a monk and Nineteenth Ancestor of the Zen tradition in 
India. 

kumbhdanda: Skt. ¥#/?38 [kuhanda]. Demon who flies like wind and 
consumes human spirits. 

Kumu Facheng: *&7\i&hk [Koboku HO6jo]. 1071-1128, China. Also 
called Jingyin Facheng. Became dharma heir of Furong Daokai, 
Caodong School, on Mount Dahong, Sui Region (Hubei). 
Accompanied Daokai when he moved to Jingyin Monastery, 
Dongjing (Henan). Later became its abbot. He was called Kumu, 
meaning “tree stump,” because of his devotion to sitting in silent 
meditation day and night, as he had learned to do from his teacher, 
Shishuang Qingzhu. Kumu was one of the teachers of Hongzhi 
Zhengjiao and inspired his emphasis on “silent illumination Zen,” 
which later became the defining practice of the Caodong School. His 
posthumous name is Great Master Puzheng, #isA6m ([Fusho 
Daishi]. 

Laborer Huineng: See also Dajian Huineng. 

lacquer, bucket of pitch-black: 78% [koku shittsi]. Complete 
darkness, ignorance. 

lake without heat: #2438 [munetsu chi]. #22432 [munetsuno chil, 
literally, lake of no suffering from heat. 

lamp: '& [to]. Represents dharma that is transmitted. 

land of eternal serene light: HFXICL [jojakko do]. 

land on earth, not an inch of: Aitt##T -E [daichi mu sundo]. 

Land View Pavilion: | [Boshi Tei]. Located in Mount Xuefeng, Fu 
Region (Fujian). Known for its excellent view. See also Crow Stone 
Peak. 

language, intimate: 245% [mitsugo], literally, secret words. 

Langye Huijiao: 388% [Roya Ekaku]. Ca. tenth-eleventh century, 
China. Dharma heir of Fenyang Shanzhao, Linji School. Taught at 
Mount Langye, Chu Region (Anhui). Langye decided to become a 
monk after visiting an ancient monastery at the top of Mount Yao 
and feeling as though he already knew the place. His teachings and 
those of Master Xuedou Chongxian were known as “the two gates of 
sweet dew.” Given the title Zen Master Guangzhao 2a¢##4 [Kosho 
Zenjil. 

lantern: {#2 [tdrd]. Originally a bamboo container for a lamp with 
paper at the sides. Often represents insentient being. 

Laozi: @f [Roshi]. Ca. sixth-fifth century, China. Sage regarded as 
founder of Daoism. Attributed author of the Daoist classic Daode 
Jing (Tao-te Ching), “The Way and Its Power.” 

lapels, pull open the: ##% [kaikin]. 

lapis lazuli: $438 [ruri]. 

last eon: 4#£R#) [shdgen k6], literally, kalpa of magnificence. 

latecomer: IR [bangagu], #2 [kogaku], literally, one who studies 
later. One who recently started. Bi [banshin], literally, one who 
advances afterward. fii [banru], literally, later stream. 

Later Han Dynasty: #7% [Gokan]. See also Han Dynasty. 

laughing kills people: St85%%A [sho ya shOsetsu nin). 

lay men and women: 41608 XX [zaizoku no nannyo]. 

layperson: {8 [zokunin]. H* [byakue], literally, white robe, as 
opposed to black robe representing a monk or nun. 

Lazy An: See Changqing Da’an. leap, make the: PKA [chddatsu-su], 
literally, jump and drop away. 

leap beyond: —#&89 [itchd-su], literally, take one leap. See also go 
beyond. 

leap beyond ancient and present: jABRKHSIE [chodatsu kokon tei]. IK 
[tei] is a suffix meaning “that which is.” 

leap into: HLA [chonyi]. 

leap out: Hkh [chdshutsu]. Leap clear. Become free. 

leap over: BH [sanchd], literally, study and jump. HEX [chdhon], 
literally, jump and flap. 

learn from the ancients: #84 [keiko]. Revere and follow the ancient 
way, study the past. Also, ancient custom. 

learn to do concentration: 4## [shiizen]. Step-by-step practice of 

learning meditation. 

learning, extensive: 4 [fs] [tamon], literally, much hearing. 

learnings, three: == [sangaku]. Practice of precepts, samadhi, and 
prajna. 

Leave bondage behind: See go beyond. 

leave no trace: 4\€4AKHM [fury chinshaku], literally, not leaving a sign 
of traces. 

Leaving the Household: 13% [Shukke]. Eighty-third fascicle of this 
book. 

lecture: eM [koju]. 

lecture, informal: BS [shinzo], literally, ascend the (teaching) seat. 

lecture on scripture: #4%& [koky6]. 

lecturer: #824 [kosha]. 346M [kdshi], literally, lecturing teacher. B= 
[zasu], literally, head of seats. One who teaches Buddhist scriptures. 

leg, invisible: KAKI3K [shikkyaku rail], literally, lost leg comes. 

legs, crossed: = [ruisoku]. 

Leian Zhengshou: #FS1E3 [Raian Shoju]. Ca. twelfth-thirteenth 
century, China. Compiler of Jiatai Record of the Universal Lamp. 
Advocated the accord of the Three Teachings (Buddhism, 
Confucianism, and Daoism). 

leisurely person: fAi38A [kandonin], literally, leisurely way person. 

Lesser Vehicles: See also Vehicles, Three. 

Letan Zhantang: See Zhantang Wenzhun. 

let flow, freely: ita [tsticho-su]. 

let go: #X [ho]. ## [shal], literally, throw away. & [shitsu], literally, 
lose. BX{T [hd gy6], literally, practice letting go. #44% [nempo], 
literally, take up and let go. 64X$9 [soho-su], literally, let go both. 

level, ultimate: Wee [kukyoi]. 

level balance: +#+# [heihei], literally, even and even. 

li: C. 2 [ri]. Measuring unit. One li was approximately 559.8 meters 
(0.348 miles) in Tang Dynasty and 553 meters (0.343 miles) in Song 
Dynasty. 

Li Fuma: 285 [Ri Fuba]. d. 1038, China. Government official. 
Studied with Guyin Yuncong, Linji School, and received seal of 
approval. Developed friendship with a number of Zen masters. 
Compiled Tiansheng Extensive Record of the Lamp during Tiansheng 
Era (1023-1032). 

Li, Minister: See Minister Li. 

liang: C. PY [ryo]. Measuring unit. One liang was approximately 37.3 
grams (1.31 ounces) in Tang and Song dynasties. Sometimes we 
translate it as “ounce.” 

Liang: See Xishan Liang. 

Liang: 3% [Ry6]. Southern kingdom of China, 502-557. 

Liang, Lecturer: 2B [Ryd Zasu]. Ca. eighth century, China. A 

student of Mazu Daoyi, Nanyue Line. After realization, he secluded 
himself on Mount Xi, Hong Region (Jiangxi). 

Liangjie: See Dongshan Liangjie. 

Liangshan Yuanguan: 3.4#% [Ryozan Enkan]. Ca. tenth century, 
China. Dharma heir of Tong’an Guanzhi, Caodong School. Taught at 
Mount Liang, Ding Region (Hunan). 

Liaoran: See Moshan Liaoran. 

Liaoyuan: See Fuyin Liaoyuan. 

liberation, gate of: f#AiiP4 [gedatsu mon]. See also emancipation, gate of. 

liberation, pure: 757+ FAR [shojo gedatsu]. 

librarian: #i=E [zosu]. 

life, before and after: 3565 [shinsen shingo]. Also, before and after 
this lifetime. 

life, limited: 48% [myosha]. Those who live a transient life. 

life, renounce worldly: #848 [shamy6]. 

life, vitalize: }&ai [katsumy6]. 

life root: 484% [mydkon]. 

life span: #ap [jumy6]. 

life span, timeless: # [jury6]. Timeless activity. 

life stream, forthright: Banik [jiki myomyakul]. 

life vein: ask [myOmyaku]. Life stream. Continuous transmission of 
dharma through buddha ancestors. 

life vein, tip of the: apAlkK—3 [myomyaku issen]. 

lifetime, details of a: —{t@%a#< [ikke no shijii], literally, from 
beginning to end of one transformation (guidance). 

life’s study of the great matter: See great matter. 

lifetimes, many: “ [ruishd]. 

light to shine within, turn the: See turn the light to shine within. 

light, radiate: HXFé [hoko]. 

light, soften the: #13¢ [wak6o]. Reduce the radiance of enlightenment 
and mingle with the ordinary. 

Lingdao: See Caoxi Lingdao. 

lingering trace: See also wind and stream. 

Lingnan: 34% [Reinan]. South of the Nanling Mountains, which divide 
China into north and south. Worker Lu (later, Sixth Ancestor 
Huineng) came from Xin Region (Guangdong) in this area. 

linguistics: (K=EiH [eshu ringon], literally, modifier, the modified, 
the neighbor, and the close. A way of classifying a compound noun 
and an alternative expression. 

Lingxun: See Furong Lingxun. 

Lingyou: See Guishan Lingyou. 

Lingyun Zhigin: #22752) [Reiun Shigon]. Ca. ninth century, China. 
Studied with Guishan Lingyou, Guiyang School. After practicing for 
thirty years, had realization upon seeing peach blossoms. Taught at 

Mount Lingyun, Fu Region (Fujian). 

Linji School: Eia##5% [Rinzai Shi]. One of the Five Schools of Chinese 
Zen Buddhism. Regards Linji Yixuan as founder. In the eleventh 
century. Chiming Chuyuan’s heirs, Huanglong Huinan and Yangqi 
Fanghui, became founders of the two sects of this school, 
Huanglong Order and Yangqi Order. The former spread first. but the 
latter became dominant in China in the twelfth century. A Japanese 
form of Linji School is the Rinzai School. 

Linji Yixuan: fai [Rinzai Gigen]. d. 867, China. Dharma heir of 
Huangbo Xiyun, Nanyue Line. Taught at Linji Monastery, Zhen 
Region (Hebei). Known for his shouting and dynamic teaching. 
Regarded as founder of Linji School, one of the Five Schools of 
Chinese Zen. His posthumous name is Great Master Huizhao B8aX% 
fit [Esho Daishil]. 

Linji’s shout: Eii#§ O 2" [Rinzai no kokatsu]. 

lion, combatting: fii ih [shishi funjin]. 

lion roar: ffi "Yl [shishi ku]. 

lips, smack: RHA ReCLET [kurydhempi wo koto-to-su], literally, 
busy moving two skins of the drum (lips). 

list of the names of the participants according to their dharma ordination 
seniority: FUARhE [kairo hai], literally, dharma age plaque. 

Liu Chongjing: 2) [Ryt Sokei]. Ca. eighth century, China. Nation’s 
Chief General under Emperor Dai of Tang Dynasty. 

Liu, Old Man: #3 [Ryi Shi O]. Ca. ninth-tenth century, China. 
Planted pine trees at the monastery of Dongshan Shigian, Mount 
Dong, Rui Region (Jiangxi). 

livelihood, pure: #45 [jomyd]. 

livelihood, right: IEés [shomy6]. True life. See also path, eightfold noble. 

Living beings all are buddha nature. See also buddha nature. 

logic, beyond: #26 KUAE LU [rie oyobi gatashil], literally, logical 
understanding cannot reach. 

logical thought, phrases of: &\&®zS) [nenryo no goku]. 

long for the ancient way: #&H4H(F) [boko(-su)]. Long for the authentic 
teaching. 

Long Nail Brahman: See Bradhman, Dirghanakha. long river: 7] 
[choga]. 

Longshan: See Tanzhou Longshan. 

Longtan Chongxin: #2)252/8 [Ryiitan Soshin]. Ca. eighth-ninth 
century, China. Dharma heir of Tanhuang Daowu, Qingyuan Line. 
Lived in a hut in Longtan, Feng Region (Hunan). Deshan Xuanjian’s 
teacher. 

Longya Judun: #27 iE [Rytige Kodon]. 835-923, China. Dharma heir 
of Dongshan Liangjie, Caodong School. After studying with Cuiwei 
and Deshan, joined Dongshan’s community and received dharma 

transmission. Taught at Miaoji Monastery, Mount Longya, Tan 
Region (Hunan). His posthumous name is Great Master Zengkong #& 
23 Xb [Shoki Daishi]. 

look into deeply: &%4 [kankan], literally, see and see. 

look into this: 5{22% [shi kokan], literally, try to bring up seeing. 

look through a bamboo pipe at a corner of the sky: —hs / @& [ichigii no 
kanken]. 

Lord Wen: See Han Yu. 

lose one’s life: #5 Xs [sdshin shitsumy6]. To become free from one’s 
limited self. 

lotus blossom: ## [renge]. 

Lotus Samadhi Repentance, Method of the: j42#48;% [Hokke Sembd]. 
Treatise written by Nanyue Huisi on lotus samadhi, a method to 
experience reality by contemplating the teaching of the Lotus Sutra. 

Lotus School: ;&325 [Hokke Shi]. Tiantai School, KA [Tendai 
Shi]. Established by Zhiyi at Mount Tiantai, Tai Region (Zhejiang), 
China, in the sixth century. Based on Zhiyi’s classification of the 
entire canon. Central to this school are the Lotus Sutra and the 
meditation practices of shamatha (Skt., ceasing of wavering mind) 
and vipashyana (insight). 

Lotus Stitra: Skt., Saddharma Pundarika, “Sitra of Wondrous Dharma 
Blossoms,” %);%i# 244 [Myo Horenge Kyo], ¥;4#24 [Myo Hokke 
Kyo]. Dharma Blossom Sitra, #246 [Hokke Kyo]. (The Sanskrit title 
does not include “Sttra.”) Full of parables and poetic imagery, this 
scripture is one of the most revered in the Mahayana canon. Other 
stitras are considered provisional teachings, as opposed to the 
“complete” or supreme teaching of the Lotus. Unique to this sitra 
are the teachings of One Vehicle, and of Buddha’s enlightenment 
from the beginningless past. 

Lotus Sutra, assembly described by the: ;4#£@ [Hokke’e]. 

lower one leg: #2— © [sui issoku]. 

luminous: ABER 2222 [shosho ryoryo], literally, bright bright mysterious 
mysterious. 

Luohan Guichen: See Dizang Guichen. 

lute, song, and wine: 2539 }4 [kin shi shu]. 

Madhya: ##2E) [Madai Koku]. An ancient kingdom of India. Details 
unknown. 

Magadha: vee [Makada], literally, country of Magadha; 2 u% 
[Makatsu]. An ancient kingdom of northeastern India, currently 
southern Bihar, bordering Nepal. Buddhagaya (present-day 
Bodhgaya), where Shakyamuni Buddha was enlightened, is located 
in this region, and much of his dharma discourses, later recorded in 
scriptures, took place on Vulture Peak near its capital city, 

Rajagriha. The Buddha’s pari-nirvana took place in Kushinagara in 
this country. 

Maha Abhijfid Jfiand Abhibhi Buddha: Ais HsG [Daitsi Chishd 
Butsu]. King whose sixteen children left the household. He 
expounded the teaching of the Lotus Sitra upon entering nirvana. 

Maha Pari-nirvana Siitra: Skt. AAR{ES246 [Dai Hatsu Nehan Gyo], #282 
4& [Nehan Gyo]. AZ [Dai Ky], literally, great siitra. A Mahayana 
scripture, regarded as describing the last discourse of the Buddha, a 
major source of teachings about buddha nature. Most of the Sanskrit 
version is lost. 

Mahé Prajfid Paramita Heart Sutra: Skt. ER AAIRABS OE [Maka 
Hannya Haramitta Shin Gyo]. Brief Mahayana siitra. Excerpt of 
Maha Prajfid Paramita Sutra. Seventh-century Chinese translation by 
Xuanzang is most common in East Asia. A longer version is recited 
in Tibet and Mongolia. 

Maha Prajfia Pdramitd Siitra: Skt. KAXBIR#@BR [Dai Hannya 
Haramitsu Ky6]. Comprehensive collection of Prajfia Paramita 
scriptures, some of which are among the earliest Mahayana texts, 
formed around first century B.ce. A seventh-century Chinese 
translation by Xuanzang contains 600 fascicles—largest of all 
Buddhist scriptures. 

Maha Sangha Precepts: See Great Sangha Precepts. 

Mahakaruna Bodhisattva: Skt. AA [Daihi Bosatsu], literally, Great 
Compassion Bodhisattva. One of the former lives of Shakyamuni 
Buddha. 

Mahdkdashyapa: Skt. Transliteration: 371% [Makakasho], WE 
[Kash]; 3003278 [Kashoha]. W32A [Kasho Daishil], literally, great 
person Kashyapa. wWw#44 [Kasho Sonja], literally, venerable 
person Kashyapa. A senior disciple of Shakyamuni Buddha who 
engaged in rigorous ascetic practice. Regarded as the First Ancestor 
of the Zen School. 

Mahanaman: Skt. 5] [Makamanan], #24 [Makanan], #5 
[Manan]. One of the five monks who practiced with the Buddha 
after he left the palace. Elder brother of Aniruddha. A grandson of 
King Simhahanu. Later, he returned to be a lay practitioner and 
became King of Kapilavastu while the Buddha was alive. 

Mahaprabha: Skt. AZEBA [DaikoOmyo]. A slate roofer who was one of 
the former lives of Shakyamuni Buddha. 

mahasattva: Skt. Transliteration: #55] [makasatsu]. Translation: A= 
[daishi], literally, great person. Honorary way of referring to a 
bodhisattva. Often used as “bodhisattva mahasattvas.” 

Mahayana. See also Vehicles, Three. 

Mahayana, Meaning of the: A3@#= [DajoO Gisho]. An extensive, 
elucidating text of the Mahayana teaching by Huiyuan of Sui 

Dynasty. 

mahoraga. See also guardians, eight types of. 

maintain: {%{£(F) [honin(-su)], literally, keep and undertake. Fully 
present, enact, confirm. #24(¢) [bugon(-su)], literally, respectfully 
see. See in veneration. #3475 [bugon shdji], literally, respectfully 
see and uphold. s<& [gonen], literally, protect with mindfulness. 

Maitreya: *#f [Miroku]. Maitreya Bodhisattva. Maitreya Tathagata, 
82) 903% [Miroku Nyorai]. Venerable Buddha Maitreya, ‘#2025 #% 
[Miroku Sombutsu]. The future Buddha. Predicted to come down 
from Tushita Heaven to the Continent of Jambudvipa 
5,670,000,000 years in the future as the next Buddha and awaken 
those who missed the teaching of Shakyamuni Buddha. 

make: fia [sei], literally, conduct a deed, activities. j4/F [zdsa]. By 
intention, create. 

Making Offerings to Buddhas: {#258 [Kuyo Shobutsu]. Eighty-eighth 
fascicle of this book. 

Malaya, Mount: 38.) [Mari Sen], also#®Z@H8.l) [Maraya Sen]. 
Known as a place in the ancient kingdom of Dravida in southern 
India where incense from white chandana trees was produced. 

mandara blossoms: Skt., mandara, =fe## [mandara ge]. Also, great 
mandara blossoms, #5]=le2## [maka mandara ge]. Flowers of 
the heavenly world with colors and fragrance that make people 
joyous. The plant has many leaves, giving people shade and 
comfort. 

manifest: 7.3% [shigen], literally, show and appear. 

Manifestation of Great Prajfid: ERAtGik#& ([Maka Hannya 
Haramitsu]. Second fascicle of this book. 

mafijtishaka blossoms: Skt. S9*7># [manjusha ge]. Also, great 
mafijishaka blossoms: #55") [maka manjusha ge]. Soft 
white blossoms, which are rained down by heavenly beings and free 
the viewers from wrong actions. 

Mafijushri: 325% [Monju]. Mafijushri Bodhisattva, 3C>RETAU ERE 
[Monjushiri Bosatsu]. Mafijushri Buddha, SC9REMA GE [Monjushiri 
Butsu]. Bodhisattva of wisdom, whose figure is often enshrined as 
the Sacred Monk in the center of the monks’ hall in a Zen 
monastery. 

mantra: Skt. 5 [shingon], literally, true word. MR [ju], magical spell. 
Indicates a dharani, especially a short one. Regarded as having a 
specific psycho-spiritual effect. A mantra is Sanskrit-based, but its 
sound is often unlike any known word. 

Mantra School: 3m [Shingon Shi]. Esoteric Buddhist teaching 
which was widely practiced but not organized as a school in China. 
It was brought to Japan in 806 by Kikai, who soon established the 
Shingon School. Mantra (J. shingon, “true word”) indicates the 

expression of dharma in mystical syllables. The Shingon School, 
along with the Tendai School, was influential before and during 
Dogen’s time. 

mark on top of missing the mark, miss the: $4#4 [shaku shaku]. 

mark, hit the: A [tekit6]. 

mark, not hit the: BJ7< [soku fuchi], literally, just not hitting. 

mark, off the: #6 [sada], literally, stumble. 

mark, right on the: IER [shoteki]. 

marketplace, confiscate goods from the: ##{77H [zandatsu koshi]. 

marks, missing of one hundred: A“ [hyaku futd], literally, not hit 
one hundred. 

marks, thirty-two: =+ (48) [sanjiini (s6)]. Extraordinary physical 
characteristics of the Tathagata as described in siitras. They include 
a golden body, full cheeks like a lion’s, a hair tuft on the forehead, 
and a raised area on top of the head. 

marrow, attain the: 4a [tokuzui]. See also skin, flesh, bones, and 
marrow. 

marrow, you have attained my: Bodhidharma’s words to his students. 
Skin, flesh, bones, marrow—each represents the essence of teaching. 

master: >x[& [sd-sho], literally, craft person of the essential teaching. 
2 =F ([tsiitetsu-su], literally, be thoroughly familiar. (iz=o 
[ryOtatsu-su], literally, complete arriving. 

master, ancient: 446 [kosen], literally, ancient and early one. Hi 
[kotoku], literally old virtuous one. 

master, guiding: #$6ifi [doshi]. 

master, thoroughly: ifi#(9) [tstidatsu(-su)]. Fully explore, fully 
experience. 

master, true: #01 [shin zenchishiki], literally, true good knower. 

master and disciple: ffi [shishi]. 

masteries, eight: /\3# [hattatsu]. Experiencing feely. 

mat: & HE [s6za], literally, grass seat. 

mat, thick: SAE [zaniku]. 

Matanga: [fgil [Matdgya], Kashyapamatanga, wW0= a AR wD 
[Kashomatogya]. Monk from central India. Arrived in Luoyang, the 
capital of Han Dynasty, in the tenth year of the Yongping Era (67 
c.E.) with Dharmaratna. Translated the Forty-two-Chapter Sutra. This 
marked the official introduction of buddha dharma into China. 

match: #92 [soi], literally, mutually entrust. 

material: 4) [motsu]. Thing, an object. 

material, pure: #84 [jozai]. 

materials to study: 

matter, great: K# [daiji]. Most essential issue in understanding 
dharma. 

matter, heart of the: $# [ri]. 

matter, life’s quest of the great: —-EEOXS [isshd sangaku no daiji]. 

matter, single essential: —A3# [ichidaiji], literally, single great matter. 
If_—7 # [yiitsu daiji], literally, only one great matter. -ABAKR 
[ichi daiji innen], literally, a great matter of causes and conditions. 
Essential mat-ter; matter of grave importance. According to 
Buddhist teaching, all events are results of prior causes and 
conditions, and they themselves serve as causes and conditions for 
future events. 

matters, three: =j% [sambd]. What is essential to sustain one’s body 
and mind: consciousness, warmth, and life. 

mature: FAK [jukudatsu], literally, ripen and get off. 

mature, not yet: #{E [miben], literally, not yet favorable. 

matures of itself: A %AAK [jinen jo], literally, naturally become. 

maturing, heterogeneous: #74 [ijuku], literally, ripen differently. 
Wholesome and unwholesome cause brings forth a neutral effect. 

Maudgalyayana: & #212 [Mokkenren]. i [Mokuren]. One of the ten 
major disciples of the Buddha. Born to a Brahman family near 
Rajagraha. Together with his close friend Shariputra, he became a 
student of the Buddha. Known for his mastery of miraculous 
powers. 

may I ask how you are: 4\# [fushin], literally, (I do) not know details 
(about you). 

Mayu Baoche: kX [Mayoku Hotetsu]. Ca. eighth—-ninth century, 
China. Dharma heir of Mazu Daoyi, Nanyue Line. Taught at Mount 
Mayu, Pu Region (Shanxi). 

Mazu Daoyi: &##i8— [Baso Doitsu]. 709-788, China. Dharma heir of 
Nanyue Huairang, Nanyue Line. Taught at Kaiyuan Monastery, 
Zhongling (Jiangxi). Along with Shitou Xiqian, considered one of 
the two great jewels of Zen in his time. Had 139 enlightened 
disciples and made the Nanyue Line of the Southern School flourish. 
Initiated the Zen tradition of “recorded sayings,” collections of 
informal dialogues and lectures. Also called Jiangxi, ;[74 [K6sei]. 
His posthumous name is Zen Master Daji, A#<+#40 [Daijaku Zenji]. 

meal offering: #§ [sai]. A midday meal hosted by a donor to home 
leavers. 

meal time, morning: #58 [shuku ji], literally, gruel time. 

meal, satisfied with each: 3*)726R2 [shuku soku han soku], literally, 
satisfied with gruel (morning meal) and satisfied with cooked rice 
(midday meal). 

meals: #4545 [saishuku], literally, gruel and cooked rice. Morning and 
midday meals. Traditionally, only two meals were served in a Zen 
monastery, in the morning and at noon. 

meaning: << 4 [kokoro], literally, mind. = [shishu], literally, 
source reason. #%£& [gyddan], literally, shape and steps. 

meaning behind: #) [kuri], literally, deep inside the phrase. 

Meaning of Bodhidharma’s Coming from India, The: *HEiiF§3R= [Soshi 
Sairai I]. Sixty-seventh fascicle of this book. 

meaning, essential: AS [taii], literally, large intention. Fundamental 
meaning. 

means, skillful: #15 [zengy6], literally, good and skillful. 2A 
[zengyo hoben], literally, good and skillful method. 

measure: jl [shikitaku], literally, measure degrees. 

measure, beyond: jf [kary6], literally, pass the measure. 

meditation, first stage of: #]## [shozen]. See also meditation, four stages 
of. 

meditation, four stages of: DU¢#7 [shi zenjo], Fath [shijoryo]. (1) 
Having joy and ease by becoming free from desire. (2) Having joy 
and ease through samadhi. (3) Having ease of body by abandoning 
joy. (4) Free from joy and suffering. 

meditation, learning. See also learn to do concentration. 

meditation, paramita of: See also six paramitas. 

meditation, walking: See walking meditation. 

meditation, Zen: ##7E [zenjo], literally, Zen samadhi. 

meditation posture: #iltk [kafu], literally, crossed legs. 

meet even one person, not: A3Z— A [fuho ichinin]. 

melodic siitra chanting, do: ##@¢ [fugin-su]. 

mendicant: Z 52, [koji], literally, begging child. 

mental activity: See activity, mental. 

merge in realization: 52 [shonyi], literally, enter realization. 

merge with realization: 278 [kaishin shoe], literally, merge minds 
and realize understanding. 

merging, beyond: 4\[2]& [fuego]. Going beyond merging in complete 
merging of realization. 

merit: 14 [kudoku], literally, function and virtue. If [k6], literally, 
function. Ability to awaken self and/or others. 

merit beyond making: #£/F O1)(8 [musa no kudoku], literally, function 
and virtue of not doing. 

merit, great: KI) [daiko]. 

merit, have: @If) [uk6]. 

merit, visible: @ROIN [ui no kd], literally, effect of having 
(intentional) creation. 

merits, ten excellent: —-f¥$4!| [jisshori]. See fascicle 13, “Power of the 
Robe.” 

method: {Fi& [sah6], literally, dharma of making (conduct). 

Miaoxin: ¥){§ [Mydshin]. Ca. ninth century, China. Nun who was a 
student of Yangshan Huiji, Guiyang School. Served as director of the 
guesthouse in Yangshan’s monastery. 

midpoints, four: PU# [shiyui]. Southeast, northeast, southwest, and 

northwest. 

Migasisa: F238 [Rokut6]. Originally a Brahman in the kingdom of 
Kaushala, known as an outstanding scholar. Became a student of the 
Buddha and attained arhathood. 

Mihu: See Jingzhao Mihu. mind art: ij ([shinjutsu]. Also, 
determination. 

mind, all things are inseparable from: BBy&ME [mambo yuishin], 
literally, myriad dharmas are mind only. 

Mind Itself Is Buddha, The: Bits [Sokushin Zebutsu]. Sixth fascicle 
of this book. 

mind, make up: jR7E(F) [ketsujo(-su)], literally, determine and settle. 
Be clear about, resolve, understand. 

mind, through countless springs there is no change of: #BiZSARE 0 
[kido hoshun fu henshin]. 

mind, way-seeking: Skt., bodhi chitta. j4/t) [ddshin]. literally, heart of 
the way, or mind a the 1e way. Aspiration for enlightenment. 

mindfulness is present: 227 [kenen], literally, fasten mindfulness. 

mindfulness, four abodes of: WU4£ [shinenjai]. Four objects of 
contemplation: (1) Impurity of the body. (2) The perception of 
suffering. (3) Impermanence of the mind. (4) Things have no 
independent and permanent self. Also called four places of 
mindfulness, PU; kz [shinenjo]. 

Minister Fang: 1. B48 [BO Shokoku]. Probably refers to Pei Xiu. See 
Minister Pei. 2. fS*8Ed [BO Shokoku]. Fang Xuanling, HAE? [BO 
Genrei]. 578-648, China. Prime Minister for fifteen years serving 
Emperor Tai, second emperor of Tang Dynasty. Also a historian, 
participated in compilation of the History of Jin. 

Minister Feng: 14828 [Hyd Shoko]. d. 1153, China. Feng Yi. }5#8 [Hyo 
Shi]. A lay student of Fuyan Qingyuan, Linji School. Governor of 
Qiong Region (Sichuan). 

Minister Li: 249) [Ri Shokoku]. Ca. ninth century, China. Studied 
Zen with Yaoshan Weiyan, Qingyuan Line. 

Minister Pei: 2249) [Hai Shokoku]. Pei Xiu, 2€( [Hai Kyi]. 797-870, 
China. A lay student of Huangbo Xiyun, Nanyue Line, Pei also 
studied with other masters, including Guishan. Compiler of 
Huangbo’s Transmission of Heart, Essential Dharma. 

Minister Tai: AZ [Taiko]. Named Wang, © [B6d]. Ca. eleventh 
century, B.c.E. Assisted King Wen, then his son King Wu, and 
defeated Empire of Yan. Later founded Kingdom Qi in Zhou 
Dynasty. Author of the military manual Liutao. 

miracle: ##3% [jinzi], literally, divine reaching. Also, a supernormal 
event. 

miracle, minor: /|\##3& [shojinzi]. For Dogen, a magical event. 

Miracles: #43 [Jinzi]. Twenty-sixth fascicle of this book. 

miracles, great: A##i6 [dai jinzi]. For Dogen, the everyday activity of 
an awakened person. 

miracles of buddha: (#18 [butsu jinzi]. 

miraculous power: See power, miraculous. 

miraculous powers, five or six: 71}7\iH [gotst rokutsi]. 

miraculous powers, practice: ##)6(Z%8 [jinzi shush6], literally, practice 
and realization of miracles. 

miraculous powers, six: 7\##iH [roku jinzi], 7\i% [rokutst]. The 
celestial feet, the celestial eye, the celestial ear, seeing others’ 
minds, knowing the past, and the power to be free from desire. The 
last three are called three types of knowledge, =—H [sammy6], three 
miraculous powers. 

miraculous powers, three: =H [sammy6]. Three types of knowledge; 
three of the six miraculous powers: knowing the past, celestial eye, 
power to be free from desire. 

mirror: # [ky6/kagami]. A round bronze mirror represents unmarred 
awakening. 

miss: #£i8(9) [shaka(-su)], literally, stumble and pass. Ignore, be 
ignorant. #§ [shaku], literally, mistake. #32%#5j% [tenso ten’on], 
literally, turn remote and turn far. 

miss one hundred marks: See marks, miss one hundred. 

missing the mark: See mark on top of missing the mark, miss the. 

mistake after mistake: #4838 [shoshaku jushaku], literally, take a file 
(rasp) and work on the file. File a file about something. Take up a 
mistake and settle in with the mistake. Mistakes surpass mistakes. 
$afa [shakushaku]. 

mistaken: 47 [fuze], literally, not correct. 

model: '#6fi [kansetsu], literally, precedented form. 483% [kikan], 
literally, tortoise (timeless) mirror. 

moment: —*x [ichinen], literally, a flash of thought. Skt., kshana. 
Transliteration: #l|HB [setsuna]. Skt., muhirta, 7458 [shuyu]. #8878 
&§ [setsuna shuyu]. An instant. ‘SZ [sun’in], literally, an inch of 
(the movement of) a shadow. 

moment, at each. See also abide in one’s condition. 

moment, at this very: IE {&FERF [shOtd immo ji], literally, just this 
time. 

moment, condition complete this: See condition complete this moment. 

moment, great: A&fi [dai setsu], literally, large division. 

moment, myriad years in one: —%®3‘F [ichinen mannen], literally, 
moment of a thought (that is) ten thousand years. 

moment, myriad years of this: B28S3‘F [jikishu mannen]. Directly 
(experiencing) this moment (as) ten thousand years. 

moment, one hairbreadth: — 7+ [ichimoko], literally, one hair 

amount.. 

moment of a thought: —2xt& [ichinen ky6]. 

moments as uncountable as the sands of the Ganges: {2 #46 [gosetsuna]. 

monasteries, high-ranking: FA #!) [kassetsu]. 

monastery: #*K [sorin], literally, grove and forest. #¢/% [sdseki], 
literally, grove seats. BP [immon], literally, temple gate. *#E& 
[shoran]. Abbreviation of #44 {ME [shoja garan]. ts [shojal, 
literally, hall of effort. {fl # [garan], abbreviated transliteration of 
Skt. sangha arama, quiet place for home leavers’ assembly. 

monastery, join the: ##}¥8 [kata], literally, hang a (travel) bag. 

monastery, Zen: ##}X [zenrin], literally, Zen forest. 

monastery officer. See also officers, six. 

monk: Skt., bhikshu. Transliteration: LEE [biku], %2 [bisst]. A 
[soke], literally, sangha house (person). 

monk, blind: BtEE [mo biku]. 

monk, junior: /|\fifi [shoshi], literally, minor teacher. 

monk, old: &{% [rodso]. 

monk, patch-robed: ##{ [ndso]. 

Monk, Sacred: 224% [shdso]. Statue, usually of Mafijushri, enshrined in 
the center of the monks’ hall. 

monk, senior: EE [joza], literally, high seat. 

monk, sitra chanting: @4&{ [nenkin sd]. 

monk of solitary practice: See solitary practice, monk of. 

Monk of the Fourth Stage Meditation: PU%##tE [Shizen Biku]. Ninety- 
first fascicle of this book. 

monkey: #3 [miko]. 

monk’s action: See action, monk’s. 

monks, five: AEE [gobiku]. Ajfatakaundinya, Assaji, Mahanaman, 
Bhadrika, and Vappa, who heard the first expounding of dharma by 
the Buddha after he attained the way. Also called Five Sangha 
Treasures, HA(8# [gonin soho]. 

monks, group of the eighteen: +/\##tEE [jthachi gun biku]. Group of 
dharma practitioners who break the precepts. 

monks, group of the six: 7<##ttEH [rokugun biku]. Monks during 
Shakya-muni Buddha’s time who engaged in wrongdoing and 
caused the need for precepts. 

monks, ocean of: 438 [kaishu], literally, ocean of assembly. 

monks’ hall: See hall, monks’. 

monks’ quarters: #32 [anri], literally, inside the huts. 

monograms: #2 [kaji], literally, flowery character. Used for 
signature. 

moon: KA [getsu/tsuki]. Usually represents enlightenment. 

Moon, The: #8# [Tsuki], meaning “moon” by pronunciation while the 
ideographs mean “entire” (tsu) and “function” (ki). Forty-third 

fascicle of this book. 

moon face: Ail [gachimen] . . . See also Buddha, Sun-Face. 

Moon-Face Buddha. See also Buddha, Sun-Face. 

Moonlight Bodhisattva: See Bodhisattva, Moonlight. moon thusness: AY 
[getsunyo]. 

morning star: FA [myodjo]. Represents Shakyamuni Buddha’s 
enlightenment, based on a legend that he attained the way when he 
saw the morning star while sitting under the bodhi tree. 

mortar, stone: Aff [sekitai]. 

Moshan Liaoran: #1 Sf ¥& [Massan RyGnen]. Ca. ninth century, China. 
Nun. Dharma heir of Gaoan Dayu, Nanyue Line. Taught at Mount 
Mo, Yun Region (Jiangxi). She was a prominent female teacher in 
the early, male-dominated Zen School. One of her students, Guanxi 
Xian, said of her, “I received half a ladle at Father Linji’s place and 
half a ladle at Mother Moshan’s. Since I took that drink, I’ve never 
been thirsty.” 

mosquito biting an iron bull: WF Ow+ICOlES [bunsu no tetsugyi ni 
noboru]. Phrase indicating that something is incomprehensible by 
intellectual thinking. 

Most Excellent King Sutra: BxA¥=—%% [Saisho O Ky6]. One of the 
translations of Suvarna Prabhdsottama King Sutra. 

mountain: LL| [san/yama] 1. Mountain in the usual sense. 2. Nature. 3. 
One’s state of meditation. 

mountains and waters, bear hardships traveling through: W7kKIcC#& F 
[sansui ni shinku-su]. 

Mountains and Waters Sutra: L7K%% [Sansui Ky6]. Fifteenth fascicle of 
this book. 

Mountains are mountains, waters are waters: LU) 7K#7K [san ze san, 
suii ze sui]. Qingyuan Weixin’s words. 

Mountains, Nine. See also Sumeru. mountains, rivers, and earth: Wja]A He 
[senga daichi]. 

move, a single: —& [ichijaku]. As in the go game. 

move delusions in samadhi and pull them out with wisdom: See samadhi 
and pull them out with wisdom, move delusions in. 

move forward: ¥£25 [shimpo]. Walk forward, go beyond. 

moved by the words: s8Alk / 43 [gomyaku no honshin], literally, turn 
the body by the word vein. 

movement, before a: #€55 [kisen]. 

movement, within a: #€-A [kichi]. 

mu: J. #%. C., wu. No, nothing, or nothingness. A monk asked 
Zhaozhou, “Does a dog have buddha nature or not?” Zhaozhou said, 
“No [mu].” This “no” is regarded as an understanding beyond “yes” 
or “no.”. 

mud, go into the: if—7K [deisui-su]. Stained by muddy water; to be in 

the ordinary world to awaken beings. 

mud, lump of: i/é] [deidan], e5#-- [deidan su]. Mud ball. 

mud, stone, sand, and pebbles: 4) tH [deseki sharyaku]. 

mud and water, enter into: AifEA2K [nyidei nissui]. 

mud ball, twiddling with a: ##i/EH] [rd deidan]). 

mudra: Skt. Ef) [in]. Seal, proof, shape, or form. What is definite. The 
symbol of a buddha’s or bodhisattva’s original vow. Also, a physical 
gesture or posture in meditation. 

mustard seed storing Mount Sumeru: 744285 [ke nd Shumi]. 

mutual activity: See activity, mutual. 

mutual affinity and interaction: JRIEIB3<(9) [kannd dodkd(-su)], 
literally, responding feeling and the ways cross. A buddha responds 
to the feeling of a sentient being, and vice versa. 

Muzhou Daoming: 8/3828 [Bokushi Domyd]. 780-877, China. Also 
called Venerable Chen, f%2$%§ [Chin Sonshuku], by his family 
name. Dharma heir of Huangbo Xiyun, Nanyue Line. Taught more 
than one hundred students at Longxing Monastery, Mu Region 
(Zhejiang). Then left his students and made straw sandals to support 
his mother. 

Myoan Eisai: BARES F§ [also, Mydan Yosai]. 1141-1225, Japan. FaFlial 
[Sai Osho], literally, Priest Eisai. Went to China in 1168 and 
brought back Tiantai texts. Made a second visit to China between 
1185 and 1191 to study Zen. Dharma heir of Xuan Huaichang, Linji 
School. Author of On Raising Zen and Protecting the Nation [Kozen 
Gokoku-ron]. Founded Shofuku Monastery in Hakata, Jufuku 
Monastery in Kamakura, and Kennin Monastery in Kyoto. Regarded 
as founder of Rinzai School, the Japanese form of Linji School. 

Myozen: See Butsuju Myozen. 

myriad things: #33 [banji], literally, ten thousand things. Bi& 
[mamb6], literally, ten thousand dharmas. 

myrobalan fruit: &# [anra ka]. Skt. 4mura. Sometimes translated as 
“mango.” 

mystery of mysteries: AZ% [gen no gen]. 

Nagarjuna: Skt. Transliteraton: ABWMIES#tIBB [Nagaarujuna]. 
Translation: Dragon Tree, 82%! [Ryiiju]; Dragon Excellence, EH 
[Rytisho]; Dragon Ferocity, #2%m [Ryimyo]. Also, Ancestor 
Nagarjuna, #e‘s!¢H6M [Ryaju Soshi]; Nagarjuna Bodhisattva, sett = 
B= [Rytijju Bosatsu]. Ca. second-third century, India. Pioneered a 
philosophical investigation on the Mahayana doctrines, centering on 
the concept of shiinyata or emptiness. Known as the founder of the 
Madhyamika School based on the Mahd Prajfia Paramitd scriptures 
and his own writings. Author of treatises as well as “Verses on the 
Foundation of the Middle Way.” Regarded as the Fourteenth Indian 

Ancestor in the Zen tradition. 

name and concept: 448 [my6dso], 4 [myo shiki], literally, names 
and forms. 

name, hide one’s: #34 [tomy6]. 

name, what is your: 7<{J¥£ [nyo ka sho]. Asking the family name. 

nameless: #£44 [mumy6]. 

Nanda: ##8¢ [Nanda]. A half brother of Siddhartha, a son of King 
Shuddodana and Queen Mahaprajapati. After the Buddha’s 
enlightenment, Nanda was about to be installed as king of the 
Shakya Clan in Kapilavastu, but the Buddha used his skillful means 
and made him leave the household. He served the Buddha’s 
monastery as an officer and became an arhat. 

Nanquan Puyuan: FAR2RA [Nansen Fugan]. 748-834, China. After 
studying Buddhist philosophy, became a Zen student. Dharma heir 
of Mazu Daoyi, Nanyue Line. Lived at Mount Nanquan, Chiyang 
(Anhui), for thirty years cutting wood, raising cattle, and plowing. 
Taught many students including Changsha Jingcen and Zhaozhou 
Congshen. He called himself Old Master Wang. 

Nanquan’s story of a sickle: FARO Gh [Nansen no kensu wal. 
Nanquan was once on the mountain working. A monk came by and 
asked him, “What is the way that leads to Nanquan?” The master 
raised his sickle and said, “I bought this sickle for thirty cents.” The 
monk said, “I am not asking about the sickle you bought for thirty 
cents. What is the way that leads to Nanquan?” The master said, “It 
feels good when I use it.” 

Nanyang Huizhong: Rabat [Nan’yo Echi]. d. 775, China. Dharma 
heir of Sixth Ancestor Huineng. Taught at Nanyang (Henan) for 
forty years and taught Zen while emphasizing scriptural studies. 
Emperor Su asked Nanyang to be his teacher. Regarded as a master 
of the Northern Chinese Zen. His posthumous name is National 
Teacher Dazheng AsSEWEM [Daisho Kokushi]. 

Nanyuan Huiyong: FAB aa [Nan’in Egyo]. 860-930?, China. Dharma 
heir of Xinghua Cunjiang, Linji School. Nanyuan was considered the 
most important teacher of the third generation from Linji. He taught 
at Nanyuan Temple of Baoying Monastery, Ru Region (Henan), and 
was known for the strictness of his teaching. 

Nanyue Huairang: Fas Rae [Nangaku Ejo]. 677-744, China. Studied 
fifteen years with Sixth Ancestor Huineng and became his heir along 
with Qingyuan Xingsi. Taught at Bore Monastery, Nan Peak (Mount 
Heng), Heng Region (Hunan). The teaching lineages derived from 
Nanyue and Qingyuan became the main streams of the Chinese Zen 
tradition. Regarded as founder of the Nanyue Line; he was teacher 
of Mazu. His posthumous name is Zen Master Dahui AR##6M [Daie 
Zenji]. 

Nanyue Huisi: F842 [Nangaku Eshi]. 515-577, China. Studied lotus 
samadhi with Huiwen of the Kingdom of Qi and _ reached 
enlightenment through contemplating the Lotus Sutra. Practiced Zen 
for eight years at Nanyue (Mount Heng), Heng Region (Hunan), 
during the last part of his life. Teacher of Zhiyi, he established the 
Tiantai School and authored Mahe Fuchuan #3] 1E#% [Maka Shikan] 
(Great Shamatha and Vipashyana). 

Nanyue Xuantai: FAA A; [Nangaku Gentai]. Ca. ninth century, China. 
Dharma heir of Shishuang Qingzhu, Qingyuan Line. Known as a 
poet and called Cotton Robe Tai. Lived on Nanyue (Mount Heng), 
Heng Region (Hunan). 

nature: 4 [sho]. Fundamental characteristics. 

nature, ocean of: t#7 [shokai]. 

nature, original: A£ [honsh6]. Basic characteristics. 

nature, other: {tH [tashO]. Fundamental characteristics of other, as 
opposed to self. 

nature, self: At [jisho]. Fundamental characteristics of self. 

nature, true: Blt [jisshO]. ZTE [rishO], literally, reason nature. 

natures, three: =" [sansho]. The wholesome action nature, the 
unwholesome action nature, and the neutral nature. 

necessarily, not: 7<W [fuhitsu]. 19] [kahitsu], literally, how is it 
always? Beyond one’s knowledge. 

negations, one hundred: HE [hyappi]. Negations upon negations. 

nest, old: #5 ([kytisoO]. Stagnating. Staying in comfortable, 
conventional views or understanding. 

net of pearls: B44 [shinju mo]. 

neutral: #£3¢ [muki]. Neither wholesome nor unwholesome. 
new, something: #1 [shinjo], literally, new twig. Fresh and 
extraordinary. 

Niaoke Daolin: Ri [Chodka Dorin]. 741-828, China. Dharma heir 
of Jiashan Faqin, Niutou School. As he lived on a limb of a long 
pine tree, he was called Zen Master Bird Nest (Niaoke). 

Nidana. See also Divisions, Twelve. 

night: 7% [ya/yoru]. Darkness, which sometimes represents the realm 
of nonduality. 

night period: % [k6]. One fifth of the time from sunset to sunrise. 

nihilistic view: &fi51 [danken], literally, cutting off seeing. View of 
annihilation. The belief that nothing exists. 

nine realms of sentient beings: See realms of sentient beings, nine. 

Nine Schools: See Schools, Nine. 

Nine Ties of Teaching: See Ties of Teaching, Nine. 

nirvana: Skt. Transliteration: #282 [nehan], j/€78 [naion]. Translation: 
®UM ([jakumetsu], literally, serene extinction. The state of 
enlightenment attained by Shakyamuni Buddha, or by any other 

buddha. Literally, extinction of fire, meaning extinction of desires, 
or liberation from the cycle of birth, death, and rebirth. In 
Mahayana Buddhism, nirvana is viewed as not separate from birth 
and death, as opposed to extinction of birth and death. In Dogen’s 
usage, nondualistic experience. One of the four elements of the 
“circle of the way.” See also way, circle of the. 

nirvana, great: A}#S% [dai nehan]. 

nirvana, path of: #282@i834% [nehan no dohd], literally, way dharma of 
nirvana. 

nirvana, wondrous heart of: *28¥>it) [nehan mydshin]. See also 
treasury of the true dharma eye. 

nirvana by skillful means, manifesting: Fi {23832 82 [hoben gen nehan]. 

Nirvana Hall: *282 [nehan do]. Building in a monastery for residents 
who are very ill. 

Niutou Farong: “-38j}&@# [Gozu Hoyii]. 594-657, China. Said to be a 
dharma heir of Fourth Ancestor Daoxin. His lineage is called Niutou 
School or Ox-Head School, in contrast to Fifth Ancestor Hongren’s 
East Mountain School. His teaching emphasized thoroughness and 
logic. His posthumous name is Great Master Farong, jABYAEMD 
[Hoyt Daishi]. 

no more studying and no more doing: ##2225 [zetsugaku mui]. 

no small matter: 7S{&\/)\/|\ [fu do shdshG], literally, not the same as 
small small. 

noble conduct: See awesome manifestation. 

noble path, eightfold: See path, eightfold noble. 

noble truths, four: See truths, four noble. 

no-expression: 7\j& [fud6]. Beyond expression. 

no-form: #£4§ [mus6]. 

noise and confusion: t&fsl [kainy6]. 

nondifference: 7AiZ [fui]. 

nongreed: 4\& [futon]. 

nonhuman: 4£ A [hinin]. 

Northern Continent, Great: 4t{2i [hoku kuroshi]. See also 
Continents, Four. 

nose appears, sharpened: 333K [senbi rai]. 

nose, grab hold of the: & [ha bi]. 

nose, truly worth grabbing by the: =) [shin habi]. 

no-self. #£3X% [muga]. The understanding that there is no truly existing, 
separate self—the interdependence and impermanence of sentient 
beings and all things as seen through the eye of nonduality. 

nostril: &fL [biki]. That which is essential. Same as original face, 
eyeball, bones, and marrow. 

nostrils, lose one’s: K#IEFL [shikkyaku bikii]. 

nostrils, vitalize the: ;4EFL [katsubikii]. See also beyond. 

not buddha: 4E(# [hibutsu]. Buddha who is free from being a buddha. 

not hearing: 4\f—i [fumon]. Direct experience of realization through the 
body. 

not knowing. 7% [fuchi], “sa [fushiki]. Direct realization, or 
knowing outside of words. 

not necessarily: See necessarily, not. 

notice: #0 [kakuchi]. 

not-thinking. See also thinking, beyond. 

novice: Skt., shramanera. Transliteration: 74 [shami]. 

now and then: H 4A [goko gokon]. 

now, begin just: %###2 [shiki]. 

now, eternal: 4 [chdkon], literally, long now. 

now, just this right: E<>®iS= [sokkon no sharil], literally, within this 
right now. 

nuns, group of the six: 7\##fE [rokugun ni]. Nuns whose wrongdoings 
caused the precepts to be expanded. 

object: 4% [ky6]. Objective. 

objects of the senses: EEA [jinchi], literally, in the dust. Dust [jin] 
represents the six-sense objects. See also dusts, six. 

obligation and love: | [on/ai], literally, benefit by a person of higher 
position, such as a parent, and love. Worldly obligations. 

obscure: < 5 L [kurashi], literally, dark. 

obscure traces: See brilliance and obscure traces, hide. 

obstruct: 3€[§) [kek6], literally, go against. 32 [hon], literally, commit 
(wrongdoing). 

obstruction, beyond: #£%% [muge], literally, no hindrance. 

occasion, on: fiat [zuiki], literally, according to circumstances. 

occupied, not being: 7\ il [fukuku]. 

occur equally: [a}4% [dojo], literally, same twig. 

occurrences, four most excellent: JU4#54$ [shishu saish6]. Benefits of 
living in Southern Continent, Jambudvipa: seeing the Buddha, 
hearing the dharma, leaving the household, and attaining the way. 

ocean dries up and yet does not reveal the bottom: ##*47. 232) [kaiko 
futo rotei]. 

ocean mouth: ##0 [kaiko]. 

Ocean Mudra Samadhi: ;SEN=—R [Kai’in Zammai]. Thirty-second 
fascicle of this book. 

ocean, inexhaustible: #334 F278 [mujin hokkai kai]. 

offer sand: See sand, offer. 

offering: H# [kuy6]. B44 [onkyii], literally, beneficial giving. 

offering, faithful: {Bif6 [shinse]. 

offerings, four types of: PU [shi ji]. Offering of things necessary for 
dharma practitioners, including food, clothes, bedding, and 

medicine. Sometimes, banners, canopies, flowers, and incense are 
included. 

offerings, revere and make: #84(# [kugyo kuy6]. 

offerings, six types of hearts that make: (#@i0\@7\% [kuyOdshin u 
rokushu]. A heart (1) in the field of benefaction, (2) of gratitude, 
(3) that arouses the most excellent heart of all sentient beings, (4) 
rare to encounter, (5) rare in the billion worlds, (6) that embodies 
the principles that are depended on in the world and beyond the 
world. 

offerings, ten types of: (4 |C 1## [kuyo ni jusshu]. Offerings (1) to the 
Buddha himself; (2) to a place of veneration for the Buddha; (3) to 
the Buddha himself and to a place of veneration for the Buddha; (4) 
to the invisible Buddha as well as to a place of veneration for the 
Buddha; (5) by oneself; (6) that one has others make; (7) of 
materials; (8) that is excellent; (9) that is unstained; (10) of the 
ultimate way. 

offerings, three types of: =##O{## [sanshu no kuyd]. Offering to a 
Buddha image: a mat, sugar water, and candles. 

officer, retired: #4 [zenshi]. 

office: & [ry6]. Also, living quarters. 

officers, six: 7\#08 [roku chiji]. Six main officers in a Zen monastery. 
$1 3 [chiji], literally, those who understand the matter: (1) #8 
[tstisu], director or chief administrator (also called/#®] [kusu]) (2) 
Bes? [kansu], assistant director (also called Eiht [kan’in], Br 
[inju]); (3) BI ([ftisu], treasurer; (4) #EAB [ino], practice 
coordinator in charge of activities in the monks’ hall and 
ceremonies (also called =] [ddsu], director of the monks’ hall); (5) 
HH [tenzo], head cook; (6) Hix [shissui], work leader. 

officiate: #\fa) [oshd]. Also, honorable. 

Old Buddha Caoxi: See Dajian Huineng. 

Old Buddha Mind: 741% [Kobutsu Shin]. Forty-fifth fascicle of this 
book. 

Old Buddha Tiantong: See Tiantong Rujing. 

Old Mirror: 4% [Koky6]. Twenty-first fascicle of this book. 

old shrine: 44a] [koshi]. 

OM MANI SHRI sURYA: Skt. M8EEFERSIE 84 [om mani shiri soro]. Mantra 
that means “Homage to the jewel that shines like the sun.” 

On the Endeavor of the Way: ##i834 [Bendowa], literally, talk on the 
endeavor of the way. First fascicle of this book. 

once-returner. See also fruits, four. 

one: — [ichi]. 1. One as opposed to two or many. 2. —¥%] [ichinyo]. 
The inseparableness of two, such as practice and enlightenment. 

One Bright Pearl: —#88A3% [Ikka MyOju]. Fourth fascicle of this book. 

One Hundred Eight Gates of Realizing Dharma: —®/\i%BAF [Ippyaku 

Hachi Homy6o Mon]. Ninety-sixth fascicle of this book. 

One Hundred One Practices of the Sarvastivadin School. RAAB A 
#5—8 [Kompon Setsuubu Hyaku-ichi Komma]. Guidelines of one of 
the pre-Mahayana schools in India. 

one or many ways: —{& PAK [ichi j6 ry6jo], literally, one or two strips. 

one or two stalks are bent and three or four stalks are leaning: — 2 iy = HH 
WI, = BMRA [ikkyd rydkyd kyoku nari, sankyd shikyd 
sha nari]. 

one piece: [A){% [dojo]. Also, single avenue. 

one rod of iron, ten thousand miles long: & 2 —{&$H [ban ri ichijo tetsu]. 

one thing: —i% [ipp6], literally, one dharma. Also, oneness, single 
matter. 

One Vehicle: See Vehicle, One. 

One Vehicle, dharma of the: —3€i& [ichijo ho]. 

one who buys gold sells gold: 3#78 8 =A [maikin shuze maikinnin]. 

one, clouds and moon are: =A Ia) [ungetsu ze do]. 

oneness or difference: — # [ichi i]. 

Only a Buddha and a Buddha: "fe (£486 [Yuibutsu Yobutsu]. Ninety- 
second fascicle of this book. 

open the summer: #4= [ketsuge], literally, form a summer (practice 
period). 

open up: R229" [kaihatsu-su]. 

openings and blockages: i [tstisoku]. 

opportunity: {@'& [bengi]. Also, facility. 

opportunity, time of surging: HifzO ¢ = [gekiyo no toki]. 

opposite: *8#{ [sotai], literally, face each other. Separate; arise in 
alignment; sequential. 

ordinary humans, cannot be grasped by: HEH A{$ [hijii nintoku]. 

ordinary person, constantly being an: %# N, [jobon]. 

ordination: #/E= [tokudo], literally, attain crossing over (to the shore 
of enlightenment). 

organs and six sub-organs, five: Fifisi7< iit [gozo roppu]. Ancient Chinese 
classification: heart, kidney, lung, liver, and spleen; colon, small 
intestine, stomach, gallbladder, bladder, and three jiaos (burners), 
=f [samso] (an area that includes lower heart and upper 
stomach). 

organs and their objects, six sense: 7\A [rokunyd], literally, six 
enterings. 

organs, five sense: At® [gokon] literally, five roots. Eyes, ears, nose, 
tongue, and body. 

organs, sense: s44® [shokon]. See also organs, six sense. 

organs, six sense: 7<\# [rokkon], literally, six roots. 7\t& [rokujo], 
literally, six feelers. Eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind. 

original enlightenment: See enlightenment, original. 

originally in this land, the ancestor was: *H6i2X3RZ%-E [soshi honrai shi 
do]. 

other-power: {t7) [tariki]. Guidance of a Buddha or bodhisattva to lead 
one to enlightenment. 

ounce: See liang. outlook: #2 [gyok6], literally, form rising. 

outside the way, six teachers: 7<fi) [rokushi], literally, six teachers. Six 
liberal thinkers who lived around the time of Shakyamuni Buddha. 

outside the way, those: Yi [ged6], literally, outside the way. Often 
implies those who follow Brahmanism. 

outside the way who believe in spontaneous enlightenment, people: K2AIb 
i& [tennen ged6], literally, natural (enlightenment) outside the way. 

outside-inside, intimate: #2384 [hyori danran). 

outstanding disciple: ##£ [jinsoku], literally, divine feet. 

outstanding seeing: FAiJ#dk [kentetsu dokubatsu], literally, seeing 
through alone and distinguished. 

Overnight Jiao: See Yongja Xuenjiao. 

ox, white: A4F [byakugyi]. 

Padmottara: # EttH [Kejo Biku], literally, Flower Top Monk. Monk 
who committed the five avichi crimes at the time of Kashyapa 
Buddha. 

Pagodas, Eight: /\t8 [hatto]. Stiipas built in the eight places related to 
Shakyamuni Buddha’s life. 

painting: # [ga/e]. 1. Expression intended to represent reality. 2. 
Experience of nonduality. 3. In Dogen’s usage, a painting or picture 
represents the expression of enlightenment. 

Painting of a Rice Cake: ## [Gabyo]. Literally, painted rice cake. 
Forty-first fascicle of this book. 

painting of a rice cake does not satisfy hunger: BICAIFSBSBVIA, 3 
BENS ¢lcf5S¢g [e ni kake ru mochii wa ue wo fusagu ni tara 
zu]. 

painting spring &@B< [haru wo egaku]. To experience truth 
directly, free from forms or concepts. 

panels: {% [j6]. Strips of cloth used to create a kashaya. 

Pangyun, Layman: B27] [H6o’on (HO’un) Koji], Be 782 [Ho Koji 
On K6o]. 740-808, China. Also known as Layman Pang. A lay 
student of Mazu Daoyi, Nanyue Line, who also studied with Shitou. 
Lived in Xiang Region (Hubei) and made his living by making 
baskets and having his daughter Lingzhao sell them in town. His 
teachings are found in Recorded Sayings of Layman Pang. 

Panshan Baoji: 82.2% [Banzan Hoshaku]. 720-814, China. Dharma 
heir of Mazu Daoyi, Nanyue Line. Taught at Mount Pan, You Region 
(Hebei). Panshan was awakened when he heard a customer in the 
market ask a butcher for meat of the best quality, and the butcher 

replied “Where is there any that is not the best quality?” 

paper, strips of: #54 [suihaku]. 

Papiyas: Skt. 3&8) [Hajun]. ik) [Ma Hajun], literally Mara 
(Demon) Papiyas. KH) [Tenma Hajun], literally, Celestial Mara 
Papiyas. A demon who tried to tempt and obstruct the practice of 
Shakyamuni Buddha and his disciples. 

parable: 21 [hiyu]. Also, analogy. 

Paramartha: iii [Shintai], literally, Genuine Truth. 527-596. An 
Indian monk who held the title of Tripitaka Master. Invited by 
Emperor Wu of the kingdom of Liang and arrived in China in 546. 
Translated sixty-four Buddhist texts, including Golden Beam (Most 
Excellent) King Sutra. 

paramita: Skt. Transliteration: (22@2 [haramitsu]. Translation: & 
[do], literally, ferrying or crossing over. Arriving at the other shore 
(of enlightenment through the ocean of delusions). Manifestation; 
realization. Sometimes translated as perfection. See also prajfid 
paramitd; pdramitas, six. 

paramitas, six: 7VijR#& [roku haramitsu]. 7\E [rokudo], literally, six 
crossings over (to the shore of enlightenment). Six types of 
realization. The basis for a bodhisattva’s practice leading to the 
shore of nirvana: giving, #2 (#B)[dan(na)]; keeping precepts, F # 
[shira]; patience, #2 [sendai]; vigor, F2XH8 [biriya]; meditation, 
#248 [zenna]; and prajiia (beyond wisdom), AX4& [hannya]. 

parent: 3¢ [chichi], literally, father. 

parent and child: 40 [fushi], literally, father and child. 

parents were born: 

pari-nirvana: Skt. Transliteration: A%7282 [hatsu nehan], A&/E;E [hatsu 
naion], literally, perfect nirvana. The Buddha’s death. 

pari-nirvana, great: AARES2 [dai hatsu nehan]. Great death of the 
Buddha. 

pari-nirvana, manifestation of: iE [metsudo gen], literally, 
realization of dying and crossing (people) over (to the shore of 
enlightenment). 

pari-nirvana, unsurpassable great: #REXAQES [mujo dai hatsu 
nehan]. 

Pari-nirvana Sutra, Maha: See Maha Pari-nirvana Sutra. 

Parshva: }32;m28 [Barishiba]. Legendary monk regarded as the Tenth 
Ancestor of the Zen tradition in India. As he engaged in the practice 
of not lying down, he was called Venerable Undefiled Sides, fn#& 
[Kyo Sonja]. 

part of: Et [shoko], literally, a small portion. 

part, one: —ff [ichigi], literally, one corner. 

particle, most minute: —#i&X [ichi gokumi]. 

particle, one: — EE [ichijin]. One speck of dust. 

particle of dust: #XEZ [mijin], literally, minute dust. 

particles, crack open: (EZE@1RF [mijin wo ha-su]. 

Parvatardja: tj ([San’o], literally, Mountain King. Shakyamuni 
Buddha made offerings in his former lifetime to many Buddhas with 
this name. 

pass on person to person: $88t87K [tekiteki s0jo]. 

pass on the original nourishment: i#{t17X3} 3 %4 [gen ta hombun sory6], 
literally, returning to another the original grass to feed the person. 

pass through the barrier: #8] [chokan]. Go beyond the barrier of 
dualism. 

passage, this: —A)Oi8*4 [ikku no dojakul], literally, expression of one 
phrase. 

passed on, be: S39 [jugod-su], literally, receiving the work 
(accomplishment). 

past: [3% [korai], literally, come toward (now). BUA [zento rail], 
literally, former (life) coming (toward now). #8 [t6] is a suffix. ip 
[shukumy6], 74/4 [shukushd], literally, past life. 

past, future, (or) present: =f [sansail], literally, three boundaries. 

past, illuminate the: 8274 [shoko]. 

past, knowing. See also miraculous powers, six. 

past, planted in the: 458 [shukujikil]. 

past, present, and future: 1839'S [ka gen to], WIR [ka gen torai]. 
See also worlds, three. 

past, reflect on the: 884% [shdgo], literally, illuminate back. 

past and future: BifE@ f= [zentei kotei]. 

past life [of a disciple of the Buddha]: &# [honji]. 

past life, knowledge of a: T{£#§ [shukujii chi]. api [shukumydotsii]. 
{08 [shukutsii]. 

path, authentic: 1Fi& [shod6]. 

path, complete: 38 [zendo]. 

path, eightfold noble: /\1Ei& [hasshod6d]. Fourth of the four noble 
truths: right understanding, right thoughts, right speech, right 
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right 
concentration. See also enlightenment, thirty-seven wings of. 

path, invisible: i =3 [tsiishO], literally, penetrating the clouds. Vast sky. 
Celestial path, 1#324 [tsiish6 ro]. 

path, single: S(#i [sekijo do]. 

path, vital: ;4#§ [katsuro]. 

path of letting go: #8 [shutsuro], literally, road for going out. 

paths, five: Hi8 [god6]. 471. See also paths, six. 

paths, six: 7\i8 [rokud6], 7<\#X [rokushu]. The “roads” or 
“destinations” in the cycle of birth, death, and rebirth: realms of 
devas (gods or celestial beings), human beings, fighting spirits 
(asuras), animals, hungry ghosts, and hell beings. The first three are 

considered wholesome. The last three are called unwholesome 

realms, #3# [akushu]; three lower paths, =i [sanzu]; or three 

unwholesome paths =8j8 [san’akudd]. Sometimes called five 

realms, when hungry ghosts and hell beings are classified together. 
paths, three lower. See also paths, six. 

patience: &73 [annin]. See also pdramitas, six. 

patience, paramitd of. See also paramitas, six. 

pavilion, wind-and-string: ##4+2 [kan gen ro]. 

pay respect: #24 [raigyo]. 

peaceful establishment: &YZ [anryi]. 

pearl, a: —FA¥® [ikka ju]. 

pearl, dragon’s bright: &#3% [ri ju]. Pearl said to be hidden under a 
dragon jar. Symbol of enlightenment. 

pearl, one bright: Complete and nondual reality. See also One Bright 
Pearl. 

pearl from the gill: #83 [ganju]. 

pearl hidden in the hair: 22% [keiju]. Pearl in the topknot. 

pearl rolls on the board: RO #@ |i LS [tama no ban wo hashiru]. 

pearl sewn inside the robe: See robe, pearl sewn inside the. 

pebble from Mount Yan: #4 [En seki]. A rock that looks like a jewel 
but is actually worthless. Mount Yan is in present-day Hebei, China. 

peg, anchoring: —# [ikkitsu], literally, one peg. 

Pei Xiu: See Minister Pei. penetrate: i&AK [todatsu]. Break through, jump 
beyond, see through, free from, free and transparent, emancipation. 
KX [santetsu], literally, practice through. ###? [kytiben], literally, 
inquire thoroughly, ultimate study. 5iti& [sett], literally, speak 
through. j4#23K [tdtanrai], literally, carry through. j4#8 [totai], 
literally, go through the body. i43&¢9 [toka-su], literally, pass 
through. 

penetration: if [tsti]. Direct experience; thorough understanding 
beyond discriminatory thinking. 

penetrations, seven: Cif [shichitsi]. Knowing freely. 

people, good: #3 [zen nanshi], literally, good men. 

people, mediocre: faim [yoru], literally, ordinary stream. Also, 
mediocre lineage. 

people of excellence: #4[& [tessh6], literally, wise artisan. 

people outside: {#4 [bokan], literally, (those who) see at a side. 

perception. See also skandhas, five. 

perception skandha: x [jushu], literally, perception assembly. See 
also skandhas, five. 

period of decline: See also three periods. 

permanence, dharma of: 7E;& [joho]. 

permanent: #1£ [joji], literally, continuously abiding. Unchanged. 

permanent self, view of a: See self, view of a permanent. 

Persian person looks for ivory: FAYS:RETKRA [nankai hashi gu zoge]. 

person, idle: FA [kanjin]. 

person, iron: #3) [tekkan]. 

person, know the very: SFU A [tochi zenin]. 

person, make a true: A [inin], literally, make a person. Teach 
someone. 

person, original: 23K [honrainin]. 

person, true: A [nin], literally, person. 

person, Zen: ##A, [Zennin]. 

person as the very person, very: W#B A [nyo ze tonin]. 

person beyond: #£A [munin], literally, no person. 

person beyond measure, great: 2A A [motsury6 taijin]. 

person in the ultimate realm: See realm, person in the ultimate. 

person to person, pass on: See pass on person to person. 

person who is beyond enlightened: 4\{8% [fugosha], literally, one who 
is not enlightened. 

perspective, lofty: SAR [kochakugan]. 

perturbed: Ai [tai shinso], literally, very coarse mind. 

petals, five: HE [goy6]. 

phenomena, all: B&R [mansho shinral], literally, myriad forms, 
many arraying. [5] [bankai], literally, myriad rotations. 

phenomena, inexhaustible worlds of: ##;34F [mujin hokkai]. 

phenomena, temporary: {Fai& [kehd]. 

phenomena, world of: 54Ft [hokkai]. 

phrase, dead: 464) [shiku]. 

phrase, single: —®J-— [ikkusu]. [su] is a suffix with no special 
meaning. —3& [ichi do], literally, one expression. 

Phrases, Three: =) [sanku]. Three lines that outline the essence of 
Zen. Separately taught by Linji Yixuan, Yantou Quanhuo, Fenyang 
Shanzhao, Yunmen Wenyan, and Taiping Huiqin. 

pick it up or let it go: —44—X [ichinen ippo], literally, taking up one, 
letting go one. 

picture, enter into and see the: A#@ [nyi ga kan]. 

pieces, one hundred broken: & ##4% [hyakuzassui]. 

pilgrimage: «4S [junrei]. 

pillar, bare: #244 [rochi]. An unpainted column in the lecture hall or 
buddha hall. Represents insentient existence. Synonym for walls or 
bricks and pebbles. 

pillar walks in the sky: #84£2523{7 [rochi ho ki gy6]. 

pillow, someone asleep at night searching for the: WARMSFRRF 
[nyo nin yakan haishu mo chinsu]. 

Pindola: #382 [Binzuru]. Formerly a retainer of a king. Left the 
household and attained supernormal powers. At the Buddha’s 
request, he taught in southwestern India, not entering nirvana. 

Foremost of the sixteen arhats—the Buddha’s disciples. 

pishdcha: Skt. 21 [bisasha]. Flesh-eater. A type of demon. 

pit: S& [kakutsu]. Bit [kukk6]. Old pit: 8 [kyika]. Conventional 
views. Old pit of demons: RO [kytka no kikutsu]. Pit of 
confusion. 

pivotal, not: 4\ [fuyo]. Not essential. 

place that contains one’s body: & 43 @itt [ydshin no chi]. 

place, communal: 25} [kugai]. Common area in a monastery where 
things for common use are kept. 

place, this: $8 [shat6]. Just this. 98 [to] is a suffix. 

place, this very: i= [shari], literally, this within. 

plantain: &# [basho]. 

plaque announcing a siitra recitation: #}# [kankin hai]. 

platform, front: B28 [zenka]. A raised, long seating area on the south 
side of the monks’ hall, near the center (where the monastery 
officers sit). 

platform, long sitting: iE2/K [chOrenjo]. A raised seat in the monks’ 
hall on which five to ten monks do zazen side by side. Each 
assigned unit is called a tan. A cabinet is attached to the back of 
each tan for storing bedding and personal items. 

platform, meditation: ##/ [zensho]. A long platform on which 
practitioners sit side by side. 

platforms, sitting: 2K [renjo]. 

play with: #=($) [r6(-su)]. Fool with. 

pluck out: RH [kesshutsu]. 

Plum Blossoms: #§# [Baika]. Fifty-ninth fascicle of this book. 

point: —¥& [ikkyi], literally, one thorough investigation. +87 [shiji], 
literally, point to and show. i&: [dodsho], literally, place of 
expression. 

Make a statement. i@32 [dori]. Expression of understanding; reality; 
truth; teaching. 

point, deepest: XthO =H [tetchi no do’6], literally, inside the hall of 
penetration. 

point, fundamental. See also kan. 

point, get the: {F#$= [satoku ze], literally, attain just this. 

point, grasp the: BX!) [shusoku], literally, get the case (k6an). 

point, have a: —faO#s1S [ichigt no kotoku], literally, a corner (bit) of 
having arrived. 

point, miss this: 34 [yitai], literally, further stagnant. 

point, pivotal: 2% [yoki]. Essential point; essential method. 

point, this very: IE [shoto], literally, correct hit. 

point, turning: See turning point. 

point, understanding this one: is — f# [sha ichige]. 

Point of Zazen, The: S4##j% [Zazen Shin]. Literally, bamboo needle on 

zazen. 

Shin also means admonition. Twenty-eighth fascicle of this book. 

poisons, three: = [sandoku]. Greed, hatred, and delusion. 

pole, top of a one-hundred-foot bamboo: B R°#98 [hyaku shaku kant6]. 

polishing a brick: See brick, polishing a. 

poppy seed: 3+-f [keshi]. 

portrait: JA4#4 [chins6], literally, form of head top. 

pound: See also jin. 

pounding and crackling: 44 [chikujaku katsujaku]. Hit a stone 
and sound the stone. Bounce here and there. 

power: If7J [kuriki], literally, effort and strength. See also ability. 

Power of the Robe: 282eIf)4#® [Kesa Kudoku]. Thirteenth fascicle of this 
book. 

power, miraculous: ##7) [jinriki]. Extraordinary power. 

powers, ten: +7) [jiriki]. Extraordinary wisdom of the Buddha. Power 
to: discern what is reasonable and not; know each cause and effect; 
know various type of samadhis; distinguish abilities of sentient 
beings; know wishes of sentient beings; understand the nature of all 
beings; know the realms to which sentient beings are destined to go; 
recall the past lives of the self and others; know the death and 
rebirth of sentient beings; know the way to be free from desire. 

Prabha: 3¢8A [Komy6], literally, Radiant Light. Shakyamuni Buddha 
made offerings in his former lifetime to many Buddhas with this 
name. 

Prabhdva: Bi ([Itoku], literally, Awesome Virtue. Shakyamuni 
Buddha made offerings in his former lifetime to many Buddhas with 
this name. 

Prabhitaratna Tathagata: See Tathagata, Prabhitaratna. 

practice: 1247 [shugyo], (2 [shu], {7 [gyo]. Continuous daily activity 
centered on zazen. A moment-by-moment process of actualizing 
enlightenment, according to Dogen. {24% [shuren], literally, practice 
and train. {72/{TKe [anri], literally, traveling case / traveling 
sandal. Activity; daily activity; vital process; workings; {73 
[gyog6], literally, taking action. ##i8 [bend6], literally, endeavor of 
the way. 

practice, bodhisattva’s original: A4{7='ziE [hongyo bosatsudd]. 

practice, complete: {7 © [gydsokul], literally, sufficient practice. 

practice, difficult and rigorous: ##{7 7517 [nangy6 kugy6]. 

practice, engage in early morning: §} E8AS [chojo chosan]. 

practice, intimate: 4{J [mitsu gy6]. Also, thorough practice. 

practice, original: A4J [hongyo]. Fundamental practice; practice in 
past life. A{#{7[honshugy6]. Practice that in essence is realization. 

practice, person of leisurely: FRINK;# [kan kufi kan]. 

practice, pure: #247 [sdgo]. 

practice, temper: 4% [remma], literally, temper and polish. 

practice, thorough. See also practice, full. 

practice, thoroughly: 2% [sangaku]. Also, student. BAi(F) [sankyii(- 
su)], investigate thoroughly. {T# [gydjin], literally, exhaust 
practice. 

practice, true: 1E(2{7 [sho shugy6]. 

practice, unchanging: 9894 73.') [ennen nari], literally, as it is. 

practice, wholeness of: f=)1% [ddshu], literally, same practice. Practice 
that includes enlightenment. 

practice, wondrous: ¥){& [mydshu]. Also, inconceivable practice that is 
not outside of realization. 

practice and enlightenment, undividedness of: R235 O(Z3% [fuzenna no 
shusho]. Oneness or wholeness of practice and enlightenment. 

practice and realization: {€% [shusho]. Also, practice and 
enlightenment. 

practice and realization, depend on: {Fx{Z%% [ka shusho]. 

practice and understanding, merge the: {7 #E4HKE [gydge so’d]. 

practice continuously: R&S {FS [tenden kdsa-su], literally, unfolding 
and turning broadly. 

practice coordinator. See also officers, six. 

practice-enlightenment. See also practice within realization. 

practice for sudden or gradual realization: t8;8i{2{7 [tonzen shugyd]. 

practice instruction, evening: ia [bosh6]. Literally, evening request. 
Personal instruction in the abbot’s room. 

practice mutually: fJ24F [do sanki]. 

practice period: &/& [ango], literally, “peaceful dwelling.” A three- 
month period of intensive practice. In DOgen’s time the summer 
practice period ran from the fifteenth day of the fourth month to the 
fifteenth day of the seventh month of the lunar calendar. It actually 
consisted of eighty-five days, but the number is rounded off, as is 
customary in East Asia, so that it is called a ninety-day practice 
period. (The winter practice period, which ran from the fifteenth 
day of the tenth month to the fifteenth day of the first month, was 
also known. But Dogen says, “The tradition of winter practice 
period has not been passed on.”) 

Practice Period: &F& [Ango]. Seventy-ninth fascicle of this book. 

practice period, completion of the: fi#fil| [kaisei], literally, undue 
restriction. 

practice period, summer: 3 fii [ger]. See also practice period. 

practice period draws to a close: f# = [kaige], literally, undue summer. 

practice place: i81% [dojo], literally, place, way, or field of 
enlightenment. 3 i815 [sembutsu ddjo], literally, place of 
practice for selecting buddhas. 

practice-realization: 12% [shush6], originally, practice and realization/ 

enlightenment. See also practice within realization. 

practice within realization: 78F@Ot& [shojo no shi], literally, 
realization on top of practice. Practice that is inseparable from 
enlightenment or realization of buddha nature. A central teaching of 
Dogen. 

practices completely, person who: AtZ{TlkA [dai shugyo tei nin]. Je 
[tei] is a suffix meaning “one who.” 

practices, seven-type: t#@{Ts [shichishu no gydsho]. Taught in 
Lotus Sutra. Receive, chant, memorize, study, and copy Lotus Sutra, 
plus see Shakyamuni Buddha and become Shakyamuni Buddha. 

practicing: {J [egy6], literally, depend on practice. 

practitioner: {=%& [jinsha], literally, virtuous person. {ERX [sakke], 
literally, house (person) who makes or becomes (a_ buddha). 
practitioners, four groups of: PU [shishu]. The Buddha’s four types 
of disciples: monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen. 

prajfia: Skt. Transliteration: A&%4 [hannya]. Translation: 4 [chie]. 
Wisdom to see directly beyond dualistic views; wisdom beyond 
wisdom. 

prajfa paramitd: Skt. Transliteration: #xAjk##S ([hannya 
haramitta], AX 4)R#2 [hannya haramitsu]. Arriving at prajiia; 
manifestation of prajfia; realization of wisdom beyond wisdom. See 
also pdaramitds, six. 

prajnid, base of: {8442 [hannya dai]. 

prajfid, eighteenfold: -/\#{@MAXA [jahachi mai no hannya]. Prajfia of 
eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind; the prajia of sight, sound, 
smell, taste, touch, and objects of mind; also the prajia of the 
corresponding consciousness of eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and 
mind. 

prajfid, right seed of: AX#4@ 1E*# [hannya no shoshu]. 

prajfid, twelvefold: ix4ik#@+T—M [hannya haramitsu jini mail. 
Praja that understands the twelvefold causation. 

Prajfiad Kita Bodhisattva: See Bodhisattva, Prajna Kuta. 

Prajnatara: AX # [Hannyatara]. Ca. fifth-sixth century, India. 
Bodhidharma’s teacher. Originally a Brahman in eastern India; 
taught in southern India. Regarded as the Twenty-seventh Ancestor 
in the Indian Zen tradition. 

pratyeka-buddha: Skt. Transliteration: h#32W1(#% [byakushika butsu]. 
Abbreviated as #32 [byakushi butsu], 32 [shi butsu]. 
Translation: 4%’ [engaku], literally, one who realizes causation. 38 
 [dokkaku], literally, (one who was) awakened alone. Solitary 
awakened person who did not study with an authentic teacher. 
Mahayana word for a sage of earlier-style Buddhism. 

Pratyeka-buddha Vehicle. See also Vehicles, Three. 

praying mantis: 42488 [t6rd]. 

precedent, ancient: cit [sensho]. Example. 

precept: Skt., vinaya. Transliteration: F2fEé [bini]. Translation: ## 
[kairitsu], literally, precepts. #€ [ritsugaku], literally, study 
(practice) of the precepts. 

precept, break the: #kEBFESE [otsu bini zai], literally, crime of 
transgressing vinaya. 

precept, buddha: See buddha precept. 

precept, general: i 7X [tsiikai]. 

Precept School: #&: [Risshii]. One of the Nine Schools of Buddhism in 
China, based on the Mahayana system of precepts. Daoxuan (596- 
667) is regarded as founder. 

precepts: See precepts, ten; unwholesome actions, ten; precepts, come and 
receive the. 

precepts, eight: /\# [hakkai]. Precepts observed by laypeople on six 
particular days of purification in a month: (1) not to kill; (2) not to 
steal; (3) not to misuse sex; (4) not to make false statements; (5) not 
to sell or buy alcohol; (6) not to decorate one’s hair and not to see 
or listen to music performance; (7) not to sleep on a high, wide bed; 
(8) not to eat outside the mealtime. 

precepts, forty-eight minor: PU--/\#€ [shijiihachi kyo]. 

precepts, hold to the: #$#% [jikai]. 

precepts, paramita of. See also paramitas, six. 

precepts, receive the: 2H [jugu]. 

precepts, ten: +#% [jikkai]. Ten pure precepts, ®3#+ 7K [bonjo jikkai]. 
+ [ji ja], literally, ten grave precepts. Guiding admonitions 
observed by Buddhists. The ten Mahayana precepts quoted by 
Dogen’s “Receiving the Precepts” literally read: (1) not to kill; (2) 
not to steal; (3) not to misuse sex; (4) not to make false statements; 
(5) not to sell or buy alcohol; (6) not to discuss the faults of other 
home-leaver bodhisat-tvas; (7) not to praise yourself and insult 
others; (8) not to withhold dharma or treasure [the Buddha’s 
teaching or materials]; (9) not to be angry; (10) not to slander the 
three treasures. These precepts correspond to those in the Indra’s 
Net Sutra. 

prediction: 30%i) [kibetsu]. Of enlightenment. 

prepare: #329" [ryori-su]. 

present in the three realms: > \t~= [konshi sangai]. 

Priest Rock Head: See Shitou Xigian. 

primary beyond-truth: 53— #8 [daiichi mutai], literally, primary no- 
truth. 

primary truth: 53 — #8 [daiichi gitai]. 

Prince Shotoku: #4#®AF [Shotoku Taishi]. 574-622, Japan. Second 
son of Emperor YOmei. As Regent of Emperor Suiko, he established 
a constitution and sent an envoy to China. A practitioner and 

pioneering supporter of Buddhism in Japan. 

principle, clarify the: #3# [kyiri]. Realize the great matter. 

principle, profound: A732 [genri]. AS [genshi]. ;&#!) [hosokul], literally, 
law. 

procedure: {%§l) [gisoku]. Also, rules of practice; occasions. 

procedure, essential: A4#% [hongil]. 

procedure, not following the authentic: #424 [mukeiko], literally, not 
respecting the ancient. 

procession of amassing the assembly: ARR4HiK [daishu sds6]. 

profundity: 31% [dgen], literally, inner subtlety. 

prose: {TJ [jogo], literally, long line. 

protect: 5fi29 [shugo-su]. 

provisional name: K4 [komy0], literally, hollow name. 

Puhua: #{¢, [Fuke]. Ca. ninth century, China. Dharma heir of Panshan 
Baoji, Nanyue Line. Lived in Zhen Region (Hebei). A friend of Linji, 
he was known for eccentric conduct such as making a cartwheel and 
overturning tables at feasts provided by donors. Known as “one who 
has a head but no tail.” The Japanese Fuke School of Zen, which 
incorporates playing shakuhachi flute music with meditation 
practice, is named after Puhua. 

pure action(s): See action(s), pure. 

Pure Land: ##= [jodo]. 1. A pristine world, free from delusion, where 
buddhas and bodhisattvas abide. 2. Paradise in the western 
direction where Amitabha Buddha presides. 

purification, dharma of: #i% [joh6]. 

pushing others: 

Pusya: #67) [Fusha/Hossha]. Shakyamuni Buddha made offerings in 
his former lifetime to many Buddhas with this name. 

Puyuan: See Nanquan Puyuan. 

Qi’an: See Yanguan Qi’an. 

Qianfeng: See Yuezhou Qianfeng. 

Qici: See Budai. 

Qinfeng: See Baizhao Zhiyuan. 

Qingliao: See Changlu Qingliao. 

Qinglin Shiqian: See Dongshan Shiqian. 

Qingyuan: See Fuyan Qingyuan. 

Qingyuan Xingsi: /R{iTH [Seigen Gyodshi]. d. 740, China. Dharma 
heir of Sixth Ancestor Huineng. Abbot of Jingju Monastery, Mount 
Qingyuan, Ji Region (Jiangxi). Students included Shitou Xiqian. 
Regarded as founder of the Qingyuan Line, from which the 
Caodong, Yunmen, and Fayan schools derived. His posthumous 
name is Great Master Hongji, 5A]####Ei [Kosai Zenji]. 

Qingzhu: See Shishuang Qingzhu. 

Quanhuo: See Yantou Quanhuo. 

quarters, individual: [tanry6]. Private quarters in a monastery. 

quarters, other: %& [shory6]. 

question: féjf [monsho], literally, point of inquiry. Question: Fz 
[monjaku], F4j#8 [monto]. 4 [chaku/jaku] and §8 [td] are both 
suffixes. #ti# F [gigi-su], literally, discuss. 

quiescent, heart is: ##h###233 [toku kydkin buji ry6], literally, 
getting the chest and lapels not eventful. 

quietude: tA2A MD [shozen no ki], literally, opportunity of being quiet. 

Radiant Light: 3488 [KOmy6]. Thirty-seventh fascicle of this book. 

radiate light, cause the land to: BA EXX [kokudo hok6]. 

Rahula: #@R# [Ragora]. Son of Siddhartha before he became 
Shakyamuni Buddha. His mother was Princess Yashodhara. When 
the Buddha visited the Shakya Clan, Rahula became a novice. Later 
he became one of the ten great disciples. Known for strict 
observance of the precepts. 

raise it overhead: #i% [taijaku]. & [chaku/jaku] is a suffix. 

raise one’s eyebrows: tale [yobil]. 

Rdjagriha: =k [Osha JO], literally, king’s city of residence. Capital 
city of the ancient Indian kingdom Magadha. Much of Shakyamuni 
Buddha’s teaching activity took place around this city. 

rank, monk’s: WAZ [shukke’i]. 

rank, true person of no: ##{iZi& A [mui shinnin]. 

Ranks, Five: Afii [goi]. Dongshan Liangjie’s theory of understanding 
reality, which consists of two elements: C. zheng IF [sho] and pian, 
{ii [hen]. Zheng, literally, correct or upright, can be translated here 
as oneness, real, general, complete, universal, noumenal, or 

absolute. Pian, literally, eccentric or one-sided, can be interpreted as 
differentiation, apparent, special, partial, particular, phenomenal, or 
relative. Dongshan’s original theory consists of: (1) pian within 
zheng, (2) zheng within pian, (3) zheng alone, (4) pian alone, (5) 
zheng and pian together. There are also later versions of the Five 
Ranks. 

rarity of meeting, extreme: ## {2 ##1& [nanchi nangi]. 

Ratnachiida: &2 [Hokei], literally, Crest (hair). One of the Buddhas 
to whom Shakyamuni Buddha made offerings in his former life. 

reach one thing: —;#if [ippo tsi]. 

read, silently: *% [nen]. 

Reading a Siitra: 4# [Kankin]. Twenty-second fascicle of this book. 

readiness of those who hear it, in response to the: ##4%|CjZT [kien ni zu- 
su]. 

reading, single path of silently: —%@7&/E& [ichijo no nentei]. 

real: 1E [sh6], literally, true; right. B [jitsu], literally, genuine. BB 
[shinjitsu], literally, genuine and true. 

reality: #48 [jiss6], literally, true form; genuine forms. BBA 
[shinjitsu so], literally, true and genuine form. 

reality, enter: A3ZP9 [nyiiri mon]. 

reality, mudrd of: BtHEN [jissdin]. 

reality, open up: 2£18 [hosshin]. 

reality, scale of: B44 [jissory6]. 

reality, three treasures that are the essence of: See treasures that are the 
essence of reality, three. 

reality as it is: {148 [nyoze jisso]. 

reality of all things: #4448 [shoho jisso]. Things as they are, which 
are not outside of ultimate truth. Cf. Lotus Sitra, “Skillful Means”: 
Only a buddha and a buddha can finally master the reality of all 
things. 

Reality of All Things, The: #4482248 [Shoho Jisso]. Fifty-first fascicle of 
this book. 

realization: %& [sho]. Body and mind experience of reality; 
enlightenment. 38% [shojaku], literally, realization completed. {8/ 
&¢1) [go/satori], enlightenment. @ [kaku], #8 [kakuchi], 
awakening, understanding. fbx [genjo], actualization, actualizing 
the fundamental point. # [ki], insightful flashes. HRB [genzen], 
manifesting right in front. See also pdramita. 

realization, before or after: #¥7¢4##4@ [kisen kigo]. Beyond the moment 
of having insight flashes. See also realization. 

realization, enter: Az# [nissho], A [tokunyi]. 

realization, fruit of: 5B [shdjitsu]. 

realization, immediate: Bes [jikishd]. 

realization, in: %_E [shojo], literally, on top of realization. 

realization, intimate: eine [missho]. 

realization, mark of: i ea [shds6]. 

realization, merge with: §£32(9). [shokai(-su)]. 

realization, original: A [honshd]. 

realization, receive: =A [shoshi], literally, inherit realization. 

realization, receive through: %&{% [shdden]. Inherit dharma upon being 
enlightened. 

realization, seal of: Ez [insho]. Seal of enlightenment; certification of 
realization. 

realization, wholeness of: [@J# [ddshd]. One realization, literally, same 
realization. 

realization itself: 5&8!) [shosoku], literally, realizing a case (of kdan). 

realization thought: = [ery6]. 

realization without a teacher: #&64'% [mushi dokugo]. Usually means 
self-proclaimed enlightenment, which is cautioned against in the 
Zen School. In Dogen’s usage, a teacher’s selfless realization and a 
student’s selfless realization completely merge. 

realization without self: #8318 [muji dokugo]. See also realization 
without a teacher. 

realize. See also accept. 

realize and manifest: {2s23%hx [shushd genjo], literally, actualize 
practice and realization. 

realm: FAttH [denchil], literally, rice field land. 

realm, human: Ai& [nind6]. 

realm, person in the ultimate: #A [kukyonin]. 

realm beyond 

realm of beyond merging: 4<[2|& [fuego], literally, not turn each other. 

realms of sentient beings, nine: 7\i& [kud6]. Favorable realms where 
sentient beings abide: human realm, four realms in the form realm, 
and four in the no-form realm. 

realms, all: #52 cleat 

realms, three: = [sangai], roughly paige the entire world of 
phenomena and beyond. (1) Desire realm, &%#% [yokukai], including 
the six paths. (2) Form realm, &F# [shikikai], of those who are free 
from desire. (3) Formless realm, #£f5% [mushikikai], of those who 
have attained the highest worldly mental states through meditative 
exercises. 

realms, visible and invisible: =$% [meiy6]. 

reborn as a wild fox: "@#}3\ [da yakoshin], literally, fall into a wild 
fox body. 

receive: B252(9 ) [bonju(- su)]. Respectfully receive. 

receive, intimately: #32 [mitsuju]. 

receive instructions: #329 [shinsan-su], literally, ask for study (with 
the teacher). 

receive the entire earth: Aih#UX [daichi zenshi]. 

Receiving the Marrow by Bowing: te#7#{$#8 [Raihai Tokuzui]. Ninth 
fascicle of this book. 

Receiving the Precepts: 7% [Jukai]. Ninety-fifth fascicle of this book. 

recent member of the community: 4 [gosho], literally, born later. 

receptive samadhi: See samadhi, receptive. 

recitation hall: B= : [kankindo]. 

recitation of a gatha: 7 ie = [bonnon], literally, Indian sound. 

recognize, fully: $454 [shakunin], literally, recognize mistakenly. See 
also mistake after mistake. 

recognize it even though you are facing it, not: AH7+8i% [taimen fu 
soshiki], literally, to face but not know each other. 

recognize the thief as one’s own child: #a&4ES [ninzoku ishi]. 

Record within the Forests: Linjian-lu, #\fl#x [Rinkan-roku]. Collection 
of Zen Buddhist stories edited by Jiaofan Huihong, also called 
Shimen, of the Linji School, China. Published in 1107. “Forests” 
represent monasteries. 

red, brilliant: 757K [shakushaku], literally, red and red. 

reflect: [&)3¢9 [ek6-su], literally, turn around the light. Reflect: 5&8 
[shoko], literally, illuminate back. @2%¢9 [shokan-su], literally, 
taste and observe. 

Refrain from Unwholesome Action: #@3852/F [Shoaku Makusa]. 
Eleventh fascicle of this book. 

Refrain from unwholesome actions. Do wholesome actions: #32521 RE 
#7 [shoaku makusa, shuzen bugy6]. The Seven Original Buddhas’ 
precepts take this imperative form. According to Dogen’s 
interpretation, in practice within realization it is not possible to be 
engaged in unwholesome actions, and wholesome actions are 
invariably carried out. See also wholesome; unwholesome. 

refresh oneself: #40. [tenjin], literally, lighten the mind. Also, snack. 

refuge, take: #48 [kyOrail], literally, respect and bow. 

Regulations for the Auxiliary Cloud Hall at the Kannondori Koésho Gokoku 
Monastery: He 8A|RSEHSS2 Ez) ([Kannondori Kosho 
Gokoku-ji Ja’undo Shiki]. Fifth fascicle of this book. 

rejoicing, extraordinary oneness of: $i—{&O#K= [tokuchi ichijd no 
kangi]. 

rejoicing, fully: ##2X= [hen kangi]. 

relationships, all: 234% [ban’en], literally, ten thousand conditions. 

relevant, not: 4\FA%$ [fuyotokul], literally, not able to use. 

relics: &#| [shari]. 

remain free of administrative duties: 7 OXF%72 L [chiso no hammu 
nashi], literally, no busy duty of cutting weed. 

Renyong: See Baoning Renyong. 

repent: 2£32 [hotsuro], literally, begin to reveal. 

repentance: {€{#, [shusan], literally, practice repentance. 

repentance, formal: #=#¥{#'$ [raihai zange], literally, bow and repent. 

replace the tail with the head: LASA}&& [itd kambi]. 

replete with: FACS) [juy6-(su)], literally, receive and utilize. Be 
fulfilled, be enriched. Experience receptive samadhi. 

resource: #38§ [chiryaku], literally, wisdom and plan. 

respond: F&/& [kanno]. 

respond, invisibly: = [mydkan]. 

respond, not: ##3#{@+4¢9 [mutai wo nen-zul], literally, take up no 
answer. 

response, mistaken: $4¥4 [shakutai]. 

result: #234 [hOgo], literally, reward of action. Ait [shokan], literally, 
what is experienced. & [sh6], literally, award. 

result received in a lifetime after the next: |IA¥R& [jungoji ju]. 

result received in the next lifetime: |IXR“E [junjishd ju). 

result received in this lifetime: |IA}RJA= [jungenho ju]. 

retired officers: 2)& [gonkyi]. 

retreat: #2 [enshitsu], literally, close the room. 

return to be a sentient being: 2 {Fk [gen sa shujo]. 

return to the source and manifest a buddha body: ({{€4S#£W [jihon 
suijaku]. 

return to the source and origin: izi/RjRA. [gengen hempon]. 

returning once, fruit of: #ib6@ [shiidagon ka]. #iBE@[shiidagon] is a 
transliteration of Skt. sakrid 4gamin, once coming. § [ka] means 
fruit. One who is reborn once to be enlightened. Second of the four 
stages of becoming an arhat. 

reveal: #8 [ro]. 

reveal each other: *4#8 [soken]. 

revered, deeply: KEE ([taison kisei]. Having great value, 
magnificent. The last ideograph, sei, is a suffix with no special 
meaning. 

reward, meritorious: #4#% [fukuho]. 

reward, true: B#k [jippo]. 

reward body: See buddha body. 

rice cake: §# [mochii]. 

rice cake, painted: BE# [gabyo]. 1. Xiangyan said, “A painting of a rice 
cake does not satisfy hunger.” This is usually interpreted as 
“studying words and letters does not help one to realize ultimate 
truth.” 2. Dogen’s interpretation is that words and letters as an 
expression of enlightenment cannot be separated from the ultimate 
truth. Thus, “painted rice cake” means an expression of 
enlightenment. See also fascicle 41, “Painting of a Rice Cake.” 

rice plants, flax, bamboo, or reed, widely spread: #§F*11# [toma chikui]. 
A great number of things. 

rice water: 3 [konzu]. 

rice, husking: 78 [bei haku]. 

rice, satisfied with cooked: # [han soku]. 

ride the buddha hall upside down and move in a circle: 54 Ex] — Tb 
[toki butsuden ta isso]. 

ride the robber’s horse to chase the robber: §&®4E5iK8X [ki zokuba chiku 
zokul]. 

right now: {<> [nikon]. This particular moment, here and now. 

right now, all-inclusively: BASE [gai jisetsu], literally, cover the time 
period. 

right path limb, eightfold: /\1Ei83z [hasshodo shi]. See fascicle, “Thirty- 
seven Wings of Enlightenment.” 

right shoulder uncovered: {fj#24 8 [hendan uken]. 

right to the point: = [ze], literally, this, correct, right. 

Rinzai School: fii#§a% [Rinzai Shi]. Japanese form of Linji School. One 
of the two major schools of Japanese Zen Buddhism. Myoan Eisai is 
regarded as founder. In the eighteenth century this school was 
revitalized by Hakuin, a dharma descendent of Xutang Zhiyu. 

ritual: Skt., karman. Transliteration: #3 [komma]. Manners. Precept 
transmission ceremony. 

Rivers, Four: (U8 [shitoku]. Great rivers of China: the Yangzi, the 
Yellow, the Zhun, and the Ji. 

rivers, four great: JUAjA] [sh daiga]. Mythological rivers in general. 

road, inconceivable: A#s [genro], literally, subtle path. 

robe: *%#% [esan]. E is kashaya, and san is upper robe. Represents an 
entire garment. 

robe, antarvasa: Skt. 2B22% [andabasha]. Inner robe. 

robe, brocade: #a% [kinran’e]. The robe that is said to have been 
handed from Shakyamuni Buddha to Mahakashyapa and from 
Mahakashyapa to Ananda. 

robe, combined: ##%x [jikitotsu], #i [tossu]. One-piece robe. Upper 
robe (jacket) and lower robe (skirt) combined. 

robe, dharma: j&% [hoe]. 

robe, double: ##%%K [jiifuku e]. See also robe, sanghdti. 

robe, great: KX [dai e]. See also robe, sanghati. 

robe, informal: /|\%& [shée], literally, small robe. 

robe, inner: NK [nai e]. See robe, antarvasa. 

robe, lay: §Ak [zokufuku]. 

robe, less formal: FAX [chi e], literally, middle robe. 

robe, outer: E% [joe], literally, high robe. Uttarasangha robe. 

robe, patched. See also kashaya. 

robe, pearl sewn inside the: A story in the Lotus Sitra. A man went to 
see a dear friend, got drunk, and fell asleep. As a gift, a friend 
sewed a priceless jewel inside the man’s robe while he was asleep. 

When the man awoke, he did not notice the pearl, so he never knew 
he had received this gift. 

robe, pure: +#%K [jd e]. New or fresh robe. 

robe, sanghati. (4i032%K [sodngari e], (4iW0AR*K [sdngaji e] Also called 
great robe and double robe. A formal robe for visiting and teaching. 

robe, shoulder: See kashaya. 

robe, single stitch: 334% [tanhd]. 

robe, supreme: —JA%K [itch e], literally, single peak robe. 

robe, teaching of the: *&i& [eho]. 

robe, two-piece: 4##4%#2 [kun henzan]. Kun (skirt) and henzan (upper 
robe) in separate pieces. 

robe, under: F%K [ge ‘e]. Another name for the inner robe. 

robe, uphold the: JA#% [chGddai]. Putting the folded kashdya on one’s 
head before wearing it. Gesture of handling a sacred object. 

robe, upper: #m#Z [hensan], #2 [san]. Jacket, day robe, upper robe. 

robe, uttardsangha: Skt. Wah 42 {2 (pl* [uttarasdgya’e]. See robe, outer. 

robe, work: F74%K [samu e]. 

robe beyond form: ##48%K [mus6 e], literally, a robe of no-form. 

robe of a field of benefaction: #%1% [fukuden ‘e]. 

robe of compassion: 246% [jihi el]. 

robe of discarded cloth: #t#*K [funzo e], literally, robe of excrement- 
cleaning cloth. 

robe of emancipation: f#BLAR [gedappuku]. Robe of liberation. 

robe of patience: 74% [ninniku e]. 

robe of the Tathagata: Y#03K%* [Nyorai e]. 

robes, black and white: #8 [shihaku]. Black robes worn by home 
leavers and white robes worn by lay practitioners. 

rock, dissolve a: }44 [shOseki]. 

rock hanging in emptiness, a piece of: =3—F 4 [ki ri ippen seki]. 

rolling the pearl and turning the jewel: E#23#i2 [gyokuten shukai]. 

Rooster-Foot, Mount: Skt., Kukkutapada. ##2Ll) [Keisoku San]. Located 
in southeast of Gaya (Brahma Gaya), in the country of Magadha, 
ancient India. Known as the place where Mahakashyapa engaged in 
ascetic practice and also passed away. 

root: #£iJR [kongen], literally, root and source. 

root, branch, and beyond: AAA [hommatsu kukyd], literally, root, 
branch, and the ultimate realm. 

root, capacity, awakening, and the noble path: #87)238 [kon riki kaku 
do]. The [fivefold] root, the [fivefold] power, the limbs of 
enlightenment, and the noble path. 

root, unwholesome: E48 [zaikon], literally, root of crime. 

root, wholesome: #48 [zenkon]. 

root or branch: AAR [hommatsu]. 

roots, six sense: See organs, six sense. 

rough, pretty: Af [taisosei]. 4 [sei] is a suffix with no special 
meaning. 

round cushion: #4] [futon]. Also 4454 [zafu]. A cushion for sitting 
zazen. Nowadays in Zen, futon indicates a rectangular sitting mat. 

Ruchi Buddha: See Buddha, Ruchi. 

Ruizhu Shaoli: tm114432 ([Zuichiku Shori]. Ca. eleventh-twelfth 
century, China. Dharma heir of Xingjiao Dan, Linji School. A 
teacher of Dahui Zonggao. 

Rujing: See Tiantong Rujing. 

Rules for Zazen: S44#{(% [Zazen Gi]. Fifty-eighth fascicle of this book. 

Ruman: See Fuguang Ruman. 

run barefoot: rfl [shakkyaku so]. 

ryo: J. See liang. 

Ryokan: #4. Ca. twelfth-thirteenth century, Japan. Also known as, 
E2#8 [Ryoken] according to an early biography. Dogen’s uncle. A 
monk of the Tendai School who practiced in a hermitage on Mount 
Hihei. 

Ryiizen: f###. Ca. twelfth-thirteenth century, Japan. Originally a 
student of Myoan Eisai. Monk who was practicing at Tiantong 
Monastery before and during the time Dodgen practiced there. 
Further biography unknown. 

Sacred Monk: See Monk, Sacred. 

sage: 32 A [seijin], literally, sacred person. 

sage, ancient: 5¢22 [sensho]. 7¢#4 [sentetsu], literally, early wise one. 
$648 [sentoku], literally, early virtuous one. 

sage, constantly being a: #2 [jdsho]. 

sage, emerge as regional: /&@ [djaku], literally, appear in response (to 
the need of people in the region). 

sage, enlightened: 3252022 [shoka no kenshO], literally, wise one 
and sage with fruit of realization. 

sage, great: AEE [daisho]. 

sages, seven or ten: 32+ #2 [shichisho jissho]. Those who are in one 
of the seven stages of practice in early Buddhism; also called tS 
[shichiken]. Or, those in one of the ten stages [jissho]. See also 
bodhisattvas of the ten stages and three classes. 

Saha World: Skt. ##tt+2 [shaba sekai], 2H) [shaba kokudo]. 
The cosmos within the reach of Shakyamuni Buddha’s teaching, 
literally, world of endurance, referring to the hardship of 
inhabitants, which requires the development of patience. Siitras say 
that there are a billion such worlds, each consisting of Mount 
Sumeru and the Four Continents that surround it. 

saindhava: Skt. 462 [sendaba]. Meaning variously, salt, vessel, 
water, and horse. According to the Maha Pari-nirvana Sutra, when a 

king asked his retainers to bring saindhava, a wise retainer 
understood which saindhava the king referred to without receiving 
further explanation. Thus, saindhava indicates direct 
communication. 

salt and vinegar, not short of: 7.24 Ra E888 [fuzd ketsu enso]. 

samadhi: Skt. Transliteration: =f [sammai]. Translation: [jo], 
literally, stability. Concentration; serene, settled, and collected state 
of body and mind in meditation. 

samadhi, dharma-nature: ;&'t4=8* [hossho zammai]. 

samadhi, diamond: € {aE [kongo jo]. 

samadhi, practice of: © [jogaku], literally, study of samadhi. One of 
the three learnings: precepts, samadhi, and prajnia. 

samadhi, receptive: B3¢FA=8K [jijuyt zammail, literally, self receiving 
and utilizing samadhi. The buddha’s realizing and utilizing the joy 
of samadhi. Contrasted with tajuyui zammai— extending samadhi for 
helping other beings. 

samadhi, serene subtle: &i#=K [ansho zammail]. 

samadhi, shitrangama: t8 Bae. [shuryOgon jo]. Taught in Shirangama 
Sutra. A method of meditation for swiftly removing defilement and 
attaining enlightment. 

samadhi, sit in: SAE [zajo]. 

samadhi and pull them out with wisdom, move delusions in: ERBtk 
[jodo chibatsu. ] 

samadhis in formlessness, four: U##f7£ [shimushiki jo]. 

Samantabhadra: #%# [Fugen]. Bodhisattva of awakened practice. An 
image of this bodhisattva, along with that of Mafjushri, often 
accompanies that of Shakamuni Buddha. 

Samyuta Agama Siitras: ##h]3k [ZO Agon Kyd]. Collection of 
miscellaneous and short sitras in early Buddhist tradition. 

sand, count grains of: $%) [sansha]. Fully depend on scriptures. 

sand, offer: According to the King Ashoka Sutra, Buddha and Ananda 
were on the road begging one day when they came upon two young 
boys playing with sand. One of the boys was deeply taken with 
Buddha’s deportment. Urged by a strong wish to offer something, he 
placed a handful of sand—the only thing he had—into the Buddha’s 
begging bowl. The Buddha made the prediction that the boy would 
be born in his next life as King Ashoka and be a great supporter of 
buddha dharma. 

sandals, change: #2 [kan’ai]. 

sandals, straw: 8 [soai]. Represents nonintellectual understanding. 

sandals and socks: #£%#% [aibetsu]. 

sands of the Ganges: See Ganges, sands of the. 

sangha: Skt. {iil [sdgya]. A practitioners’ community. Universal 
community of dharma practitioners. See also treasures, three. 

sangha Gsanika: Skt. {300(if— [sanka sunnai]. Skt. Asanika is a meal. 
The single meal taken once a day by the sangha, or practitioners’ 
community. One of the ascetic practices engaged in by 
Mahakashyapa. 

sangha naishadika: Skt. {8ié7)4{— [sunnai sashaku]. Not to lie down 
day or night, but to practice walking meditation and sleep sitting 
up. One of the twelve ascetic practices engaged in by 
Mahakashyapa. 

Sanghdnandi: (2 (i###2 [Sogyanandai]. A prince of King Ratnavyuha in 
the city of Shravasti, Kingdom of Kaushala. He could speak soon 
after his birth and kept praising the Buddha’s teaching. In his youth, 
he was allowed to leave the household and study with monk 
Dhyanartha while staying in the palace. But he left the palace at 
night and became a wandering monk. He became the Seventeenth 
Ancestor in the Zen tradition. 

Sanping Yizhong: =*# 32% [Sampei Gichii]. 781-872, China. Dharma 
heir of Dadian Baotong, Nanyue Line. Taught at Mount Sanping, 
Zhang Region (Fujian). 

Sansheng Huiran: =22349K [Sansho Enen]. Ca. ninth-tenth century. 
Linji School. After becoming a dharma heir of Linji Yixuan, visited 
and studied with Yangshan, Deshan, and Xuefeng. Taught at 
Sansheng Monastery, Zhen Region (Hebei). Traditionally regarded 
as the compiler of the Record of Linji. On his deathbed, Linji is said 
to have claimed that his teaching would perish with this “blind 
donkey” (Sansheng). 

Sanskrit: $$ [Bon]. 

Sarvarthadarsha: 5—t])## [Ken’issaigi]. A number of Buddhas of this 
name to whom Shakyamuni Buddha made offerings in one of his 
former lives. 

Sarvastivada School: ##8 [ubu]. Abbreviation of #—t)@#8 [Setsu 
Issai Ubu], literally, group of those who insist that all things exist. 
The most influential school in early Buddhism. 

save sentient beings: ¥{£ [gusho]. 

say quickly: i818 [sokud6]. 

say something (about oneself): —®)@iEEXS [ikku wo ddshusu], 
literally, express one phrase. 

scale: & [ryo]. Measurement. See also balancing scale. 

scholars with extensive knowledge: '8i>Oie= [gosha no hengaku], 
literally, study as extensive as the innumerable sands of the Ganges. 

Schools, Five: Aix [Goshi]. AR [goke], literally, five houses. APY 
[gomon], literally, five gates. The major schools of Zen Buddhism 
after the late Tang Dynasty China: Fayan, Guiyang, Caodong, 
Yunmen, and Linji schools. Dogen denies that these schools offer 
separate teachings. 

Schools, Nine: Ji=% [kushii]. A classification of Buddhist schools: (1) 
Kosha [Kusha] School, based on Abhidharma-kosha Treatise by 
Vasubandhu; (2) Satyasiddhi [Jojitsu] School, based on Satyasiddhi 
Treatise by Harivarman; (3) Precept [Ritsu] School; (4) Three 
Treatises [Sanron] School, based on Nagarjuna’s Madadhyamika 
Treatise and Twelve Gate Treatise, as well as Aryadeva’s One Hundred 
Treatises; (5) Tiantai [Tendai] School; (6) Avatamsaka [Kegon] 
School; (7) Dharma-lakshana [Hosso] School; (8) Mantra [Shingon] 
School, and (9) Zen School. 

scriptural school: AR [kyoke]. Zen Buddhist way of naming other 
schools of Buddhism whose teaching is based on specific siitras or 
treatises. Zen Buddhists explain that Zen teaching is based directly 
on Shakyamuni Buddha’s enlightenment without depending upon 
any particular siitras. This theory is described as “transmission 
outside of scriptures.” 

scriptural school, view of: #82. fi# [chokyo no gel. 

scripture-burning platform: 3423 [hunkyo dai]. 

scriptures, net of: #4 [kyom6]. 

scriptures, teachings of Buddhist: A# [kyojaku], literally, teaching text. 

scriptures, transmission outside of: See transmission outside of scriptures. 

scroll, yellow: #&%& [Okan]. 

seal of approval: E\=J [inka]. 

seal of realization: See realization, seal of. 

seal, buddha: See buddha seal. 

seal, intimate: #4E]] [mitsuin]. Person-to-person confirmation of 
enlightenment. 

seal, mind: Ef] [shin’in]. Confirmation of the merging of the minds of 
teacher and disciple. 

seamless tower: A standing-egg-shaped one-piece tombstone for home 
leavers. 

Seas, Eight: /\$ [hakkai]. See also Continents, Four. 

Seas, Four: YU7# [shikai]. Seas in all quarters, representing the world. 

seasonal greetings: 2S [kanken], literally, cold or warm. 

seat, ancestral: 487% [soseki]. 

seat, diamond: {fk [kongoza]. The name for the seat beneath the 
bodhi tree where Shakyamuni Buddha was sitting when he attained 
enlightenment. 

seat, teaching: ff HA [shishi za], literally, lion seat. 

secluded area: #452 [kekkail], literally, bound realm. 

Second Guishan: See Changqing Da’an. 

second next lifetime: 33 =F [daisan sho], literally, the third birth. 

second person: 3 — A [daini nin]. 

secondary: 54 — [daini]. 

thease — 

secondary, fall into the: $%55—5A [raku daini to]. 

secretary of the monastery: 3c [shoki]. 

see: 51 S[miru]. Direct experience without separation between subject 
and object. 

see beyond seeing: E74. [cho fuken], literally, see not see. 

see buddha: [kembutsu]. Realize buddha beyond the dualism of 
seeing and seen, subject and object. 

see colors with entire ear: ii 54 [manni kenshiki]. 

see spring in a branch of plum blossoms: #844 [ken bai sho shun]. 

see through: Af [kentokul]. 

see through immediately: BAR [kya chakugan]. 

seed, bloom, and fall: £74 Ak [shu juku datsu]. 

seed, wholesome: #2 [zenshu]. 

Seeing Others’ Minds: {titi [Tashin Tsti]. Eightieth fascicle of this 
book. See also miraculous powers, six. 

Seeing the Buddha: 54 [Kembutsu]. Sixty-first fascicle of this book. 

seeing, way of: 54 Bz [genjo], literally, point of seeing. 

seek eloquence beyond words: 5 49}3K15 [gonge guk6]. 

seek, nothing to: #5 [mushomyaku], literally, no place to seek. 

self: [jiko] Ht. 1. Ego as an independent and permanent entity. # 
[ga]. Buddhism denies the existence of self in this sense. See also 
skandhas, five. 2. A person. AX [jike], literally, one’s house. 3. A 
person who has realized selflessness that is not separate from the 
universe. True self. See also self, original. 

self, chase things and make them into the: j\®#9FsC, [chikumotsu iko]. 

self, heavenly: OX [jikoten], literally, self heaven. Highest self. 

self, original: 43}. [hombun nin], literally, person of original share. 
1. Same as original face. 2. AF [honga], a non-Buddhist idea of 
permanent, universal self. 

self, radiant light of the: RU3¢HA [jiko komy6]. 

self, scheming: 3t#& [keiga]. 

self, view of a permanent: i [joken]. 

self, without a permanent and independent: ###% [muga]. 

self, without an abiding: Die H 5 & S [ware ni ara zaru]. 

self and make it into things, chase the: \A GES [chikuko imotsu]. 

self and other: Ei {th [jita]. 

self-awakening: 8 & [jikaku]. Also, self awareness. 

self-control: Aisa [jichd]. 

self-deception: AZhGm [jinetsuman]. 

self-direction: AA [jihd]. All ten directions experienced within the 
self, at this moment. 

self existence: #{# [gau]. Existence of a permanent “self” according to 
a non-Buddhist view. 

self-interest: G%l) [kori]. 

Self-Realization Samadhi: Bi#=— ([JishO Zammai]. Seventy-fifth 

fascicle of this book. 

Sengcan: See Jianzhi Sengcan. 

Sengmi: See Shenshan Sengmi. 

senior disciple: E [josoku], literally, high feet. 

senior monk: A [guju], literally, equipped with long life. 

senior nun: FE 6M [nishi], literally, nun teacher. 

senior student: 2)#8 [gonkyi zenshi]. One who has served as a 
monastery officer; retired officer. 

seniority in ordination date: #XYAK [kai ro]. 

sense organs: s&4& [shokon], literally, various roots. See also organs, six 
sense. 

senses, six: 7\t8 [rokujo]. 

sentient: {8 [jo]. 

sentient beings: See beings, sentient. 

sentient beings that are numberless, vow to save: R+8}2 2RAE [shujo 
muuhen seigan do]. 

separate, not: #2} [mtai], literally, not facing. 

serene: #XAP [jakujo]. 

serenely composed: &#% [annon]. 

serve: £)'8(9) [gonkaku(-su)], literally, work respectfully. Also, 
endeavor. 

set aside: WNT [hdsha-su], literally, let go and throw away. 

set up: ft#iX(F) [sesetsu(-su)]. Structure; present; guide; explain. 

settle the great matter of the way: Ai@@=iRIZT [daidd wo ketsujaku- 
su], literally, make a selection and decision on the great way. 

settling point: }AR [chish6], literally, sign of (peaceful) governing. 

Seven Original Buddhas: See Buddhas, Seven Original. 

seven paths vertical and eight paths horizontal: -C#t/\*8 [shichiji 
hachio]. Free in countless ways. 

shaku: J. RR. Measuring unit. Ten sun. 

Shakya Clan: ## [Shaku]. Based in the ancient kingdom of Kapilavastu. 
Shakyamuni Buddha, who came from this clan, encouraged many of 
its members to practice dharma. 

Shakya Clan, one thousand members of the: ## [sen Shaku]. 

Shakya Clan, twenty thousand members of the: — 83% [niman Shaku]. 

Shakyamuni Buddha: See Buddha, Shdkyamuni. shamatha and 
vipashyanad: Skt. IF## [shikan]. Literally, stopping (shi) and 
observing (kan). The technique of sitting meditation, consisting of 
calming the mind (shamatha) and analytical introspection or insight 
(vipashyana). Not to be confused with shikan taza (see just sit). 

Shdnavasin: FA ARFI(Z [Shonawashu]. Monk from Mathura, central 
northern India. Received dharma from Ananda. Third Indian 
Ancestor of the Zen tradition. 

Shanhui: See Jiashan Shanhui. 

Shanta: =#X [Zenjaku], literally, Wholesome Serenity. Shakyamuni 
Buddha made offerings in his former lifetime to sixty-two Buddhas 
with this name. 

Shanzhao: See Fenyang Shanzhao. 

Shaoli: See Ruizhu Shaoli. 

Shaolin Temple: Situated on Mount Song (Henan), China, where 
Bodhidharma sat facing the wall for nine years. 

Shariputra: Skt., literally, heron child, child of Shari (his mother’s 
name); sometimes interpreted as relic child. Transliteration: &¥l # 
[Sharihotsu]. Translation: # [Shiji], literally, heron child; Bf 
[Shinshi], literally, body (relic) child. Combination of transliteration 
and translation: #4) [Sharishi]. Regarded as the best listener 
among disciples of the Buddha. Many sutras take the form of the 
Buddha delivering discourses to him; and Devadatta; addressed by 
Buddha; practice of; wisdom of; words of. 

shashu: J. =. A mindful way of holding hands on the chest. One 
hand covers the other, inner hand closed in a fist. In traditional 
Chinese way, the left hand covers the right fist. The current Soto 
way is the right hand over the left. This hand position is used in 
walking or standing when one’s hands are not in gassho. 

Shenguang. See also Dazu Huike. 

Shenshan Sengmi: ##L{#2% [Shinzan Somitsu]. Ca. eighth—ninth 
century, China. Dharma heir of Yunyan Tansheng, Qingyuan Line. 
Traveled for twenty years with his dharma junior brother Dongshan 
Liangjie. A number of their dialogues have beeen recorded. 
Dongshan’s students respectfully called him Dharma Uncle Mi (Mi 
Shibo). 

Shenxiu: See Yuquan Shenxiu. 

Shenying: See Dingshan Shenying. 

Shexian Guixing: 948% [Sekken Kisei]. Ca. tenth century, China. 
Dharma heir of Shoushan Xingnian, Linji School. Taught at 
Guangjiao Monastery, She Prefecture, Ru Region (Henan). He 
traveled widely. His teaching style was confrontational, and some of 
the koans mention his throwing or breaking things. 

Shibei: See Xuansha Shibei. 

shielded. 3& [sha]. Entirely covered. £4] [sokukyaku], literally, 
blocked. & [kyaku] is a suffix indicating the completion of action. 

Shigong Huizang: @ Ai, [Shakkyo Ezo]. Ca. eighth century, China. 
Dharma heir of Mazu Daoyi, Nanyue Line. Previously a hunter, he 
arrived at Mazu’s while chasing a deer. Taught at Mount Shigong, 
Fu Region (Jiangxi). 

shikan taza: See just sit. 

Shimen Huiche: P9233‘ [Sekimon Etetsu]. Ca. tenth—eleventh 
century, China. Dharma heir of Liangshan Yuanguan, Caodong 

School. 

Shingon School: See Mantra School. 

Shigian: See Dongshan Shiqian. 

Shishuang Qingzhu: #8 a4 [Sekiso Keisho]. 807-888, China. Dharma 
heir of Daowu Yuanzhi, Qingyuan Line. Taught at Mount Shishuang, 
Tan Region (Hunan), for twenty years. He and his students sat like 
decayed trees without lying down. As a result, they were called the 
“Dead Stump Assembly.” His posthumous name is Great Master 
Puhui, Ab [Fue Daishi]. 

Shita, Mount: #€Bél [Shida San]. Mountain in the mythological 
country of Vimana. 

Shitou Xigian: G387%6i@ [Sekito Kisen]. 700-790, China. Ordained by 
Sixth Ancestor Huineng, after whose death he studied with 
Qingyuan Xingsi and became his dharma heir. As he did zazen 
continually in a hut built on a rock at Nan Monastery (also called 
Nanyue), Mount Heng (Hunan), he was called Priest Rock Head 
(Shitou). Author of poems “Merging of One and Many” and “Song of 
the Grass Hut.” His posthumous name is Great Master Wuji #i§X~ 
Ei [Musai Daishi]. 

Shiva: Skt. BfEX [Jizai Ten], literally, Deva of Freedom—a Buddhist 
epithet of Shiva of Brahmanism: Ishvara, the Lord of the Universe. 
Shizi: PF. A book written by Shijiao of the Warring Period [503-222 

B.C.E.], China. It has survived in fragments. 

sho: J. #t. Measuring unit. Approximately 1.8 liters. 

shore, arrive at the other: (RF2!| [higan to]. See pdramitd. 

Shouchu: See Dongshan Shouchu. 

Shouduan: See Haihui Shouduan. 

shoulder to shoulder, put: 3/39 [seiken-su]. 

shoulders, cover both: iPS [tsi ryOken ta]. A way to wear a 
kashaya. 

Shoushan Xingnian: Wz [Shuzan Shonen]. 926-993, China. 
Dharma heir of Fengxue Yanzhao, Linji School. Founded a 
monastery at Mount Shou, Ru Region (Henan). 

Shouxun: See Heshan Shouxun. 

Shouzhuo: See Changling Shouzhuo. 

shramana: Skt. %P4 [shamon]. A wanderer or a monk. 

shramanas, four fruits of. See also fruits, four. shrdvaka: Skt. #fl 
[shomon], literally, a listener; a disciple of the Buddha’s whose goal 
is arhatship. Mahayana word for a sage of “Hinayana” Buddhism. 

Shravaka Vehicle. See also Vehicles, Three. 

Shravasti. See also Kaushala. 

Shrenika: 5¢fE [Senni]. A Brahman scholar described in the Maha Pari- 
nirvana Sutra who asserted permanency of soul but was argued 
down by Shakyamuni Buddha. 

Shrimala Devi Sitra: Skt. f§=4% [Shoman Gyo]. Mahayana sitra 
describing the dedication of Queen Shrimala. Expounds the teaching 
of One Vehicle and is also an early source for teaching about 
tathagata garbha [literally, buddha womb, matrix, seed or essence], 
related to teaching of buddha nature. 

shrine. See also chaitya. 

Shrivaddhi: #at# [Fukuzo], literally, Happiness Increase. Wealthy man 
who lived in the city of Rajagriha, Magadha. Ordained at age one 
hundred twenty by Maudgalyayana with permission of the Buddha, 
who was at Kalandaka Bamboo Grove, north of Rajagriha. After 
ordination, he extensively studied dharma. 

Shuangfeng: See Dayi Daoxin. 

Shuklayah: # [Senbyaku], literally, Pure White. Woman from 
Kapilavastu who wanted to be ordained by the Buddha. When the 
Buddha said, “Come, Nun,” her mundane clothes turned into a 
kashaya. 

Shitrangama Sitra: Hts BRE [Shuryogon Kyo], tsBxee [Rydgon Kyo]. 
Mahayana scripture explaining the meaning of shirangama samadhi, 
a valiant state of meditation. 

shut one out with silence: #${2@j& [bondan no ho]. Skt. brahman 
danda. Transliteration: #8 [bondan]. Refers to the practice in 
which members of the sangha do not speak to a fellow member who 
has committed wrongdoing. This practice—j& [ho]—of punishment 
is defined by a precept. 

Siddhartha. See also Buddha, Shakyamuni. 

silence, noble: 222% [shomoku]. 

silent, be: (KF [kyii-su]. Literally, come to rest. 

silk cloth, fine: #8#K [fufukusa su]. 

Simhabhikshu: ffi=— [Shishi], literally, Lion Monk. Twenty-fourth 
Ancester of the Zen tradition in India. Taught in Kashmira, 
northwestern kingdom of India, but was killed by a king who 
persecuted buddha dharma. 

simultaneously attain the way: See way, attain the. 

single great matter: See matter, single essential. 

sit at ease: #e44'S [enza-su], literally, sit like a swallow. 

sit facing the wall: ®(H#]44 [hekimen taza]. M12 [mempekil], literally, 
facing the wall. A common way to sit in zazen, individually or in 
community. 

sit in samadhi: See samadhi, sit in. 

sit, just: See just sit. 

sit solidly: JLJL [gotsugotsu]. Solid; steadfast. JL44 [gotsuza], sitting 
like a rock. 

sit through: AERC) [zadan(-su)]. Cut through by sitting. Adm 
[zasatsu], literally, sit and kill. 

sit through the skin you were born with: S64R3#4 & [zaha josh6 hi]. 

sit upright: Vm [tanza]. 

sitting, endeavor in: ¥J44INX [taza kufi]. 

sitting, steadfast. See also sit solidly. 

sitting form: S4#8 [zasd]. 

sitting platform, long: See platform, long sitting. 

situation: #¥4% [kien], literally, capacity and conditions. 

Six Excellent Places: 7<7*isitH [Roku Shushdchi]. A garden at the 
Guangli Monastery, Mount Ayuwan (Zhejiang). 

six paramitas: See pdramitas, six. 

six paths: See paths, six. 

six sense organs: See organs, six sense. 

six sense roots: See organs, six sense. 

six senses: See organs, six sense. 

Sixin Wuxin: FE10'|8#R [Shishin Goshin]. 1043-1114, China. Dharma 
heir of Haihui Shouduan, Linji School. Taught at Mount Huanglong 
(Jiangxi). Legend says he was born with purple skin on his 
shoulders and right side, as if he was wearing a monk’s robe. 
Awakened upon hearing a thunderclap while on pilgrimage. He 
once shouted at a monk who was talking a lot, “Stop! Stop! Can you 
feed people by talking about food?” 

Sixth Ancestor: See Dajian Huineng. 

Sixth Ancestor’s Platform Sutra: 7\*838#% [Rokuso Danky6]. Collection 
of Chinese Six Ancestor Huineng’s words. Some parts were added by 
later writers. Dogen regards the entire text as apocryphal. 

skandha, discernment: i#3& [shiki shu], literally, discernment assembly. 
See also skandhas, five. 

skandha, feeling: 4832 [sdshu], literally, feeling assembly. See also 
skandhas, five. 

skandha, form: 3% [shiki shu], literally, form or matter assembly. See 
also skandhas, five. 

skandhas, eighty thousand: /\ 4a [hachiman on]. /\@i## [hachiman 
ho’on]. A number of dharma teachings. 

skandhas, five: Skt. #%/ Hf2 [go’on]. HX [goshul], literally, five 
types of aggregate or assembly. Five streams of body and mind: (1) 
form (matter), & [shiki]. (2) feeling, & [ju], literally, receiving. (3) 
perception, #8 [s6], literally, visioning. (4) inclination or impulse, 
{7 [gyo], literally, go or act. Voluntary and involuntary mental 
facility that forms action. Sometimes translated as mental 
formation. (5) discernment, 8 [shiki], literally, consciousness. 
Facility to discriminate. With the understanding of five skandhas, 
what is commonly seen as a self is explained as a continuous 
interaction of these elements, not a fixed and independent entity. 

skandhas, realm of: #&#% [onkai]. 

skillful means: Skt., upaya.77{@ [hoben]. Expedient method to remove 
deluded people’s doubts and lead them to realize true dharma. 
Expedient phrase. 

skillful means, gate of: 73{%P4 [hoben mon]. 

skin bag: BX [hitai]. R&F [hitaisu]; $8 [taihi]. Human being 
described as a collection of bones enclosed in a bag of skin. Human 
or animal. 

skin bag, stinky: SZS& [shihitai]. 

skin, flesh, bones, and marrow: RWB He [hiniku kotsuzui]. Each 
represents the essence of teaching. Originally, Bodhidharma’s words 
of confirming his four disciples. 

skin, flesh, bones, and marrow, you have attained my: ‘RLBBRAB BE 
[nyo toku go hi ni kotsu zui]. Bodhidharma’s words to each of his 
four students are combined in this way. 

skull: #32 [dokuro]. Sitting in stillness. 

skull covers the entire field: #3 82i1@2} [dokuro hen’ya]. 

sky, boundless: }2X [manten]. 

sky, entire: ‘f§X [miten]. 

slightest hint: 274ZJk [gokotsu no cho]. 

Small Vehicles: See Vehicles, Three. 

smash: #]K(F) [tashitsu(-su)]. 

smash sound and form: 2&@t]X [shoshiki wo tashitsu-su]. 

smile. See also treasury of the true dharma eye. 

smile, breaking into a: {REARS [hagan mishO]. See also treasury of the 
true dharma eye. 

snap the sleeves and walk away: t#4H{#{T [hosshii benko]. A gesture 
usually made before an emphatic departure. In Dogen’s usage, 
activity that is free and leaves no traces. 

snow blossom: #32 [sekka]. 

Snow Mountains: =) [Sessen]. Himalaya Mountains, where 
Shakyamuni Buddha practiced in a former life according to Maha 
Prajna Paramita Sutra. 

Snow Palace: 3 [Setsu Gi]. Same as Snow Mountains. 

soapberry pit: A*#S8F [mokukan su]. 

softening the light and emerging as regional sages: #03¢/)EE [wako dojin]. 
Refers to a Buddha not fully manifesting the light of wisdom, 
becoming close to sentient beings, and appearing as a local deity. 

solitary practice: Skt., aranya. Transliteration: ff ([arannyal, 
literally, wilderness. 

somersaults, turning: #4JT+ [honkinto]. Also, turn cartwheels. 

Song: # [S6]. Song Dynasty, 960-1279. Great Song China, AH 
[Dai Sokoku]. Also means China. 

sorcerer: {il|A. [sennin]. ##(L| [shinsen], literally, divine sorcerer. 

S6t6 School: Bia [SOtd Shi]. Japanese form of Chinese Caodong 

School. One of the two major schools of Zen Buddhism in Japan. 
Dogen is regarded as its founder. 

soul: Skt., atman =f [reichi]. Everlasting identity or consciousness 
throughout a series of transmigrations. Dogen denies existence of 
such a permanent self. 

sounding block: ###€ [kentsui]. 

sounds, different: #& [ion]. 

source beyond words, directly clarify the: B24 B49#As [jikishu shige 
myoshi]. 

source, original: Att [honji]. 

source, return to the: Bem [kigen]. Bie [jikki], literally, true return. 

south of Xiang, north of Tan: 4472 F4=Z46 [sho no nan tan no hoku]. 
Xiang Region is in the south of Tan Region near Changsha (Hunan). 
This phrase means everywhere. 

Southern Continent. See also Continents, Four. 

space: f2 [kokii]. Open sky; boundless realm. 

Space: fz23 [Koki]. Seventy-seventh fascicle of this book. 

space, play with: #FkZ2 [ro koki]. 

space is one piece but is divided with a touch: H2—it#fsm275 [koki 
ikkai soku ni zenna]. 

space throughout the ten directions: T7i kz [jippd koki]. 

sparks of a gimlet: $8 [sanka]. 

sparrow, sick: fA [bydjaku]. 

speaking about it won’t hit the mark: HiflA— ENA [setsuji ichimotsu 
soku fuchi]. 

Speaking of Mind, Speaking of Essence: titi [Sesshin Sessh6]. 
Forty-ninth fascicle of this book. 

specks of gold in human eyes: €/ [kinsetsu]. 

speech: sm [gotan], literally, edge of words. 

speech, noble: B23} [shdsetsu]. 

speechless: Wii; [akan], literally, one who is unable to speak. 

spirit: 40% [zeikon]. 4# [jin]. 

spirit, corpse with no: #2 [mukon shisu]. 

spirit, full activity of playing with the: ##¥§@RO AR [rd zeikon no 
kakkei]. 

spirit, playing with the: ##¥42% [rd zeikon]. Twiddling with spirit. 

spirit being: ##i8 [shindod]. ##4% [jimmotsu]. ## [jin]. Deva, fighting 
spirit, or demons. 

spirit’s hairy head: ##580427E [jinzu no him]. 

spirits, fighting. See also paths, six. 

splattered by mud and soaked in water: Ajf—eA7K [nyiidei nyisui]. 
Identification with sentient beings in guiding them. 

splendor: 44% [shogon]. Adornment. 

spoken, what cannot be: sit7#$Je [setsu fu toku tei]. J& [tei] is a suffix 

meaning “that which is.” 

spread the bowing cloth twice and make three bows: PARR=F* [rydten 
sampai]. The way a monastic trainee expresses respect to the abbot: 
spreads the bowing cloth fully on the floor and makes three full 
bows, stands up and folds the bowing cloth, spreads it threefold on 
the floor and makes three full bows, stands up and folds it, then 
makes three semiformal bows. Customarily, at the beginning, the 
abbot gestures to simplify the procedure so that the trainee skips the 
first two sets of three full bows, but still spreads the bowing cloth 
twice. 

spread the teaching: 54;% [guh6]. 

spread widely: 54i38(F) [guzii(-su)]. Prevail everywhere. 

spring: & [haru]. Often meaning total experience of the world. 

Spring and Autumn: # xk [Shunji]. Sixty-sixth fascicle of this book. 

spring, god of: &# [Tokun], literally, lord of east. 

sprout: AF [saisho-su]. 

squeeze out: AX S [koshutsu-su]. 

staff: £4 [shujo]. A long walking stick carried by a traveling monk, 
or used by a Zen master when lecturing or encouraging students. 
Thus, it represents a person who practices or teaches. 

staff, arched bamboo: J£ [shippei]. A ceremonial staff used by a Zen 
teacher. 

staff, iron: $iFE*X [tetsu shujo]. 

stage, ultimate: {iz [kai], literally, stage of fruit. 

stages, ten: +t [jutchi]. See also bodhisattvas of the ten stages and three 
classes. 

stained: # [sen]. Separated by dualistic conception. 

stake: 7AAHK [mokketsu], literally, wooden stick. 

stake, withered: *4#& [kosh6]. 

stand alone: 325 [dokuho], literally, walk alone. 

stand like a wall: 2&9 [hikiryi-su]. 

stand on one’s toes: #472 [gydsoku]. 

standard: ##%6 [kiku], literally, rule, custom. #/§ ([rydkyoku], 
literally, measure and boundary. Hl## [fuki], literally, style and 
rule. 

standing bow: See bow, standing. 

statement: 438 [watd]. Outstanding statement; words. §8 [td] is a 
suffix meaning “that which is (spoken).” 

statement, confused: #Aait®liB [usetsu rondo], literally, barbarians’ 
speech and confused words. 

statement, false: ffi [kosetsu]. Fiction. 

statement is just right: {272 [do ze]. 

statement that kills doubt: #€3%45A [gisatsu watd]. 

status: t8{iZ [chi’i]. 

steadfast sitting. See also sit solidly. steadfastness: JL#B [gotsuji]. 

stick, See also staff. 

stick and shout: #1 [bo katsu]. 

stick swallowing both people, a single: —{##=4L MHA [ichijd shujd don 
ryonin]. 

still and serene: 78i# [chOtan]. 

still, remain: t4## [tenjo], literally, peaceful and quiet. 

stone or tile: &R5h [rokusen]. 

stone woman gives birth to a child at night: G&@+5 [sekinyo ya 
shojil. 

stoppings, four right: JUIFEf [shishodan]. Not arousing an 
unwholesome action that has not arisen, stopping an unwholesome 
action that has arisen, arousing a wholesome action that has not 
arisen, and allowing a wholesome action that has arisen to increase. 
Part of the thirty-seven wings of enlightenment. 

storm, vairambhaka: Fil [birampt]. Ei [biran] is transliteration 
of Skt. vairambhaka. Horrendous storm that blows at the beginning 
and the end of an eon. 

story for studying: See causes and conditions. 

story, illogical: #3224 [murie wal]. 

straight ahead: ## [makujiki]. 

straight ahead, go: 53 (03K [hekimen rai]. 

straight on: B® [jikishu]. 

straightforward: IE [shojiki]. Direct. 

straightforward by nature: 4B [jitsujiki]. 

straightforward expression: 7A A [sekishin hempen], literally, bits 
and pieces of red heart. 

stream, authentic: IEMIk [shomyaku], literally, authentic vein. 

stream, enter the: Skt., srota 4panna. Transliteration: 2Af¢;}8 [shudaon]. 
Translation: 747% [yoru], literally, entering the stream (of buddha 
dharma). First of the four stages for becoming an arhat. See also 
fruits, four. 

stream, homogenous: in [toru]. Cause and effect are similar. 

stream enterer. See also fruits, four. 

strict observance: fsxi# [gonjo], literally, solemnly pure. 

strike a person: ¥] 4 [tanin]. 

stringed instrument in tune, keep a: #414#% [chogen]. 

strings attached, soar with no: © F#4#K% [sokka mushi ko]. 

strive whole-heartedly: {73=44— [gy6go jun’itsu], literally, practice 
single and pure. 

stroke the air: LAF iR Ez [i shu satsu koki]. 

student, a coarse Zen: *#24#4]] [zusan zenna]. 

student, thorough: 45% [shiky6], literally, disciple is strong. 

=> 

student, true: '&i7i [shinrul], literally, true stream. 

student, Zen: ##40- [zenna su]. 

students, good: s&*##1®% [shozentoku]. Addressing Zen students. 

study, begin to: &# [sisan], literally, question and study. For Dégen, 
study often means practice. 

study, deep: 7} [gengaku]. 

study, definitive: STKRNSBR [sadama reru sankyi], literally, 
defined thorough study. 

study, further: [a] 22 [shuko no sangakul], literally, study going 
toward. 

study, going beyond: #2 [zetsugaku], literally, cut off study. 

study all the way: See examine. 

study and investigate thoroughly: Fi [kyiitetsu]. 

study shoulder to shoulder: [=)227/& [dosan seiken]. 

study simultaneously and all-inclusively: [h| 41% [ddsan henzan]. 

study together: fa]J(9) [ddsan(-su)], literally, same going. One 
practice; those who study together; investigate together; practice 
mutually; go together; arise simultaneously. 

stupa: Skt. Transliteration: {## [toba]. 382 [toba]. thipa (in Pali). 
Shrine or tower for relics. 

stupa principle: 83 [to ji]. 

stipa shrine: t8)8A [to byo]. 

Stipas, Eight: See Face-to-Face Transmission. 

styles, one thousand: -F fi [sembon], literally, one thousand things. 

Su Dongpo: #&54& [So Toba]. 1036-1101, China. Shi & of the Su #& 
family. Initiatory name: Zidanf§& [Shisen]. Renowned poet of Song 
Dynasty, also a high government offical. Lay student of Zhaojiao 
Changzong. Later studied with Foyin Liaoyuan. 

Subhadra: 7A%&bE# [Shubatsudara]. The last student of the Buddha. 
As a one-hundred-twenty-year-old Brahman, he went to meet the 
Buddha, heard his last dharma talk, and attained arhathood. 

Subhiti: Skt. Transliteration: 74##z [Shubodai]. Translation: R= 
i [Guju Zengen], literally, Holding Long Life (elder), Actualizing 
Wholesomeness. Born in Shravasti in the kingdom of Kaushala. 
Heard the Buddha’s discourse and became a monk when Jeta Grove 
opened. Regarded as the one who best understood emptiness among 
the Buddha’s disciples. 

subtle: 4 [bi], literally, minute. 

subtle and pivotal: *## [hiyd]. 

successive: #4 [shokeil]. 

suchness, form as: 7248 [zes6]. 

suchness, one: &01— [nyoichi]. 

suddenly: 749K [kotsunen]. 

suffering: [ku], literally, bitterness. 

— 

suffering, truth of: Hai [kutai]. The first of the four noble truths. 

suffering, truth of the causes of: $2: [shitai]. The second of the four 
noble truths. 

suffering, truth of the cessation of: isi [metsutai]. The third of the four 
noble truths. 

sufferings, eight: /\& [hakku]. Four sufferings (birth, old age, sickness, 
and death) plus: parting with loved ones, encountering resented and 
hated ones, not getting what is wanted, and caused by the five 
skandhas. 

Sui: f§ [Zui]. Chinese dynasty. 

Sumeru: Skt. Transliterations: 74% [Shumi], [8 [Meiro]. According 
to Indian mythology there are nine mountains and eight oceans in 
the world around Four Continents, with Mount Sumeru at the 
center. 

Sumeru, Great: KZA} [dai Shumi]. See Sumeru. 

Sumeru, Small: /|\ZA 5} [sho Shumi]. See Sumeru. 

summer practice period, ninety-day: JL [kyigel, literally, nine (ninety- 
day) summer. 

summer retreat: B= [byakuge], literally, summer with announcement. 
Summer practice period is called in this way as daily cautions to 
participants are given. 

sun: J. ‘f. Measuring unit. Approximately 3 cm (1.18 inches). 
Corresponds to Chinese cun, which was 3.11 cm in Tang Dynasty 
and 3.072 cm in Song Dynasty. 

sun face: Hi [nichimen]. 

sun face and moon face: AMA [nichimen gachimen]. See Buddha, 
Sun-Face. 

Sun Zhongjin: ##8Ai [Son Chdshin]. Ca. eighth century, China. A 
courtier for Emperor Su of Tang Dynasty. Sent to invite Huizhong to 
be the emperor’s teacher. 

sun, moon, and stars: H Afr [nichigetsu seishin]. 

Sunakshatra: ## [Zensho]. Prince of Shakya Clan. Although he 
became a monk under Shakyamuni Buddha, he was not obedient 
and always had wrong schemes. He returned to laity and spoke ill of 
the Buddha. 

Sun-Face Buddha: See Buddha, Sun-Face. 

supernormal powers, practitioners of: ##i824{4LOQ12AS [jinzii henge no 
yakara], literally, those of miracles, transforming (things magically). 

supporter: 298 [danna]. Lay supporter of a practicing community. Cf., 
Skt. dana, literally, giving. 

surging opportunity, time of: See opportunity, time of surging. 

surpass ancestor: See go beyond ancestor. 

surrender and reject: {£3 [nin’i]. 

surrender, totally: (£{£ [ninnin]. —{¥ [ichinin]. 

Stryarashmi: HBA [Nichimy6], literally, Sun Bright. Fifteen Buddhas of 

this name to whom Shakyamuni Buddha made offerings in his 
former life. 

Sushan Guangren: #RL3¢{= [Sozan KOnin]. Also, Sushan Kuangren, &# 
LW {£ [Sozan Kyonin]. Ca. ninth-tenth century, China. Dharma 
heir of Dongshan Liangjie, Caodong School. Taught at Mount Su, 
Linchuan (Jiangxi). 

Sushan Kuangren: See Sushan Guangren. 

sutra: Skt. #£ [ky6], literally, warp as in weaving, later meaning 
principle of the teaching. Now refers to Indian Buddhist scriptures 
which take the form of discourses by Buddha as heard and verified 
by one of his disciples. Chinese transliteration: sudanlan, #/H48 
[sotanran]. ##4 [kensh6], literally, thin silk for mounting books. 
See also Divisions, Twelve; Buddha Sutras. (“Stitras,” created outside 
of India are regarded as apocryphal.) 

stitra, chant a: 3% [zuky6]. 

sutra chanting, do melodic: See melodic sitra chanting, do. 

sutra, copying a: &%& [shoky6]. 

Sutra, Lotus: See Lotus Sutra. 

stitra, maintain a: $4 [jiky6]. 

stitra, read a: #4%#€ [kankin]. Reading or chanting a scripture, literally, 
looking at a sitra. 

sutra, receive a: 32%& [juky6]. 

sutra, shravaka: {#/4% [shomon ky6]. Scriptures of Shravaka Vehicle. 
Early Buddhist siitras. 

sttra, study a: @B@U5< [kydsho wo hiraku], literally, open a 
sutra. 

stitra, turn the: #§42¢ [tenky6-su]. Ceremonially chant a siitra. 

Sutra of the Three Thousand Guidelines for Pure Conduct: =F Rie 
[Sanzen ligi Kyo]. A Mahayana sittra on daily activities for home 
leavers. The two hundred fifty precepts are called for in each of the 
four bodily presences in three times—past, present, and future. 

sutra recitation, plaque announcing a: See plaque announcing a sutra 
recitation. 

sutras, entire treasury of the: — iF [ichi daizd kyo]. Buddhist canon. 

Suvarna Prabhdsottama King Siitra: Skt. 3¢8A4% [Kon Komyo Kyo]. 
Golden Beam King Sutra. In East Asia this Mahayana scripture was 
often recited and enshrined for the protection of the nation. It 
explains that the four guardian deities protect the king in ruling the 
nation. 

swallow: #&- [ensu]. Bird. -— [su] is a suffix. 

swallowing up everything in one gulp: — #4 [iku donjin]. 

sway, fall, prosper, and decline: £53223 [yoraku seisui]. 

sweet dew, gate of: H##P9 [kanro mon]. 

sweet melon: ##74)I\ [tenjuku ka]. 

sweet melon has a sweet stem: #H/IMPX@#8H [tenka tettai ten]. 
swordmaster: #& [kenkaku]. 

table: = 8 [daiban]. 

table, small: ## [takusu]. 

Taibai Peak: KAZ [Taihaku Ho]. AHABwW [Taihaku Meizan], 
literally, renowned Taibai Mountain. Also called Mount Tiantong, 
KHW [Tendd Zan]. Tiantong Jingde Monastery, where Dogen 
studied, is located on this mountain. 

tails are right: FE{R1E [bijo shin]. 

Taiping Huigin: A+#3424 [Taihei Egon]. 1059-1117, China. Dharma 
heir of Wuzu Fayan, Linji School. Taught at Xingguo Monastery, 
Mount Taiping (Anhui), where he was abbot. An official of the 
imperial court presented Taiping with the ceremonial purple robe 
and gave him the name Fujian, or “Buddha Mirror”—Zen Master 
Fujian (38 ##60 [Bukkan Zenji]. 

Taiyuan Fu: AJR [Taigen Fu]. Ca. ninth-tenth century, China. 
Student of Xuefeng Yicun, Qingyuan Line. Served as head of the 
bathhouse. Remained as a senior Zen student. 

take care: }|g HE [bessho ambail], literally, bring (the person) and 
get settled. 

take in: 22UZS [sdshii-su], literally, receive both. 

take out a little from a little: ) miLEF [shOsho gen shasu]. 

take refuge: B#ttk(F) [kie(-su)]. Pay homage. 

take up: #4 [nen]. #2449 [hanen-su], literally, grab and take up. #479 
[nentoku], literally, manage to take up. #422 [nenko], literally, take 
up and raise. Investigate. 

take up images and cast the mirror: +4{#$#$2 [nenzo shukyd]. 

take up one view: #4— [nen’ichi], take up another view. 

Taking Refuge in Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha: §#4BiX1S [Kie 
Buppos6]. Eighty-ninth fascicle of this book. 

talk: SaX4034 [gondan shitai], literally, speak and respond. 

talk, formal: [= [jodo], f# [shindo], literally, ascending (in) the 
hall. Ascending the (teaching) seat. Giving a discourse in the 
dharma hall. 

talk, informal: /|\& [shésan], literally, small study. 

talks on profundity and wonder: FRAG [dangen dammy6], literally, 
talk on profundity and talk on excellence. 

tallow beads: A*E-F [mokukansu]. 

Tang Dynasty: F&A [Toch6o]. # [To]. Tang China. 618-907. Golden 
age of Zen in China. 

Tanhua: See Ying’an Tanhua. 

Tansheng: See Yunyan Tansheng. 

Tanzhou Longshan: }#)N#2U [Tanshi Ryiizan]. Ca. ninth century, 

China. Dharma heir of Mazu Daoyi, Nanyue Line. Secluded on a 
mountain till the end of his life. Also called Yinshan. 

tathagata: Skt., literally, one who has thus gone; one who has thus 
come; or one who has come from thusness. Honorific name for 
Shakyamuni Buddha, also indicating buddhas in general. WK 
[nyorai]. Buddha tathagatas, s&903K [shobutsu nyorai]. 

Tathagata, Prabhiitaratna: B93 [Taho Nyorai], literally, Many 
Jewels Tathagata. #A§%138 [Hodshd Nyorai], literally, Excellent 
Treasure Tathagata. Ancient Buddha who emerged from 
underground to demonstrate the true meaning of Lotus Sutra. 
Whenever this stitra is being expounded, Prabhitaratna appears in 
his sttpa or reliquary floating in mid-air. He opened his stipa to 
allow Shakyamuni Buddha to sit side-by-side with him, a primary 
motif of the Lotus Sutra. 

Tathagata, reclining: B\Y03K [ga nyorai]. Image of the pari-nirvana of 
the Buddha. 

Tathagata’s Entire Body: %03R5 [Nyorai Zenshin]. Seventy-first 
fascicle of this book. 

tea and rice, daily: R(O)AEK [kajO (no) sahan], literally, usual 
house tea and rice. Everyday matter. 

tea and treats, serve: RU%4 [sen ten]. 

tea room: #<'= [sadO], literally, tea hall. 

teach: 321%, [sekke], literally, set up for transformation. 

teach the assembly: 72x [jishu], literally, show the assembly. Give a 
discourse. Present a talk. 

teach, ask to: fafa] [shomon], literally, request for questioning. 

teacher: #0 [chishiki], literally, one who knows. 

teacher, authentic: IEfii [shdshi]. 

teacher, earlier: 5612 [sendatsu], literally, earlier mastering. Pioneering 
teacher. 

teacher, enlightened: #i8@RbM [udod no shishil], literally, teacher of 
the (Zen) school who holds the way. 

teacher, great: K#=#lix [dai zenchishiki]. 

teacher, incapable: #86 [jashi], literally, crooked teacher. 

teacher, ordinary: Li [bonshi]. 

teacher, revered: 474 [sonshuku], literally, honored abode. Master. 

teacher, root: AXffi [honshi]. One who ordains or gives dharma 
transmission to the student. 

teacher giving the document: D&A\#Obi [tugikami no shil], literally, 
teacher giving joined sheets of paper. 

teacher is excellent: fii [shishd]. 

Teacher of Humans and Devas: KAf&fi [Tennin Shi]. One of the 
honorary names of the Buddha. 

teacher(s), aged: RA [ido]. 

teaching: 3x /&l [kafti], literally, wind (style) of the house. 

teaching, ancestral: 425: [soshii]. Ancestral school; ancestral source. 

teaching, broad: 7i/# [h6k6], literally, directions vast. 

teaching, essential: 52 [shishi]. Essence, essential meaning, teaching, 
heart of the teaching, various doctrines. 

teaching, expedient: {FRRIZM;# [keryi no hol, literally, dharma that is 
temporarily established. 

teaching, practice, and enlightenment: A{Ti= [kyo gyo sho], Also, 
teaching, practice, and realization. 

teaching, practice, practitioner, and essence: #4{J A3Z [kyo gyo nin ri], 
literally, teaching, practice, person, and principle. 

teaching, profound: %& [genshi]. Zill [genkun], literally, deep 
admonition. %i# [genky6], literally, deep state. 

teaching, Shakyamuni Buddha’s: *#3#{ [Shakuky6]. Buddhism. 

teaching, true: (85% ([shinketsu], literally, true formula. True 
understanding, essence, essence of the teaching. 

teaching expounded not in response to a question: ##fJ8ak [mumon 
jisetsu]. 

teaching word: F a8 [agyo], literally, words (that are brought) down. 

Teachings, Three) = [sankyo]. Buddhism, Daoism, and 
Confucianism. 

Teachings are in accord, Three: =#lL—FZ') [sankyo wa itchi nari]. 

temple: #*#l) [bonsetsu]. #% [bon] means, pure. # [setsu] is 
transliteration of Skt. kshetra, literally, land. 

temple building: Skt., sangha arama. Transliteration: (BRE 
[sogyaramma], (#(M5 [sogyaran]. 

ten directions: FA [jippo]. North, south, east, west, their midpoints, 
plus up and down. 

Ten Directions: +75 [Jippo]. Sixtieth fascicle of this book. 

ten directions, penetrates the: +7338 [jippo tsi]. 

Ten Kings: += [Ja O]. Lords of hell, including King Yama. The 
concept of this group of kings derived from China. 

ten names: 15k [ji go]. Ten principle titles of, or ten honorific ways of 
referring to Shakyamuni Buddha: Worthy of Offering, True 
Encompassing Knower, Clear Walker, Well Gone, Knower of the 
World, Unsurpassable Warrior, Excellent Tamer, Teacher of Humans 
and Devas, Buddha, the World-Honored One. 

ten stages. See also bodhisattvas of the ten stages and three classes. 

ten unwholesome actions: See unwholesome actions, ten. 

Tendai School: KER [Tendai-shi]. Japanese form of the Tiantai 
School. Founded by Saicho in the ninth century. Mount Hiei, 
northeast of Kyoto, is its center. A distinguishing element of this 
school is the addition of Esoteric Buddhist practices to the Chinese 
Tiantai way. Dogen first studied Buddhism and became a monk at 

Mount Hiei. 

tenzo: See also officers, six. 

thing beyond suchness: 4MJGFEH [fuimmo ji]. Literally, thing that is not 
suchness. 

thing, extra: #j& [joho]. 

thing, one: —t% [ikky6], literally, one object. 

things as they are: ;&#§ [honi]. See also thusness. 

things, all: %47% [shohG]. See also dharma. 

things, flower of all: %i&##46 [shohd kes6], literally, flower form of all 
dharmas. 

things, reality of all: See reality of all things. 

things, turn: #449) [tenmotsu]. 

things, turned by: 4% [motten]. 

think beyond thinking: #247 [munen nen]. 

think deeply: j3#/& [enryo]. Also, deep understanding. 

think one hundred times: 8 3 [hyakushi]. 

thinking: A= [shiryo]. 

thinking, beyond: jE [hi shiryo], literally, nonthinking; not 
thinking. In contrast to thinking, BS [shiryo]; and not-thinking, 7% 
fe [fu shiryo]; beyond thinking or nonthinking describes the 
unrestricted mind in zazen where one tries neither to develop nor to 
suppress thoughts which are continually arising. These terms come 
from the following dialogue:When Yaoshan was sitting, a monk 
asked him, “In steadfast sitting, what do you think?”Yaoshan said, 
“Think not-thinking.” “How do you think not-thinking?” Yaoshan 
replied, “Beyond thinking.” 

thinking, deluded: {§ = [joryo]. 

thinking, discriminatory: ‘| [shikiry6], literally, measuring. BEF!) 
[shiryo fumbutsu], literally, thinking, measuring, and 
discriminating. 

thinking, give rest to: A [sokuryo]. 

thinking, human: Af [ninsho], literally, human place. 

thinking, ordinary: Lf [bonryo]. Lt [bonjo], literally, ordinary 
feeling. 

thinking, thinking about: ##%% [unen nen]. 

thinking and be still, cease: BRR [sokuryo gydjaku]. 

thinking of bad, not: %t87\As [aku ya fu shiryo]. 

thinking of good, not: =t)4\8s [zen ya fu shiryo]. 

third child of Zhang and fourth child of Li: *&=2=00 [Cho san Ri shi]. 
Zhang and Li are common names in China, so this expression refers 
to ordinary people. 

thirty blows: =+## [sanjii bo]. Master striking a student with a stick. 

thirty blows, I grant you: BX{fi=+## [ho ni sanjii bo]. 

thirty-seven wings of enlightenment: See enlightenment, thirty-seven wings 

of. 

Thirty-seven Wings of Enlightenment: =t-Co&A#=#25;4 [Sanjishichi 
Hon Bodai Bump6]. Seventy-third fascicle of this book. 

thirty-two marks: See marks, thirty-two. 

this, be one with just: BMJ [sokushi], literally, be this. 

this, free from just: @EItE [rishi], literally, apart from this. 

this, just: Elz [soku ze]. 90> [nyokon], literally, now as it is. 

this, what is: (EERE [somo san]. 4 [san] is a suffix. 

thorn branches: #i)#R [keikyoku]. 

thorough going: 4 [hengaku], literally, study all over. 

thought: ls [nenryo]. 

thought, crooked: 487% [janen]. 

threads as incarnated bodies of the tree god: {t4% [keshi]. 

three classes: See bodhisattvas of the ten stages and three classes. 

Three Continents: =j{ [sanshi]. The Four Continents minus the 
Northern Continent. 

three heads and eight arms. See also asura. 

three lower realms. Worlds of animals, hungry ghosts, and hell beings. 
See also paths, six. 

three periods: =¥ [sanji]. 1. The three stages (five hundred years 
each) of Buddhist teaching after Shakyamuni Buddha passed away: 
the period of the true dharma, 1Ej& [shdbd], when teaching, 
practice, and enlightenment exist; the period of the imitative 
dharma, *&7% [zdhO], when teaching and practice remain; the 
period of the decline of the dharma, #i& [mappd], when there 
remains only teaching. This concept was not found in siitras but was 
believed by a number of Chinese and Japanese Buddhists, and was 
very influential in Japanese Buddhism, though not believed by 
Dogen. In Japan there was a theory that 1051 cr. was the first year 
of the period of the dharma’s decay. 2. This lifetime, next lifetime, 
and lifetime(s) after the next. See also fascicle 85, “Karma in the 
Three Periods.” 

Three Phrases: See Phrases, Three. 

three realms: See realms, three. 

Three Realms Are Inseparable from Mind: =FRMEd [Sangai Yuishin]. 
Forty-eighth fascicle of this book. 

three realms, leave the: Hist =F [shutsuri sangail]. 

three teaching: See teachings, three. 

three three after: See three three before, three three after. 

three three before, three three after: BI==*#== [zen sansan go 
sansan]. Many beings in front and back; first and last nine days of a 
month. 

three treasures: See treasures, three. 

Three Vehicles: See Vehicles, Three. three virtues: See virtues, three. 

threshold: j& ft] [dokon]. 
aaa 

thunder: #@2 [byakuryaku]. 

thunderstorm: #¢@2/2\s [byakuryaku firai]. 

thiipa: See st ipa. 

thusness: {&F& [immo], pronounced renmo in Chinese. Originally a 
Chinese colloquial expression, meaning this, that, such, in this way, 
or how. In Zen usage, reality itself, which is limitless. Suchness. As 
it is; things as they are. 

Thusness: {&F& [Immo]. Thirtieth fascicle of this book. 

thusness, aspects of: 417246 [nyzo sd]. 

thusness, buddha nature of: 9+ [shinnyo bussh6], literally, true 
thusness of buddha nature. 

thusness, knowledge of: SUB #1 [nyojitsu chiken]. 

thusness, ocean of: £78 [shou kai], literally, ocean of (original) nature. 

thusness, timeless: ®Y0##%4 [unyo mushi], literally, having thusness 
without beginning. 

thusness, true: 4] [shinnyo]. 

thusness emerge?, how does this expression of: RERISRE [i jimmo 
immo do]. 

thusness within: 9A [nyochi]. 

Tianhuang Daowu: K#i8'% [Tennd Dogo]. 748-807, China. Dharma 
heir of Shitou Xiqian, Qingyuan Line. Abbot of Tianhuang 
Monastery, Jing Region (Hubei). Previously studied with Mazu. He 
was said to have a noble appearance and was known for the 
diligence of his practice. His reputation as a teacher was widely 
known, and many practitioners came to study with him. He treated 
his visitors equally, whether they were humble or influential. 

Tianlong: See Hangzhou Tianlong. 

Tianning. See also Changling Shouzhuo. 

Tianran: See Danxia Tianran. 

Tiansheng Extensive Record of the Lamp:Tiansheng Guangdeng-lu, KE 
(3% [Tensho Kotoroku]. Compiled by Layman Li Zunxu. Dedicated 
to the Emperor on the seventh year of the Tiansheng Era (1029). 
Includes biographies and sayings of over three hundred seventy 
masters in the Zen lineage, starting with Shakyamuni Buddha. 

Tiantong Rujing: KHWiF [Tendo Nyojo]. Old Buddha Tiantong, K# 
th # [Tendo Kobutsu]. Dogen calls him “My late master,” Schiff 
[Senji]. 1163-1228, China. Dharma heir of Xuedou Zhijian, 
Caodong School. Between 1210 and 1225 he was successively abbot 
of Qingliang Monastery, Jiankang (Jiangsu); Ruiyan Monastery, Tai 
Region (Zhejiang); and Jingci Monastery, Hang Region (Zhejiang). 
In 1225 he became abbot of Jingde Monastery, Mount Tiantong 
(Mount Taibai), Ming Region (Zhejiang), where he transmitted 
dharma to Dogen. His teaching is included in the Recorded Sayings 

of Priest Rujing. 

Tiantong Zongjue: KR [Tendd Sdkaku]. 1091-1162, China. 
Dharma heir of Changlu Qingliao and a link in the Caodong lineage. 
He was abbot of Yuelin Monastery, Ningbo (Zhejiang), for twenty- 
three years, before he went on to teach at Mount Xuedou and 
Mount Tiantong, both in Ming Region (Zhejiang). Called himself 
Daxiu, so he was called Zen Master Daxiu, A(AK##6h [Daikyii Zenji]. 

Ties of Teaching, Nine: J.## [kyttai]. Taught by Fushan Fayuan, 
dharma heir of Shexuan Guixing of Linji School: (1) Treasury of the 
true dharma tie. (2) Treasury of buddha dharma tie. (3) Penetrating 
the reality tie. (4) Phenomena tie. (5) Phenomena and reality 
interaction tie. (6) Bending and hanging tie. (7) Wondrous inclusive 
tie. (8) Gold needle and double chain tie. (9) Everyday ordinary tie. 

tiger, trap a: P4@ [kanko]. 

Tiger Cen: See Changsha Jingcen. 

tile: $§ [sen]. 

tile to attract a jewel, hurl a: {ft85|= [hosen ingyoku]. 

tiles and pebbles: Evi# [garyaku]. Represents insentient beings. 

time, arrival of: PBZ 3K [jisetsu torai]. 

time, at the same: {889 [kuji]. 

time, from beginningless: #2%8#)3K [mushi ko rai]. 

time, passage of: 7¢8Z [koin], literally, shadow of (sun) light. 

time, passage of: 25/% [horeki], literally, walk of calendar. 

time, throughout: HAF [goji]. 

Time Being, The: #8 [Uji]. Twelfth fascicle of this book. 

time being, for the: #A¥ [uji]. Once in a while. 

time span, a vast: F{ti®iz [nendai jinnen], literally, generation deep 
and far. 

timeless life, those who live: #%& [jusha]. Unlimited life. 

timelessly passing away: AE [ku metsudo], literally, long pari- 
nirvana. 

timelessness, tides of: BF6f#IIK [jisetsu kohal. 

times, all: 8% [miji]. 

ting-ting, ting-ting, ting-ting: #4 ] 8 Fi JR [tekitei tory tekitei]. 

titles as Zen masters: 5% [shigo]. 

to: J. =+. Measuring unit. Ten sho. Approximately 18 liters (4.75 
gallons). 

tomb: 1898 [tatchi], literally, tower. #8 [t6/chi] is a suffix. 

tomb, square: F738 [hofun]. 

Tong’an Changcha: [| [Doan Josatsu]. Ca. ninth-tenth century, 
China. Dharma heir of Jiufeng Daoquing, Qingyuan Line. Taught at 
Tong’an Monastery, Mount Fengqi, Hao Region (Jiangxi). 

Tong’an Daopi: [A)#i8Z [Doan Dohi]. Ca. ninth-tenth century, China. 
Dharma heir of Yunju Daoying and a link in the Caodong lineage. 

Taught at Tong’an Monastery, Mount Fengqi, Hao Region (Jiangxi), 
and passed the dharma seal on to Tong’an Guanzhi. When a monk 
asked about how to practice the way, Daopi said, “Eat gruel. Eat 
rice.” 

Tong’an Guanzhi: [3|#4%% [Doan Kanshi]. Ca. tenth century, China. 
Dharma heir of Tong’an Daopi, and a link in the continuing 
Caodong lineage. Taught at Tong’an Monastery, Jianchang 
(Jiangxi). 

tongue: vim [zettan], literally, tip of the tongue. 

tongue, click one’s: MiZ [tosshi]. 

tongue, long broad: #&H [koch6zetsu]. The Buddha’s tongue. 

topple: 2!) [td]. 

tortoise climb up a tree backward, black: Faia 2) _E# [uki tojojul. 

tortoise, a captured: 82468 [kyiki]. 

tortoise, black stone: 4F3& [seki uki]. Represents beyond conceptual 
thinking. 

total: #8 [toro], literally, entire bucket. 

totality: 42= [sdshG], literally, entire structure. 

Touzi Datong: #2 AIA] [Tosu Daido]. 819-914, China. Dharma heir of 
Cuiwei Wuxue, Qingyuan Line. Datong lived and taught in obscurity 
at Mount Touzi, Shu Region (Anhui), for more than thirty years, but 
many practitioners found him there and came to study with him. He 
told the monks:“There is no mystery that can be compared with you 
yourself.” During a period of civil unrest, a knife-wielding bandit 
entered the temple, and after hearing Touzi’s calm dharma 
discourse, he took off his clothes and left them as an offering. 
Touzi’s posthumous name is Great Master Ciji, RAISAB [Jisai 
Daishi]. 

Touzi Yiging: 42 #B [Tosu Gisei]. 1032-1083, China. Dharma heir 
of Dayang Jingxuan, Caodong School. Taught at Mount Touzi, Shu 
Region (Anhui). Restored the Caodong School. Touzi left home to 
become a monk at the age of seven, and over his lifetime he studied 
various traditions (such as Huayan) with many teachers, including 
Fushan Fayuan, who transmitted the Caodong lineage to Touzi for 
Dayang Jingxuan. Touzi’s reputation as a teacher was widespread. 

trace, no: #5 [mushaku]. 

track, single: —{& [ichijo]. 

train for a long time: A1tE4R{T [kushu rengyo]. Longtime practitioner. 

transform: {t(¢ ([ke-su]. Give guidance. #29 [ses-su], literally, 
encounter. f_ $£ [kaitaku], literally, open and entrust. 

transform devas: {(X% [keten]. 

transform humans: {tA [kenin]. 

transformation, miraculous: ### [shimpen]. ##2¢#1% [shimpen 
shinge], literally, miraculous transformation, miraculous wonder. 

transformations, ten thousand: #3{¥, [banka]. 

transformative function: {4% [kegi]. 

transforming guidance of the spreading sky: HRO1{t [goten no ked6]. 

transmigration: #21 [rinne], ###8 [rinden], literally, wheel turning. 

transmission, authentic: 1E{# [shdden]. authentic. See also dharma 
transmission. 

transmission, direct: &{% [tanden], literally, single conveying. Person- 
to-person, single-lined transmission of dharma. 

transmission, face-to-face: H¥% [menju]. Ht [menju sodjo], 
literally, face-to-face giving and mutually holding. 

Transmission of the Lamp: See also Jingde Record of Transmission of the 
Lamp. 

transmission outside of scriptures: AU} A{# [kyoge betsuden], literally, 
separate transmission outside the teaching. 

transmit: *87K [sdj6], literally, mutually holding. 

transmit, intimately: #(t UD) [mitsju (se shimu)], literally, allow 
to receive intimately. 

transmit dharma. See also dharma transmission. 

transmit mind with mind: Wud{its [ishin denshin]. 

Transmitting the Robe: {#% [Den’e]. Fourteenth fascicle of this book. 

traps and snares: 23 [sentei]. 

travel, way-seeking: See way-seeking travel. 

treasures, ocean of the three: = #07 [sambo no umi]. 

treasures, seven: #& [shippo]. Gold, silver, lazuli, moonstone, agate, 
coral, and amber. (The list varies according to the siitra.) 156. 

treasures, three: =#& [samb6]. Buddha, dharma, sangha. Buddhists are 
those who take refuge in the three treasures. See also fascicle 89, 
“Taking Refuge in Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.” 

treasures as one treasure, three: —=— & [ittai sambo]. 

treasures that are the essence of reality, three: £233 = & [ritai sambd]. 

treasures that function as teaching, three: {({% = [kegi sambO]. 

treasures that have been maintained, three: (£#3=® [jiji sambo]. 

treasury, small: /|\#% [shOz6]. Canon of early Buddhist scriptures. 

treasury of the true dharma eye: IF;KERiex [shobo genzo]. According to 
Zen legend: Once, at an assembly on Vulture Peak, Shakyamuni 
Buddha took up an udumbara flower and blinked. Mahakashyapa 
smiled. Then, Shakyamuni Buddha said, “I have the treasury of the 
true dharma eye, the wondrous heart of nirvana. This I entrust to 
Mahakashyapa.” Although not found in Indian scriptures, this story 
is traditionally used as a proof of authenticity of the Zen tradition. 

Treasury of the True Dharma Eye: 1E;&ARie, [Shobd Genzo Shobdgenzo]. 
1. Three hundred cases of koans collected by Dogen at Kosho Horin 
Monastery. Dated 1235. Written in Chinese, probably to serve as 
notes for his main text of the same title (number 2 below). Also 

called Shinji Shobo Genzo, or the Chinese-Language Treasury of the 
True Dharma Eye. 2. The lifework of Dogen, written in Japanese and 
divided into numerous parts or “fascicles.” (See “Preface and 
Acknowledgments” and “Editor’s Introduction” for more detailed 
information.) There are several versions of this text: (a) 75-fascicle 
edition, Dogen’s primary version; (b) 12-fascicle version, a later 
version by Dogen; (c) 60-fascicle version, edited by Giun (1252- 
1333), fifth abbot of Eihei-ji; (d) 28-fascicle version, called the 
“Secret Shobo Genzo,” a collection of fascicles not included in the 
60-fascicle version. A 95-fascicle version edited in chronological 
order around 1690 by Kozen, thirty-fifth abbot of Eihei-ji, and 
published in 1815. In addition to these three main forms of the text, 
there are also 83- and 84-fascicle versions. Our book is based on the 
95-fascicle version, plus “One Hundred Eight Gates of Realizing 
Dharma” from the 60-fascicle version. 

Treatise on Realization of Great Wisdom: A# Ea [Daichido Ron]. Ait 
[Dai Ron]. An extensive commentary in Sanskrit on the Mahd Prajna 
Paramita Sutra by Nagarjuna. Kumalajiva made an abridged 
translation of this work in Chinese entitled Dazhidu Lun. 

treatises, master of: afl! [ronji]. Commentator. 

tree, cypress: #48} [hakuju]. 

tree, decayed: *42 [koboku]. 

tree, rootless: ##Rts} [mukon ju]. 

tree, withered: t&7K [kosboku]. Sitting in stillness. 

treeness: t&{I)) [juk6], literally, tree function. 

trees and rocks: 4#444 [nyaku ju nyaku seki], literally, whether 
(they are) trees or whether (they are) rocks. 

trees, two types of: 7X [ni boku]. Classification in the Lotus Sutra. (1) 
Separate teaching for bodhisattvas. (2) Common teaching for 
shravakas, pratyeka-buddhas, and bodhisattvas. 

tripitaka: Skt. =i& [sanzo]. “Three baskets” of Buddhist teaching: 
sutras, precepts, and commentaries. Entire canon. Also, a master of 
the canon. 

tripod of a worshipping vessel: ‘0 = fil [kanae no sankyaku]. The three 
legs of a ceremonial bronze pot of ancient China are compared to 
the Three Teachings. See also Teachings, Three. 

troublemaker: #488 [katai]. 

true dharma eye: iE;&ER [shobo gen]. Understanding and experience of 
authentic dharma. 

true human body: See also buddha body. 

true person: See person, make a true. 

true person, become a: A|c#83ZT [nin ni sd’6-su], literally, encounter 
a person. 

true person inside: f€i-F A [kochii nin], literally, person inside this. 

trunk and branches: A4X [honshil]. 

trust: }#15 [joshin], literally, pure faith. 

trust, accept with: {532(F) [shinju(-su)]. 

trust, complete: 32 [zenk6], literally, total dependence. 

trust, genuine: 1E{& [shdshin]. True faith. 

trust, practice: {&{J [shingy6]. 

trust, realize: 1&9 [shdshin-su]. 

trust, true body of: 1E{s& [sho shinjin]. 

trust, true heart of: IE{sit [sho shinjin]. 

truth: ### [taijitsu], literally, truth and reality. 91 [nyojitsu], 
literally, reality as it is. 

truth, foremost sacred: 32555 — ea [shOtai daiichigi tai]. 

truth, realizing the: 332 [shori]. 

truth, sacred: #83 [shotai]. 

truth doesn’t do anything, sacred: B2#9K7\ ES [shotai yaku fui]. 

truth of the path: j€# [dOtai]. The fourth of the four noble truths. 

truths, four noble: Psi [shitai]. One of the earliest teachings of the 
Buddha. The truth of suffering; the truth of the causes of suffering; 
the truth of the cessation of suffering; and the truth of the 
(eightfold) path. 

tuft on forehead, white: R= [byakugo]. 

tumble over: 3% [hekiraku], literally, wall falling down. 

tune, same: [aa] [d6cho]. 

turn: #4 [ten]. 

turn heads and exchange faces: [|5E}4H [kato kammen]. See face, 
exchange. 

turn the body and flap the brain, freely: #15 [)A§ [honshin kain6]. 

turn the dharma wheel: #8j%% [tenborin]. The Buddha expounding 
dharma. See also dharma wheel. 

turn the light to shine within: 1@7¢i8 88 /[E)7¢iR 88 [eko hensho]. Turn the 
light inward and illuminate oneself. 

turning one’s head: [2]88 [kaito]. Turning around. 

turning point: #2 [tensho]. #8# [tenki], literally, turning event. A 
place where delusion is transformed into enlightenment. 

turning the body in the word vein: 5BAk|c #339 [gomaku ni tenshin-su]. 
Being free from intellectual, verbal thinking. 

Turning the Dharma Wheel: #8;& #8 [Temborin]. Seventy-fourth fascicle 
of this book. 

turning the head and pivoting the brain: [| 888A [kaitd tennd). 

turning word(s): See word(s), turning. 

turning word, ask for a: 38 —#85% [sho ittengo]. 

Tushita Heaven: Skt. Transliteration: 2f& [Tosotsuda]. Also, 
transliteration plus “heaven” [Ten]: WJ#|K [Tori Ten], MBAR 
[Toshita Ten], #2£X% [Tosotsu Ten]. A heaven in the desire realm 

presided over by Indra. Believed to be an abiding place for 
bodhisattvas who are bound to go down to the human realm and 
become buddhas. Also called Heaven of Thirty-three Devas. 

Twelve Divisions: See Divisions, Twelve. 

twelvefold causation of rebirth: See causation, twelvefold. 

twining vines: Sf [katt], literally, a plant called kuzu or kudzu, and 
wisteria. 1. Words and concepts that are a hindrance to 
understanding. 2. Entanglement. 3. In Dogen’s usage, transmission 
and heritage of dharma through dynamic interaction and oneness of 
teacher and disciple. 4. Condition of being immersed. 

Twining Vines: Sf [Katto]. Forty-seventh fascicle of this book. 

two kinds (of birth and death): —*%(E7E) [nishu (shdji)]: (1) Individual 
birth and death: ordinary beings transmigrate with bodies of 
particularities. (2) Changeable birth and death: those whose vow is 
believed to have the ability to alter their direction of birth and 
death. 

Two Lesser Vehicles. See also Vehicles, Three. 

Udana. See also Divisions, Twelve. 

udumbara blossom: Skt. {#22 [udon ge], {#2 [udon], &# [don ge]. 
A mythological flower that blooms once in three thousand years 
when the Tathagata appears. See also treasury of the true dharma eye. 

Udumbara Blossom: {#2 [Udon Ge]. Sixty-eighth fascicle of this 
book. 

ultimate: #5 [kuky6]. Utmost teaching, understanding, or realm. 

umpan: J. #4, literally, “cloud board.” Metal board in the shape of a 
rising cloud, hung in the kitchen or the study hall for sounding 
signals. 

unconditioned: #£& [mui]. Skt. asamskrita. Same as unconstructed, # 
i@/F [muzosa]. Completely at rest, beyond causes and conditions. 
Nonthinking, nonintending, nonattaining. Free of expectations. 
Place of no effort. 

unconditioned, originally: #47#48%A [shojo honnen], literally, originally 
pure. 

unconstructed, realm of the: #£-@ttt [mui no chil]. 

unconstructedness: ##3&{F [muzosa], literally, not constructing. 

undefiled: 4375 [fuzenna]. Also, undivided. Not colored with 
dualistic separation, especially between practice and realization. See 
also What has thus come? 

understand: © [el], literally, merge. @3 [eshi], literally, realize the 
essential meaning. SSS [kakuryd-su], literally, awakening 
completed. 48 & [rydran], literally, realize and see. ###29° [taikan- 
su], literally, see the truth. f##§ [gero], literally, unfold the path. 

understand through study: fm#0 [gaku ni chi]. 

understand without teachers, those who: #£8%0% [mushi chi sha]. See 
also realization without a teacher. 

understanding:. See also ability. 

understanding, fundamental: #4 [tokuhon]. 

understanding, half-: —#1>-f% [itchi hange], literally, know one and 
understand half. 

understanding, human: Af@i8H [ninryo no shikitaku], literally, 
measurement by human thinking. 

Understandings, Four: PU#4fij [shiryOken]. Four positions of subject and 
object taught by Linji: denying subject and not denying object; 
denying object and not denying subject; denying both subject and 
object; not denying either subject or object. 

understood with trust: {a##¢ [shinge-su]. 

undivided: 4.2475 [fuzenna], literally, nondefilement, unstained. A 
#75 [fuzdo zennal, literally, not ever defiled. 

undivided activity: See activity, undivided. 

Undivided Activity: 4% [Zenki]. Forty-second fascicle of this book. 

unfolding the stillness: fia# [kaijo]. Leaving the seat after the end of a 
zazen period. 

ungraspable: |24\44 [go futoku], literally, cannot attain realization. & 
A$ [e futoku], literally, cannot attain understanding 

Ungraspable Mind: 4®J4§ [Shin Fukatoku]. Nineteenth fascicle of 
this book. 

Ungraspable Mind, Later Version: ##ts485]{§ [Go Shin Fukatoku]. 
Twentieth fascicle of this book. 

Unicorn Sitra: {#28 [Butsurin Kyo]. Not an actual scripture, 
“Unicorn Sutra” is Dodgen’s poetic expression for the buddhas’ 
unique teaching. 

Universal Lamp: See Jiatai Record of the Universal Lamp. 

universe: &zt# [kenkon]. 

Unprecedented Causation Sttra: ®###€ [Mizdu Kyo]. One of the 
Twelve Divisions of siitras. 

unroll the matter: f= [tenji]. Opening a question. 

unroll the matter and hurl insightful flashes: REt2#4 [tenji toki]. 
Teacher and student open an essential question and harmonize their 
understanding. 

unsurpassable activity: See activity, unsurpassable. unsurpassably: #3 
® [mutddo no], literally, not equaled at all. 

unwholesome: %& [aku]. Commonly translated as bad, wicked, or evil. 

unwholesome action, refrain from: See Refrain from Unwholesome Action. 

unwholesome actions, ten: —-#& [jiaku]. Actions prohibited by precepts: 
(1) to kill; (2) to steal; (3) to misuse sex; (4) to make false 
statements; (5) to buy or sell alcohol; (6) to discuss the faults of 
other home-leaver bodhisattvas; (7) to praise yourself and insult 

others; (8) to withhold dharma or treasure; (9) to be angry; (10) to 
slander the three treasures. 

unwholesome realms. See also paths, six. 

unwholesome time: Att [akujisei]. 

up, down, or the cardinal directions: - F DU#E [joge shiyui]. 

Upadesha. See also Divisions, Twelve. 

Upagupta: (222% 2 [Ubakikuta]. Son of a merchant in the kingdom of 
Mathula, central northern India. Taught in his youth by Shanavasin. 
Achieved arhathood as soon as he was ordained. Fourth Ancestor of 
Zen tradition. 

Upali: &BiRee [Ubari]. After being a barber, he became a student of 
the Buddha and became an advanced student. Known for 
understanding and maintaining the precepts. He recited precepts at 
the first assembling of the Buddha’s teachings soon after the latter’s 
pari-nirvana. 

uphold: 4% (F) [bonji(-su)], literally, receive and hold. 

uphold in veneration: #44 [konen]. 

uplift, vigorously: BiaS [gekiyo-su]. 

urgency: YEH [shikyi], literally, death fast. 

utilize: {#FAS [shiyo-su], literally, make use. {#7$(9) [shitoku(-su)], 
literally, attain usage. Activate, engage in. 

utmost actualization: See actualization, utmost. 

utpala blossom: Skt. {(2#4#2: [upara ge]. Blue lotus blossom. 

Utpalavarna: Skt. Utpala Blossom, {##42@8# [Upara Gel], literally, 
Lotus Blossom Color. Translation: #22 [Renge Shiki]. Nun 
originally from Rajagriha. The foremost female disciple of 
Shakyamuni Buddha. Known for attaining the six miraculous 
powers and becoming an arhat. 

Utpalavarna, Siitra on the Former Birth of Nun: (@3h#@ 2 (LAER 
[Upara Ge Bikuni Honsho Kyo]. 

utterance, complete: i184$ [dotoku ze]. Expressing the point. 

utterance, make one brief: 1&@4#—‘) [dotoku ikku], literally, say one 
phrase. 

Vaipulya. See also Divisions, Twelve. 

vairambhaka: See storm, vairambhaka. 

Vairochana Buddha: See Buddha, Vairochana. 

Vairochana, stepping over the head of: BE&J& £47 [Biru chojo ko]. 

Vairochana’s ocean storehouse: Ee au [Biru zokai]. 

Vaishali Clan: 34 [Risho]. Based in the ancient Indian kingdom of 
Vaishali (Braj in modern India), located in the north of Magadha. 

Valley Sounds, Mountain Colors: 24%. [Keisei Sanshoku]. Tenth 
fascicle of this book. 

valley where no shouts echo: Ma4\24 [kan fukyo koku]. 

valleys and mountains are separate: 24%!) [keizan kakubetsu]. 

values, worldly: #t9®# [jisOno zen], literally, goodness of the 
practical aspects of matters. 

vanish: #]& [dashitsu], literally, be lost. $] [da/ta] is an emphatic 
prefix. 

Vappa: #4 [Bafu]. See also five monks. 

Varanasi: }&#? [Harana]. City on the Ganges in central northern 
India. The Buddha gave his first dharma discourse in Deer Park 
there. Capital city of the ancient kingdom of Kashi. Most sacred 
center of ancient Brahmanism and the later Hinduism. 

vast spirit has no contradiction: #i##212R #48 [kattatsu reikon mu 
kohai]. 

vast, empty, and clear: &B9AGZBA [kakunen komei]. 

Vasubandhu: #2(28898 [Bashubanzu]. Twenty-first Ancestor of the Zen 
tradition in India. A legendary figure, possibly named after the 
famous Mahayana commentator in fifth-century India. 

Vedic Scriptures, Four: VU=%e [shiida]. Veda, Sama Veda, Atharva 
Veda, and Yajur Veda. 

veer off, not: 7XiR [futai]. 

Vehicle, Bodhisattva. See also Vehicles, Three. 

Vehicle, Buddha. See also Vehicle, One. 

Vehicle, Great. See also Vehicles, Three. 

Vehicle, One: —3€ [ichij5]. Buddha Vehicle, (3€ [butsujd]. The 
teaching that carries sentient beings over the ocean of birth and 
death to the shore of nirvana. According to the Lotus Sutra, the 
Three Vehicles are expedient means to arrive at the One Vehicle. 

Vehicle, Pratyeka-buddha. See also Vehicles, Three. 

Vehicle, Shravaka. See also Vehicles, Three. 

Vehicle, Small: See Vehicles, Three. 

Vehicle, Supreme: E3€ [Jojo]. One Vehicle. 

Vehicles, Five: A3€ [gojo]. Three Vehicles plus Human Vehicle and 
Deva Vehicle. 

Vehicles, Lesser. See also Vehicles, Three. 

Vehicles, Three: =3€ [sanjo]. According to the traditional Mahayana 
Buddhist view, the Buddha’s teaching is classified into three ways: 
the Shravaka (listener) Vehicle, #fi3€ [shomon jo]; the Pratyeka- 
buddha (solitary awakened one) Vehicle, ##3€ [engaku jo]; and 
the Mahayana or Great Vehicle, AZE [daijd]. The first two are 
called in a derogatory way the Hinayana or Lesser (Small) 
Vehicle(s), \3€ [shdjo]. They are also called Two Vehicles, —3€ 
[nijo]. The Great Vehicle, which emphasizes bringing all sentient 
beings to enlightenment, is also called the Bodhisattva Vehicle, = fz 
3 [bosatsu jo]. 

vein: See blood vein. 

venerable: 23% [sonja]. 

Venerable Chen: See Muzhou Daoming. 

verse: 4A [ju]. 8 [ge], #45 [geju]. 

verse, capping: 484 [juko]. 

verse, four-line: 14) 1% [shiku ge]. 

verse, teaching reiterated in: B48 [jiju]. 

verses, eighty-four thousand: /\%2U-F 1% [hachiman shisen ge]. 

very person as the very person: See person as the very person, very. 

vessel of the way: i&#¥ [doki]. 

vessel, tripod of a worshipping: See tripod of a worshipping vessel. 

view, carefree: 3812 [kattatsu]. 

view, distorted: #8 [jaken]. #85t [jakeil, literally, crooked thinking. 

view, mistaken: {#5 [hekiken], literally, one-sided view. 

view, narrow: /\\&, [shoken], literally, small view. /|\@& [shdryd no 
ken], literally, small-scale view. 

view, self-generated: & [shoken], literally, view on living (being). To 
think there is something solid as sentient beings. 

views, confused: #A&L@s% [uron no setsu], literally, talk of revolting 
barbarians. 

views, five wrong: H& [goken], literally, five views. (1) Attachment to 
the self and possession. (2) Extreme views. (3) Denial of cause and 
effect. (4) Regarding one’s own view as the highest. (5) Trust in 
outsiders’ practice. 

views, four: J‘) [shiku], four basic modes of discernment: affirmation; 
negation; partial affirmation and partial negation; negation or doubt 
of both affirmation and negation. 

views, outrageously crooked: mi %!| 48 [mori no jaken]. 

vigorousness: See pdramitds, six. 

village, mystic: 7748 [teiky6], literally, hometown of the emperor. 

Vimalakirti: Skt. Transliteration: #4 [Yuimakitsu]. Layman 
Vimalakirti, #{2fEt[Yuima Koji]. Translation: #4] [Jomyo], 
literally, Pure Name. An enlightened layman who is the main figure 
of the Mahayana text Vimalakirti Sutra. 

Vimalakirti Sitra: #2246 [Yuima Gy6]. Mahayana siitra presenting 
stories of Vimalakirti, an enlightened lay disciple of the Buddha. 

Vimana, the great country of: F22AEJ [Bima Taikoku]. A mythological 
country. 

vines: See twining vines. 

Vipashyin Buddha: See Buddha, Vipashyin. virtue: #a%#@ [fukutoku], 
literally, beneficial virtue. 

virtue, develop: 4% [ruitoku], literally, accumulate virtue. 

virtue, field of: #%FA [tokuden]. 

virtue, guiding: % [dori], literally, guiding benefit. 

Virtue of Home Leaving: W3xI)%8 [Shukke Kudoku]. Eighty-seventh 

fascicle of this book. 

virtues, five: H® [goj6]. Love, righteousness, formality, wisdom, and 
trust. Taught in Confucianism. 

virtues, three: =%#* [santoku]. Excellent qualities of cooked food: 
mildness, cleanliness, and formality. 

Virtuous King Stitra: {4% [Ninn6d Ky6]. Mahayana siitra expounding 
the essentials of protecting the nation. Revered by rulers in East 
Asia. 

visage, motion and stillness of one’s: 8 1ES)# [yoshi doy6). 

visiting abbot: See abbot, former. 

visitors’ room. See also hall, entry. 

visualization: #4712 [kanren kunju], literally, refine seeing and 
practice fragrance. 

vital: #2 [kappatsu]. 758% [kappatsupatsu], literally, very vital. j& 
a8 fe8tth [kappatsupatsu chi]. tH [chi] is a suffix meaning “that which 
is.” Lively, active, vigorous. ;4###i25 LOD [kappatsupatsunara 
shimu], literally, cause to be vital. Enliven. 

Vivadabala: #7) [Ronriki], literally, Debate Power. A Brahman who 
regarded himself as a great debater and who challenged the 
Buddha. He learned that Migasisa, who was known as the best 
scholar, had already become the Buddha’s student. Ashamed, he 
himself became a follower of the Buddha. 

voice that stops all sound: #7 1t# [yOsh6 shikyo]. 

voice, a single: —& [itton]. One sound. 

voice, in one: — [al [ikku do’on], literally; one mouth, same sound. 

void. See also emptiness. 

voidness and send back an echo, receive: #KkE}=ES [shdko sekky6]. 

vow: {T&A [gydgan], literally, vow of practice. Vow for enlightenment. 

vow, chant a: UifAS [jugan-su]. 

vow, great: AHA [daigo], literally, great expectation. 

Vulture Peak: Skt., Gridhrakita. Transliteration: Bill [Gishakkutsu]. 
Translation: #2.) ([Rydju Sen], literally, spiritual vulture 
mountain; #2.) [Jubu Sen], literally, vulture peak mountain; # 
[Ryo Zen], literally, spiritual mountain. A mountain in the northeast 
of Rajagriha City, the capital of Magadha, India. Siitras mention this 
mountain as a place where Shakyamuni Buddha gave discourses; as 
lotus flowers; assemblies on; confirmation on; dharma transmission 
on; in the tower; equinimity of; kings and ministers on; teachings at. 

Vyakarana. See also Divisions, Twelve. 

walk backward: i826 [taiho]. Move backward. 

walking: 2 [ho]. 1. One of the four postures. 2. In Ddgen’s usage, 
continuous practice. 

walking meditation: 4£{7 $F [kinhin-su], literally, pass and go. 

walking, abiding, sitting, and lying down: {7{ESSEA [gydjii zagal. 

wall: == [shdheki]. A stone or brick wall, symbol of insentient 
beings. 

walls, tiles, and pebbles: #2 EL¥# [shoheki garyaku]. 

wander about like a cloud or a waterweed: #23825 [un’yii hyoki]. 

wander around: #4 # [reihei]. 

wander at ease: 15329 [shoyo-su]. 

Wang Boxiang: {AE [O Hakushd]. 1106-1173, China. Writer and 
government official. Author of Biography of Zen Master Hongzhi. 

warn: fg F) [keikai(-su)]. Admonish. 

wash house: El [shi]. 

washing powder: j= [sdzu], literally, bath beans. 

Washing the Face: {1 [Semmen]. Eighth fascicle of this book. 

water: 1. Water in the usual sense. 2. River, ocean. 3. Thusness. 4. 
One’s state of meditation. 

water, east mountains travel on: BL7K EF [t6zan suijo kG]. 

water, fetch: 327K [unsui]. 

water, sugar: @ 2432 [shakumitsu sho]. 

water buffalo: 7k#44F [suikogyi]. Sometimes refers to a person who 
realizes original face through practice. 

water buffalo comes out and bellows: —3B7KA4W3RIEHM [ittd 
suikogyt shutsurai do un’un]. 

water by four types of beings, views of: JUS [shiken], literally, four 
views: Devas see water as a jewel palace; humans see it as water; 
hungry ghosts see it as pus and blood; fish see it as a place of abode. 

water chestnut: #& [hishi]. 

water draws water: 7K5|7K [sui in sui]. 

water of eight virtues: /\I)4#2K [hakkudoku sui]. Water in paradise or 
around Mount Sumeru has qualities such as: sweet, chilly, soft, 
light, pure, free of smell, not hurting the throat, and not hurting the 
stomach. 

water thusness: 7K 9] [suinyo]. 

waves: }& [ha/nami]. Often represent vital life or activity. 

waves, follow waves to chase: K&}#jX3R [zuiha chikurd]. 

way: i& [do]. Path of spiritual pursuit for and actualization of 
enlightenment. Buddha way. Enlightenment. Eightfold noble path. 
Expression. To express, to speak. 

way, ability of the: 187) [doriki]. 

way, ancestor: #818 [sod6]. 

way, attain the: Axi [jod6], #i [tokudo]. Completion of practice, 
including Shakyamuni Buddha’s enlightenment under the bodhi 
tree. In this case “way” is the translation of Skt. 

bodhi (enlightenment). Cf. Shakyamuni Buddha’s words: “I, 
simultaneously with all sentient beings and the great earth, attained 

the way.” AHA tSAFALIEG [daichi ujo dodji jodo]. Arousing the 
unsurpassable mind. 

way, awakening of the: 238 [kakudo]. 

way, bones of the: 18’ [dokotsu]. 

way, circle of the: See circle of the way. 

way, concentrated endeavor of the: JNAX##iE [kufai bendd]. 

way, cultivate the: #38 [kodo]. 

way, decisive: 238 [shido]. 

way, flavor of the: 181% [domi]. 

way, follower of the: i&imt [doru], literally, way stream. 

way, fruit of the: 3452 [dokal]. 

way, go against the: 4E3& [hid6]. 

way, in every possible: -Fim=sim [sentan mantan], literally, one 
thousand edges, ten thousand edges. 

way, intellectual: @it}O#XA) [ushin no shuk6], literally, going forward 
with mind (thought). 

way, long for the ancient: See long for the ancient way. 

way, maintain the: 818 [ud6], literally, have the way. 

way, opening of the: 127% [unkei], literally, opening of the fortune. 

way, penetrate the: }#§ [tstiro], literally, way for passing. 

way, practice of the: {Ti8 [gyddd]. Also, chanting while 
circumambulating. See also way, study the. 

way, practitioner of the: 18 A. [donin], literally, way person. 

way, settle the great matter of the: See settle the great matter of the way 

way, single: —i8 [ichido]. 

way, students of the: B&2F4i3E0A [sangaku kand6 no hito], literally, 
person of study, leisure in the way. 

way, study the: 38 [gakud6]. Also, practice the way. 

way, this and that: Cif/\i# [shichitsi hattatsu], literally, seven 
penetrations and eight masteries. 

way, those outside the: See outside the way, those. 

way, vessel of the: 182§ [doki]. 

way, voice of the: 14 [ddsh6]. 

way-seeking eyes: 144R [dogen], literally, eyes of the way. 

way-seeking mind: See mind, way-seeking 

way-seeking travel: {7fi) [angya]. 

ways, a number of: 24a [shubon], literally, various things. 

ways, various: #f24XOj& [kyotahan no hd], literally, many things. 

wear: 48% [tatsujaku]. 

weeds: & [s0/kusa]. Delusions or the world of delusions. 

weeds, enter the: AT [niss6-su]. 

weeds, gather and bind: 2%} 13) [sord wo musubu]. 

Weibai: See Fuguo Weibai. 

Wei Dynasty: 2% [Gi]. Northern dynasty in China. 

Weiqing: See Lingyuan Weiqing. 

Weiyan: See Yaoshan Weiyan. 

Weiyi: See Huanxi Weiyi. 

Well Gone: #8 [Zenzei]. One of the ten principal titles of the Buddha. 

Wengong: See Yang Wengong. 

Wenyan: See Yunmen Wenyan. 

Wenyi: See Fayan Wenyi. 

Wenzhun: See Zhantang Wenzhun. 

What degrees can there be?: {)hS4k2& [ga kaikyi shi yi]. 

What has thus come?: {+ FEYs{SFEX [jimo motsu immo rai]; also read 
as nani mono ka immon ni kitaru, literally, what thing thus comes? 
Originally, Huineng’s question to Nanyue, roughly meaning “Who is 
here?” One of the essential Zen questions. 

What is it here?: 16 32@(t PAPI [shari ze jimo sho zai]. 

What is the meaning of Bodhidharma’s coming from India?: 9] =4H 6h Fa 
3ki= [ika naru ka kore soshi sairai i]. This can also be read: l\A‘Ic 
HSS AM CNA PERS [ika ni ara n ka kore soshi sairai il, 
literally, what is the meaning of the ancestor coming from the west? 

what it is, understanding of: {tT F&i{F [jimo shingyo], literally, what (it 
is) of mind movement. 

what’s there: #8123 [nahen ji]. 

wheel, dharma: See dharma wheel. 

wheel, wondrous dharma: 4% [my6 horin]. 

wheel of dharma, turning the: *;4 #4 [ten borin]. 

wheel-turning king: See king, wheel-turning. 

whisk: #-— [hossu]. A ceremonial implement used by and thus 
representing a Zen master. 

whisk, raise the: #24 [kohotsu]. 

white-ox cart: See cart, white-ox. 

wholeheartedly: —[4)|< [ikkOni], literally, in a single direction. 

wholeness: —4] [ichinyo], literally, one thusness. —& [itt6], literally, 
one and equal. Inseparableness. Not one, not two. Also translated as 
“oneness.” 

wholesome: # [zen]. Commonly translated as good. 

wholesome action, do. See also Refrain from Unwholesome Action. 

wholesome actions, ten: [jizen] +. Refraining from engaging in the 
ten unwholesome actions. 

wholesome at the beginning, middle, and end: #9) 444% [sho chi go zen]. 

wicked time: 358% [akuji]. 

willing: FE [gangy6], literally, wish and enjoy. 

willow: fat) [yoryi). 

willow twig: t2*& [ydjil. 

willows, plums, peaches, or apricots: tat3hk= [yo bai to ri]. 

wind: [al [fa/kaze]. Often represents style of teaching. 

wind, nature of: FE\ [fish]. 

wind, unobstructed: #2 %t/&l, [mugefi]. 

wind and stream: Klin [faryi]. Activity of all things, or pure practice. 
Also, lingering trace. 

wind-and-string pavilion: See pavilion, wind-and-string. 

wind and the banner: Ja\t& [faban]. 

window, bright: BA [my6s6]. 

window, lattice: t8-F [renji]. 

winter solstice: —8&% [ichi yo], literally, one sun. 

wisdom, all-: §€24 [sabanya]. Skt., sarva jfia, literally, all-wisdom; 
all-knower. 

wisdom, cultivation of: #(€ [kunju]. 

wisdom, realization of: #053;R#22 [chiken haramitsu], literally, 
paramita of knowing and seeing. 

wisdom and practice, complete: BA{7 © [my6 gyosoku]. 

wisdom beings, seven: -C& [shichiken]. Stages of early Buddhist 
practice. 

wisdom beings, three: =€ [sangen]. Stages of early Buddhist practice. 
Also, three classes; see bodhisattvas of the ten stages and three classes. 

wisdom beyond desire: #£:m#§ [muro chi], literally, no-desire wisdom. 

wisdom equaling the master: #3} ii [chitd ushi]. 

wisdom eyes. See also eyes, five. 

wisdom is pushed aside, while emotions arise: See emotions arise wisdom is 
pushed aside, while. 

wisdom surpassing the master: #§ 88 [chisho ushi]. 

Wise and Fools Sitra: BA [Gengu Kyd]. Collection of sixty-nine 
stories. Titled thus in China. 

wise people: A, [kenjin]. 

wishes, four aspects of the fulfillment of: FU90%3 [shinyoisoku]. Four 
bases of practice for enlightenment: (1) Wish for excellent 
meditation. (2) Effort for excellent meditation. (3) Controlling of 
mind. (4) Contemplation and observation with wisdom. 

wisteria, entwined around a tree like: Whe tt [nyoto iju]. 

wisteria vines entangled with each other, like: {0##{@# [nyoto itd]. 

withered stake: See stake, withered. 

withered tree: See tree, withered. 

Within a Dream Expressing the Dream: Sai [Muchi Setsumu]. 
Thirty-ninth fascicle of this book. 

within, turn the light to shine: See turn the light to shine within. 

woman, old: &#f [rdbasu]. f [su] is a suffix with no special 
meaning. 

woman becoming a buddha, a: hk [nyoshin jobutsu]. There was 
an ancient belief that a woman could not become a buddha. An 
early Mahayana response was that a woman can turn her body into 

a male body in this lifetime and gain enlightenment. Dogen denies 
this theory and asserts that everyone can be enlightened. (In his 
later life, he emphasizes that one can become a buddha only by 
leaving the household.) 

womb: Ag [tairi], literally, inside the womb. 

womb, sacred: 228A [shotai]. Body that contains the potential of a 
buddha. 

womb birth, egg birth, moisture birth, transformation birth: AASAIRAL [tai 
ran shitsu ke]. 

women, heavenly: KX [tennyo]. 

wonder of wonders: #72) [my6 no myd]. 

wondrous: #) [myo]. iZH\7i [tei firyi], literally, express wind and 
stream. 

wondrous, most: #i&#) [gokumy6]. 

Wondrous Plateau: %)#2 [Myoko Dai]. The abbot’s quarters at the 
Tiantong Monastery. 

wooden dipper, broken: 4&7\#) [ha mokushaku]. Useless. Fully 
immersed in sitting. 

wooden stalk: AX#K [bokuketsu]. 

word vein: #Hk [gomyaku]. Continuous expression. Ceaseless 
murmuring. 

word(s), turning: #448 [tengo]. Statement that crushes delusion and 
leads to liberation. 

words: Sim [gontan], literally, edge of speech. i&/& [dotei], literally, 
expression. J& [tei] is a suffix meaning “that which is.” if 
[gongo]. S34) [gonku], literally, word and phrase. 4) [ku], literally, 
phrase. 1. Limited dualistic expressions, which are a hindrance to 
realization. 2. In Dodgen’s usage, the entire expression of 
enlightenment, including silence. 

words, after the: ®)#% [kugo], literally, after the phrase. 

words, conversational: i428 [tstigo], literally, ordinary talk. 

words, golden: 5 [kingen]. 

words, profound: %zx [gendan]. 

words, truthful: 74S [jogon]. 

words, with: #4) [uku]. 

words and phrases, confined to: ##Si#) [taigon taiku]. 

words are all-inclusive: 53> [goto], literally, words that are equal. 

work: If [kug6], literally, effect of the work. Accomplishment. 

work leader. See also officers, six. 

work of the way: 143 [dogo]. Activity of the way, understanding. 

work on: {£329 [shuri-su], literally, practice the principle. ##8(9) 
[roroku(-su)], literally, scoop up and roll. 

worker: {7% [anja]. Assistant. 

Worker Lu. See also Dajian Huineng. 

working. See also activity. 

working, part of the: —i&7K [ichi zoji], literally, one creating. 

world, all-embracing: #5 [hengai], literally, all over the world. #jZF 
[henhokkai], literally, all over the dharma world. Whole world of 
phenomena. 

world, dusty: EE#% [jinkai]. Ordinary world. E255 [jinr6], literally, 
dusty labor. 

world, entire: HF} [jinkai], 25 [konkai]. 

world, floating: ##t£ [ukiyo]. 

world, heavenly: EF} [jokai], literally, upper world. 

world, leave the dusty: HWE [shutsujin]. 

world, material: 23144] [kiseken]. Realm of insentient beings. 

world, nothing is hidden in the entire: #527 3 igi, [hengai fu s0z6]. 

world beyond conditions: *§4} [kakugai], literally, outside frameworks. 
Beyond worldly scales or ordinary thinking. 

World-Honored One: Skt., bhagavan. Transliteration: 3#(1% 
[Bagyabon]. Translation: t& [Seson], literally, world-revered. One 
of the ten primary titles of the Buddha. (#t2 [Butsu Seson]; 
Buddha, the World-Honored One. Shakyamuni Buddha. 

world of blossoming flowers arises: 3 Ratt FRc [kekai sekai ki]. A line in 
the transmission poem from Prajnatara to Bodhidharma. 

world of phenomena, most honored in the: 492-48 [hokkai chi son]. 

worldly life, renounce: See life, renounce worldly. 

worlds, billion: See billion worlds. worlds, four: FUKF [shitenge]. Four 
mythological continents around Mount Sumeru. 

worlds, three: =tt# [sanze]. Past, present, and future. 

Wuji Liaopai: #28 Sik [Musai Rydha]. 1149-1224, China. Dharma 
heir of Zhuoan Deguang, Linji School. Abbot of Mount Tiantong 
when Dogen first visited the monastery. 

Wuxin: See Sixin Wuxin. 

Wuxue: See Cuiwei Wuxue. 

Wuzu Fayan: H48;438 [Goso Hoen]. d. 1104, China. Dharma heir of 
Haihui Shouduan, Linji School. Taught at Mount Wuzu, Qi Region 
(Hubei), and spread teachings of the Yangqi Order. His successors 
included Fuyan Qingyuan, Taiping Huiqin, and Yuanwu Kegin. 

Xiangshan Baojing: #4? [Kozan H6jo]. Ca. sixth century. Taught 
at Mount Xiang, Luoyang (Henan). Sent Dazu Huike to study with 
Bodhidharma. 

Xiangyan Zhixian: #3 — [Kyogen Chikan]. d. 898. Guiyang School. 
Ordained by Baizhang Huaihai and studied with Guishan Lingyou. 
Left Guishan and was enlightened by the sound of a pebble striking 
bamboo while he was sweeping at the graveyard of Nanyang 
Huizhong on Mount Wudang, Jun Region (Hubei). Became dharma 

heir of Guishan and taught at Xiangyan Monastery, Deng Region 
(Henan). His posthumous name is Great Master Xideng, EVE XE 
[Shuto Daishi]. 

Xianlang: See Zuoxi Xian lang. 

Xiantong Era: fXitFA [Kantsi nenchi]. 860-873, Tang Dynasty, 
China. This is when Xuansha Shibei aspired to leave the household 
at age thirty. Signifies a particular time, also, anytime. 

Xiaoang: #aen [Shogo]. Ca. sixth century, China. Known as the 
Governor of Guang Province, Liang Kingdom, who greeted 
Bodhidharma when he arrived from India. 

Xiaoliao: See Biandan Xiaoliao. 

Xinchang: {7H [Gyosho]. Ca. seventh-eighth century, China. A 
student of Sixth Ancestor Huineng. Biography unknown. 

Xinghua Cunjiang: 8{07#22 [Koke Sonsh6]. 830-888, China. Dharma 
heir of Linji Yixuan, Linji School. Taught at Xinghua Monastery, 
Weifu (Hebei). Supervised the compilation of Linji Record. His 
posthumous name is Great Master Guanji, A268 [Kosai Daishi]. 

Xingnian: See Shoushan Xingnian. 

Xingsi: See Qingyuan Xingsi. 

Xinlong: #82 [Sheiryai]. A temple in Chang’an where monk Daoyin 
wrote a commentary on the Diamond Sutra. 

Xigian: See Shitou Xigian. 

Xishan Liang: FRLUS% [Seizan Ryd]. Ca. eighth-ninth century, China. 
Dharma heir of Mazu Daoyi, Nanyue Line. Retreated to Mount Xi, 
also called Mount Shuangfeng, Huangmei, Qi Region (Hubei). 
Biography unknown. 

Xitang Zhizang: FES SiR [Seidd Chizd]. 735-814, China. Dharma heir 
of Mazu Daoyi, Nanyue Line. Zhizang, Huahai, and Nanquan 
Puyuan were the three most outstanding students of Mazu, who 
praised the former two by saying, “Zang’s head is white, Hai’s head 
is black.” His posthumous name is Zen Master Dajiao, K#B##6M. 

Xiujing: See Jingzhao Xiujing. 

Xiyun: See Huangbo Xiyun. 

Xuanjian: See Deshan Xuanjian. 

Xianjiao: See Yongjia Xianjiao. 

Xuansha Shibei: %}) iif [Gensha Shibi]. 835-908, China. Third son 
of Xie Family, #{= 68 [Sha Sanr6]. Engaged in fishing in childhood. 
Studied with Xuefeng Yicun and was called Ascetic Bei, {#886 [Bi 
Zuda], for his severe observance of precepts. Celebrated by Dogen 
for his statement “The entire world of the ten directions is one 
bright pearl.” Abbot of Xuansha Monastery, Fu Region (Fujian). 
Given title Great Master Zongyi, =2—ZA&M [Soichi Daishi] by the 
emperor. 

Xuantai: See Nanyue Xuantat. 

Xuanze: See Baoen Xuanze. 

Xuechuang Zongyue: aA [Sesso Sogetsu]. Ca. thirteenth century, 
China. Head monk at Tiantong Jingde Monastery when Dogen was 
practicing there. 

Xuedou Zhijian: = B33 [Setcho Chikan]. 1105-1192, China. Dharma 
heir of Tiantong Zongjiao, Caodong School. Taught at Mount 
Xuedou, Ming Region (Zhejiang), where many students came to 
hear his dharma, including his famous dharma heir, Tiantong 
Rujing. As a boy, he saw the marks of the Buddha on his hands. As 
an adult, he became enlightened late one night despite seeing a 
hundred ghosts. 

Xuedou Zhongxian: #28 [Setcho Jiken]. 980-1052, China. 
Dharma heir of Zhimen Guangzuo, Yunmen School. Taught at 
Mount Xuedou, Ming Region (Zhejiang). As he was a noted poet, his 
selection of koans became the basis of the Blue Cliff Record. His 
posthumous name was Zen Master Mingjiao, BAS##6 [Mydkaku 
Zenji]. 

Xuefeng Yicun: 338% [Seppo Gison]. 822-908, China. Dharma heir 
of Deshan Xuanjian, Qingyuan Line. Taught at Mount Xuefeng, Fu 
Region (Fujian), where his congregation of monks rose to fifteen 
hundred. He emphasized direct, wordless experience in his teaching. 
It was Xuefeng who famously tipped over the rice pot when his 
teacher Dongshan asked him whether he would strain the rice from 
the sand or the sand from the rice. His posthumous name is Great 
Master Zhenjiao, Af [Shinkaku Daishi]. 

yaksha. See also guardians, eight types of. 

Yama, King: Skt. E& = [Emma O]. fi##= [Enra O]. Lord of hell. 

Yang Wengong: t@3C2S [YO Bunko]. taf— [YO Oku]. 974?-1020?, 
China. Poet and government official. Lay student of Shoushan 
Xingnian, Linji School. Supervised Jingde Record of Transmission of 
the Lamp. 

Yangqi Fanghui: tgllX77@ [Yogi Hoe]. 993-1046, China. Dharma heir 
of Ciming Chuyuan, Linji School. Taught at Mount Yangqi, Yuan 
Region (Jiangxi). Regarded as founder of the Yangqi Order of the 
Linji School. He became a monk after he got into trouble as a tax 
administrator and was forced to flee the city. He taught that 
enlightenment is to be found in everyday events. 

Yangshan Huiji: (023% [Gyozan/Kyozan Ejaku]. 803-887, China. 
Opposed by his parents, he cut off two fingers to show his 
determination to become a monk. When young, studied with 
Baizhang Huaihai. He was like Shariputra, who gave one hundred 
answers to ten questions, and he was called Small Shakyamuni. 
Attending Guishan Lingyou, he spent three years watching over a 

buffalo. Became dharma heir of Guishan. Taught at Mount Yang, 
Yuan Region (Jiangxi). Sometimes said to have had prophetic 
talents, he also used symbolic circular diagrams in his teaching. 
Guiyang School was partly named after him. 

Yanguan Qi’an: 28273 [Engan Sai’an]. 750-842, China. Dharma heir 
of Mazu Daoyi, Nanyue Line. He had an unusual appearance, and 
Mazu recognized him as a “great vessel.”Taught at Haichang 
Monastery, Yanguan, Hang Region (Zhejiang). Known as an 
accomplished teacher of the precepts. The famous koan of the 
rhinoceros fan—”If the fan is broken, then bring me _ the 
rhinoceros”—is his teaching. His posthumous name is National 
Teacher Qi’an, 24 EJEM [Seian Kokushi]. 

Yanhui: #8[2] [Gankai]. Top student of Confucius. Lived in poverty, 
enjoyed the Heaven’s decree, and engaged in virtuous conduct. 

Yantou Quanhuo: fs ([Gantd Zenkatsu]. 828-887, China. 
Dharma heir of Deshan Xuanjian. Traveled widely with his friend 
Xuefeng Yicun. Taught at Yantou near Lake Dongting (Hunan), 
where many monks came to study with him. He was attacked and 
killed by bandits while sitting in meditation. Without losing his 
composure he made a great shout that could be heard ten miles 
away. 

Yanzhao: See Fengxue Yanzhao. 

Yaoshan Weiyan: #.L'¥£(g [Yakusan Igen]. 745-828, China. He was 
an earnest student of the precepts, but when he grew weary of the 
repetitive observances, he went to study with Shitou Xiqian, 
Qingyuan Line, and became his dharma heir. Taught at Mount Yao, 
Feng Region (Hunan). Noted by Dogen for replying to a monk that 
during meditation he thought of not-thinking, which is beyond 
thinking. Once, when the monks entered the hall to hear his lecture, 
he descended the dharma seat without saying a word. His 
posthumous name is Great Master Hongdao, 5Ai8X6 [Kodo 
Daishi]. 

Yefu Daochuan: (@3238)|| [Yafu Dosen]. Ca. eleventh-twelfth century, 
China. Dharma heir of Jingin Jicheng, Linji School. 

Yicun: See Xuefeng Yicun. 

yin and yang: C. B28% [in’yo]. —44 [nihei], literally, two stems, two 
powers. Passive and active forces. 

Yinfeng: See Deng Yinfeng. 

Ying’an Tanhua: f&#%## [Oan Donge]. 1103-1163, China. Dharma 
heir of Huqiu Shaolong, Linji School. Taught at Mount Tiantong 
(Zhejiang). Regarded as one of the Two Nectar Gates of Linji School, 
along with Dahui Zonggao. 

Yiging: See Touzi Yiqing. 

Yixuan: See Linji Yixuan. 

Yizhong: See Sanping Yizhong. 

YO Koshi: t43¢%5. Ca. thirteenth century, Japan. An early lay student 
of Dogen’s. Resided in Kyishit Island. Further biography unknown. 
yojana: Skt. FA®) [yujun]. Measuring unit. Seven to nine miles. 

Distance for an ancient king to travel per day. 

Yongjia Xuanjiao: 7K#2%'S [YoOka Genkaku]. d. 713. Came from 
Yongjia Prefecture, Wen Region (Zhejiang). After studying the 
Tiantai meditation of the Lotus School, he studied Zen. Upon 
meeting and exchanging a few words with Sixth Ancestor Huineng, 
he received dharma transmission and stayed overnight at his 
community, so he was called Overnight Jiao (Awakening). He went 
back to Wen Region and taught. Wrote a poem, “Song of the 
Realization of the Way.” His posthumous name is Great Master 
Zhenjiao, & Afb [Shinkaku Daishi]. 

Yongping Era: 2K*#4FA [Eihei nenchii]. In the tenth year of the 
Yongping Era [67 c.z.] during the reign of Emperor Xiaoming of the 
Later Han Dynasty, Buddhism was formally introduced to China 
from India. 

Yoshimine Temple: Bl@3F /H%aF [Yoshimine-dera, also Kippo-ji]. 
Located in Echizen Province, Japan. Dogen’s community resided in 
the thatched-roof building of this abandoned temple while the 
nearby Daibutsu Monastery was under construction. 

you and I are just this: {f#x22 [niga ko]. 

you have attained my marrow: See marrow, you have attained my. 

Yuanguan: See Liangshan Yuanguan. 

Yuanwu Kegin: H|t8522) [Engo Kokugon]. 1063-1135, China. Also 
called Jiashan. Dharma heir of Wuzu Faya n, Linji School. Taught at 
Jiashan Monastery (Hunan). Had over one thousand students. 
Compiled the Blue Cliff Record by adding comments and verses to 
Xuedou’s one hundred cases. His posthumous name is Zen Master 
Zhenjiao, & #8 & [Shinkaku Zenji]. 

Yuanzhi: See Daowu Yuanzhi. 

Yuezhou Qianfeng: #!}|#Z2= [Esshi Kempo]. Ca. ninth century, China. 
Caodong School. Dharma heir of Dongshan Liangjie. Taught in Yue 
Region (Zhejiang). When asked by a monk about all buddhas’ road 
to nirvana, he responded by drawing a line on the ground with his 
walking stick. 

Yun’an Kewen: See Zhenjing Kewen. 

Yunding Defu: #=JA###X% [Uncho Tokufu]. Ca. ninth-tenth century, 
China. Dharma heir of Sushan Guangren, Caodong School. 
Biography unknown. 

Yunju Daoying: = EjE/& [Ungo Doyo]. d. 902, China. Caodong School. 
Dharma heir of Dongshan Liangjie. He founded Jenru (True Thus- 
ness) Monastery on Mount Yunju, Hong Region (Jiangxi), and 

taught many monks there for more than thirty years. His 
posthumous name is Great Master Hongjiao, 54#¢X6f [Kokaku 
Zenji]. 

Yunmen School: PH [Ummon Shi]. A lineage from Yunmen 
Wenyan. One of the Five Schools of Zen in China. 

Yunmen Wenyan: #F93@({2 [Ummon Bun’en]. 864-949, China. After 
becoming dharma heir of Xuefeng Yicun, he traveled widely and 
established a monastery at Mount Yunmen, Shao Region 
(Guangdong). His community grew to include one thousand monks. 
His teaching flourished, and he is considered founder of the 
Yunmen School. Known for expressing buddha dharma in pithy 
single phrases. Given the title Great Master Daciyun Kuangzhen, 
24 [ES Ab [Daijiun KyOshin Daishi] by the Emperor. 

Yunyan Tansheng: #fxrx [Ungan Donjo]. 782-841, China. Studied 
with Baizhang Huaihai for twenty years. Then he became a disciple 
of Yaoshan Weiyan, Qingyuan Line, and became his dharma heir. 
Taught at Yunyan, Tan Region (Hunan). Many dialogues are 
recorded between Yunyan and his dharma and biological brother, 
Daowu Yuanzhi. Dongshan Liangjie, who studied with several 
famous teachers, regarded the lesser-known Yunyan as his dharma 
teacher because Yunyan never explained anything directly. His 
posthumous name is Great Master Wuzhu, #8{£A6ii [Mujii Daishi]. 

Yuquan Shenxiu: —5R##75 [Gyokusen Jinshii]. d. 706, China. Dharma 
heir of Fifth Ancestor Daman Hongren, he was the most senior 
student among over seven hundred peers. Taught at Mount 
Dangyang, Jing Region (Hubei). Regarded as founder of Northern 
School of Zen, while his dharma brother Huineng is regarded as 
founder of Southern School of Zen. 

zazen: J. 444%. A Chinese compound of zuo [za], sitting, and chan 
[zen], meditation. Total concentration of body and mind in upright 
seated meditation posture, which is the basis of Zen Buddhist 
practice. 

Zazen School: 44487 [Zazen Shi]. 

Zazen, The Point of: See Point of Zazen, The. 

Zen: J. ##. Originally, Skt. dhyana. Its Chinese transliteration is 
channa, ## #8 [zenna]. Abbreviated as chan [zen]. Translated as &# 
f& [joryol, literally, quiet thinking. 1. Meditation; contemplation. 2. 
Zen Buddhist practice. 3. Zen School of Buddhism. 4. In Dogen’s 
usage, the buddha way. 

Zen, practice: 4% [sanzen], literally, visiting (and studying) Zen (with 
a teacher). 

Zen master: ##6 [zenji]. 1. Accomplished meditation teacher. 2. Title 
given by the Emperor. 

Zen monastery: ##§% [zen’in]. 

Zen School: ##7% [Zen Shi]. Zen Gate, ##P4 [Zemmon]. 

Zen student: A [gakunin], literally, studying person. 

Zen text: #8} [zensatsu], literally, Zen bundle (of books). 

Zhang Zhuo: Stitt [Cho Setsu]. Ca. ninth century, China. Scholar. Had 
realization after exchanging a few words with Shishuang Qingzhu. 
Zhanran: }£9& [Tannen]. 711-782, Tiantai School sixth ancestor and 
scholar who articulated the teaching potential of grasses and trees 
and more generally the buddha nature of nonsentient beings. These 
were important philosophical background materials for Dogen’s 
teachings about worldview and buddha nature. Author of Zhiguan 
Fu Xingchuan Hongjue, Ir#i8A{T1—54iR (Biological Study of the 
Buddha’s Practice That Supported Shamatha and Vipashyana)—a 
large commentary on Mahe Fuchuan 3] 1b #8 [Maka Shikan] (Great 
Shamatha and Vipashyana) by Zhiyi, founder of the Tiantai School. 
Dogen quotes this book of Zhanran, while referring to him as an 

ancient teacher. 

Zhantang Wenzhun: }#3<4= [Tandd Monjun]. 1061-1115, China. 
Studied with Zhenjing Kewen, Linji School, and became his dharma 
heir. Abbot of Letan Monastery, Nanchang (Jiangxi). 

Zhao: see Hutou Zhao. 

Zhao, Superintendent: it} [Cho Teiko]. Ca. thirteenth century, 
China. Government officer, grandson of Emperor Ning of the Song 
Dynasty. A lay student of Tiantong Rujing. 

Zhaojiao Changzong: 88348 [Shokaku J6s6]. 1025-1091, China. 
Dharma heir of Huanglong Huinan, Linji School. Taught at Donglin 
Monastery, Jiang Region (Jiangxi). Teacher of Su Dongpo. His 
posthumous name is Zen Master Zhaojiao, 5@##6 [Shokaku 
Zenji]. 

Zhaozhou Congshen: #8)" [Joshi Jishin]. 778-897, China. 
Dharma heir of Nanquan Puyuan, Qingyuan Line. Aroused 
aspiration for enlightenment at age sixty-one. Taught for forty years 
at Guanyin Monastery, Zhao Region [Zhaozhou] (Hebei). His 
teachings are collected in Recorded Sayings of Zen Master Zhenji of 
Zhaozhou. A great many of his sayings, and anecdotes about him, 
are used as koans, including the koan mu, about a dog’s buddha 
nature. His posthumous name is Great Master Zhenji, BRRA&MD 
[Shinzai Daishi]. 

Zhengjiao: See Hongzhi Zhengjiao. 

Zhengshou: See Leian Zhengshou. 

Zhenxie Qingliao: See Changlu Qingliao. 

Zhichang: See Guizong Zhichang. 

Zhicong: #§4@ [Chiso]. Ca. twelfth century, China. Also named Huiyan 
Zhizhao. Dharma heir of Zhuoweng Ruyan, Linji School. Visited 

monasteries for twenty years and compiled Human and Deva Eyes. 

Zhifu: See Ehu Zhifu. 

Zhijian: See Xuedou Zhijian. 

Zhimen Guangzuo: #§P93¢#%F [Chimon KOso]. Ca. tenth century, China. 
Dharma heir of Xianglin Chengyuan, Yunmen School. He first 
taught at Shuangchuan in Suizhou and later became Abbot of 
Zhimen Monastery, Sui Region (Hubei), from which he derived his 
name. Also known as Beita Guangzuo. 

Zhiqin: See Lingyun Zhiqin. 

Zhixian: See Guanxi Zhixian; Xiangyan Zhixian. 

Zhiyi Kefu: 44%524 [Shie Kokufu]. Ca. ninth century, China. Linji 
School. Student of Linji Yixuan. Called Ascetic Paper Robe (Zhiyi) 
because of his clothes. Also called Zhuozhou Kefu. 

Zhiyuan: See Gushan Zhiyuan. 

Zhizang: See Xitang Zhizang. 

Zhongjian: 3% [Sdkan]. Ca. twelfth-thirteenth century, China. Abbot 
of Wannian Monastery on Mount Tiantai (Zhejiang) before Dogen 
visited. Biography unknown. 

Zhongjin: See Sun Zhongjin. 

Zhongxian: See Xuedou Zhongxian. 

Zhongxing: See Jianyuan Zhongxing. 

Zhou, Lord: JAX [Shi Taifu]. Ca. twelfth century B.cz. Named Ji 
Dan. Son of King Wen and brother of King Wu. Established legal 
system of the Zhou Dynasty. Regarded as an ideal ruler by 
Confucius. 

Zhu, Government Secretary: “{a}# [Chiku Shdsho]. Ca. ninth century, 
China. Studied with Changsha Jingcen, Qingyuan Line. Biography 
unknown. 

Zhu Falan: See Dharmaratna. 

Zhuangzi: #¢-F [Sdji (Sdshi)]. Also, Chuang-tzu. Ca. fourth century 
B.C.E., China. Zhuangzhou, author of Zhuangzi, one of the main texts 
of ancient Daoism. Known for his wit, colorful parables, and deep 
insight. 

Zhuo: See Zhang Zhuo. 

Zhuoan Deguang: fii#%#3¢ [Setsuan Tokko]. 1121-1203. Dharma heir 
of Dahui Zonggao, Linji School. The Emperor gave him the honorary 
title Zen Master Fuzhao, (#88##6 [Buss Zenji]. Abbot of Ayuwang 
Monastery, Ming Region (Zhejiang), when Dogen’s teacher Rujing 
visited. Later taught at Lingying Monastery and Mount Jia, both in 
Hang Region (Zhejiang). His posthumous name is Great Zen Master 
Puhui Zongjiao, SBR BAAN [Fue Shikaku Daizanji]. 

Zhuozhou Kefu: See Zhiyi Kefu. 

Zhiyuan: See Bozhao Zhiyuan. 

Zichun: See Danxia Zichun. 

Zidan. See also Su Dongpo. 

Zixuan: See Changshui Zixuan. 

Zongchi, Nun: fe48#4 [Ni Soji]. Ca. sixth century, China. A disciple of 
Bodhidharma. Biography unknown. Described in apocryphal 
legends as the daughter of Emperor Wu, whom Bodhidharma first 
encountered upon arrival in China. 

Zonggao: See Dahui Zonggao. 

Zongjiao: See Tiantong Zongjiao. 

Zongyue: See Xuechuang Zongyue. 

Zunxu: See Li Zunxu. 

Zuoxi Xianlang: AZ82%BA [Sakei Genrd]. Ca. seventh-eighth century, 
China. Dharma brother of Yongjia Xuanjiao when he was practicing 
in the Lotus School. 

Zuxin: See Huitang Zuxin. 

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Albany: State University of New York Press, 1994. 

____. Existential and Ontological Dimensions of Time in Heidegger and 
Dogen. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1985. 

__.. The Zen Poetry of Dogen: Verses from the Mountain of Eternal 
Peace. Boston: Tuttle Publishing, 1997. 

Ichimura, Shohei, trans. and ed. Zen Master Eihei Dogen’s Monastic 
Regulations. Woodville, Wash.: North American Institute of Zen and 
Buddhist Studies, 1993. 

Jaffe, Paul, trans. Flowers of Emptiness: Dogen’s Genjokoan with 
Commentary by Yasutani Roshi. Boston: Shambhala Publications, 
1997. 

Kim, Hee Jin. Dogen on Meditation and Thinking: A Reflection on His 
View of Zen. Albany: State University of New York Press, 2007. 

____. Eihei Dogen: Mystical Realist. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2004. 

Kim, Hee Jin, trans. Flowers of Emptiness: Selections from Dogen’s 
Shobogenzo. Lewiston, N.Y.: Edwin Mellen Press, 1985. 

Kodera, Takashi James. Dogen’s Formative Years in China: An Historical 
Study and Annotated Translation of the Hokyo-ki. Boulder, Colo.: 
Prajna Press, 1980. 

Kopf, Gereon. Beyond Personal Identity: Dogen, Nishida, and a 
Phenomenology of No-Self. Richmond, Surrey: Curzon Press, 2001. 
LaFleur, William R., ed. Dogen Studies. Honolulu: Kuroda Institute, 

University of Hawaii Press, 1985. 

Leighton, Taigen Dan. Songs for the True Dharma Eye: Verse Comments 
on Dogen’s Shobogenzo. San Francisco: Browser Books, 2007. 

____. Visions of Awakening Space and Time: Dogen and the Lotus Sutra. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2007. 

Leighton, Taigen Dan, and Okumura Shohaku, trans. with 
introductions. Dogen’s Extensive Record: A Translation of the Eihei 
Koroku. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2004. 

__., trans. Dogen’s Pure Standards for the Zen Community: A 
Translation of Eihei Shingi. Albany: State University of New York 
Press, 1996. 

Masunaga, Reiho. A Primer of Soto Zen: A Translation of Dogen’s 
Shobogenzo Zuimonki. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 1978. 

Merzel, Dennis Genpo. Beyond Sanity and Madness: The Way of Zen 
Master Dogen. Boston: Charles E. Tuttle, 1994. 

Myers, Bob. First Dogen Book. Scott Valley, Calif.: CreateSpace, 2008. 

Nearman, Hubert, trans. The Shobogenzo: A Trainee’s Translation of 
Great Master Dogen’s Spiritual Masterpiece. www.urbandharma.org/ 
udharmal12/shobo.html. 

Nishijima, Gudo Wafu, and Chodo Cross, trans. Master Dogen’s 
Shobogenzo. 4 vols. Woods Hole, Mass.: Windbell Publications, 
1994-1998. 

Nishijima, Gudo. Master Dogen’s Shinji Shobogenzo. Woods Hole, Mass.: 
Windbell Publications, 2003. 

Nishiyama, Kosen, and John Stevens. Dogen Zenji’s Shobogenzo (The 
Eye and Treasury of the True Law). 4 vols. Sendai, Japan: 
Daihokkaikaku, 1975-1983. 

Okumura, Shohaku, trans. and ed. Dogen Zen. Kyoto: Kyoto Soto Zen 
Center, 1988. 

___, trans. Shobogenzo Zuimonki: Sayings of Eihei Dogen Zenji, Recorded 

by Koun Ejo. Kyoto: Kyoto Soto Zen Center, 1987. 

_, ed. Dogen Zen and Its Relevance for Our Time: An International 
Symposium Held in Celebration of the 800th Anniversary of the Birth of 
Dogen Zenji. San Francisco: Soto Zen Buddhism International Center, 
2003. 

Okumura, Shohaku, and Taigen Dan Leighton, trans. The Wholehearted 
Way: A Translation of Eihei Dogen’s Bendowa with Commentary by 
Kosho Uchiyama Roshi. Boston: Charles Tuttle and Co., 1997. 

Rajneesh, Osho. Dogen the Zen Master: A Search and a Fulfillment. 
Cologne, West Germany, Rebel Publishing House, 1988. 

Shasta Abbey Buddhist Monastery. Shobogenzo. www.shastaabbey.org/ 
shobogenzo1.htm. 

Shimano, Eido, and Charles Vacher, trans. Shobogenzo Busshé: The 
Buddha Nature / La nature donc bouddha. La Versanne, France: Encre 
Marine, 2002. 

____, trans. Shobogenzo Uji: Etre-temps (Being time). La Versanne, 
France: Encre Marine, 1997. 

____, trans. Shobogenzo yui butsu yo butsu, shdji / Seul boudha connait 
bouddha, vie-mort. La Versanne, France: Encre Marine, 1999. 

Stambaugh, Joan. Impermanence Is Buddha-Nature: Dogen’s 
Understanding of Temporality. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 
1990. 

Tanahashi, Kazuaki, ed. and trans. Beyond Thinking: A Guide to Zen 
Meditation by Zen Master Dogen. Boston: Shambhala Publications, 
2004. 

__, ed. Enlightenment Unfolds: The Essential Teachings of Zen Master 

Dogen. Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1999. 

____, ed. Moon in a Dewdrop: Writings of Zen Master Dogen. New York: 
North Point Press, 1985. 

Tanahashi, Kazuaki, and John Daido Loori, trans., with commentary 
and verse by John Daido Loori. The True Dharma Eye: Zen Master 
Dogen’s Three Hundred Koans. Boston: Shambhala Publications, 
2005. 

Waddell, Norman, and Abe Masao, trans. The Heart of Dogen’s 
Shobogenzo. Albany: State University of New York Press, 2002. 

Warner, Brad. Sit Down and Shut Up: Punk Rock Commentaries on 

Buddha, God, Truth, Sex, Death, and Dogen’s Treasury of the Right 
Dharma Eye. Novato, Calif.: New World Library, 2007. 

Warner, Jisho, Okumura Shohaku, John McRae, and Taigen Dan 
Leighton, eds. Nothing Is Hidden: Essays on Zen Master Dogen’s 
Instructions for the Cook. New York: Weatherhill, 2001. 

Wright, Thomas, trans.RefiningYour Life: From the Zen Kitchen to 
Enlightenment by Zen Master Dogen and Kosho Uchiyama. New 
York: Weatherhill, 1983. 

Yokoi, Yuho, trans. The Shobogenzo. Tokyo: Sankibo Buddhist 
Bookstore, 1986. 

Yokoi, Yuho, with Daizen Victoria. Zen Master Dogen: An Introduction 
with Selected Writings. New York: Weatherhill, 1976. 

Books with Material Concerning Dogen 

Anderson, Reb. Being Upright: Zen Meditation and the Bodhisattva 

Precepts. Berkeley: Rodmell Press, 2001. 

_. Warm Smiles from Cold Mountains: Dharma Talks on Zen 

Meditation. Berkeley: Rodmell Press, 1999. 

Barnhart, Bruno, and Joseph Wong, eds. Purity of Heart and 
Contemplation: A Monastic Dialogue between Christian and Asian 
Traditions. New York: Continuum, 2001. 

Bodiford, William M. Soto Zen in Medieval Japan. Honolulu: Kuroda 
Institute, University of Hawai’i Press, 1993. 

Cleary, Thomas, trans. and ed. Minding Mind: A Course in Basic 
Meditation. Boston: Shambhala Publications, 1995. 

____, ed. and trans. Timeless Spring: A Soto Zen Anthology. Tokyo: 
Weatherhill, 1980. 

Faure, Bernard. Visions of Power: Imagining Medieval Japanese 
Buddhism. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996. 

Heine, Steven. Shifting Shape, Shaping Text: Philosophy and Folklore in 
the Fox Koan. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 1999. 

____. Zen Skin, Zen Marrow: Will the Real Zen Buddhism Please Stand 
Up? New York: Oxford University Press, 2008. 

Heine, Steven, and Dale Wright, eds. Zen Ritual: Studies of Zen Buddhist 
Theory in Practice. New York: Oxford University Press, 2008. 

Kasulis, T. P. Zen Action / Zen Person. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i 
Press, 1981. 

Katagiri, Dainin. Each Moment Is the Universe: Zen and the Way of Being 
Time. Boston: Shambhala Publications, 2007. 

____. Returning to Silence, Zen Practice in Daily Life. Boston: Shambhala 
Publications, 1988. 

Leighton, Taigen Dan. Faces of Compassion: Classic Bodhisattva 

Archetypes and Their Modern Expressions. Boston: Wisdom 
Publications, 2003. 

Leighton, Taigen Dan, and Yi Wu, trans. Cultivating the Empty Field: 
The Silent Illumination of Zen Master Hongzhi. Boston: Tuttle 
Publishing, 2000. 

Loori, John Daido, ed. The Art of Just Sitting: Essential Writings on the 
Zen Practice of Shikantaza. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2002. 

Nearman, Hubert, trans. The Denkoroku: The Record of the Transmission 
of the Light, by Zen Master Keizan Jokin. Mount Shasta, Calif.: Shasta 
Abbey Press, 1993. 

Okumura, Shohaku, trans. and ed. Shikantaza: An Introduction to 
Zazen. Kyoto: Kyoto Soto Zen Center, 1985. 

Okumura, Shohaku, ed. Soto Zen: An Introduction to Zazen. Tokyo: Soto 
Shu Shumucho, 2002. 

Okumura, Shohaku, and Thomas Wright, trans. Opening the Hand of 
Thought. New York: Arkana; Viking Penguin, 1994. 

Payne, Richard, and Taigen Dan Leighton, eds. Discourse and Ideology 
in Medieval Japanese Buddhism. London: Routledge, 2006. 

Snyder, Gary. Mountains and Rivers without End. Washington, D.C:: 
Counterpoint, 1996. 

____. The Practice of the Wild. New York: North Point Press, 1990. 

Suzuki, Shunryu. Not Always So: Practicing the True Spirit of Zen. New 
York: HarperCollins, 2002. 

____. Zen Mind, Beginner’s Mind. New York: Weatherhill, 1970. 

Tanahashi, Kazuaki, and Tensho David Schneider, eds. Essential Zen. 
San Francisco: Harper, 1994. 

Williams, Duncan Ryuken. The Other Side of Zen: A Social History of 
Soto Zen Buddhism in Tokugawa Japan. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 2005. 

JAPANESE 

Books about Dogen 

Ito Shuken. Dogen Zen Kenkyu (Study of Dogen Zen). Tokyo: Daizo 
Shuppan, 1998. 

Kagamishima Genryu. Dogen In’yo Goroku no Kenkyu (Study of Quoted 
Materials by Dogen). Tokyo: Soto Shugaku Kenkyujo, 1995. 

____. Dogen Zenji to Sono Shufu. Tokyo: Shunjusha, 1994. 

____, trans. Genbun-taisho Gendaigo-yaku Dogen Zenji Zenshu (modern 
Japanese translation: Collected Works of Zen Master Dogen). Vols. 
10-13. Tokyo: Shunjusha, 1999. 

Kato Shuko, ed. Shobo Genzo Yogo Sakuin (Shobo Genzo Concordance). 

2 vols. Tokyo: Rishosha, 1963. 

Kawamura Kodo, ed. Eihei Kaisan Dogen Zenji Gyojo Kenzei-ke, Shohon 
Taiko (Kenzei’s Biography of the Founder Dogen of Eihei, compared 
versions). Tokyo: Daishukan Shoten, 1975. 

__, ed. Shohon Taiko: Eihei Kaisan Dogen Zenji Gyojo Kenzei Ki 
(compared versions: Kenzei’s Biography of Zen Master Dogen, 
Founder of Eihei). Tokyo: Daishukan Shoten, 1975. 

Kosaka Kiyu and Suzuki Kakuzen, eds. Dogen Zenji Zenshu (Collected 
Works of Zen Master Dogen). 7 vols. Tokyo: Shunjusha, 1989. 

Masutani Fumio, trans. Gendaigo-yaku Shobo Genzo (Modern Japanese 
translation: Treasury of the True Dharma Eye). 8 vols. Tokyo: 
Kadokawa Shoten, 1973-1975. 

Mizuno Yaoko, ed. Shobo Genzo. 4 vols. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 1993. 

Nakamura Soichi; Nakamura Sojun; and Tanahashi Kazuaki, trans. 
Zen’yaku Shobo Genzo (complete modern Japanese translation: 
Treasury of the True Dharma Eye). 4 vols. Tokyo: Seishin Shobo, 
1971-1972. 

Nakaseko Shodo. Shin Dogen Zenji Den Kenkyu (New Study of Zen 
Master Dogen’s Biography). Tokyo: Kokusho Kankokai, 2002. 

Nishijima Kazuo, trans. Gendaigo-yaku Shobo Genzo (modern Japanese 
translation: Treasury of the True Dharma Eye). 4 vols. Tokyo: 
Bukkyosha, 1975. 

Okubo Doshu, ed. Dogen Zenji Zenshu (Entire Work of Zen Master 
Dogen). 2 vols. Tokyo: Chikuma Shobo, 1970. 

Sakai Tokugen, Kagamishima Genryu, Sakurai Hideo, supervisors; 
Suzuki Gakuzen, Kawamura Kodo, Kosaka Kiyu, eds. Dogen Zenji 
Zenshu (Entire Work of Zen Master Dogen). 7 vols. Tokyo: 
Shunjusha, 1988-1993. 

Sawaki Kodo. Dogen Zen Sanky (Thorough Study of Dogen Zen). 
Tokyo: Chikuma Shobo, 1976. 

Sekiryu Mokudo, trans. Gendaigo-yaku Kenzei-ki Zue (Modern Japanese 
translation: Illustrated Biography of Dogen by Kenzei). Tokyo: 
Kokusho Kanko-kai, 2000. 

Suganuma Akira. Dogen Jiten (Dogen Dictionary). Tokyo: Tokyodo 
Shuppan, 1999. 

Takahashi Kenchin, trans. Zenkan Gendai-yaku Shobo Genzo (all- 
fascicles modern Japanese translation: Treasury of the True Dharma 
Eye). 2 vols. Tokyo: Risosha, 1961-1962. 

Takeuchi Michio. Dogen. Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kobunkan, 1962, rev. 
1992. 

Tamaki, Koshiro, trans. Gendaigo-yaku Shobo Genzo (modern Japanese 
translation: Treasury of the True Dharma Eye). 6 vols. Tokyo: Okura 
Shuppan, 1994. 

References 

Hirakawa Akira, ed. Bukkyo Kanbon Daijiten (Buddhist Chinese- 
Sanskrit Dictionary). Tokyo: Reiyukai, 1997. 

Koga Hidehiko, ed. Zengo Jiten (Dictionary of Zen Terms). Kyoto: 
Shibunkaku, 1991. 

Komazawa Daigaku Shiten Hensanjo, ed. Zengaku Daijiten (Extensive 
Dictionary of Zen Studies). 3 vols. Tokyo: Daishukan Shoten, 1978. 
Nakamura Hajime, ed. Bukkyogo Daijiten (Dictionary of Buddhist 

Terms). Tokyo: Tokyo Shoseki Shuppan, 1981. 

CREDITS 

Sign up to learn more about our books and receive special offers 
from Shambhala Publications. 

Sign Up 

Or visit us online to sign up at shambhala.com/eshambhala.