The Gateless Gate 

00/ A Philosopher Asks Buddha 

A philosopher asked Buddha: 'Without words, without the word- 
less, will you you tell me truth?' 

The Buddha kept silence. 

The philosopher bowed and thanked the Buddha, saying: 'With your 
loving kindness I have cleared away my delusions and entered the 
true path. 

After the philosopher had gone, Ananda asked the Buddha what he 
had attained. 

The Buddha replied, 'A good horse runs even at the shadow of the 
whip. 

Mumon's Comment: Ananda was the disciple of the Buddha. Even so, 
his opinion did not surpass that of outsiders. I want to ask you 
monks: How much difference is there between disciples and outsid- 
ers? 

To tread the sharp edge of a sword 
To run on smooth-frozen ice, 

One needs no footsteps to follow. 
Walk over the cliffs with hands free. 

01/Joshu's Dog 

A monk asked Joshu, a Chinese Zen master: 'Has a dog Buddha- 
nature or not? 

Joshu answered: ‘Mu. [Mu is the negative symbol in Chinese, mean- 
ing 'No-thing' or 'Nay'.] 

Mumon's comment:s To realize Zen one has to pass through the bar- 
rier of the patriachs. Enlightenment always comes after the road of 
thinking is blocked. If you do not pass the barrier of the patriachs 
or if your thinking road is not blocked, whatever you think, whatever 
you do, is like a tangling ghost. You may ask: What is a barrier of a 
patriach? This one word, Mu, is it. 

This is the barrier of Zen. If you pass through it you will see Joshu 
face to face. Then you can work hand in hand with the whole line of 
patriachs. Is this not a pleasant thing to do? 

If you want to pass this barrier, you must work through every bone 
in your body, through ever pore in your skin, filled with this question: 
What is Mu? and carry it day and night. Do not believe it is the com- 
mon negative symbol meaning nothing. It is not nothingness, the op- 
posite of existence. If you really want to pass this barrier, you 
should feel like drinking a hot iron ball that you can neither swallor 
nor spit out. 

Then your previous lesser knowledge disappears. As a fruit ripening 
in season, your subjectivity and objectivity naturally become one. It 
is like a dumb man who has had a dream. He knows about it but can- 
not tell it. 

When he enters this condition his ego-shell is crushed and he can 
shake the heaven and move the earth. He is like a great warrior with 
a sharp sword. If a Buddha stands in his way, he will cut him down: if 
a patriach offers him any obstacle, he will kill him; and he will be 
free in this way of birth and death. He can enter any world as if it 
were his own playground. I will tell you how to do this with this koan: 

Just concentrate your whole energy into this Mu, and do not allow 
any discontinuation. When you enter this Mu and there is no discon- , 

tinuation, your attainment will be as a candle burning and illuminating 
the whole universe. 

Has a dog Buddha-nature? 

This is the most serious question of all. 
If you say yes or no, 

You lose your own Buddha-nature. 

02/ Hyakujo's Fox 

Once when Hyakujo delivered some Zen lectures an old man at- 
tended them, unseen by the monks. At the end of each talk when the 
monks left so did he. But one day he remained after the had gone, 
and Hyakujo asked him: 'Who are you? 

The old man replied: 'I am not a human being, but I was a human 
being when the Kashapa Buddha preached in this world. I was a Zen 
master and lived on this mountain. At that time one of my students 
asked me whether the enlightened man is subject to the law of cau- 
sation. I answered him: “The enlightened man is not subject to the 
law of causation." For this answer evidencing a clinging to absolute- 
ness I became a fox for five hundred rebirths, and I am still a fox. 
Will you save me from this condition with your Zen words and let me 
get out of a fox's body? Now may I ask you: Is the enlightened man 
subject to the law of causation?' 

Hyakujo said: 'The enlightened man is one with the law of causa- 
tion. 

At the words of Hyakujo the old man was enlightened. 'I am eman- 
cipated, he said, paying homage with a deep bow. 'I am no more a fox, 
but I have to leave my body in my dwelling place behind this moun- 
tain. Please perform my funeral as a monk.' Then he disappeared. 

The next day Hyakujo gave an order through the chief monk to 
prepare to attend the funeral of a monk. 'No one was sick in the in- 
firmary, wondered the monks. ‘What does our teacher mean?' 

After dinner Hyakujo led the monks out and around the mountain. 
Ina cave, with his staff he poked out the corpse of an old fox and 
then performed the ceremony of cremation. 

That evening Hyakujo gave a talk to the monks and told this story 
about the law of causation. 

Obaku, upon hearing this story, asked Hyakujo: 'I understand that 
a long time ago because a certain person gave a wrong Zen answer he 
became a fox for five hundred rebirths. Now I was to ask: If some 
modern master is asked many questions, and he always gives the 
right answer, what will become of him?" 

Hyakujo said: ‘You come here near me and I will tell you 

Obaku went near Hyakujo and slapped the teacher's face with this 
hand, for he knew this was the answer his teacher intended to give 
him. 

Hyakujo clapped his hands and laughed at the discernment. I 
thought a Persian had a red beard/' he said, ‘and now I know a Persian 
who has a red beard'‘ 

Mumon's comment: "The enlightened man is not subject. How can this 
answer make the monk a fox? 

‘The enlightened man is at one with the law of causation.' How can 
this answer make the fox emancipated? 

To understand clearly one has to have just one eye. 

Controlled or not controlled? 
The same dice shows two faces. 
Not controlled or controlled, 
Both are a grievous error. 

03/ Gutei's Finger 

Gutei raised his finger whenever he was asked a question about 
Zen. A boy attendant began to imitate him in this way. When anyone 
asked the boy what his master had preached about, the boy would 
raise his finger. 

Un 

Gutei heard about the boy's mischief. He seized him and cut off 
his finger. The boy cried and ran away. Gutei called and stopped him. 
When the boy turned his head to Gutei, Gutei raised up his own fin- 
ger. In that instant the boy was enlightened. 

When Gutei was about to pass from this world he gathered his 
monks around him. 'I attained my finger-Zen,' he said, ‘from my 
teacher Tenryu, and in my whole life I could not exhaust it.' Then he 
passed away. 

Mumon's comment: Enlightenment, which Gutei and the boy attained, 
has nothing to do with a finger. If anyone clings to a finger, Tenyru 

will be so disappointed that he will annihilate Gutei, the boy and the 
clinger all together. 

Gutei cheapens the teaching of Tenyru, 

Emancipating the boy with a knife. 

Compared to the Chinese god who pushed aside a mountain with 
one hand 

Old Gutei is a poor imitator. 

04/ A Beardless Foreigner 

Wakun complained when he saw a picture of the bearded 
Bodhidharma: 'Why hasn't that fellow a beard?' 

Mumon's comment: If you want to study Zen, you must it with your 
heart. When you attain realization, it must be true realization. You 
yourself must have the face of the great Bodhidharma to see him. 
Just once such glimpse will be enough. But if you say you met him, 

you never saw him at all. 

One should not discuss a dream 
In front of a simpleton. 

Why has Bodhidharma no beard? 
What an absurd question! 

05/ Kyogen Mounts the Tree 

Kyogen said: 'Zen is like a man hanging in a tree by his teeth over a 
precipice. His hands grasp no branch, his feet rest on no limb, and 
under the three another person asks him: 'Why does Bodhidharma 
come to China from India? 

'If the man in tree does not answer, he fails; and if he does an- 
swer, he falls and loses his life. Now what shall he do? 

Mumon's Comment: In such a predicament the most talented elo- 
quence is no use. If you have memorized all the sutras, you cannot 
use them. When you can give the right answer, even though your past 
road was one of death, you open up a new road of life. But if you 
cannot answer, you should ages hence and the future Buddha, 
Maitreya. 

Kyogen is truly a fool 

Spreading that ego-killing poison 

That closes his pupils' mouths 

And lets their tears stream from their dead eyes. 

06/ Buddha Twirls a Flower 

When Buddha was in Grdhrakuta mountain he turned a flower in 
his fingers and held in before his listeners. Every one was silent. 
Only Maha-Kashapa smiled at this revelation, although he tried to 
control the lines of his face. 

Buddha said: 'I have the eye of the true teaching, the heart of 
Nirvana, the true aspect of non-form, and the ineffable stride of 
Dharma. It is not expressed by words, but especially transmitted 
beyond teaching. This teaching I have given to Maha-Kashapa” 

Mumon's Comment: Golden-faced Guatama thought he could cheat 
anyone. He made the good listeners as bad, and sold dog meat under 
the sign of mutton. And he himself thought it was wonderful. What if 
all the audience had laughed together? How could he have transmit- _ 

ted the teaching? And again, if Maha-Kashapa had not smiled, how 
could he have transmitted the teaching? If he says that realization 
can be transmitted, he is like the city slicker that cheats the coun- 
try dub, and if he says it cannot be transmitted, why does he ap- 
prove of Maha-Kashapa? 

At the turning of a flower 
His diguise was exposed. 

No one is heaven or earth can surpass 
Maha-Kashapa's wrinkled face. 

07/ Joshu Washes the Bowl 

A monk told Joshu: 'I have just entered the monastery. Please 
teach me. 

Joshu asked: 'Have you eaten your rice porridge?' 

The monk replied: 'I have eaten. 

Joshu said: 'Then you had better wash your bowl. 

At that moment the monk was enlightened. 
Mumon's Comment: Joshu is the man who opens his mouth and shows 
his heart. I doubt if this monk really saw Joshu's heart. I hope he 
did not mistake the bell for a pitcher. 

It is too clear and so it is hard to see. 

A dunce once searched for fire with a lighted lantern. 

Had he known what fire was, 
He could have cooked his rice much sooner. 

08/ Keichu's Wheel 

Getsuan said to this students: '‘Keichu, the first wheel-maker of 

8 

China, made two wheels of fifty spokes each. Now, suppose you re- 
moved the nave uniting the spokes. What would become of the 
wheel? And had Keichu done thism could he be called the master 
wheel-maker?' 

Mumon's Comment: If anyone can answer this question instantly, his 
eyes will be like a comet and his mind like a flash of lightning. 

When the hubless wheel turns, 

Master or no master can stop it. 

It turns above heaven and below earth, 
South, north, east and west. 

09/ A Buddha Before History 

A monk asked Seijo: 'I understand that a Buddha who lived before 
recorded history sat in meditation for ten cycles of existence and 
could not realize the highest truth, and so could not become fully 
emancipated. Why was this so? 

Seijo replied: 'Your question is self-explanatory. 

The monk asked: ‘Since the Buddha was meditating, why could he 
not fulfill Buddahood?' 

Seijo said: 'He was not a Buddha: 

Mumon's Comment: I will allow his realization, but I will not admit his 
understanding. When one ignorant attains realization he is a saint. 
When a saint begins to understand he is an ignorant. 

It is better to realize mind than body. 

When the mind is realized one need not worry about body. 
When mind and body become one 

The man is free. Then he desires no praising. 

10/ Seizei Alone and Poor 

A monk named Seizei asked of Sozan: 'Seizei is alone and poor. 
Will you give him support?’ 

Sozan asked: 'Seizei?' 

Seizei responded: ‘Yes, sir. 

Sozan said: 'You have Zen, the best wine in China, and alrady have 
finished three cups, and still you are saying that they did not even 
wet your lips. 

Mumon's Comment: Seizei overplayed his hand. Why was it so? Be- 
cause Sozan had eyes and knew whom to deal. Even so, I want to ask: 
At what point did Seizei drink wine? 

The poorest man in China, 

The bravest man in China, 

He barely sustains himself, 

Yet wishes to rival the wealthiest. 

11/ Joshu Examines a Monk in Meditation 

Joshu went to a place were a monk had retired to meditate and 
asked him: 'What is, is what?" 

The monk raised his fist. 

Joshu replied: 'Ships cannot remain where the water is too shal- 
low.' And he left. 

A few days later Joshu went again to visit the monk and asked the 
same question. 

The monk answered the same way. 

Joshu said: 'Well given, well taken, well killed, well save. And he 
bowed to the monk. 

FOO, O TTT UE 

Mumon's Comment: The raised fist was the same both times. Why is 
it Joshu did not admit the first and approved the second one? 
Where is the fault? 

Whoever answers this knows that Joshu's tongue has no bone so he 
can use it freely. Yet perhaps Joshu is wrong. Or, through that monk, 
he may have discovered his mistake. 

If anyone thinks that the one's insight exceeds the other's, he has 
ho eyes. 

The light of the eyes is as a comet, 
And Zen's activity is as lightning. 

The sword that kills the man 
Is the sword that saves the man. 

12/ Zuigan Calls His Own Master 

Zuigan called out to himself every day: ‘Master. 

Then he answered himself: ‘Yes, sir. 

And after that he added: 'Become sober. 

Again he answered: ‘Yes, sir. 

‘And after that he continued, 'do not be deceived by others. 

Yes, sir; yes, sir he answered. 
Mumon's Comment: Old Zuigan sells out and buys himself. He is open- 
ing a puppet show. He uses one mask to call 'Master' and another that 
answers the master. Another mask says ‘Sober up' and another, 
‘bon't be cheated by others. If anyone clings to any of his masks, he 
is mistaken, yet if he imitates Zuigan, he will make himself fox-like. 

Some Zen students do not realize the true man in a mask 

Because they recognize ego-soul. 
Ego-sould is the seed of birth and death, 

And foolish people call it the true man. 

13/ Tokusan Holds His Bowl 

Tokusan went to the dining room from the meditation hall holding 
his bowl. Seppo was on duty cooking. When he met Tokusan he said: 
‘The dinner drum is not yet beaten. Where are you going with your 
bowl? 

So Tokusan returned to his room. 

Seppo told Ganto about this. Ganto said: 'Old Tokusan did not un- 
derstand the ultimate truth. 

Tokusan heard of this remark and asked Ganto to come to him. ‘I 
have heard, he said, ‘you are not approving my Zen. Ganto admitted 
this indirectly. Tokusan said nothing. 

The next day Tokusan delivered an entirely different kind of lec- 
ture to the monks. Ganto laughed and clapped his hands, saying: 'I 
see our old man understands the ultimate truth indeed. None in China 
can surpass him. 

Mumon's Comment: Speaking about ultimate truth, both Ganto and 
Tokusan did not even dream it. After all, they are dummies. 

Whoever understands the first truth 
Should understand the ultimate truth. 
The last and first, 

Are they not the same? 

14/ Nansen Cuts the Cat in Two 

Nansen saw the monks of the eastern and western halls fighting 
over a cat. He seized the cat and told the monks: 'If any of you say a 
good word, you can save the cat. 

12 

No one answered. So Nansen boldly cut the cat in two pieces. 

That evening Joshu returned and Nansen told him about this. 
Joshu removed his sandals and, placing them on his head, walked out. 

Nansen said: 'If you had been there, you could have saved the cat. 
Mumon's Comment: Why did Joshu put his sandals on his head? If 
anyone answers this question, he will understand exactly how Nansen 
enforced the edict. If not, he should watch his own head. 

Had Joshu been there, 

He would have enforced the edict oppositely. 

Joshua snatches the sword 
And Nansen begs for his life. 

15/ Tozan's Three Blows 
Tozan went to Ummon. Ummon asked him where he had come from. 
Tozan said: 'From Sato village. 
Ummon asked: 'In what temple did you remain for the summer? 
Tozan replied: 'The temple of Hoji, south of the lake. 

‘When did you leave there? asked Ummon, wondering how long 
Tozan would continue with such factual answers. 

‘The twenty-fifth of August, answered Tozan. 

Ummon said: 'I should give you three blows with a stick, but today 
I forgive you. 

The next day Tozan bowed to Ummon and asked: ‘Yesterday you 
forgave me three blows. I do not know why you thought me wrong. 

Ummon, rebuking Tozan's spiritless responses, said: 'You are good 
for nothing. You simply wander from one monastery to another. C 

Before Ummon's words were ended Tozan was enlightened. 

Mumon's Comment: Ummon fed Tozan good Zen food. If Tozan can 
digest it, Ummon may add another member to his family. 

In the evening Tozan swam around in a sea of good and bad, but at 
dawn Ummon crushed his nut shell. After all, he wasn't so smart. 

Now, I want to ask: Did Tozan deserve the three blows? If you say 
yes, not only Tozan but every one of you deserves them. If you say 
no, Ummon is speaking a lie. If you answer this question clearly, you 
can eat the same food as Tozan. 

The lioness teaches her cubs roughly; 

The cubs jump and she knocks them down. 

When Ummon saw Tozan his first arrow was light; 
His second arrow shot deep. 

16/ Bells and Robes 

Ummon asked: 'The world is such a wide world, why do you answer 
a bell and don ceremonial robes?' 

Mumon's Comment: When one studies Zen one need not follow sound 
or colour or form. Even though some have attained insight when 
hearing a voice or seeing a colour or a form, this is a very common 
way. It is not true Zen. The real Zen student controls sound, colour, 
form, and actualizes the truth in his everyday life. 

Sound comes to the ear, the ear goes to the sound. When you blot 
out sound and sense, what do you understand? While listening with 
ears one never can understand. To understand intimately one should 
see sound. 

When you understand, you belong to the family; 
When you do not understand, you are a stranger. 
Those who do not understand belong to the family, 
And when they understand they are stran 

17/ The Three Calls of the Emperor's Teacher 

Chu, called Kokushi, the teacher of the emperor, called to his at- 
tendant: 'Oshin. 

Oshin answered: ‘Yes. 

Chu repeated, to test his pupil: 'Oshin. 
Oshin repeated: 'Yes. 

Chu called: 'Oshin. 

Oshin answered: 'Yes‘ 

Chu said 'I ought to apologize for you for all this calling, but really 
you ought to apologize to me‘ 

Mumon's Comment: When Old Chu called Oshin three tiems his 
tongue was rotting, but when Oshin answered three tiems his words 
were brilliant. Chu was getting decrepit and lonesome, and his 
method of teaching was like holding a cow's head to feed it clover. 

Oshin did not trouble to show his Zen either. His satisfied stomach 
had no desire to feast. When the country is prosperous everyone is 
indolent; when the home is wealthy the children are spoilt. 

Now I want to ask you: Which one should apologize? 

When prison stocks are iron and have no place for the head, the 
prisoner is doubly in trouble. 

When there is no place for Zen in the head of our generation, it is 
in grievous trouble. 

If you try to hold up the gate and door of a falling house, 

You also will be in trouble. 

18/ Tozan's Three Pounds 

un 

A monk asked Tozan when he was weighing some flax: 'What is 
Buddha? 

Tozan said: 'This flax weighs three pounds. 
Mumon's Comment: Old Tozan's Zen is like a clam. The minute the 
shell opens you see the whole inside. However, I want to ask you: Do 
you see the real Tozan? 

Three pounds of flax in front of your nose, 

Close enough, and mind is still closer. 

Whoever talks about affirmation and negation 
Lives in the right and wrong region. 

19/ Everyday Life is the Path 

Joshu asked Nansen: 'What is the path?' 

Nansen said: 'Everyday life is the path. 

Joshu asked: 'Can it be studied? 

Nansen said: 'If you try to study, you will be far away from it 

Joshu asked: 'If I do not study, how can I know it is the path?' 

Nansen said: 'The path does not belong to the perception world, 
neither does it belong to the nonperception world. Cognition is a de- 
lusion and noncognition is senseless. If you want to reach the true 
path beyond doubt, place yourself in the same freedom as sky. You 
name it neither good nor not-good. 

At these words Joshu was enlightened. 
Mumon's Comment: Nansen could met Joshu's frozen doubts at once 
when Joshu asked his questions. I doubt that if Joshu reached the 
point that Nansen did. He needed thirty more years of study. 

In spring, hundreds of flowers; in autumn, a harvest moon; 
In the summer, a refreshing breeze; in winter snow will accompany, 

your. 
If useless things do not hang in your mind, 
Any season is a good season for you. 

20/ The Enlightened Man 

Shogen asked: 'Why does the enlightened man not stand on his 
feet and explain himself?' And he also said: 'It is not necessary for 
speech to come from the tongue 

Mumon's Comment: Shogen spoke plainly enough, but how many will 
understand? If anyone comprehends, he should come to my place and 
test out my big stick. Why, look here, to test real gold you must see 
it through fire. 

If the feet of enlightenment moved, the great ocean would over- 
flow; 

If that head bowed, it would look down upon the heavens. 

Such a body hsa no place to rest... 

Let another continue this poem. 

21/ Dried Dung 

A monk asked Ummon: 'What is Buddha?' Ummon answered him: 
'Dried dung. 

Mumon's Comment: It seems to me Ummon is so poor he cannot dis- 
tinguish the taste of one food from another, or else he is too busy to 
write readable letters. Well, he tried to hold his school with dried 
dung. And his teaching was just as useless. 

Lightning flashes, 
Sparks shower. 

In one blink of your eyes 
You have missed seeing. 

22/ Kashapa's Preaching Sign 

Anada asked Kashapa: 'Buddha gave you the golden-woven robe of 
successorship. What else did he give you?' 

Kashapa said: ‘Ananda’ 
Ananda answered: 'Yes, brother. 

Said Kashapa: 'Now you can take down my preaching sign and put 
up your own. 

Mumon's Comment: If one understands this, he will see the old 
brotherhood still gathering, but if not, even though he has studied 
the truth from ages before the Buddhas, he will not attain enlighten- 
ment. 

The point of the question is dull but the answer is intimate. 
How many persons hearing it will open their eyes? 

Elder brother calls and younger brother answers, 

This spring does not belong to the ordinary season. 

23/ Do Not Think Good, Do Not Think Not-Good 

When he became emancipated the sixth patriach received from 
the fifth patriach the bowl and robe given from the Buddha to his 
successors, generation after generation. 

A monk named E-myo out of envy pursued the patriach to take this 
great treasure away from him. The sixth patriach placed the bowl 
and robe on a stone in the road and told E-myo: 'These objects just 
symbolize the faith. There is no use fighting over them. If you de- 
sire to take them, take them now. 

When E-myo went to move the bowl and robe they were as heavy 4 

as mountains. He could not budge them. Trembling for shame he said: 
'I came wanting the teaching, not the material treasures. Please 
teach me. 

The sixth patriach said: 'When you do not think good and when you 
do not think not-good, what is your true self? 

At these words E-myo was illumined. Perspiration broke out all 
over his body. He cried and bowed, saying: 'You have given me the 
secret words and meanings. Is there yet a deeper part of the teach- 
ing?' 

The sixth patriach replied: 'What I have told you is no secret at 
all. When you realize your true self the secret belongs to you. 

E-myo said: 'I was under the fifth patriach for many years but 
could not realize my true self until now. Through your teaching I find 
the source. A person drinks water and knows himself whether it is 
cold or warm. May I call you my teacher? 

The sixth patriach replied: 'We studied together under the fifth 
patriach. Call him your teacher, but just treasure what you have 
attained. 

Mumon's Comment: The sixth patriach certainly was kind in such an 
emergency. If was as if he removed the skin and seeds from the 
fruit and then, opening the pupil's mouth, let him eat. 

You cannot describe it, you cannot picture it, 

You cannot admire it, you cannot sense it. 

It is your true self, it has nowhere to hide. 

When the world is destroyed, it will no be destroyed. 

24/ Without Words, Without Silence 

A monk asked Fuketsu: 'Without speaking, without silence, how can 
you express the truth? 

Fuketsu observed: 'I always remember spring-time in southern 
China. The birds sing among innumerable kinds of fragrant flowers. 

19 

Mumon's Comment: Fuketsu used to have lightning Zen. Whenever he 
had the oppurtunity, he flashed it. But this time he failed to do so 
and only borrowed from an old Chinese poem. Never mind Fuketsu's 
Zen. If you want to express the truth, throw out your words, throw 
out your silence, and tell me about your own Zen. 

Without revealing his own penetration, 

He offered another's words, not his to give. 
Had he chattered on and on, 

Even his listeners would have been embarassed. 

25/ Preaching from the Third Seat 

In a dream Kyozen went to Maitreya's Pure Land. He recognized 
himself seated in the third seat in the abode of Maitreya. Someone 
announced: 'Today the one who sits in the third seat will preach.' 

Kyozen arose and, hitting the gavel, said: 'The truthof Mahayana 
teaching is transcendent, above words and thought. Do you under- 
stand? 

Mumon's Comment: I want to ask you monks: Did he preach or did he 
not? 

When he opens his mouth he is lost. When he seals his mouth he is 
lost. If he does not open it, if he does not seal it, he is 108,000 miles 
from the truth. 

In the light of day, 

Yet ina dream he talks of a dream. 

A monster among monsters, 

He intended to deceive the whole crowd. 

26/ Two Monks Rolls Up the Screen 

Hogen of Seiryo monastery was about to lecture before dinner 
when he noticed that the bamboo screen lowered for meditation had 
not been rolled up. He pointed to it. Two monks arose from the audi- 

ence and rolled it up. Ta 

Hogen, observing the physical moment, said: "The state of the 
first monk is good, not that of the other“ 

Mumon's Comment: I want to ask you: Which of those two monks 
gained and which lost? If any of you has one eye, he will see the fail- 
ure on the teacher's part. However, I am not discussing gain and loss. 
When the screen is rolled up the great sky opens, 
Yet the sky is not attuned to Zen. 

It is best to forget the great sky 
And to retire from every wind. 

27/ It is Not Mind, It is Not Buddha, It is Not Things 

A monk asked Nansen: 'Is there a teaching no master ever 
preached before?' 

Nansen said: ‘Yes, there is. 
‘What is it?' asked the monk. 
Nansen replied: 'It is not mind, it is not Buddha, it is not things. 

Mumon's Comment: Old Nansen gave away his treasure-words. He 
must have been greatly upset. 

Nansen was too kind and lost his treasure. 
Truly, words have no power. 

Even though the mountain becomes the sea, 
Words cannot open another's mind. 

28/ Blow Out the Candle 

Tokusan was studying Zen under Ryutan. One night he came to 
Ryutan and asked many questions. The teacher said: 'The night is 
getting old. Why don't you retire? 

So Tukusan bowed and opened the screen to go out, observing: It, 

is very dark outside. 

Ryutan offered Tokusan a lighted candle to find his way. Just as 
Tokusan received it, Ryutan blew it out. At that moment the mind of 
Tokusan was opened. 

'What have you attained?' asked Ryutan. 
‘From now on," said Tokusan, 'I will not doubt the teacher's words. 

The next day Ryutan told the monks at his lecture: 'I see one monk 
among you. His teeth are like the sword tree, his mouth is like the 
blood bowl. If you hit him hard with a big stick, he will not even so 
much as look back at you. Someday he will mount the highest peak 
and carry my teaching there. 

On that day, in front of the lecture hall, Tokusan burned to ashes 
his commentaries on the sutras. He said: 'However abstruse the 
teachings are, in comparison with this enlightenment they are like a 
single hair to the great sky. However profound the complicated 
knowledge of the world, compared to this enlightenment it is like one 
drop of water to the great ocean. Then he left the monastry. 

Mumon's Comment: When Tokusan was in his own country he was not 
satisfied with Zen although he had heard about it. He thought: 
‘Those Southern monks say they can teach Dharma outside of the 
sutras. They are all wrong. I must teach them. So he travelled south. 
He happened to stop near Ryutan's monastery for refreshments. An 
old woman who was there asked him: 'What are you carrying so 
heavily?' 

Tokusan replied: ‘This is a commentary I have made on the Diamond 
Sutra after many years of work. 

The old woman said: 'I read that sutra which says: “The past mind 
cannot be held, the present mind cannot be held." You wish some tea 
and refreshments. Which mind do you propose to use for them? 

Tokusan was as though dumb. Finally he asked the woman: 'Do you 
know of any good teacher around here?' 

The old woman referred him to Ryutan, not more than five miles 
away. So he went to Ryutan in all humility, quite different from when, 

he had started his journey. Ryutan in turn was so kind he forgot his 
own dignity. It was like pouring muddy water over a drunken man to 
sober him. After all, it was an unnecessary comedy. 

A hundred hearings cannot surpass one seeing, 

But after you see the teacher, that once glance cannot surpass a 
hundred hearings. 

His nose was very high 

But he was blind after all 

29/ Not the Wind, Not the Flag 

Two monks were arguing about a flag. One said: 'The flag is mov- 
ing. 

The other said: 'The wind is moving. 

The sixth patriach happened to be passing by. He told them: 'Not 
the wind, not the flag: mind is moving. 

Mumon's Comment: The sixth patriach said: 'The wind is not moving, 
the flag is not moving. Mind is moving. What did he mean? If you 
understand this intimately, you will see the two monks there trying 
to buy iron and gaining gold. The sixth patriach could not bear to see 
those two dull heads, so he made such a bargain. 

Wind, flag, mind moves. 
The same understanding. 

When the mouth opens 
All are wrong. 

30/ This Mind is Buddha 
Daibai asked Baso: 'What is Buddha?' 
Baso said: 'This mind is Buddha‘ 

Mumon's Comment: If anyone wholly understands this, he is wearing 
Buddha's clothing, he is eating Buddha's food, he is speaking Buddhas 

pz if eum qe— ——— _ _ I] | — 

words, he is behaving as Buddha, he is Buddha. 

This anecdote, however, has given many pupil the sickness of formal- 
ity. If one truly understands, he will wash out his mouth for three 
days after saying the word Buddha, and he will close his ears and 
flee after hearing 'This mind is Buddha. 

Under blue sky, in bright sunlight, 

One need not search around. 

Asking what Buddha is 

Is like hiding loot in one's pocket and declaring oneself innocent. 

31/ Joshu Investigates 

A travelling monk asked an old woman the road to Taizan, a popular 
temple supposed to give wisdom to the one who worships there. The 
old woman said: 'Go straight ahead‘ When the monk proceeded a few 
steps, she said to herself: 'He also is a common church-goer. 

Someone told this incident to Joshu, who said: 'Wait until I inves- 
tigate.' The next day he went and asked the same question, and the 
old woman gave the same answer. 

Joshu remarked: 'I have investigated that old woman. 

Mumon's Comment: The old woman understood how war is planned, 
but she did not know how spies sneak in behind her tent. Old Joshu 
played the spy's work and turned the tables on her, but he was not an 
able general. Both had their faults. Now I want to ask you: What was 
the point of Joshu's investigating the old woman? 

When the question is common 

The answer is also common. 

When the question is sand in a bowl of boiled rice 
The answer is a stick in the soft mud.