e NG 

Deccan College Monograph Series : 16 

RAMANUJA'S 
VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

BY ; 
J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

Bo oO N 

DECCAN COLLEGE MONOGRAPH SERIES 

Panipat 1761—by T. S. Shejwalkar. Crown 4to, pp. 141 and 9 maps, 
1946. Rs. 12/- [M 1] 

Anthropometric Measurements of the Marathas—by Irawati Karve. 
Crown 4to, pp. 71 and 4 plates, 1948. Rs. 8/- [M 7] 

Studies in the Historical and Cultural Geography and Ethnography of 
Gujarat—by H. D. Sankalia (being the Thakkar Vassonji Madhavji Lec- 
tures for 1944 at the University of Bombay). Crown 4to, pp. xvi + 245 
and 3 maps. 1949. Rs. 15/- [M 11] 

Etched Beads in India—by M. G. Dikshit. Crown 40, pp. viii 4- 79 and 
19 plates, 1949. Rs. 10/- [M 13] 

Report on the Excavations at Brahmapuri (in. Kolhapur) —by H. D. San- 
kalia and M. G. Dikshit. Crown 4to, pp. xvi-154 4-37 plates. 1952. 
Rs. 30/- [M 15] 

Stone Age and Pleistocene Chronology im Gujarat—by F. E. Zeuner. 
Crown 4to, pp. 46 -- 11 plates. 1950. Rs. 8/- [M 17] 

-Phonemics of Old Tamil—by C. R. Sankaran. Crown 4to, pp. vi-++ 71 

+2 plates. 1951. Rs. 8/- [M 18] 

Anthropometric Measurements of Mahürüstra—by I. Karve and V. M. | 
Dandekar. Crown 4to. pp. vi + 134 -+ 2 maps + 24 plates. 1951. Rs. 12/- 
IM 20] P. 
Nagpur Affairs (Selections from the Menavali Daftar) —by T. S. Shej- 

- walkar, Royal 8vo, pp. lv 4- 450. 1954. Rs. 15/- [M 25] 

Godavari Palaeolithic Industry—by H. D. Sankalia. Demi 4to. pp. ii 
-+ 59 449 figs. 1952. Rs. 12/- [M 28] mE 

Kinship Organisation in India—by Irawati Karve. Crown 40. 
pp. x + 304. 1953. Rs. 15/- [M 41] ° 

High School Students in-Poona—by I. P. Desai. Crown 4to. pp. x + 123. 
1953. Rs. 10/- [M 44] 

Excavation at Nasik and Jorwe—by H. D. Sankalia and S. B. Deo. Crown 
Ato, pp. xv +177 + XXXVI plates and 85 drawings. 1954. Rs. 45/- 
[M 45] 

DECCAN COLLEGE DISSERTATION SERIES 

Historical Grammar of Old Kannada (based entirely on the Kannada 
inscriptions of the 8th, 9th and 10th centuries A.D.)—by G. S. Gai. 
Royal 8vo. pp. xvi + 232. 1946. Rs. 15/- [D 2] - 

Cultural History. from Vayu Purüna—by, D. R. Patil. Royal 8vo.. 
pp. xviii + 348. 1946. Rs. 15/- [D 3] 

‘Historical Grammar of Inscriptional Prakrits—by. M. A. Mehendale. 

Royal 8vo. pp. xi -+ 345. 1948. Rs. 21/- [D 5] 

piena uL and Destitution in Poona—by Mrs. G..N. Rut- 
tonsha. Demi 8vo. pp. 180. Rs. 8/- [D 6] ^ : 
Historical Grammar of 'Apaohraméa—by G. V. Tagare. Royal 8vo. 
pp. xviii 4 454. 1948. Rs. 21/- [D 8] : » 
Verbal Composition in Indo-Aryan—by R. N. Vale. Royal 8vo. pp. xii 
+ 324. 1948. Rs. 18/- [D 9] 

. 4-62. Bs. 8/- [D 12] 

Stone Age Cultures of Bellary—by B. Subbarao. Royal 8vo. pp. viii: 

RAMANUJA'S 
VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

INTRODUCTION, CRITICAL EDITION 
AND ANNOTATED TRANSLATION 

BY 
J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

Sometime Sub-Editor, Dictionary of ‘Sanskrit 
on Historical Principles, Deccan College, Poona 

Code No. M. 54 

First Edition: 750 copies: October 1956 

All Rights Reserved 

Price Rs. 20/- 

Published by Dr. S. M. Katre, for the Deccan College Postgraduate and 
Research Institute, Yervada, Poona-6 
Printed at the G. S. Press, Mount Road, Madras 

TO 

THE EDITOR-IN-CHIEF AND THE STAFF 
OF THE SANSKRIT DICTIONARY ON 
HISTORICAL PRINCIPLES 
POONA 

wae 

s 

RAMANUJA'S 
VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

E-D ~ 

ह DN 2 6 AUG I969 

NS DAT moms, F5 9] c 
CF Moms, PIS A 

Deccan College Monograph Series 

16 

RAMANUJA'S 
VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

BY 
J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

DECCAN COLLEGE 
POSTGRADUATE AND RESEARCH INSTITUTE 
POONA 

PREFACE 

RamanuJa’s Vedarthasamgraha marks a new era in Vedanta philo- 
sophy. It is the début of a thinker who, with all the force of his remarkable 
talents, set out to restate the theology of the Absolute in the terms of religion 
and worship. It was, according to tradition, in front of the sacred image of 
SriSailapati in the temple of Tirumalai that Ramanuja delivered this lecture 
on the interpretation of the Upanisads. We may suppose that it was first public 
appearance as a mature theologian. No doubt many years of erudite disputa- 
tions with the followers of Sankara and Bhàskara, of Yadaprakasa and Pra- 
bhakara, and also with the Vaisnavas of his own milieu, preceded this func- 
tion, But now his doctrine was complete, his truth definitive: in this short 
but extremely rich lecture he was able to choose his principal adversaries 
and to outline a both philosophically and theologically sound refutation of 
their views. That he offered it to one of the multiple forms of the one God 
is characteristic of this deeply religious thinker. 

This Vedarthasamgraha is virtually unknown to Western scholarship; 
end even in India, where its usefulness as a compendious introduction to 
Visistadvaita has long been recognized in the pathasalas, it has not inspired 
to the study which it certainly deserves. I know of one old English transla- 
tion, exceedingly, even excessively literal, published by the South-Indian 
scholar VASUDEVACHARIAR in the issues of the Brahmavadin. This transla- 
tion, still more his Tamil rendering, is all but inaccessible in the West. 

The present work offers a critical edition of the Sanskrit text, a libe- 
rally annotated translation into English, and an Introduction. As the work 
was undertaken in connexion with my post on the Staff of the Sanskrit 
Dictionary Department of the Deccan College at Poona, I have made it my 
object to study the text primarily from the philological point of view: to 
which I was the more inclined by the consideration that without a sound 
philological basis the philosophical study of Indian thought and its compa- 
rison with other patterns of thought will never achieve finality. "Therefore 
I have made the notes to the English translation as exhaustive in dealing 
with terms and references as was possible to me; not exhaustive enough 
by far: many studies like those which Hacker devotes to advaita will have 
to be made in all systems before the entire context of concepts in Indian 
thought is rightly intelligible. I have made full use of SUDARSANASURTS 
excellent commentary: Western scholars disregard these erudite studies by 
privileged colleagues with great disadvantage to their comprehension of the 
scholastic background of the studied authors. 

viii PREFACE 

In the Introduction I have sought to avoid all duplication and to centre 
the attention on relevant topics which so far have been dealt with insuffi- 
ciently or not at all. Special regard has been given to Ràmanuja's place 
in the history of Vedanta thought. The importance of Uddalaka’s Sadvidya 
for Vedànta as a whole and the variety of its interpretations led naturally 
to a more detailed description of Uddalaka’s teaching as a convenient start- 
ing-point. RHamànuja's ancient predecessors have been studied anew and 
their fragments collected in an appendix. The relative date of the Vedartha- 
samgraha has then been established and Ràmànuja's sources, in the widest 
sense, have been investigated: in that connexion special interest has been 
shown to the place of Paficaratra and the doctrine of Yamuna. A chapter 
of observations on Ràmaànuja's hermeneutics concludes the introduction. 
Several Indexes will, I hope, enhance the usefulness of the book. 

This study has been made possible by my stay in Poona. The Minister 
of Education of the Netherlands, who granted me a travelling subsidy, the 
Curators of the State University of Utrecht, who arranged generously for a 
long study-leave, and the Council of the Deccan College Post-Graduate and 
Research Institute, who appointed me a Sub-Editor of the Sanskrit Dic- 
tionary, are the first to whom my gratitude is to be acknowledged. In the 
course of my daily routine in the Dictionary Department I have been able 
to benefit greatly by intimate contacts with Indian friends, colleagues and 
Scholars; the readiness with which they have accepted me in their midst 
and shown me their friendship will for ever remain unforgettable to me. 
Professor V. A. RAMASWAMI SASTRI, whose liberal friendship I consider a 
privilege, has followed the work of this study with the greatest interest and 
sympathy; his helpfulness in matters pertaining to Karmamimamsa has been 
invaluable; I owe more to his advice and encouragement, and to our innu- 
merable neighbourly verandah discussions, than I am able to express. 

It is to Dr. S. M. KATRE, Editor-in-Chief of the Sanskrit Dictionary, 
who invited me to Poona, that my warmest thanks are due. I do not know 
a better way of expressing my gratitude to him, reputed scholar, under- 
standing friend and most charming host, than by dedicating this volume to 
the Staff of the Poona Sanskrit Dictionary, his creation. 

Poona, May 1955. J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PREFACE 
4 BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES AND ABBREVIATIONS 
PART ONE: INTRODUCTION 
CHAPTER 
I. The Sadvidyà in Vedànta 
II. The Ancient Masters 

$1. Bodhayana the Vrttikara 
$2. Tanka the Vakyakara and Dramida the Bhasyakara 
$3. The views of the Ancient Masters 

II. The Vedarthasamgraha 

1. Its date 
2. Its sources 
A. Smrti 

$1. Function of Smrti 

$2. Visnupurina 

$3. Influence of Parcarütra Agama 

B. Daráanas 

$1. Mimàms&: a. Sabarasvamin; b. Kumarila; 
c. Prabhakara. 

82. Vedanta: a. Advaita; b. Bhedabheda; 
c. Yamuna. 

-IV. Observations on the exegetical method and principles 

of Ramanuja 
81. The authority of Sabda 
$2. All Srutis equally authoritative 
§ 3. Laksana 5 
$4. Context 
Part Two: TEXT 
Editorial Note 
Sanskrit Text 
Part THREE: TRANSLATION 
Contents of the Vedarthasamgraha 
Annotated English translation 
APPENDIX 
81. Fragments of Bodhayana’s Vrtti 
§ 2. Vakya and Dramidabhasya 

INDEXES 
I. Notable Sanskrit terms 
II. Ancient Indian authors quoted 

Addendum et corrigenda 

* 

| 
E PE ^ है k i 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES AND ABBREVIATIONS 

ABHYANKAR, Notes. 

Agamaprámanya 
Annambhatta, TS. 

Apadeva, MNPr. 

ATHALYE, TS. 

Atmasiddhi. | 

BELVALKAR, Lectures 
Vedanta. 

BhG. 

BrS. 
BrSBh. 

BrSiddhi 
Burrenen, J.A.B. VAN. 

DASGUPTA, Indian 

Philosophy. 
Dr SMET 

DEUSSEN, System of 
_ Vedanta. 
DEUsseN, Upanisads 

Dharmaraja, VedP. 

Fark, Namarupa. — 

on 

V. S. ABHYANKAR, Sribhisya of Ramanuja- 
cárya, II, Introduction and Notes (Sans- 
krit) (Bombay, 1916). 

see Yamuna. 

Tarkasamgraha by Annambhatta. 

— Y. ATHALYE, Tarkasamgraha, edition and 
notes (Bombay, 1938). 

— A. Foucuer, Le Compendium des Topiques 
(Tarkasamgraha), text and French trans- 
lation (Paris, 1949). 

Mimansanyayaprakasa by Apadeva, edited 
and translated by Franklin EDGERTON 
(New Haven, 1929). 

see Annambhatta. 

see Yamuna. 

S. K. BzLvALKAR, Lectures on Vedanta I (The 
Shree Basu Mallik Lectures), Poona, 
1929. 

Bhagavadgita. 

Brahmasütras of Badarayana. 

. Brahmasütrabhasya. 

— Sankara’s bhàsya, ed. by N. R. ACARYA 
(Bombay, 1948). 

— Bhàskara's bhasya, ed. by Pt. V. P. 
DvivEp, Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series 
70; 185; 209 (Benares, 1915). 

— Riminuja’s bhàsya, see Sribhasya (SBh). 

see Mandanamisra. 

HAS. on the Bhagavadgità (The Hague, 
953). 

S. Dascurta, A History of Indian Philosophy 
III (Cambridge, 1940); IV (ib., 1949). 

R. V. DE Smet, S.J., The Theological Method 
of Samkara (thesis Pontifica Universitas 
Gregoriana, Rome, 1953). 

Paul Deussen, The System of the Vedanta, 
authorized translation by Charles John- 
ston (Chicago, 1912). 

Paul DEUSSEN, Sechzig Upanisad’s des Veda? 
(Leipsic, 1921). 

Vedantaparibhisa by Dharmaràja Adhvarin, 
edited and translated by S. S. Surya- 
narayana SASTRI (Adyar, 1942). 

Maryla FALE, Nàma-rüpa and Dharma-rüpa 
(Caleutta, 1943). 

xii 

FoucHEr, TS 

G. 
Gautama, NS. 

GBh. 
Gonna, Early Visnuism. 

HACKER, Untersuchungen. 
Hacker, Vivarta. 

HIRIYANNA. 

Istasiddhi. 
ISsvarasiddhi. 
Jayantabhatta. 

JHA, Prabhakara. 
KurPUsWwAMI, Indian Logic. 
KMS. 

Lacomse, ASV. 

Lacomse, La Doctrine. 

LacomseE, Notes. 

MNPr.: 

NS. 

Prakaranapancika. 

RADHAKRISHNAN, Indian 
Philosophy. 

RADHAKRISHNAN, Upanisads. 

Ramanuja, GBh. 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

see Annambhatta. 

Bhagavadgita. 

Nydyasitras of Gautama, with Vatsyayana’s 
bhasya, ed. by Ganganath JHa, (Poona, 
1939). 
see Ramanuja. 

J. Gonna, Aspects of Early Visnuism (Utrecht, 
1955). 

Paul HACKER, Untersuchungen über Texte 

. des frühen Advaitavüda, I. Die Schüler 
Sankaras (Ak. Wiss. u. Lit. Mainz, Abh. 
G. u. Sw. Kl. 1950, 26) (Wiesbaden, 
1950). 

Paul HACKER, Vivarta, Studien zur Geschichte 
der illusionistischen Kosmologie und 
Erkenntnisstheorie der Inder (Ak. Wiss. 
u. Lit. Mainz, Abh. G. u. Sw. K1., 1953, 5) 
(Wiesbaden, 1953). 

see Sure$vara. 

see Vimuktatman. 

see Vimuktatman. 

see Yamuna. 

Nydyamafijart - by Jayantabhatta, ed. by 
S.N.S. SUKLA, Chowkhamba Sanskrit 
Series 106 (Benares, 1992/1936). 

Sir Ganganath JHA, The Prabhakara School 
of Pūrva Mimümsü (D.Litt. thesis Allaha- 
bad, 1911). 

S. KurPuswaMI SASTRI, A Primer of Indiam 
Logic, according to Annambhatta's Tarka- 
samgraha (Madras, 19512). 

Karmamimümsüsütras of Jaimini, see Sabara. 

Olivier LACOMBE, L'Absolu selon le Védânta 

(Paris, 1937). 

Olivier LACOMBE, La doctrine morale et méta- 
physique de Rümünuja (= annotated 
translation of Sribhasya, 1, 1, 1). (Paris, 
1938). 

Olivier LACOMBE, Notes to 

see Apadeva. 

see Gautama. 

see Salikanatha. 

Ramanuja. f | 

5. RADHAKRISHNAN, Indian Philosophy,6 2 ४०७. 
(London, 1951). i 

S. RADHAKRISHNAN, The Principal Upanishads, 
annotated translation (London, 1953). 

Gitübhasya by Rāmānuja, ed. with the 
Tatparyacandrika of Venkatanatha, by 
V. N. APTE (AnandaSrama Sanskrit Ser. 
34, 3d ed., Bombay, 1936). . 

La Doctrine, etc. 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

Ràmànuja, SBh. 

Ràmaànuja, VedantaD. 

Mandanamisra. 
Ràmaànuja, VedantaS. 

Ràmànuja, Ved. 

Renou, Gramm. Sct. 
Renov, Terminologie. 
Rusen, Philosophen. 

$. 
S. 
Sabarasvamin. 

Salikanatha. 

Sankara, BrSBh. 
Sankara, Upadesas. 

Sankara, Upanisadbh. 

Samvitsiddhi. 

Sarvajnatman, 
Paficaprakriya. 

Sarvajüatman, Samksepa- 
Sarirakam. 

SBh. 

SCHRADER, Paficaratra. 

SINHA, Psychology. 

Siddhitraya. 
Slokavarttika, 
Srinivasa, YID. 
SRINIVASACHARI, Bhedabhe- 

da. 

xiii 

Sribhasya by Ramanuja, ed. by V. S. ABHYAN- 
XAR (Bombay, 1915); references to SBh. 
1, 1, l are specified by page-numbers in 
this ed., and sometimes also by page- 
numbers of THIiBAUT'S translation. 

Vedantadipa by Ramanuja, ed. Shree Acharya 
BHATTANATHASWAMY (Benares Sanskrit 
Series 69; 70; 80; Benares, 1904). 

Brahmasiddhi of Mandanamisra, ed. by 
S. KurPUSWAMI (Madras, 1937). 

Vedantaséra by Ramanuja, ed. and translated 
by Narasimha AyYANGAR (Adyar, 1953). 

Vedarthasamgraha by Ràmànuja with Sudar- 
$anasüris Tdatparya-dipikd, ed. by 
S. S. P. S. Rama Misra SASTRI (Reprint 
from the Pandit? Benares, 1924); the 
Dipikà is quoted acc. to this edition. 

Louis Renou, Grammaire sanscrite, 2 vols. 
(Paris, 1930). 

Louis Renou, Terminologie grammaticale du 
sanscrit, 3 vols. (Paris, 1942). 

Walter RusEN, Die Philosophen der Upani- 
shaden (Bern, 1947), * 

Sankara. 

Sudarganasuri, see Ràmaànuja, Ved. 
Mīmāmsādarśana by Sabarasvamin, ed. by 
V. G. APTE, 6 vols. (Bombay, 1929-34). 
Prakaranapaiicika by Salikanátha (Chau- 

khamba Skt. Ser.). 

see BrSBh. 

Upadesasahasri by Sankara, with Ramatirtha’s 
Padayojanika, ed. by C. Laxman Sastri 
PANSIKAR (Bombay, 1930). 

Upanisadbhasya by Sankara, ed. H. R. BHAGA- 
VAT (Poona, 1927-28). 

see Yamuna. 

The Paiicaprakriya of Sarvajfiatman, ed. by 
T. R. CHINTAMANI (Madras, 1946). 

The Samksepasariraka of Sarvajiatman, ed. 
by H. N. Arte (Bombay, 1918). 

see Ràmànuja. 

F. Otto SCHRADER, An Introduction to the 
Pàücarütra (Adyar, 1916). 

Jadunath SINHA, Indian Psychology: Percep- 
tion (London, 1934). 

see Yamuna. 

see Kumarila. 

Yatindramatadipika by Srinivasa, 
H. N. APTE (Bombay, 1906). 

P. N. SRINIVASACHARI, The Philosophy of 
Bhedabheda (Adyar, 1950). 

ed. by 

«xiv .BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

- :Sure$vara,. Naiskarmya- 
...siddhi. 

sa SureSvara, 
;:.BAUpBhVirttika. 
Th. 

Tatp. 

Stotraratna. 

TS. . 

. MARADACHARI, Theory of 
. knowledge. 

y Ved. 

- VedP. 

v Vimuktatman. 

. VP. 

“ Yamuna. 

YID. 

. The Naiskarmyasiddhi of Sureśvara, ed. by 

M. Hirtvanna (Bombay, 1925). 

: The Brhadaranyakopanisadbhàsyavürttika of 

. Sure$vara 

.George THIBAUT, Vedànta-Sütras with Rüma- 

. nuja’s Commentary, SBE 
(Oxford, 1904) 
Tatparyadipika of SudarSanasiri, see Rāmā- 
nuja, Ved. 

XLVIII 

. see Yàmuna 

see Annambhatta, TS 

. K. C. VARADACHARI, Sri Ramanuja's Theory of 

; Knowledge (Tirupati, 1943) 
Vedarthasamgraha, see Rámànuja, Ved. 

. Vedantaparibhasa, see Dharmaraja 

Istasiddhi by Vimuktitman, ed. by M. Hm- 
YANNA (Baroda, 1933) 

^ Visnupurana, ed. Gita, Press (Gorakhpur, 

2009/1951) 
Agamaprümünya, reprint from Pandit,-ed. by 

Pt. S. M. Rama Misra SASTRI (Benares, 
1994/1937) 

. SxppHrTRAYA, consisting of Atmasiddhi, I$vara- 

siddhi and Samvitsiddhi, ed. by Pt. S. M 
Rama Misra SASTRI (Chowkhamba Sans- 
krit Series, Benares, 1904). 

. Stotraratna, ed. and translated by Swami 

ADIDEVANANDA (Madras, 1950). 

. Yatindramatadipikü, see Srinivasa. 

PART I: INTRODUCTION 

i 

I THE SADVIDYA IN VEDANTA 

The moment that the ancient Indian speculations on the creation and 
origin of the world passed from a mythological stage to a more or less philo- 
sophical one is often, and in my opinion correctly, fixed by the first occur- 
rences of the term sat in cosmogonical Veda texts. This is of course not 
much more than a convenient landmark, the selection of which has been 
determined by the role of the term and conception of sat in later thought 
rather than by its significance in the Veda. Moreover, it would be too rash 
to assume a direct and complete evolution of cosmogonic speculations from 
a mythological to a philosophical plane: not only do mythological elements 
accompany the speculations on sat's origin — elements which will persist, 
though later on they may conveniently be called theistic —, but also the 
manner in which they are introduced into some of the Vedic hymns creates 
the impression that the conception of sat and correlated ideas had already 
reached an advanced stage of elaboration before they were accepted in a 
Vedic context: in other words, that they derived from another milieu than 
that commonly represented by the Vedic poets. On the other hand, the 
strictly philosophical import of the notion of sat should not be exaggerated : 
it is anachronistic to render it as “being” in the sense of esse. It is a very 
concrete term with a distinct demonstrative value! and can perhaps best be 
rendered by “this which is here and now" — a meaning that can be followed 
through the Upanisads. od l 

The paramount importance in later Indian thought of the idea complex 
that is from the beginning connected with sat needs no proof. Although in 
other systems of philosophy its influence can be shown, it is most conspicuous 
in Samkhya and Vedanta. But when we survey these two darśanas as the 
-clear-cut systems of later date, we find that sat, or corresponding terms, 
have assumed different, even opposite, connotations which reflect the funda- 
mental difference between the dar$anas: for Vedanta as a whole sat is the 
‘transcendent and ‘immaterial, for Sámkhya the immanent and material first 
"cause of the world. Within the fold of Vedanta again the elaboration of the 

1. Cf. such formulae as sac ca tyac ca (TaittUp. 2, 6, where the context tempts 
us to understand asat by tyad), which is not merely a folk-etymology of the etymologically 
transparent satya but in which sat "that which is here" is also opposed to "that which 
is that or there", e.g. Brahman (cf. BAUp. 3, 9, 9 katamo deva iti — prüna iti — sa brahma 
tyad ity dcaksate, where we may recall that ib. 2, 3, 1 sat as an embodied form is distin- 
guished from a disembodied form described as the wind and the sky: prana as the micro- 
cosmic counterpart of vüyw is quite well known). 

4 

4 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

problems involved in the idea complex of sat as transcendent causa prima has 
led to extremely diverging solutions. We have therefore in the presystematic 
speculations about sat and its origin a convenient starting-point to seek a 
point of vantage from which we can survey the relation between Vedanta 
and Sàmkhya, and between the systems of Vedànta, among which especially 
Ràmaànuja's system will interest us most. We shall try to sketch in broad 
‘outlines the complex of notions associated with sat in its presystematic usage 

to see if there is anything in it that may add to our understanding of the 
later differences 

We may depart from the sadvidyà of Chandogya Upanisad 6, Uddalaka's 
teaching of his son Svetaketu, easily the most celebrated Sruti text. It plays 
an important part in Vedantamimamsa, not only for its own sake, but also 
indirectly because it has been dealt with in the Brahmasitras, so that all 
system-building commentators had to explain it precisely. 'Their explanations 
concern invariably the relation between the first cause and the effected world, 
and in so far as this relation is the fundamental problem of Vedànta the com- 
mentaries on the Grambhanadhikarana represent the central doctrines of the 
systems. The general interpretation is of sat as the self-existent, transcendent 
and absolute Brahman as an essentially perfect entity in opposition—of varying 
degree—to its effect, the phenomenal world. Modern scholarship, on the other 
hand, has long since recognized? that the same sadvidyà represents an early 
stage of more or less ‘Samkhyan’ speculations; and whereas translators like 
Bóhtlingk, Deussen, Senart, Hume and Radhakrishnan render. their text in 
a spiritualist sense, other scholars like Jacobi, Betty Heimann and Ruben? 
urge that this famous prapüthaka voices a materialist tendency. We have to 
‘go beyond our text to discover its meaning in the context to which it belongs. 

The earliest form—but not necessarily the most primitive one—of the 
question of the provenance of "this which is" is found in Rigveda 10, 72: it 
is asked how the gods came to be. The poet describes how Brahmanaspati 
forged these worlds as a blacksmith: for in the age before the gods sat origi- 
nated from asat, and after it, or rather along with it, originated the worlds.* 
"The sequel shows that the poet had other, probably more congenial, cosmo- 
gonic associations in mind where Daksa and Aditi were the primeval progeni- 

! 2. cf. OLDENBERG,. Die Lehre der Upanishaden, pp. 185f.; JACOBI,, Ueber das Ver- 
hàültnis des Vedanta zum Samkhyam, Festschrift Kuhn, p. 38. 
-. 3. JACOBI, o.c; HEIMANN, Studien zur Eigenart des indischen Denkens, p. 49; 
.RUBEN, Die Philosophen der Upanishaden, pp. 156ff., and again, but extremely tendentious, 
„Geschichte der indischen Philosophie, pp. 87 ff 

4. bréhmonaspétir etá sám karmára ivüdhamat / devánam pūrvyé yugé ’satah sád 
ajayata (with c. cf. 10, 129, 6 arvág devá asyá (sc. sato) visdrjanena/ "the gods are since 
its emanation")// tád ásà ánv ajüyanta. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 5 

tors from whom the worlds were born. The relation between sat and the 
personality of Bráhmanaspáti, who somehow assisted at its origination, re- 
mains obscure. His personality reminds us of RV. 10, 81 where creation is 
described as the handiwork of the divine artisan Vi$vákarman—who signi- 
ficantly is called Vacispiti. In this sakta the question is posed: what is 
the foundation, what the foothold on which ViSvakarman created; and again: 
seek with your minds, O sages, for that on which he stood while supporting 
the worlds. This question is, it would seem, directly answered in RV. 10, 129; 
the sages found out that sat is fastened to asat. 

This famous hymn formulates elaborately and in an already advanced 
form the view that sat arose from asat. The progress made in this hymn 
concerns not so much the relation between sat and asat as that between both 
and the personality behind it: Bráhmanaspáti and Visvakarman Vācáspáti 
are succeeded by a vague and anonymous ádhyaksa or superintending person 
whose actual assistance at, and knowledge of, sat's origination is questioned: 
under whose protection did it take place? and: he knows, or does he?9 Hence- 
forth the question of a personal agency behind the creation of this world will 
remain connected with the question of tbe relation between sat and asat. 

` The latter relation is expressed in this sükta in the terms of conception 
and procreation:" in the womb of asat, the dark hidden within the dark, in 
which the embryonic water was as yet ‘unaccidented’, the one first embryo 
(abhi) is conceived with an excess of heat—orgasm; the procreative impulse 
(kama) takes shape in that germ which is the first germ of will (mánas):? 

5.. Stt. 2 and 4 (see below), 3 (sám bahtibhyam dhámati sám pdtatrair dydvabhtmi 
janáyan devá ékah), and 7 (vacáspátim vi$vákarmaámam); Brhaspati, of course, is called 
vücaspati in such texts as MS. 2, 6, 6 and SatBr. 14, 4, 1, 23. Note that Ramanuja cites 
the ádhyaksa as the personal deity in the immaterial heaven ($881; 1271.) 

6. 1 c kásya Sdrmann; 7 iyám visrstir yata Gbabhtivayddi và dadhé và ná/ yó 
asyddhyaksah paramé vyóman só angá veda. yadi và ná véda 

7. Cf. GELDNER ad 10, 129 "das Bild der Zeugung und Geburt wird in dem ganzen 
Liede folgerichtig durchgeführt"; it is difficult, however, to decide to what extent it is 
‘just "Bild" or symbolic representation: could, in that mythological period, world creation 
be easily conceived in other terms than those of procreation? 

`. 8..táma üsit témasa gülhám dgre ’praketdm salilám sdrvam & idám; GELDNER: 
apraketé "unerkenntlich" in the sense of “unterschiedslos” which is perhaps already 
too abstract 

9. kámas tád ágre sám avartatédhi ménaso rétah prathamám ydd ósit (4 ab); 
GELDNER über dieses kam am Anfang das Liebesverlangen, was des Denkens erster 
Same war," where yád is a loose relative conjunction; perhaps it is preferable to take 
‘sam-\/vrt in the attested sense of “to conglomerate, take shape in, become”: the pro- 
creative impulse took concrete shape in that which then became the first seed of mánas 
(which is nearer to ‘will’ than ‘thought’); cf. this will-to-create personified as the first 
self-created creature AthV. 9, 2, 19ff.; cf. also 13, 1, 6ff. and 13, 2, 25 8. where the 
sun personifying tapas (rohita-) is the first creating creature. 

6 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

sages found out that this sat is fastened to asat—and one is inclined to add: 
with the omphalical cord? This intimate connexion between that which is 
sat and that which is not sat enables us to understand the somewhat enigmatic 
beginning of the hymn: asat "another than sat" is there only to account for 
sat's origin and has no proper existence apart from sat, so that before sat came 
to be, its counterpart was not there either; it is rightly said that originally 
there was absolutely nothing, neither sat, or this which is here, nor another 
than this. Asat, the other, the womb from which sat arises, has been com- 
pletely abstracted from a primeval progenitrix; a reminiscence of a progenitor 
persists, though his function is questioned and he is at most, if at all, someone 
watching the process from the far-away 5५.2 

This tendency to do away with both the relicts of a creator person and 
asat as a necessary hypothesis for the origination of sat finds it conclusion in 
Uddalaka's sadvidyà where for the first time the originality and eternity of 
this which is is posed in a polemical manner: originally sat was only here, 
nothing else: for how could it arise from asat?) Something that is of a 
certain kind cannot arise from something else which is not of the same kind 
sat is the irreducible, it is ‘kind’ itself, like in a clay pitcher clay is the ‘kind’ 
beyond which the pitcher cannot be reduced 

How does Uddalaka account for this view in the terms of his age? He 
begins by asking his son: “What is the instruction by which the unrevealed 
is revealed,^ the not understood understood, the unknown known?" The 
instruction is given in the following lessons which are summarized (4, 5) "this 

D 

10. 8666 béndhum ásati mir avindan (4c).. 

11. I cannot quite believe in a mystical or alogical "neither being nor non-being” 
as generally translated, which renders the poet at once capable of admirable abstractions 
but incapable of logical thinking; the poet is neither "ganz barock" nor guilty of "geheim- 
nisvolle Gestammel" (RUBEN, Philosophen, p. 161), but, trying to do away with asat as 
an independent magnitude but still allowing a beginning of sat, he reduces asat to sat 's 
matrix, existing only by virtue of sat. 

12. This ddhyaksa in the sky must be a solar deity corresponding to Daksa in 
10, 72, Visvakarman ib. (cf. 10, 170, 4), Brahmanaspati in 10, 81 (cf. 2, 24, 3 ; 4, 50, 4 
10, 68, 12); worth noting is also TaittBr. 2, 2, 9 where the sun originates from asat. 

13. As against the more or less contemporaneous contentions of TaitttUp 2, 7, 1 

BAUp. 1, 2, 1; ChUp. 3, 19, 1, that sat originated from asat, which was the old-fashioned 
position. 

14. éruta- in a more technical sense of “known by or as Vedic revelation 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 1 

is what the ancient who knew it, those who were great in disputations!5 and 
great experts in Sruti, have said: ‘Now there is no one who could name a 
single thing that is not yet revealed, understood and known;' for they knew 
it by those (three colours): that which is red, they knew it for the colour of 
glowing-heat; that which is resplendent, they knew it for the colour of water; 
that which is black, they knew it for the colour of grown food; that which is 
not known (for anyone of these three colours), they knew it for a combination 
of these three deities 

It is clear that the instruction is primarily concerned with an inventory 
of the world under the three ‘aspects’ (ritpa~ "colour, coloured form") of 
tejas “glowing-heat”, apas “water”, anna “grown food”. These three aspects are 
described as the successive offspring of what is called sat. All the beings that 
in their turn went forth from the deities which are these ‘aspects’ (from tejas 
derives sun and all that is of sun etc.16) are described as “change proceeding 
from speech, or name.” What exactly is meant by this phrase becomes clear 
from the illustrations given by Uddalaka. His son asks what is the instruction 
which promises to reveal everything, and Uddalaka answers: “It is like this, 
my son: we can know all that is made of clay by knowing one lump of clay: 
the change is that which proceeds from speech or name: it is clay: that is the 
truth.” Similarly we know all that is made of copper by knowing a lump of 
copper ore," and all that is iron by knowing a nail-cutter. The last instance 
warns us that the point is not so much that we first are to know the first or 
rough material but that a small piece of the same kind is enough to classify 
the kindred; as indeed it is. E 2 

15, mahê$ala maha$rotriyah; the former term is invariably translated “having 
great houses" (BómrLINGK “grosze Hausherre: DEUssEN even "Groszen an Reichtum" 
SENART “grands maitres de maiso: RADHAKRISHNAN “great householders”) but the 
term in this. sense is pointless in this connexion; besides $ald is “court, compound, enclo- 
sure, hall” rather than “house as living-quarters", and used for receiving guests, etc., 
as place of meeting, teaching and discussion (cf. pathasala, etc.); in connexion with 
mahasrotriya I would suggest "he who entertains large parties of theologians in his hall 
and hence himself shining in disputations” or “whose hall-disputes are great”; cf. ChUp. 
5, 11, 1/3. ` 

16. apágüd agner agnitvam .. ddityad ádityatvam, invariably translated "the quality 
of fire, etc. vanished from fire, etc.” can be understood much more significantly as 
describing further emanations: for this is the topic of this and the following khandas 
where creation by triplication is described (tejas/fire > sun and. sun-like, moon and 
moon-like, lightning and the like); suffix °tva- in the sense of a collective (cf. RENOV, 
Grammaire sanscrite § 187); esp. the translation of DEUSSEN, and those based on it (Hume's, 
RapHAKRISHNAN’s) reveal a monistic bias more inspired by Sankara than by their texts. 

- 17. lohamani-; mani- "any more or less precious stone, or stone-like metal ore, that. 
is mined or delved”; RADHAKRISHNAN “nugget of gold", but "gold" is a late sense of toka 
borrowed from Sankara. 

8 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

When this is made clear Uddàlaka declares: “only sat was here!® ori- 
ginally, nothing else; i.e., nothing that was not sat, i.e., asat. “That wished:!9 
‘I will be many, I will beget,’ it begot tejas. That tejas thought: ‘I will be 
many, I will beget,’ it begot water. That is why whenever a man is hot then 
he sweats; consequently from the (engendered) heat water arises.98 Water 
wished: “I will be many, I will beget,’ it begot grown food. That is why 
whenever it rains, then there is plenty of food. Food and eatables consequently 
arise from water. All beings have three ways of being born, from an egg, 
a living being, or a plant. That first deity wished: “Well, now will I make 
separate forms and names by entering into these three deities as a living being 
myself: I will make each of them threefold." So she entered and divided. 

We see that in this instruction an inventory is attempted of all beings 
under the three aspects or ‘elements’ tejas, water and food. These ‘elements’ 
however do not sum up the entire world: they are ‘classes’. Nor do they sum 
up sat: as the comparisons show sat is the field on which tejas works to 
produce water, and both to produce food. This vision was no doubt inspired 
by nature: sun, rain and food work from and on earth. Later commentators 
invariably take these three ‘elements’ to imply the classical five. But, if not 
more primitive,2° the series is of a different kind. Not only does it intend to 
distinguish the three spatial layers of sun, clouds and land?! but also three 

18. idam adverbially, as its position would indicate; otherwise BOBTLINGK, SENART, 
DEUSSEN cum suis 

19. RADHAKRISHNAN's comment that “aiksata, thought, lit. saw [but rather ~ aká- 
mayata, cf. SatBr. 14, 4, 2, 30, TaittUp. 2, 6, 1 etc.; DEUSSEN rightly "beabsichtete"] indi- 
cates that pure being [abstract; but the term is a concrete "a being", less equivocal 
"this which is"] is conscious" suggests more than there is to it and rather begs the 
question if these: mythologizing thinkers were able to conceive of world creation in 
non-anthromorphic terms; RADHAKRISHNAN’s remark is inspired by BrS. 1, 1, 4 iksater 
nasabdam 

19a. I follow here Edgerton’s translation (JAOS, 1915, p. 2401.) 

20. According to ChUp. 3, 11, Uddalaka Aruni was the eldest son of 
Aruna: this Aruna (his name “the ruddy one” is significant in view of 
his preoccupation with the sun) described the sun-power under five colours 
or aspects, under which the existent beings are classified: in. this respect Aruna’s 
five correpond to Uddalaka’s three; noteworthy is moreover that his five colours are. 
evidently built on the three mentioned by Uddalaka: they are 1. rohita (3, 1, 4); 
2. $ukla (3, 2, 3); 3. krena (3, 3, 3); 4. parah-krsna (3, 4, 3); and 5. yad etadddityasya 
madhye ksobhata iva. Obviously father and son had a common starting-point; RUBEN's 
remark that Uddalaka "unter dem erdriickenden Eindruck der mythisch-mystischen 
Sonnenverherrlichung seines Vaters Aruna zu seinem realistischen Gegner werden. 
muszte, weil der Sohn (=Svetaketu) unter der Grosze des Vaters litt” (Philosophen, 
pp. 158-59) is rather facile romance. 

21, So SENART ad ChUp. 6, 3, 2, note. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 9 

temporal events: hot season, rainy season, harvest time. The stage of 
Uddalaka’s speculations is yet more advanced: the three are also the three 
aspects under which the existent beings can be grouped according to colour. 
From this point of view the series shows affinities with that of the three gunas 
under which the world, constituted by the five elements, is classified as being 
bright, moving and stationary. It is interesting to note how the colours 
persist: $veta$vatara ‘puns’ on an unborn male (aja- “constant self and 
purusa" or "he-goat") who copulates with an unborn female (ajà- "constant 
matter" or "she-goat") who is red, white and black; red, white and black 
threads woven in a piece of cloth will be the Samkhya’s stock-example of the 
material cause persisting in the effect, 

We may now ask: how does the sadvidyà continue RV. 10, 129? Funda- 
mental is Uddalaka’s polemic against those who hold a more original asat to 
account for sat. So did the Vedic poet hold, but his asat is by no means 
original: originally there was nothing at all. Uddalaka's did away with the 
hypothesis of asat: sat in the beginning—the beginning as far as the world is 
concerned, creation—was there alone. Is Ramanuja right in explaining 
advitiya as denying that there was a separate adhisthütr who was ‘instrumental’ 
to the process of creation?#4 In any case the vague watching person has dis- 
appeared. Yet we find traces of the original birth-process of sat as described 
in the sükta; but the events which in the Vedic hymn took place as successive 
stages in a conception are now represented as primary emanations of sat itself 
and the chronological sequence has become a causal chain. Nonetheless, the 
emanations of tejas, water and food are of a different kind from creation proper 
which only sets in after food has been produced and sat has entered the 
‘elements’. The parallelism is unmistakable: in the sükta the embryo which 
was conceived by an excess of heat (tápas)?9 in the formerly unaccidented ' 
water was the germ in which the primary creative impulse took shape: an 
order káma—tápas—Water—conceived germ presents itself clearly. In 
Uddalaka's account these succeeding events are moments in a causal series 
proceeding from sat's first impulse: sat desires to multiply and tejas appears, 
after and through tejas water, after and through water the fruit (anna). 

` 22, For the original three seasons, cf. e.g. FILLIOZAT, L’Enigme des 256 Nuits 

d'Asoka, J. As. 1949; OLDENBERG, o.c, p. 185, makes in passing a similar suggestion. 

23. SvetUp. 4, 5 ajam ekam lohitasuklakrsnam bahvih prajah srjyamünám, etc. 
where sat has already completely become matter. 

24. Ved. $816; 33. . 

25. In this respect SvetUp. 4, 5 is illustrative: matter which is red, etc. starts 
to create. È 

26. An important parallel is furnished by AthV. 13, 1 and 2 where rohita is a 
personification of tapas (cf. 2, 25) from which or whom agni, sun, etc. arise: 1, 48; 
2, 49 (with which compare ChUp. 6, 4, 4 and the note above 9). 

४.2 

10 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

Bearing the Vedic archetype in mind we could speak of sat's self-creation, 
which is completed with the origination of anna. 

At this exact point we find a remark that is highly significant: there 
are three ways of being born, from an egg, as a living being, a plant. So long as 
we do not recognize that sat is creating itself, this remark seems irrelevant, 
and Senart was indeed led to regard it as an interpolation. But it is a neces- 
sary observation: how does the definitive birth of the now completely con- 
ceived sat proceed ? To each of its constitutive ‘elements’ corresponds a mode 
of birth: to tejas that of the brooded egg, to water that of the living being 
born in the embryonic liquid, to anna that of a plant.” So naturally the next 
sentence reads: "I will now make separate names and forms (i.e. start creation 
proper) by entering the three deities as a living being myself.” The three 
constitutive events of conception elaborated as separate moments of a causal 
series are now again condensed and integralized, and it is sat, not anna, which 
starts creation by being born in the manner of a living being itself.28 

It goes without saying that Uddalaka's vision is not a mere recast of 
the Vedic archetype. The contents of the Vedic description are its structure 
rather than its contents: to use our terms, the events of a more or less symboli- 
cal creation by procreation provide the structure of a temporal-spatial coher- 
ence of the three layers of the world and three successive creative changes, 
which is integralized in the self-creation of sat. This self-creation is preceded 
by, or proceeds from, a phase of sat as bhi, a potentiality which actualizes 
itself by passing through a series of primary emanations, prototypes of the 
following creation by triplication; but these three prototypes form the triunity 
of the actual sat. Hence it is rightly said that in the final analysis sat is the 

: 27. The latter function of the egg in cosmogony is already announced early: cf, 
Aitareya Up. 1 in a very similar context atma và idam eko ‘gra asm... so 'dbhya eva 
purusam samuddhrtyümürcchayat / tam abhyatapat tasyabhitaptasya mukham nirabhid- 
yate yathündam / mukhad vag, etc. and more explicitly ChUp. 3, 19 in similar context: 
asad evedam agra Gsit tat sad àsit tat samabhavat tad dndam niravartate tat samvatsa- 
tasya matram asayata tan nirabhidyate te Gndakapale rajatam ca suvarnam cübhavatüm; 
already ad RV. 10, 129, 4 GELDNER remarks “im tápas steckt zugleich die Vorstellung des 
brütenden Vogels” (cf. also Sayana ad ekam RV. 10, 82, 6 anddbhiprayenoktam); the 
idea that tapas "heat, body-heat" was a creative power naturally led to creation being 
conceived as originating from the brooded egg.—How near the notion of originating from 
a plant was to Uddalaka himself shows 6, 8, 6 clearly. A fourth way of birth, men- 
tioned AitUp. 3, 3, origination from sweat, has a cosmic correspondent in Gopatha Br. 
1, 1 where the primaeval waters originate from Brahman's sweat. 

28. 1 take Gtmané as a reflexive pronoun; cf. a parallel passage in SatBr. 13, 1, 1, 1 
brahma vai svayambhü tapo tapyate / tad aiksata — na vai tapasy àmantyam Asti 
hantüham bhütesv Gtmanam juhuvüni bhütáni cütmani, etc., cf. also Renou, On the word 
&tman, esp. $6 (Vak 2, Poona 1952); we may also compare such expressions as *ütmanü 
if.c. in the sense of ?bhàvena, “taya, ?tvena “as being.." 3 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 11 

anima, the irreducible stuff of which everything is made, root, meeting-place,?9 
solidity, àtman of everything: the atomic minimum that remains after all 
successive products have inversely been dissolved in their causes, and "you 
are it, Svetaketu.” 

We have but lightly passed by the meaning of the phrase vácürambha- 
mam vikaro némadheyam, describing the process by which the effect emerges 
from its cause. This phrase has become the bone of content of the later 
commentators explaining BrS. 2, 1, 14 tadananyatvam | ürambhanasabdadi- 
bhyah, There can be little doubt that the term aGrambhana is taken from, or in- 
spired by, RV. 10, 81, 2 where it is asked: kim svid asid adhisthanam ürám- 
bhanam katamát svit kathasit / yáto bhiimim jandyan visvikarma vi dyám 
aürnon mahima visvdcaksah “what was the underlay or foothold, what the 
support, and how was it, out of which Vi$vakarman, producing the earth, sepa- 
rated the sky by his power, he the all-seeing One?”3! This question is 
repeated and illustrated (4): "What was the forest and what the wood, out 
of which they fashioned heaven and earth? Seek for that with your minds, 
O sages, on which he stood while supporting the worlds. One reply was 
given in 10, 129: sat is fastened to asat. Uddalaka replies: the effect is vàcà- 
rambhanam, i.e. nimadheyam. : 

No doubt with this connexion of the Vedic hymn in mind Ràmànuja 
tries to show that the sadvidyà by advitiya denies a separate adhisthatr, and 
he quotes TaittBr. 2, 8, 9, 6 where the question of the Vedic poet was 
directly answered: brahman is the forest and the wood on which the creator 
stood, i.e., the materia prima out of which he created. Madhva, even more 
explicitly, refers directly to the Vedic hymn;3? and though the use he makes 
of it is objectionable, GHATE is wrong in declaring that “the topic is irrele- 
vant”. Arambhana is synonymous with adhistana “the stable and solid 

. 29. ChUp. 6, 8, 6-7; dyatana in sadàyatama can be more significantly translated 
than “abode” by deriving it from Vyat-+4 “place where”: "the place where the beings 
meet, their common ground." 

30. Since this was written I have resumed the subject in greater detail in Vaca- 
rambhanam, Festschrift S. K. CHATTERJEE Indian Linguistics vol. XVI (Poona 1955). 

31. GELDNER "er der ganz Auge ist"; but ViS$vakarman / Daksa here represent the 
sun which separates earth from heaven by rising from night; cf. 10, 170, 4. 

32. He comments on the sūtra: svatantrabahusidhand srstir loke drsti/ 
naivam brahmanah / svaripasimarthyad evaitasya srstih / kimsvid .... kathasid 
ity üksepah / adhisthanadyukteh : "creation in the world proceeds in our experience with 
the aid of many instruments that have an independent existence; this is not so in brah- 
man’s case: his creation proceeds from his essentially self-sufficient creativeness: this 
is implicit in RV. 10, 81, 2 ab, because of the mention of adhisthana, etc. (which may 
be explained as ‘instrument’).” 

33. V. S. GHATE, Vedanta, p. 81. 

12 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

foundation" which in Indian thought, where the notion of cause is insepa- 
rably linked up with that of a permanent, immobile and solid substructure, is 
virtually synonymous with our “material cause". As the second quoted 
stanza shows àrambhama is the materia prima from which things take their 
beginnings and in which, apart from some individual modifications, they 
consist. So one would translate: “Name is the effect, name which has its 
basis in speech". We are reminded of the fact that ViSvakarman, who 
created the worlds while standing on the àrambhana was called the Lord of 
Vàc and that Brahmanaspati, who forged the worlds when sat emerged from 
asat, is the Lord of Brahman, and that according to Taitt Br. that on which 
Vi$vakarman stood was again Brahman. Sat, wishing to multiply, said: “I 
be many”, and it was many. Vic and Brahman, it seems, 000034 stand for 
the powerful and powerfully creative word that creates a thing in its indi- 
viduality by pointing it out and thus distinguishing it from the common 
stuff it is made of. He who names uses of the power of naming to create: — 
name is what he resorts to (&\/rabh) when singling out a new thing from 
the common undistinguished stuff. Uddalaka, doing away with the creat- 
ing and naming person, still preserves the power of naming to account for 
the emergence of new things out of the common stuff that is sat, or of sat: 
satya. 

l Is this stuff, this sat that is the atman of everything, a material or 
or immaterial entity for Uddalaka? In an interesting $ruti?5 Uddalaka him- 
self replies to a similar question of king A$vapati: “Gautama, how do you 
conceive of the atman?” “As the earth.” A$vapati paraphrases this answer: 
Uddalaka’s atman is the solid basis,36 on which he stands solid himself, solid 
in children and cattle, and eats and enjoys life: but his atman is the atman’s 
feet. Important are other descriptions of sat: BAU. 1, 3, 28, ChUp. 8, 3, 5 
it is deathless (amrta), so BhG. 9, 12; BAUp. 2, 3, 1 it is Brahman's embodied 
form, corresponding to that which is stationary and transient, this embodied 
form being distinguished from a disembodied one that is described as being 
wind and sky: sat is clearly the earth here. Later on, Prasn. Up. 2, 5; 4, 5; 
BhG. 4, 5 sat and asat simply sum up the entire world. 

34. The relation between vüc and brahman is very close as witness RV. 10, 114, 
8d yavad brahma tisthati tàvati vak (GELDNER remarks: “brahman ist hier die Grundlage 
der vác"); AitBr. 4, 21, 1, SatBr. 2, 1, 4, 10, BAUp. 1, 3, 20 vág vai brahma; TS. 7, 3, 
1, 4, etc., etc. One wonders if a detailed study of the relation brahman-vac as sacred 
and sacrally creative speech would not contribute materially to our understanding the 
‘evolution’ of the notion of brahman “sacred powerful speech, creative word, the word 
that is creation" to that of cause of creation, etc. 

35. ChUp. 5, 17, 1 atha hovacoddélakam Arunim — Gautama kam tvam ütmànam 
upassa iti / prthivim eva bhagavo rajann iti hováca / ego vai pratisthütmà vaisvanaro yant 
tvam updsse, etc. 

36. pratistha. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA i 13 

It is clear that Uddālaka’s teaching is not ‘spiritualist’ in the sense 
that the irreducible stuff at the bottom or root of all things is conceived as 
an entity different in kind from the matter of the phenomenal world and 
transcending it as an immaterial spirit that happens to be also immanent to 
some extent. Yet, no more can it be urged that the teaching is materialist. 
Matter and spirit — the term nearest to spirit is neither atman nor manas, 
but vāc in vácárambhanam — are not treated as different or distinct. Actually 
the question of matter and spirit does not arise. Nor is the diversity emerg- 
ing from the stuff sat disparaged as being merely effects: there is nothing 
discreditable in things being created by naming out of their common sub- 
stratum: rather is the discovery of name as a principle of individuality a 
precious one. One might go further and suggest that Uddalaka’s main pur- 
pose was not to set forth the rather obvious unity of things in general, but 
just the manner of deriving diversity from it: his is after all a creation myth. 

Another point is worth interest: Uddalaka manages to elaborate a 
cosmic vision without once borrowing terms from ritual terminology. The 
majority of Upanisad thinkers cannot conceive of wide perspectives in both 
macrocosmos and microcosmos except in ritual terms: small wonder, for it 
was in these terms that the Brahmanas had described a coherent sacrocentric 
universe. Uddalaka, one may gather, did not care to depart from the ritually 
sacred, and his brahman was vac 

We may read an essentially ‘SAmkhyan’ tendency in his discourse: 
Ssmkhya not in the sense of a coherent system with a psychology and escha- 
tology of its own, but rather of an attiude, an approach of study, an interest 
in classifying the world, a summing-up and inventorizing, indifferent to a dis- 
tinction between matter and spirit, or even sacred and non-sacred, but pri- 
marily concerned with this which is, or sat. 

Does this long analysis justify itself in helping us to understand the 
Jatter differences in interpreting the relation between the first cause and 
the effected world? I think it does. Though necessarily we must study the 
history of thought by the texts that have come down to us, we should while 
doing so never lose sight of the fact that the actual history moved on another 
plane, stages of which happened in passing to be fixed and perpetuated in 
texts while thought moved on. Indian culture was incomparably less 
livresque than the Western. The continuity of thought was at first served 
unconsciously by the thinkers, but when gradually the spirit changed, the 
time came when they began to return consciously to former thought as pre- 
served in ancient texts to receive inspiration from it and so to be better 
able to serve its continuity. Trends that had been partly or incidentally or 
not at all voiced in those texts had then been developed, and original 
visions of a more primitive, and hence often more comprehensive, character 

14 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

been elaborated and distinguished. So texts came to be vehicles of views 
which, if expressed in them at all, had been part of a different context; and 
gradually the Word became really transcendent. 

When the inspiration of the Upanisad fragments, with their sudden 
aperçus, cosmic imagery and criss-cross flashes of penetration, had given way 
to a spirit of systematization, and, after the example of Purvamimimsa, 
imposed on the kaleidoscopic teachings of the ancient. Later darSanas or 
outlooks distinguished themselves. Samkhya, from a more or less inde- 
pendent attitude, became a more independent inquiry. Among those prin- 
cipally interested in the sacred, distinction began to be made —though not 
yet contradistinction — between the study of the rites proper and the study 
of that comprehensive power hovering over the rites, their language, their 
function and their fruits, that more or less objective but mysterious and 
enigmatic object of speculations about the cosmic constancy correlated to 
the not less cosmic dynamics of the all-comprising ritual—the brahman. 
With this brahman dealt the upasanas of the upanisads and now this in its 
vastness unalterable constancy was sought to be grasped, described and 
defined on the basis of these texts — mainly, if not exclusively at first, on 
the basis of the Chandogya Upanisad.37 ; 

Though we saw that Uddalaka did not conceive of his sat as an im- 
material entity, yet he must have been surrounded by thinkers who tended 
to do so. A vedic poet already declared that ekam sat viprü bahudhà 
vadanti38 What he called sat was elsewhere named brahman or atman or 
Nirdyana. It was conceived as the one principle existing par excellence 
as the stable foundation of cosmic ritual, which to recognize and command 
would secure release from the retributory effects of ritual, from world itself. 
In this respect the brahman, too, was satya "true, real" with the peculiarly 
Indian connotation of “permanently and underivably real". . Macrocosmically 
that vast, hidden power that supports the world, microcosmically the solid 
soul of the body, its character of basic constancy attracted the function: of 
cause, which was inseparably connected with the notion of permanent, 
underlying solidity. Side by side, a brahma-centric and a more tellurian 
approach developed out of the sacrocentric cosmology of former ages, but 
in constant interaction. Sat was conceived of differently as cause. Simul- 
taneously a mythology of the creator god, of a strictly personal character 

37. cf. BELVALKAR, Lectures on Vedanta, I, p. 141 ff. 

38. RV. 1, 164, 46 “The visionaries give many names to the One that is”. 

39. AitUp. 1, 1 brahmaivedam agra dsit; BAUp. 1, 4, 1, atmaivedam agra üsit; 
MahUp. 1 eko ha vai Narayana üsit, ui 

40. The origin of this equation sat = brahman should be studied further. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA ° 15 

which forbade microcosmic identifications, persisted and gained new import- 
ance with the rise of the religions. Though more allied to the Sàmkhyan 
spirit of lucid distinctions by names and forms, this personalism influenced 
the monistically tending brahmanical spirit profoundly and persistently. Such 
is the composite picture which the Gita shows, and in this picture belong 
historically the activities of the Brahmasitrakaras. They conceived synthe- 
tically of the mystic relation between this effected word of transitory pheno- 
mena and Brahman, the hypostatized constancy, as a relation of immanent 
causality. Brahman—never exclusively regarded as an undifferentiated 
‘abstract entity — emanated the world; the effect grew upon it: while 
remaining essentially its constant and undisturbed self it passed by a process 
of parinama into the condition of effect.41 That in Badarayana’s collection 
this view is summarized under the ‘Samkhyan’ sadvidyà is not surprising: 
Uddalaka’s indifference did not preclude a dichotomy of matter and spirit, 
still less such a vague and pantheistic relation as envisioned by the sutras; 
and early Sáàmkhya formed part and parcel of early Vedanta where it would 
remain its substructure. 

It took long before the logical difficulties of maintaining the imma- 
nence of a transcendent Absolute in an imperfect, relative and transitory 
world were recognized, and the parinama doctrine was challenged. The 
doctrine of vivarta was formulated, at first it seems by $abdàdvaita, and 
later elaborated in Sankara’s school. Hacker has shown that the vivarta 
doctrine was not yet fully accepted by Sankara who tended towards modify- 
ing parinama in an illusionist sense.“ A more oldfashioned position was 
taken up by Bhàskara who maintained parinama in its full force, allowing 
upüdhis or limiting conditions to render the absolute and perfect partly rela- 
tive and imperfect. Yamuna, and more systematically Ramanuja, repre- 
sented a very different view in which parinama took place not in the Abso- 
lute but in the phenomenal world of matter and souls which were eternally 
and really related to the Absolute as its natural modes. Madhva, at last, 
went one step further and rejected this relationship: he professed a radical 
dualism. i 

' However divergent these solutions, they show one basic agreement: 
all agree upon the primacy of the transcendence of the Absolute that is sat. 
We have reached the end of the development. 

41. That the Sütrakara adhered to the parinàmavada is now generally recognized. 
42. HACKER, Vivarta, $5, pp. 197 ff. 

43. HACKER, o.c. pp. 208 ff. 

44. See Ch. III. 

16 E J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

SRINIVASACHARTS in his useful study of bhedabhedavada says that 
Bhiskara’s philosophy marks a transition from Sankara to Ramanuja, but it 
is doubtful if such an evolution Sankara — Bhaskara — Ràmànuja, suggested 
by the relative chronology of their works, can be maintained historically. 
One would hesitate even to speak of an evolution within Vedanta exclusively: 
for Sankara and Ràmaànuja at least one would rather assume influence, or 
inspiration, from without Vedanta. That Sankara was influenced by Buddhist 
thought is now generally recognized, and the inspirations of the popular 
Samkhya of the Puranas are manifest in Ram4nuja’s philosophy. Bhaskara 
would seem to represent a more traditional view of Vedanta which admitted 
parinama within the absolute and perfect Brahman, a view which both 
Sankara and Ràmànuja declined to accept without profound modification. 
Sankara's modification towards illusionism was perhaps the simplest and, on 
the given premisses, the most logical procedure: given the unique reality of 
Brahman as the eternal spirit, the reality of the phenomenal world with its 
plurality and variety of transitory material and conscient entities could not 
be of the same degree of ultimate reality. The world, obviously imperfect 
and relative effect of the perfect and absolute sat, could not be described 
as wholly sat; but somehow deriving its relative reality from its perfect 
cause, it could neither be described as wholly asat, but, for merely 
practical purposes, it could be taken at least provisionally as real. This 
view is, in the final analysis, a development of a more ancient Vedànta 
view — as represented later on by Bhàskara — in that it accepts some effect- 
ed change of and in Brahman, yet questions the ultimate validity of the condi- 
tions of this change and consequently of the change itself. 

Ramanuja’s thesis is essentially different from both Sankara’s and 
Bhàskara's in that it attributes an ultimately valid, distinct and definable 
reality to the phenomenal world, and within the phenomenal world to the 
component orders of non-spiritual matter and individual spirits or souls. The 
souls are not real (or practically real) and conditioned projections of the 
absolute spirit, but fundamentally uniform spiritual monads, which in a 
beginningless process of causation (karman) happen to suffer degrees of 
change in their essential attribute knowledge. | 

This thesis is basically Samkhyan, but not dualistic for that. Even 
with regard to Samkhya itself one hesitates to subscribe to the qualification 
of dualism. Eternally soul and matter are interrelated in interaction; how- 
ever different both may be, soul is accessible to matter in its essential 
quality of knowledge. 'Though soul may be free from matter, still in 
potentiality it is vulnerable to it. The union of soul and body is no doubt 

45. SRINIVASACHARY, Bhedübheda, p. 7. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA E 17 

brought about by a deception: the soul mistakes itself for a material ego. 
From the soul's point of view the union is a deficiency, but from the ego's 
point of view a harmony: the body obeys the orders of the captive soul to 
fulfil its purposes: it is completely dependent on the soul for its very 
existence, it is the mode and the particularization of the egotized soul, with- 
out which it is purposeless; and through the body the soul may ultimately 
rediscover itself in its essential difference. 

It is this microcosmic harmony of the soul, as the consciously directing 
agent and the body as its perfect instrument, which Rāmānuja has elaborat- 
ed into an analogy for a macrocosmic harmony. It is remarkable that the 
conception of the body as the defect of the soul has hardly any significance 
for Ramanuja: the marvellous utility of the body is for him its most 
significant function. This attitude is the consequence of his positive inter- 
pretation of Release: it is not an escape from the evils of embodied life but 
a supreme hankering after a higher fulfilment in the loving adoration of 
God. So Ràmànuja could conceive of a harmonious Universe, in which the 
harmony of body and soul was repeated in the harmony of matter and souls 
which form the body of God who himself is the directing spirit within it. 
This harmony is eternal; soul and matter exist, and have existed, eternally 
as modes of God, essentially dependent and subserving the single but 
supreme purpose of glorifying his Majesty. 

- Sat at the beginning of creation is God Narayana as modified by soul 
and matter which both constitute His body. The vikāra or parinama describ- 
ed by Uddalaka takes place only in God's modes. God is His perfect self, 
with the modifying body that at the beginning of creation abides in the subtle 
or causal phase. Thus God is the material cause, though only his mode of 
matter undergoes transformation in its essence and his mode of soul in its 
attribute of knowledge. God is also the operative cause inasmuch as He is 
the inner Ruler, setting in motion and allowing to operate the causality of 
karman which brings about the diversity of the finished products, or the 
gross, effectual phase of God's body. 

We are not concerned here with the question how far Ramanuja’s 
exegesis of the sadvidyà is the ‘correct’ one, but only with the developments 
of the-idea-complex for which Uddàlaka in the terms of his age had found a 
‘suggestive expression in the famous sixth prapathaka. . The regularity with 
"which the Indian thinkers have ever since returned to the sadvidyà to inter- 
pret into it their own theses is proof of the fundamental significance for 

^ .. .46. Rāmānuja defines the body : ."that substance (dravya) that a spiritual entity 
can use and support entirely for his own purposes and that in its essence is exclusively 
subordinate (Sesa-) to that entity, is the body of that soul"; cf. trsl. note 21. 

V.3 

18 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

Indian thought of the concept which it expresses. Sat, originally determined 
neither as an impersonal law nor as a personal demiurge, took in the course 
of history either form without excluding the other completely. The divergen- 
cies between the different schools concern the degree in which the immanence 
'of the transcendent is admitted. But basically they all agree that the 
transcendent is somehow present and accessible. Even the more radical 
advaitins, restating the satkaryavada as satkaranavada, allow that the 
Absolute be cause. The perfect is never completely unattainable to the 
imperfect, the absolutely real never wholly inaccessible to the relatively real. 
The instinct urge to Release of the soul implicated in samsara is a bridge 
between world and godhead. And sat preserves its ancient meaning through- 
out the fluctuations between an eminently transcendent, disembodied and 
unqualified Brahman and an eminently immanent, embodied and qualified 
Deity: the sat is the one that is present, the transcendent that is immanent. 

Uddalaka expressed sat’s immanence in creation to some extent as the 
soul’s presence within it, from which presence all this derives its satya: 
similarly Ramànuja formulated God's immanence in the world as His inner 
presence as the soul of the Universe, His body. For Uddalaka sat was the 
anima, the subtlest possible reduction, for Ramanuja it is God whose body 
abides in the subtle phase of cause. Though in other respects their views 
are far apart, yet both thinkers have a common approach in dealing with the 
most ancient and most vital problem of Indian thought: the cause is approach- 
ed from the effect, not the effect from the cause. The formula in which their 
common approach is summed up is, not tvam tad asti “it is you”, but tat 
tvam asi “you are it”. - 

It is not for merely polemical reasons that Ramanuja begins his exposi- 
tion of his views in his philosophical début the Vedarthasamgraha by a 
fresh interpretation of the sadvidya, but because he recognized the basic 
significance of this text, which for him, not less than for Sankara, expresses 
the profoundest truth that man is able to grasp. 

IL. THE ANCIENT MASTERS 
Among the names which Ràmànuja mentions in his list of ‘ancient 
commentators! Bodhàyana, Tanka, Dramida, Guhadeva, Kapardi and 
Bhàruci, only the three first mentioned are known as authors of specific 
commentarial texts, whereas of the others nothing but the names has been 

41. Ved. $93; Srinivasa, YID. I, p. 2 gives a similar list where Bodhayana's name 
is followed by those of Guhadeva and Bhiruci, then Brahmanandin's (= Tanka) and 

Dramida's: does he suggest that Guhadeva and Bhàruci were the masters who summa- 
rized the Vrtti? 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 19 

saved from oblivion. Nonetheless, the identities of the first three are 
hardly less obscure and they have been obscured further by several attempts 
to clarify them. It would seem to be necessary, after KUPPUSWAMT'S interest- 
ing but unconvincing identificationsf$ and Dascupta’s critical but incomplete 
account, to restate the problems and rearrange the available evidence. 

§1. l Bodhàyana the Vrttikàra : 

Ràmànuja declares in the first line of his Sribhasya? that he will fol- 
low the interpretation that Bodhayana has given of the Brahmasütras in his 
extensive vrtti, which has been abbreviated by the ancient Masters. He 
quotes this Vrtti— to conform to the custom and use the class-name as 
its title— some seven times in his $ribhasya and nowhere else! These 
seven fragments, it would seem, are all that is known of a vrtti by a 
Bodhayana. Sankara, however, according to his commentators Ramananda 
and Anandagiri refers implicitly to a Vrttikdra in several places of his 
Brahmasütrabhasya.? They identify this author with an Upavarsa, 
possibly on the strength of a remark by Sankara ad BrS. 3, 3, 53: ata eva 
bhagavatopavarsena prathame tantre ütmüstitvabhidhanaprasaktau 'éürirake 
vaksyüma ity’ uddhara uktah “therefore the venerable Upavarsa declared at 
a point in the First Tantra where there was occasion to discuss the existence 
of the Soul: “We shall explain this in the Sàriraka". This remark is, ac- 
cording to KUPPUSWAMI, a clear indication that Upavarsa was the author of 

48. MM. S. Kuppuswamr SASTRIGAL, Bodhàyana and Dramidacürya-—two old 
Vedantins presupposed by Rāmānuja (Proc. & Tr. 3rd Or. Conf. Madras 1924), pp. 465. 

49. DascuPrA, Indian Philosophy III, pp. 105 ff.; cf. also S. KRISHNASWAMI IYENGAR, 
Manimekhalai in its historical setting, pp. 91ff.; V. A. RAMASWAMI SASTRI, intr. to Vacas- 
pati's Tattvabindu (Annamalai Un. Skt. Ser. 3, 1936), pp. 14 ff. 

50. bhagavadbodhüyanakrtüm vistirnàm brahmasitravrttim pūrvācāryāh samci- 
ksipuh / tanmatanusarena sütrüksarümi vyakhyasyante; Abhyankar’s reading Baudh? is 
incorrect 

51, Collected and shown against the relevant sütras in Appendix $1 

52. BrSBh. 1, 1, 19/23/31; 1, 2, 23; 8. quotes him by name ad 1, 3, 28 ७ढा eva 
tu, Sabda iti bhagavan Upavarsah 

53. The utmost caution should be observed in assuming that comparatively late 
commentators knew works which have been lost long since; in many cases it is probable 
that they too inferred rather than knew. We should not even be too sure that $. knew 
Upavarsa’s complete commentary: both citations may easily have been current dicta in 
school-tradition ; his one citation varnd eva tu Sabda iti summarizes Sabara's Upavarsa 
quotation; bis other one is also found in Bhaskara 1, 1, 1, (Chaukh. ed. p. 6) ata evo-. 
pavarsicaryenoktam prathamapüde — ütmavüdam tu Sarirake vaksyéma iti, If Upavarsa’s 
prestige. was great enough to render these relatively unimportant citations significant, one 
wonders why his authority is not evoked in more controversial sections — if his views 
were known, That Bhüskera quotes Upavarsa in exactly the same connexions as §. 
(though under different sütras) and only there makes it probable that Bh. quoted from $. : 

20 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

vrttis in both karma — and brahmasütras and he proceeds to identify him 
with Ràmànuja's vrttikara Bodhayana. 

The question is, however, appreciably more complicated than at a first 
glance it would appear to be. An Upavarsa is mentioned by Sabarasvamin 
ad Karmasütra 1, 1, 5 in a discussion on the topic of what constitutes a 
word.54 So, on the basis of Sankara's and Sabara’s references and citations 
and of Ràmaànanda's identification, we may conclude that Upavarsa did 
indeed write a vrtti on both Karma- and Brahmasütras. Venkatanatha, 
writing in the 14th Century, suggests the identity of this Upavarsa with our 
Bodhayana, but it is noteworthy that he refers to him by quoting Sabara’s 
quotation. One wonders whether he knew much more of him than just that 
analysis of the word gauh, and whether, for that matter, Sankara's com- 
mentators did. : 

The citation from Upavarsa by Sankara is in itself most interesting. It 
is remarkably worded. Tantra may indeed mean "system, doctrine" but 
much more frequent is the sense of "chapter, part of a larger treatise". If 
we accept this sense we shall be led to conclude that Upavarsa’s text con- 
tained both the Karma and Sarirakasutras as one context. KUPPUSWAMI 
just stops before this conclusion: “Upavarsa was decisively in favour of 
treating the Karma-Mimamsa and Brahma-Mimàmsa as forming the former 
and the latter parts of an integral whole". Left at this the statement 
vaksyamah means simply that Upavarsa contemplated writing a vrtti on the 
Sariraka part. Yet, to express such an intention of commenting on another 
work some time in the future is most uncommon with Indian commentators; 
but very frequent indeed are references to, and anticipations of, what is to 
follow later on in the same text. Reading the citation naturally we under- 

54. kah íabdah—gakarauküravisarjaniyüà iti bhagavüm Upavarsah: if, as is gene- 
rally accepted, the quotation of the Vrttikara (vrttikáras tv anyathenam grantham var- 
nayüm cakre, etc.) runs to the end of bhdsya ad 1, 1, 5, then, JACOBI argues (the Dates 
of the philosophical sütras of the Brahmans, p. 17 (JAOS 1911); followed by P. V. KANE, 
Gleanings from the Sabarabhasya (JBBRAS 1921)), the Vrttikára quotes Upavarsa and 
cannot be identical with him; this is too cautious: it is clear from the context as well 
as Sankara's reference 1, 3, 28 that this Vrttikara is Upavarsa; for an account of his 
views, cf. V. A. RAMASWAMI SASTRI, Old Vrttikaras on the Pūrva Mimümsü Sutras (IHQ 
1934), p. 431 ff. 

55. Tattvatika, p. 149. 

56. Another interpretation is possible by which prathama tantra comprises I-XII, 
a second tantra the Samkarsakanda XII-XVI, and the Sariraka is appended as the third 
part; cf. this use is Praparicahrdaya, p. 39. A third one is suggested by Bhaskara who 
has prathame pade where $. has prathamatantra-; ad 1, 3, 10 Bh. however uses tantra 
for the entire corpus of KM Sutras when quoting Upavarsa: prathamatantrasiddhatvdc 
catra sphotanirükaranam nisphalam syát. The use of tantra as a whole of sutras "threads" 
is of course natural, i Ag i 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 21 

stand that Upavarsa postponed the discussion of a certain topic to a later 
chapter of the treatise on which he was commenting. But all our evidence 
points to the fact that Jaimini’s and Badarayana’s Sutras are not only 
different treatises by different authors but belong to two altogether different 
$astras; and any evidence extracted from one stray sentence crumbles before 
this firm fact. : 

Sure$vara, however, in his Naiskarmyasiddhi sambandhokti ad 1, 91 
makes incidentally a surprising statement: .. yato na Jaiminer ayam abhi- 
praya 'ümmüyasya sarva eva kriyartha’ iti: yadi hy ayam abhipriyo 
*bhavisyad ‘athato brahmajijndsi jammüdy asya yata’ityevamadi .. sarva- 
vedüntamimümsanam Srimaccharirakam nàsütrayisyat;asütrayac ca “ Jaimini 
cannot have meant that ‘all scripture bears on acts’: if he had he would not 
interprets the sense of all Upanisads: but the fact is that he did!” In the 
light of this remark?" our explanation of Upavarsa’s statement as referring to 
one treatise of both corpora of Sütras becomes more plausible. 

Let us also consider the testimony of one of Bodhayana’s fragments: 
samhitam etac chürirakam Jaiminiyena sodasalaksaneneti $üstraikatvasiddhih 
“that Karma- and Brahmasütras constitute one $àstra is proved by the fact 
that this Sàriraka is incorporated in one treatise with Jaimini's Sütras in 
16 Chapters": the wording again is significant: etat must mean that Bodha- 
yana refers to the work on which he is commenting, whereas the pregnancy 
of the word-order Jaiminiyena sodasalaksamena can only be brought out in 
rendering it “Jaimini’s work, ie. the one in 16 chapters": in other words 
at least two forms of the Jaiminiya were already known to Bodhàyana, one 
in 16 and one not in 16 chapters. 

P "s There is little doubt | that the 16 Chapters refer to KMSütras I-XII 
with Samkarsakanda XII-XVIS8 1६ follows that we have three corpora of 

57. S. K. BELVALEAR was the first to accept the direct sense of this remark (Jai- 
miniya’s Süriraka-Sütra, Fest-Gabe Garbe "Aus Indiens Kultur", Erlangen 1927), but 
he has not answered Hiriyanna's pertinent objection to taking it literally: H. rightly 
points out that Padmapada, Suresvara's contemporary, does not know a Jaiminiyasariraka 
(even denies it: cf. Paficapadika 40, 153-54 cf. also Sankara BrSBh. 1, 1, 4); Belvalkar's 
summary condemnation of the traditional view that the pupil shares his teacher's 
opinions and that Jaimini therefore may just stand for Bàdarayana may be right from 
the point of view of modern scholarship, but the question is what view Suresvara him- 
self held. On the other hand the fact remains that the point of Sure$vara's argumenta- 
tion is that Jaimini (and no other) did compose a sütra; striking also is the almost con- 
versational tone which suggests that it is a fact of common knowledge. 

. "58. I refer to V. A. RAMASWAMI SASTRI, Sankarsakünda—a genuine supplement to 
the Pūrva Mimümsá Sutra (IHQ. IX, 1933). 

22 ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

sütras known to Bodhàyana: one in 12, one in 16, and one in 20 chapters 
including the 4 adhyàyas of the Sariraka. Did he comment on the preceding 
16 Chapters of the Jaiminiya also? I doubt it. The quoted fragment II 
must have been connected with fragment I in some discussion like this: 
* Atha has the sense of immediate succession. [Objection: No; for Karmami- 
māmsā and Brahmamimamsa being different $astras immediate succession is 
excluded. Reply: No;] that both constitute one sastra is proved by the 
fact etc." It is possible to explain sodasa° as 12 KMS. + 4 BrS., as Ramanuja 
clearly does. In that case we are to conclude that Jaimini wrote a Sariraka, 
which as we saw is quite possible, and that Bodhayana did not comment on 
that one but a different one, since otherwise the specific mention of Jaiminiya 
would be pointless; moreover Ràmànuja, had he known about such a Sari- 
rakam, would no doubt have made the most of it because the continuity 
of the Sastras is the corner-stone of his system: that he does not think of 
it although it is implied by his own interpretation of sodasa proves that he 
did not know of the existence of a continuous treatise of Sütras that was 
commented on in its entirety by Bodhayana. As Ràmaànuja is the only 
author of whom we know that he consulted this vrtti, we have to accept his 
evidence—whether he was right or wrong—and leave it at that. 

There is other confusing evidence which contradicts this. The Prapafi- 
cahrdaya states that Bodhayana did write vrttis on both Sutras, even a 
complete extensive commentary called Krtakoti “Disputation on Karman'594; 
this bulky commentary was abbreviated by Upavarsa, but slightly (kimcit), 
and further abbreviated—for the slow-witted—by Devasvamin.© . Then 
Bhavadàsa was the first to comment the 16 Chapters of the Jaiminiya only; 
finally Sabarasvàmin was the first to comment on the. 12 Chapters only, 
leaving out the Samkarsakanda. How reliable is this account ? We know 
nothing about the author and its age, but we gather that he was a Vaisnava 
bhakta following Samkhya and a tantric kind of Yoga, which. would render 
his date rather late. Of the Vedanta systems he describes only an advaita 

59. Right after the quotation he remarks: atah pratipipddayisitérthabhedena şaş- 
kabhedavad adhy&yabhedavac ca pürvottaramimümsayor bhedah, etc, "pürva and uttara- 
mimamsa are distinguished according to their subject-matter like the division of (the 
12 chapters of KMS in two parts of) six adhyayas and in separate adhyayas”. 

59a. If we read it as a bahuvrihi: "(the commentary) in which arguments áre 
made". - : 

60. tasya vimsatyadhydyanibaddhasya mimümsüásastrasya krtakotinümadheyam bha- 
syam Bodhayanena krtam / tadgranthabahulyabhayüd upeksya kimcit samksiptam Upa- 
varsena krtam / tad api mandamatin prati duspratipddam vistirnatvdd ity upeksya sodasa- 
laksanapirvamimamsasastramatrasya Devasvüminütisamksiptam krtam, etc. Praparica- 
hrdaya IV, p. 39. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 23 

school, which seems to be post-Sankara and he mentions the names of Sankara, 
Brahmadatta and Bhaskara. He is right about Sabara, at least partly right 
about Devasvamin of whom we have a commentary on the Samkarsakànda 
left. His other data conflict with what little evidence we have. Ràmaànuja 
-did not know about a Sütra collection in 20 Chapters. Besides, the convinc- 
ing name of the Commentary is more probably that of Upavarsa's, whom 
the Vaijayanti calls Krtakotikavi “author of the Krtakoti".9 His history 
of the Sütras and its commentaries sounds plausible, but some of the earlier 

names may have been filled in to make it stick. Withal its authority is 
dubious. 

To sum up. On our evidence the probabilities are that Upavarsa, 
author of a vrtti on both Sütras, probably entitled Krtakoti, is different from 
Bodhayana known from Ràmànuja's quotations; that Bodhàyana did not 
‘compose a vrtti on the KMSitras; that therefore he was later than Upavarsa, 
recognised the schism between the two $ástras but did not accept it. Further 
we may consider the possibility that Upavarsa's $arirakam not only formed 
part of, but also went under the name of, Jaiminiyasutras; and finally that— 
abstracting from the dubious Devasvamin—since Sabarasvamin was the first 
commentator to explain the Pürvamimamsàásütras only and therefore also 

recognised the schism, Bodhayana’s date will not be far removed from 
Sabara's. 

Again we may ask: what is Ramanuja’s evidence worth? In other 
‘words, how much did he know of Bodhayana himself? Tradition relates® 
that Ràmànuja had his pupil Kure$a procure a copy of the vrtti from a 
Sarada Math in Ka$mir:95 possibly it was purloined, for as soon as it was 
missing Ràmànuja and Kure$a were chased by the temple-keepers and the 
‘manuscript was recovered; meanwhile Kure$a had learnt it by heart. The 
‘circumstances of the story may be fictitious, but they would hardly have 
been invented unless Bodhayana MSS. were known to have been extremely 
searce. And is it a coincidence that all the quotations are from the first 
adhyàya? Arguments ex silentio are seldom conclusive; but that neither 
Sudar$anasüri nor Venkatanatha quote once from the vrtti in their com- 

61. cf. p. 40 tato mayasabalabrahmani samanvayüd, avirodho dvitiye; that he men- 
tions neither Ramanuja nor Madhva does not necessarily mean that he preceded both 
Vaisnava vedàntins. . 

62. He is usually dated much later than Sabara 

63. ed. G. Oppert (Madras 1893) I, 3, Brahmanakanda, 158 cd. halabhütis tüpavar- 
sah krtakotikavi$ ca sah 

64. DascuPrmA III, p 102 i 
65. Far from the battle-fields of India, Kaśmīr and, in the extreme south, Tra- 
vancore, have been traditionally the find-spots of rare or unique MSS 

24 ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

mentaries on a treatise that professes to have been inspired by it—whereas 
'they do quote both the Vakya and the Bhàsya, which are far less funda- 
mental to the Sribhasya—renders the conclusion that neither one ever saw a 
copy of it virtually unavoidable. Significant is also Ràmànuja's statement 
that Bodhàyana's supposedly extensive vrtti has been abbreviated by ancient 
Masters; he does not actually say that he is following the vrtti, but the vrtti 
as abbreviated. It is quite possible that Ràmànuja, too, knew it only by 
fragments from quotations. This possibility is further increased by the 
comparative insignificance of the fragments quoted; except for I and II they 
hardly contribute anything to the argumentation and sometimes they are 
added as an after-thought. But they may conceivably have been found cited 
in early treatises which continued ancient traditions of interpretation. 

Against this background no special authority can be attributed to 
Venkatanatha’s identification Bodhaàyana = Upavarsa on which Kuppu- 
swami's case rests but which Venkatanatha himself offers as a guess. ` 

Of interest also is another point. Yamuna, at the beginning of his 
Atmasiddhi, gives a list of ancient Vedantins. Strangely enough he does 
not mention the Vrtti by which Ràmanuja set great store and which must 
have enjoyed great authority—if only by report—in their common milieu. 
But he mentions a bhüàsyakrt who had explained Badarayana’s Sutras 
“briefly and profoundly”: bhagavata Büdarüyanenedamarthamy eva sitrani 
pramitüni vivrtini ca tani parimitagambhirabhdsiné bhasyakrtü. This 
bhasyakrt is always identified with Dramida the Bhasyakara, for which, as 
we shall see, there are no arguments. Ramanuja declares that the vrtti was 
an extensive one, Yamuna that the bhàsya was a brief one. Vrtti “gloss, 
scholion" is mainly distinguished from a bhasya “commentary” by its size: 67 
a long vrtti will be very similar to a short bhasya. As Bodhàyana's omission 
cannot be accounted for in this context—where also a sub-commentary by 
a Srivatsankamisra, another ancient Master, is mentioned—I am inclined to 
think that Yamuna and Ràmaàanuja both referred to the same work by 
different descriptions; Rámànuja may have preferred the term vrtti to avoid 
confusion with Dramida's bhàsya 

$2. Tanka the Vàkyaküra and Dramida the Bhasyakara 

Apart from the Vrttikdra and rarely if ever in the same context Rama- 
nuja quotes regularly from the Vakya of an anonymous vakyakara and 

66. Atmasiddhi, p. 8 

67. Similar confusions happen oftener: cf. TRIPATHI, Tarkasamgraha, p. XV “San- 
karichirya styled his commentaries on Katha and Brhadaranyaka vrttis, yet as they are 
really bhásyas it appears that in old times both words were interchangeable". 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA f 25 

from a bhāşya thereof by Dramida. Both are also known elsewhere. 'The 
Vākyakāra is generally named Tanka, and he is identified by Sudarśanasūri 
and others with Brahmanandin. Tanka’s name, which has the second place 
in Ramanuja’s list, does also occur in a list of Yamuna, but here he has the 
distinction of being mentioned the first of a series of adversaries and is put 
on a par with Advaitins like Bhartrhari and Sankara and with Dvaitadvaitins 
like Bhartrprapafica and Bhàskara.8 Whatever his persuasion, we have no 
reason to doubt that Yàmuna's Tanka is identical with Rāmānuja’s. That 
Ràmànuja, who never introduces him as such, also regarded Tanka as the 
Vakyakara is indicated by the place which his name holds between Bodha- 
yana the Vrttikara and Dramida the Bhasyakara. Dramida, this is evident 
from the citations themselves, followed Tanka’s vakya scrupulously. This 
is another argument against identifying Yamuna’s bhasyakrt with Ramànuja's 
bhasyakara, 

Besides, we can understand why Tanka was excluded by Yamuna and 
included by Ràmànuja. Sarvajnatman, the author of the SamksepaSariraka, 
quotes in 1,218 ff. a Vakyakara by name of Atreya who was commented upon 
by a Bhasyakara: beyond any doubt the latter is Dramida, for the quotation 
corresponds literally to one by RàmanujaS? Nrsimhasramin’™ commenting 
on the Samksepasariraka identifies this Atreya with Brahmanandin to remove 
the last doubt of his identity. Sarvajüatman's reference reads: “Atreya’s 
Vakya tells us also that all effect is merely phenomenal, not of ultimate 
reality (samvyavaharamatram). The many defects inherent in the satkarya- 
vada cannot affect the mayavada because it is contradictory: thus, if the 
effect is merely phenomenal, the defects inherent in the Samkhya view are 

68. Atmasiddhi p. 8: tathapy dcaryatankabhartrprapancabhartrmitrabhartrhari- 
brahmadattasankarabhaskaradiviracitasitasitavividhanibandhanasraddhévipra labdhabuddha- 
yo na yathivad anyathü ca pratipadyante; on Bhartrpraparica cf. M. HIRIYANNA, Frag- 
ments of Bhartrprapaiica (Proc. & Tr. 3d Or. Conf, Madras 1924), p. 9; Bhartrmitra is 
known as a commentator of the Karmamimamsasutras and Kupruswamr is inclined to 
see in him a precursor of Prabhakara (The Prabhakara School of Karma Mimümsü, Proc. 
& Tr. 2nd Or. Conf. Calcutta 1922), pp. 410f.; Brahmadatta is reputed to have written 
on Karmamimamsa, cf. Prapaficahrdaya, p. 39 brahmakàndasya bhagavatpadabrahmadat- 
tabhdskaradibhir matabhedenüpi krtam, ie, Sankara, Brahmadatta and Bhaskara, but 
there can be no question of it but Br. preceded S.: further material in HIRIYANNA's paper 
Brahmadatta : an old Vedantin (J. Or.. Res. Madras 1928), p. 1ff.; on Bhatrhari see V. A. 
RAMASWAMI SasrRI's papers, Was Bhartrhari a Bauddha? and Bhartrhari as a pre-Sankara 
Advaitin (resp. All-India Or. Conf. Mysore 1935 and Trivandrum 1937), also Bhartrhari 
as a Mimümsaka (Deccan College Bulletin XIV, 1). N 

` 69. Fragment XIII. x 
70. Quoted by KuePuswaMr in the paper mentioned supra note 48; the Subodhinl 
(AnandaSrama ed.) identifies the Vakyakara with Brahmadatta; HÓiRIYANNA's first alter- 
native (o.c. p. 7-8) that this is an error is certainly the right one, 

V.4 

26 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

completely avoided. Hence the sage of Atri's clan, who is well conversant 
with the stages of Vedanta, declares that the effect is merely phenomenal. 
The statement tat satyam in ChUp. 6, 8, 7 is based on the effect's dependence 
on satya. His example of the sea and the foam should be understood on the 
basis of phenomenality (i.e. the effect — foam is phenomenal, Brahman — sea 
is ultimately real). After the Vakyakara has described the effect (vikara-) 
he adopts immediately afterwards, and develops gradually, the view that al) 
effect is merely phenomenal, and therefore he maintains non-duality 
(advaita-). The venerable Bhasyakara declares likewise that “the Venerable 
Lord the Supreme Deity is antarguna, i.e. pratyagguna “intrinsically real”. 
And this agrees with our view of a Brahman without qualities, not with the 
view of a Brahman with qualities”. 

We understand that Sarvajnatman refers to the Vakya on ChUp. 6, 

2 ff. and especially 6, 8, 7 aitadatmyam idam sarvam tat satyam sa atma, 
where Atreya illustrates the relation between idam sarvam “this Universe” 
and its underlying principle by the example of the foam and the sea and 
explains it as satyasamü$rayatva: the Universe has its ontological basis in 
the ‘Real’ that is its cause (ChUp. 6, 2, 1). Sarvajiiatman applies his 
doctrine, or exegetical method, of the “didactic stages” (bhümi-),7 pretend- 
ing that Atreya was “well-conversant with the stages of teaching of the 
Upanisads", and interprets the drstanta as the first stage or parimümavüda 
(satkaryavada) and the comment corresponding to satyasamésSrayatva as the 
second stage or vivartavüda (mayavada), and so claims him a true-blue 
Advaitin. The Bhisyakara’s quotation is most probably taken from the com- 
mentary on Daharavidya ChUp. 8, 1, 1 (tasmin yad antas tad anvestavyam) 
and antarguna- “in whom qualities inhere" explained as “who is essentially 
‘interior’. Sarvajfidtman: seems aware of diverging explications and 
emphasizes that it agrees with the nirgunavada. Foam-and-sea is a favourite 
example of the bhedabhedavadins, and I think it extremely probable that 
Yamuna excluded Tanka by name and Dramida by implication because they 
tended toward dvaitadvaita. For compare now a quotation by Bhàskara ad 
BrS. 1, 4, 25 (S. 26; R. 27) atmakrteh parinamat, where parinama is that of 
Brahman's creative power: Bhaskara proceeds to say that this is the tradi- 
tional view taken by the authors of the Vakya and the Vrtti on the Chàn- 
dogya, and quotes the Vakya: “There is an inner causal change (parinama), 

71. Madhusüdana comments: gunasabdah svarüpaparah, anya devatàh paragraph 
paradevata tu pratyagütmarüpüparoksacidekarasety arthah. 

72. On Sarvajüátman's “stages of Vedanta”. Cf. Hacker, Vivarta, pp. 231ff. See 
Samksepasariraka II, 60 ff हि aS . 19^ $ 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 27 

as in the case of curds etc.” We may trust this statement which goes un- 
challenged by Ràmànuja and fits in remarkably well with Sarvajñātman’s 
exposition.74 

Ràmànuja, now, who addressed a larger audience of Vedintins than 
Yamuna, was no less a dialectician than Sarvajriatman and a far superior 
exegete. Though the expression nirbhugnadaivatam is difficult,’ it is clear 
that Ramanuja's interpretation of the common citation is the more natural 
one. Moreover, in his zeal to show that his system of Vedanta was the one 
favoured by the ancient Masters, Ràmànuja was at pains to include both 
ancient commentators Tanka and Dramida, who enjoyed great esteem. This 
is also proved by Sankara's references to Dramida in his Bhasyas'$ and by 
Sure$vara's adoption of a story of his, the well-known one of the prince 
who, suffering from amnesia, lived with hunters until his memory returned 
and he recognized himself for what he was. We may conclude that both 
commentators were ancient Vedàntins whose names were hallowed by tradi- 
tion. Certainly Tanka was not identical with the Tankacarya profusely 
quoted by Hamsayogin in his Gitabhasya:78 one glance at the style of both 
will prove this immediately. 

73. sütrakürah $rutyanuküri parinémapaksam sütrayámbabhüva / ayam eva chins 
dogye vàkyaküravrttikárübhyàm sampraddyah [DVIVEDIN'S text reads sampradagam]/ atak 
samü$ritah/tathà ca vakyam parinémas tu sydd dadhyddivad iti vigitam; the vrttikara 
must be the same as Ramànuja's bhasyakara; for the synonymy of vrtti and bhásya see 
above. : 
74. I take it that the quotation by Bhàskara explains the meaning of the word 
viküra-; according to Sarvajüatman, the Vakyakara first describes vikāra still in terms 
of the first bhümi,.or parinamavada, before developing the meaning in terms of the 
second bhumi, or vivartavada. The fact that three different authors tried to make use 
of the same passage of an ancient gloss is too remarkable to go uncommented. One 
would suggest that Sarvajnatman endeavoured to challenge Bhaskara’s claim and forced 
his own interpretation of two didactic stages on the Vakya text, while Ramànuja again 
corrected Sarvajriatman by bringing out the full force of Dramida’s comments, This is 
a guess, but there is nothing in the chronology to conflict with it; besides, tacit references 
by one author to another are far more numerous than one would suspect at a first glance 

75. See my translation and note ad Fr. XV; obscurity must have been the rule 
and may account for the divergency of interpretation 

76. ChUpBh. Intr. and 3, 8, 10; $. Mandükya KBh. 2, 32; cf. also Ánandagiri's 
Tarkasamgraha and Tripathi’s (not conclusive) remarks p. XVI; KUPPUSWAMI is cer- 
tainly right to consider the Dravida of the Advaitins identical with the Dramida of ihe 
Visistadvaitins; Dravida and Dramida are also in Visistadvaita MSS. variants of the 
same name 6 f 

77. Varttika on Sankara’s BAUpBh., 2, 1, 506, included in Appendix $2 as Frag- 
ment XVI b. 

78. Cf. F. O. Scuraver, Neues über die Bhagacadg:ità (Fest-Gabe Garbe “Aus 
' Indiens Kultur”), p. 179. द 

28 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

It cannot be doubted that both Vakya and Bhàsya explained the Chàn- 
dogya Upanisad.??* This is not only borne out by the testimonies of Bhaskara, 
of Sarvajrnatman's commentators and of Anandagiri, but also by the internal 
evidence of the quotations themselves. All except three of the fragments 
can somehow be connected with Chàndogya texts and have been so connected 
by Ramanuja. Apart from Yamuna’s dubious bhasyakrt, there is no evidence 
at all to connect them with the Sütras. I have collected all fragments known 
so far and shown against the corresponding ChUp. texts in Appendix I, § 2. 

A final question might be asked. Is Tanka, who must have been a 
very ancient Master, known in the older literature ? The language of his 
very concise Vakya displays an antique sütra-like style; old-fashioned words 
and constructions are the rule. Tanka appears as the first in Yamuna’s list, 
of which the chronological arrangement is borne out by the other names 
mentioned. Although the date of the Sütras is far from fixed, one would 
assign a date to the Vakya not too far removed from Badarayana’s. Of 
course we enter here the realm of speculation, but it may be pointed out 
that Bidarayana mentions an Atreya by name as advocating a view to which 
an Audulomi is opposed. It would seem that the occasion of the cryptic 
difference is the interpretation of a Chàndogya passage. Incidentally we 
have good reasons to believe that the Sütrakara, whoever he was or whoever 
they were, tended himself toward. dvaitadvaita of a kind. We may also 
remark that the Sütrakàra's main concern was with the Chandogya Upanisad. 
BELVALKAR on plausible grounds goes so far as to contend that the original 
Sutras were Chandogya Sutras.s! Though all this is-not much evidence, yet 
it is not entirely out of the question that one of the several unknown 5980592 
mentioned in the Sütras may have left some vestiges in literature: and we 
would hardly expect these vestiges to be other than incidental and 
ambiguous citations by later successors on the same road. 

It is impossible to fix a date for Brahmanandin Tanka Atreya. Does 
it signify anything that in Yamuna's list he precedes Bhartrmitra, who accord- 

78a. There is also a tradition that Dramida commented on the BÁUp 

79. BrS. 3, 4, 44-45, which according to R. refers to the ritual accompaniments 
of the daharavidyà, ChUp. 8, 1 

80. I refer to V. S. GHATE's important conclusions in Les Brahma-Sütras et leur 
cinq commentaires (Thesis, Paris 1919), English translation, The Vedanta, A study of 
the Brahma-Sitras, etc. Poona 1926; cf. also Dascurra, I. f 

81. S. K. BELVALKAR, Lectures on Vedanta I, p. 141: "There is nothing improbable 
in a “Chandogya” Brahmasütra having in fact formed the nucleus of the present Sütras, 
and been even incorporated therein;" for his arguments see pp. 142ff 

82. Atreya, Asmarathya, Audulomi, Kasakrtsna, Kársnájini, Jaimini and Badari; 
note that all the names are patronymics and may refer to families rather than individuals 
the Atreya family belongs to Sáàmaveda 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 29 

ing to the Praparicahrdaya would not seem far removed from Sabara? In 
any case it is significant that all Vakya quotations, not only Ramanuja’s but 
also Sarvajriatman’s, Sudaráana's and Venkatanatha’s, are accompanied by 
citations from Dramida's bhasya, and Bhaskara refers to both simultaneously. 
We may take it that the Bhasya, which seems to have been the most autho- 
ritative commentary on the Chandogya Upanisad before Sankara’s eclipsed 
it, has preserved the Vakya. Dramida’s language is not only so much more 
archaic than Sankara’s but also than Bhartrpraparica's that a lapse of at least 
three centuries may reasonably be presumed. Besides, whereas Sankara 
attacks Bhartrprapafica, he pays Dramida the compliment, due to venerable 
age, of accepting his interpretation where he can safely do so and passing 
without comment the many passages which he must have found objectionable. 

§3. The views of the ancient Masters: 

The few fragments of Bodhayana’s vrtti are not very informative of his 
views. We may conclude from the way in which he stresses the continuity 
of Karma- and Brahmamimamsa that he accepted the great importance of 
ritual acts as preparatory to the liberating intuition of the Absolute—however 
he may have conceived of it—and adhered somehow to the jidnakarma- 
samuccaya view with its corollaries of the reality of the phenomenal world 
and the validity of the criteria of perception and reason in theology. To 
derive from the fact that Ramanuja professes to follow him — or rather the 
ancient masters as commenting him — the probability that Bodhàyana anti- 
cipated in all points his late successor, would seem speculative. The most 
we can say is that the manner in which he was interpreted by his early 
commentators — possibly the mysterious Guhadeva, Kapardi and Bhàruci — 
was generally favourable to Ramanuja’s system of unity in difference. 

" On Tanka and Dramida we are better informed. Though their anti- 
quity made them venerable alike to such opposites as Sarvajfiatman, Bhas- 
kara and Ramanuja, the last two certainly had better claims on them. Tanka 
rejects explicitly the doctrine that God's body is a mere pedagogic fiction 
and must therefore have affirmed to some extent the reality of the world. 
The relation between God and world — including the empirical soul— is 
expressed in terms reminiscent of dvaitadvaita: it is like that between sea 
and foam: the changing phenomena of the world are no more, but not less, 
than odd and useless products of an accidental commotion on the surface 
of a Being which, remaining undisturbed in its infinite profundity, reabsorbs 
them when calm returns. He adhered to the parinamavada according to 
which Brahman as cause changes into effect like curds change into butter. 
We may conveniently call this dvaitüdvaita as long as we are aware of the 
falsification that is implied: the term belongs to a later period and a different 
universe of discourse. 

30 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

The personal Deity, possessed of a suprasensible body to his soul, is 
the object of our knowledge. Interesting are Tanka’s views on १७०८४०1१०८, 
those upanisadic meditations which, originally the mental accompaniments of 
the bodily ritual acts, in the end would supersede the acts themselves. For 
him they are propaedeutic to the beatific vision: upàsana is their constant 
rememorization or anusmrti, not once and for all but repeatedly and habi- 
tually, until, fortified by the observance of cumulative restrictions — rang- 
ing from proper nourishment to the suppression of the last relicts of animal 
life-satisfaction and dissatisfaction —, the completely expurgated mind has 
penetrated the sense of tat tvam asi and attains God in identity. 

Dramida appears to have advanced beyond Tanka’s pantheism to a 
more anthropomorphic theism. Aksara and Brahman are for him Bhagavan. 
He quotes the Bhagavadgiti. He considers the maya doctrine unscrip- 
tural. He is a realist and is fond of graphic comparisons — oceans jumping 
the shores like rutting rams —, parables and stories. His God is a merciful 
sovereign who, waving the fan of his omnipotence, rules all the worlds as 
' a paramount king z 

As they stand the Vakya and Bhisya quotations are the oldest instances 
of commentaria] Vedànta texts; and it is important to note that on the whole 
— however much may escape us — they are more favourable to Ràmanuja's 
than to Sankara's system of Vedanta. . : E 

IIL. THE VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 
1. Its date: 

There can, in my opinion, be no doubt that the Vedarthasamgraha 
was Rāmänuja’s philosophical début. It was written prior to the Sribhasya 
which refers to it twice, not to speak now of innumerable tacit references. 
Elsewhere I have tried to demonstrate that the Gitabhasya presupposes the 
Sribhisya and no evidence has so far come up to correct this opinion 

Another work ascribed to Ràmànuja, the Vedantadipa, is also later than the 
Sribhüsya to which it refers explicitly. . < a ७:22 : 

83. SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 58, where reference is made to the Ved: explication of the 
Sadvidyà (§13ff.), and ib. p. 116, where reference is made to the Ved. discussion of 
God being denoted in sémdnddhikaranya sentences with objects of which he is the inner 
Ruler ($817; 21) 

84. See my Ramdnuja on the Bhagavadgité, Ch. III 

85. Benares ed. p. 8 érutinydyavirodhas tu tesám bhàásye prapamcita iti neha pra- 
tanyate / bhásyodito 'dhikaranarthah sasütravivaranah -sukhagrahanáya samksepenopanya- 
syate. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 31, 

There is, however, a curious problem created by still another abridge- 
ment of the Sribhasya, known as Vedantasara ‘essentials of Vedanta’, not 
to be confused with Sadànanda's well-known advaita manual. SUDARSANA- 
CHARYA maintains that the Vedantasara is prior to the Vedarthasamgraha, 
on grounds whose cogency I fail to see. In itself the very existence of a 
second and rather thorough-going abridgement of Ràmànuja's magnum opus, 
side by side with the useful Vedantadipa, is curious enough. That it was 
Ràmànuja's début, as SUDARSANACHARYA suggests, is extremely unlikely. To 
me it is unconceivable that Ram&nuja would have put forward his system 
of Visistádvaita for the first time to a highly critical audience of contempo- 
rary vedantins by merely indicating its barest outlines as it is done in the 
Vedantasara, which is nearer to being a vakya than a bhasya. In the most 
detailed explication to be found in the booklet, that of BrS. 1, 1, 2 janmady 
asya yatah, to which the basic scriptural evidence of SBh. 1, 1, 1 is delegated 
as a more convenient place to deal with it, the bare essentials of Visista- 
dvaita are enumerated without the slightest attempt at convincing presenta- 
tion and plausible argumentation. Read, for instance, toward the end: "all 
vedàntins agree that at the time of resorption there persists a subtle differ- 
entiation between, on the one hand, spirit and matter, and the Supreme Being 
on the other hand, a differentiation so subtle that it does not admit of pheno- 
menality;?' for they, too, (ie. advaitavadins and aupadhikavadins) assume 
that the differentiation (between the three ontological orders), being brought 
about either by nescience or by limiting conditions, has no beginning. But 
our view differs peculiarly in this: whereas the others contradict all scrip- 
ture and reason by maintaining either a brahman that is nescient or a brah- 
man that is limited by conditions, we are guilty of no such contradictions on 
account of the absence (of such doctrines)." This is an extremely tenden- 
tious presentation of the rival views, which can only be understood when 
we have seen Ramdnuja’s arguments either in Vedarthasamgraha or in Sri- 
bhàsya. We may also note that Ramanuja nowhere uses the term vedüntin, 
nor indeed vedanta in the sense of Vedantamimamsa; nor is vyavahüra in 
the sense of “phenomenality” common with Ramanuja; finally, the last sen- 
tence is clearly a recast of the second sanza of the Vedarthasamgraha. 

Similar observations can be made on the majority of the comments in . 
the Vedàntasara by anyone well-read in Ràmànuja; and I think it extremely 
improbable that Ramanuja presented his system to the thinkers of his age 
in such a poor form. If the text was at all composed during Ramanuja’s 
life-time, it wil at most have been an authorized epitome by one of his 

86. Upodgháta to his Vedarthasamgraha ed. p. 35. j 
87. vyavahürünarhasüksmabhedah; NARASIMHA Ayyangar (Adyar ed. 1953) trans- 
lates ‘subtle and indescribable difference’. 

32 ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

pupils. The Vedantadipa seems to be more authentic and its existence has 
indeed some justification in the length and difficulty of the Sribhasya. Yet 
also in this case I find it hard to believe that Ramanuja, who, after a tradi- 
tional life of six score, left but few works in comparison with Sankara, would 
have preferred the clerical and thankless task of abridging his own chef- 
d'oeuvre to the more congenial composition of, for example, commentaries 
on the Upanisads. 

Among the more lyrical works ascribed to Ràmànuja, the Gadyatraya 
and Nityagrantha, only the former is found referred to sufficiently often by 
Indian authors to touch lightly upon it here. It may be described loosely as 
a prose-poem, consisting of three unequal parts, Saranagatigadya, Sriranga- 
gadya and Vaikunthagadya. The text has been commented on by the Vedàn- 
tadesika who ascribes it to bhasyakàra Rāmānuja, and tradition has it that 
Ràmànuja wrote it in his old age. The gadyas may be described more pre- 
cisely as exercises in bhakti as taught by Ràmaànuja, an endless and repeti- 
tious pondering over and rememorizing of God's infinite perfections. Large 
portions are repeated over and over again and many passages are practically 
identical with such evocations as the introduction to the Gitabhàsya and 
comments ad Gita 9, 34; and they are also strongly reminiscent of Yamuna’s 
hymns. Remarkable is the oft-recurring expression eküntikatyantikapara- 
bhaktiparajüünaparamabhakti in which the VedantadeSika reads an ascen- 
sion from the desire of having an immediate intuition of a supreme kind 
to the actual attaining to such an intuition and finally the uninterrupted retain- 
ing of it. The expression is not known to me from Ramanuja’s other works; 
possibly it is a restatement of the ascension karman —> jana — bhakti, where 
karman, which is essentially àrüdhama “propitiation” of God, combined with 
the knowledge of the natures of God, spirit and matter, gradually culminates 
in the conscious and loving adoration of God. The later distinction be- 
tween a lower bakti of works and a higher bhakti of complete abandon 
(prapatti) does.not seem to be known to, or at least accepted by, Ramanuja, 
as we have tried to show elsewhere, and it is significant that Vedantadesika 
does not explain it in these terms. Though formerly I hesitated, there is | 
no valid reason to doubt the authenticity of this little devotional work: 
perhaps modern scholars are too apt to suspect lyrics that are ascribed to 

88. In his Gadyabhasya (Srimad-Vedintadesika-granthamiala, part 4, ed. by Sri 
Kanchi P. B. ANNANGARACHARYAR, Conjeeveram 1940), p. 104: atra parabhaktir uttarot- 
tarasáksütkürecchatmakt dhih, sa ca ya pritir ityddisv iva svabhavajd, na tv istasidhanat- 
vabuddhijà/ parajfüünam uttarottarasdksatkarah / sáksütkrte nirantaranububhisa parama- 
bhaktih; the quotation is VP. 1, 20, 19 yd pritir avivekünüm visayesv anapüyini / tvm 
anusmaratah sa me hrdayan müpasarpatu. 

89. See my Rāmānuja, etc. pp. 19ff. .. 

90. O. c. pp. 24 fi. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA | 33 

philosophers and to forget that these philosophers were theologians and 
officiating priests. The songs of St. Thomas Aquinas, whom nobody would 
suspect of lyrical aspirations on the basis of his philosophical works, furnish 
an interesting parallel. 

2. Its Sources 
A. SMRTI 

81. Function of Smrti: 

The scope and authority of smrti texts have been fixed ever since 
Jaimini ruled: “Smrti is to be disregarded whenever it militates against 
$ruti.! A propos of this sūtra Ràmànuja, commenting on Brahmasütra 
2, 1, 1, defines the function of smrti in the following terms: “The Vedanta 
texts aim at establishing complete objects on the basis of apodictical assump- 
tion, which is beyond the scope of all other pramànas, from perception on- 
wards; therefore, those people whose knowledge of scriptural revelation falls 
short stand in need of corroboration of these objects; many smrtis, promul- 
gated by perfectly trustworthy personalities in harmony with the contents 
of the Sruti, serve to corroborate them. This corroboration being equal to 
the elucidation of the truths set forth by the scriptures is impossible when- 
ever smrti militates against $ruti in its primary meaning." In this con- 
nexion, where the authority of the traditional doctrine of Samkhya is con- 
demned, he mentions a number of smrti texts which do fulfil this corrobo- 
rative function: Mahabharata, Bhagavadgita, Manu, Visnupuràna, Apastam- 
biyadharmasütra, Daksasmrti, etc., and which fail to do so, Kapilasmrti and 
Brhaspatismrti. E 

- "The same view is stated in the Vedarthasamgraha®? with reference to 
the Ramayana text: “Seeing that KuSa and Lava were wise and firmly esta- 
blished in the Vedas, the Lord made them apprehend in order to corrobo- 
rate the Vedas :" for this exactly is the function of epics and purànas. 

` Distinction is always made between the Mahabharata and its cele- 
-brated episode the Bhagavadgità. On the place of the latter text in Rama- 
nuja's system the present writer has commented elsewhere in great detail, 
.and little need be added here. Noteworthy is that in our text the quota- 
tions from the Visnupurana outnumber those from the Bhagavadgita, while 
in the Sribhàsya the latter text appears to play a far more important rôle. 
There is an ancient Vaisnava tradition that Ramanuja wrote his Gitabhasya 

91. KMS. 1, 1, 3. 
92. Ved. § 33, 

v.5 

34 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

. 

in extreme old age, which may signify that the Gita grew in importance for 
Ràmànuja in the course of his career. 

Strictly epical citations are mainly from the Mahabharata, especially 
from the Moksadharma which Rimanuja once styles the jñānakānņnda of the 
great epic, and rarely from the Ramayana. Quotations from the smrtis in 
the stricter sense of the word are chiefly from the cosmological and philo- 
sophical portions of Manusmrti. 

Generally, with the possible exception of the Gita citations, the 
quoted stanzas from other smrtis are incidental, supplementary rather than 
decisive, current quotations of a certain milieu rather than the significant 
fruits of a dedicated study. The references to the Visnupuràna, however, 
play a more important role: it is to this text that Ramanuja turns to enlarge 
upon topics most dear to his heart. 

$2. Visnupurüma : 

In comparison with the smrtis that were generally accepted as autho- 
ritative, the epics among which the Bhagavadgita has a privileged position, 
and Manu, the smarta authority of the Puranas was not so widely and com- 
pletely recognized before Ràmànuja's age. Sankara, for instance, only makes 
sparingly use of corroborative evidence from the Puranas.% 

Ràmàanuja, however, quotes profusely from the Puranas, or rather 
from one of them, the Vaisnavite Sri-Visnupurina. But even he does not 
do so without an attempt at justification. He introduces% a typically puranic 
classification of the purànas into four groups, those promulgated by Brahma 
on a ‘day’ — that is one day of Brahma’s life — when his sattva constituent 
preponderated, those promulgated when rajas preponderated and when tamas 
preponderated, and those promulgated on a day when the gunas were mixed. 
In accordance with the classification only the sattvika puranas are fully 
authoritative, and in case there happen to be conflicts between different 
puranas, the teaching of the better qualified one is decisive. The multiple 
authorship of the Puranas exists only in appearance: Brahma himself is the 
auctor intellectualis, on his dictation the sages have compiled their Puranas. 

By far the greater majority of the smrti quotations in the Vedartha- 
,Samgraha have been taken from the Visnupurana. It is worth noting how 

93. Sankara’s Sutrabhasya quotes the Puranas some 8 times (DEUSSEN, System o] 
Vedanta, p. 31). 

94, Ved. § 94. 
95. 894. 
96. 894. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 35 

Ràmànuja defines? the scope of its authority: “The Vaisnava Purana is 
accepted without dissension by all scholars from the East, North, South and 
West of India as being adequate (paryapta-) in so far as it establishes all 
the dharmas and all the tattvas". We may assume: that in Ramanuja’s age 
the Visnupuràna had gained wide currency and popularity — not necessarily 
only in Vaisnavite circles — as a religious and edifying book in all the Indian 
senses of the words. Interesting is the restriction to “all dharmas and all 
tattvas": the basic doctrines do not stand in need of corroboration by the 
Visnupurana, they are not smürta but Srauta. The description of this Puranas 
as a dharma-book is possibly with reference to the huge appendix Visnu- 
dharmottara — which, incidentally, is quoted only once in the Sribhasya?s 
and not at all in the Vedarthasamgraha —, whereas the tattvas refer either 
to the three ontological orders of Supreme Being, soul and matter, or to the 
categories of SAmkhya, the influence of which on this popular Purana has 
been very great. 

The strictly metaphysical object of the Visnupuràna is described in 
the following terms:9? it serves the special and exclusive purpose of setting 
forth a certain aspect of Brahman's essence, that is not a phenomenal pro- 
jection of the Supreme Being, but a particular manifestation of Its essence. 
This aspect of Brahman or, personally, of Narayana who is the Supreme 
Brahman, is Visnu who represents Nàrayana's character of omnipresent per- 
vader and saviour-god of incarnations. 

A propos of Ramanuja’s introduction of the Visnupurana a few general 
remarks may be made. Not infrequently Ramanuja is opposed to Sankara 
as the 'first sectarian commentator', by which is meant that he was the first 
to introduce into Vedintamimimsa, so far kept pure, external and dete- 
riorating elements which made his system a parochial manifesto rather than 
a universally valid system of thought; or it is said that he fabricated scrip- 
tural evidence, that is to say, made room within Vedànta for a great many 
$rutis and smrtis that Sankara either ignored or delegated to the rank of 
relative truth. It is clear that those who pass these criticisms take Sankara’s 
selection and treatment of scriptures as normative, in other words, believe 
on speculative grounds that Sankara is more right than Ramanuja. 

Ràmànuja's citations of the Visnupurana are only illustrative and cor- 
roborative. His justification of these citations shows clearly that he was 
anxious not to introduce any evidence that would be unacceptable to his fellow 

97. 8110. 
98. SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 70f. (104, 23-26). 
99, 8110, 

36 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

Vedàntins.?? It is for all Vedanta that he claims to speak. I doubt whether 
his contemporary Vedàntins would have disputed the relevancy of any quota- 
tion he gives, though they might debate his interpretation. No doubt the 
results of his scriptural exegesis are at times picturesque. Yet remarks 
such as Radhakrishnan—a sympathetic describer of Ramanuja’s thought— 
passes:101 "Ràmaànuja's beautiful stories of the other world, which he 
narrates with the confidence of one who had personally assisted at the 
origination of the world, carry no conviction,” are not quite fair in many 
respects. Other-worldly stories never sound convincing to unbelieving ears; 
neither do Sankara’s. Besides, the example is ill chosen: Ràmànuja is not 
particularly interested in the circumstances of world origination beyond the 
fact that it is a causal process by which the qualified, subtly embodied God 
as the material cause evolves into the phenomenal world of soul and matter 
constituting a modus of God as the immanent guiding spirit. Finally, if ever 
he indulges in wondrous stories, he is forced to do so by his texts. This is 
exactly the point: he takes his texts seriously. A more comprehensive col- 
lection of $rutis and smrtis could hardly be made. And he takes his texts lite- 
rally. If these texts, the authority of which is the very foundation of orthodox 
metaphysical thought, happen to speak about the golden splendour of God, 
about the supreme immaterial heaven, about angelic beings eternally absorb- 
ed in the contemplation of God's essence, he accepts them in their literal 
sense. Only then he proceeds to illustrate and supplement them by quota- 
tions from the Visnupuràna. If we criticize the results of his exegesis, we 
criticize the authority of his texts and the validity of his exegetical princi- 
ples. We are free to do so; but if we do so in order to pass judgment on 
things metaphysical, we can claim faith, not proof 

83. The influence of Paíicarüátra Agama: 

It has often been suggested, and indeed taken for granted, that Rama- 
nuja attached great importance to the so-called Agama or Tantra of the 
Paficaratra, that is that class of multitudinous and voluminous texts which 
present themselves since 5th-7th centuries A.D. side by side with the Puranas 
with which they have much in common. They embody the ancient tradition 

^ 100. A comparison with the bhàsya of Madhva is instructive; this author, who 
cannot have lived much later than Ramanuja, not only quotes Puranas and Tantras much 
more frequently than éruti, but treats their evidence as decisive for Vedanta; in the first 
adhyaya are quoted such texts as Aditya P. (1); Garuda (3); Naradiya (3); Padma (6); 
Bhag. Tantra (1); Bhag. P. (3); Brhat Samhita (4); Brahmavaivarta (5); Brahmanda 
(6); Mahakaurma (2); Vamana (4); Váráha (3); Vyoma Samhita (1); Skandha (19); 
Harivaméa (1). 
101. Indian Philosophy II, p. 720. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 37 

of Paficaratra, combining a Sáàmkhyan or Sáàmkhya-inspired cosmogony with 
the devotion of Visnu-Nàràyana. Although ideally treating of metaphysics 
as well, they are for the greater part manuals of Tantric ritual and mantra. 
Their metaphysical doctrines and speculations are, if at all, stated in a 
cosmogonical context.!?? A striking feature is the doctrine that the Supreme 
Personal God, quasi-independent of whom his personified Sakti or creative 
potency operates as his active female counterpart, at the beginning of creation 
becomes differentiated into four Vyühas or divisions, Vasudeva, Samkarsana, 
Pradyumna and Aniruddha, over whom the perfections and functions of the 
God are distributed and who develop the new universe in several successive 
stages. Although most of the origin of Paficarütra is obscure, it would in 
my opinion not be too speculative to regard this system, at least the cosmo- 
gonical-metaphysical side of it, as a continuous development of pre- 
systematized theistic Samkhya as alluded to or expressed in Upanisads like 
ihe Chàndogya, SvetaSvatara and Katha and in philosophical portions of the 
epic. Extraneous elements may have been absorbed when the personality 
of Visnu became increasingly complex. Esoteric speculations on hidden 
meanings in language, as old as the Brahmanas, may always have formed 
part of it, even though the contents of these speculations—jealously kept 
secret, even now—have changed. The conspicuous ritualistic tendencies 
would also point to ancient associations. One is inclined to think of this 
comprehensive and syncretistic 'system' as one of the main channels by 
which the old Brahmanistic spirit continued to flow through the wasteland 
of the Buddhist period, never quite running dry but receiving from under- 
ground tributaries that sprang from distant and unexplored sources. "That 
this spirit was able to receive inspiration from the popular beliefs around 
the divine figure of Visnu the vi$varüpa could find some explanation in the 
fact that of the Vedic gods who in Hinduistic times became prominent Visnu 
was from of old intimately associated with the life-preserving ritual. 

Agama appears to have played an important rôle with Ràmanuja's 
precursors who attempted to emancipate their traditional Vaisnavism and 
Bhàgavatism. No less a part did it play in post-Ramanuja Visistadvaita. 
Yamuna composed a special prakarana to defend its authority, the Agama- 
prümanya. Venkatanatha the Vedantadesika wrote a Paficarütraraksá, and 
in the brief but authoritative manual Yatindramatadipika the authority of 
Paficaratra is stated without question.!0 This often emphatically expressed 
favour of ancient and modern Viésistadvaitins for Paficaratra is the main 
reason for the prevailing view that this corpus of mythological, cosmogonical, 

102. I refer to ScHRADER's Introduction to Pancaratra, p. 27. 
103. YID VII, p. 45... éripaüücarütrügamasya kvacid api vedavirodhabhàávat kärt- 
sneyena pramanyam. 

38 ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

ritualistic and occult speculations and practices occupied a priviliged place in 
Ràmànuja's philosophical system. 

We have already seen that Ràmaànuja, far from being a “sectarian 
commentator fabricating Srutis” actually took the utmost care to avoid any 
parochialism and, when attacking his adversaries and erecting his own school 
on’ the ruins of their systems, used recognized weapons and tools. When he 
adduces evidence from so venerable a smrti text as the Visnupurana he 
carefully proceeds to define and confine the scope of its authority. We would 
expect, and his adversaries demand, a similar avant-propos before he would 
introduce the Agama in evidence 

It is however remarkable that neither in the Vedarthasamgraha nor 
in the Sribhasya — except in the utpattyasambhavadhikarana — Ramanuja 
quotes a single pada from the one and a half crore of Slokas in which, ac- 
cording to the tradition, the Agama consists.1* Nor are any of the characteris- 
tic doctrines of this system as much as hinted at. It is true that Ramanuja 
enlarges upon Paricaratra in his comments on Brahmasütras 2, 2, 39-42, but 
even there it should be noted that he does not confess himself a Bhàgavata 
or Satvata and that he mainly repeats and restates the arguments adduced 
by Yamuna against Sankara’s and Bhaskara’s controversial explanations. As 
this section of the $ribhasya is our only evidence that Ràmànuja admitted 
the Paficaratra at all, we should not interpret its significance too pregnantly. 
We cannot conclude that he regarded those texts, three of which he quotes, 
as authoritative in any other sense than other smrti texts like Manusmrti, 
Mahabharata and Ramayana, each of which is quoted more often than all 
Agamas together 

The main points of his commentary are 1. Paricaratra does not hold 
that the soul has a beginning;!5 2. The Vyuhas are the subtle or causal 
phase of the Supreme Being as the material and operative cause;196 3. Agama 
embodies the Vedic doctrine in an easily comprehensible popular form; 
4. Badarayana the Sutrakara and Vyasa the composer of the Mahabharata 
are identical and therefore cannot deny in one place what they affirm in 
another;!" 5. Paficaratra, in contrast to Samkhya, Yoga and Paéupata, is not 
founded by men but promulgated by God himself.108 

Taking all positive and negative evidence of all his works together we 
may say that the Agama, albeit recognized in passing as an orthodox system 

104. SCHRADER, 0.०. p. 14. 

105. Corresponds to Agamapramanya, p. 54, 1. 6ff. 
106. O.c. 55, 1. 10ff. 

107. O.c. 54. 

108. O.c. 23ff.; 42ff. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 39 

of thought, is not at all utilized as a source of knowledge in its own right 
to corroborate Ramanuja’s system of Vedanta, One reason has been offered: 
Ràmànuja addresses himself to all Vedantins and endeavours to support his 
original theses by scriptural evidence that is acceptable to all. Another reason 
is no doubt that he was very little interested in the mechanics of world creation 
and evolution and had no occasion to make use of a class of texts whose 
only contributions to metaphysics were inseparably linked up with cosmo- 
gonical speculations that are of small value in explaining God's relation to 
the world in harmony with $ruti and reason. Ramanujas and indeed 
Vedànta's main concern is with ontology: only when the ontological relation 
between the supreme Cause and the phenomenal Effect has been established 
cosmology and cosmogony may proceed. Ramanuja’s evident indifference 
toward Paficaratra should therefore not necessarily be regarded as typical 
of this Vaisnavite philosopher. 

B. Darsanas 
$1. Mimamsa: 

That Ramanuja was well-grounded in Pürvamimàmsa need hardly be 
mentioned. For all Vedantins, however differently they may ultimately con- 
ceive of the relation of the two mimàamsas, the First Exegesis is propaedeutic 
to the second. 

Both schools of Karmamimamsa on the basis of Sabarabhasya, the 
Bhatta and the Prabhakara, were known to Ramanuja. But, apart from one 
occasional quotation of Kumarila, his principal, though antagonistic, interest 
is directed to the doctrines of Prabhakara’s school. This is interesting in 
view of the fact that in later time the Vi$sistadvaitins have come to be 
associated with the Prabhakaras in the same way as the Advaitins were 
associated with the Bhattas, though perhaps not so exclusively. 

a. Sabarasvamin: 

That Ramanuja was familiar with Sabara’s commentary on the 
Karmamimamsasütras is—if proof were needed—evidenced by several pas- 
sages dealing with fundamental Mimamsaka concepts. Quotations from the 
Vedic scriptures of the karmakanda have generally the form—also abbreviat- 
ed—in which they are cited by Sabara, and though I have taken some pains 
in my notes to identify them in Sruti, it is certain that Ramanuja himself 
knew them from or through Sabara. What Edgerton remarked!” can be fully 
applied to the Vedàntins as well: “For the most part it is clear that the 

109. Intr. Mimansanyayaprakasa, p. 23. 

40 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

later Mimàmsakas limited themselves to the passages used in Sabara- 
svamin’s Bhàsya as illustrations of the laws of Jaimini. These were the 
accepted stock in trade of the school and were discussed and worked over. 
again and again, obviously with little reference to the original Vedic texts. 
This is the custom of scholasticism everywhere". This holds good for the 
stock-instances of the various schools, and also, but in a lesser degree, for 
the Sruti quotations of the Vedanta schools separately. 

b. Kumérila: 

. The founder of the Bhàtta school of Mimàmsà is once found quoted 
with approval. The citation is from the Niralambanavadakanda of the Sloka- 
varttika and fits in so neatly with Ràmanuja's exposure of the advaitin’s 
ultimate nihilism that we are inclined to look for other verbal reminiscences. 
So it would seem probable that Ràmànuja's example of the real vision of 
an imaginary gandharvanagara has been inspired by Kumaàrila's mention of 
the same in st. 110 of this kanda. 

c. Prabhikara: 

It seems very likely that Ràmaànuja's main source of the doctrines 
of Prabhakara was Sàlikanatha's Prakaranapaficika, though we cannot be 
sure before we have more Prabhakara works available. He quotes half a 
$loka which is found in Salikanatha’s section on vakyarthamatrka (p. 190) 
with a slight variant, and there introduced as usual with dha. That Rama- 
nuja may have quoted directly from Salikanatha’s eventual source is not 
entirely out of the question, but not probable in view of other corresponden- 
ces: from the same section, p. 190, Ràmànuja borrows a casual example 
verbally—with the rare word garbhadüsa “born slave", misunderstood by 
many copyists—and develops it into a cosmic analogy. Other corresponden- 

ces have been pointed out in my notes to the relative paragraphs of the 
translation. 

82. Vedanta 
‘a. Advaita: 

It would seem unquestionable that Ramanuja knew Sankara’s works. 
For the Brahmasiitrabhasya this is evidenced clearly by the Sribhisya where 
the pürvapaksa's that are set aside regularly confom to Sankara’s siddhàntas 
More difficult is it to decide the same on the comparatively scanty evidence 
of the Vedarthasamgraha, but probably § 49-51 are a case in point: it is 
plausible to connect the argumentation of Raminuja à propos of two 
analogies, that of a person dreaming and the stock-instance of the snake in 
the rope, with Sankara’s comments on Brahmasütras 2, 1, 14 (p.-198) yathà 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA : 41 

suptasya prükrtasya janasya svapna uccüvacün bhüvün pasyato niscitam eva 
pratyaksabhimatam vijndnam bhavati etc. 

Ràmànuja's refutation of the advaitin’s interpretation of BAUp. 2, 3, 
'6 athadta ādeśo neti netiti may have been evoked either by Sankara’s com- 
mentary ad BrS. 3, 2, 22 or by his comments on the passage in his upanisad- 
bhasya. The fact that Ramanuja quotes BrS. 3, 2, 22 in favour of his own 
exegesis probably means that he refers to Sankara’s view as expressed in 
his sütrabhàsya. 

There is at least one clear indication that Ramanuja knew other works 
as well His polemical explication of the meaning of satyam jñānam anantam 
brahma is no doubt directed against Sankara’s interpretation in his com- 
mentary on the Taittiriya Up. 2, 1, which will be discussed in another con- 
nexion; here the requisite terminological correspondences are clear enough. 
Less obvious is a possible reference to Sankara’s Chandogya Up. Bhàsya: 
‘commenting on the satkaryavada of the sadvidyà (6, 2, 2), Ramanuja intro- 
duces a rival theory that contends that the passage katham asatah saj jáyeta 
intends mainly to refute the Buddhist nihilist view by way of rejecting the 
asatkaryavada, instead of refuting this last naiyüyika theory only. In fact, 
Sankara in his Chandogyabhasya formulates this precise view, but so does 
Mandanamisra in his Brahmasiddhi!! However, I have not been able to 
identify unequivocal references to the latter thinker in the Vedarthasam- 
graha;11 besides, Ramanuja’s subsequent discussion of laksana in tat tvam 
asi as assumed by the rival advaitin would point to Sankara rather than to 
Mandana. 

The question to whom Ràmanuja would here refer is of special interest, 
for the pürvapaksa is formulated in significant terms: nanu niradhisthana- 
bhramüsambhavajfiapanàyasatküryavüdanirüsah kriyate / tatha hy ekam cid- 
Tüpam satyam evüvidyacchaditam jagadrüpema vivartata ity avidyü$rayat- 
vaya qmülaküranam satyam ity upagantavyam ity asatküryavüdanirüsah. 
Variant readings for avidyachaditam are ?$abalam and ?$abalitam. It is 

110. BrSiddhi, p. 20: katham asatah saj jüyeteti ca svayam sinyatiyd misedhat / 
bhávo hi yathavad aprakésamano ’dhyastavidyamanaripah prakāśate; $unye tu kvadhyà- 
sah, kim prakdsatam iti nirbijataiva; the expression nirbijata occurs also in Sankara's 
ChUpBh.; bia is what Ramáànuja calls in this connexion mülakarana; the terms are sug- 
gested by ChUp. 6, 8, 6 

111. HACKER, in his paper Jayantabhatta and Vdcaspatimisra (Schubring Fest- 
schrift, Hamburg 1951), p. 165, n. 4, remarks that SBh. 1, 1, 1 the confutation of advaita 
mainly concerns the monistic doctrine of pratyaksa and may therefore have been inspired 
by Mandana; on closer inspection, however, it appears that R. investigates advaita theory 
on the basis of all three pramünas, and I for one am not convinced that in dealing with 
pratyaksa R. had Mandana in mind, 

V. 6 

42 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

difficult to decide whether dcchaditam is a lectio facilior or sabalam an hyper- 
correctness of a copyist inspired by vivartate. The fact that Raàmànuja does 
not use the term $abalam elsewhere and that the best MS. reads icchaditam 
make the latter alternative the more probable one. Both $abala- (but rather 
müyüsabala-) and vivarta- would remind us of Sarvajfiatman. On the other 
hand neither Mandana nor Sankara use vi-\/vrt and its derivatives in the 
sense of an illusory evolution or causation, which sense is clearly intended 
by Ràmànuja. His use of the term is in itself noteworthy: neither Bhaskara 
nor Yamuna use or know it in this sense. Yamuna employs it in an important 
description! of the advaita doctrine of God (= impersonal brahman):..Its 
essence (viz. of pure consciousness) is subject to limiting conditions 
(upüdhis): it obtains such perfect qualities as omniscience because it is con- 
ditioned by maya, which undergoes a variety of evolutions that are depen- 
dent on itself (.. svarüpam eva.. svüdhinavicitravivartasvabhavamüyopa- 
hitataya samasadita- [! not adhyasta- or adhyüropita-] -sárvajfiyadisampadam 
upahitam abhidadhati). It is evident that for Yamuna vivarta equals pari- 
nama, vikāra, etc.: maya, not brahman, is vicitravivartasvabhava. So, though 
there be occasion to connect Ràmànuja's pürvapaksin with Sankara ad ChUp. 
6, 2, other arguments, mainly Ràmànuja's special use of vivarta tell against 
direct connexion, so that at most we can say that if Ràmànuja referred to 
his august antagonist he already interpreted the later vivartavada into San- 
kara’s doctrine. Besides, there are more associations: it would seem pro- 
bable, as we saw, that Rāmānuja consulted the Slokavarttika here 

Unless certain authors are quoted verbally it is exceedingly difficult 
to identify them in pürvapaksins. Moreover, we have to consider the supreme 
probability that Ráàmànuja addressed himself in the first place to living adver- 
saries of his time and milieu, in whose teachings old advaita doctrines were 
being restated and developed. It will also happen that the references. are 
just too vague: Vimuktàtman, on clear terminological grounds identifiable 
in the Sribhasya,143 does not emerge in the Vedarthasamgraha, whereas Sali- 
kanatha, so evidently referred to in the latter text, can only be guessed 
behind the corresponding portions of the Sribhasya. 

b. Bhedabhedavàda: 

Bhaskara’s doctrine, as presented here by Ramanuja, that Brahman is 
conditioned by wpüdhis into becoming the phenomenal world cannot be 
entirely derived from the Brahmasitrabhasya. Though certain drstantas 

112. Atmasiddhi, pp. 4-5 

113. For brevity's sake I refer to HIRIYANNA’S introduction to the Istasiddhi (Baroda 
1933), pp. XI-XH COE AERE 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 43 

can be identified, they appear much more elaborate and may hail from fol- 
lowers. One instance is curious: Ràmànuja avails himself of the analogy 
of space and a space-unit enclosed in, that is conditioned by, a pitcher. This 
analogy had already been given by Sankara and we note that Ramanuja’s 
terminology corresponds more closely to Sankara’s than to Bhaskara’s: 
tasmüd yathà ghatakarakadyakasanam mahakaéananyatvam .. evam asya- 
bhogyabhoktradiprapaficajatasya brahmavyatirekenabhdva iti drastavyam 
(BrSBh. 2, 1, 14, p. 197). 

Ràmànuja's last argument against the aupadhikavadin's view that not 
God but his creative potency undergoes modification is no doubt to be con- 
nected with Bhaskara’s commentary ad BrS. 1, 4, 25. 

c. Yamuna: 

The doctrine of Yamuna, Ràmaànuja's predecessor and teacher's 
teacher, has not yet been made the subject of a monograph, in spite of the 
fact that his Siddhitraya, in which his doctrine is preserved fragmentarily, 
seems to be of great importance for the history not only of Visistadvaita but 
also of Vedanta as a whole. This is not the place to go into great detail 
and we have to content ourselves for the time being with mentioning a few 
fundamental points 

His principal tenets can best be described in his own words, taken 
from the beginning of the Atmasiddhi, where he enumerates a great many 
different views that were held by Indian schools of thought before him on 
‘the cardinal truths: Generally his own opinion concludes the series of theo- 
‘ries as a preliminary thesis to be demonstrated later on. 

On the nature of the atman, the individual, ‘empirical’ soul, he con- 
cludes that it is not material and non-spiritual, is not identical with the body, 
or the vital breath, or the manas; nor yet is it unqualified consciousness 
upon which certain qualities are projected by nesciencellt or by limiting con- 
ditions,H5 but that it is a substance qualified by the essential property know- . 
ledge." This special knowledge acquires the designation ‘beatitude’, ‘bliss’, 
etc., from the fact that its object is pleasurable, not because it would be 
pleasurable itself! . This atman, though self-illuminating, can be the object 
of our knowledge by the pramanas of scriptural revelation, reasoning, intro- 
spective perception: by means of these instruments and sources of 

114. Advaitavada 

115. Bhaskara’s aupadhikavada 

116. àtmavisaye ...... &srayanukilyapratilabdhinandasukhddivyapadesabodhavisesa 
evüsya svübhàvika ity anye, pp. 2-3 

117. Cf. Rs exposition, $8 142-43, 

44 J.. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

knowledge we can come to an immediate apprehension of the àtman so as 
it is, in its essential and categorical difference from everything else, with. 
& gradually increasing clarity of cognition which finally culminates in a 
perfect lucidity. Although the atman is in itself without magnitude, it 
is localized by the magnitude of the corporeal mass which it pervades in 
its totality, not merely by knowledge or consciousness.!!?. It is unchanging 
and eternal!? In each of the fields of empirical experience, that is in each 
body, the atman has a distinct individuality.122 

The Supreme Spirit, the paramatman, is described as à person, depend- 
ent on whom are the existence and the activity — in all its forms — of the 
three classes of spiritual beings, or àtmans, and of non-spiritual, material 
entities. ‘This personal God is a mighty ocean of all perfections, primarily 
the six beautiful qualities of knowledge, strength, dominion, heroism, power 
and splendour, which are natural properties, limitless and absolute.122 

Dascupra, describing Yamuna’s doctrine of the soul on the basis of 
the Atmasiddhi,3 comes to the conclusion that “Yamunas main contribu- 
tion consists in establishing the self-consciousness of the soul" but "gives 
hardly any new ideas about l$vara and His relation to the souls and world." 
As the manner in which Ràmaànuja's vedantic predecessors conceived of the 
relation between the absolute and the non-absolute is of importance to decide 
his own originality of contribution, we may inquire whether, and if so to 
what extent, Dasgupta's verdict is just 

In Atmasiddhi p. 4-5, after summing up the advaitin’s relation brah- 
man — avidya and the bhedabhedavadin’s relation brahman — upühitabrah- 
man, Yamuna states finally what, by exclusion, should be his own view or 
siddhanta: “granted that there is diversity, yet the relation itself is non- 
difference: it is an intimate connexion definable as that between amSa and 
améin, or has the form of a $esa-éesin!?* relation that is characterized by 

118. tathedráo (sc. svayamjyotis-) ‘py dgamainumanayogajapratyaksaih svetarasa- 
kalavilaksanasvàbhaüvyena visadavisadataravi$adatamatayantáto yathāvad aparoksyata iti 
p. 3; cf. R.’s recurring expression visadatamapratyaksatapanna- to. describe the vividness 
-of knowledge through bhakti हि 

119. tatha svatah parimamnürahito ’pi vyàpyavastuparimitikrtapariccheda iti, vyàptir 

svarüpeneti, p. 3 
. 120. tathà kütastho mitya iti, p. 4. 

121. pratiksetram mümabhüta iti, p. 4. 

122. tatha paramütmavisaye ’pi .. anye tw svadhinatrividhacetandcetanasvaripa- 
sthitipravrttibhedam ^ svàbhàvikaniravadhikátisayajfnabalai$varyaviryasaktitejalyprabhrti- 
sakalakalyanagunamahérnavam purusavisesam ivaram ütisthante, p. 5. 

123. Indian Philosophy, III, p. 139 ff. 

124. On sesa see trsl. notes 3. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 45 

dependence, or again is the relation between possession and possessor that is 
characterized by servant and master,”125 

` Again, at the end of the Isvarasiddhi, we have a notable reading: 
"the entire Universe in its three phases of past, present and future, is for its 
subsistence and resorption dependent on a Being that has a wealth of quali- 
ties, among which the capacity of sustaining and resorbing the Universe, 
because it is of an inconceivably varied and various composition: it may be 
compared to paintings and sculptures which we infer to be exclusively 
dependent for their existence, etc., on an extremely gifted person."1?6 

The same reading continues: "The Universe, which is described by 
the word vibhüti, stands to the One Being in a relation of object supported, 
object governed and object accessory, because it is His body, comparable 
to the relation between the “I” and its body. It is true that this reading 
is not found in the mss. that are mainly utilized by the different editors — 
whose critical principles, incidentally, remain completely mysterious!?$— yet 
a comparison with the first quoted passage, found in all mss., renders this 
variant acceptable. 

We.may also compare the final stanzas of the I$varasiddhi: “This 
Universe obeys the command of one person because it is not spiritual: like 
a body. All spiritual beings perform the task under the control of one 
person, as the senses —touch, etc. —, because the task requires the associa- 
tion of a body. The Universe, the topic of our polemic, has one Supreme 
Soul, because he is the soul of spiritual and non-spiritual beings: it forms 
as it were one country with one king.”! In other words — which would 

125. nänātve saty evübhedo namanvayah/ . amsamsibhavalaksanah | samaváyah / 
paratantratdlaksanah $esasesitvarüpah / svasvámibhüvobhrtyasvamilaksana iti ca nánàvidhà 
vüdàh; RAMANUJACHARYA in his translation of the Atmasiddhi, Journal, Annamalai Univer- 
sity, connects nànüvidhaà vüdáh only with this paragraph, suggesting that these views are 
at variance mutually; but rather it sums up the entire section: .. iti kecit.. ityanye .. itare 
.. iti ca, nànüvidha vadah. 

126. - traikülikam krtsnam jagat tadanugunasaktyadigunaganavadáyattasthitilayakam 
acintyavividhavicitraracanatvát / atikusalaiküáyattasthityadikataya pramitacitrapratimadi- 
,vat, I$varasiddhi, p. 79-80 (Chaukh. ed.) 

127. wibhitipadabhidheyam krtsnam | eküdheyavidheyasesabhavam / tacchariratvát, 
macchariravat; RAMANUJACHARYA, 0.c., renders “all things denoted by", which is not so apt. 
y . 128. Neither Rama Misra SASTRI, Chaukhamba Skt. Ser. ed. nor SRINIVASACHARI, 
Journal Annamalai University ed., give an account of their mss and critical methods; 
the Telugu ed. I have been unable to consult. : 

129. ekecchanuvidhayidam acaitanyit svadehavat// ekenadhisthitàh karyam kur- 
vate sarvacetanüh / dehasambandhasüpeksaküryatvát tvagddivat // ekapradhünapurusam 
vivddddhyasitam jagat / cetanücetanütmateüd ekarajakadesavat // RAMANUJACHARYA’S 
translation differs but is less plausible. 

46 ; J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

seem the most plausible explication of these lines: the material Universe 
is obedient to God's will, like a man's body to that of man; the personal 
entities, the cetanas, again perform God's work under God's control, work 
that requires bodily action which they provide: but their function is of a 
higher order than that of matter, and they may be likened to the senses 
of the body of God. So the composite Universe in its totality is governed 
by one Supreme Person or Soul who is comparable to the soul of the body 
constituted by spirit and matter. f 

DASGUPTA is certainly right in asserting that it “is almost certain that 
his (Yamuna’s) own attitude did not differ much from the Nyaya attitude”. 
In ISvarasiddhi, p. 75, the arguments of the Mimàmsakas against a Nyaya 
view are countered in a karika with atra brümah, which supports the Naiya- 
yikas; elsewhere, however, he attacks the Nyaya proofs for the existence of 
God. But Dasgupta's statement that Yamuna, too, "left the duality of 
the world and I$vara absolutely unresolved" is, as we have seen, too sweep- 
ing. Not less sweeping is the pronouncement that “he is also silent about 
the methods which à person should adopt for procuring his salvation." 

In Atmasiddhi, p. 5, Yamuna sums up the prevailing views of the 
way in which release is achieved and the final view or siddhànta is that it 
— paramapurusürthabhüta brahmapraptilaksanamoksa “man’s supreme goal 
release, which consists in attaining brahman" — can only be achieved by 
means of the bhakti-yoga, of an exclusive and absolute character, of one 
whose inner faculty has been prepared by both jfiana- and karma- yoga." 

Similarly, in Gitárthasamgraha, st. 32, it reads aiküntyatyantadasyai- 
karatis tatpadam apnuyat “he whose only joy is in perfect and absolute ser- 
vitude will achieve that end (or God's place)", an expression patently utilized 
by Ràmaànuja in his Introduction to Gitábhasya: °aSesasesataikaratiripa® 
and throughout the Gadyatraya. 

Finally, in a special study, the Agamapramanya, Yamuna professes in 
emphatical terms his adherence to Paficaratra which describes the relation 
between God and the Universe in terms of the farthest possible reduction 
of difference verging on, but never quite merging in, unity, and the method 
of salvation as that of a most humble and exclusive loving devotion or bhakti. 

We have seen that, on account of the fundamental problématique of 
Vedanta itself, the basic conceptions of the various systems concern the rela- 
tion between the Absolute and the Universe, and that these conceptions can 
best be studied from the commentaries on the àrambhanadhikarana which 

130. Atmasiddhi, pp. 75-78. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 41 

summarizes the import of the sadvidya. So also Yamuna’s conception, though 
he did not comment on the Sütras— a task he assigned to Ramanuja. Yet 
he too had to deal with the sadvidya, and he did so at some length in the 
Samvitsiddhi. 

What is the meaning of advitiya? Is it a tatpurusa or a bahuvrihi 
compound? In neither case the existence of the Universe is denied. Skip- 
ping his more ingenious than convincing remarks on a grammatically possible 
tatpurusa and concentrating on the term as a bahuvrihi: he argues that 
advitiya is a vi$esana, a qualifying adjective, and that therefore it cannot 
be explained thus that nothing else exists but Brahman.!3! The non-existence 
of a second thing cannot qualify Brahman: because it does not exist it is 
not qualifying, unless Brahman be itself non-existent. Consequently the real 
existence of the phenomenal world —the prapañca that consists in spirit and 
non-spirit (cidacinmaya-) — is not denied in this text of non-duality : proved 
by its own praminas of perception and inference it is further corroborated 
by $ruti. 

For what does our text mean? Brahman has no second, that means 
that there is no one and nothing in past, present and future that can be 
counted his second, i.e., his equal or superior.3?? The world, consisting of 
a particle of a division of His manifestation,!33 can hardly be called a “second”. 
“Matchless” is the true sense: just as in the phrase: “The king of the Colas 
is a universal monarch who does not find his match in the present world." 
"The uncounted millions of existent beings are but drops in the ocean of 
the majestal manifestation of Visnu, the Paramount Sovereign unaffected 
by suffering, action, evolution, etc. the treasury of the six divine qualities, 
Visnu whose supernal manifestation is beyond imagination. Who, counting 
the seven seas by his fingers, could count their waves, foam-spots, bubbles 
and drops? If we say there is no second sun in the sky, do we deny by 
the sun its rays? The world with its animate and inanimate beings is just 
vücürambhana and vikāra: sat is the unchanging radical cause.! The effect 
is not different fom its cause: sparks are not different from the fire from 

. 131. dvittyavastunastitvam na brahmano (Chaukh. ed. brahma ma) vigesanam / 
asattvdn na hy asad brahma bhaven napi visesanam // tasmat prapasicasadbhava nadvai- 
tasrutibadhitah / svapramanabalat siddhah Srutyd cipyanumoditah // Samvitsiddhi (Chaukh. 
ed. p. 82). 

132. sama- and abhyadhika-, terms we find repeated by R., Ved. $10; compare 
also Stotraratna, st. 16. 

133. vibhavavyühakalüámütram; vyüha- is in Paficaratra is fourfold personified pro- 
jection of the Supreme, over which the six divine qualities are "divided"; together the 
four Vyühas form also part of. God's vibhava "projection, manifestation". 

134. kütastham mülaküranam; the radical cause is of course the material cause; 
cf. also supra note 110. su 2 

48 . l J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

which they shoot forth, nor the pot from the clay, etc.36 The element 
derives its power and force from its cause. So, by knowing the one material 
cause we know the Universe.137 

In the light of all this Dascurta’s judgment cannot well stand. On 
the contrary, in his, admittedly mainly polemical, works Yamuna departed 
from a more or less clearly defined conception of Vedintic cosmology and 
eschatology. The relation between the Personal God and the Universe is 
stated in various, mutually complementary ways: as that of améa and amśin 
— so also sparks of fire —, of Sesa and $esin, of body and soul: the Universe 
is God's manifestation, governed, supported and ensouled by Him. These 
terms recall immediately those in which Ràmaànuja couches his central idea: 
so much so that we are justified in saying that Rāmānuja, developed and 
elaborated systematically what Yamuna had already discovered. Yamuna 
did not. yet systematize his views nor exhaust the fertile concept of Sarira- 
Sariribhava, but it is clear that his thoughts went in the direction of this 
analogy as the basic solution. 

IV. OBSERVATIONS ON RAMANUJA's ExEGETICAL PRINCIPLES AND METHOD 

The increasing tendency among historians of Indian philosophy to study 
the systems of Indian thought, particularly Vedànta, with special reference 
to and in comparison and juxtaposition with Western philosophies has 
created an unfortunate misunderstanding of the typically theological cha- 
racter of Vedantic speculation as a whole. The reasons are many and 
diverse. On the Indian side this tendency is an interesting cultural pheno- 
menon which may well prove to be of the greatest importance for the future 
of Indian thought in the context of world philosophy. On the Western side 
there is often apparent a certain aversion to theology as such and an 
inability to keep in mind that the soteriology of Vedanta is not ‘philosophic’ 
in purpose, but religious, inspired and borne out by scripture and revelation. 
Vedanta is after all a positive theology based upon scripture. The fact that the 
results of scriptural exegesis do not conform to the conclusions of historical 
philological research does not mean that therefore scripture plays a subordi- 
nate róle, as a handmaiden to the philosopher who cannot hope to put across 
his original views without the authority of revelation, and so makes it fit in 
with his own doctrine. This view fails to take into account the importance 
of the tradition of exegesis, of its method and rules 

135. From BAUp. 2, 1, 20. 
136. The drstántas summed up in ChUp. 6, 1, 4-6. 

137. ekapradhünavijüanad vijnatam akhilam bhavet: the pratijnd or promissory 
assertion of ChUp. 6, 1, 3. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA - 49 

It is only recently that a studious attempt has been made to describe 
systematically the theological method of Sankara. Now that a serious 
beginning has been made, one realizes how far we are still removed from a 
complete and comprehensive study of the theological principles and herme- 
neutical methods of the great Indian commentators, without and within 
Vedànta, and generally of the rules of ancient Indian commentatorial 
industry. When studying the many bhasyas on scriptures and sütras the 
student is surprised at the freedom, and often arbitrariness, with which the 
commentators thought fit to treat their texts. A just appreciation of these 
interpretations will remain difficult: not only are the presuppositions of theolo- 
gical exegesis far removed from, if not actually in conflict with, those of 
philological explication — and ultimately the profane scholar has no criterion 
to evaluate supra-rational significance —, but also the breach in the com- 
mentatorial tradition of the Vedanta before Sankara prevents us to under- 
stand the why and wherefore of interpretations that are taken for granted 
later on.139 

Especially in Rámànuja's case the loss of ancient vakyas, vrttis and 
bhàsyas make themselves gravely felt. He more than Sankara names and 
cites many precursors, of whom only a few are identifiable, and he claims 
that his system is nothing but a systematical elaboration of their views: 
“I have come to the conclusion that this is the central doctrine of the 
Vedanta texts after having made a.painstaking study not only of the whole 
mass of all the various $rutis but also of the commentaries that have been 
composed and accepted by judicious thinkers”. 

| But even less than Sankara is Ramanuja concerned with describing, 
or even alluding to his exegetical principles, which for him and his con- 
temporaries were doubtless self-evident. We have to gather them from 
his works. In the following sections a few topics have been discussed, 
in so far as relevant to the Vedarthasamgraha, which may contribute a little 
to our understanding of his principles and method. 

138. R.V. DE Smet, The Theological Method of Samkara (thesis Rome, Pontifica 
Universitas Gregoriana, 1953), mimeographed edition with limited circulation; a revised 
edition is under preparation; excerpta and partial French translation Langage et connais- 
sance chez Samkara in Revue philosophique de Louvain, tome 52 (3e série, no. 33), 1954, 
p. 31-74. ¢ 

139. This is most clearly shown by the commentaries on the Brahmasutras where 
there is nothing in the text to account alike for the agreement and the disagreement of 
the bhasyakaras. 

V. 7 

50 ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 
81. The authority of Sabda : 

The authoritative character of $abda "verbal testimony" is, within 
the pales of orhodox Indian philosophy, one of the fundamental assump- 
tions; for those systems, moreover, which deal especially with metaphysics, 
$abda is the only valid instrument and criterion (pramana) for supra- 
sensible knowledge. We should bear in mind that $abda is not only human 
and profane language, but also and even primarily, sacred language, the 
revelation of scripture, which, by its self-sufficiency, is authoritative in 
its own right. The principle that Sabda—i.e. sacred revelation—can give 
us reliable information about things which, by their very nature, fall out- 
side the scope of the other two fundamental pramànas of sensual perception 
and rational inference, has been developed by the Mimamsakas. The pre- 
cise extent of this authoritativeness has, however, been disputed 

In order to understand the controversy we have to consider the sup- 
positions of Purvamimamsa and remember that the authority of $abda in 
the form of scriptural revelation had been taken for granted long before 
ihe necessary theories had been evolved to account for it and define it. 
Then ‘the very ‘trustworthiness of $ruti, without which the whole fabric of 
ritual would crumble, necessitated the assumption that it did not derive 
from human agency with its implicit fallibility, but must be apauruseya 
“preterhuman”.141 .This again led to the conclusion that the language of 
the scriptures, and by extension all language — which derives from the 
scriptures—,!4? has not a human but a preterhuman origin: if its trust- 
worthiness be preterhuman, it must be preterhuman itself. In other words, 
it could never have come into being on the strength of a convention or 
agreement to which man was a party;143 consequently, that peculiar power 
that makes language significative, the power. by which words can denote 
meanings and refer to objects, could not be based upon an immemorial 
agreement of human beings that henceforth this word was to denote that 
meaning, but must have been eternally inherent in the words themselves 
which were not created or invented by man but in their entirety of 
language given at the beginning of creation.144 

140. svatahpramanatva- 

141, I will gladly give up this rendering for a better one; the usual "impersonal" 
is wholly inadequate. 

142. Cf. eg. Ved.$21 

143, The pracina-naiyayikas held that the relation word-object derives from a 
convention initiated by I$vara; the navya-naiyayikas simplified this formulation and stated 
that it derives from convention 

144. The descripton is, of course, a rationale; the doctrine of the hypostasized 
character of the revealed Word is no doubt a continuation of the ancient speculations 
on the divine progenitrix Vdc. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 51 

Pürvamimàmsa was primarily concerned with studying and syste- 
matizing the principles governing tbe ritual with respect to its fruits as. 
described in the karmakanda. Accordingly the whole mass of $ruti was 
classified into three categories: 1. those portions which prescribe or enjoin 
the performance of certain rites to secure certain results, vidhi or codana 
“injunction”, comprising nisedha “prohibition”; 2. those portions which ex- 
plain, describe or generally add to the injunctions, arthavada; 3. those por- 
tions which comprise the Vedic mantras that are used in the rite In 
this classification the order of importance is given: the injunction constitutes 
the principal element to which the others are accessory. 

This principal importance of injunction, without which all the rest 
would be purposeless and hence meaningless, was generally recognized. 
Mimàmsàá as a whole maintains that the non-vidhi portions derive their 
relevancy from their being accessory and supplementary to injunction. It 
follows that purposive signification of scriptural testimony abides, and its 
authoritative validity is vested, in injunction only. 

Among the Mimamsakas the school of Prabhakara went consistently 
a step further. Whereas the Bhattas admitted the authoritative character 
of speech that is pauruseya, ie. human and profane speech, the Prabha- 
karas!46 contended that as a pramana $abda is always Sastra, that is to say, 
only the sacred language of revelation is a source of valid knowledge. In 
profane language words refer to objects which generally do not. stand in 
need of verbal testimony in order to be validly known and established; 
the objects are established by other praminas, perception or inference. 
Validly established objects cannot be again validly established by language. 
Even in those cases where there are no other pramanas to establish an 
object and we have to resort to verbal testimony, in other words to rely 
on hear-say, we have not invariably reliable knowledge, because of the 
human factor. Profane speech does not fulfil the necessary condition of 
authority: to be invariably a source of valid knowledge. Consequently 
only $ástra is pramana stricto sensu. Here 585003 is to be taken literally: . 
seriptural injunction; for inasmuch as language cannot validly establish an 
object already completely established? (parinispannavastu, siddhavastu), 
it must invariably bear on something yet to be established, a task yet to 
be undertaken, an act yet to be performed, karya. The authority of Sabda 
and therefore its. exclusive significance as a source of valid knowledge, lies 

145. This is Ramanuja's classification; Mim&msakas often make misedha into a 
Separate category and add naémadheya “proper name 

146. JHA, Prabhékara Mimamsé, p. 240. 

147. उ, o.c, p. 237 ff. 

52 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

in its enjoining a kürya. Another consequence is that the smallest signifi- 
cative unit of language is the sentence, that is ideally the injunctive 
sentence. 

To illustrate this theory they described the way in which a child 
learns a language. In this description they departed, understandably, from 
the verbal character of language: the verb is the operative word in the 
sentence without which the rest is not effective and significative. As it bears 
on action, the sentence can only be understood by a child when it sees it 
acted upon by its elders.148 

This theory that language is only significative when it is an injunc- 
tion bearing on kürya—which does not mean that every significative and 
validly authoritative sentence has to be an injunctive one, but that it can 
be either construed as one or subordinated to one—leads to curious 
consequences when applied to that part of $ruti whose purport is not to 
enjoin acts but to teach knowledge, the jííanakümda. | 

The Mimàmsaka applying his categories, which had been developed 
and elaborated with exclusive reference to the karmakanda, to the descrip- 
tive jüáànakanda, has only one way open: like all scriptural Sabda it must 
derive its relevancy from the injunction.. Accordingly the Bhàtta 
subordinates the jnanakanda to the karmakànda as an arthavada of the 
eternity of the soul which is fundamental to the eternal validity of the 
Vedic injunctions. The Prabhakara appears to have taken a different view: - 
like all Sabda the Vedanta—i.e. jfiánakanda, comprising the Aranyakas and 
the Upanisads—must bear on kürya. Brahman however, which is the ob- 
ject of the Vedanta texts, is not a karya but a completely established entity. 
Consequently it was held that “those Vedanta texts that speak of Brahman 
must be regarded as speaking of Brahman as something on which one is 
enjoined to meditate or know (sic), in order to escape the meshes of 
metempsychosis”.149 À 

This view we find discussed and refuted in Ràmànuja's complicated 
commentary on the samanvayüdhikarana, BrS. 1, 1, 4, where it is stated in 
these terms: “Although the Vedanta texts cannot be the means of valid 
knowledge about brahman's proper form which is completely established, 
yet brahman’s proper form can be established (anew). How? Because 
the Vedanta texts can denote the injunction of meditation”.5° In the same 
connexion we find another Prabhakara view discussed, not mentioned by 

148. Jua, oc, p. 228. 
149. JHA, o.c, p. 62. 
150. SBh. 1, 1, 4. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 53 

Jha, which Sudaréanasüri styles nisprapaficikarananiyogavada: “Just be- 
cause they bear on kürya, the Vedànta texts can bear validly on brahman 
itself. From where do they derive this authority? The object of these 
texts is an injunction by means of the annihilation of phenomenality: an 
injunction to this effect that “one is to render brahman—which, because of 
beginningless ignorance, is conceived as phenomenal—devoid of pheno- 
menality, without second and essentially knowledge.'"150a 

To sum up, whereas the Bhàttas do not admit that the jnanakanda 
can deal authoritatively with its object brahman in its own right, the 
Prabhakara allows that it can do so, provided that it be construed as a 
vidhi—or in his terminology—as a miyoga. Leaving aside the second alter- 
nativing the injunction to “dephenomalize” brahman—this goes to say that 
the meditation on, and knowledge of, brahman can be the object of an 
injunction. : l | 

' To this construction Sankara took serious exception. In his view, 
brahmajfiana, in virtue of its nature, does not admit of being enjoined at 
all: it can only be evoked by a text:19! it cannot initiate any action but only 
remove our consciousness from any other entity but brahman: when this 
consciousness has been removed, then there is no room for any action 
because that would be incompatible.5? The knowledge of brahman puts 
an end to all activity.53 Knowledge derives only from pramanas and the 
real existence of the object concerned; — not from man's volition, but simply 
from that which exists really and unchangeably.!5* 

Ràmànuja, as far as I can judge, does not express himself so categori- 
cally, at least not in the Vedarthasamgraha. As a matter of fact, to know 
Brahman in Ràmànuja's sense, that is to ascend to knowing the personal 
God through constant loving adoration, is the final stage of one road to 
perfection, leading from the conscientious performance of ritual acts to the 
self-recognition of the individual soul and from there to the love-attainment 
of the Supreme God, whom to serve is the soul's sole purpose and essence. 

` The ritual acts, whichever gods they are dedicated to, are essentially 
propitiations of the one God. 'To serve God would be imperative indeed, 
it is the paramapurugürtha, the supreme end to be achieved; there is’ noth- 

'150a. Same view refuted by Bhiskara ad BrS. 1, 1, 4; for a discussion cf. 
Hirrvanna’s paper Prapafica-vilaya-vdda—A doctrine of pre-Sankara Vedanta (J. Or, 
Res. Madras, 1927, p. 109 ff). 

151. ChUpBh. 6, 7, 7; in this paragraph 1 have made use of material collected 
by DE SMET, o.c., p. 202f. y 

152. BAUpBh. 1, 4, 7. 

153. BAUpBh. 1, 4, 7. 

254. BrSBh. 2, 2, 21. 

54 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

ing in this to militate against the supposedly injunctive character of all 
sruti 

Ràmànuja's objections are directed first against Prabhakara’s high 
and mighty command P5 that language can only be significative in enjoining 
actions to be effected. By a few well-selected examples he shows this. A 
child does not learn a language by watching how his elders react to a 
series of words, but by having things named: it is nominal description 
rather than verbal motivation by which he learns how to speak and under- 
stand. A dumb adult, conversant with the language of gestures, can read 
the meaning of a person who instructs his servant, not by word of mouth. 
but by gestures, to convey a certain message to another. When the dumb 
man, watching the whole story, hears the servant translate the message 
into worded speech, he knows what the words of the message mean with- 
out seeing any action taken on it.56 Which goes to prove that the signifi- 
cation of the words cannot lie in their relation to. an action that is to be 
effected in consequence thereof. On this showing there is no ground what- 
ever to deny that language has the power of denoting a completely establish- 
ed entity, about wnich nothing is to be effected. 

Then Ràmànuja proceeds that the arthavada brahmavid üpnoti param 
can indeed be construed as a vidhi. He compares this text with such $rutis 
as pratitisthanti ha vai ya età (rütrir) upayanti/brahmavarcasvino ^nnadà 
bhavanti ya età (ratrir) upayanti (Sabara ad KMS. 4, 3, 17 = Paficavimsa. 
Br. 23, 2, 4) which is an example of a text which, though being arthavada, : 
is yet vidhi and therefore significative: 157 with regard to the rite of ratrisattra 
it is an arthavada, but it is significative for the reward, pratistha, which is the 
phala that cannot be known by any other pramana. Similarly brahmavid 
üpnoti param is informative of the fruit, ie. param, the highest Brahman. 
Consequently the phala that is the Supreme Brahman is established and all 
the Srutis and arthavadas which contribute to our knowledge of Brahman's: 
essence and qualities are therefore fully informative है 

Another argument he borrows from. Dramida,58 who reasons: if the 
arthavadas have the purpose of praising an object that has a function in 
a vidhi, it can only praise this object if it exists. It follows that all arthavadas 
are really significative or informative of the real existence of qualities, so as 
to give rise to the knowledge that the object of the act is praiseworthy. 
Hence follows again that in this very manner all objects known through 

155. rajajna, Ved. 8116. 
156. 8116 
157. 8117. 
158. $118. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 55 

mantras and arthavidas are proved to exist. To sum up, arthavádas are 
really significative themselves, not merely laudatory. 

The same question is touched upon in another connexion? where the 
meaning of the Sruti tad Visnoh paramam padam sada paSyanti sürayah is dis- 
cussed. This $ruti can be read either that those who are süris regard or that 
those who regard are sūris. Here a Mimàmsaka objects that in either case not 
more than one guna can be enjoined; either the quality of being sūris or the 
quality of regarding, not both, otherwise there would be vaékyabheda.16 
Ramanuja points out that the objection is not to the point and demonstrates 
that here there is question of a visistavidhi where more than one quality 
can be enjoined. Here again he upholds that in themselves the mantras are 
informative of the objects or qualities which they describe and he concludes: 
As we have said before, even if we assume that mantras and arthavidas are 
significative only when bearing on an action to be effected their objects 
signified are established; a fortiori when etymological explication proves 
that in fact they bear on established objects in their own right. In this 
manner everything is sound. 

From all this we can conclude that Ramanuja did not want to supersede 
the principles of Pürvamimamsà, as Sankara had done, but to modify them 
with respect to the uttarabhiga, where emphasis is not on vidhi but on 
arthavada, and admit of a fully significative character of these arthavadas. 
He does not exclude the view that, after all, these arthavadas may find their 
significance and purpose in vidhi, but he is obliged to refute the extreme 
views of the Prabhakaras who are not less radical in upholding the autonomy 
of the Parvamimamsa as Sankara is in maintaining the self-sufficiency of 
Uttaramimamsa: For Ramanuja, however, both mimamsas are not different 
$àstras, but constitute one continuous discipline. The substance and objec- 
tive of both inquiries is fundamentally the same: both inquire into the way 
in which brahman is worshipped. But whereas the pürvabhüga describes the 
ritual acts by which God, the Supreme Brahman, is worshipped indirectly 
in His multiple manifestations of the Vedic deities, the uttarabhaga describes 
the way in which God is directly worshipped by an immediate knowledge of 
perfect love. The former is ancillary and propaedeutic to the latter; both 
chapters of the same śästra cannot, however, be in conflict. i - 

- The reservation which Rāmānuja makes—reluctantly enough—for the 
possibility of construing the jñānakāņda as injunctive is, it would seem, 
peculiar to the Vedarthasamgraha and has been abandoned in the Sribhasya. 

159. $128. 
160. cf. MNPr.. $33. 
161. vyutpatti- 

56 ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 4 

In the samanvayüdhikarana!$? Ramanuja states his view in a preliminary 
thesis: "these aggregates of words (sc. $üstra) which have the power of 
denoting completely established objects that have already been proved by 
the very etymology of the terms, can and do bear completely and 
harmoniously on the Brahman that is the cause of the origination, subsistence 
and annihilation of the entire universe, absolutely opposed to all imperfection, 
eminently possessed of unlimited perfections, and, in essence, boundless and 
incomparable bliss. Thus they serve no purpose conducive to activity or 
inactivity! and therefore do not bear on any other purport. For all pra- 
' mànas terminate, not in a purpose, but in the knowledge of the objects with 
which they are concerned. Nor is the operation of any pramana determined 
by a purpose: on the contrary, the purpose is determined by the knowledge 
resulting from the pramana. Nor does the fact that the pramana has no 
direct connexion with activity or inactivity mean that it is devoid of all pur- 
pose, for we see that it is related to anyone of the goals of human life." 

This thesis is meant to reject Kumirila’s definition: “Sastra is called 
that (verbal testimony) either eternal (sc. vaidika) or conventional (sc. 
laukika) which sets forth which actions man has to perform or is not to 
perform”.1¢4 According to the Bhatta, the jfianakanda is arthavada, setting 
forth the eternity of the atman of man engaged in ritual acts, without which 
eternity the ritual acts themselves would lack permanence 

On Ràmànuja's Vedanta thesis follows the Mimamsaka’s (Bhatta’s) 
pürvapaksa, in the course of which two apparently Prabhakara views are 
discussed and refuted, the nisprapaficikarananiyogavada or the view that the 
jBànakanda enjoins the establishing of a non-phenomenal Brahman, and the 
dhyünaniyogavàda, the view that it enjoins the meditation on Brahman. In 
the course of the discussion of the latter view advaitavada and bhedübheda- 
vada are refuted. The Bhàtta's pürvapaksa is then refuted again in the 
Vedantin’s siddhanta, that is to say, the entire argumentation which preceded 
in the course of the Mimàmsaka's discussion is accepted, except the thesis 
that, in as much as the jianakanda does not terminate in direct purpose, i.e., 
describes what is to be-done and what not, it has no purpose at all 

Consequently, Ràmànuja's provisional thesis and his Siddhanta, with 
in between the entire complicated argumentation, go to prove that he no 
longer made the reservation that the jfidnakanda could possibly be construed 
as being injunetive - - - 

162. SBh. 1, 1, 4. 

163. pravrtti and mivrtti 

164. §lokavarttika, Sabdapariccheda st. 4; pravrttir và mivrttir và nityena krtakena 
ca / pumsüm yenopadisyate tac chastram abhidhiyate / / 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 57 

82. All Srutis are equally authoritative : 

We have seen that whereas Sankara refuses to admit the Mimamsa 
category of vidhi into Vedantamimamsa, Rāmānuja, in order to save the con- 
tinuity of the First and the Second Inquiries, takes a more conciliatory view 
and, without denying the applicability of a typical Mimamsa construction 
vidhi — arthavada to the jiánakanda as well, yet urges the independent infor- 
mativeness of the latter category. 

One of the most striking features of Sankara’s exegetical method is 
the distinction that he introduces between the pure Vedanta texts, which 
set forth the paramürthajfiüünma, and the far more sizeable texts in which 
definite wpüsanas are set forth describing the absolute in anthromorphic 
terms and which consequently are vyavahürika. DE Smet attempts to 
show! that this distinction between major and minor texts corresponds to 
that which Pürvamimàmsa makes between the injunctions, which are prin- 
cipal, and the arthavadas, etc., which are accessory to the principal texts; 
on the strength of this correspondence he suggests that Sankara’s distinction 
was inspired by Jaimini's. This correspondence, which at a first glance looks 
plausible, breaks however down when we scrutinize it more closely. For 
Sankara the minor texts have a definite propaedeutic function, by preparing 
the mind of the pupil alike by describing magnificent projections of brahman, 
which are first to be contemplated upon, then to be abandoned, and by 
pointing out the underlying unity in the great variety of things with respect 
to their common cause, the Supreme Soul. Ultimately these texts cannot 
lead the student to the final truth by themselves. In other words, in the 
last analysis these minor texts are not at all accessory to the major texts. 
Actually the division between major and minor texts reflects that most 
general one between paramürtha and vyavahüra, a division far more funda- 
mental than, and not at all related to, that of Purvamimamsa between the 
principal texts and the accessory texts which are relevant with regard to the 
principal ones. 

This division between paramartha and vyavahara is reflected in Sruti 
on two different levels, first in $ruti as a whole in the main division between 
major and minor statements, secondly in the major statements themselves, 
where the terms are distinguished as having their primary sense with regard 
to their empirical concepts and another sense by laksana when they are 
referring to the non-qualified brahman. Ràmànuja who does not allow San- 
kara’s distinction between an ‘ideal’ and a ‘practical’ reality, rejects conse- 
quently its twofold reflection in Sruti. 

165. DE SMET, o.c., p. 199 ff, 
v.8 

58 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

To Ràmànuja, all Srutis are equally authoritative. This position is, 
as far as I can see, not expressly stated but throughout his works taken for 
granted. At one place,!66 for example, he maintains in passing the equal 
authority of the $ruti ChUp. 1, 6, 6 atha ya eso ^ntarüditye hiranmayah puruso 
dráyate — which according to Sankara does not even refer to the paramat- 
man but only to a highly qualified individual soul!l$? — and of the ‘maha- 
vakya’ satyam jiidnam anantam brahma: both $rutis predicate specific quali- 
ties of the personal God, who is the brahman 

Elsewhere he hints at the vicious circle implicit in the distinction 
between major and minor statements: we decide which texts are major and 
which are minor ultimately on the strength of an insight acquired by the 
study of those texts which later on we shall classify as major. Ràmaànuja 
exposes the advaitin’s scriptural eclecticism in 8886-87, after he has reconciled 
the various texts, propounding difference, difference-non-difference and non- 
difference, within the conception of a Supreme Being modified by distinct 
but dependent orders of matter and soul. The advaitin objects: tat tvam 
asi, etc., clearly declares identity and it follows that this knowledge of iden- 
tity alone is conducive to release. Ràmaànuja replies: no, for another Sruti 
(Svet.Up. 3, 9-11) declares that release is obtained in consequence of the 
knowledge of the distinct orders of Supreme Spirit, individual soul and 
matter. The advaitin then exclaims that, since this is obviously in conflict 
with the $ruti he quoted, the other $ruti can only refer to knowledge con- 
ducive of attaining, not the absolute non-differentiated brahman, but the 
relative qualified and not absolutely real brahman. Rāmānuja then raises 
the question: why should the former $ruti be more authoritative than the 
latter one? We are not to ignore but to reconcile, as to do he proceeds. 

Incidentally, for the so-called mahdvakyas, which set forth the sole 
reality of the absolute non-qualified brahman, Ràmànuja uses the term 
Sodhakavakyas, which I have not been able to trace to an advaita source. It 
is plausible that it has been borrowed from the terminology of a milieu which 
used the term Suddhabrahman to describe the absolutely real non-qualified 
brahman, and we are reminded of this usage with Sarvajfiatman, etc. For 
Rámànuja, of course, these ‘purificatory’ statements are not privileged. They 
deny simply that God is affected by a number of specified imperfections and 
thereby assert that He possesses the opposite perfections. On this point he 
touches in connexion with his interpretation of satyam jüünam anantam 
brahma, to be discussed below i 

166. Ved. § 136. 
167. BrSBh. 1, 1, 21. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 59 
$3. Laksana; 

The second level on which the distinction ‘ideal’—‘practical’ is reflected 
in $ruti, viz., in the primary and secondary meanings of the terms employed 
with reference to the non-qualified brahman, comes in for a direct discussiori 
in a polemical passage. 

This polemic seems to be directed especially against Sankara's inter- 
pretations ad Taittirlya Up. 2, 1. There it reads: bhàvasadhamo jñāna- 
Sabdo, na tu jñānakartr / brahmavisesanatvat satyünantübhyüm saha / na hi 
satuaátünantatà ca jñānakartrtve saty upapadyate. As this passage has been 
misunderstood before,l® a short analysis is indicated. The above quotation 
means: “the term jñäna is a verbal noun with the sense of the root, not the 
agent of jñäna (in other words: jñāna “the knowing, knowledge", not “know- 
ing, knower"), because it serves as an attribute of brahman, together with 
satya and ananta; for if brahman were the agent of knowledge, then it could 
be neither satya nor ananta.” Sankara develops the view that the visesanas 
satya, jñāna and ananta have here not an attributive but a definitive func- 
tioni? (laksanartha). Since a specifying attribute (visesana-) serves 
only to specify members of a same class as distinct from one another (sama- 
najatibhya eva nivartaküni vi$esanüni visesyasya), the terms cannot very 
well have this attributive function in this case, because brahman does not 
belong to any class: but they have a definitive function: definitives dis- 
tinguish the object from all other objects (laksanam tu sarvata eva [sc. nivar- 
takam visesyasya]). On the other hand, Sankara does not exclude the attri- 
butive function of the terms entirely: vi$esanarthavattve pi satyadinadm svar- 
thàparityaga -eva/ $ünyürthatve hi satyüdi$abdanüm visesyaniyantrtva- 
nupapattih / satyidyair arthavattve tu tadviparitadharmavadbhyo visesye- 
bhya brahmano visesyasya niyantrtvam wupapadyate / .. tatrünantasabdo 
*ntavattvapratisedhadvarena visesanam / satyajfidnasabdau tu svarthasamar- 
panenaiva visesena bhavatah: “even if the terms satya, etc., are taken as attri- 
butes (not as definitions), they do not lose their proper sense. In fact, if they 
had a non-existent object, they could not determine the object to be attributed 
at all However, while retaining their meaning, they determine brahman as 
their object attributed by distinguishing it from all objects that possess pro- 
perties opposite to those which they denote themselves. .. The term ananta 
is a viSesana of brahman by denying that brahman has a limit; the terms 
satya -and ३7706 are vigesanas particularly in their own right, just by apply- 

168. De Swrr, Langage et connaissance chez Samkara, p. 47. 

169. LAcoMBE, who devotes a few pages to $.’s exposition ad TaittUp. 2, 1 (ASV. 
p. 79 ff), surprisingly mistakes laksana (n) in laksanürtha- for laksana (f) and translates 
and argues accordingly. 

60 ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

ing their own meanings to brahman.” In other words, to the extent in which 
the terms are negative, ie. deny properties of phenomenal objects rather 
than affirm properties of brahman, they are attributable to brahman. But 
how about terms like satya and jñāna? They cannot have the same signi- 
ficance for brahman as they have for the phenomenal objects or minds: from 
the point of view of brahman It alone is reality and knowledge and all other 
objects are unreality and nescience. Yet the terms are taken from pheno- 
menal life where they have a definite meaning. So Sankara replies: tathapi 
tadabhasavacakena buddhidharmavisayena’ jüüna$abdema tal laksyate na 
tücyate, $abdapravrttihetujátyadidharmarahitatvàt / tathà | satyas$abdenapi / 
sarvavisesapratyastamitasvaripatvad brahmano bdahyasattdsimanyavisayena 
satya$abdema lakşyate: satyam brahmeti/na tu satyasabdavaicyam eva 
brahma: “yet the term jana, which (in phenomenal life) has reference to 
a property, sc. knowledge, and which expresses only a phenomenal projec- 
tion of absolute knowledge, can only indicate brahman but not express it 
directly, because brahman is devoid of all properties — like generality, etc. 
— which are the basis of the operation of all speech. Similarly the term 
satya: this term denotes the general concept of external being, but brahman 
being essentially devoid of all differentiations can only indirectly be indi- 
cated in satyam brahma, and cannot be expressed directly by the term satya 
This view has been summarized by Sarvajfiatman :170 

akasadaw satyatàü tivad eka pratyanmatre satyata kücid anya / 
tatsamparküt satyatütra canya vyutpanno "yam satyasabdas tu // 

"the concept of satya when predicated of phenomenal entities —from space 
onwards — has another content than when predicated of that which is abso- 
lutely interior: in the latter case the concept of satya is analogously used, 
whereas the term has its proper meaning in the former." "The question is 
resumed by Madhusüdana Sarasvati!7! who comments: na ca — anrtasvarüpe 
$abale satyatvüyogah, yoge và tato münrtavyüvrttir iti vàcyam; Sabale hi 
satyatü esaiva yat paramürthasamsargema pratiyamane tasmin satyasabda- 
samgatigrahah / tad uktam | Samksepas$arirake — àküàs$üdaw ete., iti / evam 
anandadipadesv api drastavyam / tatháca, katham tesüám nànrtüdivyüvarta- 
katvam ? etena — Suddhad anyatra satyatvadyasambhavat satyatoadivakyasya 
laksanayà akhandarthatve $uddhe satyatvader abhünüt paryayatvam durvaram 
iti — parastam / svariipamatre "pi ma padantaravaiyartham | vyüvrttibheda- 
bodhanena säphalyäd iti coktam ca: (it is said that, when applied to the 
perfect brahman, the words satya, etc., which denote the imperfect brahman 
qualified by reality, ete., have to be taken with laksana). Objection: no 

170. SamksepaSariraka 1, 121. 
171. Advaitasiddhi, p. 692 (akhanddrthalaksana), 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 61 

reality, etc., can be predicated of the imperfect which is essentially unreal; 
or, if they are applied, it follows that they do not exclude, but imply, the 
unreal Reply: You cannot say that: in fact, the reality in the imperfect is 
such that the applicability of the term satya "real" (to phenomenal objects) 
is grasped when the imperfect is understood in its relation to the ultimately 
real. This is stated in the SamksepaSariraka: “..”. The same can be noted 
in the case of the words like dnanda, etc. So how would these terms not 
exclude the unreal, etc.? This argument takes also care of the objection 
that, inasmuch as no reality, etc., is conceivable in anything but the perfect, 
the terms satya, etc., can only have their absolute sense by laksana, but then, 
since satyatva, etc., are not apparent in the perfect, all such terms are neces- 
sarily synonymous. We may add another rejoinder: even when applied to 
the pure essential simplicity, other words do not lose their significance but 
retain their significance by conveying all the various aspects of exclusion." 

This view is summed up by Ramanuja ($11) as follows: etacchodakàni 
prakaranüntaravükyümy api satyam jñänam anantam brahma (etc) ityadini 
sarvavi$esapratyanmikaikakaratàm bodhayanti/na caikakaratabodhane ’pi 
padanim paryàyatà / ekatve "pi vastunah sarvapratyanikakaratvopasthapa- 
nena sarvapadünüm arthavattvüt: “the purifying statements in other con- 
texts, like satyam, etc., convey an object that is absolutely opposed to differ- 
entiations; yet, even though all words convey its perfect simplicity, they are 
not therefore synonymous : for they all are significant, even though referring 
to the simplicity of an entity, just by establishing its absolute opposition to 
everything else.” But Ramanuja refuses to admit that a number of words 
can refer to a non-differentiated object, even if they be merely apophatic: 
$odhakavükyüny api niravadyam | sarvakalyanagunükaram param brahma 
bodhayanti / sarvapratyanikakaratüábodhane'pi tattatpratyanikakaratayam bhe- 
dasyüvarjaniyatvün na nirvi$esatvasiddhih: “the purifying statements, too, 
convey that the supreme brahman is perfect and possessed of perfect qualities: 
for even if they convey that He is essentially opposed to everything else, yet 
necessarily they convey differentiation in that He is essentially opposed to 
each different quality separately."!72 

urther objections are raised against Sankara’s interpretation of jííana, 
and these objections are fundamental Knowledge is not an independent 
substance but a property. Not only is it logically absurd to maintain an 
objectless and subjectless knowledge, but also grammatically the advaitin 
is at a loss to find a term which could convey a non-differentiated notion. 
Jana or its synonym jfapti are nouns of a certain gender and number and 

: 372. -Ved. § 23. 
173. $24 

62 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

take on certain functions, when used in a sentence, which are everything 
but non-differentiated. The occurrence of the substantive noun jñāna side 
by side with plain adjectives like satya and ananta is easily explained. More 
than “real” and “limitless”, jñāna is an essential property of God and may 
be used to describe it, in a way comparable to our “his Majesty, Holiness”, 
etc, which describe persons who are eminently possessed of majesty and 
holiness. Ràmànuja does not borrow Yamuna’s argument that the accent 
jfüüná forbids us to take jnana as a noun,!’3a but takes essentially the same 
position that in this particular connexion jñāna cannot mean anything but 
one eminently characterized by knowledge; aptly he refers to the next line 
of the Taittiriya Up. so *Snute sarvün kāmān saha brahmanü vipasciteti and 
BrS. 2, 3, 30-31 where the same problem is discussed with regard to the 
atman. 

l The problem of laksana is touched upon immediately afterwards, in 
a discussion of tat tvam asi. Although, as far I as know, Sankara’ does no- 
where commit himself explicitly on this point, his interpretation on this cele- 

1739. Atmasiddhi, p. 74: satyam jfidnam ity atrüpi brahmalaksananirdese jñūna- 
sabdo na jiüünamütravacanah / api tu tadvadvacanah, tadvacanatve liti ity üdyudáttatva- 
prasakteh / antodatta$ cayam jñānaśabdah / matvarthiyácpratyayüntatve tathatvam gha- 
fate, nünyathüà ity etat paramütmanirüpame ’tinipunam upapüdisyümah / aitareyakopa- 
nisad api prajüanam brahma ity uktvà sa etena prajmenatmana iti prakrgtajnanavantam 
evesvaram: darsayati / tat siddham jrataivayam atma “the word jñāna in the text satyam 
jranam, etc. with the function of defining brahman, does not mean ‘only knowledge’, 
but ‘one who possesses knowledge’: for if it were to mean ‘only knowledge’ it should 
have had the accent oñ the first syllable according to the rule liti, Panini 6, 1, 193; but 
here the word jfána has the accent on the final syllable. Now it can only be jñäná if the 
last syllable contains suffix ac in the sense of the possessive suffix matu(p), and not 
otherwise. We shall demonstrate this point exhaustively when we discuss the Supreme 
Soul Incidentally, the Aitareya Up. too, expounds that the Lord is indeed possessed 
of eminent knowledge (prakrstá- explaining pra-) in prajüünam brahma, continuing 
sa etend prüjnenütmanaü. So it is proved that the atman is a knower.” Yamuna’s point 
is an interesting one; it appears that jüüna in this Sruti is recited at present. as. an 
oxytone: either this practice existed in Yamuna’s days already, or the practice then 
(and now) continues the original one: Yamuna is about half-way the- age of the text. His 
argument is less acceptable: Panini 5, 2, 127 rules arsaddibhyo "c in cases of certain 
bodily deficiencies and colours (and similar ones: akrtigano ‘yom adds Siddhàntakaumudi). 
Oxytonesis of jñāná, though as far as I know not attested, is not impossible and would 
point to an agent rioun | (WACKERNAGEL-DEBRUNNER II 2, $81, a, B; § 82, c; WHITNEY, $1150, g. 
But as Renov notes (Gr. &cte 828) "l'accent dans les textes classiques. n'est pas noté; 
et ¥ien rna permet d'indiquer avec précision la nature de l'accent dans la période post- 
védique” The most recent translation of our text (RENOU-LESIMPLE, Paris 
1948) follows the traditional interpretation "Brahman est réalité, connaissance, 
infinitude.” It should be remarked, however, that the line between personal and 
impersonal, concrete and abstract, was infinitely less sharp for the Upanigadic thinkers 
than it is for us, and either translation cannot help being too clear-cut, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 63 

brated’ vakya implies laksana. Most explicit perhaps, is he in UpadeSasa- 
hasri II (padyabhiga), 18, stt. 177-183, where he declares that when we 
establish the sense of tvam by means of positive and negative formula- 
tion” the sense of the judgment tat tvam asi becomes clear (183). 

vakyartho vyajyate caivam kevalo *hampadarthatah / 
duhkhity etadapohena pratyagatmaviniscayat // 

“thus it appears that the sentence is an identity judgment, for by abstract- 
ing the notion of empirical ego from the complete entity “I”, we establish 
(for the words aham in aham brahmüsmi and tvam in tat tvam asi) the 
meaning of atman.” 

And st. 197: 

tacchabdah pratyagütmürthas tacchabdarthas tvamas tatha / 
duhkhitvapratyagatmatvam vareyatam ubhav api // 

“the word tat has the meaning of interior self, the word tvam has the mean- 
ing of the word tat; both words drop part of their meaning, tvam that of 
empirical ego, tat that of non-self.” 

This last stanza shows that the laksana implied is that of jahad- 
ajahallaksanü. SureSvara,! in his Naiskarmyasiddhi 2-3 follows Sankara's 
view as expressed in the UpadeSasahasri very closely, without however 
enlarging on the particular significance of the implicit laksana.!7533 Padma- 
pada, in his Paficapadika 9, 21 (p. 307), is the first to compare the judgment 
tat tvam asi with so ‘yam (Vivarana: so 'yam Devadattah), which is the 
stock-instance of jahadajahallaksana. Most explicit of all is Sarvajnatman, 

174. ie. anvaya and vyatireka, not further explained in the US., occur again in 
Naiskarmyasiddhi H, 8-9 in identical connexion. HIRIYANNA notes ad 2, 8 (p. 236) not 
very helpfully: "there are two methods of inquiry which may, perhaps, be described 
as ‘method of agreement’ and ‘method of difference’.” HACKER, Untersuchungen, p. 74. 
describes the terms as "Reflexion darüber, dasz der Inhalt der Worter und des Satzes wohl- 
begründet and das Gegenteil logisch unmoglich ist. More precisely: the proposition is 
first considered positively.by anvaya, whereby the connexion is realised between that in 
tat which is in tvam and contrariwise; then it is considered negatively by vyatireka, 
whereby that in tvam which is not tat is excluded from tvam and contrariwise. 

175. HACKER, Untersuchungen, p. 75ff. has dealt extensively with Suresvara’s 
exegesis of tat tvam asi in the Naiskarmyasiddhi, but unfortunately has not gone into 
the question of its relation with the US. as quoted here. 

175a, This laksana is meant by Dharmaraja when he states: tasmāt tat tvam asiti 
vakya ücàryánüm (honorific plural = §.) laksamoktir abhyupagamavadena ("by way of 
hypothesis” leaving scope for diverging interpretations) bodhya, Vedantaparibhasa IV. : 

64 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

Samksepasariraka stt. 1, 149 ff. and Paficaprakriya I, p. 10 sq. . . jahada- 
jahallaksanü püroksyasadvitiyasabale vyutpannayos tattvampadayor ekümáa- 
parityagendmsantare vrttisambhavat soyam ityadivükyürthapadayor iva / 
tasmüj jahadajahallaksanayü pratyagatma bodhyate, “the words tat and 
tvam, which have their proper sense respectively for remoteness and for the 
manifold and imperfect, are to be taken with partial laksana, since, by dropping 
part of their meaning, they can function significantly in another part of 
their meaning, like the words in judgments of the type ‘this is he (that)’.” 
He also allows gunàvrtti, figurative use, of the type simho devadattah “Deva- 
datta is (like) a lion (in that he is cruel, brave)”. This is the generally 
accepted advaita view until Dharmaraja suggests another solution (Vedanta- 
paribhasa IV). 

Ràmànuja takes exception to assuming laksana in “you are it", Not 
only is there no need at all to resort to laksana in explaining the 
identity of “this here and now” (ayam) and “that there and then” (tat), 
because the differences between the two terms are accounted for by a lapse 
of time and do not as such militate against identity: “This is that Devadatta” 
means nothing but “Our Devadatta here was, at some previous time, some- 
where else, he is the same person who was there at the time”. This polemic, 
irrelevant though it may seem, touches again a fundamenal difference of 
view: for the same drstünta is an illustration of the so-called indeterminate 
perception, by which an object is perceived without any determinant proper- 
ties, an analogy of the intuition of a non-differentiated brahman. 

De Smet has drawn a comparison between Sankara’s laksanàjfiána and 
the knowledge by analogy of the scholastic theology;! with some caution we 
may also avail ourselves of the term analogy to explain Ràmànuja's method 
of interpreting the $ruti. We have seen that Ràmànuja, by analogy of the 
microcosmic harmony between body and soul, conceived of a macrocosmic 
harmony between the phenomenal world of matter and spirit, and the 
Supreme God who is the soul that animates the world as his body. When 
we refer to a body, we refer simultaneously to the soul, on which the body 
is entirely dependent and apart from which it has no proper existence. Just 
because of this intimate relation between body and soul, judgments are 
possible of the type “I am stout”, by which a property of a body is predicated 
of the self. What is actually said is this: “I, the individual atman, who 
am empiricised by my descent into a body, am stout as far as this body is 
concerned”. This type of judgment can be generalized to that of “I am my 

176. R. V. Dp Smet, The correct interpretation of the definitions of the Absolute, 
according to Sankardcérya and Saint Thomas Aquinas (Philosophical Quarterly, 1955, 
XXVII, 4), p. 187 ff. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 65 

body" which means *I am the soul which has taken possession of this body 
and apart from which this body does not exist". Analogously we can under- 
stand the s@manadhikaranyas of the $ruti where the Absolute is described 
and defined by terms that express concepts which in profane linguistic usage 
are considered to be exclusively phenomenal In tat tvam asi, where tat 
resumes the Deity called sat in the preceding section, tvam has its full 
significance of "individual atman within a body"; but this is not the complete 
significance of the term. Just as the body has no proper existence apart from 
serving the soul, similarly the soul has no proper existence apart from serv- 
ing the Supreme Soul, God, who is immanent in it as the inner Ruler. Just 
as the body terminates in the soul, so the soul terminates in the inner Soul. 
Consequently all words which describe the body, ultimately refer to the 
soul, and all words which describe the soul ultimately refer to God. This 
reference of words is not due to any significative power in themselves, but 
to the very constitution of the objects which they express. By denoting 
the part they do not imply the whole, but the part itself implies the whole 
compositum of matter animated by individual souls that are internally guided 

by the Supreme Self. 

From this discussion of Rámànuja's polemics, which for all their abstru- 
sity concern the most fundamental problems, a general idea of his realism 
emerges. He has been called all-too-literal; and so he is. But this literal- 
ness lies at the very root of his hermeneutics. His glorious vision of a God 
who includes the world like the soul includes the body would never allow 
him a method of interpretation by which any term is applicable to God, only 
when all worldly. connotations have been carefully excluded from it. To his 
mind such a procedure would detract from God's glory. He realizes that in 
the end we would be left without any means of knowing Him at all. All 
Scripture is of necessity anthropomorphist ; Sankara and Ramànuja represent 
diametrically opposed, views of how to approximate the Absolute in its 
transcendence in spite of the anthropomorphism of Revelation. Whereas for 
Sankara brahman is the Other, and he goes ever farther the way of exclud- 
ing from its concept all that is related to the world, to the point of denying 
the reality of the world in the final analysis, Rámànuja worships a God that 
is verily Supreme and includes in His concept all that is of this world, to 
the point of affirming this world just because it is related to. God. Devout 
Vaisnava if ever there was one, his vision can be understood. Visnu, the 
god of incarnations par excellence, who in every age takes personally a hand 
in the direction of the world's affairs, god of preservation and maintenance, 
who pervades the Universe, the Vi$varüpa and omnipresent one, will lead 

177. ChUp. 6, 2, 1. 
प्र. 9 

66 न E J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

his devotee to a very different conception of Absolute and World from that 
to which Siva would inspire, the god of annihilation, who represents yogic 
renunciation and systematic abnegation. 

$4. Context 

Ràmànuja's categorical rejection of the two methodological principles 
of Sankara’s exegesis, the distinction of major and minor statements and of 
primary and secondary sense,—a distinction which is ‘ultimately purely 
human and therefore presumptuous to make in preterhuman revelation— 
naturally aggravates the difficulty of interpreting the kaleidoscopic and often 
contradictory teachings of the sacred texts in a satisfying and consistent 
sense : GENG E - Tori 

In order to arrive at a consistent sense, which is of course given since 
gruti is not subject to human fallibility, Rāmānuja makes an ingenious and 
skillful use of the criterion of prakarana, or context: “We have declared that 
the scriptural statements are no longer in conflict as soon as we have deter- 
mined their true purport correctly. 

How he applies this criterion of context may be illustrated by a few 

exemplary.$rutis which are often quoted by advaitins to prove their own. 
views. 

The celebrated vakya of Brhadaranyaka Upanisad (2,3,6): athüta üdeso 
neti netiti "thus the instruction that it is neither such nor such", which ac- 
cording to Sankara denies all differentiation of brahman by negating that 
brahman has any form, either embodied or disembodied, takes, according to 
Ramanuja, an entirely different sense when we consider the context to 
which it belongs. Does it really deny the initial statement of 2, 3, 1 dve vava 
brahmano ripe mürtam caivümürtam ca, as Sankara holds?! But then, 
what is the point of introducing this admitted falsehood at all, only to deny 
it in the same breath? This is unconceivable. Besides, in the immediate 
sequel the same text affirms that brahman has qualities like satya etc. Clearly 
upakrama, or initial statement, and upasamhdara, or concluding statement, are 
in agreement, so that the context is established.18 Within this context neti 
neti cannot mean to deny differentiation. For the true explication he refers 
to the Brahmasütras (3, 2, 22): prakrtaitavattvam pratisedhati tato braviti 
ca bhüyah "this expression denies that brahman is only so much as has been 

178. Ved. 83ff. 
179. BrSBh. 3, 2, 22. 
180. The most important of the indications of the coherence of a context. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 67 

set forth here, and affirms consequently that brahman is more than that 
alone 

Similarly, only a painstaking scrutiny of the entire sadvidya will help 
us in understanding the true sense of the upasamhàra tat tvam asi within 
this context. The context opens with the pratijñā or thesis that when the 
ddesa—i.e. the directing Person!®1—is known this all is known. This person, 
later on called sat, is described as the' universal cause by which we can 
know the world its effect: in sat the world has its material cause (sanmila) 
and its operative cause (sadáyatana). The effectuation of this world with 
all its variety of material objects and conscious spirits takes place by the 
descent of sat into this world by means of the individual atman 
(jivenátmanaünupraviéya nümarüpe vyükaravüni). Finally, all has been 
summed up in the complete statement aitadátmyam idam sarvam tat satyam 
sa atma: tat tvam asi, Svetaketo “the entire Universe is ensouled by Him who 
is sat, it is real, for He is the atman: so you are He, Svetaketu”: which can 
only mean that you are ensouled by God, so that you are He in so far as 
you are the body to Him, your soul There can be no question that the 
declaration tat tvam asi only means to say that tvam does not exist as the 
ensouled effect at all: this would militate against the obvious sense of the 
entire prakarana.. What is expressed here is not the identity of cause with 
cause, but the relation between God and creature as that between soul and 
body: aitadétmyam idam sarvam, sa atma. 

These interpretations are comparatively straightforward and simple 
So to make good his challenge that all superficial contradictions between the 
many $rutis will disappear instantly as soon as we have discovered the true 
purport of hem, Ramanuja quotes a few apparently conflicting $rutis: 
“Brahma, Visnu, Rudra and Indra have all been begotten, but not the cause: 
therefore we are to meditate on the cause: Sambhu, the Supreme One who 
enjoys universal paramountcy should be meditated upon in the middle of 
Space."1803. He: combines this with a Sruti from SvetUp 3, 9-11 where the 
Supremacy of the great person is declared. Here we have two claims to uni- 
versal paramountcy which we are at a loss to reconcile within one being. 
Yet, replies Rámànuja surprisingly, everything fits in perfectly when we bear 
in mind that Nàrayana is the Supreme Brahman, and he proceeds to substan- 
tiate this statement = 

As he states elsewhere, we cannot understand the Sruti properly unless 
we consider all the Sakhas: they often help us to understand the full signifi 
cance of certain statements. ChUp. 6 asserts that sat was here alone in the 

^ 180a AtharvasikhUp.1 7 
181. See trsl. n. 75. 

68 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

beginning, in other words, is the universal cause. Elsewhere, this sat is 
called brahman, elsewhere ütman, all in the same connexion: sat, brahman 
and atman are different designations of the same being. "Who is this being? 
We turn to another sakha: Narayana was here at the beginning. Sat, brah- 
man and atman denote Narayana: it is He who is the first and universal 
cause. We have specified the being who appears as the.cause in the 
AtharvasikhUp. 

The same Upanisad describes the Sovereignty of the cause. Do we 
find a similar description of Narayana? He refers to TaittAr. 10, 13 where 
it is said of some personal deity that the sages weave him in the middle of 
the sea (we are reminded of the AtharvasikhUp. where the cause is to be 
meditated upon in the middle of space) and that no one is master to him. 
Who is this deity? The text itself refers us further: it quotes as its context 
adbhyah sambhiitah, ete., TaittAr. 3, 13, 2. Here we find that this deity is 
styled “Great Person" and that Hri and Laksmi are his consorts: from which 
it is clear that the Paramount Deity of 10, 13, 1 and the Great Person of 
3, 13, 2 are no one but Narayana 

The connexion with the Narayandnuvaka, TaittÁr. 10, 11, 1 is now 
given. This text, inspired by the Purusasükta, concludes that Narayana is 
Brahma, Siva, Indra, Aksara, the supreme, self-sufficient Sovereign. Mean- 
while it has been shown that SvetUp. must be understood within the Mahà- 
purusaprakarana of TaittAr. 3, 13, 2. Now it is clear that the originally 
totally unrelated statements between which we suspected contradiction have 
clarified each other and themselves: Sambhu and the Great Person are Nara- 
yana, who is the first and universal cause and who enjoys paramount 
sovereignty. The description of the dissolution of pràna and senses into 
the manas and the manas into the supreme object of. meditation : in 
AtharvasikhUp., is compared with the description in Mahanarayana Up. of 
the dissolution of the Veda into Om and of Om into the A which is Nara- 
yana, who, we may recall, was called Brahma, Siva, Indra, Aksara, that is 
the ensouling principle and cause of them. -Yet another. statement of the 
AtharvasikhUp., that the cause is to be meditated upon in the middle of space, 
fits into the established context where MahanarUp. 10, T reads dahram 
vipüpmam varam vesmabhitam etc., which without any doubt-is inspired by 
the Daharavidya of ChUp. 8; this will lead Ramanuja to a further discussion 
of the true sense of this Sruti. So we see how each Sruti can and should be 
understood only when all the references, correspondences and parallels have 
been brought out by a subtle analysis. Only then we can pretend to interpret 
the Sruti, without resorting to convenient but presumptuous distinctions 
between statements which suit our views and which do not 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 69 

But apart from these detailed interpretations, at what general conclu- 
sions does Raàmànuja arrive about the sense of the Scriptures? Can we ex- 
plain them in the sense of a strict monism, denying all qualities of the 
Absolute and reality of the Universe, or of a radical dualism, separating God 
“from world and matter from souls, or of difference-non-difference in a 
pantheistic harmony? To a certain extent all these senses are valid, but we 
have to harmonize them within a new conception of the relation between 
Absolute and World. When the $ruti denies qualities of brahman, it denies 
imperfect ones; when the reality of the world is negated, it affirms the utter 
dependence of the World on God. When diversity is denied, the uniqueness 
of God as the unitive inner soul of the diverse Universe is affirmed. When 
diversity is asserted, the wonderful variety of God's manifestations in the 
Universe of matter and spirit is affirmed. All these senses find their place 
within the fundamental doctrine that the Personal God, who is possessed of 
perfect qualities, is modified by the world of prakrti and purusa, whether in 
subtle or causal state, or gross or effectual state, which constitute the body 
to which He is the Soul. 

" à 
D Li = * " 

E: 

T | 
न 

x d 

मु 
ra a te ši मु 
X i 4 

^ i E 
L " j 
« 

न 
< 
. E ” 
A : 

» 

फ़ 

Ei 

ttr m 

ay 

oe 

"T 

E 

Li 

=e 

a 

kegi ¬ pre th उक m 4 

IDEE 

MÀ mete see " 

gure er ee s 

ॐ ९. cee क क अनत 
हक 

fe mpeg: K^ 
AM Se eae | 

"m में अप के ही राप 
सिंध लक wequca enini. rena 

m FAS 

pono mr ow 

we काका a geo itn tm 

ue 

ee ae क. का IU ovp 

Doe om Rm 
LE EH ५ 

^ 
[i oa m * क: % 
D r "o4 
è + 

Di 

EDITORIAL NOTE 
i $1. The editio princeps of the Vedarthasamgraha was published by 
'ÜTIRUMULACHARYA and VIJAYARAGHAVACHARYA in Telugu character at the 
Sarasvati Bhandàr in Madras, in Kaliyuga 4984 = A.D. 1882. A new, but 
considerably less satisfactory and critical edition was published by S. Sum. 
P. S. Rama Misra Sastri in the issues of the Pandit (15) 1893, nos. 9-12; 
16; and 17, and reprinted separately Benares 1924. Occasionally a few other 
editions are met with, which are published privately and distributed for 
devotional and charitable purposes and have only a limited circulation. As 
they are not critical, have in fact no claims to scholarly principles and are 
usually hard to obtain, we shall neglect them here. Quite recently another 
edition was brought out by T. K. V. N. SUDARSANACHARYA and published at 
Tirupati. All these editions are accompanied by SudarSanasiri’s commentary 
Tàtparyadipikà. 
$2. Though the first to be published, over 70 years ago, the Telugu 
‘edition of Madras is the most, if not the only, critical one that has appeared 
so far. It is based on 13 MSS., 12 of which were privately owned. The 
variant readings are carefully noted and references are given to the num- 
bers indicating the various manuscripts. MS. 13, from the Madras Govern- 
ment Oriental Manuscripts Library, appears to have served as the basis of 
the established text. 8 MSS. are in Grantha character: nos. 1 and 6, both from 
the Sarasvati Bhandàr at Triplicane; 2, of Samijachariar of Mysore; 3, of 
Ayyuvayyangar; 4, of Karappangadu Jiyar Swami; 5, of Tiruvali Ayyangar; 
7, of Narasimhachariar; 13, from Madras Government Oriental Manuscripts 
Library. 3 MSS. are in Telugu character: nos. 9, from the Sarasvati Bhandar 
at Melkote; 10, of Astagotram Raghavachariar; 12, of Kunnapakkam Srini- 
vasachari. Finally, 2 MSS. are in Devanagari character: nos. 8, of Mila- 
kalwar; 9, of Bhasyakar, Melkote. 'The edition, blessed by Yadugiri Jeer, 
is very well printed with few errors. Unfortunately no account is given of 
the critical criteria of the editors. I have gone through all the variants and 
, tried to classify the MSS. utilized, while allowing for a reasonable margin 
of error by misprints and omissions. MS. 1 is almost certainly a copy of 
MS. 7, but very much conflated; moreover, the copyist has permitted him- 
self a fair number of ‘improvements’ on the text. MSS. 4 and 5 belong 
together intimately : either one is a copy of the other, or both are extremely 
faithful copies of one prototype. MSS. 3 and 6 are more closely related to 
each other than to any other MS., but 3 shows a great number of individual 
variants and seems to be younger. Various relations can be detected be- 
tween other MSS., notably between MSS. 8, 9 and 11, but the exact arrange- 
ment of the material has not become completely clear to me. Since the 

ii VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

Telugu text was based on other material than was at my disposal, I have 
made a point of noting its readings where they differ from those preferred 
by me. 

$3. The Pandit edition is far from being an improvement on the 
editio princeps. In one line the Editor disposes of his MSS. material. He 
states that he has consulted three MSS., one in Grantha script from Madras 
— probably the Government Oriental MSS. Library —, and two in Deva- 
nagari: one from the Satyasarasvati Library in Mysore, which is now the 
Mysore Oriental Research Institute, and another one from a Library called 
Brahmümrtavarsimi. The Mysore MS. is no doubt the present manuscript 
D.G. 1776, which has also been collated for the present edition. Although 
the Editor does not state it, it appears from his notes that he has also con- 
sulted the Telugu edition. Only a very few variant readings are noted and 
‘no references are given. Misprints abound. 

$4. The Tirupati edition, which dates itself 1953 on the title-page, 
was actually made available only towards the end of 1954, when my own 
text had already been established. A great number of variants are entered 
in notes, but one searches in vain for even a plain enumeration of the manu- 
Scripts utilized or consulted; the variant readings are simply noted pathan- 
tarüni. 'The references to quotations in text and commentary, esp. $ruti 
quotations, are not always reliable. On the other hand, the book is very 
neatly printed with few errors, and it will be found very useful by those 
who want to consult the Tütparyadipikü, In an extensive and erudite intro- 
duction the Editor, who is a $astri in both Vedantas, treats of a number of 
relevant topics from the view-point of Srivaisnavasampradàya, which 

deserves the interest of all who take the tradition of Srivaisnavism into 
consideration. 

$5. With text like the present one the difficulties of establishing 
a critical edition are usually not very great and concern mainly details. The 
text is not very old. It could, by its very character, never be subject to 
the- vicissitudes of ancient, popular, devotional and literary texts. It'is a 
technical scholastic treatise, whose readers have always been confined to 
comparatively small communities; when their own copies happened to be 
broken or spoiled, they had other copies at hand, or available in libraries 
of temple or monastery. Sudar$anasüri's excellent’ and extensive com- 
mentary, being generally transmitted along with the commented text, left 
bardly any scope for additional glosses that might find their way into the 
text. On the other hand, the constant repetition of a relatively small num- 
ber of technical terms in consecutive lines led naturally to haplographies, 
whereas also the numerous quotations from $ruti and smrti could be added 
to-or abbreviated without impairing the argument. Though there are a 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA iii 

considerable number of manuscripts extant, in the main they do not show 
important differences of reading. But, since conflation must have been 
going on constantly, it is often very difficult with texts like the present one 
to classify the manuscripts plausibly and set up an hypothetical stemma 
codicum, except — possibly — by collating painstakingly all manuscripts that 
are available: a procedure not always practicable and not always justified 
by the requirements of the individual texts. Therefore I have had to make 
a selection of manuscripts which would not only suffice to give a presentable 
text but also be representative enough to justify the claim to critical pro- 
cedure. So 6 MSS. from different sources were collated in their entirety 
and another ten in part. Soon it became plain that one Mysore MS,, indi- 
cated below M2, gave the best text and it has therefore been made the basis 
of this edition 

$6. The following MSS. have been collated completely : 

i a paper MS., deposited at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Insti- 
tute in Poona, cat. no. 660 of 1884/87; Devanagari, 44 pages 10" X 6”; 13 lines 
per page, 38 aksaras per line; well-written, but carelessly copied: errors and 
haplographies abound. On the first three pages the Sruti etc. quotations are 
indicated by red marks; the colophon gives as the scribe's name Utkoli from 
Mathura; the MS. is not dated. 

Symbol: P. 

ii. a paper MS. of the Mysore Oriental Research Institute, Mysore; 
cat. no. D.C. 1776; Devanagari; 56 pages 11” X 52"; 10 lines per page, 
86 letters per line; clearly and carefully written; it gives the impression of 
being a faithful copy of its Vorlage; no colophon, no date. 

Symbol : My 

iii. a palm-leaf MS. of the Mysore Government Oriental Research 
Institute, cat. no. Gr. 878; Grantha script; 45 pages 1542” X 134"; 9 lines per 
page, 86 letters per line; well-written, rather old; hardly any errors; no 
colophon, no date. 

Symbol :: Mo 

iv. a palm-leaf MS., of the Mysore Oriental Research Institute; cat. 
no. A 2409; Telugu character; 51 pages 17" X 13”; 6 lines per page, 74 letters 
per line; beautifully written; young; careful copy, leaving blank space where 
the prototype was obscure; colophon gives as the scribe's name Nrsimhata- 
tadasa; dated: Monday, in the bright fortnight of the month śrāvaņa in the 
year Plava, probably 1841, but not impossibly 1901. 

iv J. A. B. VÀN BUITENEN 
Symbol: Mg. ` l 
v. a palm-leaf MS. from the Adyar Library, Adyar; cat. no. 24. D. 32 

Grantha script; 19 leaves, 178%” X14”; 14 lines per page; 85 letters per line; 
no colophon, no date. 

Symbol: Ai: 

vi. a palm-leaf MS. from Adyar Library, Adyar; cat. no. 28 H.5 
Grantha script; 27 leaves, 191" X 137; 10 lines per page; 80 letters per line; no 
colophon, no date 

Symbol 

$7. After the above manuscripts had been collated completely, a 
number of other MSS. in Mysore, Adyar and Madras were consulted in 
addition. Since the material obtained from them does not contribute signi- 
ficant data on the text as established with the aid of the above manuscripts, 
their variant readings have not been included in the critical apparatus for 
reasons of economy except, at first, an Adyar Grantha MS. indicated As. 

$8. Ihave noted the following relations between the six completely 
collated MSS. P and M, derive from a common prototype, of which the 
latter is a more reliable representative; both belong together with MS no. 12 
of the Telugu edition. The three of them constitute one group with Me. 
Another group is constituted on the one hand by the two Adyar MSS. 
A, and As, which are clearly but not too closely related, and on the other 
hand by Ms, which stands more apart. This last MS., incidentally, proved 
to be very closely related to Madras Government MSS. Library MS Do 5030, 
but since the testimony of Mg is not of great importance, this relation has 
not been followed up by a complete collation of the Mladras manuscript. 
Both groups, which may be indicated as Group A and Group B, are fre- 
quently found to be interrelated, but members of each group have a suffi- 
cient number of variants between them to justify their grouping together. 
Generally the readings of the first group A have been preferred to those 
of B. In a few cases the exclusive testimony of M» has been accepted. 
Sometimes SudarSanasiri’s glosses have helped to settle the. reading. 

$9. Acknowledgements are due to the following gentlemen: P. K. 
Gode, Curator, Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona; H. Devee- 
rappa, Director, Oriental Research Institute, Mysore and Pandits Sri Niga- 
manthacharya and Palhada Thulasi Sreenivasacharya, Mysore; Alain 
Daniélou, Director, Adyar Library, Adyar; Dr. V. Raghavan, Professor of 
Sanskrit, University of Madras; T. Chandrasekharan, M.A., Curator, Gov- 
ernment Oriental Manuscripts Library and Pandit T. A. K. Venkatachari, 
Madras. It is a pleasure here to express my gratitude for the help and 
cooperation which they have extended to me officially and personally. 

॥ श्री: ॥ 

॥ वैदार्थसंग्रहः 

[१] #अशेषचिदचिदृस्तुशेषिण शेपणायिने | 
*निर्मलानन्तकल्याणनिधग्रे विष्णवे नमः ॥ १ ॥ 

[२] परं ब्रह्मेवाज्ञ भ्रमपरिगत संसरति त- 
त्परोपाध्यालीढं विवशमशुभस्यार्पद मिति | 
श्रतिन्यायापेतं जगति विततं मोहनमिदं EE" 
तमो येनापारतं स हि विजयते agag: ॥ २॥ 

[3] अशेषजगद्धितानुशासनश्रुतिनिकरशिर॑सि समधिगतोऽयमर्थः जीवर्षरमात्म- 
याथात्म्यज्ञानपूर्वकवर्णाश्रमधर्मेतिकतव्यताकपरमपुरुषचरणयुगळध्यानाचनप्रणामाँ दिरत्यर्थ - 
मियस्तत्माप्तिफलः | 

[४] अस्य जीवात्मनोऽनाद्यविद्यासं चितपुण्यपापरूपकर्मम्रवाहहेतुकत्रझ्ादिसुरनर- १० 
तिर्यक्स्थावरात्मकचतुर्विधदेहप्रवेशक्कततत्तद भिमानजनितार्वर्जनीयभवभयविध्बंसनाय देहा- 

+ Aq begins [श्रीमते] रामाचुजार्याय नमः प्रयोगिणे। 
यः श्रुतिस्म्ृतिसूत्राणामन्तज्वरमशीरामत्‌ ॥ 
A, adds before निर्मल°--श्रीमते निर्मलानन्दो aad विष्णवे नम: | 
M, “शासनप्रत्रत्तश्रति” 
M, "Rn? 
T जीवपरयाथा? 
A *दिरित्यर्थ” 
Ms om. “अवर्जनीय” 

७ (४७ # YPN SD 

74 

१० 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

` तिरिक्तात्मस्वरूपर्तत्सभावतदन्तर्यामिपरमात्मस्वरूपर्तत्खभावतदुपासनतत्कलभूतात्मखरूपा 

विर्भावपूवकानवधिकातिशयानन्दब्रह्मानुभवज्ञापने प्रवृत्तं हि वेदान्तवाक्यजातम्‌ , तत्त्व- 
मसि | अयमात्मा ब्रह्म य आत्मनि तिष्ठन्नात्मनोऽन्तरो यमात्मा न वेद यस्यात्मा 
शरीरं य आत्मानमन्तरो यमयति स त आत्मान्तर्याम्यमृतः | एष सर्वमूतान्तरात्मापहत- 
पाप्मा दिव्यो देव एको नारायणः | तमेतं वेदानुवचनेन ब्राह्मणा विविदिषन्ति यज्ञेन 
दानेन तपसानशकेन । ब्रह्मविदाप्नोति परम्‌ । तमेवं विद्वानमृत इह भवति नान्यः 
पन्था अयनाय विद्यत इत्यादिकम्‌ | 

[4] 

जीवात्मनः खरूपं देवमनुप्यादिप्रकृतिपरिणामविशेषरूपनानाविधभेद- 

रहितं ज्ञानानन्देकशुणं, तस्यैतस्य कर्म कृतदेवादि भेदेऽैध्वस्ते खरूपभेदो वाचामगोचरः 
खसंवेद्य:, ज्ञानखरूपमित्येतावदेव निर्देश्यम्‌। तच्च सर्वेषामात्मनां समानम्‌ | 

[६] 

एबंविधचिद चिदार्त्मकमरपञ्चस्यो द्भव स्थितिम॑ळयसंसार निवतेनेकहेतुमूतः 

सँमस्तहेयप्रॅत्यनीकतयानँन्तकल्याणतया च स्वेतरसमस्तवस्तुविळक्षणस्रूपोऽनवधिका- 

o. epN 

.- A,om. dd? 

A, om. “स्वरूप? 
Mis Ag om. तत्‌? 
Ag T जीवात्मस्वरूपं 
Mg ^ud 

` Mg “विधदेवादिभेदरहितं--1॥, वभ्वस्ते, My, विध्वस्ते--अपध्वस्ते is the 

reading of VP. 2, 14, 33 here referred to but note that 
S/Bh. 1, 1, 1, p. 81 the same quotation reads विध्वस्ते 

Ma ज्ञानानन्दैकस्वरूपम्‌ ` 

Me °त्मकजगडुदय ° 

M, “प्र्यमहानन्दैककारणं and lacuna ending with स्वेतर? 
Mg स्वरूपं निखिलहेयप्रत्यनीककल्याणशुणेकस्वभावमनवधि? 
A, ° प्रत्यनीककल्याणेक? 

M IA 3 om. “अनन्त E 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

तिशयासंख्येयकल्याणगुणगंण: संर्वात्मपरब्रह्मपरज्यो तिःपरतत्त्वपरमात्मसदा दिशब्दभेदे- 
निंखिलवेदान्तवेद्यो भगवान्नारायणः पुरुषोत्तम इत्यन्तर्यामिखरूपम्‌ | अस्य च वैभव- 
प्रतिपादनपराः श्रुतयः स्वेतरसमस्तचिद चिद्वस्तुजातान्तरात्मतया * निखिलनियमनं तच्छक्ति- 
तदंशतद्विमूतितद्रूपतच्छरीरतत्तनुप्रभृतिभिः शब्दैस्तत्सामानाधिकरण्येन च प्रतिपादयन्ति | 

[9] स्य वैभवप्रतिपादनपराणामेषां सामानाधिकरण्यादीनां विवरणे प्रवृत्ताः 
केचन निविरोषज्ञानमात्रमेव aa, तचच नित्यमुक्तसरप्रकाशखभावमपि तत्त्वमस्यादिसामा- 
नाविकरण्याबँगर्तजीवेक्यं ब्रक्षेवीजं वैंध्यते मुच्यते च, निर्विशेषचिन्मात्रातिरिकीश्व रेशि- 
तव्यायनन्तविकँस्परूपं कृत्स्नं जगन्मिथ्या, कश्चिह्वद्धः कश्चिन्मुक्त इतीयँमवस्था न 

विद्यते । इतः पूर्व केचॅन मुक्ता इत्ययमर्थो मिथ्या । एकमेव शरीरे जीवँवन्निर्जी- 

M, om. “गण; 

Mg lacuna "W^ TAT 

Mg om. अन्तर्यामिस्वरूपम्‌ 

M; अस्यैव-—-ग तस्य 

M: निखिलं तनियमनं--॥, सर्वस्य तन्नियाम्यत्वेन तच्छरीरत्वात्तद्वाचक- 

ard. परमात्मेवाभिधीयत इति तन्नियमनं प्रतिपादयन्ति which looks 
like a gloss that was substituted for the original reading 

निखिळनियमनं. 
6. M, अस्य 
7. T serrate 
8 
9 

bana 

“papy 

Mg om. “अवगत? 
P “जीवत्रह्मेक्ये--3॥, “जीवादभिन्नं 
10. My om. एवाज्ञ--A; एवाज्ञानं 
11. IMs ००. बध्यते मुच्यते च -2n4 reads instead स्वप्रकादाकत्वं 
12. P, Ms “इशेशितव्य? 
13. PM, 3. विकल्पस्वरूपं 
14. Mg इयं चाव” 
15. A,om. केचन मुक्ता इति 
16: Mg lacuna जीववन्‌.-.- व्यवस्थितम्‌ 

75 

16 

qo 

. J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

वानीतराणि, तंच्छरीर॑ं किमिति न व्यवस्थितम्‌, आचार्यो ज्ञानस्योपदेष्टा मिथ्या 

sr च मिथ्या ' शाखमैमाता च मिथ्या aes ज्ञानं च मिथ्या--एतत्सर्व 

मिथ्याभूतेनेव aamir इति वर्णयन्ति | 

[८] अपरे त्वपहतपाप्मत्वादिसमस्तकल्याणगुणोपेतमपि ब्रक्मेतेनेवैकयारबबो धेन 
केनचिदुपाधिविशेषेण संवंद्धं बध्यते मुच्यते च नानाविधमलरूपपरिणामास्पदं चेति 
व्यवस्थिताः | 

[९] अन्ये पुनरेक्यावबोधयाथात्म्यं वर्णयन्तः स्वौभाविकनिरतिरायापरिमितो- 
दारंुंणसागरं ब्रह्मेव सुरनरतिर्यक्स्थावरनारकिस्तरग्यपवर्गिचेतनेषु खभावतो बिलँक्षण- 
aeai च वियदादिनानाविधमलरूपपरिणामास्पदं चेति प्रत्यव तिष्ठन्ते | 

[१०] तत्र प्रथमपक्षस् श्रुत्यर्थपर्यालोचनपरा दुप्परिहारान्दोषानुदाहरन्ति । 
्रक्तपराम्ितच्छन्दावगैतखसंकल्पक्ृतजगदुदयविमर्वबिलयादयस्तदेक्षत बहु स्यां प्रजाये- 

1. A, तच्च शरीरं 
2. PM, ज्ञानोपदेश 
3. Mg, “प्रमा 
4. Mg “वगतमिति 
5. Mj Ag om. तु, P SẸ 
— 6. Mj Aj om. "समस्त? 
7. A, lacuna d [..... ] शेषेण haplogr. 
8. M, “बोधने 
9. M, विशेषण 
10. A, सम्बन्धं, Mg सं[वद्ध] बध्यते l 
11. A, अपरे gna वणेयन्तं--3॥, “बोधपरयाथात्म्यं 
12. Mg inserts “स्वाभाविकानवधिकातिशयापरिमि” 
13. T om. "निरतिशय 
14. Mg om. “युणसागरं ब्रह्मेन 
15. T चाविलक्षणं 
16. M, “are स्वस? 
17. A, विभवल्या? 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

येत्यारभ्य सन्मूलाः सोम्येमाः सर्वाः प्रजाः सदायतनाः सैत्मतिष्ठा इत्यादिभिः 
dà: प्रतिपादितास्तत्संवन्धितया प्रकरणान्तरनिदिष्टाः सवज्ञतासवशक्तित्वसर्वेश्वरत्व- 
सर्वप्रंकारत्वसमाभ्यधिक निव त्तिसत्यकामत्वसत्यसंकल्पत्वसर्वावभासकत्वायनवधिकातिशया- 
संख्येयकल्याणगुणर्गणगा अपहतपाप्मेत्याद्यनेकवाक्यावगतनिरस्तनिखिलदोषता च सर्वे 
तस्मिन्पक्षे विहं न्यन्ते | 

[११] अथ स्यात्‌-उपक्रमेऽप्येकविज्ञीनेन सर्वविज्ञानमुखेन कारणस्यैव सत्यतां 
प्रतिज्ञाय तस्य कारणभूतस्यैव ब्रह्मणः सत्यतां विकारजातस्यासंत्यतां Breda 
दर्शयित्वा सत्यमूतस्यैव ब्रह्मणः सदेव सोम्येदमग्र आसीदेकमेवाद्वितीयमिति सजातीय- 
बिजातीयनिखिळमेदनिरसनेन निर्विशेषतेव प्रतिपादिता । पंतैच्छोधकानि प्रकरणा- 
न्तरगतवाक्यान्यपि सत्यं ज्ञानमनन्तं ब्रह्म, feme निप्क्रियं ˆ निर्गुणं, विज्ञानमा- 
नन्दमित्यादीनि सर्वबिशेपम्रत्यनीकेकाकारतां बोधयन्ति । न चेकार्कौरतावोधने पदानां 
पर्यायता | एकत्वेऽपि वस्तुनः सर्व विरोषप्रत्यनीर्केतोपस्थापनेन सर्वपदानामर्थवत्त्वादिति | 

Ms adds सत्प्रतिष्ठा ऐतदात्म्यमिदे सवम्‌ [ChUp.6, 8, 7] 
P प्रकारसमा? 

Ag ° नित्रृत्तत्व? 

Mg Ag °कामसत्य? 

A, om. “गणा 

Mia Ag om. त स्मिन्पक्षे 

Ay Fred? —A, व्याहन्य” 

M, विज्ञानप्रतिज्ञामुखेन 

Ag चासलतां 

10. Mis om. ua? 

11. IMs inserts €स्वकीयनिखिल” 

12. Mi एतद्वोधकानि 

13. P M, add fiiit निरञ्जनं as according to SvetUp 6, 19 
14. Mg “कारबोधने 

15. P M, Ay Sang? — 

So NA n^ के por 

TT 

१० 

78 

3o 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

[१२] नेतदेवम्‌। एकविज्ञानेन सैर्वबिज्ञानं ate मिथ्यात्वे ae ज्ञात- 
व्यस्याभावान्न सेत्स्यति । सत्यत्वमिथ्यात्वयोरेकताप्रसक्तिर्वा । अपि त्वेकविज्ञानेन. 
सवेविज्ञानं सर्वस्य तदात्मकत्वेनेव सत्यत्वे सिध्यति | 

[१३] अयमर्थः-श्वेतकेतुं प्रत्याह सब्धोऽस्युत तमादेशमग्राक्ष्य इति परिपूर्ण 
इव रक्ष्यसे तानाचार्यान्प्रति तमप्यादेशं एष्टवानसीति। आदि्यतेऽनेनेत्यादेशः | 
आदेशः प्रशासनम्‌। एतस्य वा अक्षरस्य गागि सूर्याचन्द्रमसौ विधृतौ तिष्ठत 
इत्यादिभिरेकार्थ्यात्‌ | तथा च मानवं वैचः--प्रशासितारं सैवेषा मित्यादि । अत्राप्ये- 
कमेवेति जगदुपादानतां प्रतिपाद्या द्वितीयपदेना धिष्ठत्रन्तर निवारणादस्यैवा धिषठातृत्वमपिं 
प्रतिपाद्यते । अतस्तं प्रशासितारं जगदुपादानमूतमपि पृष्टवानसि येन श्रुतेन. मतेन 
बिज्ञातेनाश्रुतममतमविज्ञातं श्रुतं मतं विज्ञातं भवतीत्युक्तं स्यात्‌ । निखिलजगदुदय- ` 
विभवविल्यादिकारणभूतं सर्वज्ञ॑त्वसत्यकामत्वसत्यसंकल्पत्वाग्परि मितोदारशुणसागरं किं. 
Ari त्वया श्रुतमिति हार्दो भावः da निखिलकारणतया कारणमेव. 
नौनासंस्थानविशेषसंस्थितं कार्यमित्युच्यत इति कारणभूतसूक्ष्मचिदचिठ्ठस्तुशरीरकन्रकष- . 
विज्ञानेन कार्यभूतमखिलं जगद्विज्ञातं भवतीति हृदि निधाय येनाश्रुतं श्रुतं भर्वैत्यमतं 

T ¡५९7७ प्रतिज्ञानं सवस्य P M, सवविज्ञानप्रतित्ञां 

[e 

Mg A, om. second आदेशः 

Mg वचनम्‌ 

A; adds सर्वेषामणीयांसमणीयसाम्‌ from Manu 12, 122. 
Ay विभवल्या? 
M; Ag “Tam —T ^ua? 

M, °कामसव्य? 

A, om. “उदार” 

A, ब्रह्मापि कि--? Mı. om. अपि . 

10. Mg ततो for तस्य 

11. A, नानाविधसं” 

12. Mg “त्रह्मज्ञानेन--निखिलजग द्विज्ञाने 

13. M, भवतील्य” 

9 &७ 9२५ 9 ७ ०) २ 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

मतमविज्ञातं विज्ञातं स्यादिति dob प्रति ृष्टवान्पिता। तदेतत्सकलस्य वस्तुजातस्यैक- 
कारणत्वं पितृह्ृदि निहितमजानन्पुत्रः परस्परविलक्षणेषु वस्तुप्वन्यस्य ज्ञानेन तदन्यविज्ञा- 
नस्याघटमानतां बुद्धा परिचोदयति-कथं नु भगवः स आदेश इति) 

[१४] परिचोदितः पुनस्तदेव हृदि निहितं ज्ञानानन्दामलत्वैकखरूपमपरिच्छेय- 
माहाल्यं सत्यसंर्कल्पत्वमिश्रेरनवधिकातिशयासंख्येयकल्याण ुणर्गणेर्जुषमविकारखर्पं 
परं Fea नामरूपविभागानर्हसूक्ष्मचिदचिद्वम्तुशारीरं खलीलायै खसंकल्पेनानन्संविचित्र- 
स्थिरत्रसस्वरूपजगत्संस्थानं स्वांरोनावस्थितमिति | 

[१५] तलज्जानेनास्थ निखिलस्य ज्ञाततां वुर्वै्लोकदृष्ट कौर्यकारणयोरनन्यत्वं 
दर्शयितुं दृष्टान्तमाह-- यथा सोम्यैकेन 'रत्पिण्डेन सर्व मृन्मयं विज्ञातं स्याद्वाचारम्भणं 
विकारो नामधेयं मृत्तिकेत्येव सत्यमिति । एकमेव मृद्दव्यं स्वेकदेशेन नानाव्यवहारा- 
स्पदत्वाय घटशरावादिनानासंस्थानावस्थारूपविकारापन्न नानारनामधेयमपि भृत्तिकासंस्था- 
नविशेषत्वान्मृद्दरव्यभेवेत्थमवस्थितं न वस्त्वन्तरमिति। यथा भृलिण्डविज्ञानेन तत्संस्थान- 
विरोषरूपं घटशरावादि aa ज्ञातमेव भवतीत्यर्थः | 

A, om. स्यादू 

M; पुत्र परिश्ृवान्‌ 

A, lacuna—[dsg? *** ** * तद]? 

Mg अन्यज्ञानेन 

Mg Aza ° कल्पमिश्र? 

P. om. "गण? . 

P. वेचित्र्यस्थिरचर”, M, विचित्रस्थिरवराचर", M, वेचित्र्यस्थिरत्रसमान? 
A, वैचित्र्यस्थिरत्रसर?; probably चराचर as an carly gloss on 
RIIA? has been interpolated. 

Mg A1 [स्व]रूप? 

. Mg स्वावस्थितम्‌ 

10. M, dittography of काये? 

11. Agom. मृत्पिण्डेन 

12. A, संस्थानरूप्यवस्था? 

13. नामधेयोऽपि 

14. P विज्ञातम्‌ 

SION TN cir 

79 

१० 

80 

qe 

१५ 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

[१६] da: कृत्स्नस्य जगतो ब्रक्षेककारणतामजानन्पुत्रः एच्छति--भगवां- 
waa मे तद़बीत्विति। ततः सर्वज्ञं सर्वशक्ति ब्रह्मेव सर्वकारणमित्युपदिशन्स होवाच 
सदेव सोम्येदमग्र आसीदेकमेवा द्वितीयमिति । अ॑त्रेदमिति जगन्निरदिष्टम्‌। अग्र इति 
च Ge: पूर्वकालः | तस्मिन्काले जगतः सदात्मकतां सदेवेति प्रतिपाद्य, तत्सष्टि- 
कालेऽप्यविशिष्टमिति कृत्वेकेमेवेति सदापन्नस्य जगतस्तदानीमविभक्तनामरूपतां प्रति- 

नेनैव iT : > = णः 
पाद्य तमतिपादनेनेव सतो जगदुपादानत्वं प्रतिपादितमिति खब्यतिरिक्तनिमित्तकारण- 
मैद्रितीयपदेन प्रतिषिद्धम्‌ | 

[१७] तमादेशमम्राक्ष्यो येनाश्रुतं ad भवतीत्यादावेव प्रशासितेव जगदु- 
पादानमिति हृदि निहितमिदानीर्ममिव्यक्तम्‌ | खयमेव जगदुपादानं जगन्निमित्तं च 
सत्तदैक्षत बहु स्यां प्रजायेयेति | तदेतर्त॑च्छन्दवाच्यं परं ब्रह्म सर्वज्ञं सर्वशक्ति सत्यसंकल्प- 
मवाप्तसमस्तकाममपि लीलार्थ विचित्रानन्तचिदचिन्मिश्रजग््पेणाहभेव बहु at तदर्थ 
प्रजायेयेति खयमेव संकल्प्य खांशैकदेशादेव वियदादिभूतानि agi पुनरपि सैव 
सच्छब्दामिहिता परा देवतैवमैक्षत हन्ताहमिमास्तिसो देवता अनेन जीवेनात्मनानु- 
प्रविश्य नामरूपे व्याकरवाणीति । अनेन जीवेनात्मनेति---जीवस्य ब्रह्मात्मकत्वं 
प्रतिपाद्य ब्रह्मात्मकजीवानुप्रवेशादेव छृत्स्नस्याचिदट्ठस्तुनः पदार्थत्वमेवंभूतस्यैव स्थस्य 

13 

वस्तुनो नौमभाक्त्वमिति चँ दशयति। एतंदुक्तं भवति--जीवात्मा तु ब्रह्मणः 

M, A, ततः परम्‌ 

T. त्वेवेतद्‌ 

-P Ms om. अत्र?-****-*दिश्म्‌ 

Mg d7०ए—एकमेवेति . : 

M; अद्वितीयशाच्देन 

AIT. insert—सिद्िमिति 

P Mj, खुव्यक्तम्‌- 1 adds “व्यक्तमेतदेवोपपादयति 
My, तच्छब्द? 

M, A, ब्रह्मेव 

P एतस्येव for स्वयंभूतस्येव : haplography 
Mı नामरूपभाक्तुम्‌ | 

T. om. च 

Ms om. उक्तं भवति 

p Lond 
I 

TA ya 
w N 
P B 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

शरीरतया प्रकारत्वा्झात्मकः । यस्यात्मशरीरमिति श्रुत्यन्तरात्‌ । एवंभूतस्य 

जीवस्य शरीरतया प्रकारमूतानि देवमनुप्यादिसंस्थानानि व॑स्तूनीति ब्रझामकानि तानि - 

सर्वाणि | अतो देवो मनुष्यो राक्षसः Gap: पक्षी वृक्षो लता काष्ठं शिला तृणं 
घटः पट इत्यादयः सर्वे प्रकृतिप्रत्यययोगेनाभिधायकतया प्रसिद्धाः शब्दा लोके 
तत्तद्वाच्यतया प्रतीयमानतत्तत्संस्थानवस्तुमुखेन तदभिमानिजीवतदन्तर्यामिपरमात्मपर्यन्त- 
संघातस्यैव वाचका इति | 

[१८] एवं समस्तचिदचिदात्मकम्रपञ्चस्य सदुपादानतासन्नि मित्ततासदाधारता- 
सन्नियम्यतासच्छेषतादि wq च (सन्मूलाः सोम्येमाः सर्वाः प्रजाः सदायतनाः सत्मतिष्ठा 
इत्यादिना) विस्तरेण प्रतिपाद्य कार्यकारणभावादिमुखेनैतदात्म्यमिदं ud तत्सर्त्यमिति 
कृत्स्नस्य जगतो ब्रह्मात्मकत्वमेव सत्यमिति प्रतिपाय aera जगतः स एवात्मा 
कृत्स्नं जगत्तस्य शरीरं तस्मात्त्वशव्दवाच्यमपि जीवमैकारं ब्रह्मैवेति सवस्य ब्रह्मात्मकत्वं 
प्रतिज्ञातं तत्त्वमसीति जीवविशेष उपसंहृतम्‌ | 

[१९] एतदुक्तं भवति। ऐतदात्यमिदं सवमिति चेतनाचेतनप्रपञ्चमिदं 

सर्वमिति निर्दिश्य तस्य प्रपञ्चस्यैष आत्मेति प्रतिपादितः, प्रपञ्चोद्वेशेन ब्रह्मात्मकत्वं 
प्रतिपादितमित्यँर्थः | तदिदं ब्रह्मात्मकत्वं किमात्मशरीरभावेनोत खरूपेणेतिः विवेचनी- 

1. Pom. जीवस्य © 
2. Mgom. वस्तूनि— 
3. Mg om. शब्दा'***** श्त्या 
4. Ms om. समस्त? - 
5. all MSS. consulted: by me,-except- one Madras. MS. 

(R4949) om. this citation which may have been original. 
6. Mi completes the citation तत्त्वमसि श्वेतकेतो 
7. M, °त्मकमेव 
8. Mg जीवभ्रकारकं 
9. all MSS, except Mi, omit जीवविशेषे 
co. 10... P अतिपायते, \ A, °पादितम्‌ _ 
l 11. Mgom. अर्थः Hu 

81 

AM 

82 

» 

१० 

१५ 

ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

यम्‌ p खरूपेणेति Ager: सत्यसंकँस्पत्वादयः-तदेक्षत बहु स्यां पैजायेयेट्युपक्रमावगता 
बाधिता भवन्ति । शरीरात्मभावेन च तदात्मकलं श्रुत्यन्तरा द्विशेषतोऽवगतमैन्तःमरबिष्टः 
शास्ता जनानां सर्वात्मेति प्रशासितृत्वरूपात्मत्वेन सर्वेषां जनानामन्तः प्रविष्टोऽतः सर्वात्मा 
सर्वेषां जनानामात्मा सवे चास्य शरीरमिति विशेषतो ज्ञायते ब्रह्मात्मकत्वम्‌। य 
आत्मनि तिषठन्नात्मनोऽन्तरो यमात्मा न वेद यस्यात्मा शरीरं य आत्मानमन्तरो यमयति 
स त आत्मान्तर्याम्यमृत इति च। जअत्राप्यनेन जीवेनातमनेतीदमेव ज्ञायत इति 
पूर्वमेवोक्तम्‌ | अतः सर्वस्य चिदचिद्वस्तुनो ब्रह्मशरीरत्वास्सर्वशरीर सर्वकारं सर्वशब्दे- 
Rada इति तत्त्वमिति सामानाधिकरण्येन जीवशरीरतया जीवमकारं KAT 
मिहितम्‌ | 

[२०] एवमभिहिते सत्ययमर्थो ज्ञायते--त्वमिति यः पूवं ' देहस्याधिष्ठातृतया 
प्रतीतः स परमात्मशरीरतया परमात्मप्रकारभूतः परमात्मपर्यन्तः । अतस्त्वमिति शब्द- 
स्त्वअकारविरिष्टं त्वदन्तर्यामिणमेवाचष्ट इति । अनेन जीवेनात्मनानुप्रवि्य नामरूपे 
व्याकरवाणीति ब्रह्मात्मकतयेव जीवस्य शरीरिणः खनामभाक्त्वात्तत््वमिति सामानाधि- 
करण्यमरवृत्तयो द्वयोरपि TA वाच्यम्‌ | तत्र च तत्पदं जगत्कारणभूतं संकलकल्याण- 
गुणगणाकरं निरवद्यं निविकारमाचष्टे। त्वमिति च तदेव ब्रह्म जीवान्तर्यामिरूपेण 

P M, meng? 

Mag. T om. प्रजायेय 

M; A, अन्तः 

M, शब्देन aa: Wee: 
P. M, «fa? 

P M, add एथग्स्थितिम्रवृत्यन्ईः 
T समानाधिकरणप्रवृत्तयोर्‌ 

M, “भूतसकल” 

ENAM शा 

M; om. “सकल? A, T. सर्वेकल्या? 
Ma “रूपे सर्वशरी?, Aja “रूपि AAA, T ^ed सरारीर?--1 prefer 
PSAT on textual grounds 

— 
o 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

सशरीरप्रकारविशिष्टमाचष्टे । तदेवं प्रवृत्तिनिमित्तमेदेनैकसिन्त्रह्मण्येव तत्त्वमिति द्वयोः 
पदयोदत्तिरुँक्ता । ब्रह्मणो निरवद्यत्वं निविकारत्वं संकलकल्याणगुणगणाकरत्वं जग- 
त्कारणत्वं चाबाधितम्‌ | 

[२१] अश्रुतवेदान्ताः पुरुषाः सर्वे पदार्थाः सर्वे जीवात्मानश्च ब्रहमात्मका 
इति न wats सर्वशब्दानां च केवलेषु तत्तदार्थेषु वाच्यैकदेरोषु वाच्यपर्य- 
वसानं मन्यन्ते | इदानीं वेदान्तवाक्यश्रवणेन ब्रहमकार्यतया तदन्तर्यीमितया च स्वस्य 
AMS सर्वशब्दानां तत्तत्मकारसं स्थितन्रह्मवाचित्वं च जानन्ति । 

नन्वेवं गवादिशब्दानां तत्तत्पदार्थवाचितया व्युत्पततिर्वाधिता स्यात्‌। नैवं सर्वे 
शब्दा अचिज्जीवविशिष्टस्य परमात्मनो वाचका इत्युक्तम्‌। नामरूपे व्याकरवाणीत्यत्र | 
तंत्र लौकिकाः पुरुषाः शब्दं व्याहरन्तः शब्दवाच्ये प्रधानांशँरँय परमात्मनः प्रत्यक्षा्यप- 
रिच्छेद्यलाद्वाच्येकदेशमूते. aren मन्यन्ते। वेदान्तश्रवणेन च व्युत्पत्तिः 
पूर्यते । एवभेव वैदिकाः सर्वे शब्दाः परमात्मपर्यन्तान्स्वार्थान्योधयन्ति | वैदिका 
एव सर्वे शब्दा वेदौदावुद्धृत्योद्धृत्य परेणेव ब्रह्मणा सर्ववदार्थान्पूर्ववत्सरद्वा तेषु 
परमात्मपर्यन्तेषु पूववन्नामतया प्रयुक्ताः । तदाह मनुः 
A, दयोरपि 
M, प्रवृत्तिर्‌ 
Mg Aia, सवकल्या? and om. “गण? 
Ms om. सर्वेप?******** जीव? 
Ms Aa T om. वाच्येकदेशेषु 
T “यामिकतया 
P. Mg Ai, om. तत्र 
T तु पुरुषाः 
Ag om. sq? अंशस्य 
T “अंशस्येव 
Ag वाचकसमार्ति 
A, inserts वेदान्तवाक्य? 
Mg स्वार्थान्‌ सर्वान्‌ 
A P M, नेदादेबो द्रव्य 

19/70 30090) Uoc op M Fe 

Me 12 m pd pa 
> ४ ७ - ० 

83 

१० 

84 

१५ 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

सर्वेषां तु स नामानि कैर्माणि च पृथक्पृथक्‌ । | 
वेदशब्देभ्य एवादौ एथक्संस्थाश्च निर्ममे ॥ . 

इति। संस्थाः संस्थानानि रूपाणीति यावत्‌। आह च भगवान्पराशरः-- ` ` 
` नाम.रूपं च भूतानां कृत्यानां च प्रपञ्चनम्‌ | | 
वेदशब्देभ्य एवादौ देवादीनां चकार सः ॥ 

इति । श्रुतिश्च--सूर्याचन्द्रमसो धाता यथापूर्वमकल्पयदिति । सूर्यादीन्पूवेवत्परि- 
RA नामानि च पूववचचकारेत्यथः | 

[२२] एवं जगद्कणोरनन्यत्वं प्रपञ्चितम्‌ | तेनेकेन ज्ञातेन सवस्य ज्ञाततो- 
पपादिता भवति । . Ger ब्रझकार्य्व्रतिपादनेन तदात्मकतयेव . सत्यत्वं नान्यथेति 
तत्सत्यमित्युक्तम्‌1. यथा दृष्टान्ते सवस्य मृद्विकारस्य मंदात्मनेव सत्यत्वम्‌ | 

[२३] शोधकवाक्यान्यपि निरवद्यं सवेकल्याणगुणाकरं परं ब्रह्म बोधयन्ति । 
सर्वप्रत्यनीकाकारतावोधनेऽपि तत्तत्रत्यनीकाकारतायां भेदस्यावर्जनीयत्वा्न निर्विशेष- 
वस्तुसिद्धिः | | 

[२४] ननु चं ज्ञानमात्रं wea प्रतिपादिते निर्विशेषज्ञानमात्र ब्रह्मेति 
निश्चीयते | नैवम्‌ । खरूपनिरूँपणधर्मशब्दा हि धर्ममुखेन खरूपमपि प्रतिपादयन्ति | 

1 T om. GAN es एवादौ-- 

2. Ag शास्रभ्य 

3. Ag सव ब्रह्म 

4, As maa 

5. Ms arp dd सवज्ञं drops following up to सवेकल्या 
6 

7 

8 

9 

Ajag 0m. पर 
Ass, ब्रह्मेव 
Mg Ag "नीकतामेदस्य--&,» “कारमेद?--'' नीकतामेदेन 
Tom, च 
10. Agom. ब्रह्म 
11, PM,” निरूपक? 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

गवादिशब्दवत्‌ । तदाह सूत्रकारः--तद्रुणसारत्वाततद्यपदेशः ्राज्ञवंत्‌ । यावदात्म- 
भावित्वाच न. दोष इति । ज्ञानेन धर्मेण खरूपमपि निरूपितं 4 ज्ञानमात्रं ब्रह्मेति । 

कथमिदमवगम्यत इति चेद्यः सवज्ञः संर्वविदित्यादिज्ञातृत्वश्रुतेः परास्य शक्ति- 
विविधैव श्रूयते खाभाविकी ज्ञानबलक्रिया च । विज्ञातारमरे केन विजानीयादित्यादि- 
श्रुतिशतसमधिगतमिदम्‌। ज्ञानस्य धर्गमात्रत्वाद्धर्ममात्रस्येकस्य वस्तुत्वप्रतिपादनानुप- 
Ral अतः सत्यज्ञानादिपदानि स्वीर्थमूतज्ञानादिविरिष्टमेव ब्रह्म प्रतिपादयन्ति | 
तत्त्वमिति द्वयोरपि पदयोः स्वार्थप्रहाणेन निविशेषवस्तुखरूपोपस्थापनपरत्वे मुख्यार्थपरि- 
त्यागश्च | 

[२५] . AA तातर्यनिश्चयान्न लक्षणादोषः | सोऽयं देवदत्त इतिवत्‌ | 
यथा सोऽयमित्यत्र स इति ईब्देन देशान्तरकालान्तरसंवन्धी पुरुषः प्रतीयत अयमिति 
च संनिहितदेशवतमानकारसंबन्धी, तयोः सामानाधिकरण्येनेक्यं प्रतीयते । तत्रेकस्य 
युगपद्विरुद्धदेशकारसंवन्धितया प्रतीतिन घटत इति द्वयोरपि पदयोः सरूपमात्रोपस्था- 
and स्वरूपस्य चैक्यं प्रतिपद्यत इति चेन्नेतदेवम्‌। सोऽयं देवदत्त इत्यत्रापि 
छक्षणागन्धो न विद्यते । विरोधाभावात्‌ । एकस्य भूतवर्तमानक्रियाद्वयसंबन्धो न 

1. | PM, “interpolate the following passage taken from 
Ramanuja’s Vedantadipa on Brahmasütra 2, 3, 30. 
ज्ञानगुणसारत्वादात्मनो ज्ञानमिति व्यपदेशः। यथा ब्रह्मणा विपश्चिता यः सर्वज्ञ 
सवेविद्‌--इति aad एव ज्ञानगुणसारत्वात्‌ सस्यं ज्ञानम्‌ इति व्यपदिइयते । 

M, निरूपितं भवति 

A, drops 1—T inserts न तु 

A, om. SLICES 

T om. “आदि? 

Ag om. “aga? 

M, श्रुतेश्च 

Ag om. स्वार्थ भूत? 

Ag om. ननु 

P M,a तच्छब्देन - 

७ 9७फ ७ ७ फी ७ !२ 

— 
=> 

85 

१० 

86 

१० 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

विरुद्धः | देशान्तरस्थितिर्भूता संनिहितदेश स्थितिवर्तते । अतो भूतवतमानक्रियाद्वय- 
संबन्थितयेक्यप्रतिपादनमविरुद्धम्‌ | देशद्वयविरोधश्व कालभेदेन परिह्ृतः | लक्षणाया- 
मपि न द्वयोरपि पदयोर्ङक्षणासमाश्रयणम्‌। एकेनैवं रूक्षितिन विरोधपरिहारात्‌ | 
ङक्षणाभाव एवोक्तः । देशान्तरसंबन्धितया भूंतस्येवान्यदेशसंबन्धितया वतेमानत्वा- 
विरोधात्‌ । 

[२६] एवमत्रापि जगत्कारणभूतस्येव परस्य ब्रह्मणो जीवान्तर्यामितया जीवी- 
त्मत्वमविरुद्धमिति प्रतिपादितम्‌ । यथा भूतयोरेव "हि द्वयोरेक्य सामानाधिकरण्येन 
प्रतीयते । तत्परित्यागेन खरूपमात्रेक्य न सामानाधिर्करण्यार्थः--भिन्नम्रबृततिनि मित्तानां 
शन्दानामेकसिमन्नर्थे वृत्तिः सामानाधिकरण्यमिति हि तद्विदः । तथाभूतयोरेवैक्यमुर्प- 
पादितमस्माभिः। उपक्रमविरोध्युपसंहंरपदेन वाक्यतासर्यनिश्चयश्च न घटते। उपक्रमे 
हि तदेक्षत बहु स्यामित्यादिना सत्यसंकल्पत्वं जगदेककारणत्वमप्युक्तम्‌। तद्विरोधि 
चाविद्याश्रयत्वादि ब्रह्मणः | 

[२७] अपि चार्थभेदतत्संसर्गविशेषबोधनक्कतपदवाक्यस्य खरूपतालब्ध- 
प्रमाणभावस्य शाब्दस्य निर्विशेषवस्तुबोधनासामर्थ्यान्नै निविरेषवस्तुनि शब्दः प्रमाणम्‌ | 

१५ निविरोष इत्यादिशब्दास्तु केनचिद्विरोषेण विशिषष्टतयावगतस्य वस्तुनो वस्त्वन्तरगत- 

Mg As insert पदेन रक्षि? 
A, लक्षिते 

T om. "संबन्धितया 

A, अन्यभूतस्ये 

M. जीवात्मकत्वम 

P M,s A, om. हि 

T ?करण्यस्वार्थस्य 

Mg संपादितम्‌ 

Ma “हारवाक्यतात्प? 

T completes प्रजायैय 
M, अपि तु 

P M, om, न and read न प्रमाणं ` 

eer ७ ७ म YN o> 

m — Load 
७-8 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

विशेषनिवेधपरतया बोधकाः । इतरथा तेषामप्यनवबोधकत्वमेव । प्रकृतिप्रत्ययरूपेण 
पदस्यैवानेकविशेषगैर्भत्वादनेकपदार्थसंसमवोधकत्वाचच वाक्यस्य | 

[२८] अथ स्यात्‌--नास्माभिनिविशोषे खयंप्रकाशे वस्तुनि शब्द: प्रमाण- 
मित्युच्यते | खतः सिद्धस्य प्रमाणार्नपेक्षत्वात्‌ | सर्व: शब्दैस्तदुपरागविशेषा ज्ञातृत्वादयः 
सर्वे निरस्यन्ते । सर्वेषु विशेषेषु निवृत्तेषु वस्तुमात्रमनवच्छिन्नं खयंप्रकाशं खत एवाव- 
तिष्ठत इति । नैतदेवम्‌ | केन शब्देन dara निर्दिश्य तद्वतविशेषा निरस्यन्ते । ज्प्ति- 
मात्रशब्देनेति चेन्न । सोऽपि सविशेषमेव वस्त्ववलम्बते । प्रकृतिप्रत्ययरूपेण "विरोष- 
गर्मत्वात्‌। ज्ञा अवबोधन इति सकर्मकः सर्कतृकः क्रियाविरोषः क्रियान्तरव्याव॑र्तकस्वभा- 
‘aaa प्रकृत्यावगम्यते | प्रत्ययेन च लिङ्गसंख्यादयः। खतःसिद्धावप्येतत्खभाव- 
विशेषविरहे सिद्धिरेव न स्यात्‌। अँन्यसाधनखभावतया हि se: स्तः सिद्धिरुच्यते | 

[२९] ब्रह्मलरूपं कृत्स्नं सर्वदा खयमेव प्रैकाशते चेन्न तसिमन्नन्यधर्माध्यासः 
संभवति। न हि रज्जुखरूपेऽवमासमाने स्पत्वादिरध्यस्यते | अत एव हि भवद्विरा- 

PM, fhaa 
P वेद: for शब्दः 

P M, °नपेक्षितत्वात्‌ 
Ms Ay, T निवत्यंन्ते 
Ms om. त 

A, om. विशेषगर्भत्वात्‌ 
PM, “गर्मितत्वात्‌ 
A, Pax fina? 

M, °वात्तिक? 

A, om. “विशेष? 

P Mig, अनन्य” 

M, प्रकाशयति ; 
Ms om. हि 

10.09: mW FON IPT DD. टी 

Land bah fu 
PS ल. (टे 

87 

१० 

88 

१० 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

च्छादिकाविद्याभ्युपगम्यते | ततश्च शौस्रीयनिवैर्तकज्ञानस्य ब्रह्मणि तिरो हितांशो विषयः | 
अन्यथा तस्य निवर्तकत्वं च न स्यात्‌। अधिष्ठानातिरेकिरज्जुत्वप्रकाशनेन हि सर्पत्वं 
बाघ्यते । एकश्चेद्विरोषो ज्ञानमात्रे वस्तुनि शब्देनाभिधीयते स च ब्रह्मविशेषणं 
भवेतीति सर्वश्रुतिमरतिपादितसर्वविरेषणवि शिष्टं ब्रह्म भवति । 

[39]. अतः प्रामाणिकानां न केनापि प्रमाणेन निविशेषवस्तुसिद्धिः d 
निर्विकर्पकम्रत्यक्षेऽपि सविशेषमेव वस्तु प्रतीयते । अन्यथा सविकल्पके सोऽयमिति 
पूर्वावगतप्रकारविशिष्टप्रत्ययानुपपत्तेः | वस्तुसंस्थानविशेषरूंपत्वाद्वी त्वादेगिर्विकल्पकदशा- 
यामपि ससंस्थानमेव वस्त्वित्थमिति प्रतीयते । द्वितीयादिप्रत्ययेषु der den 
विशेषस्थानेकवस्तुनिष्ठतामात्र॑ प्रतीयते | संस्थानरूपप्रकाराख्यस्य पदार्थस्यानेकर्वस्तु- 
निष्ठतयानेकवस्तुविशेषणत्वं द्वितीया दिप्रत्ययावगैम्यमिति द्वितीया दिप्रत्ययाः सविकल्पका 
इत्युच्यन्ते | अत एवैकस्य पदार्थस्य भिन्नाभिनत्वरूपेण sana विरुद्धं प्रत्युक्तम्‌। 
संस्थानस्य संस्थानिनः प्रकारतया पेदार्थान्तरत्वम्‌। प्रकारत्वादेव एँयक्सिद्धथनहत्वं 
पृथगनुपलम्भश्वेति न व्यात्मकलसिद्धि: | a a 

Ma WATA 

M, तनिवतेकं 

Mg om. इति— 

M, om. प्रामाणिकानां 
P reads प्रकारेण 

T प्रतील्नुपपत्त: 

A, om. "रूप? 

Mg A, तस्यैव 

T om. "वस्तु? 

10. P M, “अवगतम्‌ 

11. PM,s A, भिन्नरूपेण 
12. M; A, विरुद्ध ब्यात्म? 
13. पदार्थत्वात्‌); पदार्थत्वम्‌ 
14. Mo प्रथक्विशानानई?--- 

19,00. OX. Qv c do DNS 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

` [३१] अपि च निर्विशेषवस्तुवादिना खयंप्रकाशे वस्तुनि तदुपरागविरोषाः d: 
शब्दैनिरस्यन्त इति वदता के ते शब्दा निषेधका इति qnem] वाचारम्भणं विकारो 
नामधेये मृत्तिकेत्येव सत्यमिति विकारनामधेययोर्वाचारम्भणमात्रत्वात्‌। यत्तत्र कारणतयोप- 
` लक्ष्यते वस्तुमात्रं तदेव सत्यमन्यदसत्यमितीयं श्रुतिर्वदतीति चेन्नेतदुपपद्यते | एक- 
स्मिन्विज्ञाते सर्व विज्ञातं भवतीति मतिज्ञातेऽन्यज्ञानेनान्यज्ञानासंभवं मन्वानस्यैकमेव 
वस्तु विकाराद्वस्थाविरेषेण पारमार्थिकेनैव नामरूपमवस्थितं चेततत्रेकस्मिन्विज्ञाते 
तस्माद्विर्रक्षणसंस्थानान्तरमपि तदेवेति तत्र इष्टान्तोऽयं निदर्शितः। नात्र कस्यचि- 
द्विशेषस्य fidem: कोऽपि शब्दो दृश्यते । वाचारम्भणमिति वाचा व्यवहारेणारभ्यत 
इत्यारम्भणम्‌ | पिण्डरूपेणावस्थितायाः मृत्तिकाया नाम चान्यव्यवहारश्चान्यः। घटशरा- 
वादिरूपेणावंस्थितायास्तस्या एव मृत्तिकाया अन्यानि नामधेयानि व्यवहाराश्चान्यादशाः। 
तथापि Saar सृत्तिकाद्रव्यमेकमेव नानासंस्थाननानानामधेयाभ्यां नानाव्यवहारेण चौरभ्यत 
इत्येतदेव सत्यमित्यनेनान्यज्ञानेनान्यज्ञानसंभवो निदर्शितः । नात्र किंचिद्वस्तु निषिध्यत 
इति पूर्वमेवायमर्थः प्रपञ्चितः | 

[३२] अपि च येनाश्रुतं श्रुतमित्यादिना त्रह्मव्यतिरिक्तस्य सर्वस्य मिथ्यात्वं 
प्रतिज्ञातं चेद्यथा सोम्यैकेन झलिण्डेनेत्यादिदटान्तः साध्यविकलः स्यात्‌। रञ्जुसर्पा- 

PM, शब्दैः सर्वे: 

Mg om. ते 

P प्रतिज्ञायते 

M, विलक्षणविज्ञानसंस्थाना? 

P M, तदेव वस्विति 

P निषेध: 

P om. वाचारम्भगमिति 

Ma संस्थितस्य-- Mg A, संस्थितायां मृत्तिकायां 
Ag नामानि 

As ‘om. सवत्र . 

P om. °नाना°--4४ “स्थानेन नामधेयेन corrected into `थेयाभ्यां— 
P M, om. च 

M, A, “दृष्टान्तोपन्याससाध्य? 

७ ७ 9) ७ ७ # ४० ७9 ४: 

- — keh kemah 
w NaO 

89 

qe 

१५ 

90 

ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

दिवैन्हृत्तिकाविकारस्य घटशरावादेरसत्यत्वं श्वेतकेतोः VAM: प्रमाणान्तरेण युक्त्या 
चासिद्धमित्येतदपि सिषाधयिषितमिति चेत्‌ | यथेति दृष्टान्ततयोपादानं न घटते । 

[३३] सदेव सोम्येदमग्र आसीदेकमेवा द्वितीयमित्यत्र सदेवैकमे वेत्यवधारण- 
वेना द्वितीयमित्यनेन च सन्मात्रातिरेकिसजातीयविजातीयाः सर्वे विशेषा निषिद्धा 
इति प्रैतीयत इति चेन्नैतदेवम्‌। कार्यकारणभावावस्थाद्वयावस्थितस्यैकस्य वस्तुन 
हैकावस्थावस्थितस्य ज्ञानेनावस्थान्तरावस्थितस्यापि वस्त्वैक्येन ज्ञाततां दृष्टान्तेन दर्शयित्वा 
श्वेतकेतोरप्ज्ञातं सवस्य ब्रंझकारणत्वं च॑ वक्तुं सदेव सोम्येदमित्यारब्धम्‌। इदमग्रे सदेवासी- 
दिति। अग्र इति कालविशेषः। इदंशब्दवाच्यस्य प्रपञ्चस्य सदार्पत्तिरूपां क्रियां सद्रव्यतां 
च वदति। एकमेवेति चास्य नानानामरूपविकारम्रहाणम्‌। पतस्मिमंतिपादितेऽस्यं 
जगतः सदुपादानता प्रतिपादिता भवति। अन्यत्रोपादानकारणस्य सब्यति रिक्ता धिष्ठात्रपेक्षा- 
दर्शनेऽपि सथविछक्षणत्वादस्य सर्वज्ञस्य ब्रह्मणः सर्वशक्तियोगो न विरुद्ध इत्यद्वितीयपद- 
मधिष्ठात्रन्तरं निवारयति । सर्वशक्तियुक्तत्वादेव ब्रह्मणः | काश्चन श्रुतयः प्रथममुपा- 
दानकारणत्वं प्रतिपाद्य निमित्तकारणमपिं तदेवेति प्रतिपादयन्ति। यथेयं श्रुतिः | 
अन्याश्च श्रुतयो ब्रह्मणो निमित्तकौरणत्वमनुज्ञायास्यैवोपादानतादि कथमिति परिचोद, 

P om. “आदि 

P M वासि? 

Mg om. प्रतीयत इति 
T एकावस्थस्य 

A, त्रह्मप्रकारत्व-- 
A, T om. च 

M, “पत्तिनिरूपितां 
A, om. नाना?-- 
M, “विकारण?-- 
M; एकस्मिन-- 

P M, उपपादिते-- 
As तस्य र 
. M, “glara” 

14. M, “कारणताम 

७ ७ :3 ७ एके ७ 02 ४ 

Ek ya m kah 
७ bre 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

सर्वशक्तियुक्तत्वादुपादानकारणं तदितराशेषोपकरणं च ब्रह्मेबेति परिहरन्ति--र्कि 
स्विद्वनं क उ स वृक्ष आसीद्यतो द्यावाएथिवी निष्टतक्षुर्मनीषिणो मनसा एंच्छतेदु 
तद्यदध्यतिष्ठद्ुवनानि धारयन्‌। ब्रह्म बनं ब्रह्म स वृक्ष आसीद्यतो द्यावाष्टथिवी निष्टतश्चुर्म- 
नीषिणो मनसा वित्रवीमि वः ब्राध्यतिषठद्धुवनानि धारयन्निति सामान्यतो इष्टेन 
विरोधमाशङ्ग य enr: सर्वविलक्षणत्वेन परिहार SH | अतः सद्वेव सोम्येदमर्म 
आसीदित्सत्राप्यम्र इत्याचनेकविरोषा ब्रह्मणः प्रतिपादिताः | भवदभिमतविशेष निषेधवाची 
कोऽपि शब्दो न इश्यते | प्रत्युत जगट्ठह्णोः कार्यकारणभावज्ञापनायाम्र इति काल- 
विरोषसद्भावः | आसीदिति क्रियाविशेषो, जगदुपादानता जगन्निमित्तता च, निमित्तो- 
पादानयोर्भेदनिरसनेन तस्यवे ब्रह्मणः सवशक्तियोगश्चेत्यपरज्ञाताः सहसशो विशेषा एव 
प्रतिपादिताः । 

[३४] : यतो वास्तवकायकारणभावादिज्ञापने प्रवृत्तम्‌ अत. एवासदेवेदमग्र 

आसीदित्यारभ्यासत्कार्यवादनिषेधश्च॒ क्रियते--कुतंस्तु wg सोम्यैवं स्यादिति | 
प्रागसत उत्पततिरहेतुकेत्यर्थः । तदेवोपपादयति--कथमसतः सज्जायेतेति emu 
उत्पन्नमसदात्मकमेव भवतीत्यर्थः | यथा मृद्‌ उत्पन्नं घटादिकं JATA) सत 
उत्पत्तिर्नाम व्यवहार विशेषहेतुभूतोऽवस्था विशेषयोगः | 

[३५] एतदुक्तं भवति । एकमेव कारणभूतं द्रव्यमवस्थान्तरयोगेनँः कार्य- 

fasi in 

मित्युच्यत इत्येकविशीनेन सर्वविज्ञानं प्रतिपिपादयिषितम्‌। तदसत्कार्यवादे- न 

A, om. युक्त 

A, adds तथाहि 

M, om. Zved«—upto...... वित्रवीमि (haplography) 
P. om. ब्रह्म वन—upt०...... व: (haplography) 
M, ब्रह्मण एव 

M, A, om. अग्र आसीद्‌ 

P प्रतृत्तमिदम्‌ 

M, अतस्‌ 

M, A, Wert? —A, घटशरावादिके 

T भूतद्रव्यम्‌ A, “योगे-- 

M, “ज्ञाने 

wor nw PF WN ४४ 

i p 
= © 
. 5 

91 

१५ 

P are 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

सेत्स्यति | तथा हि निमित्तसमवाय्यसमवा यिप्रभृतिमिः कारणेरवयव्याख्यं कार्य द्रव्या- 
न्तरमेवोत्पैद्स। इति कारणमूताद्व॑स्तुन: कार्यस्य वस्त्वन्तरत्वान्न तज्जञानेनास्य ज्ञातता 
कथमपि संभवतीति | कथमवयवि द्रव्यान्तरं निरस्यत ईति चेत्‌। कारणगतावस्था- 
न्तरयोगस्य द्रव्यान्तरोत्पत्तिवादिनः . संप्रतिपन्नस्थैवैकत्वनामान्तरव्यवहारान्तरादेरुपाद्‌- 
कत्वादूदरव्यान्तरादर्शनाचेति कारणमेवावस्थान्तरापन्नं कार्यमित्युच्यत इत्युक्तम्‌। 

[३६] ननु निरघिष्ठानश्रमासंभवज्ञीपनायासक्कार्यवादनिरासः क्रियते | तथा 
कं चिद्रूपे सत्यमेवाविचाच्छादितं जगद्रूपेण विवर्तत इत्यविद्याश्रयत्वाय मूलकारणं 
सत्यमित्यभ्युपगन्तन्य मित्यसत्कार्यवादनिरासः | नैतदेवम्‌ | एकविज्ञानेन सर्वविज्ञानप्रति- 
ज्ञादृष्टान्तमुखेन सत्कार्यवादस्यैव प्रसक्तत्वादित्युक्तम्‌। waa निर धिष्ठानम्रँमासंभवस्य 
दुरुपपादत्वाच | यस्य हि चेतनगतदोषः पारमार्थिको दोषाश्रयत्वं च पारमार्थिकं तस्य 
पारमार्थिकदोषेण युक्तस्यापारमार्थिकगन्धर्वनगरादिदर्शनमुपपन्नं, यस्य Wd दोषश्चा- 

A, द्रव्यं for कार्य 

M, A, T आरभ्यत for उत्पद्यते ` ` ` ` 

M, °भूतवस्तु? 
. M, तत्कार्य? 

PM, om. न and insert न after अपि | 
M, इति चेन्न =. 
T “हारादेर 

P उपपादत्वांत्‌ 

M, sax f? haplography l 

M, “Prana? - 

M, ?framrafed—T °विद्याशबलं 

P. om. अभ्युपगन्तव्यमिति 

M, “aft ठु ` 

PM, “भ्रमस्या? 

M, om. तु 

pen AMAN 

keh ~ lanag — Land kamad 
तह c 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

पारमार्थिको दोषाश्रयत्वं चौपारमार्थिकं तस्यापारमार्थिकेनाप्य़ाश्रयेण तदुपपत्नमिति 
भवत्पक्षे न निरधिष्ठानश्रमासंभवः | 

[३२७] शोधकेप्वपि सत्यं ज्ञानमनन्तं ब्रह्म, आनन्दो ANRI 
वाक्येषु सामानाधिकरण्यव्युतमत्तिसिद्धानेकगुर्णं विशिष्टेकार्थाववोधनम विरुद्वमि ति सर्वगुण- 
विशिष्टं ब्रह्माभिधीयत इति पूर्वमेवोक्तम्‌ । ` 

[३८] अथात आदेशो नेति नेतीति बहुधा निषेधो स्यत इति चेत्‌ । 
किमत्र निषिध्यत इति वक्तव्यम्‌ | द्वे वाव अह्मणो रूपे मूर्ते चेवामूते चेति मूर्तामूर्ता- 
त्मकः प्रपञ्चः सर्वोऽपि निषिध्यत इति चेन्नेवम्‌ | अह्मणो रूपतयाम्रज्ञातं सर्व रूपतयो- 
पदिश्य पुनस्तदेव 'निषेद्धुमयुक्तम्‌ | प्रक्षालनाद्धि पङ्कस्य दूरादस्परनं वरमिति न्यायात्‌। 
कस्ति निषेधवाक्यार्थः | gre: खयमेव वदति--प्रकृतेतावत्त्वं हि प्रतिषेधति 
ततो ब्रवीति च a इति। उत्तरत्र अथ नामधेयं सत्यस्य सत्यं प्राणा वे सत्यं 
तेषामेष सत्यमिति सँत्यादिगुणगणस्य प्रतिपादितत्वात्पूवप्रकृतेतावन्मात्रे न भवति 
AR, ब्रह्मण एतावन्मात्रता प्रतिषिध्यत इति ami: | 

M, om, चापारमा्थिकम्‌ 

M, एतच्छोधकवाक्येषु 

T “विशिष्टाथविधानम्‌ 

M, om. इति बहुधा 

T om. बहुधा 

M, श्रत for रस्यत 

M, om. किमत्र 

P A, निषेध्यते 

P fiiag—M, निषिद्धम्‌ 

P. M, om. न्यायात्‌ 

11. A, तत्र सूत्र? =- 
12. Pom. भूय इति l 
13. M, om. सत्यादिगुणगणस्य 

14. M, “सूत्राथे एव--1' gae; 

par ७ ७ # ७ ७9 ४ 

> 
e 

93 

qo 

94 

१० 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

[३९] नेह नानास्ति किंचनेत्यादिनां नानात्वप्रतिषेध एवं दृश्यत इति 
चेत्‌ । अत्राप्युत्तरत्र सर्वस्य वशी सवस्येशान इति सत्यसंकल्पत्वसर्वेश्वरत्वप्रतिपाद- 
नाचेतनाचेतनवस्तुशरीर ईश्वर इति सर्वप्रकारसंस्थितः स॒ एक एवेति तस्मेत्यनीका- 
जह्मात्मकनानात्वं प्रतिषिद्धं न भवदभिमतम्‌। सर्वास्वेवंप्रकारासु श्रुतिष्वियमेव स्थिंति- 
रिति न कचिदपि ब्रमणः सविशेषत्व॑निषेधर्कवाची कोऽपि शब्दो दृश्यते | 

[४०] अपि च निविशेषज्ञानमात्रं ब्रह्म तचचाच्छादिकाविद्यातिरो हितस्वरूपं 
खगतनानात्वं पश्यतीत्ययमर्थो न घटते । तिरोधानं नाम प्रकाशनिवारणम्‌। खरू- 
पातिरेकिप्रकाराधर्मानभ्युपगमेन प्रकाशस्यैव खरूपत्वात्खरूपनाश एव स्यात्‌ | प्रकाश- 
पर्यायं ज्ञानं नित्यं स च प्रकाशोऽविदयातिरोहित इति बालिशभाषितमिदम्‌ । अविद्यया 
प्रकाशितस्तिरोहित इति प्रकाशोत्पत्तिप्रतिबेन्थो विद्यमानस्य विनाशो वा । परकाशस्यानु- 
त्पा्संचाद्विंनौश एव स्यात्‌। प्रकाशो नित्यो निविकारस्तिष्ठतीति चेत्‌। सत्यामप्यविद्यायां 

mat न रकिंचित्तिरोहितमिति नानात्वं पश्यतीति भवतामयं व्यवहारः सत्खनिव- 
चनीय एव । 

M, T om. इश्वर इति 

M, adds “संस्थित: सर्वेश्वर: 
M, om. “प्रकारासु 

M, तिरोहितं for स्थितिर्‌ रीतिर्‌ 
P M, निषेधकः कोऽपि 

M, T °कवाचकोऽपि 

P adds “स्वस्वरूप? 

P. om, Ud 

P M, “निवारित for तिरोहित 
P °त्तिबन्धो— 

T adds “a वा 

M, उत्पाद्यमानत्वादू 

CE I ७ Po 

wò p d d 
Do peo 

A, T स्वरूपनाश 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

[४१] ननु चँ भवतोऽपि विज्ञानस्वरूप आत्माभ्युंपगन्तव्य: | स च खयं- 
प्रकाश: । तस्य च देवादिखरूपात्मामिमाने खरूपप्रकाश तिरोधीनमवश्यमाश्रयणीयम्‌ | 
खरूपप्रकाशे सति सात्मन्याकारान्तराध्यासायोगात्‌। अतो भवतश्चायं समानो 
दोषः | किंचास्माकमेकस्मिन्नेवातमनि भवदुदीरितं . दुर्घटर भवतामात्मानन्त्याभ्युपग- 
«reed दोषः परिहरणीयः | | | 

[४२] अत्रोच्यते--खभावतो मलप्रत्यनीकातिशयापरिमितोदारगुणसागरं 
निमेषकाष्ठार्कला मुहूर्ता दिपरार्धपर्यन्तापरिमितव्यवच्छेदखरूपसर्वोत्पत्तिस्थितिविनाशादि - 
सर्वपरिणीमनि मित्तमूतकालक्गृतपरिणामास्परष्टानन्तमहाविभूति खलीलापरिकरखांशभूता- 
नन्तबद्धमुक्तनाना विधचेतनतद्गोग्यमूतानन्तविचित्रपरिणामशक्तिचेतनेतरवस्तुजातान्तर्या - 
मित्वकृतसवेशरीरत्वसर्वप्रकारावस्थानावस्थितं पर्यव वेद्यं, ततसाक्षात्कारक्षमभगवद्‌द्पा- 
यनपराशरवौल्मी किमनुयाज्ञवर्क्यँगो तमापस्तम्बप्रभृतिमु निगणप्रणीतविध्यर्थवादमन्त्ररैवैरूप- 

- 

A, om, च— 
PM, AT. 
M, om. स्व” 
M, om. रोधांनमवझ्यमाश्रयगीये--4, अवश्याश्रयणीयम्‌ 
A, समानोऽयम्‌ 
P. M,.4 A, SORB 
M, inserts “णामहितपरमाथे? 

P inserts “awa” 

pe AAW PR wD 

all except M, ब्रह्म च-- 
M, om. वाल्मीकि 
M, om. गौतमापस्तम्बप्रभ्रति? . 

mA - x 
p.c 12 

A, om. “स्वरूपवेद? 

96 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

_ वेदमूळलेतिहासपुराणधर्मशास्त्रो पवृंहितपरमार्थभूताना दिनिधनां विच्छिन्नपाठसंप्रदायरग्यजुःसा- 
मौथर्वरूपानन्तशाखं वेदं चाभ्युपगच्छतामस्माकं कि न सेत्स्यति । 

यथोक्तं भगवता द्वैपायनेन महाभारते-- 

१० 

यो मामजमनादिं च वेत्ति लोकमहेश्वरम्‌ | 
द्वाविमौ पुरषो लोके क्षरश्चाक्षर एव F | 
क्षरः सर्वाणि भूतानि कूटस्थोऽक्षर उच्यते d 

उत्तमः पुरुषस्त्वन्यः परमात्मेयुदाहृतः | 
यो लोकत्रयमाविइय बिभर्त्यव्यय ईश्वरः ॥ ` 

काळं च पचते तत्र न कालस्तत्र वै प्रभुः । 
एते वै निरयास्तात स्थानस्य परमात्मनः ॥ 

अव्यक्तादिविरोषान्तं परिणामद्विसंयुतम्‌। 

क्रीडा हरेरिदं सवं क्षरमित्यर्वंधार्यताम्‌ ॥ . 
कृष्ण एव हि लोकानामुतत्तिरपि चाप्ययः | 
कृष्णस्य हि कृते भूतमिदं विश्वं चराचरम्‌ d 

१५ इति Gener “हि कृत इति कृष्णस्य शेषभूतं सर्वमित्यर्थः | 

pe yayvsa YY a 

T °अविभिन्न? 

M, A, T om. ?qte?— 

M, aaa? — 

M, °झाखवेदभास्यानभ्य? 

A, "वेदवेदान्तम्‌ 

P.M, A, उपधार्यताम्‌ 

P.M, A. om. इति— 

P om. कृष्णस्य***'**इति RI 
My A; om. R 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

` भगवता पराशरेणाप्युक्तम-- | 

शुद्धे महाविभूत्याख्ये परे ब्रह्मणि शँन्यते । 
मैत्रेय भगवच्छब्दः सबकारणकारणे || 
ज्ञानश क्तिबलेश्वर्यवीर्यतेजांस्यरोषतः | 
भगवच्छव्दवाच्यानि विना हेयैर्गुणादिभिः ॥ 
एवमेष महाशब्दो मैत्रेय भगवानिति । 
परमत्रह्ममूतस्य वासुदेवस्य नान्यगः ॥ 

` तत्र पूज्यपदार्थो क्तिपरिभाषासमन्वितः | 

शब्दोऽयं नोपचारेण त्वन्यत्र झुपचारतः ॥ 

एवंप्रकारममलं UA व्यापकमक्षयम्‌ | . 
समस्तहेयरहितं विष्ण्वाख्ये परमं पदम्‌ || 

कलामुहर्तादिमयश्च कालो न यद्विभूतेः, परिणामहेतुः ॥ 
क्रीडतो बालकस्येव चेष्टास्तस्य निशामय di 

इत्यादि । मनुनापि--- 

_ ग्रशासितारं सरवेषामणीयांसमणीयसाम्‌ |. 

इत्यक्तम्‌ । याज्ञवर्क्येनापि-- 

9 ^ Bo»Mcc 

क्षेत्रशस्येश्वरशानाद्विशुद्धिः dem मता | _ 

M, शब्दिते 

T नित्यं for सत्यं 

M, om. सर्वेषाम्‌ '"' `` ` ` `` “यसाम्‌-- 
. M, om. अणीयांसमणीयसाम्‌- 

M, A, om. विशुद्धिः परमा मता-- 

A, M, om. परमा मता 

91 

१० 

१५ 

98 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

इति । आपस्तम्बेनापि-पूँ: प्राणिनः 4 एव गुहाशयस्येति। सर्वे प्राणिनो गुहाश- 
यस्य परमात्मनः पूः- पुरं शरीरमित्यर्थः। प्राणिन इति संजीवात्मभूतसंघाता: । 
[४३] ननु च किमनेनाडम्वरेण । चोद्यं तु न परिहृतम्‌ । उच्यते। एवम- 
भ्युपगच्छतामस्माकमात्मधर्मभूतस्य चैतन्यस्य खाभाविकस्यापि कर्मणा पारमार्थिकं संकोचं 
५ विकासं च ब्रुवतां सर्वमिदं परिहृतम्‌ । भवतस्तु प्रकाश एव खरूपमिति प्रकाशो न 
धर्मभूतस्तस्य संकोचविकासौ वा नाभ्युपगम्येते | प्रकाशप्रसारानुत्पत्तिमेव तिरोधानमूताः 
कर्मादयः कुर्वन्ति। अविद्या चेत्तिरोधानं तिरोधानमूतयाऽविद्यया स्वरूपभूतप्रकाश- 
नाश इति पूर्वमेवोक्तः | अस्माकं ्वविद्यारूपेण कर्मणा स्वरूपनित्यधर्ममूतर्मकाशः 
संकुचितः । तेन देवादिसरूपात्मामिमानो भवतीति विशेष: । यथोक्तम्‌ 

१० 

अविद्या कर्मसंज्ञान्या तृतीया शक्तिरिष्यते ॥ 
यया क्षेत्रज्ञशक्ति: सा वेष्टिता नृप सर्वगा | 
संसारतापानखिलानवाप्नो्त्य॑तिसंततान्‌ ॥ 

तया तिरोहितत्वाच शाक्तिः क्षेत्रज्ञसंज्ञिता | 
सर्वभूतेषु भूपाल तारतम्येन वर्तते ॥ 

१५ क्षेत्रज्ञानां ख़धमभूतस्य ज्ञानस्य कमसंज्ञाविद्यया संकोचं विकासं च दरशंयति। 

[४४] 

अपि चाच्छादिका विद्या श्रुतिमिश्वेक्यो पदेशवलाच ब्रह्मखरूपतिरोधानं- 

हेतुदोषरूपाश्रीयते तस्याश्च .मिथ्यारूपत्वेन प्रपश्चवत्खद्शनमूलदोषापेक्षत्वात्‌ । . न सा 

४७ ९ ०५. ७ ७७ :> YPN EO 

M, om. पूः | 

all except A, सवेगुद्दा” Pom. Ud गुद्दाशयस्य 
P जीवात्मक? 

P M, om, salar f 

T च fog 

M, om. “स्व” 

P M, add 'ज्ञानप्रकाश:--- 

P drops अति 

M, om. ज्ञानस्य 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

मिथ्या दर्शनमूलदोषः स्यादिति aaa मिथ्यादर्शनमूलं स्यात्‌। तस्याश्चानादित्वेऽपि 
मिथ्यारूपत्वादेव . FRA ATA दित्वात्तदरीनमूलपरमार्थदोपानभ्युपगमाच्च Waa 
तद्दर्शनमूलं स्यात्‌ । तस्य नित्यत्वादनिर्मोक्ष एव | 

[४५] अत एवेदमपि निरस्तम्‌--एकमेव शरी. जीववत्‌ , निजींवानीतराणि 
शरीराणि खप्नदृष्टनानाविधानन्तशरीराणां यथा नि्जीत्रत्वम्‌ | तत्र खप्ने द्रष्टुः शरीर- 
मेकमेव जीववत्‌। तैस्य खप्नवेलायां दृश्यभूतनाना विधशरी राणां नि्जीवत्वमेव। अनेनैकेनैव 
परिकल्पितत्वाज्जीवा मिथ्याभूता इति aan खखरूपव्यतिरिक्तस्य जीवभावस्य सर्व- 
शरीराणां च कल्पितत्वादेकस्मिन्नपि शरीरे शरीरवज्जीवभावस्य च मिथ्यारूपत्वात्स- 
वाणि शरीराणि मिथ्यारूपाणि, तत्र जीवभावश्च मिथ्यारूप इत्येकस्य शरीरस्य तत्र 
जीवभावस्य च न कश्चिद्विशेषः | अस्माकं तु खप्ने ae: खशरीरस्य तस्मिन्नात्मसद्वावस्य 
च॑ प्रबोधवेलायामवाधितत्वादन्येषां शरीराणां तद्वतजीवानां च वाधितत्वात्ते’ सर्वे 
मिथ्याभूताः स्वशरीरमेकं तस्मिज्ञीवभावश्च परमार्थं इति विशेषः | . 

[४६] - अपि च केन at विद्यानिवृत्तिः सा च कीदृशीति विवेचनीयम्‌ | 
ऐक्यज्ञानं निवर्तकं निवृत्तिश्चानिवेचनीयप्रत्यनीकाकारेति चेत्‌ । अनिर्वचनीयप्रत्यनीकं 
निर्वचनीयं तचच सद्वासद्वा द्विरूपं वा कोरँयन्तरं न विद्यते। ब्रह्मव्यतिरेकेणेतदभ्युपग मे 

P om. मिथ्या 

M, om. मूलदोषः' 7777 मिथ्या [दर्शन? 
A, इतरदारीराणि 

A, तत्र for तस्य-- 

P inserts यथा निर्जीव” 

M, जीवसद्धावस्य for आत्म?-- 

A, om. च 

M, adds °जीवानामसद्भावानां = 
P M, om. ते 

P om. वा— My reads सा वा 

P कल्पान्तरं 

o6 ७ 9) ७ एके ७ yo 

~ m 
= O 

99 

१० 

१५ 

100 

ढे 

ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

पुनरविद्या न निवृत्ता स्यात्‌ । sua चेनिवृत्तिस्तत्मागप्यविशिष्टमिति वेदान्तज्ञानासूर्वमेव 
निवृत्तिः स्यात्‌ । ऐक्यज्ञानं Rade तदभावात्संसार इति भवद्द्शनं विहन्यते | 

[४७] किञ्च निवतेकज्ञानस्याप्यविद्यारूपत्वात्तत्रिवतेने केनेति वक्तव्यम्‌ | 
निवर्तकज्ञानं स्वेतरसमस्तमेदं निर्य क्षणिकत्वादेव स्वयमेव विनश्यति दावानळविष- 
नाशनविषान्तरवदिति चेन्न । निवर्तेकज्ञानस्य ब्रह्मव्यतिरिक्तत्वेन तत्स्वरूपतदुत्पत्तिविना- 
शानां मिथ्यारूपलवात्तद्विनाशरूपा विद्या तिष्ठत्येवेति तद्विनाशदशनस्य निवतेकं वैक्तव्य- 
मेव । दावाग्न्यादीनामपि पूर्वावर्स्थांविरो धिपरिणामपरंपरावर्जनीयेव | 

[४८] अपि च चिन्मात्रन्रह्मव्यति रिक्तकृत्ननिषेधविषयज्ञानस्य कोऽयं ज्ञाता | 
अध्यासरूप इति Aa) da निषेध्यतया निवर्तकज्ञान्र्मत्वात्तत्कर्वृत्वानुपपत्तेः | 
ब्रह्मस्वरूप एवेति चेज्न | ब्रह्मणो निवर्तकज्ञानं प्रति ज्ञातृत्वं किं खरूपमुताध्यस्तम्‌ | 
अध्यस्तं चेदयमध्यासस्तन्मूरी विद्यान्तरं च निवर्तकज्ञानविषयतया तिष्ठत्येव । तन्निवर्त- 
कान्तराभ्युपगमे तस्यापि fread | सर्वस्य हि ज्ञानस्य त्रिरूपकत्वविरहे ज्ञान- 
त्वमेव हीयते । कस्यचित्कंचनार्थ विशेषं प्रति सिद्विरूपत्वात्‌ | ज्ञानस्य त्रिरूपत्वविरहे 

भवतां सरूपभूतज्ञानवन्तिवरतेकज्ञानमप्यनिवतेकं स्यात्‌ | ब्रह्मलरूपस्येव ज्ञातृत्वाभ्युपगमेऽ 

१५ स्मदीय एव पक्षः परिगृहीतः स्यात्‌ | निव्तेकज्ञानस्वरूपज्ञातृत्वं च खनिवर्त्यान्तर्गतमि ति 

M, om. नित्रृत्ता स्यातः" "` `` qq * haplography 
A, विनिवर्त्य?-- 
P M, मन्तव्यम्‌ 

P “विरोध” 

M, om. न 

P M, तस्य for dd— 

A, कमेत्वात्मककतृ?-- 

P "रूपम्‌ 

P om. v 

P M, तन्मूलम विद्या? 

P M, “रूपत्वाद्‌ 

P M,, 33 om. एव 

IE 

— Land and 
PHS 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

वचनं भूतलव्यतिरिक्त कृत्स्नं छिन्नं देवदत्तेनेत्यस्यामेव छेदनक्रियायामस्याइछेदनक्रियाय- 
३छेततत्वस्य च हेद्यान्तर्भाववचनवदुर्पहास्यम्‌ | 

[४९] अपि च 'निखिलमेदनिवर्तकमिदमेक्यज्ञानं केन जातमिति fadirdi- 
यम्‌ । श्रृत्येवेति चेन्न । तस्या ब्रह्मव्यतिरिक्ताया अविद्यापरिकल्पितत्वात्मपश्चवाधकज्ञान- 
स्योत्पादकत्वं न संभवति। तथा हि दुष्टकारणजातमपि रज्जुस्ज्ञानं नै दुष्टकारणजन्येन 
TARA न सर्प इति ज्ञानेन वाध्यते। रज्जुसपेज्ञानभये वर्तमाने केनचिद्भान्तेन 
पुरुषेण रज्जुरियं न सर्प इत्युक्तेऽप्ययं आन्त इति ज्ञाते सति तद्वचनं रज्जुसर्पज्ञानस्य 
बाधकं न भवति भयं च न निवर्तेते | प्रैयोजकज्ञानवतः श्रवणवेलायामेव हि अमव्यति- 
रिक्तत्वेन श्रुतेरपि आन्तिमूलत्व॑ ज्ञातमिति । नि्वैतेकज्ञानस्य जञतुस्तत्सामग्रीत- 
शा्रस्य च ब्रह्मव्यतिरिक्ततया - यदि aran eta aff प्रपञ्चनिवृतेर्मिथ्या्रमा- 

A, देवदत्तेन छिन्नम्‌ - 

P M,a “क्रियाया _ 

P om. अस्याच्छदेनक्रियायाश 

M, अप” 

M, निखिलच्छेद?-- 
P. M, विवेचनीयम्‌ ˆ 

M, A, ज्ञानोत्प?--- 

P M, “कारणजन्यम्‌ 

T om. न, adds न before बाध्यते 
M, om. “ज्ञान”--॥' ज्ञाने सति . 

७ & 93१ 9 WA ७७ ४ 

Lond 
e 

11. M, प्रयोजज्ञान? 

12. P T किंच निवत 
13, P M, A, ज्ातुश्च-— 
14. M, “"भूतस्य ` 

15. A, उच्येत-- 

16. A, om, हन्त 

101 

102 

१० 

१५ 

ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

पैततीति प्रपञ्चस्य सत्यता स्यात्‌ । खप्नदृष्टपुरुषवाक्यावगतपित्रीदिमरणस्य मिथ्यात्वेन 
पित्रादिसत्यतावत्‌ | किंच तत्त्वमस्यादिवाक्यं न प्रपञ्चस्य वाधकम्‌। आन्तिमूरुत्वा्भान्त- 
प्रयुक्तरज्जुसपेबाधकवाक्यवत्‌ | l | 

[५०] ननु च स्वप्ने करिमश्चिद्धये वर्तमाने स्वप्नदशायामेवाय स्वप्न इति 
ज्ञाते सति पूर्वेभयनिवृत्तिदेष्टा । तद्वदत्रापि संभवतीति | नेवम्‌। स्वप्नवेलायामेव 
सोऽपि स्वप्न इति ज्ञाते सति पुनभयानिवृत्तिरेव दृष्टेति न कश्चिद्विरोषः । 

[५१] श्रवणवेलायामेव सोऽपि स्वप्न ईति ज्ञातमेवेद्युक्तम्‌। ` यदपि 
चेदमुक्त शआन्तिपरिकल्पितत्वेन मिथ्यारूपमपि शास्नर्म द्वितीयं ब्रह्मेति बोधयति तस्य सतो 
ब्रह्मणो विषयस्य पश्चात्तनबाधादर्शनाद्रझ सुस्थितमेवेति । तंदयुक्तम्‌ । शून्यमेव तत्त्व- 
मिति वाक्येन तस्यापि बाधितत्वात्‌। इदं श्रान्तिमूलवाक्यमिति चेत्‌ । सदद्वितीयं 
र्ति वाक्यमपि आन्तिमूरमिति त्वयेवो्तम्‌ । पश्चात्तनवाधादरनं तु सर्वशून्यवाक्य- 
स्यैवेति विशेष: सर्वशून्यवादिनो ब्रह्मव्यतिरिक्तवस्तु मिथ्यात्ववादिनश्च खपक्षसाधन- 
प्रमाणपारमार्थ्यानभ्युपगमेना भिदु्तैर्वादानधिकार एव प्रतिपादितः । 

अधिकारोऽनुपायत्वान्न वादे झून्यवादिनः । ईति | 

[५२] अपि च प्रत्यक्षदष्टस्य प्रपञ्चस्य मिथ्यात्वं केन प्रमाणेन साध्यते | 
प्रत्यक्षस्य दोषमूरत्वेनान्यथासिद्धिसभवानिर्दोषं शाख्मनन्यथासिद्धं प्रत्यक्षस्य बाधक- 
मिति चेत्‌ । केन दोषेण जातं प्रत्यक्षमनन्तमेदविषयमिति वक्तव्यम्‌ | अनादिभेद- 

P आपतेदू--- 

T both times पुत्रादि?-- 

M, A, “aati? 

M... om. &fit—M, इतिवजातम्‌? 
M, A सदद्वितीयं 

P तदुक्तम्‌ A, तदप्युक्तम्‌ 

A, om. इति 

PM, A, दृष्प्रपचस्य 

A, प्रत्यक्षवाधकम्‌ 

A, विवेचनीयम्‌ 

PP gv Uo $e op. m oL 

karad 
e 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

वासनाख्यदोपजातं प्रत्यक्षमिति चेत्‌ । हन्त तद्यनेनेव दोषेण जातं शाख्रमपीत्येकदो ष- 
मूलत्वाच्छास्प्रत्यक्षयोर्न बाध्यवाधकभावसिद्धिः | 

[५३] आकाशवाय्वादिभूततदारव्धश॑व्दस्पर्शा दियुक्तमनुष्यत्वा दिसंस्थानसं स्थित- 
पदार्थग्राहि प्रत्यक्षम्‌ । शाख्रं तु प्रत्यक्षाद्यपरिच्छेद्यसर्वान्तरात्मत्वसत्यत्वाचनन्तविशेषण- 
विशिष्टब्रह्मखरूपतदुपासनाद्याराधनप्रकारतत्मापिपूर्वेकतत्मसादळभ्यफलविशेषतदनिष्ट - 
करणमूलनिग्रह विशेषविषयमिति ने झाखप्रत्यक्षयोविरोधः | अनादिनिधनाविच्छिन्नपाठ- 
संप्रदायताद्यनेकशुणविशिष्टस्य amener बळीयस्त्वं वदता प्रत्यक्षपारमार्थ्यमवश्यमम्युप- 
गन्तव्यमित्यलमनेन . श्रुतिशतविततिवातवेगपराहतकुदृष्टिदुष्युक्तिजारतूलनिरसनेनेत्यु- 
परम्यते । eee MOREM he a 

[५४] द्वितीये तु पक्ष . उपाधिब्रह्मव्यतिरिक्तवस्त्वन्तरानभ्युपगमाठठझण्येवो- 
पाधिसंसर्गादौपाधिकाः सर्वे दोषा ब्रह्मण्येव. wag: | ततश्चापहतपाप्मत्वा दिनिर्दोषत्व- 
श्रुतयः सर्वे विहन्यन्ते | दे 

[५५] यथा घटाकाशादे: परिच्छिन्नतया.' महाकाशाद्विलक्षण्यं परस्पर भेदश्च 
eee - तत्रस्था गुणा वा दोषा वा5नवच्छिन्ने महाकारो न संवध्यन्ते एवमुपाधिकृतभेद- 
व्यवस्थितजीवगता दोषा अनुपहिते परे ब्रह्मणि न संबध्यन्त इति चेत्‌ । नेतदुपपद्यते | 
निरवयवस्याकाशस्यानवच्छेद्यस्य घंटादिमिर्छेदासंभवात्तेनेवाकाशेन घटादयः संयुक्ता इति 
ब्रह्मणो5प्यच्छेद्यत्वा SAMA स्यात्‌ | घटसंयुक्ताकाशप्रदेशो5न्यस्मादाकीश- 

P M,, om. “शब्द? 
M; A,, T om. “awa” 
P M,., place न before विरोध: 
M, A, T वक्तव्यम्‌ 
M, A, T दोषा वा गुणा 
P M, “स्याच्छेद्यस्य-- 
M,a घटादिभिः परिच्छे 
M, om. तेनेव, reads ९काशेनेव पु 
l M,., प्यपरिच्छे? 
10. A, *काशादू--- 

W USO UV Ne ie 

103 

१५ 

104 

१० 

१५ 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

प्रदेशाद्विद्वत इति 'चेत्‌। . आकाशस्येकस्येव प्रदेशभेदेन घटादिसंयोगादूघटादौ 
गच्छति तस्य चं प्रदेशभेदस्यानियम इति तद्वट्रह्मण्येव प्रदेशभेदानियमेनोपाधिसंसर्गा- 
दुपाधौ गच्छति संयुक्तवियुत्तब्रह्म्रदेरामेदाच्च ब्रह्मण्येवोपाधिसंसर्गः क्षणे क्षणे बन्धमोक्षौ 
स्यातामिति सन्तः परिहसन्ति । | 
[५६] निरवयवस्येवाकाशस्य श्रोत्रेन्द्रियत्वेउपीन्द्रियव्यवस्थावड्रह्मण्यपि व्यव- 
स्थोपपद्यत इति चेत्‌। न वायुविशेषसंस्कृतकर्णप्रदेशसंयुक्तस्येवाकाशपरदेशस्येन्द्रियत्वा- 
ततस्य च प्रदेशान्तरा मेदानियमेऽपीन्द्रियव्यवस्थोपपद्यते | आकाशस्य तु सर्वेषां शरीरेषु 
गच्छत्स्वनियमेन सत्वप्रदेशसंयोग इति ब्रह्मण्युपाधिसंयोगपदेशानियम एव | 
[५७] आकाइास्य स्वरूपेणैव श्रोत्रेन्दरियत्वमभ्युपगम्यापीन्द्रियव्यवस्थोक्ता | 
परमार्थतस्त््वाकाशो न MAP| वैकारिकादहंकारादेकादशेन्द्रियाणि जायन्त 
इति हि वैदिकाः | यथोक्तं मँगवता पराशरेण ---. . 
तैजसानीन्द्रियाण्याहुर्देवा वैकारिका दश | 
एकादशं मनश्चात्र देवा वैकारिकाः स्मृताः | इति । 

अयमर्थः | वैकारिकस्तैजसो भूतादिरिति त्रिविधोऽहंकारः। स च क्रमात्सा- 
त्त्विको राजसस्तामसश्च। तत्र तामसाद्‌भूतादेराकाशादीनि भूतानि जयन्त इति 

M, चेन्न 

P om. च, reads प्रदेश भेदेन भेदस्यानियम ` 
M, T बन्धो मोक्षश्च भवतीति 

A, om. एव, reads “काशस्येव-- 
M, “fare व्य? 

P M, “कोशस्ये न्द्रिय? 

M, “मेदादनियमे-- 

M, “द्रियस्य व्य? 

P अभ्युपयमा दिन्द्रिय? 

10, P om. भगवर्ता 

11. P M, om. भूतानि 

IZ T prints जायन्त इति [देवा वैकारिकाः eam] इति [इति--स्वमतमुच्यते 
देवाः] इन्द्रियाणि ८६८ 

१० ७ :3 ७ ४७ फी ७ YP 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

dims तैजसाद्राजसादहंकारादेकादशेन्द्रियाणि जायन्त इति परमतमुपन्यस्य 
सात्त्विकाहकारद्विकारिकानीन्द्रियाणि जायन्त इति स्वमतमुच्यते - देवा वैकारिकाः स्मृता 
इति । देवा इन्द्रियाणि। एवमिन्द्रियाणामाहकारिकाणां भूतेश्वाप्यायनं महाभारत 
उच्यते | भौतिकत्वे5पीन्द्रियाणामाकाशा दिभूतविकारत्वादेवाकाशा दिभूतपरिणाम विशेषा 
व्यवस्थिता एव शरीखत्पुरुषाणामिन्द्रियाणि भवन्तीति ब्रह्मण्यच्छेचे निरवयवे निर्विकारे 
तवनियमेनानन्तहेयोपाधिसंसगदोषो eater एवेति श्रद्दधानानामेवायं da इति 
Maa न बहु मन्यन्ते । स्वरूपपरिणामाभ्युपगमादविकीरत्वशरुतिर्वाध्यते । निरव- 
द्यता च ब्रह्मणः शक्तिपरिणाम इति चेत्‌ । केयं शक्तिरुच्यते किं ब्रह्मपरिणामरूपा। 
उत Festa कापीति | उभयपक्षेऽपि स्वरूपपरिणामोऽवर्जनीय एव | 

[५८] तृतीयेऽपि पक्षे जीर्वत्रह्मणोर्भेदवद भेदस्य चाभ्युपगमात्तम्य च तद्भावा- 
waters स्वावतारभेदवच्च सर्वस्येश्वर मेदत्वात्सरवे जीवगता दोषास्तस्थैव स्युः | 
एतदुक्तं भवति। ईश्वरः स्वरूपेणैव खुरनरतिर्यक्स्थावरादि भेदेनावस्थित इति हि तदात्मक- 
amii क्रियते। तथा सत्येकमृसिण्डारब्धघरशरार्वौदिगतान्युदकाहरणाँदीनि सर्व- 
कार्याणि यथा cea भवन्ति, एवं सर्वजीवगतसुखदुःखादि सथंमीश्वरगतमेव स्यात्‌ | 

[५९] घटशरौंवादिसंस्थानानुपयुक्तमृदूद्रयं यथा कारणान्तरान्वितमेवमेव सुर- 
पशुमनुजा दिजीवत्वानुपयुक्तश्वरः Te: सत्यसंकल्पत्वादिकल्याणगुणाकर इति ALI 

M, °कारिकभूतेश 

Mo.s. As om. तु 

M, अश्रद्धधानानां 

P HdqH—for पक्ष, 

P M,., अविकारश्रुतिर्‌ 

A, ऽन्या 

M, सा कापीति 

M, om. जीवब्रह्मणोर्‌ 

P शश्वरामेदत्वात्‌ सर्वजीवगता 
M, “शरावगत? 

P "दिसवे? 

M, T °करका? 

P M, घुरनरपञ्चमचुज--4, gg” 

७ 9० १ ७ ७ # ७. ७2 ४ 

hod hed आर jamah 
wns 

' 105 

१० 

१५ 

106 

१० 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

सत्यं स LAA एकेनांरोन कल्याणगुणाकर: स ण्वान्येनांशेन हेयगुणाकर इत्युक्तम्‌ | 
हयोरंशयोरीश्वराविशेषात्‌ । द्वावंशौ व्यवस्थिताविति चेत्‌ । कस्तेन लाभः | एकस्यै- 
वैकेनांशेन नित्यदुःखित्वादंशान्तरेण सुखित्वर्मपि नेश्वरत्वाय कर्पते | यथा देवदत्त- 
स्येकस्मिन्हस्ते चन्दनपङ्कानुलेपकेयूरकटकी दुलीयालंकारस्तंस्थेवान्यस्मिन्हस्ते मुदर्रांमि- 
घातः कालानरज्वालानुप्रवेशश्च तद्वदेवेश्वरस्य स्यादिति ब्रह्माज्ञानपक्षादपि पापीयानयं 
भेदामेदपक्षः | अपरिमितदुःखस्य पारमार्थिकतात्संसारिणामनन्तत्वेन दुस्तरत्वाच | 

[६०] ` तस्माद्विङक्षणोऽयं जीवांश इति चेत्‌। आगतोऽसि तहि ada 
पन्थानम्‌। ईश्वरस्य स्वरूपेण तादात्म्यवर्णने स्यादयं दोषः। आत्मशरीरभावेन तु 
तादाल्यप्रतिपादने न कश्चिद्दोषः । प्रत्युत निखिलभुँवननियमना दिर्मदानँयं गुणगणः 
प्रतिपादितो भवति | सामानाधिकरण्यं च मुख्यवृत्तम्‌ | 

[६१] अपि aem वस्तुनो भिन्नाभिन्नल्व विरुद्धत्वान्न संभवतीत्युक्तम्‌ | 
घटस्य पैटाद्विन्नत्वे सति तस्य तस्मिन्नमावः। अभिन्नत्वे सति dea च भाव gR I 
एकस्मिन्कैले चेकस्मिन्देरो चेकस्य हि पदार्थस्य युगपत्सद्भावोऽसद्भावश्च विरुद्धः । c 

P M; ^uis: 

M, “कल्पकल्या? 

M, स्वेनांशोन--.&, “तेनांशेन 

P M, “दु:ःखित्वम्‌ 

M, om. अपि 

P °अङ्गलीयका? 

T एतस्येव 

M, अभिभूतः 

PM, वादाद्‌ 

P. om. जीवांश '** "` 'स्यादयं [दोषः 

11. 7? १४, “चेतन? 107 “भुवन? 

12. T अयं महागुणगण: 

13. A, T. insert वस्तुनो हि 

14. P घटादू for Tels : . 
15. M, add तस्य तादात्मतया तह्मिन्‌ and तस्य तादात्मतया भाव 
16. M, om, काळे चेकस्मिन--? om. च 

Doon ० ७ >>> YN 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

- [६२५]. जात्यात्मना भावो व्यक्त्यात्मना चौभाव इति चेत्‌ । जातेमुण्डेन 
चाभेदे सति खण्डे मुण्डस्यापि सद्भावमसङ्गः । WUSA च जातेरभिन्नत्वे सद्भावो 
भिन्नत्वे चासद्भावः wa महिषत्वस्यैवेति विरोधो दुप्परिहर एव। जात्यादेवस्तुसंस्थान- 
तया वस्तुनः प्रकारत्वा्कारमकारिणोश्च पदार्थान्तरत्वं प्रकारस्य safes 
प्रथगनुपम्भश्च तस्य च संस्थानस्य चानेकवस्तुपु प्रकारतयावस्थितिश्चेत्यादिं पूर्वमेवोक्तम्‌ | 

[६३] सोऽयमिति बुद्धिः प्रकारैक्यादयमपि दण्डीति बुद्धिवत्‌ | अयमेव च 
जात्यादिप्रकारो वस्तुनो भेद इत्युच्यते | तद्योग एव वस्तुनो भिन्नमिति व्यवहार॑हेतुरि- 
Ut: | स च वस्तुनो भेदव्यवहारहेतुः स्वस्य च संवेदनवत्‌ | यथा संवेदनं वस्तुनो 
व्यवहारहेतुः स्वस्य व्यवहारहेतुश्च भवति | 

[ae] Sia एव सम्मात्रम्राहि प्रत्यक्षं न भेदग्राहीत्यादिवादा निरस्ताः | 
जात्यादिसंस्थानसंस्थितस्यैव वस्तुनः प्रत्यक्षेण गुदीतत्वात्तस्यैव संस्थानरूपजात्यादेः 
प्रतियोग्यपेक्षया भेदव्यवहारहेतुल्ाच | खरूपपरिणामदोषश्च पूर्वमेवोक्तः | 

[६५] यः प्र्थिव्यां तिष्ठन््रथिन्या अन्तरो य॑ प्रथिवी न वेद यस्य एथिवी 
शरीरं यः पृथिवीमन्तरो यमयति Wa त आस्मान्तर्याम्यमृतः ये आत्मनि REAA- 

P वा? for चा? 

P M, add व्यक्त्या चामेदे--?, च AX—M, om. च 

M, adds तर्हि तथा खण्डेन, om. च 
. P वासद्भाव:--7' ऽसद्भावः . 
PM,om.णव . .. 
: M, `संस्थानरूपतया 

PM,,Tom.*. 

A, “हेतुश्च भवति 

PU 

P M, add अत एव च 

M, om. वादा: 

P om. एष d— 

M, om. 3 afa ang: 

$9 0 H ७ ७ + wn = 

be - it pa 
oy =| 9 

107 

१० 

108 

१० 

१५ 

२० 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

नोऽन्तरो यमात्मा न वेद यस्यात्मा शरीरं य आत्मानमन्तरो यमयति एष त आत्मान्त- 
alaga: | यः पथिवीमन्तरे संचरन्यस्थ प्रथिवी शारीरं यं एथिवी न वेदेत्यादि--योऽ- 

'क्षरमन्तरे संचरन्यस्याक्षरं शरीरं यमक्षरं न वेद--यो मृत्युमन्तरे संचरन्यस्य मृत्युः 

शरीरं यं मृत्युने वेद - एष सवमूतान्तरात्मापहतपाप्मा दिव्यो देव एको नारायणः | 
द्वा सुपर्णा सयुजा सखाया समानं वृक्ष परिषखजाते। तयोरन्यः fleas स्वाद्वत्त्यन- 
्न्नन्योऽभिचाकशीति | अन्तः प्रविष्टः शास्ता जनानां सर्वात्मा | TET तदेवानु- 
प्राविशत्‌ । तदनुप्रविइय सञ्च त्यच्च सत्यं चानृतं च सत्यमभवत्‌ | अनेन जीवेनात्म- 
नेत्यादि । एथगात्मानं प्रेरितारं मत्वा जुष्टस्ततस्तेनाशृतत्वमेति। भोक्ता भोग्यं 
प्रेरितारं च मत्वा सवै प्रोक्तं त्रिविधं ब्रह्ममेतत्‌। नित्यो नित्यानां चेतनश्चेतनानामेको बहूनां 
यो विदधाति कामान्‌ । प्रधानक्षेतरज्ञपतिर्गुणेशः । ज्ञाज्ञौ द्वावजावीशनीशावित्यादि- 
श्रतिशतेस्तदुपवृहणे;--- 

जगत्सवे शरीरं ते AA ते वसुधातलम्‌ ॥ 

यत्किचित्सृज्यते येन सत्त्वजातेन वे द्विज । 
तस्य सृज्यस्य संभूतौ तत्सर्वं वे हरेस्तनुः ॥ 

अहमात्मा गुडाकेश सर्वभूताशयस्थितः di 

ana चाहं हृदि संनिविष्टो 
मत्तः स्मृतिर्जानमपोहनं च ॥ 

इत्या दिवेदविद¥रसरवाल्मी किंपराशरट्वैपायनवचोभिश्च परस्य ब्रणः सर्वस्यात्म- 
त्वावगमाच्िदचिदात्मकस्य वस्तुनस्तच्छरीरैत्वावगमाच्च शरीरस्य शारीरिणं प्रति प्रकार- 

6 0७. ७७ 

तयैव पदार्थत्वात्‌ शरीरशरीरिणोश्व धर्मभेदेडपि तयोरसंकरात्सवशरीरं- ब्रह्मेति ब्रह्मणो 
M, om. इशनीशौ 

M, सर्वास्मत्वा? 

P A, “रीरत्वाभ्युपगमाच्‌ 

A, शारीरस्य च 

M, तत्पदार्थ? 

M, धर्ममेंदेन TAT, 

Door 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

aa प्रतिपादयद्धि: सामानाधिकरण्यादिमिर्मुख्यवृत्ते' सवचेतनाचेतनप्रकारं अद्मैवाभि- 
धीयते। सामानाधिकरण्यं हि द्वयोः पैदयोः प्रकारद्वयरमु खेनैकार्थनिष्ठत्वम्‌। तस्य चेत- 
स्मिन्पक्षे मुख्यता | तथा हि तत्त्वमिति सामानाधिकरण्ये तदित्यनेन नगत्कारणं 
सर्वकस्याणगुणाकरं निरवद्यं त्रझमोच्यते | त्वमिति च चेतनसमानाधिकरणवृत्तेन जीवा- 
न्तर्यामिरूंपि तच्छरीरं तदात्मतयावस्थित॑ तत्मकारं ब्रह्मोच्यते | इतरेषु पक्षेषु सामा- 
नाधिकरण्यहानिब्रसणः सैदोषता च स्यात्‌ | 

[६६] एतदुक्तं भवति। ब्रह्मैवमवस्थितमित्यत्रैवंशन्दार्थ मूतम्रकारतयैव विचित्र- 
चेतनाचेतनातमकप्रपञ्चस्य स्थूरुस्य सूक्ष्मस्य च सङद्भावः। तथा च बहु स्यां प्रजाये- 
येत्ययमर्थः संपन्नो भवति । तस्यैवेश्वरस्य कार्यतया कारणतया च नानासंस्थानसंस्थि- 
तस्य संस्थानतया चिदचिद्वस्तुजातमवस्थितमिति i 

[६७] ननु च संस्थानरूपेण प्रकारतयैवंशब्दार्थत्वंजातिमुणयोरेव इष्टं न 
न्यस्य । स्ततन्त्रसिद्वियोग्यस्य पदार्थस्यैवश्दार्थतयेश्वरस्य प्रकारमात्रत्वमयुरक्तंम्‌ | 
उच्यते--द्रव्यस्यापि दण्डकुण्डलादेद्रन्यान्तरप्रकारत्वं हृष्टमेव। ननु च दण्डादेः 
तन्त्रस्य द्रब्यान्तरप्रकारत्वे मत्वर्थीयप्रत्ययो zu: | यथा दण्डी कुण्डलीति। अतो 
गोत्वादितुस्यतया चेतनाचेर्तनस्य द्रव्यभूतस्य वस्तुन ईश्वरप्रकारतया सामानाधि- 
करण्येन प्रतिपादनं न युज्यते । 

1. M, an. f& 

P om. पदयोः 

P इत्यनेन WW—M, A, om. T—A, इति चेत्‌ तत्समान? 
P M, "रूपेण PT 
M, तद्दोषता 

P M, A,., add इति चेत्‌ before उच्यते 

M, “चेतनद्रव्य” 

(DO AP NM 

109 

qo 

१५ 

410 

१० 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

` अत्रोच्यते-गोरश्चो मनुष्यो देव इति. भूतसंघातरूपाणां द्वव्याणामेव देवर्दत्त 

मनुष्यो जातः पुण्यविशेषेण यज्ञ॑दत्तो गौर्जीतः पापेन कर्मणा, अन्यश्चेतनः पुण्या ति- 
रेकेण देवो जात इँत्यादिदेवादिशरीराणां चेतनम्रकारतया लोकवेदयोः सामानाधि- 

करण्येन प्रतिपादनं दृष्टम्‌ | 

[६८] अयमर्थः--जातिर्वा गुणो वा द्रव्यं वा न तत्रादरः। केचन द्रव्य- 
विशेषं प्रति विशेषणतयेव यस्य सद्भावस्तस्य तदएथक्सिद्धेस्त्रकारतया तत्सामानाधि- 
करण्येन प्रतिपादनं युक्तम्‌ । यस्य पुनर्द्रव्यस्य प्रथक्सिद्धस्येव कदा चिरर्कँचिद्‌द्रव्यान्तर- 
प्रकारत्वमिप्यते . तत्र . मत्वर्थीयम्रत्यय इति विदोषः । . एवभेव _ स्थावरजङ्गमात्मकस्य 
सर्वस्य वस्तुन इश्वरशरीरत्वेन तत्मकारतयेव स्वरूपसद्भाव इति। तत्मकारीश्वर एव 
तैतच्छन्देनामिधीयत इति तत्सामानाधिकरण्येन प्रतिपादनं युक्तम्‌। तदेवैतससरष पूर्वमेव 
नौमरूपब्याकरणश्रुतिविवरणे प्रपञ्चितम्‌ | D 

. [६९] अतः प्रकृतिपुरुषमहदहंकारतन्मात्रभूतेन्द्रियतदारब्धचतुदशभुवनात्मक- 
ब्रझाण्डतदन्तवेतिदेवतिथब्मनुंप्यस्थावरा दिसर्वप्रकारसंस्थानसंस्थितं कैयमपि सर्व sed 

Jl. M,q3 ^ 
2. P.om. देव इति 
3. "M, इति महाभूत 
4. M, देवो जातो for देवदत्तो - 
5. P M, देवदत्तो 107 यज्ञदत्तो 
6. M, अन्यश्वेतनातिरेकेण--)॥, पुण्येन कमणा for पुण्याति रेकेण 
7. P इल्यादिभूतेसंघातरूपाणां द्रव्यानामेव देवादि”--)॥, इत्यादि द्रव्यादि 
शरीराणां द्रव्यानां चेतन 
8. ग द्रव्य वा शुणो वा 
9. M, किंचित्‌ for क्कचित्‌ 
10. all except M, T read तच्छब्देन 
11. M, T mama’ 
12. P €न्द्रियाद्यारव्ध” 
13. M, ?agemfa? 
14. P ud कार्यमू---? M, om. अपि 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

कारणभूतत्रेह्मविज्ञानादेव सर्व विज्ञातं भवतीत्येकविज्ञानेन सर्वविज्ञानमुपपन्नतरम्‌। 
तदेवं कार्यकारणभावादिमुखेन meer चिदचिद्वस्तुनः परब्रह्मप्रकारतया तदात्म- 
कत्वमुक्तम्‌ | | 

[७०] ननु च पैरस्य ब्रह्मण: स्वरूपेण परिणामास्पदत्वं निर्विकारत्वनिरवद्यत्व- 
्ुतिव्याकोपप्रसङ्गेन निवारितम्‌। safer अतिज्ञाइष्टन्तानुपरोधा दित्येकविज्ञानेन 
सर्वविज्ञानभतिज्ञामृत्तत्कायदृष्टान्ताभ्यां परमपुरुषस्य जगदुपादानकारणत्वं च प्रतिपादितम्‌ । 
उपादानकारणत्वं च परिणामास्पदत्वमेव | कथमिदमुपपद्यते | . 

[७१] अत्रोच्यते-सजीवस्य प्रपञ्चस्याविरेषेण कारणत्वमुक्तम्‌ | तत्रेश्वरस्य 
जीवरूपपरिणामाभ्युपगैमेन नात्मा श्रुते नित्यत्वाच्च ताभ्य इति विरुध्यते । वैपम्यने्वृण्य- 
परिहारश्च जीवानामनादित्वाभ्युपगमेन त॑त्कर्मनिमित्ततया प्रतिपादित:-वैपम्यने्वृण्ये न 
सापेक्षत्वान्न कर्मविभागादिति चेन्न-अनादित्वादुपपद्यते चाप्युपलभ्यते चे्त्यक्ृताभ्यागम- 
कृतविम्रणाराप्रसङ्गश्चा नित्यत्वेऽमिहितः | 

[७२] तथा प्रकृतेरप्यना दिता TAR: प्रतिपादिता 

'अजामेकां छोहितशुक्कक्कप्णां ai प्रजां जनयन्तीं सरूपाम्‌ | 
अजो ह्येको जुषमाणोऽनुरेते जहात्येनां भुक्तभोगामजोऽन्यः ॥ 

M, Ay... मह्यज्ञानादू 

P परंत्रह्म? 

M, स्वस्वरूपेण 

M, T निर्विकारनिरवदश्रुति?-~-7°श्रुतिकोष 

P “प्रतिज्ञान |" 

A, प्रतिज्ञातृत्वात्तत्काये — A, “ज्ञातृतद्दष्टान्ताभ्यां 

P. om. परिणामास्पदत्वम्‌ रूप[“परिणामा 

M,a "H—P. om. ART गमेनं . . 

P M, तत्तत्कार्य? 

A, अकृताभ्युपगम” 

A, “श्रृतिप्रतिपादिता-- | nae 
© P'Mypóm.gifa?^eseseegwüseo 70007 . € 

p rn anawr YD > 

ka m > 
EE ES 

111 

‘१५ 

112 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

इंति प्रक्कतिपुरुषयोरजत्वं दर्शयति । अस्मान्मायी सजते विश्वमेतत्तस्मिश्वान्यो 
मायया संनिरुद्धः-मायां तु प्रकृतिं विद्यान्मायिनं तु महेश्वरमिति प्रकृतिरेव स्वरूपेण 
विकारास्पदमिति च दर्शयति। गौरनाद्यन्तवती सा जनित्री भूतभाविनीति च । 
स्मृतिश्च भवति--- 

ईंत्यादिका | 

रक्तिं पुरुषं “चेव विद्धथनादी उभावपि। 
विकारांश्च गुणांश्चैव विद्धि प्रक्कतिसंभवान्‌ ॥ 
भूमिरापोऽनलो वायुः खं मनो बुद्धिरेव च | 

. अहंकार इतीयं मे भिन्ना प्रकृतिरष्टधा ॥ 

अपरेयमितस्त्वन्यां प्रकृति विद्धि मे पराम्‌ | 
जीवभूतां महाबाहो ययेदं धार्यते जगत्‌ ॥ 

प्रकृति स्वामवष्टभ्य fash पुनः पुनः । 

मयाध्यक्षेण प्रकृतिः सूयते सचराचरम्‌ dl 

[७३] tt च प्रकृतेरपीश्वरशरीरत्वा्ँकृतिशब्दोऽपि तदात्ममूतस्येश्वरस्य 
१५ तत्मकारसंस्थितस्य वाचकः । पुरुषशब्दोऽपि तदात्मभूतस्येश्वरस्य पुरुषमकारसं स्थितस्य 
वाचकः | अतस्तद्विकाराणामपि aay एवात्मा । तदाह--- 

m 
*-> (2 
H E 

४० 9० 3 9. ७ # ७ २ :+ 

P M, add इत्यादिना--&,., add गौरनाद्यन्तवतीति च 
P M, दर्शितम्‌ l 

M, om. अस्मान'******'**दर्शयति 

M, om. इति च—M, om. इति 

M, T om. भवति 

M, om. चेव ut 

M, A, T om. line 12. ° 

M, इत्यादिना _ 

P A,4 एवंच सति 

T prints [प्रकृति] शब्दोऽपि [पुरुषः] 

P M, add ^sx आत्मेव---8, “Ata इरमाइ--)/,., तथाइ 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA - 
saad विष्णुस्तथान्यकत पुरुषः- कार एव च। c 
स एव क्षोभको ब्रह्मन्क्षोभ्यश्चव परमेश्वरः ॥ 

इति । अतः प्र॑कृतिम्रंकारसंस्थिते परमात्मनि प्रकारभूतप्रकृत्यंशें विकारः प्रकार्यरो ` 
चाविकारः। एँव्मेव . जीवप्रकारसंस्थिति परमात्मनि चँ प्रकारभूतजीवांरो सर्वे . 

चापुरुषार्थाः प्रकार्यशो नियन्ता निरवद्यः सर्वकल्याणर्गुणाकरः सत्यसंकल्प एव]. ` 

[७४] .तथा च सति कारणार्वस्थ ईश्वर एवेति तदुपादानकजगत्कार्यावस्थोऽपि 
स एवेति कार्यकारणंयोरनन्यत्वं सथश्रुत्यविरोधश्च भवति । तदेवं नामरूपविभागानई- 
सूक्ष्मद॒शापन्नप्रक्कतिपुरुषदारीरं ब्रह्म कारणावस्थं, जगतस्तदापत्तिरेव च पल्यः। AM- 

रूपविभागविभक्त्॑थूरुचिदचिद्वस्तुशरीरं ब्रह्म कार्यावस्थं, प्रह्मणस्तथाविधस्थूलमाव एव ' 

जगतः सृष्टिरित्युच्यते p यथोक्तं भगवता पराशरेण-- 
प्रधानपुंसोरजयोः कारणं कायमूतयोः। इति। 
[७५] तस्मादीश्वरमरकारभूतसर्वावसथप्रक्कतिपुरुषवाचिनः शब्दास्तस्रकार- 

विशिष्टतयावस्थिते परमात्मनि मुख्यतया वन्ते । जीवात्मवाचिदेवमँनुष्यशब्दवत्‌ | | 
यथा देवैमैनुण्यादिशब्दा देवमनुष्या दिप्रक्ृतिपरिणामविरेषाणां जीवात्मप्रकारतंयैवं ˆ 

पदार्थत्वा्रकारिणि जीवात्मनि मुख्यतया aded तस्मास्सव॑स्य चिदचिद्वस्तुनः परमात्म 
शरीरतया तस्रकारत्वासरमात्मनि मुख्यतया वर्तन्ते सर्वे वाचकाः शब्दाः | 

1. Mgom. "प्रकृति? 
2. P M, om. ta—A, एवमेव 
3. PM,om.* . 
4. T गुणाश्रय 
5 
6 

P M,., “वस्थो$पि A P है 

. PM तदुपादानं जगत्‌. ` 

7. M, &,.,. om. EJB e ***ब्रह्मणर्‌ 

8. A, जगतस्‌ for ब्रह्मणसू *** 

9. M, “स्थितपरमात्मनि 

10. Mom. “aga —M, “्मनुष्यादि? | 
11. T. om. देवमनुष्यादि 

12. M, om, aĵa 
13. P M, तद्वाचकाः neant 

113- 

१५ 

1M. 

J. A. B. VAN. BUITENEN 

[७६] अयमेव चौत्मशरीरभावः एथक्सिद्ध-बनर्दाधाराधेथभावो निर्यन्तृनिया- 
म्यभावः रोषशेषिभावश्च। सर्वात्मनाधारतया नियन्तृतया रोषितिया चॅ-आप्नोतीत्यात्मा 
weder नियाम्यतया. शेषतया च - wafers प्रकारमूतमित्यीकारः शरीर 
मिति चोच्यते!॥ एवमेव हि. जीवात्मन: स्वशरीरसंबन्धः । एवमेव परमात्मवः wae 
शरीरत्वेन सवैशब्दवाच्यत्वम्‌ | 

_ [ew] dare श्रुतिगणः - सर्वे वेदा. यत्यद्मामनन्ति सर्वे वेदा यत्रैकं भव- 
Hi तस्यैकस्य. वाच्यत्वादेकार्थवाचिनो भवन्तीत्यर्थः p एको: देवो बहुधा. 
निविष्ट:, सहैव. सन्तं ने, विजानन्तिः देवा इत्यादि । देवा इन्द्रियाणि।. देवमनुष्यादीवा- 
मन्तर्यामितयात्मत्वेन AR aa सन्तं तेषामिम्द्रियाणि, awh नः 
विजानन्तीत्यर्थः | तथा च पौराणिकानि. वचांसि~-- 

नताः स्मः सर्ववचसां प्रतिष्ठा यत्र शाश्वतीः | 
वाच्ये. हि वचसः प्रतिष्ठा | 

कार्याणां कारणं पूर्वे वचसां वाच्यसुत्तमम | 
वेदैश्च संवैरहमेव वेद्यः ।- . ` 

M, A, om. 4 ~, 
M, विरेषणविरोषभावः for नियन्तृनियाम्यभाव 
P M, cm. 4 

P M, dittography of शेषतया-< M,., om. च+ after शेषतय' 
M, प्रकार; for आकार 

M, तथाइ 

all om. इति 

A, अन्वयः for अथे: 

P. om, न विजानन्ति '"**१००९०«* तेषां 

M, निविष्टस्य for निविश्य 

© 0 «3 ७४ A + t D — 
S ९७ ss vn Pp f wt 

— 
e 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

इत्यादीनि सर्वाणि हि धंचांसि संशरीरात्मविशिंष्टमन्तर्यामिणमेवाचक्षते । हँन्ता- 
हमिमास्तिलों देवता अनेन जीवेनात्मनानुप्रविश्य नामरूपे व्याकरवाणीति हिं श्रतिः । 
तथा च मानवं वचः-- 

प्रशासितारं सर्वेषामणीयांसमणीयसाम्‌ | 

fart स्वमधीगम्यं विद्यात्तं पुरुषं परम्‌ ॥ 

` अन्तः प्रविइयाम्तर्यामितया सर्वेषां प्रशासितारं निर्यन्तारम्‌---अणीयांस आत्मानः 
हृत्क्षस्याचेतनस्य व्यापकतया सूक्ष्मभूतास्ते तेषामपि व्यापकत्वातेभ्योऽपि सूक्ष्मतर 
इत्यर्थः — रुक्माभ: आदित्यवर्णः = स्वमधीगम्यः खम्रकल्पबुद्धिमाप्यः, विशदतमम्त्यक्ष- 
तापन्नानुध्यानेकळभ्य इत्यर्थः | 

एनमेके darak मारुतोऽन्ये प्रंजापतिम्‌ | 
ईन्‍्द्रमेके परे प्राणमंपरे a शाश्वतम्‌ ॥ 

इति | एके--वेदा इत्यर्थः | उक्तरीत्या परस्यैव ब्रह्मणः सर्वस्य Harada सर्वा 

115 

qe 

न्तरात्मतया ध्रविशयावस्थितत्वादग्न्यादयः शब्दा अपि शाश्वेतब्रह्मशब्दवत्तस्थेव वाचका 

भवन्तीत्यथः | तथा च स्पृत्येन्तरंस्‌ू--- 

~ M, om. f&—A, * for दि 
P M, A, स्वशरीर? 
P M, om. एवाचक्षते 
P M, A,., T. om. GME 
M, om. रुक्‍्मासे '***'**** अणीयांस 
P om. प्रशासितारे 
M, A, om. नियन्तारं 

Bow Mr 

SND 
5 
2 
A 
2 
4 
2 
À. 
श्र 
& 
3 
4 

M, om; qafa 4 ý 
M, प्रशासितृत्वे "REC aa 
P M, भपि weer—T. om, अपि aces 

‘opt, 
o 

.. 316 

१० 

१५ 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

ये यजन्ति पितृन्देवान्त्राह्मणान्सहुताशनान्‌ | 

सपमूतान्तरात्मानं विष्णुमेव यजन्ति ते॥ | 
इति । पितृदेवब्राह्मणहुताशनादिशब्दास्तन्मुखेन तदन्तरात्मभूतस्य विष्णोरेव वाचका 
इत्युक्तं भैवति । DM . 

[७८] अत्रेदं सवशास्त्रह्ृदयम्‌ — जीवात्मानः स्वयमसंकुचितापरिच्छिन्न- 

निर्मलज्ञानस्वरूपा: सन्तः कर्मरूपा विद्यावेष्टितास्ततत्कर्मानुरूपज्ञानसंको चमापन्नाः, ब्रह्मादि 
स्तम्बपर्यन्तविबिधविचित्रेदेहेपु प्रविष्टासत्तदेहो चितलव्धज्ञान्॑सरास्ततददेहात्माभिमानिन- 

- सदुचितकर्माणि कुर्वाणासदनुगुणसुखदुःखोपभोगरूपसंसारपवाहं प्रतिपद्यन्ते तेषां 
संसारमोचनं भंगवत्मपत्तिमन्तरेण नोपपद्यत इति. तदर्थं प्रथममेषां देवादिभेद- 

रहितज्ञानेकाकारतया सर्वेषां साम्यं प्रतिपाद्य, तस्यापि खरूपस्थ भगवच्छेषतेकरसतया 
भगवदात्मकतामपि प्रतिपाद्य, भगवत्स्वरूपं च हेयम्रत्यनीककल्याणेकतानतया सकलेतर- 
विसंजातीयमनवधिका तिश्ययासंख्येयकल्याणगुणगणाश्रयं खसंकर्पप्रवृत्तसमस्तचिदचिद्वस्तु- 

जाततया सवस्यात्मभूतं प्रतिपाद्य, तदुपासन साङ्गं तत्मापकं प्रतिपादयन्ति शाख्राणीति। 

* 8 

[७९] यथोक्तम्‌--- 
निर्वाणमय एवायमात्मा ज्ञानमयो5मल: | 
दुःखाज्ञानमला धर्मा प्रकृतेस्ते न चात्मनः | 

इति प्रकृतिसंसर्गक्ृतकर्ममूलत्वान्नात्मखरूपप्रयुक्ता धर्मा . इत्यर्थः । प्राप्ताप्राप्तविवेकेन 
प्रकृतेरेव धर्मा इत्युक्तम्‌ । 

A, om. भवति 
M, om. स्तम्ब? 
M, “29 for वदेहेषु x 
P ०. SAU + संसार 
A, एषां for एतेषां 
CM, भगवतातिपत्तिम्‌ A, भगवत्परासिम्‌' 
“Randha [मनव?******“““बस्तुजात] तया ` .* ˆ 
M,., A, आलय for आश्रय—M, om. m? ^. 
M, प्रवत्य for “IT 

७ ७ 9१ 8 एफ Ny 

“VEDARTHASAMGRAHA -117 

'विद्याविनयसंपन्ने ब्राह्मणे गवि हस्तिनि।. . 
झुनि .चैव श्वपाके च पण्डिता: समदनः | 

इति । देवतिर्यब्मनुप्यस्थावरखूपमङ्कतिसंसृष्टस्यामनः स्वरूपविवेचनी बुद्धिर्येषां ते 
पण्डिताः। तत्तत्मकृतिविशेषवियुक्तात्मयाथात्म्यज्ञानवन्तस्तत्र तत्रात्यन्तविषमाकारे वर्तमान- d 
मात्मानं समानाकारं पश्यन्तीति समदर्शिन इत्युक्तर्‌ | तदिदमाह ` ५ 

ईंहैव तैजिंत: सर्गो येषां साम्ये स्थितं मनः | 
- निर्दोषं हि समं ब्रह्म amga ते स्थिताः ॥ 

` इति। निर्दोषं-देवादिप्रकृतिविरोषसंसर्गरूपदोषरहितं स्वरूपेणावस्थितं सर्वमात्म- 
बस्तु निर्वाणरूपज्ञानेकाकारतया सममित्यर्थः | 

[८०] 

तस्यैवंभूतस्यात्मनो भगवच्छेषतैकर॑सता तंत्नियाम्यता तदेकाधारता . १० 

,च॒तंच्छरीरतत्तनुप्रभृतिमिः शब्देसत्सामानाधिकरण्येन. च श्रृतिस्मतीतिहासपुराणेषु 
‘प्रतिपाद्यत इति पूर्वमेवोक्तम्‌ | | | 

[८१] 

39: EE CONS जी” क: कर (हे. “हल 

दैवी हयेषा गुणमयी मम माया दुरत्यया | 
मामेव ये प्रपद्यन्ते मायामेतां तरन्ति ते ॥ 

all except P A, om. इति 

M, A,., om. this line. 

P M, om. इति 

P adds “प्रकतिविकृति?---॥, adds “प्रकृतिपरिणामविशेष 

P M,., सर्वात्म 

P शरसतया ५००७०७५ qrrq seere TAAT : Ve 

P M, add तदात्मकत्बं TES — A; om; तच्छरीर? ` 
“तिहासा: [gee एव ये] प्रपद्यन्ते 

T पुराणादिषु कर. eae 

118 

१० 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

इति तस्यात्मन: कर्मकृतविचित्रगुणमयप्रकृतिसंसर्गरूपात्संसारान्मोक्षो भंगवत्मपत्तिमन्तरेण 
नोपपद्यत इत्युक्तं भवति | नान्यः पन्था अयनाय विद्यत ईत्यादिश्रुतिमिश्च। 

मया ततमिदं सर्वे जगदव्यक्तमूर्तिना | 

मत्स्यानि सर्वभूतानि न चाहं *तेप्ववस्थितः | 

नै च wen भूतानि पश्य मे योगमैश्वरम्‌ ॥ 
इति सर्वशक्तियोगात्सवैश्वयेचिञ्यमुक्तम्‌ | dam— 

विष्टभ्याहमिदं कृत्स्नमेकांशेन स्थितो जगत्‌ | 
इति-_अनन्तविचित्रमहाश्चर्यरूपं जगन्ममायुतांरोनीत्मतया प्रविश्य सवे मत्संकर्पेन 
विष्टॅभ्यानेन रूपेणानन्तमहाविभूतिरपरिमितोदारगुणसागरो निरतिशयाश्चयमूतः स्थितो- 
ऽहमित्यर्थः | तदिदमाह 

एकत्वे सति aaa नानात्वे सति चेकता। 

अचिन्त्यं ब्रह्मणो रूपं कस्तद्वेदितुमह्‌ति ॥ 

इतिं* । प्रशासितृत्वेनेक एव सन्विचित्रचिदचिद्वस्तुष्वन्तरात्मतया प्रविश्य तत्तद्रपेण 
विचित्रप्रकारो विचित्रकर्म कारयन्नानारूपतां भजते | एवं खर्पौँल्पांरोन हुँ सर्वाश्चर्यमर्थ 

1. M, भगषत्प्रतिपत्तिमु-- . 
2. P om. $&—M, om, Wafa 
3. A, om. आदि इत्यादिभिः 

? तेषु वाप्यहम्‌ o 

. M, एवांशेन 
. M, om. आत्मतभा 
P sey 34—M, भ्यान्येन 
10. P M,orn, इति 
11, M, “stadt सन्‌ 
12, P एवं wg Wee, wagra 
13. M,,A,om.q 

4 
5. 
6. P तथादि for तदाइ 
1 
8 
9 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA - 

SERRA जगत्तदन्तरात्मतया प्रविरय विष्टभ्य. नानात्वेनावस्थितो5पि सन्ननवधिकातिझया- 
संख्येयकल्याणगुणगंणः सर्वेश्वरेधवर: AT: पुरुषोत्तमो नारायणो निरतिदायाश्वरय- 
मूतो नीरूंतोयदसंकाशः पुण्डरीकद्रामलायतेक्षण: स॑हसांशुसहसकिरण: परमे व्योम्नि 
यो वेद निहितं गुहायां परमे व्योमंस्तदक्षरे परमे व्योमन्नित्यादिश्रतिसिद्ध एक 
एवा तिष्ठते | 

[८२] ब्रह्मन्यतिरिक्तस्य कस्यचिदपि वस्तुन एकखभावस्येककार्यशक्तियुक्त- 
स्यैकरूपस्य रूपान्तरयोगः स्वभावान्तरयोगः शक्त्यन्तरयोगश्च न॑ घटतेः। eher 
परब्रह्मणः सवेवस्तुविजातीयतया सर्वस्वभावत्वं सर्वशक्तियोगश्चेत्येकस्यैव विचित्रानन्त- 
रूपता च पुनरप्यनन्तापरिमिताश्चययोगेनेकरूपता च न विरुद्धेति वस्तुमात्रसाम्या द्विरोघ- 
चिन्ता न युक्तेत्यर्थः | यथोक्तं | 

= शक्तयः सर्वभावानामचिन्त्यज्ञानगोचरा: । 
यतोऽतो. ब्रह्मणस्तास्तु सर्गाद्या भावशक्तयः ॥ 
भवन्ति तपसां श्रेष्ठ पावकस्य: यथोष्णता. ॥ इति | 

एतदुक्तं भवति---सर्वेषामभिजलादीनां: भावानामेकस्मिन्नपिंः भावे इष्टेव शक्तिः 
स्तद्विसजातीयभागान्तरेऽपीतिं न चिन्तयितुं युक्ता जलादावदृष्टापि तद्विसजातीयपीँवके; 

1.. M, प्रविश्य.. 

2. M, A, om. “गण: 

3. PM,, नीलजीमूत? 

4. A, ००. Wgelg gaat 

5. P M, om. स्वभावान्तर्योग:--11, A, “arte 

6, P नोपपद्यते for न घटते 

7. T तस्यैकस्य 

8. M, अचिन्त्यनयगोचराः 

9. A, अग्रिकल्पादीनां 

10. A, 'इतरे for “अन्तरे ˆ 
11. M,om. इति--- 
12. M, om. पावके--)/, पावकेऽपि arescit 

१ e 

१५ 

120 - 

J.-A:-B: VAN. BUITENEN- 
भाखरत्वोष्णतादिशक्तियथा. दृश्यते, एवमेवं -सैवैवस्तुविसजातीये. ब्रह्मणि सर्वसाम्यं 
नानुमातुं युक्तमिति । अतो विचित्रानन्तशक्तियुक्तं बरह्मवेत्यर्थः | तदाह--- ` 

जगदेतन्महाश्चर्यं रूपे यस्य महात्मनः | 
तेनाश्चैर्यवरेणाहं भवता कृष्णं संगतः |) 

^ ^ =~ ~ ~ 

इति। | 
[<3] तदेतज्नानाविधानन्तश्रुतिनिकरशिष्टपरिगृहीततर्व्याख्यानपरिश्रमाद्वधा- 
रितम्‌। तथा हि---प्रमाणान्तरापरिदृष्टापरिमितपरिणामानेकतत्त्वनियतक्रमविशिष्टो सृष्टि- . 

seat ब्रह्मणोऽनेकविधाः श्रतयो वदन्ति--निरवद्यं निरञ्जनं विज्ञानमानन्दं faf. 

.. निष्कलं निष्क्रिय शान्तं निमुणमित्यादिकाः। निगुणं ज्ञानखरूपं ब्रहेति काश्चन ATA- 

१७. 

5मिदधति। नेह नानास्ति किंचन--मृत्योः स मृत्युमाभोति य इह नानेव पश्यति 
यत्र त्वस्य सर्वमात्मेवाभूत्‌--त॑त्केन के पश्येत्तत्केन कं विजानीयादित्यादिका नानात्व- ` 
निषेधवादिन्यः सन्ति काश्चन aa: | यः सर्वज्ञ: सथवित्‌--यस्य ज्ञानमयं तपः-- 
सर्वाणि रूपाणि विचित्य धीरो नामानि कृत्वाभिवदन्यदास्ते--सर्वे निमेषा जज्ञिरे विद्युतः 
पुरुषादधि--अपहतपाप्मा . विजरो विशुत्युविशोको विजघत्सोऽपिपासः सत्यकामः 
सत्यसंकल्पं इति सथस्मिञ्जगति हेयतयावगतं सबगुणं प्रतिषिध्य निरतिशयकल्याण-.: 
गुणानन्त्यं सर्वज्ञतां सवर्शक्तियोगं सर्वनामरूपव्याकरणं स्ेस्याधारतां च काश्चन श्रुतयो ` 
बुवते । सर्वै खल्विदं ब्रह्म तज्जलानिति--ऐतदात्म्यमिदं सर्व--एकः सन्बहुधा 

1. M,A,., om. एव 

M, om. सर्वे E : ME 

M,a sata 

P “व्याख्यात? | 

PM, A, om arse RR ` < | 
P om. वादिन्य:'"****“*«*रूपाणि - | x : Y: 
M, शक्तिरूपतां t i 
M,., T. om. ‘gaat - Lue Tay 

9० 239 we ७ (२ 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

विचार इत्यादिका ब्रह्मसृष्टं जगन्नानाकारं प्रतिपाथ तदैक्यं च प्रतिपादयन्ति काश्चन | 
एथगात्मानं प्रेरितारं च मत्वा-भोक्ता भोग्यं प्रेरितारं च मत्वा--प्रजापतिरकामयत प्रजाः 

सृजेयेति--पतिं विश्वस्यात्मेश्वरं--शाश्वतं शिवमच्युतं--तमीश्वराणां परमं मैहेश्वरं तं. 

देवतानां परमं च दैवतं--सवस्य वशी सर्वस्येशान इत्यादिका ब्रणः सर्वस्मादन्यत्वं सर्व- 
स्येशितव्यमीश्वरत्वं च ब्रह्मणः सवस्य शेषतां पतित्वं चेश्वरस्य काश्चन। अन्त; प्रविष्टः शास्ता 
जनानां सर्वात्मा--एष त आतमान्तर्याम्यमृतः--यस्य एथिवी शरीरं--यस्यापः शरीरं 

यस्य तेजः शरीरमित्यादि यस्याव्यक्तं शरीरं--यस्याक्षरं शरीरं--यस्य मृत्युः शरीरं: 

थस्यात्मा शरीरमिति ब्र्चन्यति रक्तस्य aer वस्तुनो aaa शरीरात्मभावं दर्शयन्ति 
कश्चनेति | 

[८४] नानारूपाणां वाक्यानामविरोधो सुख्यार्थपरित्यागश्च यथा संभवति 
तथा वर्णनीयम्‌ | afd च--अविकारश्रुतयः खरूपपरिणामपरिहारादेव मुख्यार्थाः | 
निर्गुणवादाश्च प्राकृतहेयगुण निषेधपरतया व्यवस्थिताः | नानात्वनिवेधवादाश्च्ैस्य ब्रह्मणः 

शरीरतया प्रकारभूतं सर्वं चेतनाचेतनं . वस्त्विति. सर्वस्यात्मतया सर्वप्रकारं अक्षैवावस्थित- 

120 

मिति . सुरक्षिताः । सर्वम्रकारबिलक्षणत्वपतिव्वेश्वरत्व॑सैर्वकल्याणगुणगणाकारत्वसँत्य-- 

A, T add काश्चन श्रुतयः 

all except A, T om. शाश्वत शिवमच्युतम्‌ 

P om. महेश्वरं'"'''*'परमं 

P om. यस्य तेज: शरीरमित्यादि 

M, A, om. इत्यादि 

M, om. यस्यात्मा At,—adds इत्यादि 

T काश्चिद्‌ 

A, T तथेव 

M, T “निषेधतया 

T Cmm. . 

M, चेतनात्मकं वस्तु 

P M, A, om. सव before कल्याण — P. A, om,- गण 
P om. °सत्यकामत्व FS A PS. 

LM EP MC. D हि ce 

— ke [n] — 
w ne Oo wv 
$ ` A 

121 

Ye 

१० 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

कामत्वसत्यसंकल्पत्वादिवाक्यं तदभ्युपगमादेव सुरक्षितम्‌। ज्ञानानन्दमात्रवादि च 
सर्वस्मादन्यस्य सर्वकल्याणगुणाश्रयस्य सर्वेश्वरस्य सर्वशेषिणः सर्वाधारस्य सर्वोत्मत्तिस्थिति+ 
प्रंख्यहेतुभूतस्य निरवद्यस्य निर्विकारस्य सर्वात्मभूतस्य परस्य ब्रमणः खरूपनिरूपकधर्मो 
मरुप्रत्यनीकानन्दरूपज्ञानमेवेति खप्रकाशतया स्वरूपमपि ज्ञानमेवेति च प्रतिपादनाद्नुपा- 

. छितम्‌। ऐक्यवादाश्च शरीरात्मभावेन सामानाधिकरण्यमुख्यार्थतोपपादनादेव सुस्थिताः | 

[८५] एवं च सत्यभेदो वा भेदो वा ब्यात्मकता वा वेदान्तवेद्यः कोऽयमर्थः 
समर्थितो भवति। सर्वस्य 'वेदवेद्यत्वात्सर्व समर्थितम्‌। सर्वरारीरतया सैवैप्रकारं ब्रह्मेवा- 
वस्थितमित्यभेदः समर्थितः | एकमेव ब्रह्म नानाभूतचिदचिद्वस्तुमकारं नानात्वेनावस्थित- 

मिति "भेदाभेदौ | अचिद्वस्तुनश्चिद्वस्तुनश्चेश्वरस्य च खरूपरँयैभाववैलक्षण्यादसंकराच 
भेद; समर्थित: | 

[८६] ननु च तत्त्वमसि श्वेतकेतो तस्य तावदेव चिँरँमित्यैक्यज्ञौनमेव परम- 
पुरुषार्थलक्षणमोक्षसाधनमिति गम्यते | नैतदेवम्‌ । एथगात्मानं ARAK च मत्वा gE- 

स्ततस्तेनामृतत्वमेतीत्यात्मानं प्रेरितारं चान्तर्यामिणं प्रथम्मत्वा ततः एँथक्खज्ञानाद्धेतो- 

1. P “वाची--००. च सवेस्मादन्यस्य 
2. M, स्वस्वरूपे विज्ञानम्‌ 

3. PM, उपपादितम्‌ for अनुपातितम्‌ 
4. M,om. चेद? 

5. P M, “प्रकारक? 
6 

7 

8 

9 

P om. अभद्‌ ;"****** see Coker 

M,., A, om. वस्तु? 

M, adds मेदामेदौ समर्थितौ 
10. M,om, स्वभाव 
11. M, adds चिरं यावन्न विमोक्षे अथ संपथ्येदिति [sic] . 
12. P om. ज्ञानम्‌ upto पृथक्त्व 
13, M, प्रेरकं for प्रेरितारं--ज्ञात्ता £07 मत्वा - 
14, M, एथक्त्वभाव” 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

स्तेन परमात्मना जुष्टोऽमृतत्वमेतीति साक्षादमृतत्वप्राप्तिताधनमात्मनो नियन्तुश्च एथ- 
ग्भावज्ञानमेवेत्यवगम्यते | 

[८७] ऐक्यवाक्यविरोधादेतदपरमार्थसगुणब्रह्मप्राप्तिविषयमित्यभ्युपगन्तर्व्यमिति 
चेत्‌ । पथक्त्वज्ञानस्येव साक्षादम्रतत्वप्ना तिसाधनत्वश्रवणाद्विपरीतं कस्मान्न भवति | 

एतदुक्तं भवति | द्वयोस्तुल्ययोविरोधे सत्यविरोधेन तयोर्विषयो विवेचनीय 
इति । कथमविरोध इति Aq) अन्तर्यामिरूपेणावरस्थितस्य परस्य ब्रह्मण: शरीरतया 
प्रकारत्वाजीवात्मनस्तत्रकारं ब्रह्मेव स्वमिति शब्देनामिधीयते । तथैव . ज्ञातव्यमिति 
तस्य वाक्यस्य विर्षयः । ऐवंभूताज्जीवात्तदात्मतयावस्थितस्य परमात्मनो निखिलदोष॑- 
रहिततया सत्यसंकल्पत्वा्यनवधिकातिशयासंस्येयकस्याणगुणाकरत्वेन च थः एथम्भावः 
disse इत्यस्य वाक्यस्य विषय इत्ययमर्थः पूर्वमसङ्कदुक्तः । भोक्ता भोग्यं प्रेरितारं 
च मत्वेति भोग्यरूँपस्य वस्तुनोऽचेतनत्वं परमार्थत्वं सततं विकारास्पदत्वमित्यादयः 
खभावा:, भोक्तु्जीवात्मनश्चामलापरिच्छिन्नज्ञानानन्दखभावस्यैवाना दिकर्मरूपा विद्याकृत- 
नानाविधज्ञानसंकोचविकासौ भोग्यंभूताचिद्ठस्तुसंसर्गश्व परमात्मोपासनान्मोक्षश्चेत्यादयः 

M, इत्यर्थोऽवगम्यते : 

M, adds इति ऐक्यज्ञानस्यैव मोक्षसाधनत्वं चेत्‌ 

P om. विरोधे सति 

M, aata? 

A, जीवात्मन: प्रकारत्वात्‌ 

M, तत्त्वमिति 

M,., A, T अर्थः for विषयः 

M, ^uasit?— Peat व्यवस्थितपरमा? 

M, “हेय? for “दोष”? 

M, ऽनुसंघीयत 

P M, add वाक्यस्य A—P om. अयम्‌ 

A, भूतस्य for रूपस्य B ME M. 
T भोग्यभूतस्य i í 

2 9 3 9 ४७ Fwnds mm 

-— M 4 
Ux ur ES Sen 

as 

124 

J. A.B. VAN BUITENEN 

स्वभावाः, ` एवंभूतभो क्तभोग्ययोरन्तर्यामिरूपेणावस्थानं खरूपेण ˆ चापरिमितगुणोघा- 
श्रयत्वेनावस्थानमिति परस्य ब्रह्मणल्िविधावस्थानं ज्ञातव्यमित्यर्थः ॥ 

[८८] . तत्त्वमसीति सद्विययायामुपास्यं ब्रह्म सगुणं सगुणब्रह्ममापिश्च:. फॅलमित्य- 
भियुक्ते;पूर्वाचायेन्याख्यातम्‌। यथोक्तं वाक्यकारेण-युक्तं तद्णकोपासनादिति। व्याख्यातं 
च द्रमिडाचार्येण विद्याविकल्पं वदता - यद्यपि सैच्ितो न निर्भुम्नदेवतं गुणगणं मनसानुधा- 
वेत्तथाप्यन्तगुणामेव देवतां भजत इति तत्रापि सगुणेव देवता प्राप्यत इति | सचित्तः « 
पद्वियानिष्ठः ।. न निभुमदेवतं गुणगणं मनसानुधावेत्‌--अपहतपाप्मत्वादिकंल्याण- 
गुणगणं दैवताद्विभक्तं यद्यपि दहरविद्यानिष्ठ इव सचितो न स्मरेत्‌। तथाप्यन्तर्गुणामेव 
देवतां भजते-देवताखरूपानुवन्धिल्यात्सँककल्याणगुणगणस्य केनचित्परदेवतासाधारणेन 
निखिलजगत्कारणत्वादिना गुँणेनोपास्यमानापि देवता वस्तुतः स्वरूपानुबन्धि सर्वकल्याण- 

गुंणविशिष्टवोपास्यते । अतः सगुणमेव ब्रह्म तत्रापि पाप्यमिति सद्विय्यादहर विद्ययो- 
विकल्प इत्यर्थः । 

1. स्वभावा एव 

2. PM,., A, गुणाश्रय? 

3. PA, om: अभियुक्तः . 

4. PM, दविडा? RR भा 

5. र्थ, interpolates सद्विद्यानिष्टः ahad —P M, निर्भुग्नशुणगणं दैवतं 

- अप? in 7. 
P om. तथा up to °धवेत्‌ 4 

6 

7. M, भजञेत--)M, A, ०७. इति . - 
8. PM, om. “कल्याण” - 
9 

M, भजेत 
10. M, सकरस्य 
11. T °गुणगणेन 

12. PM, awa” 
13. M, A, "गुणगण? 

"VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

[८९] ननु च सवस्य जन्तोः परमात्मान्तर्यामी तन्नियाम्यं चे सर्वमेवेल्युक्तम्‌ | 
एवं च सति विधिनिषेधशा्राणामधिकारी न इस्यते । यः खबुद्धवेव प्रवृत्तिनिवृत्तिशक्त: 
स एवं कुर्यान्न कुर्यादिति विधिनिमेधयोग्यः । न चेष दृश्यते। सर्वस्मिन्मवृत्तिजाते 
सर्वस्य प्रेरकः परमात्मा कारयितेति तस्य सर्वनियमनं प्रतिपादितम्‌। dara श्रयते-एष 
एव साधु कर्म कारयति तं यमेभ्यो लोकेभ्य उन्निनीषति | एष एवासाधु कर्म कारयति 
तं यमधो निनीषतीति | साध्वसाधुकमकारयितृत्वान्नेश्वण्यं च | . ` 

[९०] अत्रोच्यते - सर्वेषामेव चेतनानां चिच्छक्तियोगः प्रवृत्तिशाक्तियोर्ग 
इत्यादि सर्वे प्रत्रृतिनिदतिपरिकरं सामान्येन संविधाय तन्निर्वहणाय तदाधारो 
भूत्वान्तः प्रविश्यानुमन्तृतया च नियमनं कुवेञ्दोषित्वेनावस्थितः प॑रमात्मैतदाहित- 
शक्तिः संन्परवृत्तिनिवृत्त्यादि स्वयमेव कुरुते | एवं कुर्वार्णमीक्षमाणः परमात्मोदासीन 
आस्ते । अतः सर्वमुपपन्नम्‌ । साध्वसाधुर्कर्मणोः कारयितृत्वं तु व्यवस्थितविषैयं न 
सर्वसाधारणम्‌। यस्तु पूर्व खयमेव तिमात्रमानुकूल्ये प्रवृत्तस्तं प्रति प्रीत: स्वयमेव भगवा- 
न्कस्याणबुद्धियोगदानं कुवन्कल्याणे प्रवतयति | यः पुनरतिमात्रं प्रातिकूल्ये प्रवृत्तस्तस्य 
क्रां बुद्धि ददन्खयमेव wets कर्मसु प्रेरयति भगवान्‌। यथोक्तं भगंवता-- . 

तेषां सततयुक्तानां भजतं प्रीतिपूर्वकम्‌ | 
ददामि बुद्धियोगं तं येन मामुपयान्ति ते ॥ 

MEAN निया”. ..... OT a 
M, A, T om. तथा, read श्रूयते च 

` ? “योगतादिसवे? 
M, om. निवृत्ति? l 
M, परमात्मैबतदूः . ` ` __ ` 
M, om. सन्‌), जीवात्मा सर्वेप्र? 
M, अपीक्षमाणः 
T "कमेकार? 
M, om. “विषय---? °धारणविषयम्‌ 
T अतिमात्रानु? 
T अतिमात्रप्राति? 

v 9० 3 ७ ७ + ४७ ४ |+ 

wb oad 
— © 

125 

qo 

१५ 

126 

4 

५० 

१५ 

J. 4. B. VAN BUITENEN 
तेषामेवानुकम्पार्थमहमज्ञानजे तमः | 
नाशयाम्यात्मभावस्थो ज्ञानदीपेन भाखता ॥ 

तानहँ द्विषतः कररान्संसारेषु नराधमान्‌ | 
क्षिपाम्यजस्तमशुभानासुरीप्वेव योनिषु ॥ इति | 

[९१] सोऽयं परब्रह्मभूतः पुरुषोत्तमो निरतिशयपुण्यसंचयक्षीणाशेषजन्मो- 
पचितपापराशे: परमपुरुषचरणार विन्दशरणागतिजनिततदाभिमुख्यस्य सदाचार्योपदेशो- 
cafe carrer धिगततत्त्वयाथा स्यावबोधपूर्वकाहरह रुपँची यमानशमदमतपःशौचक्षमाजब - 
भयाभयस्थानविवेकदया हिंसादात्मयुणोपेतस्य वर्णाश्रमो चितपरमपुरुषाराधनवेषनित्यनमि- 
त्तिककर्मोपसंहृतिनिषिद्धपरिद्ारनिष्ठस्य परमपुरुषचरणार विन्दयुगळन्यस्तारँमात्मीयस्य 
तद्कक्तिका रितानवरतस्तुतिस्मृतिनमस्क्ृतिवेन्दनयतनकीर्तनगुणश्रवणवचनध्यानाचेनप्रणा - 
मादिम्रीतपरमकारुणिकपुरुषोत्तमप्रसाद विध्वस्तखान्तध्वान्तस्यानन्यमयोजनानवरतनिरतिश- 
य॑परिर्यविशदतमप्रत्यक्षतापन्नानुध्यानरूपभक्त्येकरभ्यः | तदुक्तं परमशुरुभिर्भर्गवद्यामुना- 

चार्यपौदै:--उभयपरिकर्मितखान्तस्यैका न्तिकात्यन्तिकम क्तियोगलभ्य इति । ज्ञौनयोग- 
कर्मयोगसंस्कृतान्तःकरणस्येत्यर्थः | तथा च श्रतिंः। ` | à 

विद्यां चाविद्यां च यस्तद्वेदोभयं सह | | 
अविद्यया ay dial विद्ययाग्रतमश्नुते ॥ 

A, पूर्वस्य 

M, अनुस्थीयमान? 

M,., A, पेतवर्णा? 

M, om. "पुरुष"--? M, A, om. “अरविन्द? 
M, 'त्मीयतद्ध' 

PM, A,., T om. “वन्दन” 

P A, om. “प्रिय” 

M, om. “भगवद? 

P M, om, पादैः 

M, A, शानकमयोग” 

POND MDD 

- 
> 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 127 

इति । अत्राविद्याशब्देन विदेतरत्वाद्वर्णश्रमाचारादि पूर्वोक्तं कर्मोच्यते विद्याशब्देन च 
भक्तिरूपापन्नं ध्यानमुच्यते। यथोक्तम्‌ 

इयाज सोऽपि सुबहन्यज्ञाञ्ज्ञानन्यपाश्रयः | 
ब्रह्मविद्यामधिष्ठाय ततुं मृत्युमविद्यया ॥ 

इति। तमेवं विद्वानमृत इह भवति नान्यः पन्था अयनाय विद्यते य एनं विदुरः ५ 
मृतास्ते भवन्ति । ब्रह्मविदाप्नोति परम्‌। सो यो ह वै तत्परं aq aa वेद ब्रह्मैव 
भवतीत्यादि | वेदनशैब्देन ध्यानमेवाभिहितम्‌। निदिध्यासितव्य इत्यादिनैकार्थ्यात्‌ | 
तदेव ध्यानं पुनरपि विशिनष्टि-नायमात्मा प्रवचनेन लभ्यो न मेधया न बहुधा 
श्रुतेन । यमेवैष इणुते तेन॑ रुभ्यस्तस्यैष आत्मा विवृणुते तनूं खामिति। Af- 
रूपापन्नानुध्यानेनेव लभ्यते न केवलं वेदनामात्रेण न मेधयेति केवलस्य निषिद्धत्वात्‌ । १० 

[९२] Wagé भवति - योऽयं मुमु्षर्वेदान्तविहितवेदनरूपध्याना दिनिष्ठो 
यदा तस्य तस्मिन्नेवानुध्याने “निरवधिकातिशया प्रीतिर्जायते तदेव तेन लभ्यते पर 
पुरुष इति । यथोक्तं भगवता — 

` पुरुषः स परः पार्थ भक्त्या लभ्यस्त्वनन्यया । 
भक्त्या त्वनन्यया शाक्योऽइमेवंविधोऽजुन | 07038 
ज्ञातु द्रष्टं च तत्त्वेन प्रवेष्टुं च परंतप ॥ 

भक्त्या मामभिजानाति यावान्यश्चास्मि तत्त्वतः । 
ततो मां तत्त्वतो ज्ञात्वा विशते तदनन्तरम्‌ ॥. 

T शवन्नष्या? . 

M, A,., T om. सो यो"'""*"''*"परं वेद 
P om. “शब्देन 

T तेन च 

M, प्रीतिरूपा? 

T अनवधिका? 

T परमपुरुषः 

जे 9 एमी ७-४ 

128 

१५ 

J. A. B VAN BUITENEN 

इति । तंदनन्तरं मां. तत एवं भक्तितो विशत इत्यर्थः । ` भक्तिरपि निरतिशय- 
परियानन्यप्रयोजनसकलेतरवैतृप्ण्यावहज्ञानविशेष एवेति। तद्युक्त एव तेन परेणात्मना 
बरणीयो भवतीति तेन लभ्यत इति श्रृत्यर्थः | एवंविधपरभक्तिरूपज्ञानविशेषस्योत्पादकः 
पूर्वोक्ताहरहरुपचीयमानज्ञानपूवककर्मानुगृहीतभक्तियोग एव। यथोक्तं भगवता 
पराशरेण-- 

वर्णाश्रमाचारवता पुरुषेण परः पुमान्‌ | 
विप्णुराराध्यते पन्था नान्यस्ततोषकारकः ॥ ` 

इति | निखिलजगदुःद्धारणायावनितलेऽवतीर्णः परब्रह्मभूतः पुरुषोत्तमः खयमेवैतदुक्तवान:- 
खकर्मनिरतः सिद्धि यथा बिन्दति तच्छुणु ॥ | 

यतः प्रवृत्तिभूतानां येन सर्वमिदं ततम्‌ । ` 
खकर्मणा तमभ्यर्च्य सिद्धि विन्दति मानवः ॥ 
इति । यथोदितक्रमपरिणतमैक्त्येकरभ्य एव | 

[९३] 'वोधायनटङद्रमिडगुहदेवकपदिभारुचिम्रमूर्त्यविगीतशिष्टपरिगृहीतपुरा - 
तनैवेदवेदान्तव्याख्यानसुव्यक्तार्थश्रृतिनिर्करनिदर्शितोञ्यं पन्थाः। अनेन चार्वाकशाक्यौलः 
क्याक्षपादक्षपणककपिरुपतज्ञरिमतानुसारिणो वेदबाह्या वेदावम्बिकुदृष्टिभिः सह 
निरस्ता: | वेदावळम्विनामपिं यथावस्थितवस्तुविपर्ययसाइशां बाह्यसाम्यं . मनुनेवो क्तम्‌-- 

M, om. तदनन्तरे... 
ग भक्ते 
. M,A, T स्वेतर? for सकलेतर 
P “भक्‍्त्येकावस्थित —M, “Tata 
P भगवद्टो?---0॥, भगवान्बो?--' बौधायन? : 
P M, afe? 
M,., A, 'भ्रसृत्यविगानशिष्ट? 
P M, om. “वेद” 
M, om. “अर्थ? है 
M, A,., *निकरदशितो MD 

Sod व 2४ Bow mr 

pa 
e 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA : 
या वेदबाह्याः स्मृतयो याश्च काश्च कुदृष्टयः | 
सर्वास्ता निष्फला; प्रेत्य तमोनिष्ठा हि ताः स्मृताः ॥ 
इति। रजस्तमोभ्यामस्शृष्टमुत्तमं सत्त्वमेव येषां खाभाविको गुणस्तेषामेव वेदिकी 
रुचिर्वेदाथयाथात्म्याववोधश्चेत्यथः | 
[९४] यथोक्तं मात्स्ये 
| संकीर्णाः सात्त्विकाश्चैव राजसास्तामसास्तथा | 
इतिं Ragan: संकीर्णाः केचित्सत्त्वमायाः केचिद्रजःप्रीयाः केचित्तमःप्राया 

इति कल्पविभागमुक्त्वा सत्त्वरजस्तमोमयानां तत्त्वानां माहात्म्यवर्णन॑ च तत्तत्कल्पप्रोक्त- 
पुराणेषु सत्त्वादिगुणमयेन ब्रह्मणा क्रियत इति चोक्तम्‌ 

यस्मिन्कल्पे तु यद्मोक्ते पुराणं ब्रह्मणा पुरा । 

तस्य तस्य तु माहात्यं तत्स्वरूपेण वर्ण्यते ॥ 
इति । विशेषतश्ोक्तम--- | | 

wa: शिवस्य mar तामसेषु प्रकीर्त्यते । 

राजसेषु च माहात्म्यमधिकं ब्रह्मणो विदुः ॥ 

सात्त्विकेषु च कल्पेषु माहाल्यमधिक हरेः | 

तेष्वेव योर्गसंसिद्धा गमिष्यन्ति परां गतिस्‌ ॥ . 

संकीर्णेषु सरखत्याः'.... .... .... .... .... | . 

T वेदैकरुचिर्‌ 

P adds अयमर्थः 

M, om. आया; 

M, om. ब्रह्मणां 

Mg om. च 

T सात्विकेष्वथ ` 

M, feared for संसिद्धा 

A, T add पितृणाम्‌ तदितरेषु च s ३ 

Bop 

9235 

130 

१० 

1^ 

ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN. 

इत्यादि । एतदुक्तं भवति - आदिक्षेत्रज्ञत्वाद्रझणखस्यापि केपुचिदहस्सु सत्त्वमुद्रिक्त 
केषुचिद्रजः केषुचित्तमः । यथोक्तं भगवता--. . :. - 
. न तदस्ति seat वा .दिवि देवेषु वा पुनः । 

सत्त्वं प्रकृतिजेमुक्त यदेभिः RARA: | TP 
इति | यो ब्रह्माणं विदधाति पूर्व यो वे वेदांश्च प्रहिणोति तस्मा इति श्रतेः। ब्रह्मणो5पि 
सज्यत्वेन शा्रव्यत्वेन च क्षेत्रज्ञत्वं गम्यते । सत्त्वप्रायेप्वहस्सु तदितरेषु यानि 
पुराणानि ब्रह्मणा प्रोक्तानि तेषां परस्परविरोधे सति सात्तिवकाहःभ्रोक्तमेव पुराणं 
यथार्थं तद्विरोध्यन्यदयथार्थमिति पुराणनिर्णयायैवेदं सत्त्वनिष्ठेन ब्रह्मणाभिहितमिंति 
विज्ञायत इति | 

सत्त्वादीनां कार्यं च भगवतैवो क्तम्‌-- 

सत्त्वात्संजायते ज्ञानं रजसो लोम एब च। 
प्रमादमोहौ तमसो भवतोऽज्ञानमेव च ॥ 
प्रवृत्ति च fafa च कार्याकार्ये भयाभये | 
बन्धं मोक्षं च या वेति बुद्धिः सा पार्थः सात्त्विकी ॥ 
यथा धर्ममधमे च कार्ये चाकार्यमेव चे । ` ; 
अयथावत्मजानाति बुद्धिः सा पार्थ राजसी ॥ 
अधर्मे धर्ममिति या मन्यते तमंसावृतो । | 
सर्वार्थान्विपरीतांश्च बुद्धिः सां पार्थ तामसी ॥ ` | 
इति । Ga AE 
सर्वान्पुराणार्थान्त्रह्मण: सकाशादधिगम्यैव सर्वाणि पुराणानि पुराणकाराश्चक्नुः | 
यथो क्तम्‌-- 

कथयामि यथा पूवे दक्षाद्ेर्मुनिसत्तमैः । ` 

पृष्ट: प्रोवाच भगवानब्जयोनिः पितामहः | 
इति । | 

1. ग बन्धमोक्षौ 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 13i 

[९५] अपौरुषेयेषु वेदवाक्येषु परस्परविरुद्धेपु कथमिति चेत्‌। तात्पर्य- 
निश्चयादविरोधः पूर्वमेवोक्तः | यदपि चेदं विरुद्धवदूञ्यते-प्रौणं मनसि सह कारणैनौ- 
दान्ते परात्मानि संप्रतिष्ठाप्य ध्यायीतेशानं प्रध्यायीतव्यं सर्वमिदं, त्रह्मविष्णुरुद्रेन्द्रास्ते सर्वे 
संप्रसूयन्ते, न॑ कारणं, कारणं तु ध्येयः, सर्वेश्चर्यसंपन्न: सर्वेश्वरः शंभुराकाशमध्ये ध्येयः- 
यस्मात्परं नापरमस्ति किंचिद्यस्मान्नाणीयो न॑ ज्यायोऽस्ति कश्चित्‌ - वृक्ष इव स्तन्धो दिवि. ५ 
तिष्ठत्येकस्तेनेदं qui पुरुषेण सर्वम्‌ - ततो यदुत्तरतरं तदरूपमनामयं य एतद्विदुरमृतास्ते ` 
भवन्ति, अथेतरे दुःखमेवापियन्ति 

सर्वाननशिरोग्रीवः सर्वभूतगुहाशयः | 
सर्वव्यापी च भगवांस्तस्मात्सवगतः रिवः ॥ 

यदा तमस्तन्न दिवा न रात्रिर्न सन्न चासच्छिव एव केवलः | S 
तदक्षरं तत्सवितुवरेण्यं प्रज्ञा च तस्मास्रसृता पुराणी ॥ | 

इत्यादि नारायणः परं ब्रह्मेति च पूर्वमेव प्रतिपादितं, तेनास्य कथमविरोधः | 
[९६] अँत्यर्पमेतत्‌-- l 

वेदवित्मवरप्रोक्तवाक्यन्यायोपवृंहिता: | | 
वेदाः साङ्गा aft प्राहुर्जंगजन्मादिकारणं ॥ l १५ 

M, प्रमाणं £07 प्राणं~-4, प्रणामं for प्राणं 

P M, नासान्ते, A, नानान्ते | i , 

P M, om. संप्रतूयन्ते . 

PM, A,., om. न कारणं-M, om..*—M, reads अकारणं for न 
कारण 

M, om. न ज्यायो5स्ति 

M, om. पुरुषेण 

M, om. अरूपम्‌ 

A, om. HA” ater. 

M, om. न सन्‌ 

10. इयव्यल्पम्‌ 

Bun 

Q 90 3 9 ७ 

132 

qo 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

जन्माद्यस्य यतः - यतो वा इमानि भूतानि जायन्ते; येन जातानि जीवन्ति, 
यत्मयन्त्यभिसंविशन्ति, तद्विजिज्ञासख aga जगज्जन्मादिकारणं ब्रह्मे्यवगम्यते । qu 
जंगंत्सृष्टिप्रलयपैकरणेष्ववगन्तव्यम्‌ । सदेव सोम्येदमग्र आसीदेकमेवा द्वितीयमिति 
जंगदुपांदांनताजगन्निमित्तताजैगदन्तर्यामितादिमुखेन परमकारणं सच्छब्देन प्रतिपादितं 
ब्क्मेत्यवंगेतम्‌ | अथभेवार्थः-्रह्त वा इदमेकमेवाग्र आसीदिति शाखान्तरे ब्रह्मशब्देन . 
्रतिपांदितः। अनेन सच्छब्देनामिहितं बद्लेत्यवगतम्‌। अयभेवार्थस्तैथा शाखान्तर 
आत्मा वा इदमेक एवाग्र आसीन्नान्यत्किचन मिषदिति सङ्झशब्दाभ्यामांलेवाभिहित 
इत्यवगम्यते | तँथा च शाखान्तर एको ह वै नांरायण आसीन्न ब्रह्म नेशानो “नेमे 

द्यावाएथिवी न नक्षत्राणीति सङ्रह्मातमादिपरमकारणवादिमिः शाब्दैर्नारायण एवाभिधीयत 
इति निश्चीयते । 

[९७] यमन्तः समुद्रे कवयो वयन्तीत्यादि--नैनमुध्यै न तिर्यञ्चं न मध्ये 
परिजग्रभत्‌ । न तस्येरो कश्चन तस्य नाम महद्यशः॥ न संहरे तिष्ठति 

1. Pom.येन . 
2. M, `प्रलयपरप्रकारणे? 
3. M, om. “जगदन्तर्यामिता? 
4. P M, अभिहितं--1॥, प्रतिपादनं 
5, P om. ब्रह्म वा****'**'* ny च 
6, A, om. ब्रह्मशब्देन 
M, T 'द्वामिद्दितं 
8. A, om, T4I—M, adds आत्मशाब्देन आत्मा वा 
9, M; om. आत्मेव 
10, M, A, om. तथा च 

11, 4, om, fn 
इत्यादिना 

12. M, A, om. “आत्म? 

"RI —M,., T 670, . न॒ नक्षत्राणि and add 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

रूपमस्य न चक्षुषा waft कश्चनैनम्‌, हृदा मनीषा मनंसामिक्लछत्तो य 
एवं विदुरमृतास्ते भवन्तीति सर्वस्मात्परत्वमस्य प्रतिपाद्य, न तस्येरो कश्चनेति 
तस्मात्परं “किमपि न विद्यत इति च प्रतिषिध्य, ener संभूतो हिरण्यगर्भ इत्यष्टाविति 
तेनैकवाक्यतां गमथति। तञ्च महापुरुषप्रकरणं हीश्व ते लक्ष्मीश्च donate च 
नारायण एवेति द्योतयति । 

[९८] ` अयमर्थो नारायणानुवाके प्रपञ्चितः । सहस्शीर्ष देवमित्यारभ्य स 
ब्रह्मा d शिवः सेन्द्रः सोऽक्षरः परमः राडिति सर्वशाखासु ` परतत्त्प्रतिपादनर्परान- 
क्षरशिवशंभुंपरन्रह्मपरज्यो तिःपरतत्त्वपरायणपरमात्मादिसर्वशब्दांस्तत्तद्ुणयोगेन नारायण 
एव प्रयुज्य तब्यतिरिक्तस्य समस्तस्य तदाधारतां तन्नियाम्यतां तच्छेषतां तदात्मकंतां 
च प्रतिपाद्य ब्रह्मशिवयोरपीन्द्रादिसमानाकारतया तद्विभूतित्वं च प्रतिपादितम्‌ । इदं च 
वाक्यं केवरुपरतत्त्व्॑तिपादनैकपरमन्यत्किचिदप्यत्र न विधीयते | 

[९९] | अस्मिन्वाक्ये प्रतिपादितस्य सर्वस्मात्परत्वेनावस्थितस्य ब्रझणो वाक्या- 
न्तरेषु ब्रह्मविदाप्नोतिं परमित्यादिषूपासनादि विधीयते। अतः प्राणं मनसि सह 
करणैरित्यादि वाक्यं सर्वकारणे परमात्मनि करणमाणादि सर्वे विकारजातमुपसंद्दत्य 
तमेव परमात्मानं सर्वस्येशानं ध्यायीतेति परत्रमभूतनारायणस्यैव ध्यानं विदधाति | 

[१००] aff विश्वस्येति न तस्येशे कश्चनेतिं च तस्यैव स्वस्येशानता 
प्रतिपादिता | अत एव सर्वेश्वर्यसंपन्न: सर्वेश्वरः शंभुराकाशमध्ये ध्येय इति नारायणस्यैव 

1, M, किंचिदपि--&, T om. च 
2. PM, aaa वाक्यतां--\, अवगमयति 
3. पत्न्या and adds मह्दोरात्रे पाश्च? 

4. P. om. स शिवः"**''**'°वरब्रह्म” 

5. M, “dum” 

6. M, A, प्रयुज्यते 

7. P M, add तस्य तदायत्ततां तद्याप्यंतां 

8, Pom. प्रतिपादन°- `` सवेस्मात्पर-\, °तत्वैकप्रति पांदन =M, om, “एक? 
9. M,A, add q3I^—M,., परस्य ब्र 

10. A, Tom ttr - bee 

133 

१० 

१५ 

134 

qe 

१५ 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

परमकारणस्य इांभुशव्दवाच्यस्य ध्यानं विधीयते | कश्च ध्येय इत्यारभ्य कारणं तु 
ध्येय इति कार्यस्याध्येयतापूर्वककारणेकध्येयतापरतंवाद्वाक्यस्य । तस्यैव नाराय- 
णस्य परमकारणता शंभुशब्दवाच्यता च परमकारणम्रतिपादनेकपरे नारायणनुवाक 
एव प्रतिपन्नेति तद्विरोध्यर्थान्तरपरिकल्पनं कारणस्यैव ध्येयत्वेन विधिवाक्ये न युज्यते | 

[2o2] यदपि ततो यदुत्तरतरमित्यत्र पुरुषादन्यस्य परतरत्वं प्रतीयत 
इत्यभ्यधायि तदपि denen नापरमस्ति किंचिद्यसमान्नाणीयो न ज्यायोऽस्ति कश्चित्‌- 
यस्मादपरं - यस्मादन्यत्किचिदपि परं नास्ति केनापि प्रकारेण पुरुषव्यतिरिक्तंस्य परत्वं 
नास्तीत्यर्थः । अणीयस्त्वं - सूक्ष्मत्वम्‌ । ज्यायस्त्वं - सर्वेश्वरत्वम्‌ | . सर्वव्यापित्वा- 
्वेश्वरत्वादस्यैतद्यतिरिक्तस्य कस्याप्यणीयस्त्वं ज्यायस्त्वं च नास्तीत्यर्थः। यस्मान्ना- 
णीयो न ज्यायोऽस्ति कश्चिदिति पुरुषादन्यस्य कस्यापि ज्यायस्त्वं निषिद्धमिति तस्मा- 

` दन्यस्य परत्वं न युज्यत इति प्रत्युक्तम्‌ | 

[१०२] wee वाक्यस्याथः | अस्य प्रकरणस्योपक्रमे तमेव विदिः 
त्वातिमृत्युमेति नान्यः पन्था विद्यतेऽयनायेति पुरुषवेदनस्यामृतत्वहेतुतां तब्यतिरि- 
क्तस्यापथतां च प्रतिज्ञाय, यस्मात्परं नापरमस्ति किंचित्तेनेदं पूर्णं पुरुषेण सर्व- 
मित्येतंदन्तेन demere प्रतिपादितम्‌ | यतः पुरुषतत्त्वमेवोत्तरतरं ततो यदुत्तरतरं 
पुरुषतत्त्वं तदेवारूपमनामयं य एतद्विदुरमृतास्ते रमृतास्ते भवन्ति, अथेतरे दुःखमेवापियन्तीति 

M, “aaa 

T घ्येयत्वविधि?--])॥, ध्येयत्ववाक्ये 

P M, A, परत्वं 

A, om. यस्मात्परं 

M, नास्तीति 

M, ° रिक्तपरत्वं 

M, adds अणीयस्त्व ज्यायस्त्वं 
- M, adds. अर्थ उच्यते _ 

A, om. एतद X 
'P. M,, add gaa सर्वस्मात्‌, 

cP RAAB ७० ऐ>. = 

-— 
o 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

पुरुषवेदनस्यामृतत्वहेतुत्वं तदिर्त॑रस्यापथलवं प्रतिज्ञातं सहेतुकमुपसंहृतम्‌ । अन्यथो पक्रम- 
गतप्रतिज्ञाभ्यां विरुध्यते । पुरुषस्यैव शुद्धिगुणयोगेन शिवशळ्दा मिघेयलं - शाश्वतं 
शिवमच्युतमित्यादिना ज्ञातमेव । पुरुष एव शिवशब्दामिधेय इत्यनन्तरमेव. वदति-- 
महान्म्रभुर्वे पुरुषः सत्त्वस्येष प्रवतक इति। Seda न्यायेन न सन्न चासच्छिव एव 
केवल इत्यादि wd नेयम्‌ | 

[१०३] किंच न तस्येशे कश्चनेति निरस्तसमाभ्यधिकसंभावनस्य पुरुषस्या- 
णोरणीयानित्यस्मिन्ननुवाके वेदाद्न्तरूपतया वेदवीजमूतप्रणवस्य 'प्रकृतिभूताकारवाच्य- 
तया महेश्वर प्रतिपाद्य दहरपुण्डरीकमध्यस्थाकाशान्तवतितयो पास्यत्वमुक्तम्‌ | अयमर्थ:--- 
सर्वस्य वेदजातस्य प्रकृति: प्रणव उक्तः | प्रणवस्य च॑प्रकृतिरंकारः । प्रणवविकारो 
Sa: खप्रक्कतिभूते प्रणवे लीन: । प्रणवोऽप्यकारविकारमूतः स्वप्रकृतावकारे लीनः | 
तस्य प्रणवप्रकृतिभूतस्याकारस्य यः परो वाच्यः स (व महेश्वर इति सववॉंचकजातप्रकृति- 
मूताकारवाच्यः सववाच्यजातप्रक्ृतिमूतनारायणो यः स महेश्वर इत्यर्थः| यथोक्तं 
भैंगवता--- | 

अहं कृस्नस्य जगतः प्रभवः प्रलयस्तथा | 
मत्तः परतरं नान्यत्किचिदस्ति धनंजय ॥ 
अक्षराणामकारोऽस्मि .... .... ........ ॥ 

M, इतरापथ? 

M, om. Wad 

T अभिहित 

M, सर्ववेदशास्त्रस्य 

M, om. उक्त: 

P M, om. च 

M, om. आकर: प्रणव 
P M, om. 5पि 

P M, om. अकारस्य 
M, om. एव 

A, वाचकशब्दजात” M, °वाच्यजातस्य - 
A, om. भगवता 

o 

४० 9०.७ 9 ७ # ७2 02 97 

ii -— n 
No 

135 

136 

१०° 

१५ 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN: 

इति । अँ इति ब्रह्मति च श्रतेः । अकारो d सर्वा वागिति च। वाचकजातस्याकार- 
yatta वाच्यजातस्य ब्रह्मप्रकृतित्वं च सुस्पष्टम्‌। अतो ब्रह्मणोऽकारवाच्यताप्रतिपादना- 
दकारवाच्यो नारायण एव महेश्वर इति सिद्धम्‌ । 

[१०४] wem सहस्लशीष देवमिति केवलपरतत्त्वविशेषप्रतिपादनपरेण 
नारायणानुवाकेन सथस्मात्परत्वं प्रपञ्चितम्‌ | अनेनानन्यर्परेण प्रतिपादितमेव परतत्त्वमन्य- 
परेषु सववाक्येषु केनापि शब्देन प्रतीयमानं तदेवेत्यवगम्यत इति ` शाखदृष्टया तूपदेशो 
वामदेववदिति सूत्रकारेण निर्णीतम्‌ । तदेतत्परं ब्रह्म कचिढ्रह्मशिवादिशब्दादवगतमिति 
केवरन्रह्मशिवयोन पैरत्वप्रसङ्गः | अस्मिन्ननन्यपरेऽनुवाके तयो रिन्द्रादितुल्यतया तद्विभूति- 
त्वम्रतिपादनात्‌ | कचिदाकाराम्राणादिशन्देन परं ब्र्मामिहितमिति भूताकाइप्राणादेर्य्थी 
न परत्वम्‌ | यत्पुनरिदमाशङ्कितमथ यदिदमसिन्त्रह्मपुरे दहरं पुण्डरीकं वेश्म दहरोः 
$सिन्नन्तराकाशस्तस्मिन्यदन्तस्तदन्वेष्टव्यं तद्वाव विजिज्ञासितव्यमित्यत्राकाशशब्देन 
जगदुपादानकारणं प्रतिपाद्य तदन्तर्वतिनः कस्यचितँत्त्वविशेषस्यानवेष्टव्यता प्रतिपायते | 
अस्याकाशस्य नामरूपयो निर्वो ढृत्वश्रवणात्पुरुषसूक्ते पुरुषस्य नामरूपयोः Seu. 

काशपर्यायभूतार्‍ँरुषादन्यस्यान्वेष्टव्यतयोपास्यत्वं प्रतीयत इत्यनधीतवेदानामंरष्टशात्राणा- 
मिदं चोद्यं । 

M, अ इति a—P M; om. 3: before sfr. — PM, read श्रुतेः 

A, om. सहेश्वर ; — bo ४४७००७१७७८ 
P M, om. पर 
M, om. प्रपञ्चितम्‌ 
M, “परत्वप्रतिपादनमेव परत्वम्‌ 
M, स्वेषु वाक्येषु 
A, वामदेव इति 
T शब्दावगतम्‌ 

9, PM, Tas’. 

10. PM, यथा 
11, 34, ०७. तत्त्व, . 
12. A, om. प्रतिपाद्यते'* पुरुषादन्यस्य 
13. M, पुरुषान्तरस्य for पुरुषादन्यस्य .... |. 
14. P M, A, अरष्टशाज्विदाम्‌ her 

PANEPEN ६४ 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

- [१०५] यतत्तत्र श्रतिरेवास्य परिहारमाह | वाक्यकारश्च - दह्रो5स्मिननन्त- 
राकाशः कि तदत्र विद्यते यदन्वेष्टव्य यद्वाव विजिज्ञासितव्यमिति चोदिते यावान्वा अय- 
माकाशस्तावानेपोऽन्तहृदय आकाश इत्यादिनास्याकाशराब्दवाच्यस्य परमपुरुषस्या- 
नवधिकमहत्त्व सकळजगत्कारणतया सकळूजगदाधारत्वं च प्रतिपाद्य तस्मिन्कामाः 
समाहिता . इति कामदव्देनापहतपाप्मत्वादिसत्यसंकह्पपर्यन्तगुणाष्टकं . निहितमिति 
परमपुरुषवत्परमपुरुषशुणाष्टकस्यापि पृथम्विजिज्ञासितव्यताप्रतिपिपादयिषया तस्मिन्यद- 
न्तस्तदनवेष्टव्यमित्युक्तमिति e wq परिहृतम्‌ 

[१०६] एतदुक्तं भवति - किं dea विद्यते यदन्वेष्टव्यमित्यस्य चोद्यस्य त॑स्मि- 
न्सर्वस्य जगतः शष्टत्वमाधारत्व॑ नियन्तृत्व॑ शेषित्वमपहतपाप्मत्वादयो गुणाश्च विद्यन्त 
इति परिहार इति । तथा च बाक्यकारवचनम्‌--तस्मिन्यदन्तरिति कामव्यपदेद इति। 
काम्यन्त इति कामाः | अपहतपाप्मत्वादयो गुणा इत्यर्थः | एतदुक्तं भवति--यदेतद- 
हराकाझईीन्दाभिधेयं निखिरजगदुदयवैभवरुयळीलं परं ब्रह्म तैस्मिन्यदन्तरनिहितमनवधि- 
कातिशयमपहतपाप्मत्वा दिगुणाष्टकं तदुभयमप्यन्वेष्टव्यं विजिज्ञासितव्यमिति | यथाह 
अथ य इहात्मानमनुविद्य ब्रजन्त्येतांश्च सत्यान्कँमांस्तेषां सर्वेषु लोकेषु कामचारो 
भवतीति । 

M, om. कि तदत्र*“*““आकाश 
P “वाच्य 

M, “पर्यन्तकल्याणगुणगणयोगः [7777] प्रतिपिपादयिषया 
M, om. परमपुरुषवत्‌ 

A, om. Gage चोद्यस्य 
M,., तत्र for तदत्र. 

P M, अस्मिन्‌ 

P M, तदेतद्‌ 

P M, “पदवाच्यं 

.. M, [aaa] तंदन्तर्‌ 
-OMg कामांश्च - 

9. 097४७ ७७ TET 

— wa 
~ © 
H 

137 

१० 

१५ 

138 

१० 

१५ 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

[१०७] यः पुनः कारणस्यैव घ्येयताम्रतिपादनपरे वाक्ये विप्णोरनन्यपर- 
चाक्यप्रतिपादितपरतत्त्वभूतस्य कार्यमध्ये निवेशः स सकार्यभूततत्त्वसंस्यापूरणं कुर्वतः 
स्वलील्या जगदुपकाराय स्वेच्छावतार इत्यवगन्तव्यः | यथा लीलया देवसंख्यापूरणं 
कुर्वत उपेन्द्रत्वं परस्यैव, यथा च सूर्यवंशोद्भवराजसंख्यापूरणं कुर्वतः परस्यैव ब्रह्मणो 
दाशरथिरूपेण स्वेच्छावतारः, यथा च 'सोमयंशसंख्यापूरणं कुवतो भगवतो भूभाराव- 
तारणाय स्वेच्छया बसुदेवगृहेऽवतारः | 

[१०८] सष्टिप्रलयम्रकरणेषु नारायण एव परमकारणतया प्रतिपाद्यत इति 
पूर्वमेवोक्तम्‌ । यत्युनरथवेशिरसि रुद्रेण TATA प्रपञ्चितं तत्सोऽन्तरादन्तरं प्राविशदिति 
परमासमप्रवेशादुक्तमिति Ast व्यक्तम्‌। शास्त्रदृष्ट्या तूपदेशो वामदेववदिति सूत्रकारे- 
णेवंवा दिनामर्थः प्रतिपादितः | यथोक्तं. प्रह्मदेनापि--- 

सर्वगत्वादनन्तस्य स एवाहमवस्थितः | 
मत्तः सवमह सवे मयि सवे सनातने ॥ 

इत्यादि | अत्र सर्वगत्वादनन्तस्येति हेतुरुक्तः । खशरीरभूतस्य सवस्य चिदचिद्वस्तुन 
आत्मत्वेन सवगतः परमात्मेति सर्वे शब्दाः सवशरीरं परमात्मानमेवामिदधतीत्युक्तम्‌.। 
अतो 5हमिति शब्दः खात्मप्रकारप्रकारिणं परमात्मानमेवाचष्टे। अत. इदमुच्यते. | 
आत्मेत्येव तु गृहीयात्सवस्थ तन्निपपत्तरित्यादिनाहंग्रहणोपासनं वाक्यकारेण कार्यावस्थः 
कारणावस्थश्च स्थूलसूक्ष्मचिदचिद्वस्तुशरीरः परमाल्मैवेति स्थस्य तन्निष्पत्तेरित्युक्तम्‌ । 

A, “gam” l 

M, om. स्वलील्या*-**“***** कुवत (haplography) . 

M, सोमवंशराज?--कुव॑तो [77777] स्वेच्छावतारः pn] रूष्टि? 
M, °कारेणेवायमर्थ:--ऽ९०७०५ manu °वमादीनां 

A, om. "प्रकार? 

M, “पादानं for “पासन 

DN NSS Nt 

M, interpolates वाक्यवारेण सुस्पष्टममिहितम्‌ । KATATA जगत्कारणा- ` 
वस्थिततया चिद्चिद्वाचकरान्दप्रतिपाथश्िद्विद्वस्तुशरीरः - 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 139 

आत्मेति तूपगच्छन्ति ग्राहयन्ति चेति सूत्रकारेण d | महाभारते च ब्रह्मरुद्रसंवादे 
ब्रह्मा रुद्रं प्रत्याह्‌-- 4 

तवान्तरात्मा मम च ये चान्ये देहिसंज्ञिता: । 

इति | रुद्रस्य ब्रहमणश्चान्येषां चं देहिनां परमेश्वरो नारायणो5न्तरात्मतयावस्थित इति। 

तैथा तत्रैव ५ 
विष्णुरात्मा भ॑गवतो भवस्यामिततेजसः | 
तस्माद्धनुज्यासंस्पश स विषेहे महेश्वरः ॥ 

इति । तंत्रैव-- 

एतौ द्वौ विवुधश्रेष्ठो प्रसार्दक्रोधजो स्मृतौ | 

तदादरितपन्थानौ सश्टिंहारकारको ॥ | $$ 
इति | अन्तरात्मतयावस्थितनारांयणदर्शितपथो ब्रह्मरुद्रौ सृष्टिसंह्यारकार्यकरावित्यर्थः | 
` `` [१०९] निमित्तोपादांनयोस्टु भेदं वदन्तो वेदबाह्या एव स्युः। जन्माद्यस्य यत:- 
प्रकृतिश्च—प्रतिज्ञादृष्टान्तानुपरोधादित्यादि वेदवित्मणीतसूत्रविरोधात्‌। सदेव सोम्येदमग्र 
आसीदेकमेवाद्वितीयम्‌--वैदैक्षंत बहु स्यां म्रजायेयेति--न्रह् वनं ब्रह्म स वृक्ष आसीद्यतो 
द्यावाएथिवी निष्टतक्षु:--त्रह्माध्यतिष्ठद्ठुवनानि धारयन्‌--सर्वे निमेषा जज्ञिरे विद्युतः १५ 
पुरुषादधि --न तस्येशे कश्चन तस्य नाम महद्यशः--नेह नानास्ति किंचन---सवेस्य वशी 

M, om. sre 
M, “संस्थिताः secunda manu संज्ञिताः 
. Ma, A, om. च 
P om. तथा 
M, भवतो 
M, “कोप? 
PM,om.g - 
P M, read ब्रह्म for तद्‌--4, om, qq" प्रजायेयेति 

$59 eor 

9० s ७ ७ 

140 

१५ 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

सर्वस्येशान:--पुरुष एवेदं सर्वं uum यच्च भ॑व्यमुतागृतत्त्वस्येशानः--नान्यः पन्था 
अयनाय विद्यत इत्यादिसवश्र॒तिविरोधाच | 

[११०] इतिहासपुराणेषु च सृष्टिस्थितिप्रलयप्रंकरणयो Rana परतत्त्वमित्यव- 
गम्यते | यथा महाभारते 

da: सृष्टमिदं सवे जगत्स्थावरजङ्गमम्‌ | 

प्रल्ये च कमभ्येति तन्नो ब्रूहि पितामह ॥ 
इति एशे-- HN Fi | 

नारायणो जगन्मूतिरनन्तात्मा सनातन | 
इत्यादि च बदति 

षयः पितरो देवा महाभूतानि धातवः | 

जङ्गमाजङ्गमं चेदं जगन्नारायणोद्भवम्‌ द्रवम्‌ ॥ 

इति च। प्राच्योदीच्यदाक्षिणात्यपाश्चात्यसर्वशिष्टेः सवधर्मसर्वतत्त्वव्यवस्थायामिदमेव 
र्याप्तमिर्त्यविगानपरिणृहीतं deg चं पुराणं जन्माद्यस्य यत इति जगज्जन्मादिकारणं 
्रमेत्यवगम्यते | त॑जञन्मादिकारणं किमिति प्रश्नपूर्वकं विष्णोः सकाशादुर््भतमित्यादिना 
ब्रह्मखरूपविशेषप्रतिपादनेकपरतया प्रबृत्तमिति सर्वसंमतम्‌। तथा तत्रैव ` 

- ? भाव्यम्‌ - 

PM, “प्रलयकरणयोर्‌ Mag “कारणयोर्‌ , secunda manu प्रकरणयोर 
P M, om. इति 

1 

2 

3 

4 PM, केन 

5. A, वद्न्‌--P M, वदन्ति 
6. A, om. W: इतिच 
7. P अविगीत? 

8. M,om. 4 

9 

M, कि तज? secunda manu fq—before इति 
10, M, om. YQ 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 141 

प्रकृतियाँ मया ख्याता व्यक्ताव्यक्तवरूपिणी | ` 

पुरुषश्चाप्युभावेतो लीयेते परमात्मनि ॥ - 

परमात्मा च संवेपामाधारः परमेश्वरः | 

विष्णुनामा स वेदेषु वेदान्तेषु च गीयते ॥ 
इति | सर्ववेदैवेदान्तेषु dd: शब्दैः परमंकारणतयायमेव गीयत इत्यर्थः | यथा सर्वासु ua 
श्रुतिषु केवरुपरन्रखरूपविरोषप्रतिपादनायैव प्रवृत्तो नारायणानुवाकस्त॑थेदे वैष्णवं च 
पुराणम्‌ 5. .. क " 

सोऽहमिच्छामि धर्मज्ञ श्रोतुं त्वत्तो यथा जगत्‌ | 

बभूव भूयश्च यथा महाभाग भविष्यति ॥ 

यन्मयं च जगढ्रहन्यतश्चैतचराचरम्‌। . . १० 
ठीनमासीद्यथा यत्र लयमेष्यति यत्र च ॥ 

इति | परं ब्रह्म किमिति प्रक्रम्य 
विष्णोः सकाशादुळूतं जगत्त्रैव च स्थितम्‌| 
'स्थितिसंयमकर्तासौ जगतोऽस्य जगच सः ॥ ` 
परः पराणां परमः परमात्मातसंस्थितः | l १५ 
रूपवर्णा दि निर्देश विशेषण विवजितः | | 
` अपक्षयविनाश्याभ्यां परिणामद्धिजन्मभिः | 
afa: शक्यते वक्तुं यः सदास्तीति केवलम्‌ ॥ 

सर्वत्रासौ समस्तं च वसत्यत्रेति वै यतः | T 
ततः स वासुदेवेति विद्वद्भिः परिपठ्यते ॥ -- २० 

1. M, ag for वेदेषु 
2. M, om. “वेद? 
3. M, तदिदं 

142 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

aga परमं नित्यमजमक्षयमव्ययम्‌ | 
एकखरूप च सदा हेयाभावाच्च निर्मलम्‌ ॥ 

तैदेव सर्वमेवेतब्यक्ताव्यक्तरंवरूपवत्‌ | 
तथा पुरुषरूपेण कालरूपेण च स्थितम्‌ ॥ 

५ स सर्वभूतप्रकृतिं विकारान्गुणादिदोषांश्च मुने व्यतीतः | 
अतीतसर्वावरणोऽखिलात्मा तेनास्तृतं यद्भुवनान्तराले ॥ 

समस्तकल्याणगुणात्मकोऽसौ सँवशक्तिलेशो द्ूतमूतर्वगः | 
इच्छागृहीताभिमतोरुदेहः संसाधितारोषजगद्वितोऽसौ ॥ 

तेजोबळश्वयमहाववोधसुवीर्यशकत्या दिगुणैकराशिः । ` 
१० परः पराणां सकला न यन्न क्लेशादयः सन्ति परावरेशे ॥ 

स ईश्वरो व्यष्टिसमष्टिरूपोऽव्यक्तस्वरूपः कटखरूपः | 
सर्वेश्वरः सर्वहक्सर्ववेत्ता समस्तशक्तिः परमेश्वराख्यः ॥ . 

संज्ञायते येन तदस्तदोषं शुद्धं परं निर्मलमेकरूपम्‌ | 
संदृश्यते वाप्यधिगम्यते वां तज्जञानमज्ञानमतो5न्यदुक्तम्‌ || 

१५ इति परब्रह्मखरूपविशेषनिणयायेव प्रवृत्तम्‌ | 

[१११] अन्यानि सर्वाणि पुराणान्येतदविरोधेन नेयानि। अन्यपरत्वं च 
तत्तदारम्भपकारेरवगम्यते | सर्वात्मना विरुद्धांशस्तामसत्वादनादरणीयः | 

1. PM;सदेवः' ` 
2. M, स्वरूपतः : 
3. M, Ap, died : 
4. M, स्वयत्नलेशादू 
5 Ms A, at: for Cat: 
6. M, om. €विशेष?-- - : 
7. M, WA for TITA, di Tab 
8, T aaga? Rcs 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

[११२] नन्वस्मिन्नपि 

सृष्टिस्थित्यन्तकरणौं ब्रह्मविप्णुशिवात्मिकां | 
स संज्ञां याति भगवानेक एव जनार्दनः |i 

इति त्रिमूतिसाम्यं प्रतीयते | नेतदेवम्‌। एक एव जनार्दन इति जनार्दनस्यैव Aa- 
शिवादिकृत्नम्रपञ्चतादाल्यं विधीयते | जगच्च स इति पूर्वोक्तमेव विवृणो ति--- 

स्रष्टा सृजति चात्मानं विष्णुः पाल्यं च पाति च । 
उपसंहियते चान्ते संहती च स्वयंप्रभुः ॥ 

इति च agami ब्रह्माणं रूज्यं च संहर्तारं संहार्यं च युगपन्निर्दिश्य सर्वस्य 
विप्णुतादात्म्योपदेशात्सज्यसंहार्यभूताद्वस्तुनः स्ष्टसंहर्त्रोजनार्दनविभूतित्वेन विशेषो 
हश्यते | जनार्दनविष्णुशब्दयोः पर्यायत्वेन ब्रह्मविष्णुशिवात्मिकामिति विभूतिम्‌ | 
अत एव स्वेच्छया लीलार्थ विमूत्यन्तर्भाव उच्यते। यथेदमनन्तरमेवोच्यते-- 

प्रथिव्यापस्तथा तेजो वायुराकाश एव च | 
सर्वेन्द्रियान्तःकरणं पुरुषास्यं हि यज्जगत्‌ ॥ 

स एव सर्वभूतात्मा विश्वरूपो यतोऽव्ययः | 
सर्गादिकं ततोऽस्यैव भूतस्थमुपकारकम्‌ ॥. 

स एव सुज्यः स च सर्गकर्ता स एव पात्यत्ति च पाल्यते च | 
्रह्मा्वस्था भिररेषमूतिविष्णु्वरिष्ठो वरदो वरेण्यः ॥ इति । 

[११३] अत्र सामानाधिकरण्यनििष्टं हेयमिश्रप्रपञ्चतादात्म्यं निरवद्यस्य 
निर्विकारस्य समस्तकल्याणगुणात्मकस्य ब्रह्मणः कथमुपपद्यत इत्याशङ्कय स.एव सर्वभूता- 
त्मा विश्वरूपो यतो5व्यय इति स्वयमेवोपपादयति। स एव सर्वेश्वर: परब्रह्मभूतो विष्णुरेव 
सवै जगदिति प्रतिज्ञाय सर्वभूतात्मा विश्वरूपो यतोऽव्यय इति हेतुरुक्तः | सर्वभूता- 
नामयमात्मा विश्वशरीरो यतोऽव्यय इत्यर्थः | वक्ष्यति च--तत्सव वे हरेस्तनुरिति। 

1. P M, add ब्रह्मविष्णुशिव” 
2. M,om. विभूति”... .,, जनादन? 
3. PM,, विश्वरूपो 

143 

१५ 

2 ° 

144 

१० 

J; A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

एतदुक्तं भवति | अस्याव्ययस्यापि परस्य ब्रह्मणो विष्णोविश्वशरीरतया तादात्म्यमविरुद्ध- 
मित्यात्मशरीरयोश्व खभावा व्यवस्थिता एव | एवंभूतस्य सर्वेश्वरस्य विष्णोः प्रपञ्चा- 
न्तरभूतनियाम्यको टिनिविष्टत्रह्मा दिदेवतिर्यङ्मनुप्येषु तत्तत्समाश्रयणीयत्वाय खेच्छावतारः 
पूर्वोक्तः | तदेतड्टह्मादीनां भौवनात्रयान्वयेन कर्मवश्यत्वं भगवतः TEES वासुदेवस्य 
निखिलजगदुपकाराय खेच्छया सेनैव रूपेण देवादिप्ववतार इति चँ पष्टेंडशे शुभाश्रय- 
प्रकरणे सुव्यक्तसुक्तम्‌। अस्य देवादिरूपेणावतारेप्वपि न प्राकृतो देह इति महाभारते 

भूतसंघसंस्थानो देहोऽस्य परमात्मनः । 

इति प्रतिपादितः | श्रृतिश्च--अजायमानो बहुधा विजायते--तस्य धीराः परिजानन्ति 
योनिमिति | कमेवञ्यानां ब्रह्मादीनामनिच्छतामपि तत्तत्कर्मानुगुणप्रक्ृतिपरिणामरूप- 
मूतसंघसंस्थानविशेषदेवादिशरीरमवेशर्रूपं जन्मावर्जनीयम्‌। अयं तु सर्वेश्वरः सत्यसंकर्पो 
भगवानेवंभूतशुभेतरर्जन्माङुर्वत्नपि स्वेच्छया खेनेव निरतिशयकल्याणरूपेण देवादिषु 
जगदुपकाराय बहुधा जायते, तस्रैतस्य शुभेतरजन्माकुरवेतोऽपि ख़कल्याणगुणानन्त्येन 
बहुधा योनिं बहुविधजन्म धीरा-घीमतामः्रेसरा जानन्तीत्यर्थः | 

[११४] तदेतन्निखिरजगन्निमित्तोपादानमूताज्जन्मा्स्य यैतः--प्रक्ृतिश्च 

१५ प्रतिज्ञादष्टान्तानुपरोधादितँमादिसूत्रैः प्रतिपादितासरस्माङ्ठझणः परमपुरुषादन्यस्य FA- 

M, सर्वशरीर? 
P भुवनत्रय? 
M, “uang” 
M,., A,., om. च 
M, A, TOSIA ; 
. P M, “जंन्मादि FA M, om. स्वेच्छया........कुवतोडपि 
M, A, विज्ञायते 
M, “आनुकुर्वतो. 
M, om. बहुधा योनि 
M, interpolates after यत:---अस्य विविधविचित्रभोक्तभोग्यपूर्णस्य जगतो 

यतो जन्मादि az प्रतिपादयितु शक्रोति इत्येतद्वाक्यमिति taken 
from Vedantadipa ad Br S. 1, 1, 1 ad finem. ° 

11. M, T इत्यादिभि 

७. ७:२३ छी ७ क YY धा 

wa 
e 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

चितैरतरत्वं परमतः सेतून्मानसंबन्ध भेदव्यंपदेरोभ्य इत्याशङ्क्य सामान्याततु--बुद्धःयर्थ: 
पादवत्‌---स्थानविशेषास्रकाशा दिवत्‌--उपपत्तेश्व---तँथान्यम्रतिषेधात्‌--अनेन सर्व- 
गतत्वमायामादिशब्दादिभ्य इति सूत्रकारः खयमेव निराकरोति | 

[११५] मानवे am— 
प्रादुरासीत्तमोनुदः सिसक्षुर्विविधाः प्रजाः | 
अप एव ससर्जादौ तासु वीर्यमपारूजत्‌ ॥ 
तस्मिञ्जज्ञे स्वयं ब्रह्मा 
इति ब्रह्मणो अन्मश्रवणार्क्षेत्रज्ञत्वमेवावगम्यते | तथा च स्रष्टुः परमपुरुषस्य तद्विसृष्टस्य 
च ब्रह्मणः | | 
अयनं तस्य ताः पूर्व तेन नारायणः GA: | 
तद्विसष्ट: स पुरुषो लोके ब्रह्मेति कीर्त्यते ॥ 
इति नामनिर्देशाच | तथा चं वैष्णवे पुराणे हिरण्यगर्भादीनां भावनात्रयान्वयादशुद्धत्वेन 
झुभार्श्रयत्वानहतोपपादनाक्कषेत्रज्ञत्वं “निश्चीयते । | 

[११६] यदपि कैश्चिदुक्तम्‌--सर्वस्य शब्दजातस्य विध्यर्थवादमन्त्ररूपस्य 
कार्याभिधायितवेनैव प्रामाण्यं वर्णनीयम्‌। . व्यवहारादन्यत्र शाब्दस्य बोधकल्वशत्तयव- 

M,- T परत्वे 

M, उपदेशेभ्यः 

P M, तदन्यत्र प्रतिषेधात्‌ 
T om. च 

P भुवन? 

P M, “श्रयानहे 

M; न हीयते 

M, शब्द? 

PN SEN MNS क 9: 77165 

145 

१५ 

146 - 

१1० 

१५ 

ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

धारणासंभवाब्यवहारस्य चं कार्यवुद्धिमूलत्वात्कार्यरूप एव हँव्दार्थ:। ने परिनिष्पन्ने वस्तुनि 
शब्द: प्रमाणमिति। अत्रोच्यते। प्रवतेकवाक्यव्यवहार एव शन्दानामर्थवोधकत्वशत्तयव- 
धारणं कर्तव्यमिति किमियं राजाज्ञा | सिद्धवस्तुषु शब्दस्य बोधकत्वशक्तिग्रहणमत्यन्तसुक- 
रम्‌। तथा हि-केनचिड्धस्तचेष्टादिनापवरके दण्डः स्थित इति देवदत्ताय ज्ञापयेति प्रेषित: 
कश्चित्तज्जापने प्रवृत्तो$पवरके दण्डः स्थित इति शब्दं युङ्क्ते । मूकवद्धस्तचेष्टामिमां 
जानन्पार्श्वस्थोऽन्यः प्रागव्युत्न्नोऽपि तस्यार्थस्य वोधनायापवरके दण्डः स्थित इत्यस्य 
शब्दस्य प्रयोगदर्शनादस्यार्थस्यायं शब्दो वोधक इति जानातीति किमत्र दुष्करम्‌ | 
तथा बारुस्तातोऽयमियं मातायं मातुलोऽयं मनुप्योऽयं मृगश्चन्द्रोऽयमयं च सर्प इति 
मातापितृप्रभृतिभिः शब्दैः शनेः शनैरंडुल्या निर्देशेन तत्र तत्र बहुशः शिक्षितस्तैरेव 
शब्देस्तेप्वर्थेषु स्वात्मनश्च Seer दृष्टा तेप्वर्थेषु तेषां झब्दानामङ्गंस्या निर्देशपूर्वकः 
प्रयोग: संवन्धान्तराभावात्संकेतयितृपुरुषाज्ञानाचच बोधकत्वनिवन्धन इति क्रमेण निश्चित्य 
पुनरप्यस्य शब्दस्यायमर्थ इति wae: शिक्षितः सर्वशव्दानामर्थमवगम्यः स्वयमपि सर्व 
वाक्यजातं प्रयुङ्क्ते। एवमेव सवेपदानां स्वार्थामिधायित्वं संघातविशेषाणां च 
यथावस्थितसंसर्ग विशेषवाचित्वं च जीनातीति कार्यार्थ एव व्युत्मत्तिरित्यादिनिर्बन्धो 
निनिवन्धनः । अतः. परिनिप्पन्ने वस्तुनि शब्दस्य वोधकत्वराक्त्यवधारणात्सर्वाणि 
वेदान्तवाक्यानि सकलजगत्कारणं सवेकल्याणगुणाकरमुक्तरक्षणं ब्रह्म वोधयन्त्येव | 

[AN 

M, Tom. 4 
E M, A, Yaa: 
P M, A, om. न and place it before शब्द:---8, T rqaq? 
A, स्वेशव्दानाम--- M,.,. A, “बोधनरा क्ति” 
M, प्रयुज्यते 
P M, A, अङ्कुिनिर्देशेन 
P M, gr व्युत्पत्ति 
P M, A, ^gfofa* 

o?» ran wp wy 

T पूर्वकप्रयोग: 
P जानामीति 

किन 
e 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

[११७] अपि च कार्यार्थ एव व्युत्पतिरस्तु । वेदान्तवाक्यान्यप्युपासन- 
विषयकार्याधिछृतविशेषणभूँतफलत्वेन दुःखासंभिन्नदेश विशेषरूपसर्गा दिवद्रा त्रिसत्रप्रति- 
छादिवदपगोरणशतयातनासाध्यसाधनभाववच कार्योपयोगितयेव सर्व बोधयन्ति | 
तथाहि ब्रह्मविदामोति परमित्यंत्र ब्र्मोपासनविपयकार्याधिकृतविशेषणभूतफलत्वेन 
ब्रह्मप्राप्ति: श्रयते--परपासिकामो ब्रह्म विद्यादित्यत्र प्राप्यतया प्रतीयमानं ब्रह्मस्वरूपं 

e D a e af पयो aN सिद्ध तदन्तर्गतमेव 4 » 5. € 
तद्विशेषणं च सव कार्योपयोगितयेव सिद्धं भवति। तद iraga dega- 
माधारत्वमन्तरात्मत्वमित्यादयुक्तमनुक्त च सर्वमिति न फिंचिदनुपपन्नम्‌ | 

[११८] एवं च सति मन्त्रार्थवादर्गता ह्यविरुद्धा अपूर्वाश्चर्थाः सर्वे विधिशेष- 
तयैब सिद्धा भवन्ति | यथोक्तं द्मिडभाप्ये - ऋणं हि वै जायत इति श्रृतेरित्यु- 
पक्रम्य यद्यप्यवदानस्तुतिपरं वाक्यं तथापि नासता स्तुतिरुपपद्यत इति। एतदुक्तं भवति-- 
wat ह्र्थवादभागो देवताराधनमूतयागादेः साङ्गस्याराध्यदेवतायाश्चादृष्रूपान्गुणान्स- 
zad वदन्सहख्रशः कर्मणि पाशस्त्यबुद्विमुत्पादयति | तेषामसंद्भावे प्राशस्त्यवुद्धिरेव न 
स्यादिति कर्मणि प्राशस्त्यवुद्ध-यर्थ गुणसद्भावमेव बोधयतीति । अनयैव दिशा सर्वे 
न्तरार्थवादावगता अर्थाः सिद्धाः । | 

[११९] अपि च कार्यवाक्यार्थवादिमिः किमिदं कार्यत्वं नामेति वक्तव्यम्‌। 
कृतिमावभाविता छत्युद्देश्यता चेति चेत्‌। किमिदं कृत्युद्देश्यत्वम्‌। यदधिक्कत्य कृतिवतते 
तत्कृत्युद्देश्यत्वमिति चेत्‌। पुरुषव्यापाररूपायाः कृतेः कोऽयमधिकारो नाम | यत्ाप्तीच्छया 

M, om. "भूत फल? 

M, adds after परमू-- इति तस्मिन्‌ यदन्तस्तद्‌ 
P M, सवेकार्यो? 

A, T जगत: 

M, A, om. संहतृत्वम्‌ 

M, om. अनुक्त 

M, IMAR? M,a °गतापि 

P M, द्रविड” 

A, असंभवे 

SOI THN Ue c Be (७७. हज n 

147 

3o 

१५ 

148 

OM 

१० 

१५ 

ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

कृतिमुत्पाद्यति पुरुषः wet चेत्‌ । हन्त तहौष्टत्वमेव ERAT | 
अथैवं मनुषे इष्टस्येव रूपद्दयमस्ति । इच्छाविषयतया स्थितिः gets च । तत्र 
प्रेकत्वाकारः कृल्युद्ेश्यलमिति' सोऽयं खपक्षामिनिवेशकारितो Sarva: । तथा हि- 
इच्छाविषयतया प्रतीतस्य स्वम्रयत्नोसत्तिमन्तरेणासिद्धिरेव मेरकत्वम्‌ । तत एव प्रवृत्तः । 
इच्छायां जातायामिष्टस्य खम्रयत्नोत्मत्तिमन्तरेणासिद्धिः प्रतीयते चेत्ततश्चिंकीर्षा. जायते 
ततः प्रयतते पुरुष इति तत्त्वविदां प्रक्रिया । तस्मादिष्टस्य कृत्यधीनात्मलाभत्वातिरेकि 
Suge नाम किमपि न ead) अथोच्येत - इष्टताहेलुश्च पुरुषानुकूरुता | 
त॑सुरुषानुकूरुत्वं कृत्युदेश्यत्वमिति चेत्‌। नैवम्‌। पुरुषानुकूल सुख मित्यनर्थान्तरम्‌ | 
तथा पुरुषाननुकूरं दुःखपर्यायम्‌। अतः सुखब्यति रिक्तस्य कस्यापि पुरुषानुकूलत्व 
न संभवति | | a 

ननु च दुःखनिवृत्तेरपि सुखव्यतिरिक्ताया: पुरुषानुकूलता दृष्टा नैतत्‌ । आत्मा- 
शुक्रं सुखमासमप्रतिकूरुं दुःखमिति हि सुखदुःखयोरविवेकः । तत्रात्मानुकूलं 
सुखमिष्टं भवति । तत्मतिकूलं दुःखं चानिष्टम्‌। । अतो दुःखसंयोगस्यासह्मतया 
तनिवृत्तिरपीष्टा waft | तत एवेष्टतासौम्यादनुकूरुताअमः। तथा हि---प्रकृतिसंसृष्टस्य 
संसारिणः पुरुषस्यानुकूरुसंयोगः प्रतिकूलसंयोगः स्वैरूपेणाव स्थितिरिति च RASTE: | 

A, इति चेत्‌ | "n 
M,., “कारिणो eda oe वी fel a ee 
P इथाक्रम:---06, FATA: ` é 

P चिकीषेता 

PM, उच्यते 

A, om. qnn. नैवम्‌ 

Mars पुरुषप्रतिकूल for पुरुषानचुकूलं 

M, om. तत्प्रतिकूलं 

0 9० 7४७ ०७ ४०७ pwn ४-4 

M, “सामान्याद्‌ 
M, स्वरूपेणास्थितिर्‌ 

— 
e 

: VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

तत्र प्रतिकूलसंबन्ध निवृत्तिश्चा नुंकूलसंबन्ध निवृत्तिश्व खरूँपेणावस्थितिरिव । तस्मात्रति- 
कूलसंयोगे वर्तमाने तन्निवृत्तिरूपा स्वरूपेणावस्थितिर॑पीष्टा भवति | तत्रेष्टतासाम्यादनु- 
FATAR: | 

[१२०] अतः सुखरूपत्वादनुकूलताया: नियोगस्यानुकूलतां वदन्तं प्रामाणिकाः 
परिहसन्ति | इष्टस्यार्थविशेषस्य निर्वर्तकतयेव हि नियोगस्य नियोगत्वं स्थिरत्वमपूर्वत्व च 
प्रतीयते | । खगेकामो यजेतेत्यत्र कार्यस्य क्रियातिरिक्तता खर्गकामपद्समभिव्याहारेण 
स्वर्गसाधनत्वनिश्वयादेव भवति । न च वाच्यं यजेतेत्यत्र प्रथमं नियोगः खप्रधानतयेव 
प्रतीयते खर्गकामपदसमभिव्याहारास्खसिद्धये खर्ग सिद्भयनुकरूरता च नियोगस्येति । यजे- 
तेति हि धात्वर्थस्य पुरुषप्रयलसीध्यता प्रतीयते | खगकामपदसमभित्याहारादेव धात्वर्थाति- 
रेकिणो नियोगत्वं स्थिरत्वमपूर्वलं चेत्यादि। तच खर्गसाधनखप्रतीतिनिवन्धनम्‌। समभि- 
व्याहृतखगैकामपदार्थान्वययोग्यं खर्गसाधनमेव कार्य लिडादयोऽभिदधतीति लोकव्युत्पत्ति- 
रपि तिरस्क्ृता। एतदुक्तं भवति--समभिव्याहृतपदान्तरवाच्यार्थान्वययोग्यमेवेतरपदप्रति- 
पाद्यमित्यन्विता भिधा यिपदसंघातरूपवाक्यश्रवणसमनन्तरमेव प्रतीयते | तच्च खर्गसाधन- 
रूपम्‌ । अतः क्रियावदनन्यार्थतापि विरोधादेव परित्यक्तेति । अत एव गङ्गायां घोष 
इत्यादौ घोष॑प्रतिवासयोग्यार्थोपस्थापनपरत्व॑ गङ्गापदस्याश्रीयते । प्रथमं गङ्गापदेन 
apid: स्मृत इति गङ्गापदार्थस्य “tae न वाक्यार्थान्वयीभवति | एवमत्रापि यजेतेत्ये- 

M, °रूपेणास्थितिर्‌ 

P M, A, om. अपि A 
P M, A, “कुलताया यो नियोगस्यानुकूलतां बदति qu^ 
P स्वसिद्धस्वर्गसाधनदृत्तिनिश्वयादू 

P M, A, “gada 

T om. “अर्थ? 

P क्रियापदस्यानथ? 

P घोषं प्रति” 

P Map A, पेयत्वात्‌ 

19. 90. Y^ Qv Unc ee 

kamad 
e 

149 

१५ 

150 

१० 

१५ 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

तावन्मात्रश्रवणे कार्यमनन्यार्थ Cuff वाक्यार्थान्वयसमये कार्यस्यानन्यार्थता नाव- 
तिष्ठते । . कार्यामिधायिपदश्रवणवेरायां प्रथमं कार्यमनन्यार्थं प्रतीतमित्येतदपि न संग- 
च्छते | व्युत्मत्तिकाले गवानयनादिक्रियाया दुःखरूपाया इष्टविरोषसाधनतयैव कार्यता- 
प्रतीतेः । अतो नियोगस्य पुरुषानुकूरुत्वं सवलोकविरुद्धं नियोगस्य सुखरूपपुरुषानु- 
medi वदतः स्वानुभवविरोधश्च। करीर्या वृष्टिकामो यजेतेत्यादिषु सिद्धेऽपि नियोगे 
ृष्ट्यादिसिद्धि निमित्तस्य वृष्टिव्यतिरेकेण नियोगस्यानुकूरुता नानुभूयते | यद्यप्यस्मि- 
aa वृष्ट आदिसिद्धेरनियमस्तथाप्यनियमादेव नियोगसिद्धिरवश्याश्रयणीया | तस्मित्न- 
नुकूरुतापर्यायसुखानुभूतिने Sad | एवमुक्तरीत्या कृतिसाध्येष्टत्वातिरेकि कृत्युद्देश्यत्वं न 
इस्यते | l 

[१२१] aÑ प्रति शेषित्वं कल्युदेश्यलमिति चेत्‌ किमिदं शेषित्वं "कि 
च शेषत्वमिति वक्तव्यम्‌ । कार्य प्रति संवन्धी शेषः | तत्मतिसंबन्धित्वं शेषित्वमिति 
चेत्‌ | एवं तहिं कार्यत्वमेरवं रोषित्वमित्युक्तं भवति । कार्यत्वमेव विचार्यते । wea- 
रवृत्तकृतिव्याप्त्यहं त्वं शेषत्वमिति Aq) कोऽयं wea नामेति। अयमेव हि 
विचार्यते | उद्देश्यत्वं नामेप्सितत्वसाध्यत्वमिति चेत्‌। किमिदमीप्सितत्वम्‌। ER- 
प्रयोजनत्वमिति चेत्‌ पुरुषस्य कृत्यारम्मप्रमोजनमेव हि कृतिप्रयोजनम्‌ a चेच्छा- 

M, om. Gaye "`" °अतन्यार्थ 

M, कार्यान्विताभि? 

M,., प्रतीयते - 

M, A, ?RIRII—M,., A, “PRIA — M, om. ृष्टिव्यतिरेकेण 
M, सुखे त्वनुभूतिर्‌ 

P M, न विद्यते 

M, A, om. किंच शेषत्वम्‌ 

P adds. एव हि 

P M,., om. अयमेव हि 

P M, om. कृतिप्रयोजनत्वम्‌*****'एव fü 

per ०७ ७ 2 evo 

pad 
e 

. VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

विषयः कृत्यधीनात्मळलाभ इति पूर्वोक्त एव। अयमेव हि सर्वत्र शेषरोषिभाव: | 
परगतातिशयाधानेच्छयोपादेयत्वमेव यस्य खरूपं स रोषः qc शोषी । फलेत्पत्तीच्छया 
यागादेस्तस्मयत्नस्थ चोपादेयत्वं यागादिसिंद्वीच्छयान्यत्सर्वमुपादेयम्‌ | 

[१२२] एवं गर्भदासादीनामपि पुरुषविशेषातिशयाधानेच्छयोपादेयल्वमेव 
स्वरूपम्‌ | एवमीश्वरगतातिशयाधानेच्छयोपादेयत्वमेव चेतनाचेतनात्मकस्य नित्यस्यानि- 
त्यस्य च सर्वस्य वस्तुनः स्वरूपमिति सथमीश्वररोषभूतं सर्वस्य चेश्वरः रोषीति सर्वस्य 
वशी सर्वस्येशानः पतिं विश्वस्येत्यायुक्तम्‌। कतिसाध्य॑ प्रधानं यत्तत्कार्यमभिधीयत 
इत्ययमर्थः श्रद्दधानेप्वेव शोभते | 

[१२३] अपि च स्वर्गकामो यजेतेत्यादिषु लकारवाच्यकतृविशेषसमर्पण- 
प्राणां स्वर्गकामादिपदानां नियोज्यविशेषसमर्षणपरत्वं शब्दानुशासनविरुद्धं केना- 
वगम्यते । साध्यस्वर्गविशिष्टस्य स्वर्गसौधने ager न घटत इति चेत्‌ । 
नियोज्यत्वान्वयोऽपि न - घटत इति हि स्वर्गसाधनत्रनिश्चयः। से तु शास्रसिद्धे 

कर्तृत्वान्वये स्वर्गसाधनत्वनिश्चयः क्रियते p यथा भोक्तुकामो देवदत्तगृहं गँच्छेदि युक्तः 
B त्यु 

भोजनकामस्य देवदत्तगुहगमने कर्दृत्वश्रवणादेवं प्रागज्ञातमपि भोजनसाधनत्वं देवदत्त- 
गृहगमनस्यावगम्यते । एवमत्रापि मैंवति। न क्रियान्तरं प्रति कर्तृतया श्रुतस्य 

P om. शेषं? 

M, adds परः प्रतिसँबन्धी शेषी 

P तत्र यत्नश्चोषा? 

M, “सिद्धि तत्मतिसंबन्धी चान्यत्सवम्‌ ` 
P गर्भवासा?--1' गर्भधाना? 

M, सर्ववस्तुनः 

P M, om. सर्वस्य चेश्वरस्य शेषीति 

P कृतेः साध्यं 

P om. “विशेष 

10. P “साधन? 

11. 4, ०m. Wd" हि (haplography) 
12. एननु तिसतु f 
13. A,om. गच्छेदित्युक्त 

14. P adds भवतीति 

७७३०७३ ७७५ 

151 

१५ 

152 

१५ 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

क्रियान्तरे कर्तृत्वकल्पनं युक्तम--यजेतेति हि यागकर्तृतया श्रुतस्य बुद्धो कतृत्व- 
कर्पनं क्रियते | बुद्धेः कर्वृत्वकल्पनमेव हि नियोज्यत्वम्‌ । यथोक्त॑-- 

नियोज्य सँर्वकार्य यः स्वकीयत्वेन बुध्यते । 

इति । यष्टृत्वानुगुणं तह्ठोद्भृत्वमिति चेत्‌ । देवदत्तः पचेदिति पाके कर्तृतया श्रुतस्य 
देवदत्तस्य पाकार्थगमनं पाकानुगुणमिति गमने कर्तृत्वकल्पनं न युज्यते । 

[१२४] किं च लिडादिशब्दवाच्यं स्थायिरूपं किमित्यपूर्वमाश्रीयते | 
स्वर्गकामपदसमभिव्याहारानुपपत्तेरेति चेत्‌ । aera: । सिषाधयिषितस्वर्गो 
हि. स्वर्गकामः | तस्य स्वर्गकामस्य कालान्तरभाविस्वर्ग सिद्धौ क्षणभङ्गिनी यागादि- 
क्रिया न समर्थेति चेत्‌। अँनाघ्रातवेदसिद्धान्तानामियमनुपपत्तिः । सर्वे: कर्मभिरा- 
राधितः परमेश्वरो भगवान्नारायेणस्तत्तदिष्टं फलं ददातीति वेदविदो वदन्ति। यथाहु- 
वेदबिदग्रेसरा द्रॅमिडाचार्यी:---फलसंबि्भत्सया हि. कर्मभिरात्मानं पिप्रीषन्ति स प्रीतोऽछं 
फलायेति शास्रमर्यादा इति। फलसंबन्धेच्छया कर्मभिर्यागदानहोमादिभिरिन्द्रादि- 
देवतासुखेन तत्तदन्तर्यामिरूपेणावस्थितमिन्द्रा दिशब्दवाच्यं परमात्मानं भगवन्तं वासु- 
देवर्मारिराधयिषन्ति, स हि कर्मभिराराधितस्तेषामिष्टानि फरानि प्रयच्छतीत्यर्थः | 
तथा च श्रुतिः--इष्टापूर्तं बहुधा जातं जायमानं विश्वं विभति भुवनस्य नाभिरिति । 

M, A, °कतृत्वेन 

all read स च for स्व? which is the original reading 
P, अनधीतवेद” | 
M, om. परमेश्वरो 

P M, द्रविडा? 

P M, normalize “बिभन्त्सया 

M, आत्मानमपि 

P M, om. इति शाञ्रमर्यादा 

P अभिवादयिषन्ति--)॥,., आराधयिष्यन्ति 
M, om. दष्टा? ००००१४००००७० ४: नाभिरिति 

७ 9 :3 8 ७ # ४ >: 

E 
e 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

-इष्टापू्तमिति सकशश्रृतिस्ट्रतिचोदितं कर्मोच्यते ated बिभ्ति-- ईन्दरामि- 

वरुणादिसबदेवतासंबन्धितया प्रतीयमानं तत्तदन्तरात्मतयावस्थित; परमपुरुषः स्वयमेव 

बिभति स्वयमेव स्वीकरोति gata नाभिः--त्रहमक्षत्रादिसर्ववर्णपूर्णस्य सवनस्य 
AN Ç दिष्टफलप्रदानेन Li 

धारक: --तेस्तः कममभिराराधितस्तत्तदिष्टफलप्रदानेन भुवनानां धारक इति नामि- 

faa: | अभिवायुप्रभृतिदेवतान्तरात्मतया तत्तच्छव्दा भिधेयोऽयमेवेत्याह-तदेवामि- 

सतद्वायुस्तत्सूयस्तदु चन्द्रमा इति । यथोक्तं भगवता-- 

यो यो यां यां तनुं भक्तः श्रद्धयाचितुमिच्छति । 
तस्य तस्याचलां श्रद्धां तामेव विदधाम्यहम्‌ || 
` स तया श्रद्धया युक्तस्तस्याराधनमीहते । 
लभते च ततः कामान्मयेव विहितान्हि तान्‌ ॥ इति । 
यां यां तनुमिंतीन्द्रादिदेबता विडोषास्तत्तदन्तर्यामितयावस्थितस्य भगवतस्तनवः शरीरा- 
अहं हि सर्वयज्ञानां भोक्ता च प्रभुरेव च । 
इत्यादि । प्रभुरेव चेति सर्वेकलानां प्रदाता चेत्यर्थः । र्यथा च 
यज्ञस्त्वमिज्यसे नित्यं सर्वदेवमयाच्युत | 

3: स्वधर्मपरेनाथ नरैराराधितो भवान्‌ । 
ते तरन्त्यखिलामेतां मायामात्मबिमुक्तये ॥ 
aa 

इति । सेतिहासपुराणेषु सर्वेष्वेव वेदेषु सर्वाणि कर्माणि सर्वेश्वराराधनरूपाणि, ते 
कर्मभिराराधितः पुरुषोत्तमस्तत्तदिष्टं फलं ददातीति तत्र तत्र प्रपञ्चितम्‌ | 

M, adds इन्दरा मियमवरुण? 
P M, om. “पूर्ण? 

M, उक्तिः 

T om. इति after तनूम्‌ 
M, तथा for यथा 

U PN rm 

153 

१० 

१५ 

154 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

| , एवमेव हि सर्वशक्तिं सर्वज्ञं सर्वेश्वरं भगवन्तमिन्द्रा दिदेवतान्तर्यामिरूपेण याग- 
दानहोमादिवेदो दितसर्वकर्मणां भोक्तारं सर्वफलानां प्रदातारं च सर्वाः श्रुतयो वदन्ति | 
चतुर्होतारो यत्र संपदं गच्छन्ति देवेरित्याद्याः । चतुर्होतारो यज्ञाः, यत्र परमात्मनि 
देवेप्वन्तर्यीमिरूपेणावस्थिते, देवेः संपदं गच्छन्ति--देवैः संबन्धं गच्छन्ति यज्ञा इत्यथः | 
अन्तर्यामिरूपेणावस्थिंतस्य परमात्मनः शरीरतयावस्थितानामिन्द्रादीनाँ यागादिसंबन्ध 
इत्युक्तं भवति | यथोक्तं भगवता-- l EE 

भोक्तारं यज्ञतपसां सवलोकमहेश्वरम्‌ | 

इति । तस्मादर्ग्यादिदेवतान्तरात्मभूतपरमपुरुषाराधनररूपभूतानि सर्वाणि कर्माणि, 
स एव चामिलषितफलप्रदातेति किमत्रापूर्वेण व्युत्मत्तिपथदूरवर्तिना वाच्यतयाभ्युपगतेन 
कल्पितेन वा प्रयोजनम्‌ | एवं च संति लिङादेः कोऽयमर्थः RIAA भवति। यज 
देवपूजायामिति देवताराधनमूतयागादेः प्रकृत्य्थस्य कर्तृव्यापारसाध्यतां व्युत्सतिसिद्धां 
लिढादयो5मिदधतीति न किंचिदनुपपन्नम्‌। कतृंवाचिनां प्रत्ययानां प्रकृत्यर्थस्य कर्दृव्यापार- 
संबन्धप्रकारो R वाच्यः | भूतवर्तमानादिकँमन्ये वदन्ति। लिडादयस्तु कर्तृव्यापार- 
साध्यतां वदन्ति । 5 

M,., Waa सवेशक्ति--? सर्वेश्वरं ads . 
M, “यामितयावस्थिते 

T “वस्थितपरमा? 
` P adds “dai यागादीनां ` ` 

P M, इन्द्रादि” 

P M, “रूपाणि 

P M, कल्पेन 

A, om. सति 

P M, A, “ela इति चेत्‌ 

M, “कमित्येव वदन्ति T “दिम्‌ 

oo NAW PF YN mr 

a 
e 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

~ 

[१२५] अपि च कामिनः कर्तव्यतया कर्म विधाय कर्मणो देवताराधनरूपतां 
तद्द्वारा फैलसंभवं च तत्तत्कर्मविधिवाक्यान्येव वदन्ति | वायव्यं श्वेतमालभेत भूति- 
कामो वायुर्वे क्षेपिष्ठा देवता वायुमेव स्वेन भागधेयेनोपधावति स एवैनं भूति गमयती- 
त्यादीनि । नात्र फरसिद्धयनुपपत्तिः कापि दृश्यत इति फल्साधनत्वावगतिरौपादानि- 
कीत्यपि न संगच्छति । विध्यपेक्षितं यागादेः फलसाधनत्वप्रकारं वाक्यशेष एव 

बोधयतीत्यर्थः | तस्माद्भाह्मणाय नापगुरेतेत्यत्रापगोरण निपेधविधिर्परवाक्यरोपे श्रूयमाणं - 

निषेध्यस्यापगोरणस्य शतयातनासाधनत्वंनिपेधविध्युपयोगीति हि स्वीक्रियते । sa 
पुनः कामिनः कर्तव्यतया विहितस्य यागादेः काम्यखर्गादिसाधनत्वप्रकारं वाक्यरोषा- 
बगतमनाइत्य किमित्युपादानेन यागादेः फलसाधनत्वं परिकल्प्यते । हिरण्यनिधिमपवरके 

निधाय याचते कोद्रवादिङन्धः कृपणं जनमिति श्रयते तदेतद्युप्माछु इस्यते । शत- ` 

यातनासाधनत्वमपि नाहष्टद्वारेण | चोदितान्यनुतिष्ठतो विहितं कर्माकुषतो निन्दितानि 
च कुर्वतः सर्वाणि सुखानि दुःखानि च परमपुरुषानुग्रहनिग्रहाभ्यामेव भवन्ति। एष 

ह्वानन्दयाति--अथो सोऽभयं गतो भवति-अथ तस्य भयं भवति--भीषास्माद्वातः पवते. 

भीषोदेति सूर्यो भीषास्मादभिश्वेन्द्रश्व मृत्युर्धावति पञ्चमः--इति। एतस्य वा अक्षरस्य 
प्रशासने गार्गि सूर्याचन्द्रमसौ विधृतौ तिष्ठतः--एतस्य वा अक्षरस्य प्रशासने गार्गि 
ददतो मनुष्याः प्रशंसन्ति यजमानं देवा दवी पितरोऽन्वायत्ता इत्याचनेकविधाः श्रुतयः 

C10 

सन्ति | यथोक्तं द्रमिडमाप्ये-तस्याज्ञया धावति वायुनः वन्ति तेन च कृतसीमानो 

M,., T तद्वारेण 

M,., फलसंसिद्धि 

P M, काचिपि 

P om. ^q? 

A, अत्रापि 

M, om. कामिनः 

P प्रकल्प्यते 

P श्रुतं यत्‌ 

A,., om. अथ qui भर्य भवति 
P M, पञ्च sear 

७ ००:०७ & ७ AWN mi 

yat 
=> 

155 

3o 

१५ 

156: 

१० 

१५ 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

जलाशयाः सँमदा इव मेषविसर्पितं कुर्वन्तीति। तैत्संकल्पनिबन्धना WA लोके 
न च्यवन्ते न स्फुटन्ते | स्वशासनानुवर्तिनां ज्ञात्वा कारुण्यात्स भगवान्वधयेत विद्वान्कर्म- 
दक्ष इति चं । 

[१२६] परमपुरुषयाथा त्यज्ञानपूर्यकतदुपासनादिविहितकमौर्नुछा यिनस्त्रसा- 
दात्तत्ाप्रिपर्यन्तानि सुखान्यभयं च यथाधिकारं भवन्ति । तज्ज्ञानपूर्वकं तदुपासनादि 
विहितं कर्माकुर्वतो निन्दितानि च कुर्वतस्तन्निग्रहादेव तदप्राप्तियूवकापरिमितदु:खानि भयं 
च भवन्ति | यथोक्तं भगवता-- 

नियतं कुरु कर्म त्व कर्म ज्यायो ह्यकर्मणः | 
इत्यादिना कृत्स्नं कर्म ज्ञानपूर्वकमनुष्ठेयं विधाय-- 

मयि सर्वाणि कर्माणि संन्यस्य 
इति fero खाराधनतामास्मनां खनियाम्यतां च प्रतिपा्य-- 

ये मे मतमिदं नित्यमनुतिष्ठन्ति मानवाः | 
श्रद्धावन्तो ऽनसूयन्तो मुच्यन्ते तेऽपि कर्मभिः ॥ 

ये त्वेतदभ्यसूयन्तो नानुतिष्ठन्ति मे मतम्‌ | 
सर्वज्ञानविमूढांस्तान्विद्धि नष्टानचेतसः ॥ 

P M, समुद्रा एवमेव विसर्पि), समन्दा--4, समुद्रा 
M, तत्संबन्धनि” : 
P M, इमे for dla 

M,., om. स्व” 

P M, स्वभावाञ्च for स भगवान्‌ 

M,., A, वधयते 

T “पूवक 

M, अनुस्थानादिनस्‌ 

M, यथा for विधाय 

M, सर्वकर्म, om. सवस्य Sek M an, ‘ete 

ORD: RD BONS 

beh 
e 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 157 

इति स्वाज्ञानुवर्तिनः प्रशस्य विपरीतान्विनिन्य पुनरपि खाज्ञानुपाठनमकुवतामासुरमकृत्य- 
न्तर्भावममिधायार्धमा गतिश्चोक्ता-- 

तानहं द्विषतः mede नराधमान्‌ | 
क्षिपाम्यजस्रमशुभानासुरीप्वेव योनिषु ॥ 

आसुरीं योनिमापन्ना मूढा जन्मनि जन्मनि | ५ 
मामम्ाप्यैव कौन्तेय ततो यान्त्यधमां गतिम्‌ ॥ इति । 

सर्वकर्माण्यपि सदा कुर्वाणो मब्यपाश्रयः । 
मस्रसादादवाप्नोतिः शाश्वतं पदमव्ययम्‌ || 

इति च संवाज्ञानुवर्तिनां शाश्वतं पदं चोक्तम्‌ | अश्रतवेदान्तानां कमण्यश्रद्धा मा 
भूदिति देवताधिकरणेंऽतिवादाः कृताः कर्ममात्रें यथा श्रद्धा स्यादिति सर्वमेकैशाख- १० 
मिति वेद्वि स्सिद्धान्तः | 

[१२७] तस्यैतस्य परस्य ब्रह्मणोः नारायणस्यापरिच्छेयज्ञानानन्दामछत्वखरूपव- 
जज्ञान क्तिवलेश्वर्यवीर्यतेज:प्रभृत्यनवधिका तिशयासंख्येयकल्याणगुंणवल्खसंकल्पप्रवर्त्यस्वेत- 
रसमस्तचिद्चिद्वस्तुजातवत्स्वामिमतखानुरूपेकरूपदिव्यरूपतदुचितनिरतिशयकल्याणवि - 
विधानंतभूषणखशक्तिसदशापरिमितानन्ताश्रयनानाविधायुधखा भिमतस्रानुरूपसरूपर्गुणबि- १५ 
भवैश्वर्यशीलाद्यनवधिकमहिममहिषीखानुरूपकॅल्याणज्ञानक्रियाद्यपरिमेयगुणानन्तपरिजन - 

P M, प्रशास्य 
P असमा for अधमा 
P om. स्व? 
P साभूद्‌ 
P M, एव शास्त्रे 
P M, A, om. “शक्ति” and “वीयः 
M, A, DUM 
*गुणगण? ; 2५५३४ ज्ञानशक्तिवत्वंश्वय 
M, A, °कल्याणगुण' 

o 

Pot Awe wn mi 

158 

१० 

१५ 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

परिच्छदस्वो चितनिखिळमोग्यमोगोपकरणायनन्तमहा विभवावाडूमनसगोचररँवरूपस्वभाव- 
दिव्यस्थाना दिनित्यतानिरवद्यतागोचराश्च सहस्रशः श्रुतयः सन्ति। वेदाहमेतं पुरुषं महान्त-: 
मादित्यवर्णं तमसः परस्तात्‌। य एषोऽन्तरादित्ये हिरण्मयः पुरुषः। तस्य यथा 
कप्यासं पुण्डरीकमेवमक्षिणी | स य एषोऽन्तहृदय आकाशस्तस्मिन्नयं पुरुषो मनोमयो- 
ऽमृतो हिरण्मयः--मनोमय इति मनसैव विशुद्धेन gaa इत्यर्थः--सर्वे निमेषा 
aR विद्युतः पुरुषादधि-विदयुदर्णाुरुषादित्यर्थः--नीरतोयदमध्यस्था विद्युलेखेव 
भास्वरा--मँध्यस्थनीरतोयदा विद्युलेखेव i दहरपुण्डरीकमध्यस्थाकाशवर्तिनी 
बहिशिखा सँवान्तार्निहितनीरतोयदाभपरमात्मस्वरूपा स्वान्तमिहितनीरतोयदा विद्युदिवा- 
भातीत्यर्थः मनोमयः प्राणशरीरो भारूपः । सत्यकामः सत्यसंकल्पः | आकाशात्मा 
सकर्मा सर्वकामः ERIT: सर्वरसः सर्वमिदमभ्यात्तोऽवाक्यानादरः | माहारजनं वास 
इत्याद्या:। अस्येशाना जगतो विप्णुपत्नी। dier ते लक्ष्मीश्च पल्यौ। तद्विप्णोः परमं 
पदं सदा पश्यन्ति सूरयः | क्षयन्तमस्य रजसः पराके | यदेकमव्यक्तमनन्तरूपं विश्वं 
पुराणं तमसः परस्तात्‌ | यो वेद निहितं गुहायां परमे व्योमन्‌। योऽस्याध्यक्षः परमे 
व्योमन्‌ | तदेव भूतं तदु भव्यमा इदं तदक्षरे परमे व्योमन्नित्यादिश्रुतिशतनिश्चितो- 
SAHA: | 
. [१२५८] तद्विष्णोः परमं पदमिति विष्णोः परस् ब्रह्मणः परमं पदं सदा पश्यन्ति 
सूरय इति वचनात्‌ सपकालदर्शनवन्तः परिपूर्णज्ञानाः केचन सन्तीति विज्ञायते । ये 
सूरयस्ते सदा पझ्यन्तीति वचनव्यक्तिः, ये सदा पश्यन्ति ते सूरय इति वा | उभयपक्षेऽ- ` 

P om. “स्वरूप? 

M, adds कप्यासं इश्यते ROTIMI 

M, om. सर्वे“*'*“*'अ्थेः 

M, om. मध्यस्थनीलतोयदा freer he, 5 ¢ 
P om. arate + ` स्वरूपा 

M, A, om. सकामः ` 

P M, om. परमे व्योमन्‌ 

M,., सूरयः सदा. परयन्ति 

P के च for केचन EN “i 

४० ७ 93) ०७ ७ # ७ ७9 o 

^ VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

प्यनेकविधानं न संभवतीति चेत्‌। न। अँम्राप्तत्वात्सवैस्थ सर्वविशिष्टं परमस्थानं विधीयते | 
यथोक्तं--तद्गणास्ते विधीयेरन्नविमागाद्विधानार्थे न चेदन्येन शिष्टा इति। यथा 
यदाग्नेयोऽष्टाकपार इत्यादिकर्मविधो कर्मणो गुणानां चाम्राप्तत्वेन सर्वगुणवि शिष्टं 
कर्म विधीयते तथात्रापि सूरिभिः सदा इश्यत्वेन विप्णोः परमस्थानमप्राप्तं प्रतिपाद- 
यतीति न कश्चिद्विरोधः | करणमन्त्राः क्रियमाणानुवादिनः सतोत्रशख्ररूपा जपादिषु 
विनियुक्ताश्च प्रकरणपथिताश्चामैकरणपथिताश्च सार्थं सर्वं यंथावस्थितमेवाप्राप्तम विरुद्ध 
ब्राह्मणवद्धो धयन्तीति हि वैदिकाः । मगीतमन्त्रसाध्यंगुणि निष्ठगुणाभिधानं स्तोत्रम्‌ | 
अप्रगीतमन्त्रसाध्यगुणि निष्ठगुणाभिधानं शख्रम्‌। विनियुक्तार्थम्रकाशिनां च देवतादिप्व- 
ापता विरुद्धशुण विरोषप्रतिपादनं विनियोगानुगुणमेव । नेयं श्रुतिभुक्तजनविषया । तेषां 
सदादर्शनानुपप्ते: | नापि मुक्तप्रवाहविषया । सदा पर्यन्तीत्येकैककर्तृकविषयतया 
प्रतीतेः श्रतिमङ्गप्रसङ्गात्‌। मन्त्रार्थथादगता ह्यर्थाः कार्यपरत्वेऽपि सिध्यन्ती्युक्तम्‌। 
किं पुनः सिद्धवस्तुन्येव and व्युत्पत्तिसिद्ध इति सव॑मुपपन्नम्‌ | 

ननु aa तद्विप्णोः परमं पदमिति परस्वरूपमेव परमपदशव्देनामिधीयते | 
समस्तहेयरहितं विष्ण्वाख्यं परमं . पदमित्यादिप्वव्यतिरेकदर्शनात्‌ | नेवम्‌ | क्षयन्तमस्य 
रजसः पराके, तदक्षरे परमे व्योमन्‌, यो अस्याध्याक्षः परमे व्योमन्‌, यो वेद निहितं 
गुहायां परमे व्योमन्नित्यादिषु परमस्थानस्यैव दर्शनात्‌ | तद्विप्णोः परमं पदमिति 

P om. अप्राप्तत्वेन' * ` "°°" "` स्थानम्‌ : 
M, अस्र? for स्तोत्र --रूपं--॥, adds ^gtereqeqt 
P M, om. चाप्रकरण? A, om. अप्रकरणपठिताश्च 

A, om. Tata nennen रुद्ध 

UE TNS 

M,., A,., om. Tao: RTA are these two. definitions 
interpolated ? 

M, मुक्ता), अनेक? for एकैक? 
7. M, A, om. प्रतीतेः 4, प्रतीतश्रुति? 
8. A, om. अत्र 

159 

14 

3160 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN . 
ब्यतिरेकँनिर्देशाञ्च। बिष्ण्वाख्ये परमं पदमिति विशेषणादन्यदपि परमं 'पदं विद्यत इति 
च तेनेव ज्ञायते । -तदिदं ed सूरिभिः सदादृ्यत्वेन प्रतिपाद्यते | 

[१२९] एतदुक्तं भबति - कचिर्तरस्यानं परमपदशव्देन प्रतिपाद्यते, कचि- 
त्मक्ृतिवियुक्तात्मस्वरूपं, sherman) तद्विप्णोः परमं ud सदा पझ्यन्ति 
सूरय इति पैरस्थानम्‌। _ 

iN स्थित्यन्तकालेषु & E प्रवर्तते 

सरग स्थित विधेब प्रवर्तते । . 

गुणपवृत्त्या परमं 'पदं तस्यागुणं महत्‌ ॥ 
इत्यत्र प्रकृति वियुक्तात्मसरूपम्‌ | 

समस्तहेयरहितं विप्ण्वास्यं परमं पदम्‌ | 
इत्यत्र -भगवत्खरूपम्‌ | त्रीण्यप्येतानि 'परमप्राप्तत्वेन परमपदशब्देन प्रतिपाञन्ते | 
कथं त्रयाणां परमप्राप्यत्यमिति चेत्‌ । भगवल्खरूपं परमप्नाप्यत्वादेब 'परमं पदम्‌ | 
इतरयोरप्रि भगवत्मा तिगर्भत्वादेव परमपदत्यम्‌ । सर्वकर्मबैन्धविनिर्मुक्तैत्मखरूपावापि- 

| PM, “fears 
P om. भन्यदू 
P M, परमस्थान 
P M, अस्मस्थान - 7 
M,a पदमिति andom. सद्गा पश्यन्ति HG: 
P M, परमस्थानम्‌ 
M,., DIEA 
M, माभूदू for महत्‌ 
M, age? 
A, om, “asa”. 
P A, विनिर्यु? 

७ ०५७०७ ७ + YP + 

— है 
~ © 
E 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 161 

भैगवत्मातिगर्भा | त इमे सत्याः कामा अनृतापिधाना इति भगवतो गुणगणस्य 
तिरोधायकत्वेनानृतदाव्देन स्वकर्मणः प्रतिपादनात्‌ | 

[१३०] अनतृतरूपतिरोधानं क्षेत्रज्ञकर्मेति कथमवगम्यत इति चेत्‌ | 

अविद्या कर्मसंज्ञान्या तृतीया शक्तिरिप्यते | | 
यया क्षेत्रज्ञशक्ति: सा वेष्टिता नृप सर्वगा ॥ fe ५ 
संसारतापानखिळानवाप्नोत्यतिसंततान्‌ | 

` तया तिरोहितत्वाच्च l 

इत्यादिवचनात्‌ | 

[१३१] परस्थानप्राप्तिपपि भगवस्मासिगभैंवेतिं सुव्यक्तम्‌। क्षयन्तमस्य रजसः 
पराक इति रजःशब्देन त्रिगुणात्मिका प्रकृतिरुच्यते केवलस्य रजसोऽनवस्थानात्‌ | इमां १० 
त्रिगुणात्रिकां प्रकृतिमतिक्रम्य स्थिते स्थाने क्षयन्तम्‌---वसन्तमित्यर्थः । अनेन 
त्रिगुणात्मकात्क्षेत्रज्ञस्य भोग्यमूताद्वस्तुनः परस्ताद्विप्णोर्वासस्थानमिति गम्यते । वेदाहमेतं 
पुरुषं महान्तमादित्यवर्णं तमसः deren quels सेव प्रकृतिरुच्यते | 
केवलस्य तमसोऽनवस्थानादेव | रजसः पराके क्षयन्तमित्यनेनैकवाक्यत्वात्तमसः 
परस्ताद्वसन्तं महान्तमादित्यवरणं पुरुषमहं वेदेत्ययमर्थोऽवगम्यते । सत्यं ज्ञानमनन्तं १५ 
wa.) यो वेद निहितं गुहायां परमे Aa) तदक्षरे परमे व्योर्मन्निति 
तत्थानमविकाररूपं परमव्योमशब्दाभिधेयमिति च गम्यते । अक्षरे परमे व्योमन्नित्यस्य 
स्थानस्याक्षरत्वश्रवणातक्षररूपादित्यमण्डलादयो न परमव्योमशव्दाभिधेयाः | यत्र पूर्वे 

M, A,., गर्भात्‌ Mp, गता 

1. 

2. M,om. स्व? 

3. PM, om. Ud 

4. Mg इल्यादिनात्र 

5. M, पुरुषमेतम्‌ 

6. Mi, A, om. तदक्षरे परमे व्योमन्‌), om. अक्षरे 
7. P om. gr **'व्योमन्‌ 

8. M, रूपादिसलमण्डला°--०॥७, न 

162 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

साध्याः सन्ति देवाः, यत्रर्षयः प्रथमजा ये पुराणा इत्यादिषु च त एव सूरय ईत्यवगम्यते। 
afore: विपन्यवो जागृवांसः सँमिन्धते विष्णोर्यत्परमं पदमित्यत्रापि विप्रासी-- 
मेधाविनः, विपन्यवः--स्तुतिशीराः, जागृवांसः--अस्खरितंज्ञानास्तं एवास्खरित- 
ज्ञानास्तद्विप्णोः परमं पदं संदा स्तुवन्तः समिन्धत इत्यथः | 

[१३२] एतेषां परिजनस्थानांदीनां सदेव सोम्येदमग्र आसीदित्यत्र ज्ञान- 
बलैश्वर्य दिकल्याणगुणर्गणवर्तरब्रह्मस्वरूपाः॑तर्भूतत्वात्सदेवैकमेवा द्वितीयमिति ब्रह्मान्त- 
र्भावो$वगँम्यते । एषामपि कल्याणशुणेकदेशत्वादेव सदेव सोम्येदमग्र आसीदित्यत्रेदमिति 
शब्दस्य कर्मवश्यभो कतवर मिश्रतद्गोग्यभूतमपञ्चविषयत्वाच सदा पश्यन्ति सूरय इति 
सदादशित्वेन च तेषां कर्मवश्यानन्तर्भावात्‌ । अपहतपाप्मेत्याद्यपिपास इत्यन्तेन 
सँटीलोपकरणमूतत्रिगुँणमरक्कतिमाङृततत्संसष्टपुरुषगतं हेयखभावं dd प्रतिषिध्य ur 
काम इत्यनेन स्वभोग्यभोगोपकरणजातस्य der सँत्यता प्रतिपादिता | सत्याः कामा 

T इति गम्यते 
P om. aeaee जागृवांसः 
P M, “विज्ञाना? 

100900. 

P M, “विज्ञानात 

NA A WN = 
© 
B 
aj 
AP 
31 
al 

.. M, सद्धक्ताः for सदा--ततड after अथे:--वत मानव्यपदेशाश्व सवेकाल- 
संबन्धो जायते तेषां 

7. M, A, om. “गण? 
M, om. *वर€--&, om. परब्रह्म****'** त्वात्‌ 

9. P M, A, अन्तगेत्वात्‌ 

10. M, गम्यते 

11. P M, A, add I9]^—M, A, स्वलीलो 

12. P M, A, “युणात्मकप्रकृति” 
13. A,om. a , 

14. M,wuie 

15. Mg, नित्यता for सता 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

यस्यासौ सत्यकामः | काम्यन्त इति कामा: | तेन परेण ब्रह्मणा स्वमोग्यतदुपकरणादयः 
स्वाभिमता ये काम्यन्ते ते सत्याः--नित्या इत्यर्थः । अन्यस्य ळीलोपकरणस्यापि 
वस्तुनः प्रमाणसंबन्धयोम्यत्वे सत्यपि विकारास्पदत्वेनास्थिरलात्तद्विपरीतं स्थिरत्वमेषां 
सत्यपदेनोच्यते | सत्यसंकल्प इत्येतेषु भोग्यतदुपकरणादिपु “नित्येषु fuge 
नन्तेषु सत्स्वप्यपूर्वाणामपरिमितानामर्थानामपि संकल्पमात्रेण सिद्धि वैदति। एषां 
च भोगोपकरणानां लीलोपकरणानां चेतनानामचेतनानां स्थिराणामस्िराणां च 

तत्संकस्पायत्तस्वरूपस्थितिप्रवृत्ति मेदादि सवं वदति सत्यसंकस्प इति | 
[१३३] इतिहासपुराणयोर्वेदो पैवृंहणयोश्वायमर्थे उच्यते-- 

तौ ते मेधाविनौ दृष्टा वेदेषु परिनिष्ठितौ । 
वेदोपद्वंहणार्थाय तावग्राहयत प्रभुः ॥ 

इति वेदोपवंहणतया प्रारब्धे श्रीमद्रामायणे-- 

व्यक्तमेष महायोगी परमात्मा. सनातनः |. 
अनादिमध्यनिधनो महतः परमो महान्‌ ॥ 

तमसः परमो धाता शङ्कचक्रगदाधरः | 
श्रीवत्सवक्षा नित्यश्रीरजय्यः शाश्वतो धवः ॥ 

शरा नानाविधाश्चापिं धनुरायतविग्रहम्‌। 
o अन्वगच्छन्त काकुत्स्थं सर्वे पुरुषविग्रहाः ॥ 
` विवेश वैष्णवं तेज: सशरीरः सहानुगः d 

` 9 इत्येनं, इत्यनन्तेषु--10, इत्यादिना n^ दाती आ 
- P om. नित्येषु ` : : TOS 
~. P M, om. अनन्तेषु - 

P विन्दति for वदति 

A,om. स्वरूप 

M, om. वैदोपवृंहणयोशं 

P श्रीरामा 

P A, SISHT:—M,., A, NAT: 

M.. T. घाम for तेज: «x E 

CP PNAYE YY ra 

163 

19 

164 . J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 
श्रीमद्वपेणवपुराणे-- | 
` समस्ता: शक्तयश्चैता नृप यत्र प्रतिष्ठिताः | 
तद्विश्ववैरूप्यं रूपमन्यद्धरेमहत्‌ ॥ 
Hd ब्रह्म महाभाग सवत्रह्ममयो हरिः ॥ 
५ | नित्यैवैषा जगन्माता विप्णोः श्रीरनपायिनी । 
यथा सर्वगतो विप्णुस्तथैवेयं द्विजोत्तम ॥ 
देवत्वे देवदेहेयं मनुष्यत्वे च मानुषी । 
विप्णोर्देहानुरूपां वै करोत्येषात्मनस्तनुम्‌॥ | 
एकान्तिनः सदा ब्रह्मध्यायिनो योगिनो हि ये । . 
१० तेषां तसरमं स्थानं यद्वै पश्यन्ति सूरयः ॥ 
कळामुहूर्तादिमयश्च कालो न यद्विभूतेः परिणामहेतुः ॥ 

महाभारते च-- 
दिव्यं स्थानमजरं चाप्रमेयं दुर्विज्ञेयं चागमैर्गम्यमाद्यम्‌ | 
8 गच्छ प्रभो रक्ष चास्मान्प्रपन्नान्कस्पे कल्पे जायमानः स्वमूर्त्या ॥ 
१५ काल: स पचते तत्र न कालस्तत्र वे प्रभुः । 

इति | परस्य ब्रह्मणो रूपवत्त्वं सूत्रकारश्च वदंति--अन्तस्तद्धर्मोपदेशादिति 

-{ १३.४} - योऽसावादित्यमण्डलान्तवर्ती तप्तकातेस्वरगिरिवरप्रंमः सहस्रांशुशत- 
सहस्रकिरणो गम्भीराम्भःसमुट्भतसुगृष्टनालरविकरविकसितपुण्डरीकद्ङामलायतेक्षणः 

1. A, T. श्रीविष्णुपुराणे 
2. PM, हि ते. 

3, A, om. this line 
4. M, “Hud: 

5. P M, om. “अमल? 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

gasae: सुनासः सुस्मिताधरविद्रुमः सुरुचिरकोमरगण्डः कम्बुग्रीवः समुन्नतांसविलम्बि- 
'चारुरूपदिव्यकर्णकिसल्यः पीनबृत्तायतभुजश्चारुतरातात्र॒करतलानुरक्ताडुलीमिरलंकृतसतनु- 
मध्यो Ragas: समविभक्तसर्वाड्रोडनिर्देश्यद्व्यरूपसंहनन: खिम्धवर्ण: प्रवुद्ध- 
पुण्डरीकचारुचरणयुगलः खानुरूपपीताम्वरधरो5मलकिरीटकुण्डलहारकोस्तुभकेयूरकटक- 
नू पुरोदरबन्धनाद्यपरिमिताश्चर्यानन्तदिव्यभूषणः शङ्कचक्रगदासिशा ङ्गश्रीवत्सवनमाला- 
लंकृतोऽनवधिका तिशयसौन्दर्याहताशेषमनो दष्टिवृततिर्लावण्याम्ृतपूरितारेषचराचरभूतजा - 
तोऽत्यञ्गुता चिन्त्यनित्ययौवनः पुष्पहाससुकुमारः पुण्यगन्धवा सितानम्तदिगन्तरालखेलो- 
क्याक्रमणप्रवृत्तगम्भीरभावः करुणानुरागमधुरलोचनावलोकिताश्रितवर्गः. पुरुषवरो दरी- 
zadi स च॑ निखिछजगदुदयविभवल्यलीलो निरस्तसमस्तहेयः सँमस्तकस्याणगुणनिधिः 
स्वेतरसमस्तवस्तुविलक्षणः परमात्मा परं ब्रह्म नारायण ईत्यवगम्यते | तद्धर्मोपदेशात्‌-- 
स॒ एष सर्वेषां लोकानाँमीष्टे सर्वेषां कामानाम्‌--स एष सर्वेभ्यः पाप्मभ्य उदित 
इत्यादिदर्शनात्‌ । तस्यैते गुणाः der वशी सर्वस्येशानः--अपहतपाप्मा विजर 
इत्यादि सत्यसंकर्प इत्यन्तम्‌--विश्वतः परमं नित्यं विश्वं नारायणं हरिम्‌ | पर्ति 
विश्वस्यात्मेश्वरमित्या दिवाक्यप्रतिपादिताः | 

[१३५] वाक्यकारश्चैतत्सवं सुंस्पष्टमाह--हिरण्मयः पुरुषो दृश्यत इति 
प्राज्ञ: सर्वान्तरः स्याह्ोककामेशोपदेशात्तयोदयात्पाप्मना मित्यादिना | तस्य च रूपस्या-. 
नित्यतादि वाक्यकारेणेव प्रतिषिद्धमू--स्यात्तदृप कृतकमनुग्रहार्थं तचेतनानामेश्वर्या- 
दित्युपा सितुरनुग्रहार्थः परमपुरुषस्य रूपसंग्रह इति पूर्वपक्षं कृत्वा, रूपं वातीन्द्रियमन्तः- 

M, “थैः इताशेष? 

M,a À,.,. T €UId—M; T om. च 

P M, A, interchange समस्त?" निधि; and स्वेतर^**"'***'°लक्षणः 
Mias, A, गम्यते f 

Mas, इश्वरः T. ईशः 

PM, om. सर्वेस्य वशी 

P M, A, om, सुस्पष्टम्‌ 

T. om. तद्‌ before रूप 

७ 7४ ७ ४७ & ४ २ > 

१० 

१५ 

166 

१० 

१५ 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

करणप्रंतयक्षं तन्निर्देशादृति | यथा ज्ञानादयः परस्य ब्रमणः सरूपतया निर्देशात्खरूप- 
भूतगुणास्तथेदमपि रूपं श्रुत्या खरूपतया निर्देशास््रूपमूतमित्यर्थः | भाप्यकारेणे- 
तव्यार्यातम्‌--अञ्जसैव Rust रूपं तत्तु न चक्षुषा ग्राह्यं मनसा त्वकलुषेण साधनान्तर- 
वता गृह्यते, न चक्षुषा गृह्यते नापि वाचा मनसा तु बिशुद्धेनेति श्रुतेः, न ह्यरूपाया 
देवताया रूपमुपदिञ्यते, यथामूतवादि हि शाख्रम्‌ , माहारजनं वासः--वेदाहमेतं 
पुरुषं महान्तमादित्यवर्णं तमसः परस्तादिति प्रकरणान्तरनिर्देशाच साक्षिण इत्यादिना 
हिरण्मय इति रूँपसामान्याचन्द्रमुखवत्‌ , न मयडत्र विकारमादाय प्रयुज्यते, अनारभ्य- 
त्वादात्मन इति । यथा ज्ञानादिकस्याणगुणानन्त्यनिर्देशादपरिमितकल्याणशुणवि शिष्टं 
परं ब्रह्मत्यवगम्यत एवमादित्यवर्ण पुरुष मित्या दि निर्देशा त्सवा भिमतखानुरूपकल्याणतमरूपः 
परब्रह्मभूतः पुरुषोत्तमो नारायण इति ज्ञायते । तथास्येशाना जगतो विष्णुपत्नी-- 
da ते लक्ष्मीश्च पैत्न्यौ--सदा पश्यन्ति सूरयः--तमसः परस्तात्‌--क्षयन्तमस्य रजसः 
पराक इत्यादिना पलीपरिजनस्थानादीनां निर्देशादेव तथेव ` सन्तीत्यवगम्यते p यथाह 
भाप्यकार--यथाभूतवादि हि sme 

[१३६] एतदुक्तं भवति-यथा सत्यं ज्ञानमनन्तं ब्रक्षेति निर्देशात्सरमात्मस्वरूपं 
समस्तहेयप्रत्यनीकानवधिकानन्दैकतानतयापरिच्छेयतया च सकलेतरविलक्षणं ar यः 
सर्वज्ञः सर्ववित्‌--परास्य शक्तिर्विविधेव श्रयते स्वाभाविकी ज्ञानबरक्रिया च--तमेव. 
भान्तमनुभाति सर्वं तस्य भासा सर्यमिदं बिभातीत्यादिनिर्देशात्निरतिशयासंख्येयाश्च 

` T Senis 

“Ta गुणास्‌ ` ` ` 

Mj om, arm चक्षुषा 

P M; om. आदित्य?“*«”““परस्ताद्‌ 
. P. om. रूप? 

M, manaa 

P M, Ars, om. परं 

T. om. पल्न्यौ 

P M, om. तयेव 

o6 ७ I 79 ७ + (> Mor 

» 
e 

Mg, om. तथा F: 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

गुणाः सकलेतरविलक्षणा: | तथादित्यवर्ण मित्या दिनिर्देशाटूूपपरिजनस्थानादयश्व सकलेतर- 
Azam: स्वासाधारणा. अँनिर्देश्यखरूपखभावा इति | 

[१३७] वेदाः प्रमाणं चेद्विध्यर्थवादमन्त्रगतं सर्वमपूर्वमविरुद्धमर्थजातं यथा- 
वस्थितमेव बोधयन्ति । प्रामाण्यं च वेदानांमौतत्तिकस्तु शब्दस्पार्थेन संवन्ध इत्युक्तम्‌ । 
यथाम्निजलादीनामोष्ण्यादिशक्तियोगः स्वाभाविकः, यथा च चक्षुरादीनामिन्द्रियाणां 
बुद्धिविशेषजनकशक्तिः खाभाविकी तथा शब्दस्यापि बोधनशक्तिः खाभाविकी | न च 
हस्तचेष्टादिवत्संकेतमूळं शब्दस्य बोधकत्वमिति वक्ते शक्यम्‌ । अनाचनुसंधाना विच्छे- 
देऽपि संकेतयितृपुरुषाज्ञानात्‌। यानि संकेतमूलानि तानि सर्वाणि साक्षाद्वा परंपरया 
वा ज्ञायन्ते | नच देवदत्तादिशब्दवत्कर्पयितुं युक्तम्‌ । तेषु च साक्षाद्वा परंपरया वा 
संकेतो ज्ञायते। गवादिशब्दानां त्वना्यनुसंधानाविच्छेदेऽपि 'संकेताज्ञानादेव वोधकत्व- 
शक्तिः खाभाविकी | अतोऽन्यादीनां दाहकत्वादिशक्तिवदिन्द्रियाणां वोधकत्वशक्तिवच 
शब्दस्यापि बोधकत्वशक्तिराश्रयणीया ॥ 

[१३८] ननु चेन्द्रियवच्छब्दस्यापि बोधकत्वं खाभाविकं संवन्धग्रहणं बोध- 
कत्वाय किमित्यपेक्षते, लिङ्गादिवदिति उच्यते--यथा ज्ञातसंवन्धनियमं grea 
विज्ञानजनकं तथा ज्ञातसंबन्धनियमः शाव्दोऽप्यर्थविरोषवुद्धिजनकः। एवं तर्हि शब्दो- 
ऽप्यर्थविशेषस्य रिङ्गमित्यनुमानं स्यात्‌--नेवम्‌। शब्दार्थयोः संबन्धो बोध्यवोधकभाव 

P. ब्रह्मनिर्देशास्व^ for अनिर्देश्य? 

P M; औओत्पत्तिकमोत्पत्तिकस्तु--)॥, औत्पत्तिकस्य शाब्द 
Mg शब्दानामपि 

T, वोधकत्वशक्तिः 

P Mis, Ai युक्तम्‌ 

P M, संकेत यित्रज्ञानादू 

T. औष्ण्यादि? 

P M; Ais om. ननु Ae up to एवं, in line 10; Mg omits the 
same portion but adds it on separate leaf secunda manu. 

७ S ७ ७ झी wD टा 

157 

१० 

१५ 

168 

qe 

१५ 

ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

एव धूमादीनां तु संबन्धान्तरमिति तस्य संबन्धस्य ज्ञानद्वारेण वुद्धिजनकत्वमिति विशेषः। 
एवं गृहीतसंबन्धस्य बोधकत्वदर्शनादनाद्यनुसंधाना विच्छेदेडपि संकेताज्ञानाडोधकत्व- 
शक्तिरेवेति निश्चीयते । 

[१३९] एवं बोधकानां पदसंघातानां संसर्गविरेषवोधकत्वेन वाक्यशब्दाभि- 
घेयानामुचारणक्रमो यत्र पुरुषबुद्धिपूर्वकरते पौरुषेयाः शब्दा इत्युच्यन्ते । यत्र तु 
तैदुचारणक्रमः पूर्वपूर्वोच्चारणक्रमजनिततसंस्कारपू्वकः सर्वदापौरुषेयास्ते च वेदा Ed 
च्यन्ते । एतदेव वेदानामपौरुषेयत्वं नित्यत्वं च यसर्वपूर्वोच्चारणक्रमजनितसंस्कारेण 
तमेव क्रमविशेषं स्मृत्वा तेनैव कऋमेणोच्चार्यमाणत्वम्‌। ते चानुपूर्वीविशेषेण संस्थिता 
अक्षरराशयो वेदा ऋगजु:सामाथवभेदमिन्ना अनन्तशाखा वर्तन्ते | ते च विध्यथवाद- 
मन्त्ररूपा वेदाः परब्र्ममूतनारायणखरूपं तदाराधनप्रकारमाराधितात्फलविशेषं च॑ बोध- 
यन्ति |. परमपुरुषवर्ततत्खरूपतदाराधनतत्कज्ञापकवेदारूयशन्दजातं नित्यमेव। वेदाना- 
मनन्त्वादूदुरवगाहत्वाच्च परमपुरुषनियुक्ताः परमर्षयः कर्पे कल्पे 'निखिरुजगदुपकारार्थं 
at स्मृत्वा विध्यर्थवादमन्त्रमूलानि धर्मशाख्नाणीतिहासपुराणानि च चक्रुः । रौ किकाश्च 
शब्दा वेदेराशेरुद्ूत्यैव तत्तदर्थविशेषनामतया पूर्ववत्ययुक्ता: पारंपर्येण प्रयुज्यन्ते। ननु च 
वैदिक एव सर्वे वाचकाः शब्दाश्वेच्छन्दस्येवं भाषायामेवमिति लक्षण मेदः कथमुपपद्यते | 

 T.om. अनाय 
Mg इति गम्यन्ते . > 
P. om. तदू before उच्चारण?--1॥, om.. "कम? 

Boo Dn 

Ms om. 'संस्कार?*****"घए to "जनित? in line 6 —Ag misses 
one palm-leaf and has a lacuna upto p. 170, line 16 भवन्ति 
P Mis, Ai om. पूर्व? 

Mj om. च 

P Myo, A, तत्फलजातबीजं 
P M, om. निखिल 

10. Mom. वेदाथ? 

11, My “वेदशब्दराशेर्‌ 

5 
6 
7. Ms om. “तत्स्वरूप? 
8 
9 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 169 

उच्यते---तेषामेव शब्दानां तस्यामेवानुपून्यी वर्तमानानां तथैव प्रयोग: । ` अन्यत्र 
प्रयुज्यमानानामन्यथेति न कश्चिद्दोषः | 

| [१४०] एवमितिहासपुराणधर्मशाख्रोपदंहितसाङ्गवेदवे्यः Ta नारा- 
यणो निखिलहेयप्रत्ययीक: सकलेतरविलक्षणोऽपरिच्छिननज्ञानानन्दैकस्ररूपः खाभाविका- 
नवधिकातिशयासंख्येयकस्याणरुंणाकरः खसंकल्पानुविधा यिस्वरूपस्थितित्रवृत्िभेदचिदचि- ५ 
दवस्ठुजातो ऽपरिच्छेद्यस्वरूपखभावानन्तमहा विमूतिर्नानाविधानन्तचेतनाचेतनात्मकप्रपञ्चली- 
लोपकरण' इति प्रतिपादितम्‌। सवे खल्विदं ब्रह्म--ऐतदात्म्यमिदं सब--तत्त्वमसि 

श्वेतकेतो — 

एनमेके qaem मरुतोऽन्ये प्रजापतिम्‌ | 
इन्द्रमेके परे प्राणमपरे ब्रह्म शाश्वतम्‌ ॥ १० 

ज्योतींषि शुक्लानि च यानि लोके त्रयो लोका लोकपालाखयी च। . 
त्रयोऽम्मयश्चाहुतयश्च पञ्च सर्वे देवा देवकीपुत्र एव ॥ 

त्वं यज्ञस्त्वं वषट्रका रस्त्वमोंकारः परंतपः । 

ऋतुधामा वसुः पूर्वो वसूनां त्वं प्रजापतिः ॥ 

_ जगत्सर्वं शरीरं ते AA ते बसुघातलम्‌। - | gy 
aff: कोपः प्रसादस्ते सोमः श्रीवत्सलक्षणः ॥ 
. ज्योतींषि विष्णुर्भुवनानि विष्णुर्वनानि विष्णुर्गिरयो दिशश्च | 

नद्यः समुद्राश्च स एव सवे यदस्ति यन्नास्ति च विम्रवर्य ॥ 

इत्यादिसामानाधिकरण्यप्रयोगेषु सर्वे: शब्दैः सर्वशरीरतया सर्वप्रकारं ब्रह्मेवा भिधीयत 
इति चोक्तम्‌ । सत्यसंकल्पं परं ब्रह्म स्वयमेव बहुकारं स्यामिति संकल्प्याचित्समष्टि- २० 

V, 22 

1. 
2. 
3. 

Mj om. ?qx? 
T °गुणगणाकारः 
Mj तथा च मानवः पूव वसूनां 

170 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

रूपमहाभूँतसूक्ष्मवस्तु भोक्तुवर्गसमूहं च aes स्वयमेव विभज्य तस्मादूभूत- 
सूक्ष्माद्वस्तुनो महाभूतानि SET तेषु च भोक्तृवर्गात्मतया प्रैवेश्य तैश्चिदधि हितेर्महा- 

` भूतैरन्योन्यसंसष्टैः कृत्स्नं जगद्विधाय स्वयमपि सर्थस्यात्मतया परविश्य परमात्मत्वेनाव- 

१० 

१५ 

feud सर्वशरीरं बहुप्रकारमवतिष्ठते । यदिदं महाभूतसूक्ष्मं वस्तु तदेव प्रकृतिशब्दे- 
नाभिधीयते । भोक्तृवर्गसमूह एव पुरुषशब्देन चोच्यते। तो cb प्रकृतिपुरुषो 
परमात्मशरीरतया परमात्मप्रकारभूतौ । तत्मकारः परमात्मेव परक्ृतिपुरुषशन्दा भिधेयः | 
सोऽकामयत बहु स्यां प्रजायेयेति - तत्सृष्टा तदेवानुप्राविशत्‌ - तदनुप्रविश्य सञ्च 
त्यच्चाभवत्‌ निरुक्तं चानिरुक्तं च निलयनं चानिलयनं च विज्ञानं चाविज्ञानं च सत्यं 
चानृतं च सत्यमभवदिति पूर्वोक्तं समनयैव श्रुत्या व्यक्तम्‌ | 

[१४१] ब्रमाप्त्युपायश्च शाख्राधिगततत्त्वज्ञानपूर्वकसकर्मानुगृहीतभक्तिनि 
छासाध्यानवधिका तिशयम्रियविशदतमग्रत्यक्षतापन्नानुध्यानरूपर्षरभक्तिरेवेदयुक्तम्‌ | भक्ति- 
शब्दश्च प्रीतिविरोषे वर्तते । मीतिश्च ज्ञानविशेष एव । ननु च सुखं प्रीतिरित्यनर्था- 

` न्तरम्‌। सुखं च ज्ञानविरोषसाध्यं पदार्थान्तरमिति हि लौकिकाः। नैवम्‌ । येन ज्ञान- 
_ विशेषेण तत्साध्यमित्युच्यते स एव ज्ञानविशेषः सुखम्‌ | 

[१४२] एतदुक्तं भवति - विषयज्ञानानि सुखदुःखमध्यस्थसाधारणानि | 
तानि च विषयाधीनविशेषाणि तथा भवन्ति। येन च विषयविरेषेण विशेषितं ज्ञानं 
सुखस्य जनकमित्यभिमतं तद्विषयं ज्ञानमेव सुखं, तदतिरेकि पदार्थान्तरं नोपलभ्यते | 
तेनेव सुखित्वन्यवहारोपपत्तश्च | एवंविधसुखरूपज्ञानस्य विशेषकत्वं ब्रह्मन्यतिरिप्तस्य 

T. सूक्ष्म 

M; तस्मिन्‌ for स्वस्मिन्‌ 
M, agafa 

T. om. च 

M,. A,. “परमभक्तिर्‌ 
T. तद्विषयज्ञानम्‌ 

M, ब्रह्माति रिक्तस्य 

. ६० 3 9७9 ४७ Pw ४४ 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

वस्तुनः सातिशयमस्थिरं च । ब्रह्मणस्त्वनवधिकातिशयं स्थिरं चेति। आनन्दो ब्र्म- 
त्युच्यते | विषयायत्तत्वाज्ज्ञानस्य सुखरूपतया ब्रह्मेव सुखम्‌ । तदिदमाह--रसो वै 
सः--रसं ह्येवायं लब्ध्वानन्दी भवतीति ब्रह्मेव सुखमिति ब्रह्म sup सुखी 
भवतीत्यर्थः | परमपुरुषः स्वेनेव खयमनवधिकातिशयसुंखः सन्परस्यापि सुखं 
भवति । सुखरूपत्वाविशेषात्‌ । ब्रह्म यस्य ज्ञानविषयो भवति स सुखी भवतीत्यर्थः | 
तदेवं परस्य ब्रह्मणोऽनवधिकातिशयासंख्येयकल्याणगुणर्गंणाकरस्य निरवद्यस्यानन्त- 
महाविमूतेरनवधिका तिशर्यसौ शीर्ल्यसौन्दर्यवात्सल्यजलघेः सर्वशेषित्वादात्मनः रोष- 
त्वा्तिसंवन्धितयानुसंधीयमानमनवधिका तिशयप्री तिविर्षयं सत्परं ब्रह्लेवेनमात्मानं प्राप- 
यतीति । 

[१४३] ननु चात्यन्तरोषतेवामनोऽनवधिकातिशयसुख मित्युक्तं भवति | 
तदेतत्सर्वलोकविरुद्धम्‌। तथा हि सर्वेषामेव चेतनानां खातन्त्यमेवेष्टतमं ह्यते, 
पारतन्त्यं दुःखतरम्‌ | स्मृतिश्च _ 

सर्वं परवशं दुःखं सर्वमात्मवशं सुखम्‌ | 
तथा च-- | p 
सेवा श्ववृत्तिराख्याता तस्मात्तां परिवर्जयेत्‌ । 

इति । तदिदमनधिगतदेहातिरिक्तात्मखरूपाणां शरीरात्माभिमानविजृम्मितम्‌। तथा 
हि--शरीरं हि मनुष्यत्वादिजातिगुणाश्रयपिण्डभूतं स्वतन्त्रं प्रतीयते । तस्मिन्नेवाहमिति 
संसारिणां It: | आत्माभिमानो यारशस्तदनुगुणेव पुरुषार्थमतीतिः | सिंहव्याप्र- 
वराहमनुष्ययक्षरक्षःपिशाचदेवदानवस्नीपुसन्यवर्थितामाभिमानानां सुखानि व्यवस्थि- 

1. P. °सुखरसं- A, सुखस्वरूपः सन्‌ 

2. P M, om. “गण? 

3. P. om. सौशील्य” 

4. Mg, Ag. T. “वात्सल्यसौन्दये? 

5. P M, “विषयभूतं सत 4, विषयभूतं परं 
6. My प्रतिपत्तिः £०7 प्रतीतिः 

7. M, “स्थितानामात्मा? 

171 

१५ 

172 

१० 

१५ 

ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

तानि। तानि च परस्परविरुद्धानि। तस्मादात्माभिमानानुगुणपुरुषार्थव्यवस्थया सर्वे 
समाहितम्‌ | आत्मसरूपं तु देवादिदेहविलक्षणं ज्ञानेकाकारम्‌। तच्च परशेषतेक- 
eer) यथावस्थितात्माभिमाने तदनुगुणेव पुरुषाथप्रतीतिः | आत्मा ज्ञानमयोऽमळ 
इति स्मृतेज्ञानैकाकारता प्रतिपन्ना | पतिं विश्वस्थेत्या दि श्रुतिगणेः परमात्मशेषतैकाकारता 
च iia । अतः सिंहव्याध्रादिशरीरात्माभिमानवत्स्वातन्ञ्याभिमानो5पि कमकृतविपरी-: 
TAMAN वेदितव्यः | अतः कमकृतमेव परमपुरुषव्यतिरिक्तविषयाणां सुखत्वम्‌ | 
अत एव तेषामल्पत्वमस्थिरत्वं च परमपुरुषस्येव स्वत एव सुखत्वम्‌ । अतस्तदेव स्थिरम- 
नवधिकातिशयं च - कं ब्रह्म खै ब्रह्म - आनन्दो ब्रह्म - सत्यं ज्ञानमनन्तं ब्रक्षेति श्रुतेः | 
्रह्मव्यतिरिक्तस्य कृत्स्नस्य वस्तुनः खरूपेण सुखत्वाभाव: क॑र्मकृतत्वेन चास्थिरत्वं 
भगवता परारारेणो क्तम्‌ 

नरकखगसंज्ञे वे पापपुण्ये द्विजोत्तम | 
वस्त्वेकमेव दुःखाय सुखायेर्प्यागमाय च | 
कोपाय च यतस्तस्माद्वस्तु वस्त्वात्मकं कुतः ॥ 

सुखदुःखाद्येकान्तरूपिणो वस्तुनो वस्तुत्वं कुतः। तदेकान्तता पुण्यपापकृतेत्यर्थः | 
एवमनेकपुरुषापेक्षमा कस्यचित्सुखमेव कस्यचिदूदुःखं भवतीत्यव्यवस्थां प्रतिपाद्य, एक- 
स्मिन्नपि पुरुषे न व्यवस्थितमि त्याहः 

` तदेव प्रीयते भूत्वा पुनदुःखाय जायते | 
_ तदेव कोपाय यतः प्रसादाय च जायते ॥ 
तस्माद्दुःखात्मकं नास्ति न च किंचित्सुखात्मकम्‌ | 

P M, adds. °कारता पुरुषार्थता? 

Ag, T. प्रतिपादिता 

P M, T. स्वतन्त्राभिमानो 

P Mg 61.8, om. खं s88—-Mg om. आनन्दो ब्रह्म 
M, तत्कम 4 

P, वा for i —M, om. 4 . 

M, “इल्यवस्थां--58 इत्यनवस्थां 

sa य. m^ Y पके न 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

इति सुखदुःखात्मकत्वं सर्वस्य वस्तुनः कर्मकृतं न वस्तुस्वरूपकृतम्‌ | . अतः कर्मावसाने 
तदपेतीत्यथः | 

[१४४] ag सर्वे परवशं दुःखमित्युक्तं तत्यरमपुरुषव्यत्तिरिक्तानां RER- 
शेषशेषिभावाभावात्तव्यतिरिक्तं प्रति शेषता दुःखमेवेट्युक्तम्‌। सेवा श्ववृत्तिरांख्याते- 
त्यत्राप्यसेव्यसेवा श्ववृत्तरेवेत्युक्तम्‌। स द्याश्रमैः सैदोपास्यः समस्तेरेक एव लैंति 
संवेरात्मयाथारल्यवेदिभिः सेव्यः पुरुषोत्तम एक एव | यथोक्तं भगवता-- 

मां च योऽव्यभिचारेण भक्तियोगेन सेवते | 
गुणान्समतीत्येतान्त्रह्ममूयाय कंपते ॥ 

इतीयमेव भक्तिरूपा सेवा ब्रह्मविदाम्रोति परम्‌-तमेवं विद्वानमृत इह भवति--्रह्म वेद 
aaa भवतीत्यादिषु वेदनरान्देनाभिधीयत इत्युक्तम्‌ । यमेवैष ` वृणुते तेन लभ्य इति 
विशेषणाद्यमेवेष वृणुत इति भगवता वरणीयत्वं प्रतीयते p वरणीयश्च प्रियतमः । यस्य 
भगवत्यनवधिकातिशया प्रीतिर्जायते स एव भगवतः प्रियतमः । तदुक्तं भगवता-- 

पियो हि ज्ञानिनोऽत्यर्थमहं स च मम प्रियः । | 

इति । तस्मार्॑रभक्तिरूपापन्नमेव वेदनं तत्त्वतो भगवद्माप्तिताधनम्‌ । यथोक्तं भ॑गवता 
द्वैपायनेन मोक्षधर्मे सर्वोपनिषद्यार्यानरूपम्‌-- 

M, °व्यतिरिक्तात्मानां-2)M,- om: “शेष 

M, om. आउ्यातां 

P M, A, सदा सेव्यः 

Pom.g 

T विद्धिः 

M, ब्रह्मविद्‌ for ब्रह्म वेद... 

Mg एतदुक्तं भवति for तदुक्त भगवता . . ` 
P M, om. ^n? 

prt 9 ७ # ७ ७9 धा 

a 
भगवद्वेपायनेन 

173 

१० 

१५ 

174 ^ |^ "7 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

न deat तिष्ठति रूपमस्य न चक्षुषा पश्यति कश्चनैनम्‌ | 
भक्त्या च धृत्या च समाहितात्मा ज्ञानस्वरूपं परिपर्यतीह [i 

धृत्या समाहितात्मा भक्त्या पुरुषोत्तमं परयति--साक्षात्करोति--प्रामोतीत्यथः। 
भक्त्या त्वनन्यया शक्य इत्यनेनेकार्थ्यात्‌। भक्तिश्च ज्ञानविशेष एवेति सवमुपपन्नम्‌ | 

AN [१४५] सारासारविवेकज्ञा गरीयांसो विमत्सराः | 
प्रमाणतन्त्राः सन्तीति कृतो वेदार्थसंग्रह: ॥ 

॥ इति श्रोमहूगवद्रामाजुजाचार्यविरचितो वेदार्थसंत्रहः TATA: di 

1. Ag परिपझ्यति 

P. adds the colophon श्रीपुराणपुरुषोत्तमो लदेमी विलासलालसो : 
गोपीजनस्वजनो राधासमाराधनव्यप्रो विजयतेतराम्‌ । ; 

` वेदार्थसंग्रहमिमं यदि पक्षपातं 
त्यक्ता (for AFA) पठेत्स परमात्मविदेव मत्यः । 
उत्को छिलोखमथुराधिपतिर्निजस्य l 
पाठाय पत्रनिचयेस्वत एव सद्य: ॥ १॥ 

` पतितोत्तरमीम[[]सा वृथा वेदार्थसंग्रहः | 
अनधीतोत्तरा सेव WT वेदार्थसंग्रह: ॥ 
M, adds चेदान्तसंग्रहप्रारम्भः शके १७७१ 
साधारणसंचत्सरे श्रीषणे लिखितं पुण्यम्रामे ॥ 
प्रन्थसंस्या १४०० रौष्यणि १. 
M, adds. 
तमोघने खलमते कौशीक्काश्चिते 
Weal सुगतिमजानतां सताम्‌ | 
सुखाय यो रविरिव भुव्यवातरत्‌ 
स सन्मति यतिपतिरातनोतु नः ॥ 
छवाब्दे श्रवणे मासि राकायामिन्दुवासरे । 
नरसिंहतातदासेनालिखि वेदार्थसंग्रहः ॥ 

॥ श्रोरामचन्द्राय नमः ॥ 

PART III: TRANSLATION. 

E 

* 

न 
^ * 
s 
` d t£. 

p 

D 
5 

A k 
x a 
3८ : ü 

"DEM 

2 ww 

Aa nm 

` E 

CONTENTS OF THE VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Invocation of Visnu. 

Dedication to Yàmuna. 

Ràmaànuja states his own position. 

Summary statement of the meaning of the Veda. 
Definition of the individual soul. 

Definition of the Supreme Soul as the inner Ruler. 
The Advaitin's position stated. 

Bhàskara's bhedabheda position stated. 
Yadavaprakasa’s bhedabheda position stated. 

Jl. REFUTATION OF RIVAL VEDANTA VIEWS 

(i) Advaitavada. 

§ 10. 

$11. 

§ 13. 

§§ 13-21. 
§§ 13-14. 

§ 15. 
§ 16. 

§ 17. 

$18. 

§ 19. 
§ 20. 

§ 21. 
§ 22. 

§ 23. 

V. 28 

A. Contrary to the evidence of the Scriptures 

Chàndogya Up. 6, 2 expounds that Brahman is the creator and 
possesses various qualities. 

Objection: the tenor of ChUp. 6, 2 is clearly non-dualistic. 
The promissory assertion proves that there is an 'all to know. 
Exegesis of ChUp. 6. 

The meaning of ddega and the consequent meaning of the 
pratijna. 

The meaning of the drstanta. 

ChUp. 6, 2, 1 states that Brahman is the universal cause: the 
true meaning of sad eva. 

Brahman ensouls the jiva which ensouls matter: all words 
denote Brahman ultimately. 

Brahman as the Universal soul; the meaning of tat tvam asi 
suggested. 9 i 

The sense of aitadātmya; the meaning of tat tvam asi established. 
The meaning of tat tvam asi developed. 

Objection to Brahman as denoted by all words; restatement. 
Siddhanta of ChUp. 6: the Universe ensouled by Brahman is 
real. ; 

Initial statement on the meaning of the “mahavakyani: they do 
not prove an undifferentiated Brahman, 

178 

8 24. 
852. 
§ 26. 
§ 27. 
§ 28. 
§ 29. 
§ 30. 
§ 31. 
58 32-33. 
§ 34. 
8 35. 
8 36. 
837. 

$38. 
839. 

§ 40. 
$41. 

8 42. 
8 43. 

8 44. 
8 45. 
8 46. 
847. 
8 48. 
8 49. 

g 50. 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

Objection: Brahman is undifferentiated knowledge; refutation: 
Brahman is not knowledge but knower 

The Advaitin's view of the relation between perception and 
need for laksana 

The meaning of the sémdnddhikaranya construction. 
Language cannot be a pramana for a non-differentiated entity. 
No word can denote an entity without qualities. 

The Advaita view of svayampraküsatoa involves a contradiction. 
Perception cannot prove a non-differentiated entity; indetermi- 
nate perception perceives difference of a generic nature; the 
bhedabheda view of double essence untenable. 

ChUp. 6, 1, 4 explained: the meaning of the expression 

. vücüàrambhana. 

The tenor of ChUp. 6 restated in outline — the identity of the 
material and operative cause — qualities implied in. ChUp. 6 
2,1 

ChUp. 6 denies the asatküryavüda; the relation cause-effect 
The effect as a new entity is inconceivable 

The Advaitin’s suggestion that ChUp. 6 denies the ‘baseless error’ 
of the Buddhists is rejected and turned against him. - 

The qualities denoted by the ‘mahavakyani’. 

The meaning of neti neti and neha nünüsti kimcana 

Conclusion: $ruti does nowhere refer to a non-differentiated 
entity 

. B. Contrary to the evidence of Reason 

The view that knowledge is Brahman's essence and yet is 
obseured by Nescience is untenable : 
Objection: the Advaitin turns the same argument against 
Rāmānuja 

Summary of Ràmànuja's views 

Knowledge is not the essence but an essential property, not 
excluding the possibility of obscuration. 

The theory of Nescience involves Brahman Himself in 
Nescience 

The Advaitin's view that all is unreal disproves the ekajivavada 
Nescience can never be terminated. 

The terminating knowledge can never be terminated itself. 
The terminating knowledge must have Brahman's essence for 
its agent A 

Sruti being different from Brahman and hence unreal cannot 
validly bear on Brahman lo 

The Advaitin’s analogy of the dream invalidated 

$51. 

$52. 

$53. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA i 179 

Like the $ünyavàdin the mithyavadin has no pramana to prove 
his point. ; 
The Advaitin's view of the relation between perception and 
Scripture rejected. 

The true relation explaine 

(ii) Bhaskara's bhedábhedavüda. 

$54. 
$55. 
$ 56. 

$57. 

Summary condemnation of the upidhi theory as conflicting 
with Scripture 

The analogy of main space and enclosed space stated and 
rejected 

The analogy of main space locally determined as the auditory 
sense stated and rejected. 

Space is not at all determined as the auditory sense. 

(iii) Yadavapraka$a's bhedabhedavada. 

858. 

8 59. 
8 60. 
8 61. 
$ 62. 

$ 63. 
$ 64. 

Summary condemnation of the bhedabheda theory as violating 
Scripture. 

God's functional identity with the world stated and rejected. 
God's difference accepted, provided it be in body-soul relation. 
Difference and non-difference are mutually exclusive 

They cannot properly be stated in terms of generic non- 
difference and individual difference 

Class is a mode of an individual entity. 

Conclusion. 

III. ELABORATION OF GENERAL PRINCIPLES 

(i) Brahman is the Cause. 

§ 65. 

§ 66. 

-§ 68. 
§ 69. 

$70. 

88 71-74. 

§ | 67. 

All evidence of Scripture shows, by sámüanüdhikaranya, that 
Brahman is modified by the Universe of soul and matter. 
Consequently this Universe of soul and matter being His modus 
is real, 

The objection that an independently existing substance cannot 
be a modifying quality answered. 

Résumé 

Brahman being the immanent cause is not different from his 
effects. 

Objection: as material cause Brahman must be subject to 
change, which is unscriptural 

Reply: Brahman is the material cause but only his modus is 
subject to change : 

180 

$71. 
872. 
§ 73. 

' $14. 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

Purusa or individual soul is not subject to change in its essence. 
Prakrti or matter is eternal and subject to change. ` 

The terms prakrti and purusa refer to God in so far as He is 
modified by them. 

Brahman is cause or effect as His modes of matter and soul 
are either in their subtle or in their gross phases. 

(ii) Brahman is Saririn, the Universe is Sarira. 

§ 75. 
§ 76. 
§ 77: 
§ 78. 
§ 79. 
§ 80. 
$81. 

$82. 

God can be referred to by finite terms in a way analogous to 
that in which terms of body refer to the soul 

For God's relation to the world is analogous to the soul’s rela- 
tion to the body. 

Selected scriptural evidence. 

The central doctrine of the Scriptures comprehensively stated. 
Individual souls are essentially equal to one another. 

These souls are declared to be accessory to and dependent on 
God. 

They overcome samsüra by resorting to God who is modified 
by diversity 

God's essential simplicity is not incompatible with an infinite 
complexity of forms. 

(iii) Harmonious interpretation in these terms of seemingly conflicting 
statements in scripture. 

§ 83. 
$84. 
$85. 
§ 86. 
§ 87. 

§ 88. 
§ 89. 

§ 90. 
§ 91. 

§ 92. 
§ 93. 

y- 

The various scriptural statements do not exclude but comple- 
ment one another. 

The method of primary and harmonious interpretation. 

The harmony is the harmony of soul and modifying form. 

Not the knowledge of exclusive identity but that of inclusive 
unity in difference leads to salvation 

The objection that this conflicts with such identity statements 
as tat tvam asi refuted and scriptural eclecticism exposed 
The ancient Masters support this interpretation of the sadvidyd. 
The objection that the assumption of an antaryümin denies the 
moral responsibility of the acting person raised. 

And refuted: the antaryamin instigates a person only to those 
acts for which he has a self-created predisposition. 

Bhakti is arrived at by the performance of one's own dharma 
and of devotional and religious works. 

God is only to be attained through bhakti 

This is the ancient and traditional teaching of Vedanta, which 
js a norm of orthodoxy. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 181 

(iv) Illustration of the principles of harmonious exegesis. 

$$ 96-102. 

§ 94. 

§ 95. 

§ 96. 
§ 97. 

§ 98. 

§ 99. 
§ 100. 
§ 101. 
§ 102. 
§ 103. 
$104. 

§ 105. 
§ 106. 
§ 107. 
§ 108. 

Authority of the Puranas depending on the quality of their age 
of provenance: Puranas glorifying Visnu are sattvika. 
Apparent contradictions in infallible Scripture to be removed 
by correct exegesis: illustration. 

Systematic exposition of the illustration showing Narayana’s 
paramountcy. 

Comparison of texts of different $akhüs. 

Nirayana’s paramountcy declared in Taittiriya Aranyaka 10, 
1, 3 and 3, 13, 1. 

And elaborated in TaittAr. 10, 11, 1. 

This paramount Narayana is the object of meditation. 

Sambhu- refers to Narayana. 

Mahàpurusaprakarana states Narayana’s paramountcy. 
Résumé of the meaning of the texts shown to form one context. 
Meaning of the expression “Sovereign of OM". 

Divinities declared to be ‘supreme’ as Nàrayana's manifesta- 
tions. 

Advaitic explication of the daharavidyi untenable. 

It declares that God's qualities are to be sought after. 

God's multiple manifestations His sport 

The sense of a seemingly contrary Atharvasiras passage 

(v) Miscellaneous discussions. 

(vi) 

§ 109. 
§ 110. 
$111. 

§ 112. 
§ 113. 
8114. 
$115. 

No difference admissible between material and operative cause. 
Evidence from epic and Visnupuràna adduced 

Divergent purinic versions to be studied in the light of the 
principles of $ 94 

Trimürti a manifestation of God. 

Can a perfect God ensoul an imperfect world? 

The manner in which the Sütras declare God's paramountcy. 
Brahma is a ksetrajna. 

Refutation of basic theories of the Prabhakaras. 

§ 116. 
§ 117. 

§ 118. 
8 119. 
§ 120. 
§ 121. 
§ 122. 

Language not primarily understood by the action taken on it. 
Even granted the Prabhakara view, still $abda can bear on 
Brahman. 

Arthavüda and mantra not less significative than vidhi. 
Critique of the Prabhakara view of karya. 

And of the doctrine of niyoga. 

The relation principal — accessory. 

This relation stated in terms of God and Universe. 

182 

(vii) 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN- 

$123. Critique of the Prabhakara theory of niyojya. 

$124. The apürva theory untenable: God is propitiated, and grants 
fruits, through the gods. 

§125. The result is directly, and not per assumption, known from the 
injunction. 4 

$126. Conclusion: all acts are propitiations of the Supreme God. 

God has a body and qualities. 

$127. Description of God's qualities and scriptural evidence for it. 
$128. The existence of eternally free souls: the evidence is adrnissible. 
$129. Three meanings of paramam padam. 

8130. God's essence is hidden to man because of his karman. 

$131. The immaterial Supreme Heaven of the sūris. 

$132. God's qualities: satyaküma and satyasamkalpa. 

$133. Smärta evidence for God's body. 

$134. Lyrical evocation of Chandogya Up. 1, 1, 6. 

$135. Vakya and Bhasya ad hiranmaya- 

§ 136. This Sruti as definitive as satyam jianam anantam brahma. 

(viii) Veda in its entirety preterhuman and hence veridic. 

(ix) 

§ 137. Denotativeness inherent in $abda, not conventional. 

$138. Sabda is pramàna in its own right. 

8139. Preterhuman origin of Veda. 

$140. Summing-up of the demonstrated scriptural doctrine that God 
is modified by His body the Universe and as such is its 
immanent cause. 

Bhakti. 

$141. Description of bhakti as an apex-form of loving. consciousness. 
§ 142. Discussion of the beatitude of this absolute love. 

$143. Subservience does not exclude beatitude. 

§ 144. The Beatific Vision is only possible through bhakti. 

§ 145. Concluding stanza. 

TRANSLATION 

81. Homage to the Principal to whom all spiritual! and non-spiritual? 
entities are accessory; Who reposes on $esa, and Who is the treasury of 
immaculate and infinite beautiful qualities :5 Visnu.® 

$2. May the Sage? Yāmuna prosper: He has dispelled the 
bewildering obscurity of ignorance which, albeit contrary to revelation and 

1. cit- “spiritual order of the Universe, sum-total of individual atmans," generally 
said of the evolved product of individualized souls, as against puruga- "the spiritual 
order" in its subtle, i.e., causal state (cf. infra $140). I prefer the rendering ‘spiritual’ 

. to THIBAUT’S ‘sentient’ since strictly speaking sentiency is of matter, not of spirit. 

2. acit- “non-spiritual order, material or physical component of the Universe," con- 
stituting the corporeal counterpart of cit to which it is subservient. 

3. $egin- “principal element to which other elements are accessory,” especially the 
Supreme in relation to the orders of cit and acit which are sesa “accessory” to him in 
the sense that they are subservient to him, totally and inseparably dependent on him, 
serving his eminence. Cf. infra $122 evamisvaragatatisayadhanecchaydpadeyatvam . . 
sarvasya vastunah svarüpam. This relation of principal-accessory is the counterpart of 
that of body-soul (śarīraśarīribhāva) or mode-modified (prakárapraküribh.) the first esp. 
under the aspect of the Supreme, the latter two under the aspect of the subject orders. 

4. ‘pun’ (rather ‘comparison/equation of the two concepts denoted by one term’) 
on 1. the serpent Ananta-Sesa, 2. the subject orders of cit and acit. It would follow 
from R.s exposition (8132) of the Supreme’s entourage (sri, paramavyoman etc.) as 
forming part of His essence (svarüpa-) that strictly speaking Ananta too belongs to this 
essence and not to. the orders of $esa. “This ‘pun’ is borrowed from Yamuna, Stotraratna 
39-40 ६०४6 (sc. $riyà) dsinam anantabhogini .. $arirabhedais tava Segatam ("servitude") 
gatair yathocitam $esa ititare janaih. In the second sense $esa$üyin- means "who resides 
(as the inner àtman) in the subservient orders of cit and acit." 

5. kalyana- (sc. guna-), the Supreme’s six perfections (sádgunyam) jnana, Sakti, 
bala, virya (also dhairya), aisvarya, tejas. R. does not explain himself on the relation of 
these gunas mutually (for traditional definitions see SCHRADER, Paiicardtra 32 sqq.; YID. 
vii); originally qualities somehow related to some aspect of the complex diviniy of Visnu 
(virya- “heroism” in his Vedic exploits and avataras, cf. Gonna, Early Visnuism, 118 
sqq.—bala “id.”, cf. also SvetUp. 6, 8 svibhaviki jndnabalakriya ca; Sakti cf. VP. 6, 7, 60 
Sqq.—tejas "solar splendour") their number was apparently fixed at an early date (cf. 
VP. 6, 5, 79) and, reinterpreted, they played a rôle in the Paricaratra doctrine of the 
Vyühas, cf. SCHRADER, o.c., 34. 

6. Visnu- name rarely used by R. for the Supreme (invariably named Narayana) 
here employed for the double purpose of stating at the outset 5.5 Vaisnava persuasion 
.and of suggesting God's all-pervasiveness: visnu- — vyüpin/vyüpaka-, cf. e.g. GBH. 11, 
24 (rt. vis-) or/and his entering into the subject orders as their inner Ruler (antaryá- 
-min-) (rt. vis- cf. ChUp. 6, 3, 2-3). This mangala sums up the fundamentals of R.s 
doctrine 

7. muni- invariably defined átmanananasila-, enlarged on SBh. 4, 4, 46 (Th. 710) 
idam ca maunam Sravanapratisthaérthan mananad arthantarabhütam updsandlambanasya 
punah punah samsilanam tadbhavanéripam “this mauna ('muni-hood') is something dif- 
ferent from mere reflection on the basis of scriptural instruction: it is the repeated men- 
tal representation of the very object of worshipful meditation itself, so that it grows 
upon the mind.” 
$ 8. YAMUNA (dravidicé’ ALAVANDAR), teachers's teacher of R., attacks in his Siddhi- 
traya the theses of SANKARA and BHASKARA. On R.'s relation cf. Introd. III 

184 PO 4 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

reason, has spread all over the world: such errors? as the view that the 
Supreme Brahman, being nescient and afflicted with misconceptions, is impli- 
cated in samsara; or that the Supreme Brahman is liable to adventitious 
limiting adjuncts!’ that are different from itself! and as such is subject to 
karman; or that the Supreme Brahman itself is the abode of imperfection.!? 

$3. The only meaning which is to be found in the most important 
part of the whole body of $rutis,3 which set forth what is blissful for the 
entire Universe, is as follows :14 True knowledge of the individual soul!§ and 
of the Supreme Spirit,! applied to the obligations imposed!’ by the various 
dharmas pertaining to each stage and station of life, are to precede pious 
and humble acts of devotion for and meditation on the Supreme Spirit—acts 
held extremely dear!? by the devotee—that ultimately result in the attain- 
ment of the Supreme Spirit. 

$4. In truth, all declarations of the Vedanta are meant to set forth the 
knowledge of the proper form and nature? of the individual soul which are 

9. Resp. the advaitin's and the two types (Bhaáskara and Yàdavapraküsa) of bheda- 
bhedavadin’s positions, summarized and refuted below. 

10. upadhi- “non-essential element or factor adjoined to the pure form (svarüpa-) 
of an entity which is thereby delimited and conditioned. 

11. para- "other", showing the insoluble dualism ultimately fundamental to bhe- 
dabhedavada. 4 ` 

12. asubha- or heya-, opp. of kalyana-, "imperfect, affected by the various limi- 
tations etc., due to karman to which souls are subject. 

13. i.e., the upanisads or Vedanta. | 

14. This sums up the three stages of the one road from transmigration in bondage 
(samsüra-) to the ultimate attainment of perfect bliss; corresponds completely to the three 
paths—jüüna, karma, bhakti—of the Gita as interpreted by R. See my Ramanuja etc. 
Intr. 19 sqq. 

15. jivatman—“the individualized atman in natural conjunction with (samsrta- 
"created jointly with", generally "related to, having a relation") the body." 

16. paramütman—'"God as the atman beyond the individual atman, as the átman's 
inner atman,” connoting both God's transcendence and immanence. 

17. itikartavyatd, for the meaning of this term, cf. MNPr. $126. dhyüna- “con- 
templation inspired by love" synonymous with bhakti- and updsana-; arcana- esp. "wor- 
ship of God's image". 

18. Station and stage of life = varnas$rama: varna- “social order founded on reli- 
gious law” rather than "(sociological) class”—dsrama— the ideal life-periods of brahma- 
cürin—' boy initiated into religiously founded society"; grhastha—"pater familias, keeper 
of the fire’—vanaprastha—‘retired from public life"—samnyüsin "retired from all social 
and marital life." 

19. R. frequently emphasizes the fact that the loving devotion to God is an act 
which in itself is extremely dear to the devotee and, as an entirely disinterested mental 
act, is its own reward. Cf. Ved. 8141-144. 

20. svarüpa- "proper form” (where ‘form’ is the principle of individuality, cf. naéma- 
Tüpa-), free from adventitious adjuncts but (for R.) possessed of essential properties; 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 185 

different from the body;?! the proper form and nature of the Supreme Spirit 
who is the inner Ruler? of the soul; the worship of the Supreme Spirit; and 
the apprehension of Brahman as perfect boundless bliss which presupposes 
the revelation of the proper form of the soul that results from the worship 
of the Supreme Spirit By setting forth all this the declarations of the 
Vedànta serve to remove the danger of rebirth which is inevitable since it 
results from the misconception of the individual soul that it is identi- 
cal itself with that one of the four types of bodies— sc. gods, from 
Brahma onwards, — men — animals — inanimate beings —, into which it has 
entered by the impulsion of the continuous flow of good or evil karman 
amassed during ageless ignorance. 

svabhüva- “this essential form in the process of being and becoming with and through 
its essential qualities.” 

21. Note Rs definition of body: yasya cetanasya yad dravyam sarvétmand svarthe 
niyantum dhirayitum ca $akyam tacchesataikasvarüpam ca tat tasya $ariram iti $arira- 
laksanam dstheyam SBh, 2, 1, 9; cf. Lacomse, ASV. 108 sqq.; Proceedings, All-India Conf., 
1946. 

22. antaryümin- "God as the immanent principle directing and guiding the soul 
in its actions in the same way as the soul directs the body;" term from Antaryami- 
brahmana (BAUp. 3, 7, 22) in the mádhyamdina recension, which reads ya dtmani tisthann 
antaro 'tmanah, etc.; on this difference cf. SBh. 1, 4, 27; 2, 3, 19. 

23. For it is by dedicating all actions to God (BhG. 18, 46) and devoting himself 
entirely to God (cf. GBh. 2, 61 sqq.) that a person is able to shed the bonds of karman 
and realize, ie, recognize, his soul for what it is in essence. 

24. abhimdna- “misconception (lit. “prejudice, bias, self-centred opinion") that 
the aloof àtman is identical with the body which, with the psychological functions of 
ahamkára "subjectifier", constitutes the empirical ego that is mistaken for the atman, 
Cf. also K. C. VARADACHARTS paper on abhimána in Rámánuja's Theory of Knowledge.— 
There has never been a paradisiac period before the "Fall" (j&ànabhram$a, paficaratric 
term); samsara has existed from all eternity; for the corresponding eternity of souls 
that are never implicated in samsara, the nityas or sūris, cf. infra $8128.—For the way 
in which the atman’s unlimited knowledge is contracted (samkucita-) to the scope of 
a body-bound soul, see infra. 

25. Sharply to be distinguished from Sankara's avidyi (always rendered 
"nescience"), Rs "ignorance" is a real factor which is not some undefinable shadow 
of the absolute but a concrete lack of knowledge in the samsiric being of the funda- 
mental autonomy of its individual atman as a spiritual entity of unlimited knowledge 
subject to the supreme Spirit. As the advaitin takes knowledge as the essence, nescience 
takes on a completely different, ultimately inexplicable character; whereas for R. who 
considers knowledge a property of a substance (dharmabhitajndna-) ignorance has its 
limited and definable scope of action. On this point see infra $43. Besides, whereas 
the cessation of nescience, however conceived, is for the advaitin equal to the summum 
bonum, the self-realisation/self-recognition of the individual atman in the Samkhyan 
sense is for R., although doubtless release, but the next step to the supreme goal of 
attaining God. 

Y. 

186 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

Such declarations are met with in Srutis like “Thou art That, this 
soul is Brahman,” He who, although residing in the soul, is different from 
that soul, whom the soul does not know, whose body is the soul, and, who 
directs the soul from within, He is the immortal inner Ruler of thy soul, 
He is the inner soul of all beings, free from all evil, the divine and. sole God 
Narayana,?? “tis He whom the Brahmans aspire to know by repeating the 
Vedas, by sacrifice, charity, mortification and fasting? he that knows Brah- 
man attains the Most-High?9! he that knows this is immortal: there is no 
other way to tread,"3? and so on and so forth l : 

$5. The proper form of the soul is free from all various differentia- 
tions consisting in the distinctions that are brought about by the natural 
evolution of prakrti into the bodies of gods, men, etc... In essence it 
is only characterized by knowledge and beatitude. When these differentia- 
lions of god, man, etc., — which have been brought about by the karman of 
the soul—have vanished% there persists a differentiation in its proper form?5 
it is beyond the power of expression and can only be known by the soul 
itself. So the soul can only be defined as essentially knowledge; and this 
essential nature is common to all souls.37 

26. tat tvam asi ChUp. 6, 9, 4, etc. 

27. ayam ätmă brahma MandUp. 2. 

28. ya ütmani tisthann etc. BAUp. 3, 7, 22 (Madhyamdina recension) . 

29. sa esa sarvablvütüntarütmàü SubalUp. 7. 

:80. tam etam vedánuvacanena etc. BAUp. 4, 4, 22. 

31. brahmavid üpnoti param TaittUp. 2, 1 

32. SvetUp. 3, 8 

33. -parinéma- "the effectuation of an entity which has the same degree of being 
as its material cause" (cf. e.g. the definition in Vedantaparibhasa I parinémo nümopüdà- 
na°sama’sattakakdryapattih); on the parinamavàda see Intr. I 

34. S. is unquestionably right in quoting as R.’s references the Slokas ekasvariipa- 
bhedo hi bahyakarmavrtiprajah/devadibhede 'padhvaste nasty evàvürno hi sah//VP. 2 
14, 33 "the differentiation in the actually undifferentiated proper form has its origin in 
the obscuration caused by karman that is extrinsic to the proper form; so when those 
differentiations of god etc. have disappeared, there is no obscuration left,” (also quoted 
SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 81 in similar context), and pratyastamitabhedam yat sattamatram agoca- 
ram/vacasümátmasamvedyam taj jianam brahlmasamjfiitam // VP. 6, 7, 53 (where brahma- 
= ütma-), discussed in detail SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 69 sqq. and explained in my paper The 
Subhasrayaprakarana etc 

35. svarüpabheda- "essentially distinct as an individual, having essentially distinct 
individualities.” 

36. jüánasvarüpamityetüvannirdes$yam, cannot be taken to mean that that the atman 
is pure knowledge, but that the knowledge characteristic for the atman is a svaripani- 
rüpanadharma “an attribute describing the proper form," cf. infra § 43; the tenet that 
jfüna is an attribute, not the essence, is fundamental to Rs doctrine.—SUDARSANACHARI 
in his ed., traces jüünasvarüpam to VP. 1, 4, 40, but this st. refers to the Supreme Spirit 
I would rather connect it with 6, 7, 53 yat sattámütram. taj jrdnam brahmasamjüitam, 
interpreted SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 69 àtmonah svarupam jnénasattaikalaksanam, 

37. R. endorses the Samkhya view that there is an infinite number of 4tmans which 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 187 

$6. The proper form of the inner Ruler is as follows: He is the sole 
cause of the cessation of samsara, which itself consists in the origination, 
subsistence and dissolution of the phenomenal world?s constituted by the 
above spiritual and non-spiritual entities. His proper form is therefore dis- 
tinct from all entities other than Himself, since He is absolutely opposed to 
all evil and comprises solely infinite perfection. His beautiful qualities are 
immeasurable, perfect and innumerable. He is known in the entire Veda 
under the various designations of Soul of all? the Supreme Brah- 
man, Supreme Glory,41 Supreme Principle? Supreme Spirit? Real 
Being, etc.,—all of which denote the Venerable Lord Narayana, the 
Supreme Person. The $rutis are meant to set forth his manifestation, so 
they expound the universal dominion of the Supreme Spirit as the inner 
Soul of the totality of spiritual and non-spiritual entities by expressions like 
His power, His portion, His manifestation! His form,52 His body, His 
shape, etc., and by samanadhikaramyas constructions. 

although mutually distinguished, all have the same generic structure (ükàra-) of un- 
restricted knowledge. 

38. prapaüca—is the completely evolved phenomenal Universe of matter ensouled 
by spirit in the gross (sthüla-) phase of effect. 

.89. sarvütmà SvetUP. 3, 21. 

40. param brahma TaittUp. 2, 12 

41, param jyotih ChUp. 8, 3, 4. 

42. param tattvam ChUp. 6, 2, 1. 

43. paramütmà BAUp. 3, 1, 1. 

44. sat ChUp. 6,2, 1 

45. bhagavàn, for the meaning of the term cf. the discussion JRAS 1910-12; cf. also 
R.’s quotation of VP. 6, 5, 73 sqq. infra 

46. nüráyana- for R. the name of the Supreme Personal being par excellence, one 
aspect of whom is denoted by Visnu as the all-pervading supporter of the Universe, cf. 
infra $899 ff. 

47. purusottama-, term frequently used in the Gita denotes the Supreme as a spiri- 
tual being transcending the purusa or order of individuals souls constituting his higher 
prakrti (the oft-cited passage Gita 7, 4, sq.) 

48. vaibhava- "the totality of God's vibhütis, his divine manifestation in the pheno- 
‘menal world of matter and spirit.” 

49. $akti- : parasya Saktir vividhaiva $rüyate SvetUp. 6, 8 

50. amáa- : mamaivadmso jivaloke G. 15, 7; cf. MaitrUp. 5, 2 

51. vibhiti- : G. 10, 7 etc. PrasnUp. 5, 4 4 

52. rüpa- :.ekam rüpam bahudhà yah karoti KathUp. 5, 12. 

53. $arira- : Antaryamibrahmana BAUp. 3, 7, 3-22 

54. tanu- : tasyaisa ütmàü vivrnute taniim svàm KathUp. 2, 23 

55. sümàamnüdhikaranya- grammatical term: community of case relation of two or 
‘more’ words; logical: coordination of the two (or more) terms in a judgment: the lotus is 
blue etc. Term defined (infra $26) bhinnapravrttinimittànüm sabdandm ekasminn arthe 
vrttil “the bearing on one sense of more words with different reasons for their application” 
The stock-example is the ‘mahayakya’ tattvamasi discussed in detail infra $20 

188 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

$7. While attempting to explain these sémanddhikaranya construc- 
tions, etc., which in fact only propound Brahman's manifestation, some phi- 
losophers contend®* that Brahman is nothing but non-differentiated know- 
ledge. Although it is eternally released and by its very nature self- 
illuminating, it is identical with the individual soul; this identity is con- 
cluded from sámànadhikaramya constructions such as Thou art That. Ac- 
cordingly Brahman Itself is nescient and as such may be in bondage as well 
as released. The entire Universe, with its infinite variety of Sovereign Lord, 
submissive souls etc., is false, for it is different from pure non-differentiated 
spirituality. The distinction that one soul is in bondage and the other soul 
is released cannot be made at all. It is false that some souls have attained 
release before: only one single body has an indwelling soul and all other 
bodies have no souls at all; but which body that is cannot be positively 
determined. The preceptor who imparts knowledge is false, the person who 
has correct knowledge of the śāstra5 is also false. All this is to be gathered 
from the sastra, which is false itself 

$8. Others®® occupy a different position and hold that Brahman, 
though having all perfections like freedom from evil etc.,59 is—because of 
the conception of identity—afflicted with some sort of adjunct, so that He 
may be alternatively in bondage or in released state and is consequently 
the abode of evolution which takes the form of various imperfections. 

89. Others®? again, describing the exact nature of the conception of 
identity, maintain that Brahman — ocean of incomparable and immeasurable 
noble qualities which belong to its nature — is in essence at once distinct 
and indistinct with regard to all spiritual beings — divine, human, animal, 
inanimate, infernal, celestial and released, and thus the abode of evolution 
in the form of all kind of imperfections proper to ether, etc. 

I 

§10. Philosopher who have pondered over the true meaning of 
the śruti have pointed out a number of errors in the first school which 
cannot be explained away.$! As a matter of fact, the Sruti passage from 
“It wished: I be many; I will multiply"9? to “all these creatures, my dear son, 

56. Summary of advaita school 

57. pramatd . 

58. Summary of the BHASKARA school of bhedabhedavada 

59. apahatapdpmé etc. ChUp. 8, 7, 1 

60. Summary of the YADAVAPRAKASA school of bhedabhedavada 

61. Here starts R.’s refutation of advaitavada: first it is shown that the doctrine of 
absolute non-duality is contradicted by áruti, 88 10-39. 
; 62. tad aiksata bahu syim prajüyeyeti ChUp. 6, 2, 3—sanmülüáh somyemêh etc 
ChUp. 6, 8, 4; this entire context is the theme of §§ 10-22. हु 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA ; 189 

have their roots in real being; therein they have their abode and their 
foundation,” expounds that the origination, subsistence and resorption etc. 
of the world are due to the will of Brahman, to whom the word It, indi- 
cative of the topic under discussion, refers. 

Besides, all the perfect attributes which according to other contexts 
belong to Brahman, those multitudes of immeasurable, perfect and in- 
numerable perfections like omniscience, omnipotence, universal sovereignty, 
his being modified by all, unequalled and unsurpassed, having all 
desires materialized and every will realized, and being all-illuminat- 
ing, as well as his absolute freedom from evil as is proved by 
countless expressions like He, who is free from sin, etc.,—all those perfec- 
tions are done with in this school. 

§11. — But, it may be objected, at the very beginning this Sruti as- 
serts, by stating that knowledge of all can be had through knowledge of one, 
that only the cause has reality. By adducing the instance of the clay® it 
shows that the One, being the cause, is real whereas all transformations 
have no reality. In the $ruti my dear son, this real being was alone in the 
beginning and without a second,® all distinctions, whether homogeneous or 
heterogeneous, are denied reality, and it is set forth that Brahman, to 
whom this “real being” refers, is non-differentiated. In other contexts the 
so-called purifying statements do also declare that Brahman is absolutely 
opposed to all distinction: e.g. Brahman is truth, knowledge, infinite, He 
is whole, inactive, unqualified, He is knowledge and bliss,” etc. 
Our conception of the essential simplicity of Brahman does not imply that 
these words are all synonymous: even when applied to the simplicity of an 
entity all words retain their peculiar meanings inasmuch as they establish 
the absolute opposition of that entity to all distinctions.’ 

63. satyakdma- (explained infra $132) and satyasamkalpa- from ChUp. 8, 7, 1. 

64. apahatapapma ChUp. 8, 7, 1. 

65. ie. .. ddesam .. yena .. avijidtam vijfiátam ChUp. 6, 1, 3. 

66. ie. yatha somyaikena mrtpindena etc. ChUp. 6, 1, 5. 

67. sadeva somyedamagra üsidekamevàdvitiyam ChUp. 6, 2, 1 

68. $odhakàni vàkyüni, sruti statements like the ones summed up below (niskalam 
niskriyam etc.) which, acc. to the advaitin, purify the Supreme Brahman of all differen- 
tiating qualities, and, acc. to R., of all imperfect qualities. 

69. satyam jranamanantam brahma TaittUp. 2, 1; see infra §§ 28, 3 f. 

70. R. must have had in mind SvetUp. 6, 19 niskalam niskriyam séntam niravadyam 
nirañjanam; cf. also AdhyatmUp. 62 nirgunam niskriyam süksmam etc. 

71. cf. BAUp. 4, 9, 3 vijianam dnandam brahma. 

72, ie., no quality can be attributed to Brahman. In other words: the above terms 
niskala etc. do not express perfect qualities as R. would have it, but deny for Brahman 
each quality negatively denoted by them. Cf. SANKARA TaittUpBh. 2, 1, visesanarthavattve 
‘pi satyüdindám svürthaparityaya eva ......satyüdyair arthavattve tu tadviparitadharma- 

190 = J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN- 

$12. — My reply to this is: No! If everything is false, then it 
cannot be reasonably held that all can be known when the One is known, 
for the simple reason that there is no “all” to know. Or else it would 
follow that truth and falsity are identical. On the other hand, the assertion 
that we can know all by knowing the One is only tenable in case that “all” 
has reality of its own by having the One for its soul 

813. The true meaning of our $ruti is this: “He said to Svetaketu: 
‘Stabdho 'sy uta tam üde$am aprüksyah',"4* that is ‘you seem to be an ac- 
complished scholar; now, have you questioned your teachers about the 
Gdesa?’ ade$a- means “he who exercizes üde$a"; this áde$a is synonymous 
with praéasana- “command”;7 in agreement with the $ruti it is by the come 
mand’ of that imperishable being, O Gargz that the sun and the moon 
stand apart;'9? similarly in Manu's expression: sarvesüm prasasitaram™ “the 
Commander of all". In the context under discussion it is propounded, by 
the use of the words ekam eva,’® that He is also the material cause. And 
since the word advitiyam denies that there was another operator? as well, 
it is thereby declared that that sole One is also the operative cause. 

: Therefore the sentence runs like this: “Have you asked about that 
Commander, who is also the material cause of the world, by whom, when 
heard-of, known and realized, the unheard- of is heard-of, the unknown is 

vadbhyo visesyebhyo brahmano visesyasya niyantrtvam upapadyate; for a discussion see 
Intr. IV. 

73. The assertion (pratijñā, term from BrS. 1, 4, 23) that there is someone or some- 
thing (for R. the personal ddesa-) yena (sc. vijiütena) avijidtam vijnütam presupposes 
the reality of that which is vijiiatam, ie. the effected Universe (by analogy of the 
example yathaikena mrtpindena sarvam mrnmayam vijütam syát). This very text poses 
the satkaryavada (cf. 6, 2, 2 katham asatah saj jüyeta) so that here the identity is urged 
of the first cause and the effected Universe. 1f the advaitin holds that the Universe is 
‘false’ (mithyà) as against brahman. true (satyam) there are two alternatives 1. there is 
no assertion at all but mere tautology: if the one is known the one is known; 2. if 
that is not accepted this means that the false is equated with the true. 

74. ChUp. 6, 1, 3 

75. ddisyate ’nenetyddesah/ddesah prasdsanam: ādeśa in the sense of ádestr- with 
internal object üádes$a- = prasdsana- "command"; cf. 589. 1, 4, 23, p. 385 in the same con- 
nexion Gdisyate prasisyate "nenetyüdesah .... sidhakatamatvena kartā vivaksitah / tamā- 
destüram apraksyah etc. - 

16. etasya và aksarasya prasdsane etc. BAUp. 3, 8, 9 

- 77, - Manu 12, 122 

78. In sadeva somyedam agra dsid ekam evddvitiyam, acc. to R.: (infra 833) to 
be construed idam < prapaiicam > agre sad àsit "the Universe was at the beginning real" 
consequently ekam eva states that there is only one material cause and advitiyam that 
there was no second, that is efficient or operative, cause; cf. SBh. 2, 1, 15 p. 441 in the 
same connexion sarva$aktitvenüdhisthütrantarüsahatayüdvitiyam ca 

79. On adhigthütr cf. my remarks. Intr. L.,.. 

^ Lal 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 191 

known and the unrealized is realized?" "The meaning which the father has 
in mind is this: "Have. you heard of Brahman, who is the cause of the 
origination, subsistence and resorption etc. of the entire Universe and who 
is an ocean of noble qualities without end such as omniscience and the 
power of having all his desires materialized and his every will realized?" 
The father bears tacitly in mind the knowledge that the entire Universe, 
as it is an effect, is known by the knowledge of Brahman Himself whose 
body is constituted by spiritual and non-spiritual entities in subtle state 
in which they are cause, just because He is the universal cause — it being 
said that the cause is the effect in all its variety of configurations; and 
remaining silent about this knowledge he asks his son: .... by whom the 
unheard-of is heard-of, the unknown is known and ‘the unrealized is realized. 

The son does not know the particular knowledge his father has in 
mind, viz. the knowledge that the One is the cause of all entities. Still he 
understands that when two entities are different the knowledge of one pro- 
duces no knowledge of the other. So he raises the objection: Sir, how can 
such an ade$a be?8! ` 

$14. When this objection is put to him, the father imparts to his 
son the knowledge that he has in mind and he declares that all is known 
when the One is known: the One whose proper form is purely knowledge, 
bliss and perfection, whose greatness is immeasurable, who possesses bound- 
less, unequalled and countless perfections, e.g. the power of having his 
every will realized, and who essentially is not subject to transformations: 82 
that is, the Supreme Brahman Himself, whose body is constituted by spiri- 
tual. and non-spiritual entities in subtle state, ie. not individualized by 
names and forms. This is the One who, by his own free will and for the 

80. In R.’s Samkhyan cosmogony the phenomenal world of matter and spirit evolves 
out of causal substances in which the physical and spiritual orders are contained in a 
subtle state, the átmans as purusa, yet still mutually distinguishable, not merged in a 
primeval spirit, and in matter as prakrti, an amorphous mass not yet individualized by 
names-and-forms. 

81. katham nu bhagavah sa adeso bhavatiti ChUp. 6, 1, 4. 

82. viküára—general name for the ‘alterations’ (for R. without the pejorative con- 
notation often.going with the term) that are brought about in an material object in the 
process of evolution, and in the knowledge of a spiritual entity in the process of 'egoti- 
zation' (here the pejorative value is evident), viz. the contraction of his originally and 
essentially unlimited knowledge; cf. SBh. 2, 3, 18 svarüpányathübhàvarüpavikürah: viya- 
dider acetanasya yadrso ’nyathabhavo na tádr$o jivasya / .. cidamsasya ca karmaphala- 
visesabhoktrtvaya tadanurüpaj&anavikasarüpaviküro bhavati. The Supreme Being is 
free from either vikāra of essence or viküra of property. : ee 

192 i : J. A, B. VAN BUITENEN 

sake of his own sport, constitutes with a portion of Himself the peculiar 
structure of the world with all its infinite variety of animate and inanimate 
beings in which it consists. 

815. With a view to explain this point that the One — as described 
above — when known makes everything known, the father adduces an 
example drawn from common experience in order to illustrate that cause 
and effect are not different from each other: yathà somyaikena mrtpindena 
sarvam mrnmayam vijiütam sydd vücürambhanam viküro nümadheyam 
mrttikety eva satyam, that means: “a single substance of clay can be 
transformed into various structures, conditions and forms — jug, bowl etc.— 
so that within itself it includes diverse practical purposes. Yet, although 
it may assume diverse denominations, it is an established fact that it remains 
the same substance clay and does not become another substance for it 
remains differentiated by the structural peculiarities of clay. So it is 
possible through the knowledge of one lump of clay to know all that is 

differentiated by the same structural peculiarities of clay — jugs, bowls and 
the like.” 

§16. The son does not know that Brahman is the sole cause of the 
entire Universe, so he asks: Sir, you must tell me what that is.87 Then 
the father expounds that Brahman Himself, the omniscient and omnipotent, 
is the universal cause: he says: sad eva somyedam agra üsid ekam evād- 
vitiyam. Here the word idam denotes “the world"; agra- means “the time 
before creation”; and with sad eva it is declared that during that time before 
creation the world was essentially sat. He means to say that at the very 
time of its creation the world was still non-differentiated: so in ekam eva 
he states that the world that was in the state of sat was at that time not yet 

83. lila: the important conception of God's sport is best understood by its opposite 
karman-, It contains a free action (an action not resulting from a preceding action in an 
endless retrogressive succession) performed to no purpose at all: no purpose that of 
necessity would result in new phalas for the agent to enjoy or to suffer, Hence jt is 
compared to the literally inconsequential playfulness of a child (cf. VP. 1, 2, 18, quoted 
infra $42). In creating, sustaining and resorbing the world God has no cause to effectuate 
and no end to achieve. 

84. amsa- 

85. ChUp. 6, 1, 4. 

86, samsthàna- "generic structure of an entity by which it can be classified under 
a group with a class-name”; cf. 889, 1, 1, 1, p. 32 távataiva gotvddijativyavahüropapatter 
atirekaváde 'pi samsthanasya sampratipannatvdc ca samsthinam eva jütih / samsthünam 
nama svüsüdhüranarüpam iti yathávastusamsthünam anusamdheyam. See LacoMsE, ASV 
97-98; Sınma, Indian Psychology: Perception, p. 49 f ५ 

87, bhagavamstv eva me tad bravitu ChUp. 6, 1, 7, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA + 193 * 

differentiated into names-and-forms. By this same exposition it is made 
clear that sat is the material cause of the world; now the word advitiyam 
denies that there was still another cause, or an operative cause, different 
from that material cause. 

§17-a. Then the father proceeds to develop in a lucid manner what 
he had tacitly borne in mind before in the passage: Have you asked about 
that ddesa by whom the unheard-of is heard-of etec., namely that the Com- 
mander or Operator Himself is the material cause. So he says: "That sat, 
which Itself is at once the material and the operative cause of the world, 
tad aiksata bahu syàm prajayeyeti": that means: “That Supreme Brahman, 
denoted by the word tad, who is omniscient and omnipotent and has his 
every will realized and all his desires materialized, decided nonetheless, for 
the sake of his own sport: "I be many in the form of a world composed 
of an infinite variety of spiritual and non-spiritual beings; to that purpose 
I will multiply.” He then created the primordial elements — ether etc.5? — 
out of a single portion of Himself. Then again this Supreme Deity, denoted 
by the name sat aiksata hantüham imüs tisro devatüh anena jivenat- 
manünwpravi$ya mümarüpe vyakaravaniti:?! by using the expression anena 
jivenatmana he declares that the living soul is itself ensouled by Brahman 
and points out that all non-spiritual matter becomes padartha?? when the 

88. nàmarüpa- "principle of individuality of an entity that evolves out of its 
subtle into its gross state.’ For the history of this interesting term I refer to MARYLA 
FALK’S—often speculative—account in Nàmarüpa and Dharmaripa. 

89. Note that R. has creation start with akasa or viyat “ethereal space", the first of 
the 5 ‘classical’ elements of matter (mahübhütaàni), whereas the pre-Samkhyan or proto- 
Samkhyan process described in ChUp. 6, knows only three elements, tejas, dpas and anna 
resp. (tat tejo 'srjate etc. 6, 2, 3) cf. my remarks Intr. I. Though R. does not explain 
himself there is no doubt that he, as S. suggests, takes tejas- ‘pradarSanartham’ "by way 
of illustrative instance" (cf. also Renou, Terminologie s.v.) denoting implicitly all or 
some other terms and concepts of the series to which it belongs (for a few examples 
taken from GBh. see my Rāmānuja etc. 37). In the SBh., in the viyadadhikarana (2, 3, 
1 sqq.) this interpretation is enlarged upon. 8. in ChUpBh. 6, 2, 3 explains similarly. 
8.5 remark $ribhásye mahadaderapi pradarsanáürtham ityuktam refers to SBh. 2, 3, 14 
mahàdádiküryünümapi tattadanantaravastusarirakah sa eva purusottamah kiranam, so 
that the tejas of ChUp. not only implies the two preceding mahabhütani (aküsa- and 
vüyu-) but also the preceding evolution of the functions mahat, ahamkara etc. 

90. ie. the sat of 6,2, 1 sad eva somya etc» 

91. ChUp. 6, 3, 2. 

92. Only after Brahman has entered with the embodied soul (jivátman- supra 
note 15) into the “three deities’ (=the three elements tejas-, àpas, anna-) — 5 maha- 
bhütani = prakrti) the final stage of creation has been reached: the prakrti with the 
ensouled spirit is particularized in objects with class-names: padártha- “the object 
denoted by the name," "class" "rubric of existent entities", that is, prakrti has become 
the empirical world of discourse, : à 

V. 25, 

* 194 + J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

living soul ensouled by Brahman enters into it, and that then all substance 
assumes name.93 

b. In other words: the individual soul is itself ensouled by Brahman, 
for the soul is a modification of Brahman because it constitutes His body, 
as appears from another $ruti: ..:. whose body is the soul etc. The non- 
spiritual entities?* in the generic structures of a god, a man etc. are modifi: 
cations of this same individual soul—which is a modification of Brahman him- 
self—because they constitute the soul's body. Consequently all these entities 
are ultimately ensouled by Brahman. Hence follows that all words which have 
a definite denotative value owing to the combination of the radical element’ 
with a suffix, e.g. god, man, yaksa, raksasa, cow, game, fowl, tree, creeper, 
wood, rock, grass, jug, cloth etc., actually denote the entire composite 
entity: the body; the individual soul represented by it" and finally the 
inner Ruler of. that soul, the Supreme Person in whom that entity termi- 
nates. All words denote this entire compositum by merely denoting the 
material mass which has a certain generic structure that is commonly known 
as being denoted by a certain word 

$18. Then the father sets forth in some detail that sat is the material 
cause, the operative cause, the substratum, the controller and the principal?? 
of the entire phenomenal world of spiritual and non-spiritual entities 
sanmulah somyemah prajah sadáyatanah satpratisthah etc. Thereafter the 
father proceeds to declare that because of the relation cause-effect, etc., 
the entire Universe being ensouled. by Brahman is real aitadaétmyam 
idam sarvam tat satyam. Finally the assertion that Brahman is the soul 
of all as He is the soul of the entire Universe, that this entire Universe 
constitutes His body and that He therefore, as He is modified by the in- 
dividual soul, can be denoted by the word tvam, this assertion is now sum- 

med up and applied to one specific individual soul in the statement tat 
tvam asi.100 

93. R. describes" pddartha- here as nāmabhāj- ° 

94. vastu- most-general term for "thing", often a totality: acidvastu- / cidvastu- 
sum-total of non-spiritual / spiritual entities" 

95. prakrti- "verbal and nominal radical element” cf. Renov, Terminologie s.v. 

96. pratyaga-, “verbal and nominal affix (case-ending, personal ending, verbal 
present tense affix), cf. RENOU, O.C., s.v: 

97. tadabhiménijiva- for this use cf. Sribhisya 4, 2 20 kilasabdah kalabhimani- 
devatativéhikaparah ~ Gitabhasya 8, 23 ८7० küla$abdo .. kdlabhimanidevatabhiyastaya 
mär” gopalaksanarthah 

98. $esin- supra note 3 id g : 

: ` 99. ChUp. 6, 8, 4; sat as-thé material cause is mila; as operative cause dyatana 
(apparently from-é-YAT- “making efforts, exerting energy”) 
100. ChUp. 6, 8, 7 हि : 1 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 195 

$19. In other words, in the above statement aitadátmyam idam 
sarvam tat satyam!?! the words idam sarvam refer to the phenomenal world 
of spiritual and non-spiritual entities. Thus is declared that 25,102 or “He”, 
is the soul of this phenomenal world, so that this $ruti sets forth that 
Brahman ensouls the evolved phenomenal world. 

Now the question calls for consideration whether Brahman ensouls 
the world in a soul-body relation, or is essentially identical with the world.103 
When it is supposed that Brahman is essentially identical with the world, 
this would mean that Brahman’s perfections, such as we gathered from the 
beginning of the context tad aiksata bahu syüm prajdyeyeti: for instance 
that He is satyasamkalpa,5 are thereby sublated. Besides, we have already 
learnt particularly from another $ruti that He ensouls the world by consti- 
tuting the soul of the world as a body, sc. from antahpravistah $astüà jana 
nām sarvütmü, 86 ie. "having entered into all mankind as its soul in the 
form of its controller," and consequently sarvütmà "the soul of all who form, 
his body." Similarly also the Sruti ya dtmani etc. The passage under 
discussion, anena jivenütmanü etc. tells us. the same, as we have already 
pointed out 

^ 

Therefore, since all spiritual and non-spiritual entities constitute 
Brahman's body, Brahman being thus embodied -and modified. by all; 
is denoted by all words. Hence the sámanüdhikaranya -construction :taf 
tvam. denotes Brahman as “the One who is modified by the individual soul 
inasmuch as this soul constitutes his body 

820. When this is said the sense of the statement tat tvam asi beomes 
clear. tvam means “you, ie. you that were previously held to‘ be’ no more 
than the operator of a certain body are in reality a modification of the 
Supreme Spirit because you constitute his body, and therefore you termi- 
nate in this Supreme Spirit [and are incapable of separate existence and 
activity"]199, Hence tvam denotes only the inner Ruler of tvam as differentiat- 

101. ChUp. 6, 8, 7. 

102. esa in aitadátmya-. 

103. The word aitadétmya- admits of two interpretations: “whose ‘essence’ is that” 

and “whose ‘soul’ is that": the Universe has Brahman for its essence, ie. Br. is identical 
with the world; or: it has Him for its soul, ie. Br. ensouls the world as the àtman 
ensouls the body. 
7 105. This satyasamkalpatva (supra note 63) “the quality of having His every will 
realized” is exclusively the attribute of the omnipotent Creator who is not subject to 
the limitations and conditions of the created world; it is what Dramida (Appendix Fr. XV) 
styles a daivata guna. . 

106. TaittAr. 3, 11 

107. BAUp. 3, 7, 22 (M.) 

, 108. manuscript M» adds here an important expression which may conveniently 
be explained here: prthaksthitipravrttyanarha- "incapable of subsisting and working inde- 

e 

196 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

ed by the mode tvam. Since Brahman is the soul of the embodied in- 
dividual soul (cf. the Sruti anena jivendtmandnupravisya, nàmarüpe vydkara- 
vani) 99 He has the same name as that individual soul. It follows that both 
words tat and tvam, coordinated in a sémadnadhikaranya construction, denote 
that one Brahman. The word tat refers to Brahman as the One who is 
the cause of the world, the abode of all perfections, the immaculate and 
untransmutable!© One; whereas tvam refers to that same Brahman under 
the aspect of inner Ruler of the individual soul as being modified by the 
embodied soul. So it is said that the words tat and tvam both apply to the 
same Brahman but under different aspects!!! And in this manner all the 
various perfections of Brahman, e.g. that he is the perfect, untransformed 

abode of all beautiful qualities and the universal cause, are preserved and 
no one is sublated. 

$21. Laymen!!2 who have not received the instruction of the Vedanta 
do not see that all padürthas and all individual souls are ensouled by 
Brahman, and they think that the full meaning of all words is completely 
exhausted by the various padürthas they denote, which, however, form only 
part of their full significance. Now that they have heard what the Vedànta 
declares they know that Brahman is the soul of everything because it is 

His effect and He is its inner Ruler and that every word denotes Brahman 
as modified by everything. 

But, it is objected, would that not mean that the original meaning!!3 
of words like cow etc. as denoting specific padàrthas is sublated? 

No: When we elucidated the Sruti nümarüpe vyikaravani we had 
occasion to say that all words denote the Supreme Spirit only in so far 
He is differentiated by the non-spiritual matter and the individual soul. 
Uninstructed laymen might think when they utter a certain word that the 

pendently", also prthaksiddhyanarha- "incapable of functioning independently (of a sub- 
stratum)", is said of a quality in relation to its substance and consequently, since the 

individual soul constitutes a prakara of the Supreme, also of the soul in relation to 
its Lord. 

109. ChUp. 6, 2, 3. 

110. niravadya-; this upanisadic term (SvetUp. 6, 19), here specified nirvikárya-, 
is very frequently used by R. to describe God's absolute freedom from all imperfection, 
equivalent to another frequent expression samastaheyapratyanika- “opposed to all imper- 
fection".—nirvikürya—: only the Supreme Being is in no sense subject to vikaras, 
neither in His essence, like prakrti, nor in His attribute, like the atman; cf. supra note 82 
and the passages quoted there. 

111. Cf. the definition of sámünàüdhikarawya quoted supra note 55 

112. Here the suggestion of $17 that all language ultimately denotes the Supreme 
is taken up and developed in a polemical manner 

| 113. vyutpatti- "analytical explication of a word as deriving from a certain root 
with a certain meaning". 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA l 197 

meaning of that word terminates completely in the material component of 
the entity denoted, which after all is only part of its full significance, and 
they would think so because the Supreme Spirit, who is the principal com- 
ponent of its meaning, is beyond the empirical means of knowledge.!!4 
Only when the instruction of the Vedànta is imparted, the proper significance 
of a word is presented in full measure. 

In this way all Vedic words denote their proper meanings but as 
terminating in the Supreme Spirit. All words are Vedic: the Supreme 
Brahman has extracted them from the Veda and, after having created all 
the corresponding objects as He did before, applied these words as names 
to those objects, which terminate in the Supreme Spirit, as He did before.!!6 
So Manu says: “In the beginning He created the various names and func- 
tions and peculiar samsthds of all things out of the words of the Veda."1T 
samstha- has here the meaning of samsthana- “generic structure" or rüpa- 
"form".—And the Venerable Pará$aral!i8 declares: “In the beginning He 
made the name-and-form of beings— gods, etc.— and the variety of 
duties out of the words of the Veda".!9—4And the Sruti: süryücandra- 
masau dhata yathüpürvam akalpayat!? “after having created the sun etc. 
as before He gave them names as before." 

$22. In this manner a detailed exposition is given!?! of the doctrine 
that Brahman and the world are not different from each other, which 
demonstrates that allis known when the One is known. The demonstration 
that all is an effect of Brahman furnishes proof that that all has reality of 
itself in so far as it is ensouled by Brahman and not otherwise. Hence it 

114. pratyaksidyaparicchedya- “not circumscribable by perception and inference:” 
the two praminas of empirical knowlege; only the third (for R. also the last) pramana, 
viz. $abda “verbal, ie., scriptural testimony,” can give any information on things metem- 
pirical; see Intr. IV. 

115. This implies that, the Vedas being apauruseya- “not of human origin", the 
capacity of all language to denote meanings is not based on convention (samketa-) but 
on an inherent metaphysical potency in language in itself. The important point will be 
discussed infra § 137. 

A 116. Viz. at the beginning of each new kalpa when the Vedas are newly promul- 
gated by Brahma. Note that, although here the Supreme Brahman is said to be the 
promulgator, the traditional view that Brahmà Caturmukha has this function is not 
necessarily denied: God works creation through His mode Brahma, just as he works 
the world's sustenance through Visnu and its annihilation through Sambhu, cf. infra § 112. 
. 117. Manusmrti 1, 21 sarvesüm tu sa namani. 

x 118. The promulgator of the Visnupurana, father of Vyasa Dvaipayana. 

119. VP. 1, 5, 64 nama rüpam ca bhütanam. 

120, RV. 10, 90, 1. 

121. Viz., by ChUp. 6, 1, 3 as explained above. 

198 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

is declared: tat satyam “that is real",?2 just as in the illustrative example 
every transmutation of clay is real because it remains essentially clay. 

§ 23. The so-called purifying $rutis!?3 ‘elucidate also a Supreme 
Brahman that is perfect and a treasury of all beautiful qualities. Even 
when they tell that Brahman is the opposite of everything they do not prove 
that Brahman is a non-differentiated entity:!?* for if He is the opposite of 
differentiated entities differentiation is necessarily implied. 

824. But, it is objected, if it is stated that Brahman is nothing 
but knowledge,?5 then we can be positive that Brahman is pure and non- 
differentiated knowledge. 

Certainly not, for words which denote properties that describe the 
proper form of an entity may also refer to the proper form of that entity 
itself by means of that attribute, just like the names cow etc. do.?9 For 
this reason the Author of the Sutras declares: tadgunasáratvüt tad- 

122. -ChUp. 6, 8, 7 aitadátmyam sarvam idam / tat satyam / sa átmá. R. makes tat 
resume sarvam idam, so that the interpretation runs: “all this (the phenomenal world 
of cit and acit) is ensouled by Him: hence that (world) is real, He being the atman; 
whereas Sankara makes tat satyam refer to the ensouling atman: yena cütmanütmavat 
sarvam idam jagat/tad eva sadàkHhyam karanam satyam paramürthasat (ChUpBh. 6, 
8, 7), and: sanmdtratvam ca satyatvam tat satyam iti Srutyantardt (TaittUpBh. 2, 1) 

123. Here Rs explanation of the Sodhakavikyas is taken up after the provisional 
suggestions of $8 11-12. 

124. Against the advaitin's contention that these apophatic $rutis assert an unquali- 
fied absolute by denying its qualifiedness by the various qualities negated, R. poses his 
view that the several negations of imperfect qualities imply as many affirmations of per- 
fect qualities. 

125. This is the jnana of TaittUp. 2, 1 satyam jidnam anantam brahma 

126. In other words: the co-ordination jnanam brahma in satyam jnünam anantari 
brahma is of the same category as those of satyam brahma and anantam brahma. Jnana * 
here is a distinguishing attribute (visesana-) of brahman: so jüünam brahma means 
“Br. is distinguished by the attribute 106000” and not "Br. is jnana”, Jñāna is a property 
(dharma-) that describes the proper form (svarüpanirüpanadharma- “an essential pro? 
perty”), so it may stand for that proper form itself—Ramanuja’s drstanta gavàádisabdavat 
requires some elucidation. Cow is a class name and hence the word gauh describes à 
property common to all the individuals of the bovine genus; a broken-horned individual 
is a cow, but the relation is unilateral, not reciprocal: not every cow is broken-horned: 
similarly, not all knowledge is Brahman, for individual àtmans are also knowledge. This 
same drstanta is developed SBh. 2, 3, 30: tatha ca khandidayo yüvatsvarüpabhàvigotvü- 
didharmaígbdena gaur iti vyapadisyamana drSyante / svarüpanadharmatvüd ity arthah 
“So we know from experience that individual cows, broken-horned individuals etc., are 
designated "cow" as a word denoting the property of bovinity which covers their proper 
form completely: that is to say, because it is a property describing the proper form." 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 199 

vyapadesah prajfiavat, yavaditmabhavitvac ca ma dosaf.75 Brahman’s 
proper form is designated by knowledge as its defining attribute, but it is 
not mere knowledge itself. 

But how do we know this? 

From the Sruti which asserts that He is a knower—eg. yah 
sarvajiah sarvavit,!29 and this can be gathered from hundreds of Srutis, cf. 
parüsya $aktir vividhaiva $rüyate svabhaviki jnanabalakriya ca, vijna- 
taram are kena vijānīyād!3i etc.—; from the fact that knowledge is a pro- 
perty and not a substance, and from the fact that it cannot be logically 
established that a mere property is a substance. Hence follows that words 
like truth, knowledge and the like declare that Brahman is differentiated 
by, for instance, knowledge in the proper sense of the word. When we 
disregard the proper sense of the two words tat and tvam and we make 
them out to be proof that the proper form of an entity is non-differentiated, 
we sacrifice their primary meanings.!2? 

$25. But when it is a positively established fact that two different 
words bear upon one identical object, then it is sound to assume laksana, as for 
example in the sentence so 'yam Devadattah. In so'yam the word sa refers 
to a person in connection with a different place and a different time, while 
the word ayam refers to a person connected with a near-by place or the 
present time. The co-ordination of both words denotes identity. But it is 
impossible to refer to one and the same person as if he were simultaneously 
connected with incompatible places or durations. So we contend that the 
two words are only meant to establish mere proper form and that this 
proper form is one in itself. 

This is not true.33 In the given illustration so'yam Devadattah 
there is not even a semblance of laksana because there is no contradiction 

127. BrS. 2, 3, "because that is (the ātman’s) defining property, the (atman) is 
designated by that property (namely) as having knowledge." 

. 128. BrS. 2, 3, 30 "(this use of the term jnana as a designation) is not objection- 
able, also because (jñāna) is entirely co-existent with the atman” Some MSS 
and the Pt. ed. interpolate a gloss which is identical with R.’s gloss on this 
sutra in Vedantadipa—Acc. to S., the reference to the later sutra serves to avoid the 
objection of laksana: jütigunayor vyaktiguniparyantatvasya loke pratyaksasiddhatvdt tad- 
vacisabdandm tatparyantatvam üsritam. 

129. MundUp. 1, 1, 1 “who is omniscient, all-knowing.” 

130. SvetUp. 6, 8 “His paramount power, so is revealed, is manifold, and natural 
to Him are knowledge, strength and activity.” 
", .381. BAUp. 2, 4, 14 
i 132. This paragraph seems to be directed against §.’s interpretation ad TaittUp. 
2, 1; for a detailed discussion; see Intr. chapter IV. 
' 133. Same argument in SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 21; for a detailed discussion see Intr. IV. 
—R. denies the applicability of the drstanta so "yám Devadattah which, acc. to the advaitin 

200 ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

at all. It is not at all contradictory that one and the same person is involved 
in two different actions, one past and one present: in the past he was in 
a remote place, at present he is in a near-by place. So the declaration of 
the identity of a person involved in two actions, past and present, contains 
no contradiction, for the contradiction in his presence in two different 
places is solved by the difference in time. 

Even if we assume laksané, we can never apply it to both terms of a 
judgment, for a contradiction in terms is already solved by one term with 
laksana. Here, as we have said there is no laksana at all, for there is no 
contradiction when a person who in the past was connected with one place 
is at present connected with another place 

$26. Similarly in our passage it is declared that there is nothing 
contradictory in that the Supreme Brahman, who is the cause of the world, 
is also the soul of the individual soul inasmuch as he is its inner Ruler. 
Just as the identity of two beings is conceived with the aid of sémanddhi- 
karanya (when we leave out those ‘beings’ there is identity of mere proper 
form, but that is not the meaning of sümünüdhikaramya; for, according to 
the experts, sümünüdhikaranya is the application to one object of several 
words in different functions) we have accordingly declared that both beings 
are identical. But we may not decide on a meaning of a summarizing state- 
ment that is contrary to the sense of the preceding section which it is to 
summarize. 3 For in the preceding paragraphs, the $rutis tad. aiksata bahu 

(following the Naiyayikas), is an identity judgment and predicates no attribute to the 
subject. The Devadatta of 'here and now' cannot be wholly identical with. the Devadatta 
of "then and there" because then and there he had other attributes than here and now. 
So the identification: this particular D. — that particular D. is contradictory. Here we 
have to drop from the word "this" (ayam) the notion of proximateness, from "that" (sa) 
that of remoteness and retain their simple demonstrative value—R.’s interpretation can 
be summarized: "this D. was that D.", so that all differences between "this" and “that” 
(here and now / there and then) are accounted for by the difference in time 

In SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 110 R. resumes this question: tattvamasyüdivakyesw samanadhi- 
karanyam na nirvisesavastvaikyaparam etc. .. so "yam devadatta ity atrápi na laksana / 
.. degabhedavirodhads ca külabhedena parihrtah / 

134. The “canons of exegesis” of Mimamsa are summed up in the Sloka upakramo- 
pasamhürüv abhyiso "pirvata phalam/arthavadopapatti ca lingam tatparyaniscaye// 
“initial and concluding statements, repetition, novel element of teaching, reward, des- 
cription and argumentation are the characteristics by which the right interpretation is 
determined.” Most important are upakrama and upasamhüra: the latter may never be 
in conflict with the former in order to establish the ekavükyatà of a context. The upa- 
krama of ChUp. 6 is tad aiksata bahu syam (6, 2, 3, developing 6, 2, 1 sadeva somyedam), 
‘the upasamhára tat tvam asi. If this samanadhikaranya is taken in the advaitin's sense 
it would mean that Brahman is identical with the embodied soul (jivà) in its essence; 
‘which would make Br. liable to the jiva's characteristic nescience etc, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA : 201 

syam etc., it was asserted that Brahman is the sole universal cause and that 
he has all his desires materialized: contradictory to this would be to declare 
that Brahman is the substratum of nescience etc. 

$27. Furthermore, speech can never be a pramana to prove a non- 
differentiated thing; for speech derives its character of pramana from the 
peculiar nature of the words and sentences in which it consists. The nature 
of a word is to signify the peculiar difference of the object to which it 
corresponds; that of a sentence to signify the peculiar difference of a com- 
plex of such differentiated objects. It follows that speech can never signify 
a non-differentiated object. Words like “non-different” etc. signify an 
object — which we have already found to be differentiated by a specific 
difference — by denying that it has any of the differentiating features found 
in other objects. Otherwise such words would signify nothing at all, for a word 
implies numerous differences in the object signified by its radical element 
and affix, and a sentence signifies numerous complexes of such padarthas. 

$28. But, it may be objected, we have not said that speech is a 
pramüna for a non-differentiated self-illuminating entity, for something that 
is self-evident stands in need of no pramana. So all differentiations which 
arise from superimpositions,36 e.g. that it is a knower etc., are altogether 
discarded by all words. When all differentiations have disappeared the mere 
being remains by itself, undetermined, self-illuminating. 

That is not true, for by what word do you then denote that entity 
in such a way that all differentiations of superimpossition disappear? 

By the word “pure knowledge" .137 

No! That word too refers to a differentiated substance; for by its 
radical element and affix it implies difference. The root JNA in the sense 
of “to be conscious (of)"138 tells us that it has an object and a subject and 
that it is a specific action with a specific nature which distinguishes it from 
other actions. The affix tells us that it has gender, number etc. This 
nature does also persist in the case of a self-evident, self-realized object: 
were it free from all difference then there would be no realization at all. 

135. Cf. SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 28, the passage sabdasya tu visesena savisesa eva vastuny 
abhidhanasamarthyam / .. na nirvisesavastuni $abdah pramanam / 

136. adhyàsa- “superimposition” defined by $. BrSBh. intr. as smrtirüpah paratra 
pürvadrstávabhasah “superimposition is the projection of something that has been 
perceived before elsewhere on something else, and is therefore derived from recollection.” 

137. jüaptimatra- see following note 

138. JNA avabodhana iti: so 6, jüünam jiaptir avabodhah (TaittUpBh. 2, 1); 
avabodhana- "being awake to, alive to, aware of, conscious of,” 

V. 26 

202 EE J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

We say that knowledge is self-evident or self-realized by virtue of its own 
nature, viz. the nature of realizing or proving something else.1?9 

$29. — Brahman’s proper form itself illuminates everything always. 
— But then it is impossible to attribute to it any properties that are foreign 
to it: when the proper form of a rope appears as such, then it is impossible 
to attribute to it the property of being a snake. That is why you have to 
assume an obscuring Nescience. Consequently the object of the clearing 
knowledge of the Sastra can only be a hidden part in Brahman :!° otherwise 
ihe clearing knowledge would clear nothing at all: for the supposed nature 
of snake is sublated by the illumination of the nature of rope as different 
from the substratum of the original error. When there is one differentia- 
tion denoted by a word for that entity of pure knowledge, that differentia- 
tion must be a distinguishing feature of Brahman.4! Then it follows that 

Brahman is differentiated by all the differentiating features expounded by. 
all $rutis.142 

$30. All this proves that the criteriologist have no criterion that in 
any way demonstrates the existence of a non-differentiated entity.43 Even 
in the case of an indeterminate perception!‘ the perceived entity is recog- 
nized as differentiated; for otherwise it would be impossible to have, in the | 

139. anyasddhanasvabhavataya—S, remarks jiatur visayavyavaharahetutaya hi 
svayamprakisatvam tvayü südhitam "you arrive at the notion of the self-illuminating 
character (of knowledge) because it is the ground for the knower to act upon its object" . 
and he adds svasambandhad arthantare tadvyavahürahetutvam hi svayamprakasatud- 
mumünahetuh / evam nirvigesatve svayamprakasatvinupapattir ukta “the ground on 
which you conclude to this self-illuminating character is this that (knowledge). is the 
ground for activity in another matter which therefore stands in relation to itself; con- 
sequently the Author states that the notion of svayampraküsa cannot logically be estab- 
lished for an entity that is non-differentiated.” This is borrowed from SBh. 1, 1, 1 p. 25 
api tu sarvam südhayanty anubhitih (the term is Vimuktatman’s, Istasiddhi 1) svayam 
eva siddhyati/prayoga$ | ca/anubhütir |^ ananyüdhinasvadharmavyavahürá/svasamban- 
dhàd arthantare taddharmavyavaharahetutvüt etc; the point which R. wants to make is 
that knowledge can only be proved to be svatahsiddha, if it is, not anyatahsiddha, but 
anyasüdhana; hence, far from being unqualified, it is essentially qualified by this very 
nature of proving other entities. 

140. As S. comments: there can be no obscuration unless there is something to be 
obscured. It would follow then that the advaitin's assertion that Brahman is svayam- 
prakasa cannot be logically maintained in his paksa. 

141. If Brahman can be known, he must have the property (differentiating: attri- 
bute) of being knowable. 

142. If one differentiation of Brahman propounded in the Sruti, viz. that of being 
knowable, is accepted of Brahman, all other differentiations propounded of Brahman 
must also be accepted 

143. Neither Sabda nor pratyaksa can prove an undifferentiated entity, nor, 
a fortiori, can anumana that departs from pratyaksa 

144, nirvikalpakapratyaksa, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA i यर 203 

case of a determinate perception, the cognition in so 'yam of an entity differ- 
entiated by a previously apprehended modification. From the fact that 
generic character like bovinity, etc. is a particular structural feature of an 
entity it follows that already at the indeterminate stage an entity is appre- 
hended in this way: this entity is so with such structural differentiae.46 In 
the case of a second and subsequent cognitions we recognize that these 
generic differentiae belong to more than one entity. From the second and 
subsequent cognitions we learn that the padürtha called ‘modification by 

145. In so ?yam the word sah points to a definite object perceived before, not to a 
“mere indeterminate blur: the very recognition "this is that" proves that "that" had a 
distinguishing feature which allowed it of being recognized later on as "this" and nothing 
else, or, as stated in SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 29, of being cognized at all: nirvikalpakam nama 
kenacid visesena viyuktasya grahanam ma sarvavisesarahitasya / tathübhütasya kadacid 
api grahanddarsanat / 

146. SBh. l. c. is more elaborate: kenacid visesenedam ittham iti hi 36706 pratitir 
upajayate trikonasasnidisamsthana ७१३९३९१ vind kasyacid api padárthasya grahanagogát / 
ato nirvikalpakam ekajütiyadravyesu prathamapindagrahanam trikona- n. is "triangular 
'cow's head", not adject. to süsná, as THIBAUT and LACOMBE translate; sásná “dew-lap” 
is the laksana of gotva. This definition is often found bizarre in comparison with the 
Western one “horned, cloven-footed, ruminant etc", but it is an obvious and practical 
one: it has no doubt its origin in the need for defining a cow not so much from other 
corniferous and ruminant mammals as from the very similar buffalo with which the 
cow is herded together and from which it is mainly distinguished by its dew-lap. 

N.B. R.’s theory of indeterminate perception conflicts with that held by the Naiyayi- 
kas. Acc. to the latter (and to the Buddhists who recognize the indeterminate perception 
as the only possible one) in indeterminate perception an object is seen without any quali- 
ties, a mere blur of which it can only be said that it is "something". Annambhatta (TS. 
842) defines: nisprakérakam jiiénam nirvikalpakam, yathedam kimcit [but cf. Jayanta- 
bhatta, Nyàyamanjari, p. 73, discussing Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya 1, 124: na ca nirvikal- 

` pakasamaye yat kimcid idam ityàüdisámünyasabdollekhah ko ’pi kaiscid anubhiyate tas- 
tham laksanam ity evam asambhavadosanirakaranartham avyapadesyapadam iti} and com- 
ments (TD) vigegamavi$esyasambandhànavagühi jndnam ityarthah "nirvikalpaka is that 
cognition which is without prakdra, ie. determinant feature distinguishing it from other 
cognitions", comm. "that is to say, cognition which comprehends no relation between the 
qualifying and the qualifiable,” as distinct from determinate perception which does com- 
“prehend the relation between qualifying features—name, class etc.—and the object quali- 
` fied. Similarly the advaitin: nirvikalpakam tu samsargünavagáhi jnanam (VedP.) but with 
his own example: yathà so ‘yam devadattas tattvamasityadivakyajnanam. R. argues: 
"indeterminate perception must apprehend an object with some distinguishing feature: 
for if the indeterminate perception is followed by a determinate one—when the dimly 
‘perceived object draws near and is perceived for what it is with all its peculiarities— 
we recognize it as such: "this is that same object". So we must originally have perceived 
a differentiating feature to recognize it by. The identification "this is that" presupposes 
“a common feature to both terms sufficiently peculiar to warrant an identification. The 
` Naiyáyika reasons: we cannot know a cow before we know what makes a cow (sc. its 
gotva-), so unless we know its generic peculiarities we cannot know it for a cow. We 
know beforehand its generic peculiarities by repeated observation of cows. So the 

204 न J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

generic structure’ is the differentiating feature of more than one entity as 
it applies to more than one. On the strength of this observation it is said 
that second and subsequent cognitions are determinate. 

From this appears that the assumption? that one and the same 
padartha has a double essence according to its being at once different and 
non-different should be rejected as self-contradictory. The generic struc- 
ture itself is a padartha different from the entity that has this structure; 
because it is a modification of it, it is incapable of functioning separately 

simple "this"—perception we have at the indeterminate stage combines with our recollec- 
tion of the generic peculiarities, and the simple perception combined with the recollection 
produces the knowledge of the relation: "this is a cow". R. replies: how do we arrive 
at our knowledge of these generic peculiarities in the first place? Knowledge of the 
individual precedes that of the class: we perceive a cow, ie. a member of the class cow, 
when we see repeated in that individual the features previously perceived in another 
animal. So R. goes beyond the “recollection of gotva" which the Naiyayika combines 
with the indeterminate "this" to produce the determinate or complex "perception" 'this 
cow’: this view fails to account for the origin of the very perception of gotva, So R. 
poses that the indeterminate perception is the first complete perception of a previously 
unknown object, e.g. a cow: never having seen a cow before we perceive it neither as 
a member of a class, nor yet as an individual: hence R.’s use in Ved. and SBh. of the 
vague word pinda- “mass, object" which strictly cannot be equated with vyakti- (as 
ABHYANKAR does in his Notes, followed by LACOMBE, Note 306) "individual member of a 
class", for at that stage its individual peculiarities are no more perceived than its generic 
differentiae (which presuppose class). Determinate becomes our perception when we 
see our second and third cows: we recognize the same features and see that they are 
characteristic not of one animal but a number of them: generic features. R. defines 
SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 29 ato nirvikalpakam ekajatiyesu prathamapindagrahanam "indeterminate 
is our perception when we see the first object of a class of objects." So YID. I, p. 9 
nirvikalpakam nama gunasamsthünadivisistaprathamapindagrahanam. This view of nir- 
'vikalpaka is substantially that of the Prabhikaras whereas the advaitin follows the 
“Bhatta; cf. Prakaranapancika p. 54-55, esp. tasmat samanyavisesau dve vastuni pratipadya- 
manam pratyaksam prathamam u<pa>padyate, kimtu vastvantaràánusamdhànas$ünyatayü 
sdmanyavisesaripata na pratiyate "consequently, in the first instance, the (indeterminate) 
perception proves to establish both generic and individual peculiarities, although, failing 
the accompanying comparison of another entity (of the same class), these generic features 
“and individual peculiarities are not yet recognized as such,” etc.; savikalpakam tu tat- 
prsthabhavi te eva vastuni samdnyavisesatmana pratipadyate “the determinate perception, 
on the other hand, following on the indeterminate one, apprehends both samanya and 
wisesa as such”, See JHA, Pribhékara Mimamsd, p. 157 sqq; KurPUswAMI, Indian Logic, 
p. 168-69. 

147. bhedabheda view, to be refuted in greater detail infra $$54ff; they reason 
thus: one substance may have two “modes of being" (dvyatmakatvo); it may be modified 
and it may be non-modified. The modifying feature has no real being of its own: it 
cannot exist apart from its substance. So the modified substance, the substance con- 
joined with its mode, has an essence of its own. Then the substance may be devoid of 
modes that are extrinsic to it: so it has another essence of pure entity (svarüpa). So 
one substance has two essence, one including and one excluding its mode, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA f 205 

and for the same reason it is not separately apprehensible. But all this 
does not prove that that entity has a double essence. 

$31. Moreover, if the adherent of the doctrine that a non-differen- 
tiated entity exists contends that in the case of a self-evident entity the 
differentiations brought about by superimposition are denied by all words, 
he should tell us which these words are. 

— The $ruti vàcárambhanam viküro némadheyam mrttikety eva 
satyam448 for one. This $ruti tells us that only the pure entity, which in 
the given context is implicitly designated as the cause,!9 is real and every- 
thing else unreal, because transformation and denomination are merely 
vacarambhana.150 

— This proves nothing. After it has been asserted that when one is 
known all becomes known, this illustration is adduced for him who thinks 
it impossible to have knowledge of one through knowledge of another: it 
shows that when one and the same entity exists as name-and-form by virtue 
of a differentiation in its condition by transformation, etc. — which differen- 
tiation is absolutely real —, then that entity, when known, remains the same 
entity also if it have another configuration different from the first one. It is this 
view for which the above illustration is furnished and no denial of all differ- 
entiation can be read in it.5! In vácarambhamam the word vaca means ‘on 
account of vyavahüra or practical purpose" and Grambhana is "that which is 
taken hold of". The name of clay in the condition of clod is one thing and 
its practical purpose is another.5? That same clay in the condition of jug, 
bowl, etc., has different names and different practical purposes; nevertheless 
it is that same clay which in every transformation is 'for various practical 
purposes taken hold of by various generic structures and denominations.!53 
And it is concluded that that is eva satyam “the same remains real". Thus 

148. ChUp. 6, 1, 4. 

149. Viz. sat: of ChUp. 6, 2. 

150. Cf. $. ad Brs. 2, 1, 14 (=R. 2, 1, 15) tadananyatvam drambhanasabdadibhyah 
etc. 

151. ie. from being süksma- "subtle", matter is transformed (as a vikāra in the 
causal process of parinama) into being sthüla- "gross", constituting particularized 
entities. 

152. For R. the effect is another phase (avasthd) of the cause; vikāra- is esp. the 
product of the process of parinàma viewed under the aspect of its relation to the cause 
from which it developed. 

153. This interpretation is detailed in SBh. 2, 1, 15 as follows: drabhyata àlabhyate 
spríéyata ity ürambhanam / krtyalyuto bahulam (Panini 3, 3, 13) iti karmani lyut / vaca 
vakyapirvakena vyavahàrena [S (TatpD) ad vyavahàürena (Ved.): prayojanataya hetu- 
tvam ityarthah] hetunety arthah/ghatenodakam Gcharetyadivakpirvako hy wudaküharamà- 
divyavahürah / 

206 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

the possibility of knowledge of one ‘thing through this knowledge of another 
thing is illustrated. No entity is being denied reality in this Sruti, but the 
_very sense stated above is further enlarged upon. 

§ 32. Besides, if it were alleged by the Sruti yenasrutam $rutam that 
everything different from Brahman is unreal, the example yathà somyaikena 
mrpindena would fail to illustrate the point.194 

— But the point is another one. The lack of reality of the transfor- 
mations of clay — jug, bowl, etc.—, comparable to the falsity of the snake 
in the rope, etc.,55 is not proved for Svetaketu, who is eager to learn, by 
another pramüna and the ratiocination.56 It is this point: that our passage 
means to prove. 

— No, you cannot possibly assume that, for that violates the charac- 
ter of an example introduced by yatha.157 

§ 33. But in the $ruti sad eva somyedam agra āsīd ekam evadvitiyam!8 
it is obvious that both emphatical particles sad eva and ekam eva and the 
‘emphatical advitiyam deny all homogeneous and heterogeneous differentia- 
tions exceeding pure being.!59 

This is not true. First he had illustrated with an example that the 
knowledge of one entity (which can have two modes of being, that of cause 
and that of effect) when having one mode of being, will give rise to the 
knowledge that it remains that same entity, even though it have another 
mode of being. Then, in order to propound that Brahman is the universal 
cause — which Svetaketu does not yet know — he begins sad eva somyedam. 
In this passage, to be construed idam agre sad evdsid, the word agra- denotes 

154. südhyavikala-; sádhya- "probandum", ie. the assertion that we may know 
all by knowing one. The obvious sense of the drstanta is that there is a causal process 
of parinama by which a lump of clay is transformed into clay jugs: which means that | 
these clay jugs, etc. are as real as the lump of clay; so the instance cannot illustrate 
the irreality of the "all to be known" 

155. The erroneous cognition of a snake where there is only a coiled rope is 
the stock-example of the falsity of our cognition of diversity in the Universe where 
there is nothing but the One self-identical Brahman. The ‘metamorphosis’ of the rope 
into snake is an instance of vivarta (cf. infra $836; 49). | 

156. The advaitin is made to suggest that where both sensorial evidence and 
ratiocination fail to prove the falsity of the world, the sentence yathā etc. is a statement 
of scriptural authority ($abdapramàna) which proves this falsity apodictically—The other 
pramana is the pratyaksa, ratiocination (yukti) stands for anumànapramàna; cf. S. pra- 
tyaksena baüdhadaráanam mithydtvasiddhih/vydvartamanatvadiyukter abhaüsatvüc ca na 
mithyatvasiddhih. 

157. yathé introduces a statement of analogy, not a final assertion. 

158. ChUp. 6, 2, 1. l 

159. "This (Universe contained in its cause) was sat at the beginning. “S. explains 
eat as sattümatram. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 207 

a specific time, and idam!9? refers to the phenomenal world. Of this world 
denoted by idam he says that it exercises an action, viz. the action of being 
real, and that it is a really being substance. The words ekam eva deny 
that this was already transformed into a variety of names-and-forms.19!1 When 
this has been declared, it is set forth that the world has a material cause 
which is sat. 'The fact that the omniscient Brahman is a material cause 
for something else does not contradict His omnipotence: for even in the 
view that He is associated with something different from Himself as its 
operator, He remains essentially different from everything else. "Therefore 
the word advitiyam negates, on the ground of Brahman's omnipotence, the 
existence of a separate operator. 

There are a number of Srutis, like ours, which first declare that 
Brahman is the material cause and afterwards that He is also the operative 
cause. Other Srutis first admit that Brahman is the operative cause and 
then raise the question: if Brahman is different from everything else, then 
how can He be the material cause, etc., as well? — and then, by reasoning 
from Brahman's omnipotence, solve the apparent contradiction and assert 
that the same Brahman is the material cause and all subsidiary causes as 
well. In the $ruti kim svid vanam ka u sa vrksa àsid yato dydvaprthivi 
nistataksur manisino manasa prcchated u tad yad adhyatisthad bhuvandni 
dharayan'® it is first imagined that, if Brahman be the material cause, this 
would contradict our inference from general observation : 703 but subsequently 
this seeming contradiction is solved by Brahman’s categorical difference from 
everything else in existence: brahma vanam brahma sa vrksa àsid yato 
nistataksur manisino manasa vibravimi vah brahmadhyatisthad bhuvanani 
dhürayan.194 

160. It (idam) is a substance because real being (sat) can be predicated of it. 

161. It was not yet manifested as a plurality but abode in a single mass. 

162. TaittBr. 2, 8, 9, 6 "What was the wood, or which was the tree, out of which 
they fashioned heaven and earth? Ask this with your minds, O wise, that which super- 
vises and supports the worlds. In this $ruti, it is assumed, the material cause (vana-, 
vrksa-) is distinguished from the operative cause or adhisthatr (sc. tad yad adhyatisthat) ; 
I have translated accordingly. 

163. sêmanyato drstam “knowledge by inference from general observations 
explained by Vatsyayana (Bhàsya ad NS. 1, 1, 5) vrajyápürvakam anyatra drstasydn- 
yatra darganam iti/tathà cádityayasya / tasméd asty apratyaksapy üdityasya vrajyeti/ 
"We see an object in another place than we saw it in before when it has moved; so 
we conclude the same for the sun (though we have not seen it move); so, albeit unper- 
ceived, we know that the sun moves. Similarly, it is observed generally, that no 
material cause is simultaneously the operative cause as well, so that we might be led 
to infer the same for Brahman. But since Brahman is categorically different from every- 
thing else (sarvavilaksana-), this general observation has no validity as to Him. 

164. TaittBr. 2, 8, 9, 6: “Brahman is the wood, and Br. is the tree, out of which 
ihey fashioned heaven and earth: I tell you with the mind, O wise, that it is Brahman 
that supervises and supports the worlds", (cf. supra note 162). 

208 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

To resume. In the passage under discussion the words agra, etc., 
show therefore that there are a number of differentiations in Brahman Him- 
self. 'There is no word to be found in it that voices a negation of differen- 
tiations such as you are pleased to assume. On the contrary the existence 
of a time-differentiation shows clearly that Brahman is the cause and the 
world his effect: ásit denotes a specific action; then there are His modes of 
being the material as well as the operative cause of the world; then again 
His quality of omnipotence as proved by the denial of difference between 
material and operative: thus differentiations, unsuspected before, are ex- 
pounded by thousands! 

$34. Since this $ruti means to teach that the relation between cause 
and effect is one based upon substantial reality, it gives the lie to the asat- 
karyavada doctrine as voiced in asad evedam agra Gsid, etc.,16 by counter- 
ing it with the question: “How could that really be so, my son!” i.e., there 
js no ground whatever for the origination of an entity that did not exist 
before. That is what he says in katham asatah saj jüyeta: i.e., an entity 
that has originated from asat remains essentially asat, in the same way as 
an entity — a jug, etc. — that has originated from clay remains essentially 
clay. The origination of an existent entity is by definition its conjunction 
with a variety of modes or phases of being, and this conjunction is the ground 
that it may have a variety of practical purposes.!96 

$35. In other words, it is declared that one and the same entity 
that is a cause becomes an effect when entering upon another mode of being. 
The point which is sought to establish hereby is this that knowledge of all 
can be had through knowledge of one. But this point cannot be proved in 
the asatkaryavada!87 theory, for according to this theory an effect—called 
avayavini$$ because it has several causes: nimitta, samavüayin, asamava~- 
yin,169 etc. — originates as a completely different entity. Hence it is impos- 

165. ChUp. 6, 2, 1 tad dhaika ahuh — asad evedam agra dsid, etc, R. will discuss 
this Sruti presently 

166. vyavahára- cf. supra note 1538 

167. The asatkàryaváda (the doctrine that the effect is not contained in its cause 
but originates as a new entity) is summed up neatly in Annambhatta's definition of an 
effect (TS. $39): karyam pragabhévapratiyogi "the effect is the counter-entity of its 
own antecedent non-existence,” ie. originates unprecedented. 

168. "Composite, having members," sc. the various causes. 

169. Cf. Annambhatta's definition (TS. 840): kdranam trividham samavayyasam- 
avayinimittabhedavat / yatsamavetam káryam utpadyate tat samavàüyikàranam / yatha tan- 
tavah patasya pataáca svagatarüpádeh / káryena küranena vd sahaikasminn arthe samá- 
vetatve sati yat kdranam tad asamavüyiküranam / yathà tantusamyogah patasya tantu- 
rüpam patarüpasya / tadubhayabhinnam mnimittakaranam / yathà turivemadikam patasya /, 
I refer to Athalye's and Foucher's discussions of these passages, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 209 

sible anyhow that the effect is known when the cause is known, inasmuch 
as the effect is an entity completely different from the entity that is its cause.. 

But, it may be put forward, what are the grounds on which you re- 
ject such a different entity that is avayavin? ` 

First the fact that, as even our adversary who maintains that the 
effect originates as a new entity must agree!™_—the different name, practical 
purpose etc, which apply to the identical entity, prove that a different 
phase has been entered upon by the cause; and secondly the fact that we do 
not see another entity appear at all. Hence it is said that the effect is nothing 
but the cause in another phase, and that is what our $ruti declares. 

$36. But is the asatkdryavada not rejected just to show that there 
can be no error without a substratum?!?! For one and the same being which 
alone is real in the form of spirituality, evolves into the form of the pheno- 
menal world when it is obscured by Nescience.? If Nescience is to have a 

170. For neither the Naiyayikas-Vaisesikas hold that the effect originates ex nihilo. 
AS R. declares GBh. 2, 27 utpattivindsadayah sato dravyasyüvasthavisesáh / tantupra- 
bhrtini dravyani santy eva racandvisesayuktani patadiny ucyante/asatkdryavadinapy età- 
vad evopalabhyate / nahi tatra tantusamsthünavisegütirekena dravyántaram pratiyate /, 
karakavydparanémantarabhajanavyavaharavisesinim etdivataivopapatter na ca dravy- 
üntarakalpanàü yukta / £ 

171. mniradhisthánabhramüsambhava-; the erroneous cognition of a snake presup- 
poses the existence of a real object (in casu, a rope) on which this false cognition is 
projected or superimposed. Similarly the. false cognition of the phenomenal world 
presupposes the existence of a real substratum or adhisthana. The Madhyamika Bud- 
dhist, professing the falsity of the world of cognized phenomena, denies that this falsity 
is projected or superimposed on something real: so they recognize the possibility of 
falsity projected on a void: niradhisthana / niralambana. 

172. ekam cidripam satyam evavidyacchaditam jagadripena vivartate: this sen- 
tence sums up the ontologico-cosmogonical doctrine of advaitavada: there is one entity, 
pure consciousness or spirituality, which alone is real. This oné real entity ‘unrolls’ 
itself, or develops, into the world when it is obscured by Nescience. Hence follows that, 
if this Nescience is to have a substratum, the real itself must be its ultimate cause: for, 
as S. remarks (borrowing his argument from R. §§ 46-47, note 218), if the substratum 
were not real in itself, it would stand in need of a substratum itself, and so ad infinitum, 
The vivartavada is an attempt to account for the phenomenal world without sacrificing 
the unchangeability of the absolute. Vivarta is both the process and the product of the 
development of the absolute and real into the finite and non-real, in other words, the- 
transition into an effect that has not the same degree of being as its material cause 
(vivarto nama upüdànavisamasattakakaryápattih Dharmaraja’s definition, Ved. P. II, § 85, 
in contradistinction to parinama, the transition of a cause into an effect with the same 
degree of being: parinamo nama upáüdàünasamasattákaküryapattih). -This process of 
vivarta has its origin in the obscuration of the absolute by Nescience, its opposite. Strict- 
ly, avidyà itself is the vivarta, and the phenomenal world the parinama of avidya. If 
the Advaitin wants to have ChUp. 6, 2, 1 confute the Madhyamika doctrine, his interpre-. 
tation should run like this: katham asatah saj jiyeta "how can an ‘existent’ being derive. 

v.a 

210 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

substratum, we must assume that the Real itself is its ultimate cause. Which 
proves that the asatkaryavada theory is untenable, 

This is not true. What is actually declared is this that that theory 
is untenable because the assertion and the illustration that all is known 
when one is known can only have any bearing at all on the topic if the 
satkürya point of view is adopted. For that matter, in your own position 
the theory that an error without a substratum is impossible does not admit 
of proof itself.73 Your doctrine leads to this conclusion: When one holds 
that the defect inherent in a spiritual being is real and that this defect is a 
real basis for errors to arise, then, being oneself afflicted with that defect, 
one is proved to have a vision of a phantom, say a fairy-tale castle, which in 
itself is unreal. But when one holds that this defect is unreal and therefore 
is no real basis for errors to arise, one is proved to have that illusion all the 
same, because of its very basis being unreal! Actually in your position an 
error without a substratum is not at all impossible. | 

837. We have already pointed out that Brahman is declared to be 
differentiated by all the qualities ascribed to him: for even the so-called 
purifying statements, satyam jidnam anantam brahma, amando brahma etc., 
do not contradict the assertion that one denoted object may be qualified by 
a number of qualities which are established by samanddhikaranya!™ construc~ 
tions and by the original sense of the terms, 

from nothing?” The Advaitin and Madhyamika concur in that this ‘existent’ being of the 
phenomenal world is ultimately unreal Where they differ is the reality of its ultimate 
ground, accepted by the former, rejected by the latter. Sankara (ChUpBh.) states that 
the above $ruti attacks the Vainasikas or Nihilist Buddhists: it is against this interpre- 
tation that R, raises his objection; but cf. my remarks Intr. III 

173. The advaitin derives the illusion of plurality—unreal without doubt—from avi- 
dyà or Nescience, about whose unreality he is less sure: he describes it as neither real 
nor unreal (sadasadanirvacaniya-). As R. will explain later, this leaves three possibili- 
ties: it is not sat, therefore asat; not asat, therefore sat; neither sat nor asat, therefore 
both asat and sat. Suppose we have an illusion: it must derive either from a real or 
from an unreal defect. If this defect is real, our illusion is proved, however unreal its 
content may be. If this defect is unreal, Gur illusion is still established (upapanna) be- 
cause it cannot have risen from a defect that is non-existent. So in the latter case we 
are left with a demonstrable illusion for which we cannot account. Consequently the 
advaitin, unable to define the defect properly, implicitly admits the possibility of the 
niradhisthanabhrama which he professes to deny 

174. samanadhikaranya shows a distinct peculiarity in the one entity denoted: 
the stock-example nila utpalah is “a lotus that is blue and thus distinguished from white 
and red ones.” The sense of a word established by grammatical analysis into root 
(dhátu), stem (prütipadika) and declined form (pada) shows again a number of peculiari- 
ties proper to the concept denoted: it may have a gender, be singular, dual or plural, 
govern or be governed in case relation etc., supra $28. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 211 

$38. But the $ruti athata ddego neti १९८७ is obviously a negation all 
the way round. 

I would ask: exactly what does it negate? 

The entire phenomenal world which consists of incorporated and 
unincorporated beings according to the $ruti dve viva brahmano ripe mürtam 
caivémirtam ca.176 

But, considering the maxim: Better keep from touching mud than 
wash it off," it seems hardly appropriate first to teach that all that was not 
suspected before to be Brahman's form is actually His form and then in the 
same breath to deny that same teaching. Let us see what the negation really 
means. The Author of the Sütras himself declares: for it denies that Brahman 
is only so much as has been said and asserts that He is more than that:178 so 
since immediately afterwards in atha némadheyam satyasya satyam iti prana 
vai satyam tesüm esa satyam??? a host of qualities like satya etc. is propound- 
ed, the preceding meti neti denies merely that Brahman is only so much: 
Brahman is much more than has been stated before. 'This is the meaning of 
the above sütra. 

$39. But the $ruti neha nànàsti kimcana!® clearly denies that there 
is variety. 

Here too it is declared later on, in sarvasya vasi sarvasye$ünah,!?l 
that Brahman is satyasamkalpa and sovereign Lord respectively. Hence what 
is actually denied is not what you think but: a variety that would mot be 
ensouled by Brahman: that alone is the opposite of what is declared in the 
assertion that the Lord has all entities, spiritual as well as non-spiritual, for 
his body and that therefore, as the Lord of all and as being modified by all, 
He exists as the sole One. In all Srutis of this description there is nowhere 

175. BAUp. 2, 3, 6 "so now the teaching ‘it is not such nor such’ ", 

176. BAUp. 2, 3, 1 “verily Brahman has two forms, one embodied and one disem- 
bodied;" cf. 8 ad BrS. 3, 2, 22 kim ayam pratisedho (sc. neti neti) ripe (sc. mürtam 
taivümürtam ca) rüpavaccobhayam api pratigedhati . < . dvau caitau pratisedhau, dvirne- 
tiéabdaprayogat. 

177. praksalanáddhi pankasya diarad asparsanam varam a popular maxim (nydya): 
quoted twice in Vimuktatman’s Istasiddhi (pp. 25; 215); to be found in Hitopadesa I, 185, 
where the first half reads: dharmartham yasya vittehé: varam tasya nirihaté. 

178. BrS. 3, 2, 22 prakrtaitdvattvam hi pratisedhati tato braviti ca bhüyah. 

179. BAUp. 4, 3, 6 “so, the name of the real is the real: thus the real is verily the 
vital airs and the possessor of them is the real" 

180. BAUp. 6, 4, 19 "there is no variety here of any kind.” 

181. BAUp. 6, 4, 22 "the ruler of all, the lord of all,” 

212 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

a word to-be found which in unmistakable terms denies that Brahman is 
differentiated.182 

§40. Furthermore, you cannot interpret like this: Brahman who in 
reality is mere non-differentiated knowledge finds nonetheless variety in 
Himself when his own proper form is obscured by obscuring nescience. 
Obscuration is by definition the negation of illumination; so, since you do not 

` admit that illumination is a property of, and exceeding, the proper form itself, 
it would follow that illumination is the proper form so that actually the proper 
form itself would disappear! To say that knowledge— synonymous with 
illumination—is permanent and that illumination is obscured by nescience; 
means either that the illumination is prevented from originating, or that 
existing illumination is terminated. Either alternative would mean that, since 
no illumination can originate, the proper form has ceased to exist. 

—But illumination remains permanent and untransformed. 

Then what you say boils down to this: even though there be 
nescience, there is nothing hidden in Brahman: hence follows that He finds 
variety in Himself. Now this makes no sense to honest people.182a 

$41. —But even you must agree!8? that the proper form of the soul 
is knowledge and that the soul is self-illuminating. Now, when the soul is 
erroneously identified!84 with the proper form of its body, god etc., we must 
necessarily resort to assuming that the illumination of its proper form is 
obscured, inasmuch as no other formation! can be superimposed on the soul 
proper when the soul’s proper form is known. Besides, the error that you 
have pointed. out applies to only one soul in our case, whereas in your case, 

since you assume an infinite number of souls, you have to solve it for all 
souls. 

182. This concluding statement rounds off the first part of R.’s refutation of advai- 
tavada, which is, according to the programmatic stanza .(§2) Srutinyaydipeta- “in conflict 
alike with $ruti and reason.” It has now been shown that the Scriptures lend no sup- 
port to advaita. R. will now demonstrate that its theses cannot stand the test of rational 
criticism. 

182a. satso anirvacaniyam: a pun on the repetitious sadasadanirvacaniya- with which 
the advaitin describes his maya or avidyà 

183. Both R. and $. hold that the atman is essentially knowledge, but where $ 
defines the essence as knowledge, R. regards knowledge as the essential property of a 
substance; and where 6, accepts only one atman that is at once identical with Brahman, 
R. admits an infinite plurality of individual àtmans subordinated to the Supreme Brahman. 

184, abhimüna, see supra note § 24 

185. üküra- "configuration, characteristic form". The atman is, acc, to R. jfdmai- 
küküra-: (~ jndnasvaripa-); by the. process of abhimàna “présumption (Renou)” the 
&tman is‘erroneously identified with the empirical ego of a given body: the body's akara 
is superimposed on it; now, this superimposition is only conceivable if the proper form 
is not evident as such.—The term adhyása supra note 136 belongs particularly to the 
advaitin’s terminology; R. avoids using it. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 213 

$42. The reply to this objection is this.. The Supreme Brahman 
is by nature such that his proper form is absolutely opposed to imperfection 
and is solely constituted by infinite knowledge and bliss. . He is an ocean 
of noble qualities!$$—-unlimited, unsurpassed and immeasurable—which are 
proper to his nature. His mode of being is that He is modified by all 
creatures, for his body is constituted by all entities because he is the inner 
Ruler of all entities: firstly the non-spiritual entities which enable the spiritual 
entities to attain the supreme salutary Goal, which are liable to evolutions of 
infinite variety and which are the objects of experiences for the spiritual 
entities, —and secondly, the spiritual entities themselves which are of an 
infinite variety, either bond or released: the sum-total of these entities consti- 
tutes a particle of Brahman and forms the material for his sport. They 
constitute his infinite, universal supernal manifestation which is not affected 
by the evolutions!87 that are brought about by Time, whose proper form 
comprises countless divisions, from the smallest to the highest units!88 and 
which is the operative cause of all evolutions of the Universe: origination, 
subsistence, resorption etc. It is this Brahman who is the object of our 
knowledge, that.is knowledge imparted by the Veda. This Veda consists of 
numberless branches arranging themselves according to the part they belong 
to, Rg-, Yajur-, Sāma- and Atharvaveda, whose established doctrines have 
been transmitted in an uninterrupted series of studies,!8 itihasa, purana, 
dharmaSastra etc. which are all founded on the Veda, consisting in vidhi,19° 
arthavadda! and mantra,9? and which are instituted by a great number of 
sages who were capable of immediate presentation of Brahman, such as the 
venerable Dvaipàyana, Parasara, Valmiki, Manu, Yajfiavalkya,! Gautama,!?* 

186. udáraguna-, synonymous with kalyánaguna-, supra note 5. 

187. parinama- 

188. nimesakasthákalàmuhürtaparürdhaparyanta-; ^ ^nimesa- "instant"; 15 nimesas 
make one kastha: 30 kasthas 1 kala; 30 kalas 1 muhürta: 30 muhürtas one natural day 
(cf. VP. 1, 3, 8-9); parürdha- “half the duration of Brahma’s life; cosmic life so far 
lapsed” VP. 1, 3, 26-28. To this passage cf. VP. 4, 1, 84 kalamuhurtadimayas ca kalo na 
yadvibhüteh parinamahetuh. S. adds that Time, though effecting evolution in matter, 
is subject to evolution itself: nimesa etc. are the various products. There is no evidence 
that R. subscribed to the Paficarátra conception of akhandakala- “impartite Time” cf. 
SCHRADER, Paficarütra p. 66; repeated YID V, p. 77; def. ib. akhandah kalo nityah karych 
punar anityah (sc. kalah) 

189. pütha- "lit. recital" the oral traditions of the Vedic schools; the idea is that 
these texts do only repeat, in a more comprehensible form, what from all eternity had 
been formulated in the Veda. : 

190. vidhi- "injunction." , 

191. arthavüda- "exegetical portion. 

192. mantra- “Vedic stanza used in ritual.” 

193. Author -of YAjnyavalkyasmrti. 

-194. Author of Gautamiyadharmasastra. 

214 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

Apastamba!®> etc. Now we recognize Brahman as the object of our know- 
ledge and the Veda as the pramàna of our knowledge: could we then be 
unable to reach a proved conclusion? As the venerable Dvaipayana declares 
in the Mahabharata: .... who knows that I, unborn and undying, am the 
world’s sovereign lord. Two orders of entities are in this world, a transi- 
tory and an imperishable one: the transitory comprises all elements, the 
imperishable one is called kütastha. But there is another higher person 
that is called the Supreme Spirit, who is the eternal Lord who penetrates 
and supports the entire Universe. ‘And He matures the time; no time is 
there, there is the Lord alone. Those, my dear, are the evolutions of the 
realm of the Supreme Spirit. You should reflect on this that this entire 
transcient Universe, evolving from the unevolved to the last differentiations 
and owning a wealth of developments, is Haris sport.198 For in Krsna alone 
is the rise and decline of the worlds, and for Krsna exist all these beings 
animate and inanimate.199 Here krsnasya hi krte “for Krsna” means that 
the Universe is an accessory to Krsna.2 The venerable Parasara too 
declares: “The word Bhagavat is used for the pure Supreme Brahman in 
his infinite manifestation as the first universal cause.201 The word Bhagavat 
connotes all his perfections, knowledge, power, strength, sovereignty, forti- 
tude and glory, without any imperfect quality etc.202 Thus this word Bhagavat 
is a master-word applicable to none but Vasudeva who is the Supremé 
Brahman.*3 This term, whose object, expression and signification are so 
worthy, applies directly only to Him, and to others only indirectly.2t That 
Supreme Order called Visnu is thus qualified; it is immaculate, real, 
pervasive, perennial and free from all imperfections.?5 And Time, compris- 
ing minute, hour etc., is no cause of any evolution in His manifestation. 
Hear the exploits of Him that sports like a child.?" Manu, too, says: ....the 
Commander of all, subtler than the subtle, ., Yajfiavalkya,2 too: the puri- 
fication of the ksetrajria by knowledge of God is deemed the highest. And 

195. Eponym of Apastambiyadharmasitra. 

196. BhG. 10, 3 yo mam ajam: 

197. BhG. 15, 16-17 dvàv imau purusau, 

198. MBh. 12, 25, 9, kalam sa pacate. 

199. MBh. 2, 38, 23 Krsna eva hi lokünàüm. 

200. Same interpretation GBh. 4, 4; on Sesa- supra note 3 and infra 8122. 
201. VP. 6, 5, 72 Suddhe mahàvibhütyakhye. 

202. VP. 6, 5, 79 jnüna$saktibalai$varya-. 

203. VP. 6, 5, 76 evam esa mahüsabdo. 

204. VP. 6, 5, 77 tatra pujyapadárthokti- 

205. VP. 1, 22, 53 evamprakaram alam. 

206. VP. 4, 1, 84 kalamuhiurtadi- 

207. VP. 1, 2, 18 kridato balakasyeva. 

208. Manusmrti 12, 122; the Vulgate reads aniyémsam anorapi. : 
209. Yajnavalkyasmrti 3, 34 ksetrajiiasyesvarajidndd visuddhih parama mata. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 215 

Apastamba declares: pik prüninah sarva eva guhasayasya,l i.e. "all breath- 
ing beings constitute the pur “town” or “body”?!! of Him whose dwelling- 
place is secret: the Supreme Spirit”; prüninah?)? means “the composite beings 
of matter ensouled by the individual soul." 

$43. But what is the use of this pathos? The objection is still not 
refuted ! 

We reply: once we agree upon this we have refuted your entire 
objection by asserting that contraction and expansion of consciousness,?!% 
which is a dharma of the soul that belongs to its very nature, are supremely 
real inasmuch as they are caused by karman. For you, however, illumina- 
tion is not a dharma but the proper form itself: so contraction and expansion 
of it cannot reasonably be admitted. Factors like karman,?!4 which bring 
about the obscuration, are the cause that illumination cannot originate. If 
you assume that nescience is the obscuring factor, then the illumination, 
‘which is the proper form, is annihilated, as we have pointed out before. 
For us, on the other hand, the illumination of knowledge, which is an eternal 
dharma of the proper form, is contracted by karman that takes on the form 
of ignorance. Owing to that contraction the identification?!5 of the soul with 
the proper form of its body, god etc., is brought about. This is the difference 
between our views. As has been said: ignorance, also called karman, is 
considered to be the third power by which the power which is the individual 
soul that is in everyone is frustrated and has its share of all the sufferings 
of samsüra, which have too long a life. And in proportion that this power 
called individual soul is obscured by the ignorance it works in all beings in 
different degrees.216 Which shows that ignorance, or the karman of the 

individual souls, causes the knowledge, which is a dharma proper to them, 
to contract and expand. 

210. 'Apastambiyadharmasütra 1, 8, 22, 4 püh prüninah sarva eva guhásayasya; the 
reading sarvaguhüsayasya of some MSS., adopted by SudarSanachari, is, as follows from 
R.’s own interpretation and Bühler's edition, to be rejected. 

211. S. quotes ‘the Naighantukas (= Halayudha, Abhidhànaratnamala 2, 355) 
angam vapur varsma puram pratikam. 

212. prünin-, synonymous with $aririn "soul in the body.” 

213. caitanya- “spirituality” (<cetana- "spiritual being"; advaitic term rarely 
used by R.), synonymous with jñāna- or prakdésa-; for a systematic account of the theory 
of dharmabhütajüüna- see YID chapter VII. 

214. Other factors are, acc. to S., vasana “residue of former impressions creating 
habits of thought and practice" and the prakrti with its three constituent gunas. 

215. abhimüna. 

216. VP. 6, 7, 61-63; for R.’s interpretation of this VP. context I may refer to 
my paper The Subhaírayaprakarama etc. 

216 ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

- ^ :844. ‘Furthermore, on the authority of the $rutis and on the strength 
of the doctrine of identity, you have to?!7 resort to an obscuring nescience 
that is a deficiency: which causes Brahman’s proper form. to disappear. 
Inasmuch as this nescience itself is false, it requires another deficiency that 
gives rise to the very notion of nescience, just as the. phenomenal world 
requires a deficiency giving rise to the very notion of phenomenal world, viz. 
the nescience. Therefore, considering that nescience itself cannot be the 
ultimate cause of false notions, Brahman Itself must be the ultimate cause 
of false notions: since it has no beginning this nescience must have been 
false from all eternity: so it must from all eternity have been falsely conceiv- 
ed by Brahman; and since it cannot be admitted that the deficiency that 
gives rise to the false notion of nescience is ultimately real itself, therefor 
Brahman Itself is the ultimate cause of the false notion of nescience, this means 
that Brahman being eternal we would never get rid of nescience and so 
never be released.218 

845. On the same grounds??? we reject the theory: that there. is only 
one body with one soul and the other.bodies have no soul, just as the bodies we 
see in our dreams have no souls: in a dream only the dreamer's body has 
a soul and all the various and endless bodies that appear during the dream 

. have no souls at all, because they are only the products of the imagination 
of that single one, so that their souls are false.22? Now we say;??! since Brahman 

217. "Have to" because the advaitin identifies the proper form with the obscured 
knowledge. i i 

218. Since the advaitin considers the avidyā to be “illusory” (mithyarüpa-), ie. 
to have no ultimate.reality. of its own, he must derive whatever reality it has from a 
source or basis (adhisthàna-) that is real, just as he, in order to explain the ‘illusory’ 
phenomenal world, resorts to avidya as the source of this illusion. This source of the 
deficiency avidyà, which therefore must itself be deficient, must be real and not illu- 
sory in its turn: otherwise there would be anavastha “regressus ad inifinitum", every 
unreal deficiency deriving from a preceding one. This real source or substratum can 
be no one but Brahman. Avidyà is admittedly unreal from all eternity, so Brahman 
must have had this Nescience from all eternity. Now, the advaitin cannot allow the 
eternal co-existence of truth and untruth; it follows that in the final analysis he allows 
only for untruth: untruth, falsity etc. is the ultimate reality à 

219. Viz. that all except Brahman is illusory (S.) 

220. ekajivavada; Appaya Diksita, SiddhantaleSasamgraha, 2, 2, 32. describes this 
theory in very similar terms and images: eko jwah, tena caikam eva sariram sajivam, 
anyüni svapnadrstasariraniva nirjivani, tadajánakalpitam jagat, tasya svapnadarsanavat 
yüvadavidyam sarvo vyavaharah; baddhamuktavyavasthapi nasti jivasyaikatvadt; $uka- 
muktyadikam api svapnapurusantaramuktyadikam iva kalpitam; atra ca sambhavitasakala- 
sankdpankapraksilanam svapnadrstántasaliladharayaiva kartavyam iti . 

221. R.’s argument is: acc. to the advaita only Brahman is real and everything 
else illusory; consequently all bodies are unreal and there exists no. proper jiva existent 
in a body. Granted that the bodies and souls that we dream about are illusory, the 
advaitin cannot even maintain that there is an embodied dreamer; the embodied dreamer: 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 217 

only imagines the existence of souls different from his own proper form and 
further only imagines that there are any bodies at all, the real existence of 
an embodied soul in one single body is as false as the body itself, so it 
follows that all bodies are false and the existence of souls in those bodies is 
false too. Hence there is no difference between one body and the real 
existence of a soul in it. But for us when we awake from our dream the 
personal body of the dreamer and the real existence of a soul in it are not 
sublated whereas the other bodies and the indwelling souls of our dream are 
sublated. It follows that they are all false and that only the personal body 
‘ with its indwelling soul has any reality at all: that is the difference we 
make. 

$46. Further we must inquire now how the nescience ceases to 
exists, and what that cessation is after all.2?2 

—The knowledge of identity puts an end to it, and this cessation is 
of such a kind that it is contrary to inexplicable. 

Then we contend: something is contrary to inexplicable means some- 
thing is explicable: it must be either real, or unreal, or both, there 
is no other alternative. When it is held to be different from Brahman, then 
the nescience cannot yet have ceased to exist?^ When it is held that 
Brahman Itself is the cessation, then it should have ceased before, because 
that follows from the knowledge of the Vedànta which teaches that Brahman 

is also illusory. The bodies and souls that the (illusory) dreamer dreams about are 
illusory in the second degree, but the illusory dreamer is no more real than the phan- 
toms of his dream. So, in the final analysis, there is no difference at all between the 
existence of any body and the existence therein of any soul, whether they are illusory 
in the first or in the second degree. So the entire instance is inappropriate: appropriate 
is it when the reality of the dreamer and his body is accepted: only then the illusoriness 
of the dream's bodies and souls can be defined by the reality of the dreamer's body and 
soul. 

222. S. notes that kidrsi in the question is used pejoratively (ksepartha), as it well 
may be: to it correspond in the reply the words anirvacaniyapratyaniküküra, which to 
R.’s realistic mind is an exceedingly clumsy way of expressing oneself. 

223. Anything not inexplicable (anirvacaniyapratyanika) is therefore explicable: 
it must be explained either as real, or as unreal, or as both. If the cessation is unreal, 
there is nothing to discuss. If it is real, two alternatives present themselves: it is either 
different from, or identical with Brahman: 1. if it is different, then duality must persist 
ultimately and Nescience, responsible for duality, has therefore not ceased; 2. if it is 
identical with Brahman, Nescience has ceased from all eternity, so that Nescience does 
not appear at all. If the cessation is both real and unreal, Nescience is non-existent 
on both counts. हि WP 

224. Being different from Brahman it is ‘false’ (belonging to the realm of Nes- 
cience), and consequently its annihilation is false; so, if Nescience is annihilated, it must 
still be there to account for the traces of duality left by its own annihilation, 

V. 28 

218 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

was originally non-differentiated. So your theory that the knowledge of 

identity as such means cessation of nescience and that without it there is 
samsara is invalidated. 

§ 47. Moreover, the question must be raised: considering that the 

terminating knowledge itself is also false, who terminates that terminating 
knowledge in its turn? 

—After having put an end to all difference other than itself the termi- 
nating knowledge vanishes by itself because its nature is but momentary, even 
as a fire in a forest or a counter-poison terminate themselves 

No! The terminating knowledge is different from Brahman. There- 
fore its proper form, and its origination and annihilation are false. Hence 
follows that the nescience persists in the form of its annihilation.2 So it 
remains to be said what puts an end to the notion that that knowledge has 
been annulled. A forest fire etc. too have of necessity a series of successive 
developments that are contrary to their initial phase of being. 

§ 48 Furthermore, of what kind is the subject of the knowledge which 
denies everything that is different from Brahman as pure consciousness? 

—He has the form of superimposition 

No, for then he is to be denied by, and consequently the object of, 
the terminating knowledge so that he cannot be its subject. 

—Brahman’s proper form then 

Then we have two alternatives: is Brahman's proper form in its 
pure form the subject of the terminating knowledge or in its superimposed 
form? If it is superimposed, than this superimposition and another nescience 
from which it derives will persist because they themselves are not the objects 
of the terminating knowledge. If still another knowledge is assumed to put 
an end to them, there will be a regressus ad infinitum, because this knowledge 

“will also have the triple character of all knowledge. For if it lacks this 
triple character??$ all knowledge ceases to be knowledge at all, since know- 
ledge is of some subject and has the form of a definite validity for a definite 
object. So if it lacks this triple character of all knowledge, your terminating 
knowledge is no more terminating than a knowledge constituting a proper 
form, When you assume that the subject of knowledge is Brahman's proper 

225. As S. remarks: to be annihilated is, by definition, to enter on a phase of 
being.opposed to former phases; it is not completely nothing: na tu dravyübhàávah. 

226. The ‘triple character’ (trirüpatva), or the three constituent factors of all 
knowledge are 1. jüàtr “the subject of knowing"; 2. jħñāna- "the act of knowing"; 3. 
jüeya- "the object of knowing" ` spe i 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA | 219 

form in pure form, then you adopt our point of view. It is ridiculous to say 
that the proper form of the terminating knowledge as well as the person that 
exercises this knowledge are to be numbered among the objects that they 
themselves terminate: not less ridiculous, in fact, than if in the case of an 
action of cutting wood, when it is said: “Devadatta cuts everything but the 
earth," this would be taken to mean that the person cutting and the cutting 
activity itself are to be reckoned among the things that are cut!227 

§ 49.. Further, we should inquire into another question: what source 
gives rise to that knowledge of identity which puts an end to all diversity? 

` —That source is the Sruti. 

That is impossible: for the $ruti being different from Brahman is 
a product of the imagination of nescience and can therefore never act as the 
source of knowledge that sublates the phenomenal world. For a certain 
erroneous notion that springs from a faulty cause, for example that a rope 
is a snake, is not sublated by the cognition that it is no snake but a rope, if 
that cognition too springs from a faulty cause. Suppose that when we have 
that notion of snake and are consequently afraid of it, a certain confused 
person comes along and assures us that it is only a rope and not a snake: then, 
if we knew that that person is confused, his assurance would not sublate 
our notion that the rope is a snake and our fear would not vanish.28 
Similarly, a man who has effective knowledge??? knows at the very time when 
he hears the $ruti that the Sruti too is founded on error, since it is different 
from Brahman. Besides, if a man with knowledge were told that the terminat- 
ing knowledge and the sastra in which that knowledge is assembled can be 
sublated themselves, then he would instantly conclude: “Oh, but then there 
is no reality in the termination of the phenomenal world," and he would 
know that the phenomenal world is real, in the same way as he would know, 
when a man appearing in his dream had told him that his father had died, 
that his father was still alive in reality. Besides, the statements tat tvam asi 
etc. would not”? sublate the phenomenal world?! because they are founded on 
error, just as the sublating assurance of the confused person to the effect that 
there was only a rope and no snake would not be sublating at all. 

227. Same comparison ŚBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 125 where T'urBAUT renders bhütalavyatirik- 
tam "everything on the surface of the earth", instead of "everything different from the 
earth itself:" to bhütala- corresponds Brahman, the act of knowing sublates everything 
different from Brahman. LACOMBE translates "tout ce qui dépassait la surface de la terre”, 
which is not very clear. : 

228. Same argument and comparison SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 54. 

229. prayojakajüünavatah. : i 

230. i.e. even if the laksita sense of tat tvam asi is admitted. 

231. As represented by tvam, the embodied atman. 

220 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

'$50. But, in point of fact, would it not be more like this: when 
we are afraid of something in a dream but we realize while dreaming that 
it is only a dream, then our previous fear vanishes, as is a matter of common 
experience: in the same manner this could be possible in our case too. 

That is not true, for it is also a matter of common experience that 
our fear does not cease, even though we realize while dreaming that is all 
a dream; so that does not make any difference. 

851. You say that while we hear the $ruti we realize that it is all 
a dream. But what you actually say is this: the Sastra, although it is false 
because it is a product of an erring imagination, expounds that Brahman 
has no second; and because later on it appears that the Sastra cannot validly 
bear upon a Brahman that is so as the $àstra asserts, it follows that this 
Brahman is proved. This is improper reasoning, for the assertion that all 
is nil sublates itself too. 

—But this assertion itself is found on error. 

Then you say yourself that the assertion that Brahman has no 
second is also founded on error. The only difference is that the invalidity 
of the assertion itself that all is nil appears later on. So, he who holds the 
view that all is nil and he who holds the view that all entities different 
from Brahman are false do not recognize the reality of the pramdnas that 
prove their own points; therefore the really competent declare that their 
views have no title to philosophy at all: Philosophy marches always on as long 
as philosophers have real means of knowledge; but the philosophy of the 
Stinyavadin has no title since it has no means??? 

$52. Moreover’ which pramana proves that the phenomenal world 
as apprehended by perception is false? 

—As perception can by other means be proved to derive from a defi- 
ciency, the non-deficient scripture, being not so proved by other means, sub- 
lates perception 

Then I ask: what deficiency can give rise to a perception that has 
infinite diversity for its object? 

— Perception is produced by a deficiency arising from beginningless 
vüsanüs?^ of diversity etc. - 

232. Kumárila, Slokavarttika; Niralambanavada, st. 128 cd; the half Sloka here 
translated follows (129 ab); adhiküro 'nupàyatvün na vade $ünyavüdinah, where upaya 
praména 
233. Cf. SBh. 1, 1, 1. 
234, Residues of mental impressions, creating a mentality and habits 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 221 

But then the $àstra is produced by that same deficiency, so percep- 
tion and Sastra cannot stand in the relation of thing sublated and thing sub- 
lating since they derive from the same deficiency. 

$53. Perception apprehends the padarthas which have definite gene- 
ric structures, e.g. of a human being, connected with the elements ether, 
wind etc. and with the sense-objects sound, touch etc. deriving from these 
elements. The sastra, on the other hand, is concerned with the proper form 
of Brahman as modified by endless differentiating features, like his being 
the immanent soul in all creatures and his being real, with the various 
methods of worshipping Him, wpàsana etc., and with the specific fruits that 
are obtained by His Grace which follows attainment of him, and with the 
specific eradication of the fundamental causes giving rise to things dis- 
pleasing Him,—in a word, objects beyond the scope of perception. Hence 
follows that there can be no contradiction between $astra and perception. 
Anyone who maintains the superior authority of sastra qualified by 
numerous qualities, such as being the established doctrine transmitted by 
beginningless and endless uninterrupted studies etc, must necessarily 
recognize the reality of perception. 

But enough of refuting this web of false doctrines and faulty reason- 
ing that is swept away like reed by the forceful wind of hundreds of 
$rutis in succession. We have done with it! 

854. The second school?35 assumes that there is no other entity 
existing but a Brahman conditioned by adjuncts. It follows that where 
there is a natural admixture of adjuncts to Brahman all defects inherent 
in adjuncts will be found in Brahman Himself. That means that all $rutis 
which set forth that Brahman is free from all defects, e.g. that there is no 
imperfection in Him,’ are discarded. 

| $55. But the idea is rather like this: a space-unit contained in a 
jug is of another character than the main space, since only the former is 

235. Bhaskara’s bhedabhedavada, more precisely aupàdhikavada: doctrine that 
Brahman, conditioned by real upàdhis, constitutes the phenomenal world. 
| 236. wupüdhi- adjunct, ie. an accidental factor added to an entity, subjecting it 
to restrictions and delimitations which condition its mode of being without impairing 
its essence”. 

237. apahatapüpmá, ChUp. 8, 7, 1. 

238. dkasa- “space/ether,” first of the mahabhütüni, conceived as a material ele- 
ment that is spatially unlimited: it is held to be eka- “indivisibly one” and vibhu- “om- 
nipresent”. Space may be adjoined to by a jug which has a finite measure of capacity; 
although this jug with the space contained therein delimits the space to a finite extent, 
it does not, to the mind of the aupadhikavadin, affect its unlimitedness. The comparison, 

222 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN : 

limited, and both spaces are different from each other. The properties, positive 
and negative,” inherent in these space-units do not affect the main space 
because the main space is not so particularized. Similarly, the defects 
inherent in the embodied soul, which is set apart and determined by diver- 
sity brought about by adjuncts, do not affect the Supreme Brahman, ie. 
the Brahman that is not subjected to adjuncts. 

This proves nothing. It is not possible to cut the indivisible main 
space off from the jug etc. for it cannot be divided up; so that the jug 
remains connected with the main space itself.240 Similarly it would follow 
that since Brahman cannot be cut off, He would remain connected with the 
adjuncts in his entirety. 

—But the particular place in space connected with the jug differs 
from all other places in space.*4! 

From the fact that the main space remains connected with the jug 
in varying places it follows that, when the jug moves about, any place 
without any restriction can be connected with the jug.42 So, since the 
adjunct is in a comparable way conjoined with Brahman without any 
constant restriction to a definite place, it would follow that it can move 
about in varying places in Him, and if it does so, varying places in Brahman 
would alternately be connected with the adjunct and disconnected: that 
would mean that the whole of Brahman could be conjoined with the adjunct 

although, as far as I can see, not developed by Bhaskara in this way, is found in his 
Brahmasütrabhasya, e.g. 2, 3, 43 (p. 141) katham punar niravayavasya paramatmano 
’msah sambhavati/agamat tavad avagamyate yathagneh ksudrà visphulingd iti drstanta 
iti pranayanát / yathà cdkdsasya parthivddhisthandvacchinnam karnacchidram ca: “but 
how is it possible that the Supreme Spirit, who is indivisible, has an am$a?—This is 
learnt from the Scriptures: it is demonstrated in the illustrative instance “just as tiny 
sparks spring up out of a fire, similarly all -pranas, all worlds, all gods, all creatures 
spring from this atman” (BAUp. 2, 1, 20), just as from space (a part) is delimited by a 
substratum like a clay jug, and (the space contained in) the cavity in the ear". Also 1, 
4, 21 (p. 81) samyag dha bhavan asti bhedo "py anadikàlapravrttàvidyakarmopàádhyavac- 
chedad améo hi parasyaiyam jiwo nama yathagner visphulingah, yathàkàsasya parthivádya- 
dhistànopüdhyavacchinna$ chidrapradesah tadamsasabdagrahanasaktyapeksà, etc. 

239. guna and dosa è 

240. In other words: the finite character of the space enclosed in a jug cannot be 
separated from the main space: the main space contains the finitized extent so that, in 
its entirety, the main space is restricted: it can never transcend this extent. 

241. The point which the aupadhikavadin wants to make is that the finitized. ex- 
tent of main space, though concededly never disconnected from the main space, yet 
derives from its isolated finiteness a distinct individuality marking it off from main space: 
essentially the enclosed space remains space. 

. 242. R. retorts that each and every part of space can be delimited by a jug, só 
that space is forever alternating between limitedness and unlimitedness. Applied to 
Brahman this consequence is absurd. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 223 

and that every moment He would be bond and released! People in their 
right minds laugh at this. 

$56. The one indivisible space is the auditory sense but nevertheless 
space is only partially defined as a 5९056९: 48 similarly Brahman too can be 
Shown to be partially defined. 

It is not reasonable to say that, since a definite place in space if 
connected with a certain room in the ear that has been prepared by a 
special sort of wind takes on the function of sense, therefore space itself 
is partially defined as a sense, although that place is infinitely variable. 
The bodies of all beings move freely without any restriction through space: 
therefore they are all connected with all and sundry places in space. So, 
if applied to our topic, it would rather follow that there is endless variation 
in and no constant restriction to the places in Brahman that are connected 
with adjuncts. l 

$57. —If we assume that space is the auditory sense by its proper 
form, we can likewise state that space is partially defined as a sense.246 

9 But actualy space is not the auditory sense at all For the 
Vaidikas declare: the eleven senses evolve out of the vaikdrika ahamkara.7 

243. The argument is that only that part of space contained in the aural cavity 
is the auditory sense. This argument is essentially the same one as that put forward 
above: even though akasa be partially defined as a sense (which R. does not admit), 
there is no spatially fixed part for it: any part of space may take on this function. 

244. The Naiyayika theory of sound holds that $rotra- "auditory organ" is that 
extent of space that is delimited by the aural cavity (karnasaskulyavacchinnam), The 
organ of hearing therefore cannot move out to find its object (as the organ of seeing 
goes out to find its object), since outside the aural cavity it is plain akasa, not érotra. 
So the space inside the ear (Srotra) receives the sound. R's expression vayuvisesasam- 
skrta is explained by S. uccéranaprayatnajanitavayuvisesasamyogasamskrta- “prepared 
by the contact with a particular current of air produced by the energy of producing 
sounds 

245. R.s objection is that all space must be definable as Srotra since space is indi- 
Visible: any part of space may happen to be contained in an aural cavity, so all space 
must have this function 

246. This argument is more urgent: the aupadhikavadin concedes that all space is 
essentially $rotra, either in potentiality, or, in definite parts of it, in actuality. But 
if applied to Brahman this would mean that Brahman is essentially identical with the 
finite conditioned entities: aupadhikavada becomes pantheism, implicating the Absolute 

in the conditions of the finite. 
TN 247. However primitive these ancient Sàmkhyan views may appear, their intro- 
duction here is very apt: while, to the very end, arguing by analogy of the drstanta 
supplied by his opponent, R. proves that a scrutiny of the drstanta itself 
puts his adversary in the wrong.—The 11 senses are the manas- "co-ordinating organ of 
sensorial impressions", the 5 sensorial and the 5 motorial senses (buddhindriya and 
karmendriya). a 

224 < J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

The venerable Parasara says likewise: taijasdnindriyany ühur devà vaikari- 
ka dasa, eküdas$am manas catra devà vaikürikah smrtah;*8 i.e. aham- 
kara is triple: vaikdrika, taijasa and bhütüdi; respectively it is sáttvika, 
rajasa and tamasa. After having declared that the order of creation 
is such that the elements, space, etc, evolve out of the tamasa 
form of ahamkàra, viz. the bhütüdi, he alludes to the rival view that 
the eleven senses evolve out of the taijasa or rajasa form of ahamkara. 
Then he states his own view, namely that the vaikdrika indriyas evolve out 
of the sáttvika ahamkara: devà vaikürikah smrtah, where devil means “the 
senses”.A In the Mahabharata it is declared that the bhütas nourish the 
ühamkàrika indriyas. Even if it were true that the senses evolve out of 
the bhütas, the senses of the purusa would — since they are transformation 
of the elements akasa, etc.—become distinct and peculiar evolved products of 
these elements,! in the same manner as the body. Similarly, it cannot 

248. VP. 1, 2, 46-47 "some contend that the indriyas derive from the taijasa 
form of ahamkara, (but) the ten senses, and manas as the eleventh, are (in fact) pro- 
ducts of its vaikarika form: hence the senses are known as vaikdrika.”..There is some 
discrepancy between the various interpretations of the commentaries. Citsukha and 
Visnucitta explain devah as indriyàáni (C. devah divyanti vyavaharanty ebhir iti devà indri- 
yani; V. indriyaném devasabdavacyatvam tadadhisthatrdevatdbhiprayena); Sridhara and 
Dattatreya as the superintending deities, referring to BhP. 2, 5, 30 digvütürkapraceto'$vi- 
vahnindropendramitraküh (ka- = Prajapati). The Visistádvaitin V. is the only one who 
interprets like R. svapaksam üha-atra devà etc.; the others have the ten indriyas derive 
from taijasa, and only manas from vaikárika, explaining the plural vaiküriküh as the 
superintending deities of manas.—R.s interpretation corresponds to that of Pajicaratra, 
cf, SCHRADER, Pañcarătra, p. 76. 

249. The order of evolution described in VP. 1, 2, 34 is as is shown here: Pradhana 
>> Mahattatva -> Ahamkara; 

Ahamkara 
| 

(1) tamasa = bhütádi (2) ràjasa = taijasa (3) lod Ol omen. = vaikarika 
tanmütras bhütas buddhindriya karmendr, 
sabda akasa Srotra ——- vak 
sparsa . . vàyu tvak ——— karau 
rüpa . tejas caksuh ——-— padau 
rasa ambhāmsi jihvā | ——- upastha 
gandha samghata nasika ———-» payu 

250. Reference is to MBh. 12, 194, 5 ff. and similar texts 

251. Yet, being products of the bhütas, the senses can be distinguished from them 
they are not the elements itself, but their products ($rotra c akasa). It is not clear exact- 
ly which stand R. takes: if akasa is not 57079, then what is $rotra? “N’ayant aucune 
idée du dispositif de l'oreille interne, les Vaisesika-Naiyayika ont localisé l'organe de 
laudition dans le pavillion; et, comme ils n'y apercevaient rien de spécial, au creux de 
la conque .. qui percevait le son: il s'ensuit que dans ce cas particulier l'organe du sens 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA $25 

be refuted that Brahman, being not cut off, nor divisible, nor transformed, 
would inevitably have without any restriction the defects of conjunction with 
adjuncts of infinite evil. Now, philosophers who know the scriptures do not 
think much of this: it is a theory of the very credulous! Assuming that 
Brahman’s essence is subject to evolution, they sublate the Srutis that de- 
clare that He is untransformed.25 And when they say that Brahman itself 
remains untransformed and that it is Its creative potency that is involved 
in evolution, then we raise the question: is this potency an evolved pro- 
duct of Brahman, or is it identical with Brahman? Whichever alternative 
is adopted, the assumption would remain necessary that Brahman’s essence 
is subject to evolution. 

§58. The third school? assumes that the individual soul and 
Brahman are different-non-different: it follows that Brahman is identical 
‘with soul and that in the same way as Saubhari? is different from 
himself and the Lord is different from His own incarnations, everyone is 
different from the Lord. This leads consequently to the conclusion that 
the defects inherent in the jivas are also His. 

In other words: the view that God Himself constitutes, in His essence, 
the various creatures gods, men, brutes, plants ete., declares that God is 
identical with these creatures in essence. Such being the case, all defects 
like happiness, unhappiness etc. that go with the soul, also go with the 

se confond pour eux avec la substance dont il perçoit la qualité" Foucher, TS. p. 76. 
Insisting on some sort of a difference between auditory sense and space, comparable to 
that between body and component elements, R. seems to suggest that the auditory sense 
is vested in an organ of the body rather than identical with an indefinite and variably 
localized part of space. 

252. Cf. SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 113 bhedabhedavdde tu brahmany evopadhisamsargát tat- 
prayuktajivagatadosa brahmany eva prüduh syur iti nirastanikhiladosagunatmabhavopa- 
desa hi virodhad eva parityaktah syuh / svàbhàvikabhedábhedavàde "pi brahmanah svata 
eva jivabhavabhyupagamad gunavaddosas ca svabhavika bhaveyur iti nirdosabrahmata- 
datmyopadesaviruddha eva. A detailed refutation is given in SBh. 1, 1, 4. 

252a. Cf. Bhaskara, BrSBh. 1, 4, 25. 

253. School of Yadavaprakasa, S. sums up the difference between Bhaskara and 
Yadava: acidbrahmanos tu sarvasya brahmütmakatvasruteh, nirmalatvadisruter upadhyan- 
terabhyupagame "navasthànácca bhedábhedau svabhavikàv abhyupagatau bhaiskaramate 
/ yadavaprakasamate tw muktāv api bhedanirdesasruter jivabrahmanos ca svübhaviküv 
abhimatav iti bhida. 

254. Saubhari, mythical person, reputed to possess 50 bodies at once to satisfy his 
50 wives(drsyate hi saubhariprabhrtinàm $aktimatàm yugapad anekasarirapratipattih, 
SBh. 1, 3, 26), of which he was the sole jiva (saubhariprabhrtisu hy ütmaikatvenaneka- 
sariraprayuktasukhddipratisamdhdnam ekasya drsyate, ib. 2, 1, 15 p. 434); for the story 
see VP. 4, 2, 66-133; BhP. 9, 6, 38-55. The purpose of saubharibhedavat as well of svá- 
vatarabhedavat is to exemplify identity in the guise of plurality: in spite of the seeming 
difference there is but identity: God is the individual soul. 

V. 29 

226 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

Lord, just as all actions, e.g. the fetching of water, that go with the jug, 

bowl etc. which originate from a single lump of clay, also go with that lump 
of clay itself. 

$59. — But is it not rather like this: in the same way as a substance 
of clay by itself, when it bas no function in the various generic structures 
of jug, bowl etc., has other effects as well: similarly the Lord by Himself, 
when He does not function as the soul of god, man, animal etc., is possessed 

of omniscience and of all perfections like the power of having his every 
will realized 

True. You say that one and the same Lord possesses all sorts of 
perfections in one part of Himself and all sorts of imperfections in another 
part of Himself. This is the logical consequence of the fact that two 
different parts do not make two different Lords. 

. — But both parts are well distinct?55 from each other. 

What do you gain by that? For if the same Lord is in one part 
eternally miserable you cannot say properly that He is happy in another 
part. The Lord would be comparable to Devadatta who has one hand 
anointed with sandal-paste and adorned with bracelets and rings, and 
his other hand hit by a hammer and hurting with hell-fire ! 

We may say that this bhedabheda doctrine is worse even than the 
doctrine that Brahman is nescient:26 for it contends that immeasurable 
misery is ultimately real and that it can never be overcome because there 
is no end to beings implicated in samsàra.?5? 

$60. —8But the part ‘embodied soul’ in Him is different from Himself. 

Then you are walking on my road. But when the relationship 
between Lord and soul is described in terms of identity in essence, then it 
is logically unsound to maintain difference; whereas it is sound when this 
identity is stated in the terms of a body-soul relation.25® Contrary to you 
we can declare that the Lord's qualities are universal including his 
Sovereignty over all worlds etc.; and the sémanadhikaranya thus retains its 
proper sense. 

$61. Further, we say that one and the same entity cannot possibly 
be different and non-different at once, because that is a contradiction in 

255. vyavasthita- "delimited one from the other." 
256. ie. advaitavedànta 

257. Since God is identical with the jiva in bondage, bondage is henceforth 
inescapable 

258. R/s solution of ‘difference in union’ 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 221 

terms. If a jug is different from a cloth, than the one cannot exist in the 
other; only if there is no difference one can exist in the other. But that in 
the same place and at the same time one and the same entity does at once 
exist and not exist in another entity is a contradiction in terms. 

$62. — But one entity can at once exist in another entity in so far 
as it is class and not exist in so far as it is individual.259 

If there is no difference between the class 'ox' and the individual 
*hornless ox', it follows that the individual 'hornless ox' also exists in the. 
individual ‘broken-horned ox’. If class and individual are different and 
non-different, there are two cases at once: first, if the individual ‘broken- 
horned ox’ is not different from the class ‘ox’, the broken-horned ox exists 
in the hornless ox; second, if they are different, the class does not exist at 
all in the individual, just as the class ‘buffalo’ does not exist in an individual 
horse. This contradiction is plainly insoluble. Class etc. constitute the 
generic structure! of a given thing and are consequently modifications of 
that thing; hence, as we have said before,?9? the modifying attribute and the 
modified thing are different padarthas, the modifying attribute has no 
separate function and cannot be separately apprehended, and the same 
generic structure can appear as modification in more than one thing. 

$63. The judgment "this is he" is founded upon identity of mode, 
in the same manner as is the judgment: “this one is a man-with-a-stick.”264 
And this very modification, of class etc., is declared to be the differentiation 
of a given thing. The possession of such a differentiating attribute furnishes 
the ground on which we treat a thing as different.265 This modification is 
at once the ground for acting upon the difference and for acting on the 
thing itself, in the same way as awareness: just as the being aware 

259. That is to say: two entities are non-different inasmuch as they belong to 
the same class and share the same generic differentiae, whereas at the same time they 
are different in so far as they differ in individual characteristics; cf. Bhaskara, BrSBh. 
1, 1, 4. न : - 

260. R. considers this statement under the two aspects by which the dvyätmakatva 
(supra note 147) in bhinnabhinnatva can be viewed; abhinnatva and bhinnábhinnatva; 
the third aspect of bhinnatva conflicts too self-evidently with the alleged dvyatmakatva 
to bear mention. I have interpreted this extremely concise passage with the aid of S; 
SRINIVASACHART'S interpretation (Bhedábheda p. 211) differs. For a very detailed refu- 
tation cf. Vacaspati’s Bhàmati on Sankara’s BrSBh. 1, 1, 4; cf. also SBh. 1, 1, 4. 

261. samsthéna- see supra note 86. 

262, Supra $30. 

263. prthaganupalambha- 

264. S. comments: so "yam iti buddhir amuvrttavisayavyavahürünvità buddhis 
tajjatiyatvabuddhir ayam api gauh iti buddhir ity arthah; in the second case ayam api 
dandi, the stick (danda-) is the prakara, 

265. vyavahdrahetu- 

228 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

of a given thing furnishes at once the ground for our acting on that thing. 
and for acting upon the awareness? itself, 

$64. In consequence of these reasons all theories that perception 
apprehends mere being and does not apprehend difference are rejected,?67 
firstly because only an entity that has a definite generic structure — class 
etc. — is apprehended by perception; secondly because this class etc. taking 
on the form of generic structure furnishes the ground for treating it as 
different in regard to its correlative. That it is a fallacy to assume evolution 
in proper form has already been pointed out.268 

III 

$65. All the $rutis —e.g. He who residing in the earth is different 
from the earth, whom the earth does not know, whose body is the earth, 
who directs the earth from within, He is thy soul, the immortal inner 
Ruler. He who residing in the soul is different from the soul, whom the 
soul does not know, whose body is the soul, who directs the soul from 
within, He is thy soul, the immortal inner Ruler;?? He who lives within the 
earth, whose body is the earth, whom the earth does not know, etc....who. 
lives within the aksara, whose body is the aksara, whom the aksara does 
not know.,..who lives within death, whose body is death, whom death does 
not know—He is the One who is the immanent soul of all beings, who is 
without any evil, the divine unique God Naraéyana;2™ Two birds, inseparable 
companions, have alighted on the same tree. One of them eats the sweet 
berry; the other looks on without eating;?72 The commander of men, who 
has entered within them, the soul of all;?"3 after having created it, He entered 
into it; having entered it It became present. and. yonder, true and untrue;?'4 
By way of this living soul....;2 When he knows the soul from the mover, 
then he attains with It immortality;?'6 when the enjoyer knows the enjoyed 
and the mover — all three of them are declared to be the triple Brahman;?™ 

266. samvedana- 

267. By his theory of dvyatmakatva the bhedabhedavadin postulates the possibility 
of apprehending the “pure thing" (vastusvarüpa-) apart from its differentiations and 
attributes. Of this view R. has disposed supra $30 
` 268. Supra $ 57 

269. BĀUp. 3, 7, 3. 

270, BAUp. 3, 7, 22 (Madhyamdina) 

271. SubalUp. 7 antahsarire nihito guhayàm ajo yasya prthivi Sariram yah prthi- 
vim samcaran (in this order throughout) etc 

272. MundUp.3,1,1 

213. TaittAr. 3, 11. 

274. TaittUp. 2, 6. 

275. ChUp. 6, 3, 2. 

276. SvetUp. 1, 6. 

277. SvetUp. 1, 12. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 229 

He that eternal, spiritual and unique grants the desires of the eternal spiritual 
and plural;?8$ the Lord of the gunas, Lord of matter and soul;?? There are two 
unborn ones, knowing and not knowing, sovereign and not sovereign;°—all 
these $rutis and hundreds more, as well as the declarations of Valmiki, 
Parasara and Dvaipayana, foremost of Vedic scholars, corroborating the 
evidence of the $rutis, such as the entire world is thy body, the earth is thy 
fortitude;?8! whatsoever is created by all living creatures in the production 
of all that can be created, O Brahman, that all is verily Haris body;?82 I am 
the soul, O GudakeSa, that is the resting-place of all beings;?? having en- 
tered into and residing within the heart of all I am the source of 
remembrance, knowledge and surmise;?^— all these Srutis and smrtis pro- 
pound that Brahman Himself is modified by all spiritual and non-spiritual 
entities; (1) since it is learnt from them that the Supreme Brahman is the 
soul of all and that all entities, spiritual and non-spiritual, constitute his 
body; (2) since the body is a padartha®® only by virtue of its function of 
modifying the being it embodies; and (3) since, although body and embodied 
being have different properties, they are not confused with each other.?36 
This doctrine of a Brahman modified by all spirit and non-spirit 
they propound by the use of sümànüdhikaranya constructions etc., 
taken in their primary sense, which set forth Brahman's supernal 
manifestation??? by declaring that Brahman is embodied by all For 
simanadhikaranya is the application of two terms to connote one meaning 
under the aspects of two modifications. In our interpretation it retains its 
primary meaning. So in the samanadhikaranya of tat and tvam 
in tat tvam asi??? the word tat refers to the perfect Brahman who is the 
universal cause and the possessor of all perfections; whereas the word tvam, 
which is used predicatively of spiritual entities, refers to Brahman 
as being qualified by the individual soul, or as embodied by that soul, exist- 
ing as the inner Ruler of the soul that constitutes His body. When taken 

278. KathUp. 2, 2 (5), 13 = SvetUp. 6, 13. 

279. SvetUp. 6, 16. 

280. SvetUp. 1, 9. 

281. Ramayana, 6, 120, 26. 

282. VP. 1, 22, 38. : 

283. BhG. 10, 20. 

. 284. BhG. 15, 15. 
+ 285. ie, exists as a describable magnitude with a definite function. 

286. S. explains: küsthasya rumüyü$ ca dharmabhede saty eva kasthasya samsar- 
gaprayuktam lavanatvam drsyate: evam dharmabhede pi samsargaprayukto yah 
samkaras tasya $arirasaririnor asambhavad ity arthah. 

287. vaibhava- “totality of the phenomenal manifestations (vibhüti) of the divine 
Personality.” 

288. - ChUp. 6, 8, 7. 

230 J. À. B. VAN BUITENEN 

in the sense that the other schools adopt the süámünüdhikaranya proper 
would be violated and Brahman made imperfect. 

$66. In other words, the declaration that Brahman is such proves 
the reality — in subtle and gross phase alike — of the phenomenal world, 
consisting in a plurality of spiritual and non-spiritual entities, as the mode 
denoted by the word such. Thus the full meaning of the passage bahu 
syam prajayeyeti® is exhausted: the sum-total of spiritual and non-spiritual 
entities exists conditionally as the generic structure? of this same Lord 
who has several generic structures, being either cause or effect. 

867. — However, it is a matter of common knowledge that only class 
and property are modifications of a substance in the form of its generic and 
specific structure, so that they alone can have the attributive function denot- 
ed by the word such, and not the substance itself. So it is improper to 
contend that a. padürtha capable of independent function is merely, as an 
attributive ‘such,’ a modification of the Lord. 

Not less common is the knowledge that a substance, too, e.g. a 
Stick, an ear-ring etc., serves to modify another substance. 

— But then we see that a possessive suffix?! is required to make an 
independent substance like a stick etc. into a mode of another substance: 
danda — dandin, kundala — kundalin etc. "Therefore it is against reason, if 
by means of süámünaüdhikarawya a spiritual or non-spiritual entity that is a 

substance of the same order as an ox is declared to be a modification of 
the Lord. 

I reply: it is common usage in Vedic as well as in profane speech 
to call; by. sámànüdhikaramya, certain substances, forming complexes of 
elements —ox, horse, man, god etc. — the modes of spiritual beings, gods etc., 
namely as their bodies: for example “Devadatta is born a man because of his 
good karman; Yajnadatta is born a cow because of his bad karman; another 
spiritual being is born a god because of his exceedingly good karman,” etc. 

$68. What we mean is this: we are not concerned about whether 
class, or property, or substance may constitute a mode. When a certain 
entity serves as a distinctive feature for a certain substance, then we can 
properly say, by means of a sümünüdhikaramya construction coordinating 
that entity with that substance, that it has no function apart from that 

289. ChUp. 6, 2, 3. 
290. samsthana-. : z 

291. matvarthiyapratyaya- "suffix with the sense exemplified by matu(p) ?mant- / 
mat-,' ‘Panini 5, 2, 94 tad asyasty asminn "that is of / in this." : 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 231 

substance and therefore constitutes a mode of it.??2 And if a substance that 
may have a separate function is in some place at some time wanted as a 
mode for another substance, then it has a possessive suffix; and that is all 
ihe difference there is. 

So, since the sum-total of all entities, animate and inanimate, consti- 
tute the Lord's body, their proper forms have real existence as the modes 
of the Lord. Such being the case, the Lord, who is the entity modified by 
all these entities, is denoted by the various words that denote these entities. 
Therefore these entities can appropriately be terms in sámanadhikaranya 
with Him. All this we have already expounded in detail when we elucidat- 
ed the Sruti on the separation by name-and-form.?9 

$69. Consequently, Brahman Himself is also all effects, since He 
has the generic structure of being modified by all things: prakrti, purusa, 
mahat, ahamkara, tanmatra, elements and senses,” the Egg of Brahma 
consisting in fourteen worlds that derive from the above entities,? and the 
gods, men, brutes,?9 plants etc. that live within that universe. So by know- 
ing solely that Brahman is the cause we know all In this manner it is 
established very well that knowledge of all can be had through knowledge 
of one. At the same time it is stated, on the strength of the causal relation etc. 
established hereby; that the sum-total of spiritual and non-spiritual enti- 
ties is ensouled by the Supreme Brahman inasmuch as it modifies Him. 

292. ie. all the material objects and their ensouling spiritual principles (jiva-) 
are in essence nothing but a mode of the Supreme Being. In the same way as the name 
of a body may conveniently be used to refer to the spiritual principle residing in it 
(e.g. devadatto manusyo jatah, where Devadatta = jiva and manusya- is the body.), 
so the Supreme Being may be denoted by the name of the jiva (e.g. tat tvam asi). 

293. ChUp. 6, 2, 3, supra $17. 

294, Samkhyan terms: purusa- "spiritual order", prakrti- "natura naturans" — 
mahat, first evolution = buddhi- "cognitive faculty” — ahamkara “subjectifying organ, 
ego-factor" from which on the one hand evolve the tanmátras “rudimentals” (sabda- 
etc.) > elements (bhüta-, akasa etc.), and on the other hand the senses with their co- 
ordinator manas (I follow the account of Visnupurana, 1, 2 to which R. evidently sub- 
scribes). 

295. Purinic cosmological conception of a universe built up in layers of 1. sub- 
terraneous, 2. terrestrial, 3. celestial worlds hierarchically ordered: (1) Patala, Mahatala, 
Talatala, Rasatala, Sutala, Atala, inhabited by subhuman beings and/or souls in tor- 
ment; 2. Bhürloka "earth"; 3. Bhuvarloka, inhabited by superhuman beings; Svarloka,. 
suprasolar heaven, also Indraloka; Maharloka; Janarloka; Taparloka; Satya- or Brah- 
maloka. : 

296. For an explication of the term tiryañc- in this sense cf. VP. 1, 5, 22 

297. S. explains küryaküranabhávasabdena sanmiulah satpratisthah (ChUp. 6, 8, 6) 
ity asyürtho vivalsitah. 

232 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

$70. — But does the negation, expressed in the $rutis that declare 
that Brahman is untransmuted and irreproachable,98 not deny that in his 
proper form the Supreme Brahman is the substratum of evolution? In 
prakrti$ ca, pratijidrstántànuparodhat??? the Author of the Sutras declares 
that, by virtue of the assertion that knowledge of all can be had through 
knowledge of one and on the strength of the adduced instance of the clay 
and its effects, the Supreme Person is the material cause of the world. But 
being the material cause means being the substratum of evolution. Now 
how can this be established? 

§71. The reply is as follows. It has been said that the pheno- 
menal world animated by souls does equally constitute the material cause. 
Contrary to the assumption that the Lord suffers evolution in the form of 
individual soul, is the assertion nātmā, $ruter mityatvüc ca tübhyah:99 the 
notion that Brahman is cruel and partial is refuted by the assertion — based 
upon the above assumption that the souls have no beginning — that it is 
the karman of all the various embodied souls that causes cruelty and 
partiality: vaisamyanairghrnye, na: süpeksatvát39! In ma: karmüvibhügad 
iti cen; nànüditvüd upapadyate cüpy upalabhyate ca? the Author declares 
that the contingency of obtainment of what is not due to karman and the 
loss of what is due to karmarn would only occur if the embodied souls were 
not eternal.303 

$72. The Srutis declare also.that prakrti is without beginning. In 
ajam eküm lohitasuklakrsném bahvim prajam janayantim sarupam/ajo hy eko 
jusamüano "nu$ete jahüty enam bhuktabhogam ajo ’nyah®4 e.a. it is shown 

298. Both terms nirvikara- (-kàrya-) miravadya- express particularly the Abso- 
lute Principle's absolute freedom from the conditions and limitations of the 'transformed' 
effect. D. - 

299. BrS, 1, 4, 23 "[Brahman is] the material cause, since [thus] there is no dis- 
agreement with the assertion (ChUp. 6, 1, 3) and the illustration (ChUp. 6, 1, 4)." 

300. BrS. 2, 3, 18 "The individual soul [does] not [originate, as follows] from 
the Scriptures and from [its actual] eternity [proved] by those [Scriptures]." 

301. BrS. 2, 1, 34 "[If it be objected that this means that] partiality and cruelty 
[are proper to Brahman, then I reply] no, since [karman] is taken into consideration." 

302. BrS. 2, 1, 35 "If it be objected that this is not so, because there is no 
distinction of karman, [then 1 reply that it follows from the fact that] the atman is. 
without beginning: it is established and apprehended.” ] 

303. In other words: the very eternity of the ātman enables a perfect justice in 
retribution to be worked. Whatever befalls to a soul is due to its karman: there is no 
arbitrary end put to its existence which would subject it to only part of what is right- 
fully coming to it. SBh. 2, 1, 35 repeats the same words tathánabhyupagame ’krtabhyupa- 
gamakrtavipranüsaprasatgah. - 

304. MahāNārUp. 9, 2 “With the one uncreated (matter) that has form, and that 
produces effects of various kinds, one uncreated (soul) joins itself to enjoy it, whereas 
another uncreated (soul) goes free from it when it has ceased to enjoy it’, = ŚvetUp. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 233 

that both prakrti and purusa are unborn. The Srutis out of this the Master 
of maya created this entire Universe and the other component was tied 
by the maya, and you are to know that the maya is prakrti and the Master 
of maya the Sovereign Lord? show that it is the prakrti that is the 
substratum of transformation in its proper form.30 Compare also the Sruti 
the Cow without beginning and without end, she is the genetrix that brings 
the beings into being;3°8 and the smrti be sure that prakrti as well as purusa 
are both without beginning, and that transmutations and gunas alike are 
the products of prakrti309 Earth, water, fire, wind, ether, manas, buddhi 
and ahamküra are the eight components of my prakrti31 Know, however, 
that I have still another prakrti which is of a higher order than the former, 
a prakrti that is constituted by the embodied souls, om which this material | 
world is dependent, O Arjuna 311. Taking my material from my own prakrti 
I create again and again;!? and under my guidance the prakrti with its 
animate and inanimate beings is brought forth.313 

§ 73. Therefore, since the prakrti too constitutes the Lord's body, 
the term prakrti denotes the Lord — who is the prakrti's soul—as being 
modified by prakrti. Likewise the term purusa denotes the Lord — who is 
the purusa's soul— as being modified by purusa. Consequently the Lord 
is also the soul of the transformations of both prakrti and purusa. So the 
smrti declares: Visnu is the evolved as well as the unevolved, purusa and 
time; the same Sovereign Lord is alike that which moves?1* and that which 
is moved, O Brahman3i It follows that only that part in the Supreme 

4, 5 (reads prajáh srjyaméndm) where no doubt (cf. next stanza dvd suparna sayuja etc.) 
a play is intended on aja "she-goat" with red, white and black kinds, and aja- “he-goat”. 
Red white and black products of the primeval causal matter are the fire (tejas-), 
water (üpas) and earth (anna-), the three pre- or proto-Samkhyan elements of ChUp. 
6, 2, 3; cf. Intr. chap. I. 

305. SvetUp. 4, 9 asmin mayi srjate, and cf. R.’s exegesis SBh. 1, 4, 27. 

306. SvetUp. 4, 10 mayam tu prakrtim vidyat. 

307. As distinct from the àtman which suffers the transformations (vikdra-) of 
contraction '(samkoca-) and expansion (vikāsa-) not in its proper form or essence 
(svarüpa-) but in its attribute knowledge. 

308. MantrUp. 5; this stanza, continuing sitásità ca rakta ca sarvaküámadughà vibhuh. 
is evidently inspired by SvetUp. 4, 5 above. 

309. BhG. 13, 19. 

310. BhG. 7, 4.. 

311. BhG. 7, 5. 

312. BhG. 9, 8. 

313. BhG. 9, 10. 

- 914. ie. "sets in motion (pravartayati), creates". 
g 315. VP. 1, 2, 18; the "evolved" (vyakta-) is the subtle primeval matter manifested 
in the gross creation as name-and-form, the 'unevolved" (avyakta-) this subtle matter 
before this manifestation; Time as the nimittakdrana-operating on prakrti, the upadana- 

kürana, cf. supra note 188 

V. 30 

234 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

Spirit— modified by prakrti— that is constituted by prakrti is at all sub- 
ject to transformations; that part in Him that is the substratum of this 
modification is not subject to them. Likewise all the obstacles of spiritual 
life316 belong to that part in the Supreme Spirit, modified by individual soul, 
that is constituted by the individual soul; that part in Him that is the 
substratum of the modification ‘individual soul is the Controller, ir- 
reproachable,;!? possessed of all perfections and the power of having his 
every will realized.318 

$74. Such being the case, the Lord has the mode of being of cause 
on the one hand and on the other hand that of effect, viz. the Universe 
'of which He is the material cause. So there is no difference between cause 
and effect,3!9 and consequently no $ruti is contradicted. Thus Brahman has 
the mode of being of cause when his body is constituted by prakrti and 
purusa in their subtle phase??? (ie. the phase in which they are not 
yet subject to division by name-and-form: in this phase the Universe is in 
the state of resorption), and Brahman has the mode of being .of effect when 
his body is constituted by the sum-total of spiritual and non-spiritual enti- 
ties in their gross phase (ie. in which composite prakrti and purusa are 
divided by name-and-form into isolated entities: this passage of Brahman 
into his gross phase is the creation of the Universe). So the venerable 

Parasara declares: He is the cause of the unborn prakrti and purusa which 
are effects.32l र 

§ 75. This is the reason why all terms that denote prakrti and purusa 
— modes of the Lord — whether in their subtle or in their gross phase, denote 

हि 316. apurusürtha- "that which is not, or obstructs, the attainment of the puru- 
Sárthas "goals of human endeavour", esp. paramapurusartha- "release"; in this connexion 
the obstructing factors are contraction and expansion of knowledge (samkoca-, vikdsa-), 
the vikaras to which the soul in samsara is subject.—Cf. SBh. 1, 4, 27 tat- (sc. brahma-) - 
prakürabhütaksetrajiagata$ cüpwurusürthah: ksetrajüa is esp. the individual soul in the 
transmigratory process of undergoing the results of its former acts. 

317. In the invariable sense of "free from transformations (vikdras)”. 

318. satyasamkalpatva-, divine attribute par excellence 
: 319. This non-difference, it should be noted, is unilateral: the effect, participating 
in the immanent cause is not “something else (anya-,) something new" as the Naiyayikas 
contend, but materially the same as the cause and hence indiscerptibly connected; the 
cause, however, is completely independent of and different from the effect: there is no 
reciprocal non-difference, no identity. 

320. Note that prakrti and purusa are especially used to denote matter and spirit 
at the pre-manifest stage as undifferentiated "principles". This undifferentiated subtlety 
does not, on the one hand, reduce matter to a primordial chaos, nor on the other hand 
affect the fundamental individuality of the atmans mutually: they preserve their in- 
dividuality as monads (anu-). while in ‘gross creation’ they are not so much individualized 
as particularized, or empiricized, by the bodies with which they are identified, 

: 321. VP. 1, 9, 37. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 235 

in their primary sense the Supreme Spirit as being differentiated by the 
modes they constitute: in the very same manner as the terms god, man 
etc. denote the individual souls incorporated by the bodies god, man etc. 
To put it differently: in the same manner as the terms god, man ete. in 
their primary sense denote the embodied soul that is their modified 
substratum, since the diverse evolved products of prakrti—such as god, 
man etc.—are padürthas only in so far as they are modifications of the 
embodied soul:322 thus all terms denoting any spiritual and non-spiritual 
entity denote in their primary senses the Supreme Spirit, since that entity 
denoted modifies the Supreme Spirit by constituting his body. 

$76. The relation. between soul and body means the relation 
between substratum and dependent entity incapable of functioning sepa- 
rately, between??? transcendent controller and thing controlled, between 
principal and accessory. In this relation the one term is called atman or 
“soul” because this is the one who obtains3 an object since he is in all 
respects the substratum, the controller and the principal; the other term is 
called body, i.e. form, because it is a modification? that is inseparably con- 
nected since it is in all respects dependent entity, thing controlled and acces- 
sory. For such is the relation between the individual soul and its body. 
Consequently, inasmuch as all constitute the body of the Supreme Spirit, He 
can be denoted by all terms. 

$77. This is declared by a host of Srutis: sarve vedá yat 
padam ümananti?? sarve veda yatraikam bhavanti ie. "since they 
denote the sole One, they denote only one single sense;" eko devo 
bahudhà mivistah,? sahaiva santam na vijünanti devah330 ete., where 
devàh means “the senses"?! ie, “the senses— terminating in the 

322. Cf. supra note 285. 

323. prthaksiddhyanarhadharadheyabhava, esp. the relation between attribute and 
subject, or mode and modified substance (prakáraprakáribháva-). 

324. $esa$esibháva-, this relation will be explained infra § 121. 

325. dpnotityatmd; an old etymology possibly inspired by the early occurrence of 
a prakrt form appa; cf. Sankara ad AitUp. 1, 1: átmá ápnoter atter atater và, and Ánanda- 
giri who in his vyakya quotes the stanza: yac cüpnoti yad ddatte yac catti visayàn iha/yac 
cdsya samtato bhāvas/asmād atmeti giyate //. 

326. prakürabhütam ity akarah $ariram; not a facile play on words: R. tries to 
bring out the etymological significance of both words: "something built on a basis" 
pointing at the utter dependence of "mode" or "form" on an inner ensouling principle. i 

327. KathUp. 4, 15 "the word that ali the Vedas cite", 

328. CittyUp. 11, 1 "in whom all the Vedas become one", 

329. CittyUp. 14, 1 "the one God residing in many places". 

330. CittyUp. 11, 4."the divinities do not know Him with whom they exist”, 

331. Cf, R.s interpretation of VP. 1, 2, 46-47, supra note 248, : : 

236 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

manas??? of gods, men etc. have no knowledge of Him who having 
entered into themselves as their inner soul by being their immanent 
Ruler, remains with them.” So, likewise, the pronouncements of the puranas: 
matah sma sarvavacasüm pratistha yatra $ü$vati333 for the basis of a word 
is in the object denoted. küryanüm karanam pürvam vacasüm vacyam 
uttamam34 vedaiá ca sarvair aham eva vedyah etc.335 “all these terms denote 
only the immanent Ruler modified by body and soul:" for compare the $ruti 
Well, by entering the three deities by way of their living soul I will separate 
name and form.33 Similarly Manu's word: pra$üsitàram sarvesüm aniyamsam 
aniyasam/rukmabham svapnadhigamyam vidydt tam purusam param; ie. 
“the prasdsitr or “controller’8 of all, having entered into them, sc. as their 
inner Ruler, is subtler than the individual souls (antyamsah “Souls” who are 
subtler because they pervade? all non-spiritual entities), sc. because He 
pervades? them in their turn; rukmdbha- “having the appearance of the 
sun"; svapnadhigamya-“4! “to be arrived at by cognition similar to a dream", 

332. “The eleventh sense", the co-ordinating organ of sensual impressions. 

333. VP. 1, 4, 23 ab; the stanza continues tam ddyantam asesasya jagatah poramam 
prabhum // "we bow for the paramount Lord, the beginning and the end of the entire 
Universe, in whom is the perennial basis of all words." 

334. JitStotra 1, 7a "the prime cause of the effects, the supreme object denoted 
by the words"; the second half runs: yogaéném paramüm siddhim paramam te 
padam viduh; according to Dr V. Raghavan from Madras, in a personal communication, 
the Jitantastotra—a very popular hymn among South-Indian Vaisnavas—is assigned in 
MSS to the Astaksarikalpa of Paficaratragama. 

335. BhG. 15, 4. 

336. ChUp. 6, 3, 2 

337. Manusmrti 12, 122; Vulgate reads amor api 

338. miyantr-, signifying God's direction of the soul as its immanent àtman; note 
that Kullüka gives the same interpretation: praśāsitāram niyantéram brahmáüdistamba- 
paryantasya cetandcetanasya. 

339. vydpakatayd; because the soul cannot rightly be said to be ‘invariably 
concomitant’ with the body in the Nyaya sense, it follows that the word vydpaka- is 
used in a more literal sense cf. GBh. 2, 17 vyàpakatvena niratisayasiksmatvad àtmano 
vindsanarhasya tadvyatirikto na ka$cit padártho vindsam kartum arhati, tadvyāpyatayā 
tasmat sthülatvat etc 

340. God as Visnu the Pervader. 

341. Cf. Kullüka: svapnadhigamyam drstánto ’yam, svapnadhisadrsajndnagrahyam / 
yathà svapnadhi$ caksurüdibühyendriyoparame manométrena janyata evam dtmadhir 
api.—R., however, evidently takes as the tertium comparationis the extraordinary 
vividness of the images of our dreams. The anudhydna- “contemplation” is an apex state 
of consciousness in which there is complete immediate presentation of the beloved God, 
cultivated and at last attained by the uninterrupted rememorization of His perfections. 
It is synonymous with the dhruvanusmrti- SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 9-10, described seyam smrtir 
darsanaripa pratipadita / daráanarüpatà ca pratyaksapattih/ ......atah sáksütkürarüpá 
smrtih smaryamanatyarthapriyatvena svayam atyarthapriyà /....... evamrüpà dhruvanu- 
smrtir eva bhaktisabdenabhidhiyate, A 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 231 

ie. apprehensible only by contemplation in a state of extremely lucid percep- 
tion. enam eke vadanty agnim maruto nye prajüpatim/indram eke pare 
pranam apare brahma $ü$vatam:39? eke sc. “some Vedas”: i.e. inasmuch as 
the Supreme Brahman has, as described above, entered into everything as 
the prasasitr or immanent Ruler, the terms agni etc. denote Him as adequately 
as the term “eternal Brahman”. Similarly another smrti: ye yajanti pitrn 
devin brahmanan sahutüsanün/sarvablvütàntarátmünam Visnum eva yajanti 
te: 343 ie. the terms pitr, god, brahman, fire denote, by denoting themselves, 
simultaneously Visnu Himself as their immanent soul. 

$78. This is the central meaning of all $astras: the individual souls 
are as such essentially uncontracted, unlimited and perfect knowledge.*45 
But they are enveloped*46 by ignorance in the form of karman. So they are 
subject to contraction of knowledge proportionate to their karman, and they 
enter into bodies of various kinds and classes, from Brahma to tuft of grass. 
Their range of knowledge is now confined to that which their various bodies 
encompass. So these souls are led to identify themselves with their various 
bodies and to perform acts that follow from this identification. Consequently 
they enter the continuous surge of samsára, in this form that they ex- 
perience*?7 the pleasure and pain correlated with these acts. As it is im- 
possible for them to release themselves from this samsara without resorting 
to the Venerable Lord,8 therefore, to serve this purpose, the Sastras start 

342. Manusmrti 12, 123; the Vulgate reads in a etam, in b manum anye; "some 
(Vedas) call him Agni, some the Maruts, others Prajàpati, yet others Indra or Life, 
others again call him the eternal Brahman". 

343. Daksasmrti? “Those who worship the ancestors, the gods, the Brahmans and 
the fire [so R.; rather “the brahmans who keep the sacrificial fires"], worship really 
Visnu, the immanent atman in all creatures”. 

344, asamkucita- “not contracted to the limited scope of empirical ego”. 

345. Note, again, that knowledge is the essential property of the atman and so 
may stand for the essence itself, 

346. vestita-, term taken from VP. 6, 7, 61-62 avidyà karmasamjnanya trtiyà. Saktir 
isyate / yaya ksetrajnasaktih sa vestità nrpa 5000०४८. 

347. upabhoga- term esp. used for the experiencing (suffering / enjoying) of the 
fruits of karman by the ksetrajna. 

348. bhagavatprapattim antarena. S. remarks that this is said bhaktiyoganisthasyüpi 
mnigpattyartham tadangatvena prapattir apeksitatvat prapattinisthasya svatantratayo- 
püyatvüc ca "because the one who devotes himself to bhaktiyoga stands also in need of 
prapatti as a propaedeusis to perfect his bhakti, and also because prapatti by itself, 
independent (of bhakti) is a means for the one who is devoted to prapatti”. Elsewhere 
(Ràmánuja on the Bhagavadgità, p. 24 ff). I have tried to show that R. does not 
consider prapatti a separate—let alone superior— discipline' from bhakti, but rather a 
propaedeusis to bhakti, or even identical with it; S. inclines—though here at least not 
too overtly—to the later view that prapatti alone (svatantrataya) is a means of release. 
Considering, however, the evidence of the Ved. I see no reason to change my opinion 
about the position of prapatti in Ramanuja’s doctrine, 

238 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

with setting forth the equality of all those souls: they are equal because, 
when they are free from the differentiations god, man etc., they all have 
the self-same form of knowledge. Then the Sastras declare that that proper 
form of the soul is itself ensouled by the Venerable Lord, because it is the 
soul’s sole proper form and essence? to be accessory to its principal. This 
stated, they propound subsequently the proper form of the Lord: He is cate- 
gorically different from everything else as He is in absolute opposition to 
imperfection and solely comprises perfection; He is the abode of innumerable 
numbers of beautiful qualities, boundless and absolute; He is the soul im- 
manent in everything, because each and every spiritual and non-spiritual 
entity is brought into existence by His will. Then the $àstras conclude by 
expounding that worshipping Him, as well as obtaining the necessaries for 
this worship, is the means of attaining Him. 

§79. So is said in nirváànamaya evàyam atma jivànamayo ’malah/duh- 
khàj&anamala dharméh prakrtes te na catmanah:3 ie. inasmuch as they 
derive from karman resulting from the natural conjunction of soul with 
matter, the properties summed up do not belong to the proper form of the 
soul. What is said is this: by distinguishing between that which has got and 
that which has not,35! we learn that these properties belong to matter ex- 
clusively. Likewise in vidyüvinayasampanne brühmame gavi hastini/$uni 
caiva $vápake ca panditah samadar$inah 351a i.e. panditah are they whose in- 
tellects3s2 discriminate the proper form of the soul from the prakrti in the 
form of god, man, animal, inanimate things with which it is conjoined; they 
are samadarsinah, i.e. by knowing the real nature of the soul, viz. that it is 
separate from the differentiated forms of that prakrti, they see that the soul 
that exists in any of these infinitely diversified configurations has the same 
form as all other souls?9 So the pronouncement ihaiva tair jitah sargo 

349. °ekarasa®; rasa- is here taken in the double meaning of “essence” and 
“ecstasy”, corresponding to *ekasvaripa/-svabhiva” (e.g. GBh. 18, 54) and °ekarati° 
(GBh. Intr. aéesasesataikarati-): serving God as His sesa by the loving representation 
of bhakti is as such a source of extreme joy, as R. repeatedly declares. 

350. VP. 6, 7, 22 "this atman is full of beatitude and knowledge and it is pure; 
the properties of unhappiness, ignorance and impurity are proper to the prakrti, not 
to the atman”; on nirvanamaya- cf. R. GBh. 2, 72 ad brahmanirvànam: nirvanamayam 
brahma = sukhaikatànam adtmanam.—Gita Press ed. has the less apt reading ?ajfüünamayü 
dharmah. 

351. praptapraptavivekena, S. anvayavyatirekabhyam ity arthah: discriminating by 
means of positive and negative arrangement of terms; cf. Foucher, TS. p. 132-34. / 

351a. BhG. 5. 18 "wise men see the same in a Brahmin accomplished in know- 
ledge and self-discipline, in a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater". ` 

352. buddhi-; cf. R. GBh. 5, 18 panditah — atmayathatmyavido "knowing the 
essentials of the atman", 

353. Cf. GBh. 5, 18 jnánaikakürataya sarvatra samadarsinah/visamékéras tu 
prakrter nàtmanah / ātmā tu sarvatra jñānaikākāratayā sama iti pasyantity arthah. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 239 

yesim samye sthitam manah/nirdosam hi samam brahma tasmad brahmani 
te sthitah,354 where nirdosa- means “free from the defect of natural conjunc- 
tion with differentiated forms of prakrti, such as gods etc.”: thus any mem- 
ber of the order of souls is, when abiding in its proper form, equal to any 
other member, because it has the common form of knowledge as nirvana.55 

880. Sruti, smrti, itihasa and purana propound by using terms like 
His body,35s His embodiment?9! etc, and by sémanadhikaranya that this soul 
described above is essentially accessory3 to the Lord, controlled by Him and 
dependent on Him. This we have already set forth above. 

$81. In the smrti daivi hy esa gunamayi mama maya duratyaya/mam 
eva ye prapadyante mayam etiam taranti te3 it is declared that that release 
of the above soul from the samsara in the form of its natural conjunction 
with prakrti, which is due to karman and consists in various gunas, is im- 
possible without resorting to the Lord. The same is established on the 
strength of Srutis like no other path is there for him to tread. In the 
smrti: In an unevolved form do I pervade this entire Universe: *! all creatures 
depend on Me but I do not depend on them. At the same time they do not 
rest on Me: behold my miraculous power (362 the Lord explains the diversity 
of the forms of His sovereignty by His omnipotence. Likewise He says: 
vistabhyaham idam krtsnam ekaémSena sthito 1०८0४०७३७३ i.e. “having entered into 
the world — which is of an infinitely varied, miraculous character — as its 

354. BhG. 5, 19 "Those who have already here on earth overcome the conjunction 
have their minds focused on equality; for, if free from defect, the atmans are equal:” 
sarga- in this (Ved.) connexion is doubtless to be taken as samsarga- (GBh. sarga- — 
samsGra-); note that R. here interprets brahma as átmavastu- "the order of atman” 
(neuter ?vastu- corresponding with the neuter of brahma) as in GBh. 5, 19; on the 
equation brahman = atman (ie. individual atman), cf. my Rdmanuja etc. p. 34-35. 

355. mirvüna- in the above sense "beatitude" (VP. 6, 7, 22). 

356. Sarira-, e.g. Antaryamibrahmana, BAh. p. 3, 7, 3-22. 

357. tanu-, e.g. KathUp. 2, 23. 

358. $esa-. 

359. BhG. 7, 14 "for that divine Magic of Mine, constituted by gunas, is hard to 
overcome: those alone who resort to Me overcome that Magic": on R.’s interpretation of 
this stanza see my Rāmānuja etc. p. 25 f. 

360. TaittAr. 3, 13, 1 tam evam vidvàn amrta tha bhavati / naànyah pantha ayandya 
vidyate; note that acc. to R.. the word for knowing (vedana-), sc. in vidvin, is synonymous 
with updsana- or bhakti-. 

361. BhG. 9, 4; R. GBh. explains avyaktamürtinà as aprakásitasvarüpena 
mayantaryamind. -> 

-- 362. BhG. 9, 5ab. 

363. BhG. 10, 42 “supporting this universe I constitute the world with a single 

portion of myself”, : : 

240 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

immanent soul with an infinitesimal particle?€* of Myself, I keep supporting 
it entirely by My will and I remain, while in this form possessing an infinite 
supernal manifestation, the abode of boundless perfect qualities as I am 
supremely miraculous.” The same He says in: ekatve sati nanatvam nānātve 
sati caikatá/acintyam brahmano rüpam kas tad veditum arhati3® i.e. “while 
remaining one by being its sole controller, He enters the Universe as the 
soul immanent in the various spiritual and non-spiritual entities; having a 
variety of modifications in the forms of these entities and instigating a 
variety of activities He partakes of variety Himself... Having thus, with an 
infinitesimal particle of Himself, entered into the Universe with all its 
wonders and variety as its immanent soul and vistabhya,36 i.e. though abiding 
in variety, the Sovereign Lord of lords, the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme 
Person, Narayana, whose hosts of perfections are boundless, unsurpassed and 
innumerable — who is the perfectly miraculous One — who appears like a 
blue cloud — who has long eyes so spotless as a lotus leaf — who is radiant 
with the splendour of thousands of suns—, the One in the Supreme Heaven 
revealed by $rutis such as yo veda nihitam guhüyüm parame vyoman3 tad 
aksare parame vyoman?88 etc, remains nonetheless essentially one. 

§82. For any other entity but Brahman it is impossible to have 
another form, nature and power added to its own form, nature and power.%69 
But this Supreme Brahman, being categorically different from all enti- 
ties, has all natures and all powers. Therefore it is not contradictory that 
this one being has an infinite and wonderful variety of forms and still retains 
His uniformity in this infinite and immeasurable diversity. So the fear lest 
there be contradiction in so far as He would be similar to a mere common 
entity is not justified. As has been said: Saktayah sarvabhavanim 
acintyajidnagocarah/yato to brahmanas täs tu sargadyà bhavasaktayah // 
bhavanti tapasdm $restha pavakasya yathosnata:37 in other words: it is not 
fit to think that a certain power observed in one single being exclusively 

364. ayutémsena “myriadth portion" has become in GBh. ad 10, 42 even 
ayutéayutdmsena. * : * > 

365 ? "in unity there is diversity and unity is in diversity: who is able 
to know Brahman's inconceivable form?" 

366. From BhG. 10, 42 cited above, forming part of the context of $rutis and 
smrtis expounding the Universe's utter dependence on God. . 

367. TaittUp. 2, 1, 1 "who knows that which is laid down in the inner- 
most of the Supreme Heaven". 

368. MahàánàrUp. 1, 2 “that is in the indestructible Supreme Heaven", 

369. S. comments: nahi dahasakto 'gnir jadyajananasaktah. | 

370. VP. 1, 3, 2-3 "the potencies of all entities transcend all except inconceivable 
knowledge: for these potencies, like fieriness in fire, rise from Brahman's creation 
O most excellent of ascetics!” 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 241 

“among all other beings, such as fire, water etc., is also to be found in another 

being that is categorically different from the former one: for instance the 
power of brightness, heat etc. found in fire is not to be found in water, which 
is categorically different from fire. Similarly it is not fit to infer that 
Brahman is similar to any other being in anything: He is categorically 
different from any other. What is meant hereby is: hence follows that 
Brahman possesses an infinite variety of powers. So it says: With Thee, 
Most Eminent One, whose form is this greatly miraculous world, with Thee, 
greatest of miracles, I am united, O Krsna3™ 

$83. I have arrived at the exclusion that this is the doctrine of the 
scriptures after a painstaking study not only of the endless number of all 
the various $rutis, but also of the commentaries on them which have been 
accepted by judicious scholars. It is like this: several $rutis declare that 
creation and resorption — which are not empirically known by other 
pramünas and which are diversified by a continual succession of a plurality 
of elements whose developments are unlimited — are the doing of Brahman. 
Some śrutis, e.g. niravadyam nirafijanam;372 vijiiánam;373 ánandam;?^ nirvi- 
kàram;5 niskalam niskriyam $üntam;?6 nirgunam?!! ete., assert that Brahman 
is unqualified and essentially knowledge. Other $rutis, e.g. neha masti 
kimcana mrtyoh sa mrtyum üpnoti ya iha müneva pa$yati;38 yatra tv asya 
sarvam atmaivübhüt tat kena kam pasyet tat kena kam vijaniyat379 deny that 
there is diversity. But other Srutis, like yah sarvajiah sarvavit;® yasya 
jfiüánamayam tapah;38! sarvani ripani vicitya dhiro nümüni krtvabhivadan 
yad üste;38? sarve mimesgü jajnire vidyutah purusdd adhij393 apahatapapma 

“371. VP. 5, 19, 7. 

372. SvetUp. 6, 19 niskalam niskriyam Santam miravadyam nirañjanam: “without 
: parts, without action, tranquil, irreproachable and immaculate”. 

373. TaittUp. 3, 5, 1 vijianam brahma “Brahman is knowledge". 

374. TaittUp. 2, 1. 

375. YogasikhUp. mirviküáram nirüsrayam “without causal transformations, not 
deriving from any cause". 

376. SvetUp. 6, 19 cited above note 372. . 

377. MantrUp. 2 antah pasyanti sattvasthé nirgunam gunagahvare "they who are 
in sattva see, deep down in the gunas, the One without gunas". 

378. BAUp. 4, 4, 19 "there is here no diversity whatever, he that sees diversity 
here wil meet with death after his death". 

379. BAUp. 4, 5, 15 "but when the atman is all of him, then whom does he know 
and how?" 

380. MundUp. 1, 1, 9 "who is omniscient, all-knowing". 

381. Not identified. 

382. CittyUp. 12, 7 "that which the sage, after pondering over all its forms and 
giving them names, keeps saluting". 

383. MahànàrUp. 1, 8 "all flashes of lightning spring from above the Person". -- 

V3 

242 ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

vijaro vimrtyur vi$oko vijaghatso ^"pipüsah satyakümah satyasamkalpah,*84 
negate only all those qualities that are held by everyone to be evil, and they 
declare that Brahman has an infinite number of beautiful qualities: that He 
js omniscient and omnipotent, that He has separated all according to name- 
and-form,3 and that He is the substratum of all—Other Srutis, like sarvam 
khalv idam brahma tajjalániti;386 aitadátmyam idam sarvam;?8' ekah san bahu- 
dha vicdrah,8 first expound that the universe in all its diversity is created 
by Brahman and then declare that both Brahman and Universe are identical. 
Other Srutis, e.g., prthag átmünam qpreritàram ca १८०४०५४७४१ bhoktà bhogyam 
preritaram ca matvü;?9 prajapatir akàmayate prajah srjeyeti®! patim vi$va- 

ens 

syütmesvaram $ü$vatam Sivam acyutam;? tam i$varünüm paramam mahe- 
$varam tam devatiném paramam ca daivatam;3?93 sarvasya vasi sarvasyesa- 
nak propound that Brahman is different from all, that all is subject to 
Brahman’s sovereignty and is accessory to Brahman, and that the Lord is 
the master.—Others again like antahpravistah Sasta janünüm sarvatma;3% 
esa ta átmüntaryümy amrtah $% yasya prthivi Sariram .. ४०७४७०७ Sariram .. 
yasya tejah éariram, etc; yasyavyaktam Sariram .... yasyaksaram Sariram 
(o. Yasya mrtyuh Sariram .... yasyatmé Sariram ....,397 point out the body- 

` 384. ChUp. 8, 7, 1 "exempt from defect, unaging, undying, without sorrow and 
hunger and thirst, having every will realized and all desires materialized.” 

385. Viz. ChUp. 6, 3, 2 seyam devataiksata- hantüham imés tisro devatà anena 
jivenütmanünupravi$ya nümarüpe vyükaravüniti. 

386. ChUp. 3. 14. 1 "all this is verily Brahman: the tranquil one meditates (on 
all things) as having their beginning and end in It" R. follows Sankara's interpretation of 
tajjalàn as taj-ja-la- ChUpBh. tasmad brahmano jütam tejobannadikramena (cf. 6, 2, 3) 
sarvam / atas tajjam / tatha tenaiva jananakramena pratilomatayd tasminn eva brahmani 
liyate taddtmataya Slisyata iti tallam, in SBh. 1, 2, 1 (p. 137) tajjalan iti hetutah sarvam 
khalv idam brahmeti prasiddhavan nirdesat/ brahmano jatatvad (—taj-ja-) brahmani 
linatvéd (=tal-la-) brahmdédhinajivanatvadc (=tad-ana < AN "to breathe, live") ca 
hetor brahmütmakam sarvam khalv idam jagad iti, etc. 

387. ChUp. 6, 8, 7 “all this has That for its soul”. - 

388. CittyUp. 11, 1 "though unique, manifold reflection’ 

389. SvetUp. 1, 6 "knowing the atman and the actuator to be different" 

390. Svet Up. 1, 12 "knowing the enjoyer, the enjoyed and the actuator" 

391. Not identified. "The lord of creatures desired: may I beget offspring 

392. MahànarUp. 9, 6 "Lord of all, ruler of the soul, the everlasting, auspicious 
Unfallen One" 

- 393. SvetUp; 6, 7 "Him, paramount lord of the lords, supreme deity of all divi- 

394, BAUp. 4, 4, 22 "ruler of all lord of all”. - 

395. TaittAr, 3, 11 "the instructor of men entered within, the soul of all” 

396. BAUp. 3, 7, 3-22 ".... he is the inner Ruler, the immortal One" 

397. SubalUp. 7, 1; the text runs: antahéarire mihito guhdyaém aja eko mityo yasya 
prthivi gariram yah prthivim antare samcaram yam ppthivi ma veda/yasyapah 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 243 

soul relationship that exists between Brahman and the sum-total of -entities 
other than Brahman. - 

$84. We have to interpret all these $rutis in such a manner that 
there is no contradiction between their statements, however diverse, and 
that their primary sense is not sacrificed. And we have done so.—The Srutis 
expounding an untransformed Brahman have their primary sense because 
they deny that His proper form is subject to evolution.98 Those declaring 
that He is unqualified are to be taken as denying that He is associated with 
the evil qualities mentioned in the context.399 Those that deny diversity are 
justly preserved because they signify that Brahman is modified by all in- 
asmuch as He is the inner soul of all:4° for the sum-total of spiritual and 
non-spiritual entities forms a mode of Brahman by constituting his body. The 
passages which declare that He is different from all modes, master and lord 
of all, and the possessor of all perfections and the power of having all his 
desires materialized and his every will realized,*! etc., are justly retained 
by accepting just that. Statements that He is mere knowledge and bliss are 
preserved because they set forth that the defining property of Brahman's pro- 
per form, different from all, substratum of all perfections, lord of all, master 
of all, basis of all, cause of the origination, subsistence and resorption of all, 
irreproachable and untransformed, all-ensouling — that this defining property 
is knowledge? in the form of bliss‘ in absolute opposition to imperfection,$9* 
and that therefore his proper form, being self-illuminating, is nothing but 
knowledge. Similarly well-founded are the declarations of identity as they 

fariram etc, and concludes: yasya mrtyuh Sariram yo mrtyum antare samcaran 
yam mrtyur na veda/sa esa sarvabhütüntarütmüpahatapüpmà divyo deva eko 
nürüyanah. The Vulgate does not contain the clause yasydtmd, etc. 

398. In other words, they point to Brahman as the absolutely transcendent prin- 
ciple from which change may come forth but which itself is not subject to any change 
whatever. : 

399. ie. the contexts like ChUp. 8, 7, 1 and others citied above; cf. also SBh. 1, 
1, 1, (Th. p. 78ff.). 

i 400. ie, Brahman is the unitive principle underneath all diversity which clothes 
Him rather than involves Himself: as the inner Ruler He is strictly identical with 
Himself. . g 

401. ChUp. 8, 7, 1 satyakāmah satyasamkalpah. 

402. Brahman is not knowledge, but is essentially characterized by it; knowledge 
being His essential property may, if this proviso be well understood, denote His essence. 

403. Brahman's knowledge being eminently knowledge of His own perfection may 
be considered under the aspect of (rüpa- "form") perfect bliss. 

404. mala-, for the more usual heya-. ! 

405. svaprakasatayd jüánam api svarüpam eva: in Brahman's absolute self-com- 

prehension the three elements of all knowledge: subject — action — object of knowing, 
are in perfect unity. 

244 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

establish that the s@mdanddhikaranya constructions have their primary mean- 
ing in a body-soul relationship.106 

$85. Such being the case, the question arises: what is the sense to be 
concluded from the Veda that is herewith established? That there is no 
difference,’ or that there is difference,198 or that there is a double essence, 
being at once different and non-different?409 

All of them are established, because each can be concluded from the 
Vedànta. Non-difference is established in the sense that Brahman is modi- 
fied by all because all constitute his body. Both difference and non-differ- 
ence are established in the sense that the sole Brahman, being modified by 
the variety of spiritual and non-spiriual entities, abides in variety. There is 
difference inasmuch as the non-spiritual order, the spiritual order and the 
Lord have categorically different proper forms and natures and are never 
confused. 

$86. But are we not to understand that the knowledge of identity 
as declared in tat tvam asi Svetaketo,11? tasya tavad eva ciram,‘!! is the means 
by which Release — that is man's supreme End — is attained? 

No, that is not so. Let us consider the $ruti prthag ütmünam pre- 
ritüram ca matvü justas tatas tenàmrtatvam eti,4!2 that means: “after having 
acquired the knowledge that the soul and its Mover, ie, the inner Ruler, 
are separate from each other, one attains tatas, ie., in consequence of this 
very knowledge that they are separate, the immortality by the favour of that 
Supreme Spirit. So we have rather to understand that the means by which 
we can attain immortality in person is the knowledge that the soul and its 
Controller exist separately 

- 406. ie. the identity viewed in the first place as a relation between various aspects 
of one entity: the person denoted by “thou” is indeed the Supreme Being denoted by 
"that" as viewed under the aspect of the inner Ruler contained in term-and-entity "thou". 

407. The opinion of the Advaitin 

408. The opinion of the later Dvaitins, esp. Madhva and his school, to whose pre- 
cursors, possibly under influence of Samkhya dualism, Ramanuja may refer 

409.. The opinion of the bhedabhedavadins; for dvyatmakatà, cf. supra §30. 

410. ChUp. 6, 8, 7. 

411, ChUp. 6, 14, 2 tasya távad eva ciram yivan na vimoksya atha sampatsya iti 
“it will take him some time before he will have freed himself: then he shall succeed”. 
6., ChUpBh. comments: ato brahmavido jivanddiprayojanabhave’pi pravrttaphalànam 
karmanim avasyam eva phalopabhogah syad iti muktesuvat tasya tüvad eva ciram iti 
yuktam evoktam iti 

412. Svet Up. 1, 12 "knowing the atman and the actuator to be different one attains 
Consequently by His favour the immortality”, ] 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 245 

$87. — But as this view is incompatible with the assertion that both 
are identical, we are compelled to assume that this knowledge works only 
the attainment of the qualified, not absolutely real Brahman. 

Why then could not the opposite be true,13 on the authority of our 
$ruti that only by means of the knowledge that both are separate we can 
attain immortality in person? 

In other words: when two equally valid views are seemingly contra- 
dictory, we have to discover for both a common connotation in which they 
do not contradict each other 

— But how can they possibly be reconciled? 

The word tvam refers to Brahman as modified by the embodied 
soul, for this embodied soul is a mode of the Supreme Brahman — who is 
the inner Ruler — because it constitutes the body of Him as inner Ruler. 
The meaning of your $ruti is that this is the knowledge to be acquired. 
Whereas the meaning of our $ruti is this: it must be realized that the 
Supreme Spirit— who is the soul of the embodied soul, exists separately 
from that embodied soul because He is free from all defects and possesses 
immeasurable, unsurpassed and innumerable beautiful qualities, such as 
that of having his every will realized, etc. The $ruti bhoktà bhogyam preri- 
téram ca matvü means that we are to know the Supreme Brahman’s three 
modes of being: 

1. The natural properties of the order of bhogya, or object: that it 
is non-spiritual, absolutely real! and always the substratum of transfor- 
mations; 

2. the natural properties of the bhoktr, or subject, i.e., the embodied 
soul: that, in spite of its being in essence unimpaired,!5 uncircumscribable 
knowledge and bliss, it is susceptible to various degrees of contraction and 
expansion due to ignorance in the form of ageless karman; that it is naturally 

413. Here R. turns the tables on the advaitin by assuming the same intransigence 
of interpretation: but where the advaitin on the strength of a few citations (moreover, 
according to R., misquoted and misrepresented) rejects all other $rutis, R. proceeds to 
reconcile the differences which the advaitin, just by taking his obstinate stand, had exag- 
gerated and, it is true, grossly overrated. 

414. paramartha-: this in fundamental opposition to the advaitin who does not 
admit the ultimate reality of inanimate matter.— bhogya- "object of the soul's pheno- 
menal activities" describes the inanimate matter as having no function apart from, and 
being completely subservient to; the order of souls 

415. For the soul as such is not subject to transformations, only his property. 
knowledge is VEN D E 

246 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

conjoined with the non-spiritual order which is its object; and that it is 
capable of release through worship of the Supreme Spirit; etc. 

3. The mode of being of the inner Ruler of the above subject and 
object, and, in essence, the abode of immeasurable virtues. 

§ 88. As has been explained by the competent early ácáryasí!8 in their 
commentaries, the object of worshipful meditation in the so-called sadvidya 
tat tvam asi is Brahman as qualified by qualities. The Author of the Vakya 
declares: yuktam tadgunakopdsanad,“17 and Dramidacarya when treating of 
the distinctions between the vidyds*!8 comments as follows: yady api saccitto 
na nirbhugnadaivatam gwnaganam manasaánudhavet tathapy antargunüm eva 
devatam bhajata iti tatrüpi sagunaiva devatü prapyate, that means: 
“although a person who is saccitta, i.e. wholly concentrated on the sadvidyd, 
does not rememorize immediately —- as he would when concentrating on the 
daharavidya — the multitude of qualities like freedom from sin which are 
distinct from pure godhead*!® yet the Deity is also worshipped for anyone of 
His qualities that are exclusively His as the Supreme Deity —e.g. that of 
being the universal cause*?°—, because all beautiful qualities are inherent 
in His proper form, so that in the sadvidyà too He is actually worshipped as 
being distinguished by all the beautiful qualities inherent in His proper form: 
therefore in the sadvidyà, too, the end to be attained is the qualified Brahman 
thus are sadvidyà and daharavidyà distinguished.” 

§ 89. — However, it has been declared that the Supreme Spirit is the 
inner Ruler of all creatures and that all are subject to His ruling. If this 
is true, then there is strictly speaking no one who can be a qualified subject 

416. The purvacaryas who are actually quoted by Ràmaànuja in Ved. and SBh. are 
the authors of the Dramidabhasya, of the Vrtti and of the Vakya; I refer to Intr. II 
and Appendix 

417. "This is appropriate, on account of the worship of Him as being possessed 
of these gunas", also quoted SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 79; the quotation probably refers to the 
daharavidyà where ChUp. 8, 7, 1 a number of properties qualifying the Supreme Soul 
are enumerated. 

418. Selected portions of the principal Upanisads, constituting a special knowledge 
and meditation of one of the aspects of the Supreme Being. For a complete list see 
that appended to A. Govindacarya's Sri Bhagavad-Gita with Ràmànuja's commentary 
in English (Madras 1898). The daharavidya has its name from ChUp. 8, 1, 1 
atha yad idam asmin brahmapure daharam pundarikam vesma daharo ’sminn antarakai- 
6, 2, 1 sad eva somyedam agra dsid, etc 

419. R. explains nirbhugnadaivatam (attributive to gunaganam) “that by which 
godhead is altered” (nirbhugna- “bent awry”) by gunaganam daivatüd vibhaktam; for my 
translation, see Appendix §2, Fragment XV. 

420. Since according to ChUp. 6, 2, 3 the creation proceeds from sat, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 247 

of the instructions of injunctions and prohibitions.f?! For only someone who 
is able, by his own mental disposition, to be active or to be inactive can be 
really a qualified subject of injunctions and prohibitions of the kind: 'you 
are to do this’, ‘you are not to do that’. But there is no one like him. The 
directing Supreme Spirit is the one who ultimately causes everyone to be 
active in every activity: that is His ascendancy over each and everyone, so 
js declared. And this is also attested in the Sruti: “Him He incites to right- 
eous action whom He wishes to guide upward beyond the world, and him 
He incites to unrighteous action whom He wishes to bring down, 22 Now, 
would this not mean that there is cruelty in God because He incites to good 
and evil actions arbitrarily? 

890, — The reply to this is as follows. The Supreme Spirit has 
bestowed equally upon all spiritual beings all that is required for activity or 
inactivity, for instance the capacity of spirituality, the capacity of activity, 
etc. So as to enable them to accomplish this, He has become their substratum 
and has entered into them as the principal to whom they are accessory, 
directing them by consenting. The spiritual being, whose capacities are so 
dependent on Him, performs of his own accord certain acts or refrains of 
his own accord from certain acts. But while observing the soul in its doings 
the Supreme Spirit Himself takes no sides. Therefore all is sound. Besides, 
it depends on every individual case whether He will cause good acts or evil 
acts to be performed: it is not an invariable rule that He will always cause 
one or the other in every case. When someone of his own accord has been 
active before in an extremely good action, then the Venerable Lord is pleased 
with him and by granting him a mental disposition for good actions helps 
him to be so active. When, however, someone has indulged in extremely 
inauspicious actions, then the Venerable Lord incites him to wicked activities 
by giving him a wicked disposition. So the Venerable Lord Himself has 
declared: “When people are always well-disposed and worship Me, I am 
pleased and I bestow on them a disposition by which they may attain Me. 
To show. them My mercy I dispel — immanent in their souls — the darkness 
of their ignorance with the radiant torch of knowledge“? But the hostile 
wicked, unholy criminals I cast away forever in demoniac forms of existence 
in their samsüras."4?4 

421. In other words, the person who acts or acts not is no longer a free agent: 
ihe responsibility for his actions is transferred to the directing inner Ruler. 

422. KausUp. 3, 8 esa eva (Vulgate: esa hy evainam) sadhu karma kürayati tam 
yam bhyo lokebhya unninisati, esa eva (; esa u evainam) asadhu karma kárayati tam 
yam adho ninisati. 

423. BhG. 10, 10-11. 

424. BhG. 11, 19. 

248 ग. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

$91. When a person has caused the mass of evil karman, amassed 
during all his previous existences, to melt away by amassing unequalled 
good .karman;—when he has become wholly dedicated to God as a 
result of his taking refuge at His lotus-like feet—when he has acquired 
the moral qualities Sama, dama, tapas, Sauca, ksama, arjava, bha- 
yübhayasthünaviveka, daya, ahimsü, etc.#2 and nourishes them by 
exercizing them daily and applying to them his preceding know- 
ledge of the true nature of the ontological orders gathered from 
the $àstras and corroborated by the teachings of the true acaryas, — when 
he devotes himself to the accomplishment of periodical and occasional acts 
corresponding to his station and stage of life, as the forms f?6 in which he is 
to worship the Supreme Person and avoids what is forbidden; — 
when he throws himself altogether?" at the lotus-like feet of the 
Supreme Person; — when the darkness concealing his innermost self 
is dispelled by the grace of the Supreme Person who, supremely 
compassionate as He is, is pleased with the uninterrupted acts of 
worship that are dictated by the devotee’s bhakti in glorification, remem- . 
brance,!2? homage,‘ salutation,3! mortification,#? exaltation,“ the listening 
to the description of His perfections and narrating them himself, meditation,१34 

425. The so-called atmagunas enumerated BhG. 10, 4-5: buddhir jüünam asam- 
mohah ksamà satyam damak Samah / sukham duhkham ७०८७० ’bhivo bhayam cabhayam 
eva ca//ahimsü samata tustis tapo dénam yaso ’yasah...... ; and BhG. 18, 42 samo 
damas tapah Saucam ksüntir Grjavam eva ca/ jüünam vijfnam astikyam brahma- 
karmasvabhavajam. R. explains GBh. ad 10, 4-5: samo ’ntahkaranasya tatha (ie. anartha- 
visayebhyo) niyamanam; damo bühyakaranánüm anarthavisayebhyo niyamanam; ad 18, 42 
tapo bhoganiyamanaripah $üstrasiddhakayakle$ah; saucam $üstriyakarmayogyatà; ksantih 
(= ksama) paraih pidyamanasyapi avikrtacittatà; ārjavam paresu manoripam báühya- 
cestápraká$anam; bhaydbhayasthanaviveka- “well distinguishing when fear and when 
fearlessness is. indicated”, S. explains: bhagavadupacürabhirutvam bhayasthdnavivekal 
"anxious care in the service of God”, and tadraksakatvüdhyavasaáyadinà nirbhayatvam 
abhayasthànavivekah “fearlessness in resolving to protect Him etc. (ie. His image etc.)”; 
daya "compassion" S. paraduhkhüsahisnutvam; ahimsü "inoffensiveness" R. GBh. 10, 5 
ahimsà paraduhkhahetutvam. - . ] 

426. vesa- "disguise". 

427. ie. “with all that is his" ?nyastátmátmiyasya. 

428. stuti-; S. gunakathanam bandikrtyam vā. 

429. smrti- "pondering over God's perfections and representing them incessantly 
to oneself", 

430. namaskrti-. 

431. vandama-. - > 

:432. yatana- "self-sacrifice", which S., in harmony with the temple atmosphere 
evoked by namaskrti and vandana, explains as bhagavadudyanadikaranam. 

433. kirtana- S. bhagavannüàmoccüranam, probably alluding to Visnu’s thousand 
names (MBh. 13, 433) a litany very popular among Vaisnavas, E 

434. anudhyàüna- cf. SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 11-12, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 249 

adoration and prostration, etc.; — then will he be able to attain the Supreme 
Person by virtue of his bhakti, which takes on the form of contemplation in 
the highest degree of lucid perception,“ directed to none but Him, uninter- 
rupted, pre-eminent and held preciously dear. 'This has been declared by 
that most eminent Guru, the venerable Yamunacirya himself: ubhayapari- 
karmitasvantasyaikantikatyantikabhaktiyogalabhyah, that means: “.... by 
someone whose inner faculty has been prepared by karmayoga and jfiana- 
yoga.” Similarly the $ruti: “He that has a clear insight in vidya and avidya will 
first conquer death by avidyà and then gain immortality by vidya," 43 where 
avidya‘38 stands for the above-mentioned moral conduct according to one’s 
station and stage of life etc., and vidya for the meditation in the form of 
bhakti. Likewise: “He that resorts to knowledge performs thereby a great 
deal of sacrifices; when he makes the brahmavidya his foundation, he will 
conquer death by avidya."9? In the passage: “He that knows this becomes 
immortal here and now: no other path is there for him to tread;* those who 
know Him become immortal;“! he that knows Brahman attains the Most- 
High;“2 He who knows the Most-High, who knows Brahman becomes Brah- 
man himself,“24 the verb to know is equivalent to “to meditate”, for it has 
the sense of DHY AI-, “to meditate”,™ in the passage nididhydsitavyah, etc.“ 

What this “meditation” is is specified by another Sruti: "This soul can 
not be grassped by explication, nor by mere knowledge, nor by great erudi- 
tiom: he alone whom God. Himself elects can attain Him: He singles his soul 
out to serve as His body. That implies that He can only be grasped by 

435. visadatamapratyaksatapanna®. 

436. Atmasiddhi (in Siddhitraya), stated as the siddhanta in an enumeration of 
the various views taken of the manner in which God can be attained: “Release is only 
to be attained by the exclusive bhakti discipline of one whose inner faculty has been 
trained by both”; refer to my remarks Chapt. III. 

437. 1509. 11 vidyam cüvidyüm ca yas tad vedobhayam saha / avidyaya mrtyum 
tirtvà vidyayümrtam asnute 

438. ie, avidyà in the sense of karman, as R. often takes the term; here karman 
esp. as preparatory and ancillary to the "discipline of loving comprehension" or bhakti. 

439. VP. 6, 6, 12 

440. TaittAr. 3, 1, 13. 

441. MahanarUp. 1, 11. 

442. TaittUp. 2, 1, 1. ` 4 

442a. ? so yo ha vai tat param veda brahma veda brahma bhavati. 

443. Cf. SBh. 1, 1, 1, pp. 8-19; GBh. 18, 65. 

444. nididhydsitavyah in BAUp. 4, 5, 6 atma và are drastavyah $rotavyo mantavyo 
nididhasitavyo maitreyi / átmani khalv are drste $rute mate vijndta idam sarvam viditam; 
cf. SBh. 4, 1, 1 ad this Sruti: dhydyatind vedanam abhidhiyate / dhyánam. ca cintanam / 
cintanam ca smrtisamtatiriipam na smrtimatram / upástir api tadekürthah / ekagracit- 
tavrttinairantarye prayogadaréanát, 

445. MundUp. 3, 2, 3 nàyam atma pravacanena labhyo na medhayd na bahung 
érutena / yam evaisa vrnute tena labhyas tasyaisa Atma vrnute tanüm svüm, 

V. 32 

250 J. A. B. VÀN BUITENEN 

meditation that takes the form of bhakti, not merely by knowing, for na 
medhayà excludes mere knowledge. 

$92. In other words, when an aspirant to release is wholly devoted to 
meditation in the form of knowledge of the kind enjoined by the Vedanta 
and when an oceanic feeling of perfect love for that meditation itself engulfs 
him, then by virtue of that love is he able to grasp the Supreme Person. This 
has been declared by the Venerable Lord: “that Supreme Person, O Partha, 
can be grasped by exclusive bhakti. By exclusive bhakti, O Arjuna, can 
I be known and beheld and entered so as I really am.447 When a person 
knows Me through bhakti for what I am and who I am in reality, then he 
knows Me thereby (tatas) in reality and he enters Me immediately,” i.e., 
immediately thereafter he enters Me tatas “thereby” sc. by virtue of his 
bhakti 

Bhakti is a kind of knowledge that is so excellent, precious and 
exclusive that it robs everything else of its interest. Now, he that has 
acquired this knowledge is elected by the Supreme Person, and so he can 
grasp Him. This is the full meaning of the Sruti cited above. It is through 
bhaktiyoga, furthered at first by karmayoga that is daily intensified in the 
above way and subsequently by jfidnayoga, that such knowledge in the form 
of supreme bhakti arises.5! So the venerable Parasara says: “A person 
who acts according to his station and stage of life propitiates the Supreme 
Person Visnu: there is no other way of satisfying Him."49? And the Supreme 
Person who, while remaining the Supreme Brahman, had descended to the 
earth in order to rescue the entire Universe,453 Himself has declared: “Listen 
how a man who keeps to his own task will find the highest achievement: 
by worshipping Me, from Whom all beings proceed and Who pervades this 
entire world, in his own task, man finds the supreme achievement; ”454 He is 
attainable only by bhakti that has matured in the described manner. 

$93. This ‘path’ which is shown in all the Srutis whose meaning is 
very lucidly explained by the ancient commentaries composed by Bodhà- 

446. BhG. 8, 22. 

447. BhG. 11, 54. 

448. BhG. 18, 55. 

449. svetaravaitrsnyavahe’, 

450. MundUp. 3. 2, 3 

451: Cf. my Raéménuja etec., Introduction Ch. IV. 

452, VP. 3, 8, 9 

453. Cf. GBh. Intr svam eva ripam tatsajütiyasamsthanam svasvabhavam. 
ajahad ‘eva kurvams tegu -tesu lokesv avatiryavatirya, and SBh. 1, 3, 2 

454. BhG. 18, 45 cd. 46 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 7 251 

yana, 155 Tanka,4 Dramida,457 Guhadeva, Kapardi, Bharuci etc., and accepted 
by all who are competent to judge, is only to be arrived at by bhakti that 
has developed along the above lines. And herewith the Carvakas, the 
Buddhists, Vaisesikas,55? Naiyayikas,4©° Jainas,18! and the followers of Kapila!6? 
and Patarijalii3 are condemned alike, those who are outside the pale of the 
Veda together with those who derive their heterodoxies from the Veda.‘ 
For doctrines derived from the Veda may present a completely reverse 
notion of things: Manu himself equates them with the heresies outside the 
Veda: “Heresies outside the Veda and traditional heterodoxies alike are 
all held to be fruitless after death for they are founded on tamas.”465 This 
means that those whose natural guna is the highest sattva, untouched by rajas 
and tamas, have a truly Vedic interest,566 and true insight in the real meaning 
of the Veda. 

$94. It has been declared in the Máatsyapurana that the kalpas or 
world-ages are samkirnah süttvika$ caiva rajasas tümasaüs tathd:%7 after 
these periods of Brahmi have been described, namely that some are mixed, 
some mainly of sattva, some mainly of rajas and. some mainly of 'tamas con- 
stituents, it is declared that Brahma—who is compounded of all three con- 
stituents sattva, rajas and tamas—glorifies, in purànas that are uttered in 
any-one of the above ages, those component elements of the world which 
themselves are again compounded of the same set of constituents: “Brahma 
has of old glorified in a purana uttered in a certain age the particular deity 
determined by the predominant constituent of the age And specifically: 

455. Held to be the author of the Vrtti which R. occasionally quotes (SBh. 1, 1, 10; 

1, 2, 1; 1, 3, 7; 1, 3, 32); see Intr. II and Appendix. ` 
456. Considered to be the author of the Vakya quoted in Ved. and SBh. (1, 1, 1; 

1, 3, 13); also mentioned by Yamuna who enumerates him among the false teachers; 
cf. Intr. II and Appendix. 

451. Dramidabhasya’s author; cf. Intr. II and Appendix, 

458. Materialists and hedonists, followers of Carvaka. 

459. aulükya-, after the founder Ulüka. | 

460. dksapada-, after the founder Aksapada or Gautama, 

461. ksapanaka- "religious mendicant, esp. Jaina". 

462. Kapila was the founder of the Sàmkhya system. 

463. Patarijali was the founder of the Yoga system 

464, Note that R. considers the Samkhya to be rejected in toto; with this, no 
doubt mainly polemical, statement cf. the more conciliant view in the utpattyasambha- 
vüdhikarama SBh. 2, 2, 43 

465. Manu 12, 95. 

466. vaidiki rucih. 

467. Matsya or Matsya Purana 290, 13 ab. 

468, Matsya P. 290, 15. 

252: J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

In tamasa ages the glory of Agni and Siva is sung in rêjasa ages it is held 
that it is the superior glory of Brahma, and in the sattvika ages is it the 
superior glory of Hari: in those ages the votaries accomplished in Yoga will 
achieve their supreme end; in mixed ages that of Sarasvati...”47 

In other words, since Brahma is the primeval ksetrajiia or embodied 
soul, sattva will be predominant in some of his days, rajas in others and tamas 
in others again. For as the Venerable Lord has said: “There is no being on 
earth or in heaven or among the gods that is free from the three prakrti-born 
gunas.”472 On the authority of the $ruti: “He who creates Brahma in the 
beginning and bestows on him the Vedas..”473 we learn also that Brahma 
too is a ksetrajíia?'4^ as he is created and subject to the śāstras. 

So when there is contradiction between puranas which Brahma has 
revealed on days when sattva prevailed, and puranas revealed on other days 
when other gunas prevailed, then the purana that was revealed on a sattvika 
day contains the truth and another that contradicts the former contains no 
truth: so Brahma himself has declared on a day when he was in sattva him- 
self,475 so that the purànas could decisively be discriminated. This is how 
the above citation is to be understood. 

The Venerable Lord Himself has said what the effects of sattva, etc., 
are: “From sattva springs knowledge, from rajas greed, and from. tamas in- 
dolence, bewilderment and ignorance.$ The cognitive faculty!" is sattvika 
when it knows activity and inactivity,!'8 duty and non-duty, fear and safety, 
bondage and release. When the cognitive faculty has no exact knowledge 
of dharma and adharma, duty and non-duty, then it is rêjasa. And when 
it, completely obscured, mistakes adharma for dharma, and has reverse know- 
ledge of all things, then this faculty is tàmasa."419 

469. Matsya P. 290, 14 cd. 

470. Matsya P. 290, 14 ef. 

471. Matsya P. 290, 15 (additional Sloka) 

472. BhG. 18, 40 

413. SvetUp. 6, 18, yo brahmànam vidadhati pürvam yo vai vedáméca prahinoti 
tasmai. 

474. ie. an individual soul in, and limited by a body, be it divine. 

475. It may be remarked however that Matsya P. has no such pretensions and that 
other puranas at times classify as tamasa; cf. Adidevananda’s note, YID., p. 181, 29. 
- 476. BhG. 14, 17 7 

477. buddhi-, expl. GBh. 18, 29 vivekapürvakani$cayarüpam jñānam "knowledge 
based on discrimination and taking the form of decision" 

478. GBh. 18, 30 pravrtti: abhyudayasádhanabhüto dharmah; nivrtti: mokga- 
südhanabhüto dharmah. ` 

479. BhG.. 18, 30-32. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA. 253 

All the compilers of purinas have compiled their puranas after Brahma 
himself had told them all the contents. This is said in: “I will narrate the 
story exactly like the venerable Grandfather, who sprang from the Lotus, has 
revealed it when he was questioned by the eminent sage Daksa and 
others.”480 

$95. — But how can the words of the Veda contradict one another 
if they are not of human origin?481 

— We have said before that they do not contradict one another when 
their true purport has been determined correctly. 

For instance the $rutis: "Afterf8? the nasal sound has ceased, the 
vital air with the senses in the manas should be concentrated in the Supreme 
Spirit, and one should meditate on the Sovereign and so meditate further on 
all this. Brahma, Visnu, Rudra and Indra have all been begotten;....not 
the cause:.... the cause alone should be meditated. Sambhu,! the 
Supreme Sovereign enjoying universal sovereignty, should be meditated upon 
as abiding in the centre of space.” “Higher than Whom there is nothing; smaller 
or larger than Whom there is no one; like a tree He alone stands steadfast 
in the sky. - This Person fills the entire world. Therefore that which is most 
supreme, that is formless and without defect. Those who know that become 
immortal, but the others find only misery. Having all faces, heads and necks, 
dwelling inside all beings, pervading all, this auspicous Venerable Lord is 
therefore omnipresent;186 when there was darkness, and neither day, nor night, 
nor being nor non-being, then the auspicious One was there, alone. That 
is the imperishable One, that is. Savitr’s coveted gift, and from that has arisen 
the ancient knowledge;"49! ete., etc.: if these Srutis seem contradictory, then 
I remind you that the Supreme Brahman is Narayana, as has been declared 
.before. Then how could there be contradiction? 

480. VP.1,2,8 
481. apauruseya-; acc. to the view taken by the Mimamsakas, both pürva and 

uttara, the Veda is not a creation of man and thus open to error, but eternally conceived 
by the Supreme Being and in each age ‘viewed’ by inspired seers, cf. Intr. IV. ` 

482. AtharvasikhUp. 2. 

483. nddante, ie. the anunisika of the pranava OM. 

484. R. abbreviates; the passage runs: brahmavisnurudrendrás te samprasiyante 
sarvüni cendriyani saha bhütair; na karanam karananam dhyátà: káranam tu dhyeyah 
rete. 

485. $ambhu is acc. to R. to be taken not as the well-known auspicious name of 
-Siva’ but literally as the “beneficial One", as will be shown. 

486. SvetUp. 3, 9-11 

487. SvetUp. 4, 18 yadā tamah tan na diva etc. 

254 , J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

$96. But this is too little—The Vedas with their aügas,5 corrobo- 
rated by the glosses.of the foremost of Vedic scholars and by ratiocination; 
proclaim that Brahman is the cause of the world's birth, etc: “From Him 
is its birth, etc.;489 “That, from which these creatures issue, by which they 
live when born, ४० which they return when departing, that you are to inquire 
into: that is Brahman;’’49° which tells us that Brahman is the cause of the 
world’s birth, etc. We are told the same by the very contexts that treat of 
the world’s creation and resorption. From: “In the beginning, my dear son, 
sat was alone and without second,’49! we learn that Brahman, denoted by the 
word sat is the supreme cause because He is the material and operative 
cause? of the world and its immanent Ruler. This very sense is in another 
$&khà conveyed with the word Brahman in lieu of sat: “Brahman verily was 
here alone in the beginming, 498 so that we know that the word sat denotes 
Brahman. The same sense we find again in another Saka; “the Soul verily 
avas here alone in the beginming, 494 so that we know that the words sat and 
Brahman denote the Soul. Similarly in another sakha: “Narayana was here 
alone, not Brahma, not Siva, nor heaven and earth, nor the constellations,” 
which is decisive proof that Nàràyana is denoted by all the words for supreme 
cause, like sat, Brahman, the Soul, etc, 

§97. In the passage: 496 “Him, whom the sages weave in the middle of 
the sea, .... Him one cannot apprehend as vertical or horizontal or in be- 
tween. No one is master to Him and His alone is great fame. His form is 
not to be beheld, and no one can see Him with his eyes: the wise conceive 
Him with their minds in their hearts: they who know Him so become im- 
mortal,’ His absolute superiority is propounded; and it is denied that there 
is anything superior to Him in the passage: “No one is master to Him.” 
Immediately thereafter the quotation in: adbhyah sambhuto hiranyagarbha 
ity astaw, connects the above passage as one coherent context with the 
text beginning: adbhyah sambhütah,98 where the so-called mahapurusa con- 

488. The auxiliary sciences siksa, chandas, vyakarana, nirukta, jyotisa and kalpa, 
489. BrS. 1, 1, 2 janmddy asya yatah. 

490. TaittUp. 3, 

491. ` ChUp. 6, 2, 1. 
492, cf, supra $$ 32-33 
493. BAUp. 1, 4, 1. 
494. AitUp. 1, 1. 

495. MahUp. 1 

496. TaittAr. 10, 1, 3 yam antah samudre kavayo vayanti nainam Wrdhvam na 
tiryaficam na madhye parijagrabhat etc ` 

497. astau, ie. eight rks RV. 10, 121, 1: hiranyagarbhah sam avartatagre bhütasya 
jütah patir eka Gsit, ff. 

498. TaittAr. 3, 13, 2. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA i 255 

text:199 “Hrs and Laksmi are His consorts, elucidates that all this bears 
on Narayana alone. 

This sense is further enlarged upon in the Narayana section, from 
sahasra$irsam devam onwards, concluding with: “He is Brahma, He is Siva 
and Indra,5° He is Aksara, He the Supreme self-sufficient Sovereign.” Here- 
with first all the words which in all the different S&khas denote the Supreme 
Entity — aksara, Siva, Sambhu, parabrahman, parajyotis, paratattva, pard- 
yana, paramütman, etc. — with all the qualities inherent in them, are applied 
to Narayana, then it is asserted that all things collectively that are different 
from Him are dependent on Him, pervaded by Him, supported by Him, con- 
trolled by Him, accessory to Him and ensouled by Him; and finally it is 
declared that Brahma and Siva are likewise manifestations of Him, because 
they are of the same order as Indra and the like. This entire text serves 
only to expound who is the Supreme Entity; it enjoins nothing else. 

§99. Other texts, eg., “He that knows Brahman attains the Most- 
High”, 502a enjoin that the Supreme Brahman — who is absolutely superior 
to all, as witness our text 89000९0803 — should be worshipped by upasana,™ etc. 
So the declaration pranam manasi saha karanaih,95 etc. first summarizes 
all the transformations together — of senses, vital air, etc. — as contained in 
the Supreme Brahman as the universal cause, and then enjoins: ome should 
meditate on the Supreme Spirit as the Lord of all, i.e., the meditation on 
Narayana’ who is the Supreme Brahman. 

8100. In “the Lord of all’ and “no one is master to Him” it is 
declared that He is the sovereign over all: so the text enjoins in: “Sambhu, 
the sovereign Lord, enjoying universal sovereignty, should be meditated 

` 499. Name derived from the stanza vedáham etam purusam mahaintam. 

500. ie. TaittAr. 3, 13, 2 hri$ ca te laksmis ca patnyau. 

501. TaittAr. 10, 11, 1 sahasrasirggm devam visvaksam visvasambhuvam / vi$vam 
nadrayanam devam aksaram paramam prabhum / sa brahma sa $ivah sendrah so 'kgarah 
paramah svardt; cf. AtharvasikhUp. 2. 

502. sendrah, irregular sandhi for sa indrah. 

502a. TaittUp. 2, 1. 

503. SvetUp. 3, 9 yasmát param müparam asti, or TaittAr. 10, 1, 3 na tasyese 
kascana. 

504. One is-reminded of the synonymy of vedana (in brahmavid-) and updsana, 

505. above AtharvasikhUp. 2. 

506. viz. in kdranam tu dhyeyah sarvaisvaryasampannah sarvesvarah, etc. 

507. As connected with TaittAr. 10, 11, 1 Narayananuvika. 

508. MahanarUp. 9, 3 = TaittÁr. 10, 11, 1 patim visvasya, continuing ütme$varam 
Sü$vatam sivam acyutam, 

256 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

upon in the centre of space," 59 that Naràyana—who is the supreme cause 
and is denoted by the word $ambhu—is to be the object of our meditation. 
Since the text: “who is the object of meditation?.. The cause is the object 
of meditation,"51? propounds that not the effect is the right object of medi- 
tation but only the cause, therefore the Narayana section—which declares 
only who is the supreme cause—asserts that Narayana Himself is the sup- 
reme cause and that the word $ambhu rightly denotes Him. The invention 
of other meanings contradictory to that given above is not justified in an 
assertion that enjoins that only the cause is the right object of meditation. 

$101. The contention in “that which is more supreme than Him,"5u 
that something would be known that is higher than that Person is belied by: 
*higher tham whom there is mothing, subtler or larger 'than whom there is 
mo one,” i.e. than whom nothing whatever is higher—no thing different from 
that Person is in any respect higher than Him; amiyas—means “subtle” and 
jyàyas—"the Lord of all”: for He is the Lord of all because He pervades them 
all!2—i.e. nothing different from Him is subtler or more sovereign: this 
denies that anybody different from this Person is superior to Him, and that 

means that it is refuted that any superiority can be attributed to anyone but 
Him. 

$102. So, what is the meaning of our text? In the beginning of the 
context under discussion it was asserted—in “when he knows Him, he passes 
beyond death: no other way is there for him to tread"515—that knowledge 
of the Person is the cause of immortality, and that there is no way but this 
very way of knowledge. Later on, in the concluding passage "tham whom 
nothing is higher .. this Person fills the entire world,"514 it is declared that 
the Person is superior to all Finally, the assertion that knowledge is the 
cause of immortality and that there is no other way is wound up with the 
reason for it, which is given in the concluding statement: “therefore—sc. 
since that Personal Entity is most supreme—that «Personal Entity> is 
most supreme: that is without form and without defect: they who know 
this become immortal, but the others find only misery."515 This must be the 

509. TaittAr. 10, 11, 1 BAY 

510. AtharvasikUp. 1: bhagawan kim ddau prayuktam dhyanam dhydyitavyam kim 
tad dhyünam ko và dhydta kas ca dhyeya iti 

511. SvetUp. 3, 10. 

512. This is to be seen in connexion with the Narayananuvaka: tat sarvam vyapya 
nārāyanah sthitah, and: patim vi$vasya. 3 

513. SvetUp. 6, 15 where the borrowal nànyah.panthà vidyate ’yanāya shows the 
eonnection with TaittAr, 3, 13, 1 . 
ः 514. SvetUp. 3, 9. ` 

515. SvetUp. 3, 10 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 251 

sense,516 otherwise the two assertions made in the opening text would be in 
conflict with the last one. 

The text $ü$vatam $ivam acyutam etc. has told us already that this 
Person may be denoted by the word $iva, viz. because He possesses the 
quality of purity. So our text declares immediately that this Person may be 
denoted by iva, for: “the great sovereign Person stirs every being into life.” 
And in the manner described all the rest—"there was neither being mor 
non-being, only the $iva was there alone" etc.—can be deduced. 

$103. Moreover, this Person—with whom no equal or superior can 
co-exist, as witness the above text “no one is master to Him—is first declared 
to be—cf. in the same section “subtler than the subtle"518—the sovereign 
of the Om syllable, which is the matrix of the Vedas it is its beginning and end, 
inasmuch as He is denoted by the A that constitutes the radical element of 
Om.519 Then, after this declaration is made, it is said that this Person is 
to be worshipped as dwelling in the space contained within the Little Lotus.520 

The meaning is as follows: the Om syllable is the matrix of the entire 
Veda, and the A is the matrix of the Om syllable. The Veda—a transforma- 
tion of the Om syllable—is dissolved in the Om which is its own matrix, and 
the Om being a transformation of the A is dissolved in the A which is its 
own matrix. Now, the One who is the para of, (i.e. the object denoted by) 
the A which is the matrix of the Om,9??! that One is the sovereign Lord. 
Consequently, the Naràyana who is denoted by the A which is the matrix 
of all denotative words, and who is the matrix of all the objects denoted by 
those words, is the sovereign Lord: this is the meaning. As the Venerable 
Lord has said: “I ami the origin and the dissolution of the entire Universe: 
there is nothing more supreme than I am.5?? I am the A among the letters 
etc. On the authority of the Sruti “the A is Brahman”, 524 and "the A is 

516. The first that by knowing Him one obtains immortality; the second that there 
is no other way than by knowing Him, 

517. SvetUp. 3, 12. 

518. SvetUp. 3, 10: This reference to His subtlety is made to facilitate the transi- 
tion to the discussion of the OM syllable, which, as will be shown, is the subtlest entity 
to which the entire Veda can be reduced 

519. For this passage cf. MahanarUp. 10, 8 yo vedádau prokto vedánte ca pratisthi- 
tah / tasya prakrtilinasya yah parah sa mahesvarah. 

520. MahanarUp. 10, 7 dahram vipápmam varam ve$mabhütam yat pumdarikam 
puramadhyastham / tatrapi dahram-gaganam visokam tasminn anyat tad upásitavyam; with 
which compare the daharavidya, ChUp. 8, 1, 1 

521. MahanarUp. 10, 8 cited above: tasya prakrtilinasya yah parah sa mahesvarah 

522. BhG. 7, 6cd-7ab S 

523. BhG. 10, 33 i 

524. AitA. 2, 3, 8 (ad finem) a iti brahma, 

258 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

the entire language," 95 it is very clear that the A is the matrix of all 
denotative words and that Brahman is the matrix of all things denoted by 
words. Therefore, the assertion that Brahman is denoted by the A proves 
that Narayana, who is denoted by the A, is the sovereign Lord. 

$104. The Narayana section, which with sahasrasirsam devam etc. ,9?6 
means to set forth who is the sole Supreme Entity, propounds in detail that 
He is superior to all. This Supreme Entity, dealt with by that text exclusively, 
is also in all other texts which deal with other topics understood by one 
word or the other and is to be regarded as that same Supreme Entity: thus 
the decision of the Author of the Sutras in Sastradrstyd tüpades$o vamadeva- 
vat?! The fact that this very Supreme Entity is in some text to be under- 
stood by the words Brahma, Siva and the like, does not mean that the mere 
divinities Brahma, Siva etc., are ‘supreme’ themselves, for the section that 
deals exclusively with the topic declares explicitly that they form only a 
manifestation of Him inasmuch as they are on an equal footing with Indra 
and the like. Similarly in some texts the Supreme Brahman is referred to 
by the words àküéa,97 prima etc., which does not mean that the element 
space, or the vital air etc., are imagined to be 'supreme'. 

$105. — But here an objection may be raised. In the text: “In 
this town of Brahman there is a little lotus that is a dwelling-place: inside 
there is a ‘tiny space: that which is inside that space, that should be sought 
after, that indeed should be inquired into,53! the word space, serves to denote 
the material cause of the world, and it is declared that some sort of entity 
that dwells in that space should be sought after." But, since we hear in the 
$ruti that space effects names-and-forms9? and we see in the Purusasükta5?3 
that the purusa or Person is the agent of the effecting of names-and-forms, 

525. AitAr. 2, 3, 6 (ad finem) akiro vai 307०6 vik; 

526. TaittAr. 10, 11, 1 = MahanarUp. 11, 1. 

527. BrS. 1, 1, 31 “this instruction [is made possible] by a true view taken of 
the Scriptures, [viz.] that it is a case: like Vamadeva's". SBh. 1, 1, 31R. interprets:. 
This instruction of Indra that he is the object of meditation is to be understood from 
the Scriptures which state that, as the inner Ruler, God ensouls all entities: so these 
entities are He, in tbe same way as Vamadeva. Similarly in our text the Supreme 
Entity can, on this principle, be expressed by a great many terms which ultimately denote 
the inner Ruler within them - soe 

528. viz. sa brahma sa Sivah sendrah so ’kşarah. 

529. e.g. ChUp. 1, 9, 1 asya lokasya kā gatir ity áküsa ity wváca; cf, BrS. and SBh 
1, 1, 23. —— 

530. e.g. ChUp. 1, 11, 4-5 prastotar ya devatà prastávam anvayatta katamé sd. 
devateti prana iti hovüca, cf. BrS. and SBh. 1, 1, 24 - 

531. ChUp. 8, 1, 1, the daharavidya, with which compare MahanarUp. 10, 7 quoted 
supra note 520 

532. ChUp. 8, 14, 1 ákà$o vai nama nümarüpayor nirvahita, 

533. RV. 10, 90, 6ff 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 259 

we understand that the One whom we are to revere as the object of the 
commended inbuiry must be another than that Person who is synonymous 
with space.534—This kind of objection is only raised by people who have not 
studied the Veda and have not'seen the $àstras. For the Sruti itself 
disposes of this objection there and then, and so does the Author of the Vakya. 
The Sruti reads: “What is there to be found in that tiny space within the 
lotus that is to be sought after and inquired into?"535 and in reply to this 
objection the Sruti first asserts in “Not less vast than the main space is that 
tiny space contained in the heart,’ that there are no limits to the vastness 
of the Supreme Person, here denoted by the word space, and that He sup- 
ports the entire Universe because He is the cause of the entire Universe,537 
then, in “All desires are contained therein,’ 8—i.e., “in Him are the eight 
qualities, culminating in satyasamkalpa,™® contained as in a treasury—the 
$ruti wants to make it clear with the words apahatapapmé ... satyakamah51 
that the Supreme Person as well as these eight qualities are to be inquired 
into separately, and so states that "that which is im Him should be sought 
after;”541 so the Sruti itself refutes the entire objection. 

$106. In other words: the objection raised with “what is there to be 
found that should be sought after" is refuted by the statement that in Him 
there reside his nature of being creator, substratum, controller and principal 
of the entire world, as well as his qualities apahatapāpmā etc. Therefore the 
Author of the Vakya declares: ‘tasmin yad antar iti kémavyapadesah “the 
words “that which is therein" refer to His desires;" desire means:. desired 
objects; i.e:, the qualities of being apahatapipmé etc. In other words: the 
Supreme Brahman, denoted by the words "tiny space", who creates, sustains 
and dissolves the entire Universe: that which is contained within that Supreme 
Brahman—sc. His immeasurable transcendence and his eight qualities of 
being free from sin etc., — should both be the objects of inquiry. 

So the text continues: “Those who, here on earth, come to know the 
“Spirit and the actualized desires shall find their desires fulfilled in all the 
worlds." 54? . 

534. This objection seems to be inspired by Sankara’s ChUpBh. 8, 1, 1 antaraka$a 
ükü$ükhyam brahma / ākāśo vai nama iti vaksyati, ff. 

535. ChUp. 8, 1, 2. 

536. ChUp. 7, 1, 3 yavan và ayam üküsás tàávàn eso ’ntarhrdaya akasah. 

537. .ChUp. 8, 1, 3 sarvam tad asmin samahitam iti. 

538. . ChUp. 8, 1, 5 asmin kaéméh samahitah 

539. sc. those summed up 8, 1, 5 

540. ChUp. 8, 1, 1 : 

541. ChUp. 8, 1, 1 

542. ChUp. 8, 1, 6 atha ya ihdtminam anuvidya vrajanty etams ca satyan kaman 
fesüm sarvesu lokesu kàmacüro bhavati, 

260 J. À. B. VAN BUITENEN 

$107. We have to understand that when Visnu5*® — who is the Sup- 
reme Entity as declared in the text (which deals with this topic exclusively), 
that only the cause is the right object of meditation — enters into an effect, 
then this entering into an effect is a voluntary descent of Him, so as to help 
the world, just for his sport: thereby He completes the number of entities 
of certain categories which are his own effects. So, as a matter of sport, the 
Supreme One becomes Upendra, completing thereby the number of divini- 
. ties. Likewise the Supreme Brahman has voluntarily descended into the 
shape of DaSaratha’s son Rama, thereby completing the number of kings of 
the Solar Dynasty. Similarly the Venerable Lord has voluntarily descended 
in the House of Vasudeva, to incarnate Himself in Krsna in order to support 
the world, thereby completing the number of scions of the Lunar Dynasty. 

8108. We have explained before that it is Narayana whom the con- 
texts that deal with creation and resorption declare to be the supreme cause. 
If in the Atharvasiras Upanisad Rudra enlarges upon his own universal 
sovereignty, then this is true — as witness so'mtarüd antaram pravisat — 
in so far as the Supreme Spirit has entered into him: this is made clear by 
the Sruti itself. The author of the Sutras declares in $üstradrstyà (८७०००४० 
vamadevavat that this is the meaning of statements of this type; like that of 
Prahlada for example: “Because the Infinite One is omnipresent, I am He. 
All is from me, I am all, all is in me everlasting, etc.”47 Here the ground 
that justifies this. type of statement is mentioned: the ground is that the 
Infinite One is omnipresent: the Supreme Spirit is omnipresent as the imma- 
nent soul of all spiritual and non-spiritual entities which constitute his own 
body. So we have said®48 that all words denote the Supreme Spirit Himself 
as embodied by all entities. Hence the word “I” denotes the Supreme Spirit as 
the substance modified by a mode of which He himself is the soul. The Author 

543. The Supreme Being is here referred to by His name Visnu (rather denoting 
an aspect of the total divine personality Narayana,), because this name figures in the 
AtharvasikhUp.; rightly S. comments: atha brahmavisnurudrendrás te sarve samprasü- 
yanta iti visnoh karyatvasravanat paratvavaikalyasankam vyudasyati. It would appear 
from this paragraph that to R. Visnu would primarily denote the God as the God of 
incarnations: the etymology vis-, always present to his mind, would favour this view. 

544. For the story of Krsna and the cows and Krsna’s consecration by Indra with 
the name Upendra, cf. Harivam$a ch. 75 and VP. 5, 12, esp. 12-15. 

545. AtharvasirUp. 1 devà ha vai svargam lokam dyams te rudram aprechan ko 
bhavan iti/ so 'bravid aham ekah prathamam dsid vartami ca bhavisyami ca nanyah 
kascin matto vyatirikta iti/ so ’ntardd antaram pravisad diso vyantaram pravisat (S 
reads digas cantaram sampravisat) 

546. "He has entered within from elsewhere": S: $arirüd antarasya pranader apy- 
antaram jivam prüvisat, . 

547. VP. 1, 19, 85. 

548. Supra, $17. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 261 

of the Vakya expresses the same in the terms of meditation on God under 
the aspect of the ego: “One may grasp Him as ‘Oneself’, for each has in Him 
his completion: ४४१ i.e., it is the Supreme Spirit—either in condition of effect 
or of cause—who ensouls the body constituted by spiritual and non-spiritual 
matter in gross or subtle form respectively: this is so because everyone 
and everything is completed in Him. The same declares the Author of 
the Sütras in: “But as the self: this they accept for so have the texts under- 
stand them.”5 So, again, in the Mahabharata in the Brahmarudrasamvada, 
where Brahma tells Rudra: “He is the immanent soul of you and me and 
whoever else has a body: ७1 i.e., the sovereign Lord Narayana exists as the 
immanent soul in Rudra, Brahma and all embodied beings. Likewise in the 
same epic: “Visnu is the soul of the venerable Bhava whose might is immense. 
Therefore the sovereign Lord suffers the bow to be drawn” ;552 again in “those 
two chief gods, who are believed to have sprung from His serenity and from 
His wrath, work creation and destruction when He has shown them the 
way,”553 ie. Narayana, existing as their immanent soul, shows Brahma and 
Rudra the way so that they can work creation and resorption respectively. 

$109. Those who profess that there is difference between the opera- 
tive and the material cause are heterodox, for they contradict the sutras 
which have been composed by an orthodox follower of the Veda, for example: 
“from Whom the birth etc., of this proceed,555 “He is the material cause, for 
that is in harmony with the promise and the instance;”55 and moreover they 
contradict all the hosts of Srutis such as for example; “In the beginning, my 
dear son, this was sat: it was alone and without second,55’ that reflected: I 
be many: I will multiply ;55® the forest was Brahman and the tree was Brah- 
man out of which they build heaven and earth: Brahman underlies the 

549. dtmety eva tu grhwiyát sarvasya tannispatteh, cf, Appendix $2, Fr. XI. 
550. BrS. 4, 1, 3 dtmeti tüpagacchanti grahyanti ca; cf. SBh.: The sages look upon 
God as the all-ensouling principle, for this is taught by a number of texts like the 
Antaryamibrahmana. x 
551. MBh. 12, 353ff. (Calc. Ed. 13743) which reads mamāntarātmā tava ca. 
552. MBh. 8, 1503cd-1504ab (C. reading Visnus cātmā); in the context Visnu 
enters the bow. 
` 553. MBh. 12, 343, 19 (C. 12146, reading °ddesita®): Brahma is sprung from His 
serenity (prasada), Rudra from His wrath. 
554. vedabahya- “outside the Veda, not accepting the authority of the Vedic texts.” 
555. BrS. 1, 1, 2 janmady asya yatah. 
missory assertion ChUp. 6, 1, 3 uta tam ddesam apráksyah...yenàá$rutam $rutam, etc.; the 
drstanta the instance of the clay 6, 1, 5; the sūtra refers to 6, 2 where the creation of 
the world out of sat is taught. á 
557. ChUp. 6, 2, 1. 
558. ChUp. 6, 2, 3, 

262 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

worlds supporting it;559 all the flashes of lightning spring forth from over 
that Person,;5 no one is master to Him and His alone is great fame;**! there 
is no diversity whatever here;99? ruler of all, sovereign over al1;563 this Per- 
son is all that was and that shall be, the sovereign of immortality; no other 
path is there for him to tread."565 

$110. The epics and purànas tell us in the contexts treating of the 
subsistence and resorption of the world that this is the Supreme Entity. For 
instance the Mahabharata: “Who has created this entire world, animate and 
inanimate? And to whom shall it return? Tell us that, Grandfather: "595 to 
which Brahma replies: “Narayana, who is embodied by the world, the soul 
of the infinite, the One everlasting, etc."59" and also: "sis, pitrs, gods, the 
great elements, the minerals: the entiré world, animate and inanimate, 
springs from Narayana.” h 

Likewise is set forth in the Visnupurana which is accepted without 
dissension by all instructed persons from the East, North, South and West 
as adequate in so far as it establishes all the laws and all the categories.5% 
We learn from the Sūtra: “from whom the birth etc., of this proceed," 570 
that Brahman is the cause of the birth etc. of the world. Now the Visnu- 
purana, which first raises the question: "What has caused the world to be 
born etc.?” and then gives the answer: “It has originated from Visgnu,"9 

serves only to expound a certain aspect of Brahman's proper form: this is 
the consensus of all. 

This text then reads: "The prakrti, comprising the evolved and the 
unevolved, of which I have told you, and the purusa will both dissolve in the 
Supreme Spirit. This Supreme Spirit, who is the substratum of all and the 
paramount sovereign, is sung in the Vedas and Vedüntas by the name of 
Visnu”: 572 i.e. all texts in all the Vedas and Upanisads proclaim that He alone 

a 559. TaittBr. 2, 8, 9, 6. 

560. MahanarUp. 1, 8 = TaittAr. 10, 1, 3. 

561. TaittAr. 10, 1, 3. 

562. BAUp. 4, 4, 19. 

563. BAUp. 4, 4, 22. ; 
: 1 964. RV. 10, 90, 2 purusa evedam sarvam yad bhütam yac ca bhavyam/ utümp- 
latvasyesano, 

565. TaittAr. 3, 13, 1.. 

566. MBh. 12, 182, 1. 

567. MBh. 12, 182, 12. 

568. MBh. 12, 7074 (C). 

569. tattva- 

570, BrS. 1, 1, 2 

571. VP. 1, 1, 31. 

572. VP. 6, 4, 39-40, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA : 263 

is the supreme cause. In the same manner as, among all $rutis, the Narayana 
section serves only to set forth a certain aspect of the Supreme Brahman’s 
proper form, so the Visnupurana only sets forth a certain aspect of Him. 
Beginning with the question: “What is the Supreme Brahman?” in: “I wish 
to hear from you who know the dharma how the world was and how it will 
be again, what is the. stuff that the world. is made of and whence it comes 
with all its animate and inanimate creatures, how and where it was when 
it was dissolved and whither it will return to be dissolved,”573 the Visnu- 
purana serves only to establish decisively a certain aspect of the Supreme 
Brahman’s proper form. This appears from: “The world has originated from 
Visnu and in Him it subsists. He is the One who sustains and annihilates 
the world, and He is the world.5'4 He is the paramount sovereign, supreme, 
existing as the Supreme Spirit, without any particularizing attributes like 
form, colour etc. He is free from decay and destruction, from evolution, 
birth and growth, so that it can only be said of Him that He always is. He 
is in everything and everything dwells in Him: that is why the wise call Him 
Vasudeva. That Brahman is supreme, eternal, unborn, undying, imperish- 
able, essentially simple, and always perfect as no imperfection is in It. This 
Brahman takes on completely the form of purusa and that of Time as the 
proper form of the evolved and the unevolved.”575 “He transcends, O Sage, 
the matter constituted by all beings and the transformations natural to it 
and the imperfections inherent in it like its gunas, etc. He is the universal 
Spirit, transcending all obscurations, and He covers all that is between 
heaven and earth. All beautiful qualities are inherent in his nature and He 
supports. the sum-total of creation with a fraction of his omnipotence. The 
vast body He has assumed is in harmony. with His pleasure and taken on by 
his own wish, and in that body He works the fulfilment of what is salutary 
to the entire Universe. Comprising the beautiful qualities of glory, force, 
sovereignty, transcendent knowledge, fortitude, might etc., He is chiefer 
than the chiefest and none of the afflictions etc. affect Him the paramount 
sovereign. The Lord’s form encompasses all beings in their singleness and 
in their totality, unevolved and manifest. He is the universal Lord who 
espies all and knows all, omnipotent and hence called Paramount Sovereign. 
That by which this Supreme God, free from imperfections, pure, immaculate 
and simple, is known or seen or understood, that is true knowledge; all that 
is different from this knowledge is declared to be ignorance.”576 

| 573. VP. 1, 1, 4-5. ` 
574. VP.1,1, 31. 
515. VP. 1, 2, 10-14. 
576. VP. 6, 5, 83-87. 

264 : J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

8111. All other puranas which give a diverging version should be so 
interpreted that they are not in conflict with the above one. Their divergence 
should be understood by considering the way in which each of them had its 
origin. If they are totally incompatible, then they are to be neglected because 
they must have had their origin in another guna than sattva.57 

8112. —However, does not this very Visnupurina you quoted above 
tell us that the members of the trimürti?89 are equal? See the passage: 
"The one venerable Lord Janürdana assumes the names of Brahma, Visnu 
and Siva to create, sustain and destroy."579 — No, that is not true. The clause 
“the one Janürdana" establishes the fact that the entire phenomenal world, 
constituted by Brahma, Visnu, Siva, etc., is ensouled by Janardana alone. 
This passage clarifies what has already been stated in “He is the worlq”580 
by declaring that “as the Creator the transcendent God creates Himself, as 
Visnu He protects Himself and what is under his protection, and as the Des- 
troyer He destroys Himself at the end."58! Here Brahma as the creator, the 
created beings, the destroyer and the destroyed beings are all referred to 
simultaneously, so that, when it is subsequently asserted that. Visnu ensouls 
all and everything, this assertion shows us the peculiar distinction between 
creator and destroyer as manifestations of Janàrdana on the one hand and 
created and destroyed beings on the other hand. The words Janardana and 
Visnu being synonymous it follows that the manifestation comprises Brah- 
mà, Visnu and Siva together as a class. Hence it is said that the Supreme 
Entity exists, by his own choice and for the sake of his own sport, within the 
manifestation: as is voiced immediately afterwards in: “Earth, water, fire, 
wind, ether, all senses and the inner faculty constitute the world called 
purusa. As the imperishable One is the immanent soul of all beings and is 
embodied by all, therefore 'the creation etc. localized in these beings are 
ultimately useful to Him alone. So Visnu, most excellent, beneficent and 
benevolent, is embodied by all in the various modes of Brahma etc., in which 
He is creating and created, protecting, consuming and protected." 592 — 

$113. —A doubt may arise here: how is it possible that Brahman, 
who is irreproachable, untransformed and endowed with all perfections, can 
ensoul a phenomenal world that is partly evil, as the simainadhikaranya con- 
structions would have us believe? 

577. Supra, § 94 

578. “Trinity” of Brahma, Visnu and Siva, constituting the three personified aspects 
cf one supreme and transcendent Deity. 

579. VP. 1, 2, 66. 

580. VP. 1, 1, 

581. VP. 1, 2, 67. 

582. VP, 1, 2 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 285 

— This doubt is conclusively disposed of by the text itself, which proves 
its contention with: “inasmuch as the imperishable One is the immanent 
soul of all beings and embodied by all”583 for having asserted that Visnu 
Himself, the paramount sovereign and the Supreme Brahman, is the entire 
Universe, the text demonstrates this assertion by giving its ground: “because 
the imperishable One is the immanent soul of all beings and embodied by 
all: "585 ie, because the imperishable One is this by all embodied immanent 

soul of all beings; later on the text will declare that “all this is in truth Hari's. 
body.” 

In other words: there is no contradiction in that Visnu, the Supreme 
Brahman, is imperishable and yet ensouls the world in so far as all constitute 
His body: for this defines the respective natures of body and soul from each 
other. The descent of the sovereign Lord Visnu thus described into animals, 
men and gods—like Brahma etc.—dwelling among the countless subservient 
entities that make up the phenomenal world, this descent, which is voluntary 
and serves as a refuge in which the different classes may foregather, has 
already been mentioned above. That those beings, Brahma etc., are all 
subject to karman as they belong to the three ०८८७०८७७3७ and that the ven- 
erable Lord Vasudeva, who is the Supreme Brahman, descends among gods 
etc., by his own free will and in his own proper form to succour the entire 
Universe is most clearly declared in the sixth book of the Visnupuràna in 
the chapter on Subhasraya.*86 That his body in his incarnation as a god ete., 
is not of the stuff common bodies are made of is put forward in the Maha- 
bhàrata as well: "the body of this Supreme Spirit has not the common struc- 
ture of being built up by the various elements," 58 and in the Sruti: “Unborn 
though He remains, He is born variously: the wise know his origin."588 The 
meaning is this: for Brahma and the like, who are subject to karman, it is 

583. VP. 1, 2, 68 

584. VP. 1, 22, 38 

585. bhévand, term from VP. 6, 7, 47 ff, where it has approximately the sense 
of "creative potency manifesting itself in three successive ontological orders (bhdva-), 
that of Brahman, the creator, Karman, the creation, and Brahmakarman, the mediators 
of creation Sanandana, etc. As it is stated that Hiranyagarbha and the gods belong to 
creation (50-51), R. quotes the bhdvandtraya as proof that Brahma and the gods are 
ksetrajfias and as such subject to karman. For a detailed discussion of the meaning of. 
the term bhàvanà both in VP. and with R., I refer to my paper The Subhasrayaprakarana 
Visnupurana 6, 7 and the meaning of bhévand, Adyar Library Bulletin (Adyar 1955), XIX, 
1-2, p. 3ff 

586. VP. 6, 7, 47ff.; for R.’s interpretation of this section I refer to the paper 
quoted in the preceding note 

. 687. MBh. ? na bhütasamghasamsthàno deho 'sya paramátmanah. 
588. TaittAr. 3, 13, 3 

V. 34 

266 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

inevitable—however much it may be adverse to them—that they are born 
by gaining entrance in a body of a god etc., which is a particular generic 
structure built up by. combined elements evolved out of prakrti and which 
corresponds to their various karman. The sovereign Venerable Lord, how- 
ever, who has his every will realized, does not suffer births in the way of 
the above creatures, whose births are tainted by imperfection: still He is 
‘born in many ways—as a god etc.—but by his own free will and in his own 
proper form which is unsurpassingly good, and in order to succour the world. 
And the wise, ie., the foremost sages, know his bahudhà yonim, ie. the 
multiple origin of this sovereign Lord who nonetheless does not suffer im- 
perfect births. 

$114. Of the doubt, voiced in the sütra: "there would be something 
higher, because of the mention of bridge, measure, relation and difference" 58? 
that there would be someone elso who is superior to the Supreme Brahman— 
who was already declared to be the operative as well as the material cause of 
this entire Universe in the sütras: “from whom the birth etc., of this 
proceed, and matter, for that is in harmony with the promise and the 
instance" - the Author of the Sutras himself disposes with “no, because 
of resemblance,9? it serves the idea, even as the quarter, because of the 
difference in place as in the case of light etc.,594 since it is possible, it is 
thus, since other views are belied,5% therefore his omnipresence, as follows 
from the mention of extent etc.’597 

§ 115. Similarly5 we learn from the Manavadharmaiastra, the text: “Dis- 
persing the darkness He made his appearance, wishing to create his various 
progeny; in the beginning He brought forth water and therein He discharged 
his seed, and therein rose Brahma of himself,"9! that Brahma is an em- 

589. BrS. 3, 2, 30. 
590. BrS. 1, 1, 2. 
591. 878. 1, 4, 23, "matter" in the sense of material cause. 
592. BrS. 3, 2, 31. 
. 593. BrS. 3, 2, 32. 
594. BrS. 3, 2, 33. 
595. BrS. 3, 2, 34. 
596. BrS. 3, 2, 35. 

597. BrS. 3, 2, 36. 

598. The sutras quoted are exegetical pronouncements on texts in the Chandogya 
Up. which might suggest that there is something beyond Brahman, or that Brahman is 
not absolutely perfect. For the exact interpretation of the cryptic sütras I refer to 
Rs commentary in the Sribhdsya. X 

599. Manusmrti 1, 6, d [svayambhür bhagavān avyakto] prādur üsit tamonudah. 

600. Manusmrü 1, 8 [so'bhidhaya śarīrāt svét] sisrksur vividhah prajàh / apa eva 
sasarjadau tasu viryam apüsrjat. The Vulgate reads bijam (so Kullüka: éaktirüpam) 
avasrjat 

601. Manusmrti 1, 9 c tasmiñ jajie svayam brahmé [sarvalokapitamahah] 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 261 

bodied soul, for he is said to have been born. The same follows from the 
passage: “the waters were his first course: so He is known as Nàrayana,9? 
and the purusa He created is reputed in the world to be Brahma, for here 
explicit mention is made of the names of the Supreme Person as the creator 
and of Brahma as his creature respectively. In the same manner the Visnu- 
purana concludes definitely that Hiranyagarbha etc. are embodied souls, 
viz. by the assertion that they are incapable of being śubhāśraya or pure 
object, inasmuch as they are impure—which follows from their connexion 
with the three bhdvands 

8116. There is a school®4 that contends: we must say that the whole 
body of language, as appearing in the form of injunction, exegesis and for- 
mula,®5 is a source of knowledge only in so far as language denotes things 
to do. As we cannot understand what is the power of signification of lan- 
guage unless by the purposeful action taken upon it,7 and as this purposeful 
action has its origin in a purposive idea of a thing to do, it follows that the 
‘Veda can only bear upon things to do, and language can be no source of 
knowledge about a thing that is completed.609 | 

—To this we reply: what does this high and mighty command mean 
'that we must understand that language is capable of denoting meanings 
only and exclusively bearing. upon practical activities resulting from the 

602. VP. 1, 4, 6 ayanam tasya tah pürvam tena nürüyamah smrtah; it would seem 
that R. (or an early copyist) got his quotations mixed; the Manusmrti text expected 
here reads, almost identically, tà yad asyüyanam, ete. (1, 11 ab) » 

603. Manusmrti 1, 11 cd tadvisrstah so puruso loke brahmeti kirtyate. 

604. The school of the Prabhakaras among the Mimamsakas who maintain a num- 
ber of views diverging from those of the Bhattas, or followers of Kumarila Bhatta, 
which have become normative. This discussion of fundamental tenets of the Prabhakaras 
.follows generally the same lines as the one at the end of SBh. 1, 1, 1, but is much more 
detailed and indispensable for a right understanding of the concise SBh. passages. 

605. Resp. vidhi, arthavaéda and mantra. 

, 606. karya; I adopt Lacombe's translation (La doctrine, etc.) "chose à faire” 
"which suggests the dynamism of the peremptory injunction (grammatical expressed 
by the forms of the imperative, potential, etc.) and at the same time implies the exigen- 
cies of action in profane life as well. 

607. The idea is that we, learning our language in childhood, do not know the 
meaning of sentences and words before we have seen them enacted; cf. JHA, Prabhakara 
Mimümsü, pp. 235 ff.; see below 

608. The Veda is the source of all language and contains all language. 4 

609. ie, does no longer require a conation, an action taken upon it, because jt 
is parinispanna "perfectly complete", As Brahman is by definition and of necessity a 
perfectly complete entity which is in no state of becoming itself by outside action taken 
upon it, it would follow that the Veda cannot give significant information about Brahman. 

268 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

speech of an actuating agency?! It is perfectly easy to understand the 
denotative power of speech as bearing upon established things too! Suppose 
a person A sends a person B to inform Devadatta that the stick is standing 
in the inner room. A does not tell him by word of mouth but employs a 
gesture of the hand. If B wants to tell that to Devadatta, he will use spoken 
language to the effect: “The stick is in the inner room.” Now another per- 
son C keeps him company; C knows what that original manual gesture sig- 
nifies, as a dumb man would, but he had no knowledge before of significative 
language, nevertheless, he knows now what sense the sentence: "The stick is 
in the inner room," conveys, as he has witnessed how it was used. What is 
difficult about this?611 l i l 

Similarly the father, mother etc., teach a child by degrees how to 
speak; first they point again and again with their finger at various persons 
and objects while using the words for them: “That is father, that is mother, 
uncle, a man, an animal, the moon, a snake.” The child observes that when 
the same words are used afterwards a certain idea about their objects pre- 
sents itself to him.6!2 So gradually the child concludes that the application 

610, 'The Prābhākara view that language (śabda) has an inherent denoting capa- 
city, ie. the potency of denoting objects by itself, metaphysically, and not by virtue 
of a human convention, is not denied by Ràmànuja; what he calls into question is the 
assumed necessity that this denotativeness is only restricted to imperative, etc., sentences 
enjoining things to be done. 

611. It is interesting to remark that R. appears not to have been satisfied with 
this example: in SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 127 he changed it: prakaranüntarenüpi $abdárthasamban- 
dhàva dhüranam susakam/kenacit purusena hastacestádinà pita te sukham asta iti devadat- 
taya jnapayeti presitah ka$cit tajjnapane pravrttah pita te sukham asta iti $abdam pra- 
‘yunkte / parsvastho nyo vyüpitsur mikavac cestavisesajnas tajjüpane pravrttam imam 
jnatvadnugatas tajjfüüpanüya prayuktam imam $abdam $rutvüyam sabdas tadarthabuddhi- 
hetur iti niscinoti kāryārtha eva vyutpattir iti nibandho nirnibandhanah: indeed, the. 
Prabhakara might consider the example sadhyavikala. Devadatta on obtaining this infor- 
mation that the stick is in the inner room might quite conceivably act upon it and 
retrieve the stick and by his action show the dumb person the meaning of the sentence. 
‘In other words, the sentence can be construed as an injunction, so that R. has not really 
made his point. The SBh. example “your father is keeping well" does not admit of 
any construction as a karya. 

612. tair eva $abdais ६९३७ arthesu svütmanaé ca buddhyutpattim drstva; the con- 
struction is succinct but precise; on the basis of our text we can restore a better SBh. 
.reading: the parallel SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 127, line 9 should be read with MSS. BC tair eva 
gabdais tesva arthesu svétmanam buddhyutpattim drstvà, instead of svétman& adopted 
by Abhyankar and translated by Thibaut (? “those words of themselves give rise...”) 
and Lacombe (“ils, [sc. les enfants,] se rendent progressivement compte que tel ou 
tel mot fait naítre de lui-méme [en leur esprit] la notion de tel ou tel object"). The 
correct translation there too is "(the children) observe that these words create in them 
an impression of those various objects": a buddhyutpatti of themselves, created by the 
words, about their objects, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 269 

of these words to those objects — preceded by the indication with 
the finger — is based upon a definite power of denotation that is 
restricted to those objects only, because the words have as yet only 
been associated with those and no other objects and because the child does 
not know of any person who fixes their conventional meanings. When 
his parents teach him again and tell him that the meaning of this and that 
word is so and so, the child learns the meanings of all words and is then able 
to use the language's entire stock of vocables. In the same way he knows that 
:all words have their proper meanings and that particular combinations of 
words denote certain kinds of natural associations of simple objects.9!14 Hence 
follows that the insistence upon words having meaning only for things to 
do is baseless.815 Consequently, from the fact that language can be under- 
_stood to have the power of denoting an object that is established it follows 
that all the words of the Vedànta do denote Brahman, the cause of the 
Universe the possessor of all perfections, as defined above. 

$117. But let us suppose that words have meaning only for things 
to dois Even then the words of the Vedanta would fully denote everything, 
be it that then everything would be denoted only because it subserves the 
purpose of a thing to do by being the reward that specifies the qualified 
Subjects!" of the thing to do—viz., meditation—: in the same way as the 
arthavüdas, or exegetical Vedic texts,918 denote 'heaven'61?9— 3 particular 
locality not associated with suffering—or the 'firm foundation'9? that is the 

613. samketayitr- 

614. 'This section corresponds almost verbally to SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 127, line 3ff. 

615. Same expression SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 128: nirbandho mirnibandhanah; nirbandha- 
“insistence, obstinacy (in the teeth of contrary evidence)" 

616. This is argued on the basis of the typically Prabhakara theory of anvitübhi- 
dhàna, according to which a statement derives its significance from the context (of the 
injunction), as opposed to Kumarila's theory of abhihitanvaya according to which “words 
themselves can express their separate meanings by the function of abhidhà or denota- 
tion", (COWELL, Sarvadarganasamgraha, p. 202, note, quoted by Jha). Ramanuja’s 
argument runs: the Vedanta enjoins the knowing of (“knowing” of course in R.’s sense 
of updsana) Brahman: in the context of this injunction Brahman is the fruit or reward 
of this karya (brahmavid àpnoti param) and is as such significant. 

617. adhikürin- “possessing the qualities that authorize one to perform and benefit 

by ritual, etc., actions. E . 
j 618. On Prabhakara’s views on the function of Arthavāda, see JHA, pp. 296 ff. 
where it is stated that “the arthavāda, is as much Veda as the vidhi [purely injunctive 
portions] itself, as it also, like the vidhi, expresses the karyata or performability [i.e., the 
being a thing to do] of certain acts". 

619. Cf. in the injunction svargakémo jyotistomena yajeta. (ApS. S. 10, 2, 1). 

620. pratistha, reference is to PVBr. 23, 2, 4 prati tisthanti ha vai ya età ritrir 
upayanti / brahmavarcasvino nnidg bhavanti ya eta ratrir upayanti, quoted by Sabara, 
bhasya ad Pürvamimümsà Sutras 4, 3, 17, which reads ha và, etc., and omits rātrīr, 

210 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

reward of nocturnal sattras, or the relation of means and end that exists 
between reviling-a Brahmin and a fine of one hundred gold pieces. 

So the text “He that knows Brahman attains the Most-High”52 would 
teach the attainment of Brahman, viz. as the reward that specifies the quali- 
fied subject to the thing to do in worshipping Brahman, and would be equi- 
‘valent to: “He who aspires to attain the Most-High should know Brahman:” 
the proper form and the properties of Brahman, which in this text are under- 
stood to be the end to be attained, would be established because they sub- 
serve the purpose of the thing to do; this would include all His properties— 
of being creator, destroyer, substratum, immanent soul etc., of the world— 
so nothing would be disproved anyway. 

.§ 118. .Such being the case, all the objects included in mantras and 
arthavadas that are not incompatible and are unprecedented® are establish- 
ed because they subserve, or are accessory to, the vidhis or injunctions. So 
it is declared in Dramida’s commentary, from “on the strength of the $ruti 
rnam hi vai jüyate" onwards: “the text has the function of praising the 
cutting; however, no praise is possible if the object be non-existent: 624 in 
other words: the entire division of exegetical texts or arthavada; which in 
‘a thousand ways describes the previously unknown qualities of yaga etc., as 
propitiations of deities, gives in a thousand ways rise to the knowledge®?5 
that the object of the act is praiseworthy, whereas no such knowledge would 
arise if these arthavadas did not exist. Hence follows that they inform us 
of the real existence of qualities, so as to give rise to the knowledge that the 
object of the act is praiseworthy. Hence follows again that in this very 
manner all the objects, known through mantras and arthavadas, are proved 
to exist 

$119. Further, those who maintain that the texts bear only on things 
to do should tell us how they define a ‘thing to do 

—It is that which comes into existence on the existence of an opera- | 
‘tion and is the aim of that operation.$?6 

621. TaittS. 2, 6, 10, 2. i e - : E 
622. TaittUp. 2, 1, 1. ` pan है 
623. apürva- 
624. cf, Appendix $2, Fr. HI t 
' 625. It would seem that the point which R. makes here would not be disputed 
by Prabhakara, as far as Jha's evidence goes: at the most he would dispute the deno- 
tativeness or expressiveness of those arthavadas which cannot be connected with a 
vidhi or injunction. : ; 
626. küryatva: krtibhdvabhdvité krřtyuddeśyatā ca; krti "operation" but not yet 
materialized, still conative: “volition” is another approximate rendering; cf. JHA, p. 336 
"the kürya by its very nature is something brought about by krti, or operation; and 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 271 

—Then the question arises: what is this ‘aim of operation’? 

—The aim or objective of operation is that in view of which, or to 
which end, the operation takes place.9?7 

—Then define what is the ‘object envisioned by operation’, taking 
operation as a human activity. 

The aim or objective of an operation is that desirous of which man 
enters upon an operation.®9 : 
p p 

—Well, then the aim, or the thing aimed at by the operation, is iden- 
tical with the thing desired by man.®° 

Or if you think that a desired object has two aspects: that of 
being present as the object of desire, and that of actuating a person, and 
say! that the latter aspect, that of actuating a person, alone constitutes 
the aim of operation is wasted effort due to bias in favour of your own view. 
For actually the very fact that the object, which is thus understood to be the 
object of desire, cannot be realized unless an effort is made, actuates a per- 
son, for all activity starts thence. When a person understands, after the 

' desire has arisen, that he cannot realize his desire unless he makes an effort, 
the desire to be active arises and in consequence thereof he is active. This 
is the view that the experts take. It follows that in reality one's action has 

this operation is none other than the exertion [prayatna] of the agent." So it is rightly 
said that karya comes into existence on the preceding existence of an operation. It is 
moreover that at which the operation aims: udde$ya. Lacombe, note 974, remarks "pour 
Ramanuja, cette notion est identique à la précédente [ie, karya, v.B.]; on peut la 
désigner comme 18 "fin de l'action" par opposition à la "fin de l'agent", la fin de l'action 
n'étant que’ un moyen de la fin de l'agent;" but the Prabhakara view is the exact oppo- 
site of this: in fact the goal of the agent is itself subordinated to the goal of the action 
see below 

627. yad adhikrtya krtir vartate; in SBh., 1. c., the same is expressed more con- 
cisely: krtyuddesyatvam krtikarmatvam "the krtyuddesa is the object of the operation’ 

628. adhiküra- - 

629. SBh. lc. krtikarmatvam (= krtyuddesyatvam) ca kriya praptum istatamatvam 
"the object of the operation is that which is most desired to be obtained by the opera- 
tion". 

630. igtatvam krtyuddesyatvam; thus the definition is reached that a karya is the 
object of desire. 

631. As the Prabhikara does: the reward — e.g, heaven -- 15 only of secondary 
importance in itself, as a reward: its main function is to specify the adhikarin as one 
who is svargakéma “desirous of heaven" and on whom the kdrya is incumbent. Con- 
sistently reasoned from this premisse it follows that the kárya is ultimately its own end, 
or, in more moral terms (the appropriateness of which may, however, be questioned) 
"duty for duty's sake": I refer to HIRIYANNA’S intereseing paper The doctrine of niyoga 
J. Or, Res, Madras Vol. XV, Part ए (1946) 

212 J, A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

no other aim or objective than gaining for oneself, as a result of one's own 
efforts, the object of one's desire; how can you fail to see this? 

—Or you may say: the reason why an object is desired is that it is agree- 
able to a person. The objective of an operation is that which is agreeable to 
a person. — I reply: No; pleasure is synonymous with that which is agree- 
able to a person, and suffering with what is disagreeable; so nothing that 
is not pleasure can be agreeable. But do we not see that cessation of suffer- 
ing, although it is not positive pleasure, is yet agreeable to a person? 

— No! For pleasure and suffering are to be discriminated as follows: 
pleasure is that which is agreeable to oneself — suffering is that which is 
disagreeable to oneself. The former of the two, pleasure or wbat is agreeable, 
is desirable, and the latter, pleasure or what is disagreeable, is undesirable. 
So, since we cannot bear suffering, its cessation becomes also desirable: con- 
sequently, because it is similarly desirable we mistake it for similarly 
agreeable. 

So a person who is naturally conjoined with prakrti, and hence im- 
plicated in samsara, may be in three conditions: he may be in contact with 
something agreeable; or with something disagreeable; or he may rest in his 
proper form. The last condition, that of resting in his proper form, implies 
cessation of contact alike with something disagreeable and with something 
agreeable. Therefore when a person is suffering something disagreeable it 
is likewise desirable for him to rest in his proper form, and, because that is 
like pleasure in that it is also desirable, he mistakes it for being also agreeable. 

$120. Therefore, competent criteriologists laugh at one who main- 
tains that the niyoga,9? or mandate, is in itself agreeable, for agreeableness 
has only the form of pleasure. We understand that a mandate derives its 
mandatory, permanent and unprecedented character only from its function 
of leading up to a certain objective that is desired 

In the mandate: svargakümo yajeta the radical action®? becomes dif- 
ferent from the optative mood as the thing to do, since this is positively 
intended as the means of realizing heaven inasmuch as the word svargaküma 
is mentioned in direct connection with it. 

Don't say that in yajeta the niyoga is primarily understood to be its 
own principal factor and that from the connected mention of svargaküma 
follows that the niyoga is agreeable to the realization of heaven in order to 

632. The usual term of the Prabhakaras for karya. 

633. kriya, "the verbal action as such": the kriya of YAJ- is yojana- "the act of 
worshipping (by sacrifices)", whereas the karya of the verb is formed by suffixes, esp 
the linadi suffixes of the optative/potential mood, etc. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 213 

ensure its own realization.9* In yajeta it is rather understood that the radi- 
eal meaning can only be realized through the exertion of a person. The con- 
nected mention of svargakama compels us to assume that something else 
than the radical meaning is mandatory, permanent and unprecedented, etc.: 
and this puts a definite restriction to what we are to take as the means of 
realizing heaven. The optative etc. forms denote as the thing to do only 
a means of realizing heaven which can be construed with the person denoted 
by the collocated word svargaküma. This explication, which is the most 
natural one, is also violated. 

In other words: immediately when we hear a text consisting in words 
that are intimately interconnected, we understand that the meaning of one 
word is to be consistently connected with the thing denoted by the other 
directly connected word. "Therefore — since the realizing means is to be 
50 construed that it bears upon the sense of the whole text—it is as contra- 
dictory and hence untenable for this means to have no further significant 
bearing as it is for the radical action itself. 

Therefore, in sentences like: "There is a cottage on the Ganges," we 
take it that the word Ganges denotes as its meaning “a certain entity that 
can be dwelt on." Primarily, of course, the word Ganges denotes the whole 
entity "Ganges": but the quality of being drinkable — a quality proper to 
the entity denoted by the word Ganges as a whole — is not directly in keep- 

_ing with the sense of the sentence as a whole. So here too: when we hear. 
only the word yajeta, we remember it simply as a thing to do, without further 
significant bearing: but when we have to bring it in keeping with the sense 
of the text as a whole, this simple self-contained significance remains nq 
longer 

— But at the moment we hear a word that denotes a thing to do, we 
understand it primarily as a thing to do, with no other significance, 

634. The svarga has the principal function of qualifying the niyojya or the person 
prompted by the mandate; the object to be realized (sádhya) by the niyoga is not pri- 
marily the svarga but the niyoga itself. Cf. Prakaranaparicika, p. 190 nanu niyogasya 
kamyamanaphalasddhanatvabhyupagamat phalasyaiva pradhanyat tasyaiva vakyarthatvam 
ity ata aha — ütmasiddhyanukülasya niyojyasya prasiddhaye/kurvat (text kurvan) svargd- 
dikam api pradhanam küryam eva nah//etc. “To meet the objection that, since it is 
understood that the mandate is the means of realizing the desired result, therefore the 
result itself is the principal and consequently the sentence bears on that, he (Prabha- 
kara?) says: ‘(The mention of svargaküma, etc, serves only) to make known the 
prompted person who is agreeable (to performing the niyoga) because it serves his 
personal ends; for us the principal is the karya itself which also brings about such 
results as svarga, etc.’ .” 

.V. 35 

274 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

— That does not rhyme either: for in the case of a mandate like 
*Fetch the cow" we understand that the action of fetching the cow — 
involving suffering itself — is a thing to do only in so far as it serves as a 
means of realizing a certain desired result. Hence it is contrary to all 
human experience that the niyoga or mandate itself would be agreeable to 

man, and one who maintains that the mandate is agreeable to man is belied 
by his own experience. 

In the case of mandates like: “One desirous of rain should sacrifice 
with the kàriri"95 one will not, when the mandate has been realized, 
experience the mandate itself as agreeable, because the operative cause of 
realizing rain is different from rain itself. Even though the rain is not 
invariably realized in one's present life, yet, in the very absence of such an 
invariable rule, one has necessarily to assume that the mandate itself has 
been realized, and in that mandate no one experiences any pleasure synony- 
mous with agreeableness. In the manner here described there is no other 

objective of operation than the desired object that is to be realized by the 
operation. 

$121. —But®6 the objective of operation is the principal to which the 
peration itself is accessory. 

— Then tell us what makes this principal and what the accessory ? 

— The accessory is that which is correlated with the thing to do, and 
being the principal means being correlated with that accessory. 

— Then you say no more than that the principal is the same as the 
thing to do; but what we are concerned with is, what makes a thing to do? 

—An accessory is that which admits of being invariably con- 
tomitant with an operation taking place in view of the other term 

— Then how do you define the relation “in view of the other term”? 
For that is what we are concerned with. 

635. küriryà vrstikdmo yajeta; küriri is a sacrifice in which the karira plant (the 
thorny Capparis Aphylla) figures; the only source to which I have been able to trace 
this $ruti is a quotation by the commentator ad Atreyisakhiya Kandanukrama of Taitt. 
Veda, 3, 17: kalpe.... kürirividhih, explained: kalpe—sütre (reference is probably to 
Asv$rS. 2, 13 varsakamestih karirih) divàkirtyany ucyante ... karirividhih; karirir ya 
(sie, read karirya) vrstikamo yajeti (read yajeteti), in A. WEBER, Indische Studien, 
p. 373 ff., esp. 394. 

636. This paragraph corresponds to 589, 1, 1, 1, p. 129; on $esah in the ritualistic 

sense of KMS. 3, 1, 2 éesah parárthatvát “one constituent is accessory when it is sub- 
servient to another", 

> 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 215 

— The object envisioned is that which is to be realized by the thing 
intended.. 

— What is the “thing intended” ? 
— The purpose of the operation. 

— But I have already replied that the final purpose of the operation is 
the same as the purpose for which he started operating: and its content is his 
desire, to gain which he has to resort to operating. Actually the relation 
"between principal and accessory is in any situation as follows: the accessory 
is in essence that which admits of application to, or which has its use for, 
another term inasmuch as it serves to support the transcending importance 
intrinsic to that other term that constitutes the principal. To illustrate: 
the yaga has its use, and so have the exertions required therefor, inasmuch 
as they serve to bring about the desired result; and everything else has 
its use, if, and in so far as, it serves to realize the yaga. 

$122. Similarly, it is the essence of born slaves that they have their 
use in so far as they support the transcending importance of particular 
persons. In the same manner, all entities—comprising spiritual and non- 
spiritual beings, eternal and non-eternal—have essentially only their use 
inasmuch as they support the transcendence of the Lord. Thus everyone 
and everything is accessory to the Lord and the Lord is principal to all: 
as has been declared in śrutis like “the Master of all, the Lord of all, the 
Patron of the universe, etc.” Your sense, to wit that the thing to do is the 
principal factor that is to be realized through operation, can only appeal 
“to the credulous. é 

$123. Moreover,838 in the mandate svargakamo yajeta, and similar 
mandates, the word svargaküma designates the particular agent that is 

| 637. Ramanuja borrows here no doubt from Prakaranapancika, p. 190 yathatmana 
eva samvidadhénah svdmi garbhadisasyopakaroti tatha niyogo 'pi niyojyasyeti na pra- 
dhànyapadapracyutih "just as a master benefits a born slave by making use of him for 
his own purposes, so the niyoga benefits the niyojya: but this does not mean that the 
niyoga looses its status of principal term". Noteworthy is the turn which Ramanuja 
gives to this metaphor by lifting the relation master-slave to a cosmic plane where it 
represents the relation God-universe. The same metaphor is utilized in SBh. loc. cit. 
but in an altogether different sense and wording: pradhànas tu bhrtyapose "pi svoddesena 
pravartata iti cen na, bhrtyo "pi pradhanapose svodde$enaiva pravartate "don't say that 
fhe principal serves his own purposes even by maintaining his servant, for the servant 
too. serves his own purposes in maintaining the principal". 

638. Ramanuja questions here the propriety of introducing the notion of niyojya; 
acc. to the Prabhakara the niyojya is the one who knows that the karya is his to do, 
and is distinguishable from the agent: the latter is agent of acting, the other of knowing; 
the personal ending of the verb indicates the niyojya in a general way, the word 

276 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

‘denoted by the termination of the verb. Now, how do we arrive at the 
view that this word against the rules of grammar designates the particular 
niyojya, or the person prompted by the mandate ? 

—It is impossible that a person qualified by svarga as the objective 
to be realized is construed as the agent of an action that is not a means of 
realizing svarga.®9 

— But neither can he be construed as the niyojya, or the person 
prompted by the mandate, if that mandate is not the means of realiz- 
ing svarga: which decides that it is a means of realizing svarga.910 
But at this decision, that it is a means of realizing svarga, we can only 
arrive when the injunctive text has established with what kind of agent 
the action is to be construed. To illustrate: when it is said that “he who 
wants a meal must go to Devadatta’s house," it follows, from the simple 
fact that one hears that he who wants a meal is the agent of the action of 
going to Devadatta's house, that now one also knows something one did 
not know before: namely that the action of going to Devadatta's house is 
the means of obtaining a meal The same is the case here.“ Would it 
.be proper to imagine that one who is said to be the agent of one action is 

svargakama specifies him. R. argues that this procedure is ungrammatical: the personal 
ending refers to the kartr who is specified as svargakama. 

639. The Prabhakara argues that one cannot at the same time be related to the 
südhya — ie. the svarga— and to the sádhana —ie., the action of sacrificing — . The 
verbal form yajeta, constituting the karya, does as such not at all require a peculiarly 
specified agent svargakama: the agent is already expressed by the personal ending; in 
the niyojya both the agent and the svargakàma are united. i l 

640. Rāmānuja replies that the niyojya, that is the prospective agent who desirous 
of svarga knows the kārya to be his, cannot be construed with the personal ending either, 
unless — and that is the point—the kārya is primarily the means of realizing svarga 
and not itself. This reverts the order of the Prabhakara: the mere injunction is 
indifferent unless its purpose is given; that purpose is given in svargakama; consequently 
karya primarily subserves svarga. Otherwise neither the niyojya nor the agent svarga- 
küma can be construed with yajeta. So the connexion of the kartr or agent is primarily 
given in the injunction itself. 

641. Agency in one act does not imply agency in another act; acc. to the Pra- 
bhakara, the niyojya is in the first place the agent of knowing that the karya is his 
task and in the second place and consequently the kartr. But this "agency of know- 
ing" is merely presumed, not given in the injunction, so that the notion of niyojyà 
has no title to take precedence over that of kartr; so the vàrttika quoted Prakarana- 
paficika, p. 182: tathdpi svasambandhikaryaboddhrtvenaivanvayo varnaniya iti niyojya- 
samarpakatvam evasriyata ity evam api kim ity 4ha — niyojyah ... budhyate (text: bud- 
dhyate): "yet the construction (of the svargakama with the kàrya) is to be described 
as his being the knower of the karya as related to himself: so (the word ‘svargakama) 
je taken as conveying the niyojya. He explains how this is in the stanza: "the niyojya, 

A etc,” ” í Tu 7 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 277 

the agent of another action? That is what you do: for you imagine that 
the one who is—in yajeta—said to be the agent of yaga, or sacrifice, is 
the agent of buddhi, or knowing. In fact, just the imagined assumption 
that he is the agent of knowing makes him the niyojya, or the person 
prompted by the mandate: for you say: “the niyojya is he who knows that 
the thing to do is his to do.” 

— But he must first know before he can sacrifice. 

—That means that if Devadatta, who is said to be the agent of 
cooking in “Devadatta must cook,” first goes somewhere in order to cook, 
he must first go somewhere else before he is able to cook. Is it proper 
to imagine that he is the agent of going 2042 

$124. Further, why do you assume that the apürva, as denoted by 
the optative etc. verbal forms, is something permanent ?643 

— Because otherwise the collocation of the word svargakaéma would not 
be accounted for. 

— In what sense would it not be accounted for? 

— Svargaküma is someone who desires to realize svarga. If the ac- 
tion of yaga etc. would be ephemeral, then it would not enable the svarga- 
küma to achieve the realization of heaven since that will take place at 
another time. 

: — Then it is only not accounted for the people who have not a ghost 
of an idea of the final conclusions of the Vedanta. Those who do know 
their Veda hold that the sovereign Lord, the venerable Narayana, grants 
any desired result when He is propitiated with any ritual act. For instance, 
Dramidacarya, the foremost of the authorities on the Veda, declares: ®t 

642. The Prabhakara’s contention that the agency of knowing ‘corresponds’ to, or 
suits' the agency of sacrificing is not helpful: if Devadatta has to go somewhere in 
order to be able to perform the duty of cooking enjoined on him in devadattah pacet, 
we may say that his going to cook ‘suits’ his actual cooking, but this agency of going 
is nowhere given in the simple injunction that he is to cook: that is our presumption. 

643. apürva- is in the first place the codand, vidhi, itself: KMS. 2, 1, 5 codand 
punar ürümbhah, and Sabarabhasya ad loc. codanety apürvam brimah, etc. Sabara 
defines ad 1, 1, 2 kriyéyah pravartakam vacanam. According to the Prabhakara the 
codanü is "unprecedented" because it is known from no other source than itself: 
kriyddibhinnam yat karyam vedyam manantarair na tat/ ato manantarapirvam apürvam 
ity giyate. (Prakaranaparicika, p. 187). In the second place it is the codaná's own 
suprasensible effectiveness that persists as something permanent (sthéyy eva kimcit) 
after the karya has been completed until its result will materialize. 

644, For a literal translation see Appendix, 

278 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

phalasambibhatsaya hi karmabhir ütmünam piprisantiti sa prito "lam phald- 
yeti $üstramaryüdá. That is to say: since they want to obtain the results 
they desire, they want to propitiate, with acts like sacrifice, charity etc., 
the Supreme Spirit, the venerable Lord Vasudeva, through the intermediary 
of deities like Indra etc. whose inner Ruler He is and by whose names He 
may consequently be denoted: for when He has been propitiated with 
those acts, He grants the results they desire.—Similarly the $ruti: istápitrtam 
bahudha jétam jayamanam visvam bibharti bhuvanasya nabhih®5—ista- 
pirtam®6 means “the ritual act enjoined by all Srutis and smrtis:” so visvam 
bibharti “the Supreme Person ‘bears’ for Himself, ie. accepts for Himself 
all these ritual acts which are understood to be associated with deities like 
Indra, Agni, Varuna etc., whose immanent soul He is;” for He is bhuvanasya 
nabhih, i.e. the supporter of the world comprising the classes of brahmins, 
ksatriyas etc.: He is called nabhih, or navel, since He by granting the 
diverse results of the various acts, is as such the bearer of the Universe.— 
The same Sruti declares that He is denoted by the names of the deities Agni, 
Vayu and the like, because He is their immanent soul: “that is Agni, that 
is Vayu, the sun and the moon”®7_The Venerable Lord puts it thus: “If any 
votary wishes to worship with faith any body, then I make that faith of him 
unshakable. Inspired by that faith he aspires to worship it, and in result 
he will obtain his desires, which I shall grant him.9:8 “Any body" here 
means that the particular deities etc. constitute the bodies of the Venerable 
Lord who exists as their inner Ruler.—Again: “For I am the one who 
enjoy all sacrifices, and I am the patron,"99 where patron means: “the 
bestower of all results."—So also: “Thou, comprising all gods, art the One 
who always receivest the sacrifices, O Acyuta !”651 “Those men who, intent 

on their proper tasks, propitiate Thee, O Lord, will surpass that illusion 
entirely to their souls’ release.652 

In Vedas, epics and purànas it is set forth at length that all acts are 
propitiations of the sovereign Lord and that the Supreme Person, when duly 
propitiated with all these acts, grants their diverse results that are desired. 
In this very manner, therefore, all Srutis set forth that the omnipotent, 

645, MahànárUp. 1, 6 = TaittAr. 6, 1, 6. | 

646. R. distinguishes between ista- as $rauta and pürta- as smêrta acts. 

647. MahanarUp. 1, 7 = TaittAr. 6, 1, 7: tad evdgnis tad vüyus tat süryas tad u 
candramah / tad eva $ukram amrtam tad brahma tad apah sa prajdpatih 

648. BhG. 7, 21-22 

649. BhG. 9, 24 

650. prabhu- "one who has power 

651. VP, 5, 20, 97; Gità Press ed. has the expletive 'cintya for the preferable 

652. VP. 5, 30, 16. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 219 

omniscient and sovereign Venerable Lord is the One who enjoys—as the 
inner Ruler of the deities Indra etc.—all the acts mentioned in the Veda, 
yaga, dina, homa®® ete., and that He is the One who grants all the results: 
for instance, the Sruti caturhotüro yatra sampadam gacchanti devaih,™ i.e. 
“in whom—sc. in the Supreme Spirit as the inner Ruler within the gods— 
the caturhotrs—sc. the sacrifices—come to coincide with the gods—sc. come 
to be associated with the gods.” In other words: the gods, Indra ete., by 
existing as the bodies of the Supreme Spirit who is their inner Ruler, are 
associated with yaga etc. Or as the Venerable Lord has put it: “the enjoyer 
of sacrifice and austerities, the sovereign lord of all worlds.555 

To conclude, the ritual acts have the form of propitiations of the 
Supreme Spirit who is the inner Ruler of the deities Agni and the like. He 
alone grants the results that are coveted. So what is the point of assuming 
or imagining that an apürva is denoted, which strays far from the path of 
etymological explication ?656 

— But, granting this, what sense then have we to assume for the opta- 
tive etc. verbal forms ? 

— Y AJ has the sense of “worship of the gods"; hence yàga- and other 
derivatives are propitiations of the deities. The optative etc. verbal suffixes 
denote that this yaga in its radical meaning$5 is—as appears from etymologi- 
cal explication—the object to be realized by the activity of an agent. In this 
way everything is sound. The terminations which denote agents connote that 
the radical sense of the word is modified by the connection with the activity 
of an agent; other affixes denote the present, past and other tenses; whereas 
the optative affixes indicate that the verbal action is the object to be realized 
by the activity of an agent 

$125. Moreover, the very texts that enjoin the various acts first 
enjoin that a definite act be performed by an agent who is desirous of its 
effect, and then they say that that act has the form of propitiation of a deity 
and that through the intermediary of that deity the effect of that act will be 
realized: e.g. a text like “One desirous of prosperity must sacrifice a white 

653. yaga- general term for sacrifice, homa particular sacrifice by pouring the 
substance out in fire, cf. KMS. 4, 2, 27-28 

654. TaittAr. 3, 11, 2; caturhotr, name of a recital during the new and full moon 
rites, denotes by extension the rites themselves, 

655. BhG. 5, 29 

656. That the apürva or codaná, ie. the verbal affixes of the potential, etc., moods 
(linadi), should persist as their own eventual effectiveness is an assumption that is at 
best metagrammatical 

^— 657. prakrtyartha-. 

280 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

he-goat that is destined for Vayu: for Vayu is the nimblest of the deities, 
On account of its destination, it runs up to Vayu himself. He leads him to 
prosperity: 658 here we find nothing that could disprove the realization of 
the result. Consequently it is unreasonable to say that the knowledge that 
the acts are means of realizing their results is merely based upon assump- 
tion,659 

I mean this: the subsiduary text that supplements the injunction? 
tells us what modification of the yaga as a means of realizing the result is 
required by the injunction. For instance the injunction: "Therefore one 
must not revile a Brahmin,” In the subsidiary text supplementing this 
injunction which prohibits reviling we are told that the prohibited act of 
reviling is a means of realizing a fine of one hundred gold pieces, and we 
accept this as part of the prohibitive injunction because it subserves the 
purpose of it. So in the injunction under discussion again we learn from 
the subsiduary text that the yaga, as it is enjoined to be performed by one 
who has a definite desire, is thereby modified as a means of realizing the 
svarga that is desired. Why disregard this and then smuggle in again this 
yaga as a means of realizing a result by merely assuming that it is? "Hiding 
his gold treasure in his house, he goes begging with poor people for a poor 
man's meal,”662 is a maxim that fits you admirably! Nor is it an invisible 
factor that makes the reviling a means of being fined one hundred gold 
pieces. When a person performs the recommended acts, fails to perform the 
enjoined acts and performs the censured acts, all his pleasures and sufferings 
are due to the favour and disfavour of the Supreme Person. 

There are all sorts of $rutis which declare this: “For He alone brings 
bliss®4 , , , then he finds peace .... no peace befalls him, In fear of Him 

658. TaittS. 2, 1, 1 ddyavyam Svetam Glabheta bhütiküámah / vàyur vai ksepistha - 
devatà / väyum eva svena bhagadheyenopa dhévati/ sa evainam bhütim gamayati, quoted 
also ApSrS. 19, 16, 3. s 

659. aupddinikt, S. explains upüdanapramaámasidhà vidhyaksepasiddhetyarthah 
proved by the means of assumption, ie. by implied suggestion of the injunction", 

660. vakyasesa- 

661. TaittS. 2, 6, 10, 2. 

662. A proverb (nyàya) according to S. built on hiranyanidhim nihitam akşetrajñā 

uparyupari samcaranto na- vindeyuh (ChUp. 8, 3, 2) which makes the citation in this 
connexion subtly insulting. 
- 663. adrsta- "includes the transcendental effect produced upon some material thing 
by a ritual treatment of it which produces no visible effect upon it.” It includes the 
apürva but this "exists of itself, and is not a function of any material or other object" 
(EDGERTON, MNPr. p. 279, s.v. apürva-) 

664. TaittUp. 2, 7 esa hy evanandayiti. 

665. TaittUp. 2, 7 (... yada hy evaisa ekasminn adréye "bhayam pratistham vin- 
date) atha so ’bhayam gato bhavati, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 281 

the wind blows, the sun rises and run Agni and Indra and finally Death.666 
In obedience to the commandment of Him the imperishable One, O Gargi, 
sun and moon stand apart$9 , , . . in obedience to His commandment, O Gargi, 
men praise the liberal, the gods the sacrificer, and the pitrs are entitled to 
the darvi.998 As declared in the Dramidabhasya: “In obedience to His 
command the wind blows, the rivers flow; by Him the oceans have beer 
confined and they spring like rams as if they were rutting,” and “for being 
dependent on His will the world neither falls nor bursts asunder. When 
the Venerable Lord knows that someone follows His commandments, then 
He makes him prosper in His mercy, for He knows and is capable of acting."669 

$126. When a person performs the enjoined acts such as the worship- 
ping of the Supreme Person—which presupposes true knowledge of Him — 
then, by His favour, he finds happiness culminating in the attainment of Him, 
and security,97? according to his qualification. But when he does not perform 
the enjoined acts of worshipping Him etc., preceded by true knowledge of 
Him, and performs censured acts, then he will find immense suffering, which 
presupposes failure to attain Him, and insecurity. As the Venerable Lord 
has said: “Perform acts constantly: for acts are better than knowledge": 
herewith He enjoins that acts must be performed after knowledge has been 
acquired. Then in “having dedicated all acts to Me"€7? He sets forth that 
the acts are propitiations of Himself and that the souls are under His con- 
trol Then He continues: “The men who always follow what I have taught 
here, faithfully and without muttering, will find release through acts. But 
those who mutter against it and, refuse to follow my teaching, are ignorant of 
any knowledge, lost and devoid of understanding: be sure of that, so as 
to praise those who obey His commandment and to condemn those who do 
not. Then He repeats that they who do not keep to His command have a 

666 TaittUp. 2, 8 bhisismad vátah pavate / bhisodeti sūryah / bhisismad agni§ cen- 
drags ca/mrtyur dhàvati paficamah. | 

667. BAUp. 3, 8, 9. - E 

668. BAUp. 3, 8, 9 ad finem, 

669. Cf. Appendix 

670. abhaya- 

671. BhG. 3, 8; R.’s interpretation in GBh. ad loc. differs: atah karmayoge “py 
üimano "kartrtvabhávanayátmayathátmyánusamdhüánam antarbhitam (after which two 
more arguments for karmayoga's superiority to jànayoga are given): "consequently kar- 
mayoga itself contains an essential knowledge of the atman because it entails the realiza- 
tion that the átman itself is not the agent of karman" (cf. my Rāmānuja, etc., p. 20-21); 
cp. also the GBh. explication: niyatam vydptam, prakrtisamsrstena hi vyiptam (karma), 
on which cf. my Rāmānuja, ete., ad loc, 

672. BhG. 3, 30. 

672a. BhG. 3, 31, 

V. 36 

282 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

demoniae disposition, and finally He declares their ultimate downfall in: 
“I hurl these hostile, cruel, despicable and criminal men incessantly into 
demoniac forms of existence in their samsāras. Reduced to demons, con- 
fused, and in life after life failing to attain Me, they will gradually go down 
to the nethermost limit.”673 While He describes the eternal place that the 
followers of His command will reach in: “He that always performs acts 
while resorting to Me will attain by My favour for ever the eternal place."674 
In order to prevent that all those people who have not studied the Vedanta 
should lack faith in acts, emphatical declarations are made in the devatüdhika- 
rama. However, the final conclusion of those who know the Veda is that 
ali $astras constitute one Sastra only. 

$127. There are thousands of $rutis that declare that this Supreme 
Brahman Narayana has a proper form of undefinable knowledge and beati- 
tude in the purest form; He has immeasurable, innumerable, all-surpassing 
beautiful qualities, such as knowledge, power, strength, sovereignty, fortitude, 
glory etc.; the sum-total of spiritual and non-spiritual entities different from 
Himself are actuated by an act of His will; He possesses one invariable 
divine form that is in accordance with His pleasure and in harmony with 
Himself; He has an infinite variety of unsurpassed beautiful ornaments that 
suit His form, and immeasurable, endless and marvelous weapons of all kinds 
that are equal to His power; He has a Consorts?! who suits His pleasure 
and who is in harmony with Him, possessing an immeasurable eminence of 
proper form, qualities, supernal power, ascendancy and character; He has 
an infinite entourage of attendants and necessaries,’ suitable to Him, the 
knowledge, actions etc. of whom are perfect and whose qualities are limit- 
less; He has an infinite glorious manifestation, such as is fitting to Him, 
comprising all objects and all means of experience; He has a divine residence, 
the proper form and nature of which are beyond the ken of thought and 
the power of expression: all this and so forth is everlasting and irreproachable. 

` This is declared in the $rutis: “I know that Great Person who has 
the colour of the sun, beyond matter;9'? that golden Persom within the 

673. BhG. 16, 19-20 

674. BhG. 18, 56. 

675. KMS. 9, 1, 9 

676. Cf. the astrabhüsanàádhyaya, VP. 1, 22 : 

677. Sri-, hence the typically $ri-Vaisnava appellation Sriyah patih with which 
opens the GBh. intr. which is an elaboration of this Ved. paragraph 

678. The attendants are such superior beings as Ananta-Sesa, Garuda, Visvaksena, 
ete., etc, (YID. 9, p. 134); under paricchada- S. mentions kalacikaprabhrtayah “Ladle, etc. 
(?)”; the attendants are according to GBh. intr. sūris, on which see below, 

679. SvetUp. 3, 7 vedáham etam purusam, etc, . = 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 283 

sun®80_., His eyes are like a many-coloured lotus;®! that is the space within 
the heart: therein is this Person, manomaya-, immortal, golden:989? manomaya- 
means “to be grasped by the pure mind only";983 — “all the flashes of lightning 
spring forth from over this Person: sc. "from over this sun-coloured 
Person;" nilatoyadamadhyasthà vidyullekheva bhasvard, sc. “like a flash of 
lightning that has a dark cloud within:"686 that bundle of flames that burn 
within the space in the heart of the Little Lotus and whose proper form is 
the Supreme Spirit appearing as the dark spot within those flames, blazes 
forth like a flash of lightning that has a dark cloud within itself; — “open to 
the mind, embodied in the vital airs, radiant, having all desires materialized 
and every will realized, soul of the space, who has all acts,68 all desires, all 
scents, all juices, encompassing all this, voiceless, unconcerned; His 
saffron-coloured garment; etc., etc. 

The same meaning is conveyed by hundreds of Srutis, such as: “Visnu’s 
Consort, Mistress of the world; Hri and Laksmi are Thy spouses;®! the 
sūris regard always that supreme place of Visnu;®2 lying beyond matter;5% 
that is ome, unevolved, infinite, complete, primordial, beyond matter; he 
that knows the treasure contained in the innermost Supreme Heaven; who 
watches in the Supreme Heaven; that is what is and what shall be, that 
is in the imperishable Supreme Heaven."69 

680. ChUp. 1, 6, 6 ya eso "ntar dditye, etc. 

681. ChUp. 1, 6, 7 tasya yathé kapydsam, etc., on the interpretation of which cf. 
infra $$ 134 ff 

682. TaittUp. 1, 6, 1 sa ya eso "ntar hrdaya, etc. 

683. Cf. MundUp. 3, 1, 8: na caksusa grhyate napi vácá manasa tu visuddhena. 

684. MahanarUp. 1, 6 = TaittÁr. 6, 1, 6. 

685. MahanarUp. 3, 12 milatoyadamadhyasthá, etc. 

686. madhyasthamilatoyadàá; S. explains that the compound is a bahuvrihi with 
irregular position of the first member (pürvanipáta) peculiar to chandas usage; R. inter- 
prets the obvious tatpurusa comp. in this way to harmonize this Sruti with the others 
cited. - 

687. S. explains sarvakarman- as "the One whose effect is the Universe", 

688. ChUp. 3, 14. 2 manomayah pranasarirah; no doubt here manomaya is to be 
taken in the sense of “comprehensible by the mind" 

689. BAUp. 2, 3, 6 (tasya haitasya purusasya rüpam) yathd maharajanam ०३०७ 

690. TaittS. 4, 4, 12, 5 tasyesana, etc 

691. TaittAr. 3, 13, 1 hrig ca te, etc 

692. SubalUp. 6 tad vignoh paramam padam, ete. 

- 693. TaittS. 2, 2, 12, 5 ksayantam, etc 

694. MahanarUp. 1, 5 yad ekam avyaktam, etc. 

695. TaittUp. 2, 1 yo veda mihitam, etc. 

696. RV. 10, 129, 7 yo 'syüdhyksah parame vyoman. 

697. RV. 10, 90, 2 tad eva bhütam u bhavyama, etc., cf. MahanarUp. 1, 2. 

584 i. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

$128. On the authority of the statement in the $ruti tad Visnoh para- 
mam padam that the süris always regard the supreme residence of Visnu the 
Supreme Brahman, we know that there is a class of beings of perfect 
knowledge who have the gift of regarding at all times. The specification of 
the statement is either that those who are süris regard it, or that those who 
regard it are süris. 

—But in neither case more than one guna can be enjoined 

— That is not true here, because all gunas have not been established: 698 
the supreme residence that is qualified by all gunas is enjoined; as witness the 
Sūtra: “When the gunas are not laid down by another sentence, the Sacrifice 
as well as its Accessories are enjoined by the same statement; because 
of their being mixed up in the Injunctive word, but not when the act is set 
forth by another statement.” Even as in the injunction of an act, e.g. yad 
dgneyo "stakapülo .... bhavati, an act is enjoined that is qualified by all 
gunas or accessories because neither act nor gunas have yet been established: 
similarly our Sruti propounds the supreme residence of Visnu that has not 
yet been established as being always regarded by the süris: so there is no 
contradiction. According to the Mimamsakas, the mantras which are kara- 
mas, which allude to something that is being acted,?? which have the form 

698. KMS. 1, 4, 9; the problem is as follows: in the above declaration, however 
read, two different statements are found: they see that supreme place, and: they are 
süris, by which different gunas are ‘enjoined’; now in the case where the karman “act” 
has already been established by another declaration, another subsiduary declaration may 
describe only one guna, since otherwise there is vàkyabheda “syntactical discontinuity”: 
prapte karmany anekavidhane vakyabheddpatteh (MNPr. 833, which quotes Kumirila, 
TantrV. 2, 2, 6 ab. prapte karmani nàneko vidhdtum $akyate gunah “when the acts has 
been established elsewhere not more than one guna can be enjoined”). There is another 
case, which R. envisages, where more than one guna is allowed, viz. in a visistavidhi 
injunction of an act as being further specified”, (MNPr, §12) for which the quoted 
KMsSitra provides. i 

699. KMS. 1, 4, 9. 

700. yad dgneyo 'stükapálo ('müvásyüám paurnamasydm cücyuto) bhavati (suvar- 
gasya lokasydbhijityai), adduced as an instance in case by Sabara ad 1, 4, 9, to whose 
commentary I may refer; the reference is TaittS. 2, 6, 33 

701. karanamantrah, explained by S. homddisddhanatayad vihitah “enjoined as the 
means for homa. ete., rites . 

702. kriyamànánuvádinah, expl. by S.: barhir devasadanam dami ityadayah; cf. 
MNPr. $92 tad dhi barhih samsküradvárüápürvasambandhiti mantrasya sámarthyàt tadar- 
thatve sati nànarthakyaq prasajyate, etc., “inasmuch as the mantra, by virtue of its own 
denotative potency, is related to the apürva by means of the preparation of barhis and 
is thus significant, no insignificance can be imputed to it”, etc.; the text is MaitrS, 1, 1, 2, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 285 

of stotra?3 and Sastra,™ which are applied to japa etc.,7°5 which are recited in 
context or not recited in context,/? all denote their proper sense, if not 
contradictory and not yet established, in the same way as the brahmanas.'09 
A stotra is a description of gunas found in the gunin which is to be realized 
by mantras that are sung; Sastra is a description of gunas to be found in 
the gunin which is to be realized by mantras that are not sung. The declara- 
tion which the mantras that elucidate their meanings in application make 
about the particular gunas — neither yet established nor contradictory — that 
are to be found in deities etc. are in agreement with that application. 

The above $ruti'?? does not apply to persons who are released because 
it would not be proper to say of them that they always regard. Nor does 
it apply to the continuous flow of released souls as a whole, for that would 
stultify the $ruti because it tells us in sada pa$yanti that it applies to each 
agent separately.’ We have said before that even if we assume that mantras 
and arthavàdas have meanings only for a thing to do their meanings are 
established: so a fortiori when etymological explication proves that they have 
in fact bearing upon an established thing in their own right. In this manner 
everything is sound.?!? 

— But in the assertion tad Visnoh paramam padam the words paramam 
padam denote the proper form of the Supreme One, for we cannot detect a 
difference between this $ruti and $rutis like: “the Supreme ‘pada’, free from 
all imperfection, that has the: name of Visnu.”713 

— That is not true, for in Srutis like: “lying beyond matter;"714 “that 
is in the imperishable Supreme Heaven;"5 “who watches in the Supreme 

` 7083. S.: günavisistamantroccarana- "recital of mantras by chanting”. 

704. S.: gdnarahitam eka$rutirüpoccarana- “recital (of mantras), without chanting 
as one sruti”. 

705. S: ie, japa and adhyayana, the former being recital in a low voice, the 
letter in a loud voice. 

"706. As e.g., the mantra barhir devasadanam dami is recited in the context of the 
darsapurnamasa ritual; cf, MNPr. $92; on prakarana- as a criterion (pramana) for decid- 
ing the function of subsiduaries.(anga-/Sega-, among which mantra is included), cf, 
MNPr. $8 116 ff 

707. On mantras recited out of context, cf. MNPr. $894f., and §§ 248 ff 

708. ie. the vidhi-, bráhmana- par excellence. 

709. ie., tad visnoh paramam padam sada pa$yanti sürayah. 

710. For before they were released they did not see. 

711. For cf. the sequel: tad vipráso vipanyavo jàgrvàmsah samindhate, explained 

712. Cf. supra. 

713. VP. 1, 22, 53. 

714. TaittS. 2; 2, 12, 5, 
715. TaittUp. 2, 1, q^ 

556 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

Heaven;"16 “who knows that which is laid down in the innermost Supreme 
Heaven,"!! only a Supreme place is indicated, and in “that Supreme pada of 
Visnu"8 it is designated that there is difference between one and the other. 
So by this very text we learn from the specification “the Supreme ‘pada’ that 
has the name of Visnu” that there is yet another supreme ‘pada’ different 
from this one, but it is declared that it is this ‘pada’ or ‘place’ that is always 
regarded by the süris 

8129. — In other words: in some texts the words paramam padam 
refer to a supreme place, in other texts they refer to the proper form of the 
Soul as separated from prakrti; and in other texts again they refer to the pro- 
per form of the Venerable Lord Himself. The Supreme Place is referred to 
in “The sūris regard always the paramam padam of Visnu.” The proper form 
of the soul separated from prakrti is referred to in: “During creation, 
subsistence and resorption the prakrti exists on im a triple form according 
to the activity of the three gunas; but its paramam padam is beyond gunas 
and great.”719 Finally the proper form of the Venerable Lord is referred to 
in “The paramam padam, free from all imperfection, that has the name of 
Visnu."?9 The words paramam padam can refer to all three because they 
constitute the highest attainable end. 

— But how can all three of them be the highest attainable end ? 

— The proper form of the Venerable Lord is the supreme pada, because 
that is the highest attainable end in its own right. The other two are 
supreme 'padas' inasmuch as they are implied in the attainment of the Lord. 
The realization of the proper form of the soul released from all bonds of 
karman is implied in the attainment of the Lord:??! this on the authority of 
the instruction imparted by the $ruti "those desires are real but they ave 
concealed by the wnreal,"?2 which, by using the word “unreal” declares that 
the hosts of perfections of the Lord are concealed by one's personal karman. 

§ 130. — But how do you make out that this concealment in the form 
of the "unreal" is due to the karman of the embodied soul? 

716. RV. 10, 129, 7. 

717. TaittUp. 2, 1. 

718. ie. the Supreme Residence. 

719. VP. 1, 22, 41. 

1720. VP. 1, 22, 53. , 

721. Or, to put it differently: the essence of God cannot be attained, i.e., intui- 
tionally realized, unless the soul’s essence has been recognized: dtmávalokana- is a pros 
paedeusis to the attainment of God cf. my Raéménuja, etc. Intr. IV. 

122. ChUp. 8, 3, 1 ta ime satych kama anrtapidhandh, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 287 

—On the authority of the assertion: “Ignorance, otherwise called 
karman, is regarded as another potency by which the ubiquitous potency of 
the embodied soul is enveloped, and it meets all the sufferings of samsara 
in endless succession because it is concealed by that ignorance,’ etc 

§131. That the attainment of the Supreme Place, too, is implied in the 
attainment of the Venerable Lord is clear enough: in the Sruti “lying beyond 
rajas"?* the word rajas denotes the prakrti characterized by the three gunas: 
for rajas has no proper existence alone and isolated from the other gunas. 
The sense of the text is consequently: “Him who lies, i.e. dwells, in a definite 
place beyond this our prakrti" characterized by the three gunas. So we know 
by this that the dwelling-place of Visnu must be beyond the matter that is 
governed by gunas and that constitutes the embodied soul's field of ex- 
perience. In the text “I know that great person who has the colour of the 
sun, beyond tamas,” the same prakrti is denoted by the word tamas. Since 
tamas alone has no proper existence either, this text forms one coherent 
context with the text reading “lying beyond rajas"; so we gather this sense 
“I know that great person, of the colour of the sun, who dwells beyond 
tamas 

The Sruti “who knows Brahman—who is real, knowledge and infinite— 
laid down in the innermost Supreme Heaven: that is in the imperishable 
Supreme Heaven”72 tells us that the word “Supreme Heaven" denote that 
Supreme Place as having an untransformed form. So since the clause “the 
imperishable Supreme Heaven” asserts that this place is imperishable, the 

‘words “Supreme Heaven” cannot denote celestial bodies like the sun etc. 
because those are perishable. Texts such as “where the ancient gods have 
found the fulfilment of their ends,” “where the first-born rsis of olden times? 

” tell us that they are the sūris. Similarly the Sruti tad vipraso vipanyavo 
jagrvémsah samindhate Visnor yat paramam padam: 728 viprásah, i.e., “intelli- 
gent beings"—»vipanyavah “devoted to glorification"—jügrvümsah “of unim- 
paired knowledge"—the meaning being that those intelligent beings of unim- 
paired knowledge and incessantly glorifying that Supreme Place of Visnu 
blaze forth 

723. VP. 6, 7, 61-62. 

724. TaittS. 2, 2, 12, 5. 

725. SvetUp. 3, 7 

726. TaittUp. 2, 1 

721. RV. 10, 90, 16 yatra pürve südhyàüh santi deváh ? yatrarsayah prathamajà ye 

728. SubalUp. 6. 

288: J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

$132. In the same way as the hosts of beautiful qualities—knowledge, 
strength, sovereignty etc.—in the text "this was sat in the beginning, my deat 
son," so these attendants, this place etc. are implied in the proper form of 
the Supreme Brahman. Therefore, since they, too, are comprised by the 
beautiful qualities; since in the Sruti "this was sat in the beginning" the word 
this encompasses the phenomenal world of objects of experience conjoined 
with the order of experiencing beings that are subject to karman; and since 
the former attendants are however not included among the beings subject 
to karman because they "regard always" according to the $ruti "the süris 
regard always”: therefore the text from apahatapüpmà to ०७७७३०७7३० negates 
first the imperfect nature proper to the prakrti—constituted by the three 
gunas—that furnishes the means of His own sport, and the imperfect nature 
‘proper to the ordinary prakrti-conjoined purusa; and then, with satyakdmah 
it asserts the reality of the sum-total of His own objects and means of ex- 
perience. Satyaküma- means “He whose kamas, i.e. the objects of desire, are 
real" Therefore the meaning is: the objects and means of His experience 
that the Supreme Brahman desires for Himself are real or eternal. The 
word satya- signifies that, whereas an entity that is the means of another's 
sport, is liable to transformation and therefore, albeit real in so far as capable 
of connexion with pramàanas, yet unreal in so far as impermanent, the sūris 
etc. on the contrary are permanent. Satyasamkalpa- asserts, that although 
these objects and means of experience etc. be eternal, unsurpassed and end- 
less, an infinite number of new entities owe their realization to His will 
alone. So satyasamkalpa- declares that the differences in proper form, condi- 
tion and activity of these means of experience and means of His sport, spiritual 

and non-spiritual, permanent and non-permanent, are entirely dependent on 
His volition. 

$133. This same sense is stated in epics and purànas, which corro- 
borate the Vedas as witness this passage: “Seeing that both were intelligent 
and firmly established in the Vedas, the Lord made them apprehend, in order 
to corroborate the Vedas.?! For example it reads in the Holy Ramayana, 
thus composed to support the Veda, as follows: “That great Yogin, the ancient 
Supreme Spirit, is in his evolved phase. without beginning, middle and. end, 
great beyond the great/3? beyond matter: He is the creator, who bears the 
Conch-shell, Disc and Club: on His chest is the Srivatsa curl; He has Sri for 
ever as His consort; He is invincible, eternal and immutable”73 “Various 

729. ChUp. 6, 2, 1. 
730. ChUp. 8, 1, 5. 

731. Ram, 1, 4, 6 tau tu medhdvinau drstva, etc.; the two persons are Kuga and 
Lava. 

732. The great (mahat) here will have the sense of mahattattva, 
733, Ram, 6, 1, 4, 14-15, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 289 

arrows and a long-drawn bow accompany the descendant of Kakutstha; all 
the individuals follow suit. 94 With body and with entourage he enters the 

glory of Visnu.”135 

In the Holy Visnupuraina: “That multiplicity of forms comprising all 
the forms in which all these potencies have their seats constitutes another 
vast form of Hari, Brahman is incorporate, Hari encompasses??? the entire 
Brahman. Sri, Visnu’s faithful consort, the Mother of the world is eternal 
herself, and she is omnipresent even as Visnu Himself is.738 When He is god, 
she assumes a divine body, when He is man she assumes a human body: she 
makes her own body agree with that of Visnu.”739 “The Yogins who in per- 
fect concentration constantly meditate upon Brahman possess that supreme 
place which the sūris regard.” “ .... whose manifestation is not subject to the 
evolutions that are caused by Time consisting of kala, muhirta etc.”140 

And in the Mahabharata: “Go to the divine residence, O Lord, un- 
decaying, unthinkable, unknowable, primordial, which is to be known from 
the revelations, and protect us, your votaries, by incarnating yourself in every 
age with your own body." Time gets ripe, and there is no time, there is the 

Lord alone.”142 

The Author of the Sütras declares that the Supreme Brahman has 
form in the sūtra “within, on account of the instruction of His properties. "143 

$134. He who is always gloriously visible™ is the pre-eminent Person 
who dwells within the orb of the sun. His splendour is like that of a colossal 
mountain of molten gold and His brilliance that of the rays of hundreds 
of thousands of suns. . His long eyes are spotless like the petals of a 1005757 
which, sprouting forth from deep water on a soft stalk, blossoms in the rays 

734. Ram. 7, 109, 7; Vulgate reads in c tatháyudhani te. 

735. Ram. 7, 110, 13ab; Vulgate reads in c sahaünujah. 

736. VP. 6, 7, 70; mahat in the sense of the tattva, and by extension "Universe" 

737. VP. 1, 22, 63 cd 

738. VP. 1, 9, 145 

739. VP. 1, 8, 39; Gita Press ed. reads in b yoganiscaye, in c tesam tu, in d yat tat. 

740. VP. 4, 1, 84 ab. 

741. MBh. 12, 5, 27. 

742. MBh. 12, 191, 9 ab (Poona cr ed) 

743. BrS. 1, 1, 21 antas taddharmopadesát, referring to ChUp. 1, 1, 6, on the basis 
of which R. will now give a description of the Divine Person 

744. daridrsyate, intensive built on drsyate of ChUp. 1, 6, 6 

745. 1, 6, 6: antar aditye 

746. 1, 6, 6: hiranmayah 

741. 1, 6, 7: pundarikam evam aksini, 

V. 37 

290 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

of the sun.™ His eyes’ and His forehead and His nose are beautiful, His 
coral-like lips smile graciously, and His soft cheeks are beaming. His neck 
is as delicately shaped as a conch-shell and His bud-like divine ears, beauti- 
fully formed, hang down on His stalwart shoulders. His arms are thick, 
“round and long and He is adorned with fingers that are reddened by nails 
'of a most becoming reddish tinge. His body, with its slender waist and 
‘broad chest, is well-proportioned in all parts, and His shape is of an 
unutterably divine form. His colour is pleasing. His feet are as beautiful 
as budding lotuses. He wears a yellow robe that suits Him and He is adorned 
with immeasurable, marvelous, endless and divine ornaments—a spotless 
' diadem, earrings, necklaces, the Kaustubha gem, bracelets, anklets, belt etc.— 
and with Conch, Disc, Club, Sword, the Bow Sarnga, the curl $rivatsa and the 
garland Vanamala.79 He attracts eye and thought alike of all by the measure- 
less and boundless beauty that is His. He overflows the entire creation of 
animate and inanimate beings with the nectar of His comeliness. His youth 
is exceedingly wonderful, unimaginable and eternal He is as delicately 
tender as blossoming flowers. He perfumes the infinite space between the 
cardinal points with the odour of holiness. His profound majesty is for 
ever encompassing the entire Universe. He looks upon the hosts of His 
devotees with loving eyes, filled with compassion and affection. His sport 
is to evolve, sustain and dissolve all the worlds. All evil is foreign to Him— 
He is the treasury of all beautiful qualities and He is essentially different 
from all other entities. He is the Supreme Spirit, the Supreme Brahman, 
Narayana. This is the sense to be read in ‘on account of the instruction of 
his properties,5! He rules all the worlds—all His desires,752 ‘He is beyond 
all impurities,"53 etc. His properties are declared in the texts: 'the ruler of 
all, the sovereign of all, free from imperfection, unaging,. ...whose every 

748. According to S., who substantiates this statement by quotations, R. here 
describes what is called kapyása (1, 6, 7) in three ways: conformably to the three explica- 
tions of this disputed term allowed by the Vākyakāra (see Appendix $2, Fr. XIII); 
respectively gambhirüámbhahsamudbhüta-, borrowed from Dramida (« kam "water", api, 
asa "ground, soil”); sumrsttanàüla- (< kapi [ kam pibati] “stalk”; asa [yasminn áste] 
"seat"); ravikaraviküsita- (< kapi [« kam pibati] “sun”, asa [tenüsyate ksipyate vikü- 
syate] "expansion, blowing"). 

749. In the sequel R. has been inspired by VP. 6, 7, 80 ff. 

750. I refer to VP. 1, 22 on Visnu's ornaments and weapons. 

751. 858. 1, 1, 21 antas taddharmopadesat, 

752. MahUp.? 

753. ChUp. 1, 6, 7. 

754. BAUp. 4, 4, 22, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 291 

will is realized,/55 ‘supreme beyond all, eternal, universal, Narayana, Hari,’ 736 
“Lord of all, sovereign of the souls,"!5! etc. - 

§ 135. The Author of the Vàkya declares all this in: “The Sruti “the 
golden person is regarded”75 teaches that the One who is knowing is within 
everything, because we learn that He is the Lord of the world and the 
desires, and also because He is beyond sin” etc, The same author, after 
having stated the prima facie view that the Supreme Person would have 
assumed form to favour His worshipper: “If it be said that His form is 
temporarily assumed by his sovereign power, in order to favour their 
thoughts,” subsequently denies that His form is not eternal: “That body is 
beyond sensual perception and only apprehensible by the internal faculty, 
for this has been declared:”759 i.e. even as the qualities of knowledge etc. 
have been stated to constitute the proper form of the Supreme Brahman, in 
the same manner His form belongs to His proper form, for the scriptures 
declare that His proper form is such. 

The same has been commented upon by the Author of the Bhàsya: 
“The form of the creator of all is His by nature; however, it cannot be 
grasped by the eye, it can only be apprehended by the untroubled mind. which 
has another means; this on account of the $ruti: “He is not grasped by the 
eye, nor by speech, but by purified thought." For a deity that is formless 
cannot be declared to have form, for the $üstra asserts things so as they are: 
“saffron-coloured garment,” “I know that great person who has the 
colour of the sun, beyond matter;”76! and because another context declares 
that He is a witness," etc. [Vakya] “The word hiranmaya- is used, because of 
similarity of form, just as “moon-faced”;” [Bhasya] here the suffix -maya- 
has not the sense of "being a product of" because the soul is not subject to 
beginning." Even as we learn from the mention of an infinitude of beautiful 
qualities that the Supreme Brahman is modified by measureless beautiful 
qualities, in the same way we know by the mention of “ .... that person who 
has the colour of the sun," etc. that the Supreme Person Narayana, who is 
the Supreme Brahman, has a perfectly beautiful shape which is in accordance 
with His pleasure and in harmony with Himself. Since the texts: “Visnu’s 
consort, Mistress of this world," “Hri and Laksmi are Thy consorts,”762 “the 

755. ChUp. 8, 1, 5. 

756. MahanarUp. 11, 2. 

757. MahanarUp. 11, 3. 

758. Reference is to ChUp. 8, 1, 6 and 8, 2. 
759. Viz. MundUp. 3, 1, 8. 

760. BAUp. 2, 3, 6. 

761. SvetUp. 3, 7. , 

762. TaittS. 4, 4, 12, 5. 

292 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

sūris regard always,” “beyond matter,” “lying beyond this matter,"763 etc, 
xefer to consorts, attendants, a residence etc., we know also that they actually 
exist: as the Author of the Bhàsya declared: “for the $üstra asserts things 
so as they are." : 

$136. In other words: even as the text “Brahman, who is real, know- 
ledge, eternal” declares that the proper form of the Supreme Spirit is 
essentially different from everything else inasmuch as it is antagonistic to all 
evil and comprises only boundless bliss, and inasmuch as it is undefinable— 
even as, further, the texts “Who is omniscient, all-knowing,” “His supreme 
potency is diverse, His knowledge, power and works are proper to His 
mature, 166 “everything derives its light from this luminary, all this is luminous 
by His luminosity,” etc. declare that His qualities which are unsurpassed. 
and innumerable are essentially different from everything else—in the same 
manner the text “who has the colour of the sun,” etc. declares that His form, 
attendants, residence etc. are essentially different from everything else, are 
proper to Him exclusively and have an inexplicable proper form and nature. 

8137. If the Vedas are pramana, then they denote. the sum-total of. 
unprecedented and compatible meanings, classified under vidhi, arthavada 
and mantra, so as they are in reality. That the Vedas are pramana is stated 
in the sutra. “Meaning is inherent in the word.”™68 Even as the power of heat 
is inherent in fire etc., and even as the power of originating particular cog- 
nitions is inherent in the senses of vision etc., in the same way the power 
of denotation is inherent in language.’ It is not right to say that the deno- 
tativeness of language is based on convention, as is that of the language of 
gestures. In the very absence of any knowledge about a person or persons 
who fixed the convention, although there is no break in the beginningless 
transmission of the notion (of the denotative character of language), the 
originally conventional meanings would have been known as such either 
directly or traditionally. Nor is it right to imagine that the denotativeness 
of language is as conventional as that of words like Devadatta ete., for with 
words of that type the convention is known either directly or traditionally. 
With words like cow, inasmuch as no convention is known, although. there: 

763. TaittAr, 3, 13, 1. 

764. TaittUp. 2, 1. 

765. MundUp. 2, 2, 7 yah sarvajriah sarvavit. 

766. SvetUp. 6, 8 pardsya $aktir vividhaiva. 

767. MundUp. 2, 3, 10/$vetUp. 6, 14 tam eva bhàntam. 

768. KMS. 1, 1, 5 autpattikas tw gabdasyarthena sambandhah. 

769. This theory of the originality of language is the one generally adhered to 
by the ancient systems, though the (ancient) Naiyayikas formulate it thus that the 
denotativeness of language is a convention established by God himself, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 293 

is no break in the beginningless transmission of the notion of denotativeness, 
the power of denotation is inherent. Hence follows that we must assume 
that the cognitive power of language is inherent in it just as the power of 
heat is inherent in fire and the power of cognition in the senses of vision etc. 

8138. — However, if the denotative power of language is inherent 
in it as it is in the senses, then why is it necessary for a word, in order to 
be denotative, that its relation to its denotation is apprehended? 

— We reply: it is as with the mark-of-inference?"?? in logic: just as 
marks like smoke have invariably a definite relation with the thing marked, 
fire etc., and so give rise to the cognition that there is fire, so language has 
also an invariable relation with the denotation and so gives rise to a certain 
cognition. 

— But then language, being the inferential mark of denotation, would 
be Inference and not a pramana in its own right. 

— No: the relation between word and meaning is that between means 
and object of cognition. Smoke etc., have another relation: via an inter- 
mediate stage of knowledge of that relation they give rise to a definite cog- 
nition, that is the difference. 

Summing up, inasmuch as we see that a word has the power of de- 
noting a meaning when the relation between both is apprehended, and inas- 
much we have.no knowledge of any convention, although there is no break 
in the beginningless transmission of our notion of the denotativeness of 
language, therefore we conclude that the power of denotation is inherent in 
the word itself. 

8139. So, denotative combinations of simple words are to be called 
contextual language.7! There where the word-order in speaking derives 
from human cognition"? we speak of human language. But there where the 
word-order in speaking always derives from the mental impression??? left 
by the previous word-order in an endless retrogressive chain we call them 

770. linga-; I refer to Tarkasamgraha, Buddhikanda § 48 with Athalye's notes. ` 

711. vàkyasabda- "language consisting in propositions and phrases in which a 
number of single words (padas) are coordinated and. subordinated to a vakyartha”; on 
padasamgháta- cf. Sabarasvamin’s definition samhatyartham abhidadhati padani (KMSBh. 
3, 3, 14). 

772. ie. the construction of sentences and phrases as representing a certain train 
of thought traceable to human experience. L 

773. samskára-. 

294 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

preterhuman’™ and we say that the Vedas are preterhuman. That which 
makes the Vedas preterhuman and eternal is that it is spoken in exactly 
the same precise order that has been remembered by the mental impressions 
left by previous orders in an endless retrogressive chain. And these Vedas 
— congeries of syllables, each of which bas its definite place in a regular 
order from the beginning onwards — continue in an infinite number of 
branches differing according to the Veda — Rg-, Yajur-, Sáma- or Atharva- 
Veda — to which they belong. And these Vedas, in the form of vidhi, artha- 
vada and mantra, denote the proper form of Narayana, who is the Supreme 
Brahman, and the manner in which He is to be propitiated, and finally the 
particular results that follow when He is propitiated. The entire body of 
language called Veda, which gives rise to the knowledge of the Supreme 
Person, of His proper form, of the propitiation of Him, and of the fruit 
thereof, is eternal. Since the Vedas are endless and difficult to understand, 
the great rsis have been ordered by the Supreme Person to transmit the 
sense of the Veda in every age in order to help all the. worlds, and they 
have composed the dharmaSastras, epics and purinas which are founded on 
vidhi, arthavada and mantra. The profane words are extracted as before 
from the vocabulary of the Vedas and are applied, as before, to certain 
objects as their names,” and their usage is fixed by tradition. 

— However, if all the words denoting meanings are ultimately Vedic, 
is it proper then to define them separately as belonging either to the hymns 
or to profane parlance?777 

— In the Vedas the same words have their appointed place in that 
regular order only and are there alone used, whereas the words used else- 
where are used differently, so we commit no error 

$140. Thus it is set forth that Narayana — who is the Supreme Brah- 
man —to be known from the Vedas with their subsiduaries, corroborated 
by epics, puránas and dharmasastras, is antagonistic to all evil and essentially 

714. apauruseya-; the sentences of the Veda do not represent a train of thought 
traceable to human experience: a sentence like svargakamo yajeta can only have a 
preterhuman origin since its contents cannot be derived from human knowledge: hence 
it is "unprecedented". All such sentences together form a huge frame of interdependen- 
ces in which elements are comprehensible from within but never from without. 

115. S. suggests a distinction between the dharma$astras as continuing and sup- 
porting the pürvabhaga—pre-upanisad Veda—and the epics and puranas supporting the 
Upanisads 

776. S. refers justly to VP. 1, 5, 63, quoted by R. supra $21 in a similar 
connexion. 

717. Resp. chandas- and bhdsd; for references see RENOU, Terminologie, s.v. 

bhas-. 

-VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 295 

different from everything else. His proper form is purely boundless know- 
ledge and bliss. He is a treasury of hosts of natural, innumerable beautiful 
qualities. All spiritual and non-spiritual entities, in all the varieties of 
proper form, modes of existence and activities, obey His volition. The proper 
form and nature of His infinite supernal manifestation’ are undefinable. 
The means of His sport are constituted by the phenomenal world consisting 
of an infinite variety of spiritual and non-spiritual entities. In the árutis/?? 
“all this is verily Brahman, all this is ensouled by Him....Thow art That, 
Svetaketu,789 some call Him Agni, others the Maruts, others Prajapati, others 
Indra, others the vital air, others the eternal Brahman,8! the splendours 
and brightnesses that are in the world; the world, the world-protectors and 
the three Vedas; the three fires and five oblations: the Son of Devaki is 
all and all the ४००७7७2 You are the sacrifice, You are the vasat, You are the 
Om syllable,’ You are Rtadhüman, the ancient Vasu of the Vasus, Pra- 
japati, the entire world is Thy body and the earth is Thy fortitude; fire, 
wrath, grace, soma is Thine, O Thou who art adorned with the Srivatsa;85 
Visnu is the luminaries, Visnu is the woods, Visnu is the lands, Visnu is 
the mountains and spaces, He is the rivers and the oceans, He is all what 
and what is not, O great priest:”786 in all these Srutis all words used in 
sümünüdhikaranya declare that Brahman is modified by all because all 
constitute His body, as I have said before 

The Supreme Brahman, whose every will is true, wills, of His own 
accord, that He be modified by the many. He then, of His own accord, 
divides the subtle elemental matter in the form of the totality of non-spiritual 
entities from the multitudinous hosts of experiencing entities, which were 
both dissolved in himself hitherto, and creates out of the subtle elemental 
matter the primeval elements, introduces into them as their souls the expe- 
riencing entities, creates the entire Universe out of these primeval elements. 
controlled by spiritual souls in mutual conjunction, and then of His. own. 
accord enters into them as their immanent soul?! and exists on as the 

778. mahavibhiti- ५ ; 2. 
779. ChUp. 3, 14, 1 sarvam khalv idam brahma. 
- 780. ChUp. 6, 8, 7 aitadátmyam idam sarvam (tat satyam sa atma) tat tvam asi 
Svetaketo.. : 
781. Manu 12, 123 where the vulgate reads manum anye for maruto nye. 
782. - MBh.? 
783. Ram. 6, 120, 20. 
784. Ram. 6, 120, 7. 
785. Ram. 6, 120, 26. 
- 786. VP. 2, 12, 38. 
787. ChUp. 6, 2, 3. 

296 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

Supreme Spirit whose body is formed by all, and is thus modified by the 
many. 'This subtle matter of the primeval elements is called by the name 
of prakrti, and all the experiencing entities are in their totality denoted by 
the name purusa. Both prakrti and purusa constitute modes of the Supreme 
‘Spirit because they constitute the Supreme Spirit's body. Hence the Supreme 
Spirit Himself can be denoted by the words prakrti and purusa. All this, 
which has been expounded before, is elucidated by the Sruti: “He willed: 
I be many: I will multiply; having created that, He entered into that; when 
He had entered into that it was present and yonder, it was explained and un- 
explained, an abode and not an abode, knowledge and not knowledge, true 
and false; and it was real.788 

$141. We have already declared that the means of attaining Brah- 
man is a superior bhakti in the form of rememorization staggered to a state 
of extremely lucid perception, which is immeasurably and overwhelmingly 
dear to the devotee. It is achieved by complete devotion of bhakti which 
is furthered by the performance of one’s proper acts preceded by know- 
ledge of the orders of reality as learnt from the Sistra. The word bhakti 
has the sense of a kind of love, and this love again that of a certain kind of 
knowledge. 

— However, according to people in the world love has no other sense 
than that of pleasure, and pleasure that is to be realized by a certain kind 
of knowledge is a different thing altogether. 

— No, for whatever kind of knowledge is said to lead to pleasure is 
pleasure itself. 

$142. In other words: cognitions with a content fall either under 
pleasure or suffering, or the state of neither pleasure nor suffering, and they 
become one or the other of these three according to their content or object. If 
knowledge particularized by a particular object excites pleasure, it is held dear 
accordingly. The cognition that has that pleasurable object is pleasure itself, 
and we do not notice any different thing: particularly because this cogni- 
tion leads to the practical behaviour of being happy. The capacity of par- 
ticularizing such a pleasurable cognition is but relative and impermanent 
in any object different from Brahman, but in Brahman Itself it is absolute 
and permanent: it is said that “Brahman is bliss.”799 Since knowledge is 
pleasurable if its object is pleasurable, Brahman is pleasurable as such. 

788. TaittUp. 2, 6. | 
189. ie. the discriminatory knowledge of the ontological otders.of prakrti, purusa 

and God. 
790. TaittUp. 3, 6 dnando brahma, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 297 

This is declared in: “He is pleasure: He that obtains this pleasure becomes 
happy?! i.e., Brahman being pleasure one is happy when one has attained 
Brahman. The Supreme Person, being in His own right and of His own 
accord boundless and absolute bliss, becomes bliss to another too, because 
there is no differentiation in that He is beatitudinous.792 So the meaning 
of our text is: He that has Brahman as the object of his knowledge becomes 
happy. When it is realized that the soul stands in a relation of subservience 
to the Supreme Brahman because this Supreme Brahman — treasury of hosts 
of innumerable absolute and immeasurable beautiful qualities, irreproach- 
able, possessing an infinite supernal manifestation — ocean of immeasurable 
and absolute goodness, beauty and love — is the Principal to which the soul 
is accessory or subservient, then the Supreme Brahman who is thus an object 
of absolute love leads the soul to Himself. 

8 143. — However, this would mean in other words that the soul’s 
absolute subservience itself is immeasurable and absolute happiness: but 
this is contradicted by all experience, for we see that literally all spiritual 
beings have one great wish: to be completely independent; compared with 
that, dependence means suffering. And there is the smrti: “All dependence 

means suffering, and in the same line: “Service is called a dog's way, so 
try to avoid it.”194 

— This attitude reveals the misconceived identification?95 of body and 
soul by those who have not learnt that the soul is essentially different from 
the body. For the body, which, as a matter of fact, is a mass in which quali- 
ties, such as the generic structure of man, ete., subsist, is held to be inde- 
‘pendent and they who are bond to samsāra think that the body is the 'T'796 
Whatever misconception one has of one's own soul, one holds the end of life 
to agree with that. What is pleasure is differently determined according 
to the body for which the soul is mistaken — lion, tiger, boar, man, yaksa, 
raksas, pisaca, god, danava, male, female, etc. — and these different pleasures 
are mutually incompatible. So everything is judged by whatever aim of 
life corresponds to the mistaken identity of the soul. The proper form of 
the soul has, however, knowledge for its one and only form, and is essen- 
tially different from the body, Eod, etc., and the soul's essence is that it is 

791. TaittUp. 2, 7, raso vai sah / raso hy evayam labdhvanandi bhavati. 
792. God is beatitudinous in self-contemplation: being his own object; if as such 
he is another's object there is no difference in his being a beatitudinous object. 

793. Manusmrti 6, 160 a sarvam paravasam duhkham (sarvam ütmavasam 
sukham). 

794. Manusmrti 6, 4. 
795.. abhimana-. 

796. ie. the self, soul or àtman is confused with empirical ego, 
V. 38 

298 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

subservient to Another. When this conception of the soul as it really is 
has been formed the end of life is held to be that which is in accordance 
with that. The smrti: “The soul is pure knowledge"?! declares that the 
soul's only form is knowledge. From numerous Srutis of the kind of “the 
Master of all” we know that the soul’s sole form is to be subservient to 
the Supreme Spirit. Therefore the wishful misconception of independence 
must be regarded as an erroneous cognition due to karman, just as the wishful 
misconception that the soul is identical with the body of a lion, tiger, etc. 
Consequently it is also due to karman that objects other than the Supreme 
Person are pleasurable. Therefore they are slight and impermanent, while 
the Supreme Person is happiness in Himself, so that this happiness is per- 
manent, immeasurable and absolute —on the authority of the Sruti: “Brah- 
man is joy, Brahman is space;799 Brahman is bliss; Brahman is real, know- 
ledge, infinite.”8°1 No other entity other than Brahman is essentially happi- 
ness, and if it happens to be pleasurable, it is impermanent because it is due 
to karman: this has been declared by the venerable Parasara: “sinful kar- 
man and auspicious karman are called hell or heaven;9? one and the same 
thing may lead to suffering, pleasure and jealousy and wrath: so for what 
reason has that thing that character?"803 ie, what makes an entity that is 
completely or enduringly pleasure, pain, etc., just that entity? This exclusive 
character is due to good and evil karman. After showing the want of consis- 
tency when we consider a number of persons, in that the pleasure of one is the 
suffering of another, he says that that same inconsistency holds also in one 
and the same person: “That which led to joy now leads again to pain, and 
what led to wrath now leads to peace, i.e., that any thing is markedly 
pleasure or pain is due to the effects of karman, not to the proper form of 
that thing itself; hence it disappears when an end is put to karman. न 

$144. The smrti that you just quoted “all dependence means suffer- 
ing’’8 declares as a matter of fact that, since there is no mutual relationship 
of principal and subservient terms with entities that are different from the 
Supreme Person, any subservience to something different from Him is suffer- 
ing. In “service is called a dog's way"996 it is stated that obedience to one 
who is not worth it is a dog's way. According to the text: “For He alone 

797. VP. 6, 7, 22. 

798. MahinarUp. 9, 3. 

799. ChUp. 4, 10, 5 (préno brahma) kam brahma kham brahma (iti). 
800. TaittUp. 3, 6. j 
801. TaittUp. 2, 1. 

802. VP. 4, 6, 44 cd. 

803. VP. 4, 6, 45. 

804. VP, 4, 6, 46-47. 

805. Manusmrti 6, 160. 

806. Manusmrti 6, 4, 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 299 

should be worshipped by all always in all stages of life,"99 only the Supreme 
Person is worthy of the obedience of all those who know what the true 
nature of the soul is. As the Venerable Lord put it: “When a man serves 
Me through unerring devotion to bhakti, he will pass beyond the gunas and 
become Brahman."998 This service in the form of bhakti is denoted by the 
word for “knowing” in the $rutis: “He that knows Brahman attains the 
Most-High,®°9 “He that knows this, becomes immortal, knowing Brahman 
he becomes Brahman”!!! ete. From the specifying text: “He whom He 
chooses may attain Him,”8!2 we understand from the clause: “whom He 
chooses” that one must be elected and that the most beloved one is elected. 
The most beloved of the Lord is he in whom boundless and absolute love for 
the Lord has been inspired: this is stated by the Lord in: “For I am exceed- 
ingly beloved of the knower and he is beloved by Me. Therefore it is 
knowledge which has risen to superior bhakti that is really the means of 
attaining the Lord, as the lord Dvaipayana declares in the Moksadharma by 
way of comment upon all the Upanisads: “His form is not to be beheld and 
no one perceives Him with the eye, only he who has concentrated om his 
soul espies — by bhakti and discrimination®\4— the proper form of know- 
ledge in this life,"915 i.e., after having realized one's own soul by discrimina- 
tion, one sees the Supreme Spirit by bhakti, sc. one has immediate presenta- 
tion of Him, attains Him: this follows because the meaning is the same as 
in the text: “...but by exclusive bhakti can I..."816 Since bhakti is taken 
as a form of cognition, everything is established. 

8145. Considering that there must be people who are at once pro- 
found enough and without professional jealousy and who know how to dis- 
criminate between what is of the essence and what not, I have written for 
them this Summary of the Meaning of the Veda.®!7 

807. MBh.? 

808. BhG. 14, 26. 

809. TaittUp. 2, 1. 

810. TaittAr. 3, 1, 3 

811. MundUp. 3, 2, 9 (so yo ha vai tat paramam) brahma veda brahmaiva bhavati 

812. MundUp. 3, 2, 3 

813. BhG. 7, 17 

814. dhrti- "discrimination" as according to R.. GBh. ad 6, 25 where he glosses 
buddhyà dhrtigrhitaya by vivekavisayayd 

815. MBh. 12, 230, 68 cd—69 ab (Kumbhakonam ed.). 

816. BhG. 11, 54 bhaktyà tv ananyayü $akya aham evamvidho 'rjuna/jüütuwum 
drastum ca tattvena pravestum ca paramtapa // 

817. Inspired by Yamuna? cf. Agamapramanya stt. 2-3 ye mi kecana matsarat 
sarvasya durmünasárà narah / gambhirdm gunasálinim api giram nindanti nindantu te // 
sürüsüravicürakausaladas$apüre pare "vasthitah / santah santy anasüyavo "pi bahavah 
$amsanti ye madgiram // 

4 > Rg iy oe 

APPENDIX 

$1. Fragments from Bodhayana’s Vrtti. 

II. 

III. 

Iv. 

vrttàt karmüdhigamüd anantaram brahmavividisa — 

“immediately after knowledge of karman has been acquired does 
the desire of knowing brahman arise.” 

— quoted SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 2. 

On idem, following on Fragment I — 

samhitam etac chürirakam Jaiminiyena sodasalaksaneneti Sastraika- 
tvasiddhih — 

“since this Sariraka forms one volume with Jaimini's Sutras in 16 
Chapters, it is proved that both constitute one and the same 5585079.” 
— quoted 1, 1, 1, p. 2. 

On jyotisa in BrS. 1, 4, 13 (14) jyotisaikesam asaty anne — 
jagadvyaparavarjam samano jyotisü — 

(“the atman is) equal to Light when free from involvement in the 
world's activities." 

— quoted 1, 1, 1, p. 79. 

ad BrS. 1, 1, 10 gatisémanyat — 

sata somya tadà sampanno bhavatiti sampattyasampattibhyam etad 
avaswate — 

“in the text ‘(when a person sleeps) then, my son, he is joined 
with the Existent’ (ChUp. 6, 8, 1) that is decided on the strength of 
joining and disjoining" — Apparently in the same connexion the 
Vrtti quotes BAUp. 4, 3, 21 prajnenatmana parisvaktah ‘ (thus, when 
this person is) embraced by the conscient soul (he knows nothing 

' inside or outside)’. 

V. 39 

— quoted SBh. 1, 1, 10. 

ad BrS. 1, 2, 1, sarvatra prasiddhopadesat — 

sarvam khalv asti sarvatma brahmesah — 

"Brahman is 'verily everything! (— ChUp. 3, 14, 1 sarvam khalv 
idam brahma), ‘the soul of all (=SvetUp. 3, 21), ‘the Lord’ 
(= SvetUp. 3, 7 iam tam jfiatvàmrtà bhavanti).” 

— quoted SBh. 1, 2, 1. 

302 
VI. 

VII. 

II. 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

ad BrS. 1, 3, 7 (8) bhūmā samprasādād adhy upadeśāt — 

bhima tv eveti bhimé brahma nīāmādiparamparayātmana ürdhvam 
asyopadeśāt — 

“according to the text ‘(one should try to know) that bhümà (“vast 
one”)? Brahman is bhūmā, for the instruction thereof is, in the 
preceding part, of the atman by the series beginning with nama etc." 
In other words, ChUp. 7, 2, 3 (and the preceding 7, 1, 3 ff.) bears 
on the atman, for the satya of 7, 15, 5 can be connected with the 
satya of 8, 3 which explicitly bears on the átman; note that brahman 
is interchangeable with Gtman. 

— quoted SBh. 1, 3, 7. 

ad BrS. 1, 3, 30 (31) ff. madhvüdisv asambhavüd anadhikaram 
Jaiminih/jyotisi bhavüc ca/bhüvam tu Bidardyano 'sti hi — 

asti hi madhvüdisu sambhavo brahmana eva sarvatra nicayyatvat — 
“it is possible that (the gods are qualified for) the madhuvidyà etc. 
for Brahman is to be sought for in everything." 

— quoted SBh. 1, 3, 32. 

$2. Vakya and Dramidabhàsya. 
A. Fragments possibly from BAUp.Bhàsya of Dramida. 
I 

(Unconnected) phalasambibhatsaya karmabhir àtmünam piprisanti 
sa prito 'lam phalàya iti $üstramaryada — 

“If they, motivated by the desire to be provided with the fruits, are 
anxious to please the àtman with acts, then, when he is pleased 
he suffices to bestow those fruits — thus disposes scripture." 
—SBh. 2, 2, 3 has the variant phalavidhitsaya “motivated by the 
desire to ordain those fruits": lectio facilior for ?bibhats?. 

— quoted Ved. 8124; SBh. 2, 2, 3. 

ad BAUp. 3, 8, 9 etasya va aksarasya pra$üsane gargi süryacandra- 
masau vidhrtau tisthatah etc.; cf. also TaittUp. 2, 8— 
asyãjñayā dhévati vàyuh/nàdyah sravanti/tena krtasimano jalasayah 
samada iva mesavisarpitam kurvanti — 

“At his behest the wind runs, the rivers flow; the oceans, shown 
their limits by him, jump crazily like (rutting) rams." 

—Qquoted Ved. $ 124 

Ila. Apparently same context as II — 

tatsamkalpanibandhanà hime loka na cyavante na sphutante / 

svaéüsanünuvartinam jndtva karumyat sa bhagavün vardhayeta 
vidvin karmadaksah — - 

गा. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA i 303. 
“For all these worlds, being supported by his will, do not collapse, 

.nor do they fly apart. When he knows that one follows his com- 

ynand then, mercifully, the Venerable Lord, who knows, who is 
equal to the task, will make one prosper 

— cf. BAUp. quoted in II; for the second half compare 3, 8, 10. 

— quoted Ved. 8 124. 

Unconnected. 

Bh. Tram ha vai jayata iti Sruter .... yady api avadanastutiparam 
vakyam tathapi nasata stutir upapadyate. 

“On account of the Sruti: “There shall indeed be debt ....”, even 

though the statement be meant (only) to praise the offering, yet 
there can be no praise if the object is non-existent.” 

— Reference is to SatBr. 1, 7, 2, 1-6, ending tad avadanam nama; in 
the context avadàna has the general sense of offering, to cover both 
yaga and homa. It is clear that Dramida argues that the arthavada 

` - must establish the objects referred to, even though it have the 

IV. 

function of praising the object, for without object no praise: in 
other words, arthavàüda portions are not less significant than pure 
vidhi portions. 

— quoted Ved. 8118. 

Fragments from ChUpVakya and Bhāşya. 

(Unconnected) — 

V. upanisannatvaéd upanisat — Bh. gahane hiyam vidya samni- 
visté — Vamanatika gahane brahmany upanisanna — 

“The term upanisat derives from the fact that it is put down." 
"For this meditation is contained in the mysterious One." 

“It is put down in the mysterious, i.e. the brahman.” 

— quoted Venkatanatha, Tattvatika I, p. 34. 

ad ChUp. 1, 6, 6 hiranmayah puruso dráyate — 

V. hiranmaya iti rüpasüámünyüc candramukhavat — 

Bh. na mayad atra vikaram adaya prayujyate / anarabhyatvad 
atmanah — 

“ ‘Golden’ is used because of similarity of colour; it is a comparison 
of the type candramukha “moon-like face”? 

“The suffix °maya- is here not used in the sense of modification: 
that would not agree with the fact that the atman is not caused.” 
— quoted Ved. $135; TatpD. p. 156, 

304 
VI. 

VII. 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

ad ChUp. 1, 6, 6 atha ya eso "ntarüditye hiranmayah puruso 
V. hirammayah puruso dréyata iti prajfiah sarvantarah syat / 
lokakümavyapadesát tathodayat papmandm —: 

“In the text ‘the golden person is seen’ it is the conscient One, 
entered into all who is meant: this follows from the fact that the 
world's desire is mentioned and that he transcends the evil things." 
— “the world's desire" cf. ChUp. 1, 7, 6 sa esa ye caitasmad arvāñco 
lokās tesam ceste manusyakümünüm ca; “he transcends all evil ac- 
cording to 1, 6, 7; that he enters everything is expressed in 1, 7." 
— quoted Ved. § 135 

In the same connexion the objection and reply — 

V. syüt tad rüpam krtakam anugrahartham / taccetasim aisvaryat / 
ripam vütindriyam antahkaranapratyaksanirdesat — 

— “Could it be that that body [or: his body] is artificial, meant as 
a favour (ie. to favour meditation)? For he has power over their 
minds." 

—"'Rather is it suprasensible, for it is said that it is evident to the 
inner faculty." 
— that there is a pürvapaksa — so Dramida— follows from initial 
syüt; vü in the sense of viparyaya, cf. BrS. 2, 2, 41; krtaka- 
artificial, make-believe, illusory 

Bh. na và mayamatram / añjasaiva visvasrjo Tüpam / tat tw ma 
caksusà grahyam / manasa tv akalusena sadhanantaravatà grhyate — 
na caksusü grhyate napi vaca manasd tu visuddhena iti $ruteh / na 
hy arüpüyà devatiya rüpam upadisyate / yathübhütavüdi hi 
Sastram / maharajanam vasah — vediham etam purusam mahantam 
Gdityavarnam tamasah parastüd iti prakaranantaranirdesic ca 
süksinah — 

“No, the body is not made of maya: the body of the Creator of all 
can only be natural. It can however not be grasped by the eye; 
but it is grasped by the mind which, when freed from impurity, 
disposes of another means of perception: this follows from the &ruti: 
"It is not grasped by the eye, nor by the word, but by the mind 
if pure.” For scripture will not teach that à disembodied deity 
possesses a body: scripture states things just as they are. Other 
contexts also set forth that he is a witness (i.e. embodied person): 
* (that Person has a body like) a saffron-coloured garment” “I know 
that great Person, with the colour of the sun, beyond darkness." 

— the $rutis are respectively MundUp. 3, 1, 8; BAUp. 2, 3, 6 and 
SvetUp. 3, 7 

— quoted Ved. § 135, 

VIII. 

IX. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 305 

ad ChUp. 1, 6, 7 kapydsam pundarikam — 

[S. remarks that the Vákyakàra enumerates 6 possible meanings of 
kapydsam, and rejects three: 1. Gdityamandalam, 2. markata- 
prstham, 3. isadvikasitam; and accepts three 1.] ddityaksiptam 
grimattvat “ (splendour) emitted by the sun, for (the lotus) is 
resplendent” [2. naldsanam, 3. jalabhuvam.] 

Bh. comments on second set of three with - 

gambhirümbhah .... “deep water.” 

—cf. Ràmànuja's description gambhirambhahsamudbhita-sumrsta- 
nülaravikaraviküsita-, corresponding to the acceptable renderings 3, 
2 and 1. 

— quoted TatpD. p. 326. 

V. sakrt pratyayam kuryüc chabdarthasya krtatvat prayàjádivat / 
siddham tipaisanasabdat — 
*One should conceive this idea just once, because thereby the sense 
of the scripture has already been accomplished completely, as in the 
case of the Prayaja’s etc.” “No, (what has been said, viz. that it is 
repetitive) is proved by the use of the word updsana.” 
— R. interprets both sentences as pürvapaksa and siddhanta, as 
would also follow the Vakyakara's definition of abhydsa. This 
quotation most probably precedes in order that on wpdsana (see X). 
— The meaning of the pürvapaksin's reference is this: the prayàja's 
are a group of accessory sacrifices in the dar$apürnamasa rites; to 
them correspond 6 pradhaünayügas, so that it would follow that to 
each pradhànayága a prayàja is to be joined, but according to tantra 
(the rule by which an accessory is to be performed only once for an 
entire group of principals) the prayàja is performed only once; 
tantra is defined by Sabarasvamin KMS. 11, 1, 1 tatra yat sakrt 
krtam bahünam upakaroti tat tantram ity ucyate. 

` — quoted SBh: 1, 1, 1, p. 9 

ad Ch. Up. 3, 14, 1 sarvam khalv idam brahma tajjalün iti santa 
wpüsita — 

V. vedanam upüsanam syat /tadvisaye $ravanaüt / wpüsanam sydd 
dhruvanusmrtir / daráéanüc ca — 

"Meditating would be knowing: for this follows from the Srutis on 
this topic. Meditating then would be constant rememorization also, 
for it is representing visually." 

— connexion with ChUp. uncertain; so is their suggested coherence. 
The term dhruvünusmrti is derived from ChUp. 7, 26, 2 (infra). 
Th M z 

e suggested sense of darSandc is according to Rámànuja's expli- 

306 

XI. 

XIII. 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

cation, but not certain. No comment of Dramida. 
— quoted SBh. 1, 1, 1, pp. 9 and 10. 

ad ChUp. 3, 14, 1 sarvam khalv idam brahma .... yathakratur 
asmiml loke puruso bhavati tathetah pretya bhavati — 

V. Gtmetyeva tu grhniyat / sarvasya tannispatteh — 

"One must only realize that (all this) is the atman; (then he 
becomes that which is thought) for all is fulfilled in the atman.” 
— connexion uncertain but probable; no comment of Dramida. 

— quoted Ved. § 108; SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 18; p. 116 (partly). 

V. parinümas tu syüd dadhyadivat — 

"there is an inner causal change, as in the case of curds turning 
into butter, etc." 
— Most probably in connexion with the sadvidya ChUp. 6, 1, 4 and 
explaining the word vikàüra-; cf. Intr. Chapter IV, ref. is to ChUp. 6, 6, 
—No comments of Dramida quoted, but it is stated that the author 
of the vrtti on the Vakya, doubtless identical with. the bhdsya, 
adheres to the same view. 

— quoted Bhàskara, BrS. 1, 4, 25. 

ad ChUp. 7, 26, 2 aharaéuddhaw sattvasuddhih / sattvasuddhau 
dhruvà smrtih / smrtilambhe sarvagranthinüm vipramoksah — 

V. tallabdhir | vivekavimokübhyasakriyakalyanünavasadanuddhar- 
sebhyah sambhavün nirvacanic ca/.... jatyasrayanimittadustad 
annat küya$uddhir vivekah/vimokah | küámanabhisvangah / àram- 
bhanasamSilanam punahpunar abhyasah / paficamahàayajfiadyanus- 
thünam Saktitah kriya / satyaérjavadayadanahimsanabhidhyah kalya- 
mani / desakalavaisamyàc chokavastvadyanusmrtes ca tajjanyam 
dainyam abhüsvaratvam manaso ’vasddah / tadviparyayo nava- 
sddah / tadviparyayaja tustir ^ uddharsah / tadviparyayajo nud- 
dharsah — 

— “That atman is attained by distinction, detachment, exercise, 
rite, moral virtues, non-despondency, non-contentment: for this 
agrees (with the $ruti) and is also explicitly stated. Distinction is 
purity of body through nourishment that is pure in kind, provenance, 
and without [spoiling] accidents. Detachment is ceasing to long for 
desired things. Exercise is repeated meditation on the irambhana- 
Sruti. Rite is to capacity performing of the five major sacrifices etc. 

The moral virtues are veridicity, honesty, .compassionateness, 

generosity, non-offensiveness, freedom from desires. Despondency 
is the misery, the dullness of mind caused by the vicissitudes in 
space and time and by the memory of painful things etc.; its opposite 

, 

XIV. 

XV. 

XVI. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 307 

is non-despondency. Contentment is the satisfaction caused by the 
opposites of the above; non-contentment is caused by the opposite 
of satisfaction.” . 

— Connexion with this ChUp. passage in its entirety uncertain; Bh. 
has commented on the passage and given references to corresponding 
śrutis. R. mentions one reference to BhG. explicitly: tadbhava- 
bhàvitah BhG. 7, 26 ad abhyasa. 

— quoted SBh. 1, 1, 1, pp. 11-2. 

ad ChUp 8, 1, 1 tasmin yad antas tad anvestavyam tad viva 
V. tasmin yad antar iti kimavyapadesah — 

“In the clause ‘that which is therein’ reference is made to the 
desires." 

— quoted Ved. § 106; SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 80. 

ad ChUp. 8, 1, 1 (daharavidya) — 

V. yuktam / tadgunakopüásanat — 

“(Also with regard to the sadvidya) it is appropriate; for medita- 
tion is on an object that has those qualities" — _ 

Bh. yady api saccitto na nirbhugnadaivatam gunaganam manasanu- 
dhavet tathapy antargunaém eva devatüm bhajate — 

' “Although one, when meditating on the sadvidyd, does not pursue 

with one's thought the multitude of qualities that are negative and 
divine, still one lovingly approaches the Deity as having inner 
qualities." 

— Dramida's comment probably not directly. on this Vakya, cf. 
Ramanuja: vyükhyütam ca Dramidácüryena vidyavikalpam vadata. 

: — Rendering of Dr. not certain; R. differs. I take it that nirbhugna 

refers to the qualities of the Daharavidyà apahatapapma etc., which 
are negative, and daivata to the qualities satyakümah satya- 
samkalpah, which are strictly divine. That the passage was obscure 
to early philosophers is proved by Sarvajriatman’s diverging inter- 
pretation (infra). 

—quoted Ved. § 88; SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 79. 

ad ChUp. 8, 1, 6 ya ihátmanam anuvidya vrajanty etāmś ca satyan 
kümüms tesém sarvesu lokesu kamacaro bhavati — 

Bh. devatdsayujyad a$arirasyüpi devatàvat sarvarthasiddhih syat— 
“Because (the soul) will be united with the deity, therefore, though 
being without a body, it will find all its ends accomplished, as if 
it were the deity itself." 

308 

XVII. 

XVIII. 

J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

— connexion uncertain, but suggested by R’s quotation of the $ruti 
in the immediate sequel. 
— quoted SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 79. 

ad ChUp. 8, 12, 1.... Gtto vai sasarivah priyapriyabhyam / na vai 
SaSarirasya satah ^ priyàüpriyayor apahatir asti/asariram viva 
santam ma priyüpriye sprsatah — 

Bh. yathà loke raja pracuradanda$üke ghore ’narthasamkate pi 
pradeée vartamüno pi vyajanadyavadhütadeho dosair ma sprsyate 
*bhipretams ca lokün punar api pálayisyati bhogāmś ca gandhadin 
vi$vajanabhogyünm dharayati tathasaw — loke$varo | bhramatsva- 
sümarthyacümaro dosair na spr$yate raksati ca lokan brahmaloküdin 
bhogams ca visvajanopabhogyan dharayati — 

“Just as a king on earth who, though living in a place teeming with 
mosquitoes and infested with horrible beasts of prey, yet keeping 
his body clean with ointments etc. is not touched by infections and 
will time and again protect the beloved countries and support the 
objects of experience, smell etc., that are within everybody’s reach 
to enjoy, similarly He, the king of the worlds, waving the fan of his 
omnipotence, is not touched by defects and protects the worlds 
from the Brahmaloka onwards, and supports the objects of. 
experience that are to be enjoyed by all mankind.” 

— If R.’s reference is right, the passage patently attacks the view that 
the $ruti referred to declares that the Supreme Being has mo body. 
— quoted SBh. 2, 1, 14. 

C. Indirect evidence from quotations. 

Sarvajüatman's references in Samksepa$ariraka III, 217 ff. 
— átreyavükyam api samvyavaharamatram 

kàryam samastam iti nah kathayaémbabhiva / 
satkaàryavaàdavisayo na hi dosarasir 

mayamaye bhavitum utsahate virodhàt // 217 // 
kanddadarsanasamasrayadosarasir 

dürün nirasta iha samvyavahüramütram / 
vedantabhimikusalo munir atrivamsyas 

tenüha küryam iha samvyavahairamatram // 218 // . 
sasthaprapathakanibaddham udiritam yat 

tat satyam eva khalu satyasamasrayatvat / 

1. For the translation see Intr. Ch. II, p. 25. 

XIXa. 

XIXb. 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 309 

tatraiva yat punar uvàca samudraphena- 
drstántapürvakam ado vyavaharadrstyà // 219 // 
pürvam viküram upavarnya $anaihéanais tad- 
drstim visrjya nikatam parigrhya tasmat / 
sarvam viküram atha samvyavaharamatram 
advaitam eva pariraksati vàkyakàrah // 220 // 
antargunaá bhagavati paradevateti 
pratyagguneti bhagavün api Bhasyakarah / 
dha sma yat tad iha nirgunavade. 
samgacchate na tu punah sagunapravade // 221 // 

Bhaskara, Brahmasutrabhasya 1, 1, 3 ad finem gives as an example 
of true knowledge to be gained from "false" instruction a parable 
that is substantially identical with one quoted by SureSvara and 
ascribed to Dramida (see b.): 

—drsyate ca loke mithyüvisaya upadeśas tattvajnanarthaparah- 
yathā kila kascid rajaputras taskarair Gniya nisddarajaya niveditas 
tena cüsaw putratvena parigrhito mlecchacarabhiratir evàste / tam 
rdjamantri tatrügatya mlecchajatyanugunam evdcaram kamcid 
anuvarnya pascadbhite ràjaputro si na mlecchaputra iti grahite 
samastamlecchácüram hitvà svarüpam eva pratipadyate. 

"In profane experience, too, it is found that an instruction dealing 
with something false leads to knowledge of the truth; as, for exam- 
ple: a certain prince was abducted by robbers, and brought to a 
Nisada chieftain; and, adopted by the chieftain as his son, the prince 
lived contentedly as a barbarian. Then a minister of the king came 
there and observed how the prince followed a way of life that was 
typical of the barbarian race; after some time when the minister 
had made him understand that he was the son of a king, not of 
a barbarian, he abandoned the barbarian way of life and knew his 
true self." 

— Dvivedin's edition om. aniya after taskarair and bhüte after pascad, 
both restored from Madras Govt. MSS. Library R. 6123. 

— kila at the beginning and iti at the end would indicate that the 
story is a quotation; none of 6 MSS consulted, however, add any- 
thing in support. 

Sure$vara's story of the prince reared by hunters, BAUpBhasya- 
varttika 2, 1, 506 ff. Anandagiri ad 506 introduces the akhyayikà 
with: tattvamadivakyam aikyaparam tacchesah Srstyadivakyam ity 
atra Draviddcaryapranitim akhydyikém avatérayati — 
dcaksate tatraé catra kecid àkhyayiküm Subham / 
yathabhilasitartho ’yam yatha sambhavyate sphutah /'/ 506 // 

310 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 
yatha hi ka$cit prag asic cakravartino suto yuvà / 
vyüdhiyogopaghütàder unmattah samapadyata // 507 // 
dhvastarajabhimanah san mugdho vanam upeyivan / 
vyüdhaih parigrhitas ca vyadho 'smity abhimanyate // 508 // 
tatkarmé tadalamkürah kalena mahatabhavat / 
dhvastarájatvasamsküro vasan Sabarasadmani // 509 // 
$ubhausadhywpayogüc ca svasthadhih samajayata / 

', svasvabhàüvünurodhüc ca vyüdhebhyo vyutthitatmadhih //510 // 
tacchilarüpakarmabhyo vydvrttadhisanah svatah / 
kevalasmrtyabhavüc ca na vyüdhatvam jahaty asau // 511 // 
tajjatikarmasambandhatattvavit tatpituh sakha // 512 // 
pravrttya karmanad jatya cakravartyucitais tatha / 
laksanai ràjaputratoam yatha kascit prabodhayet // 513 // 
labdhamatrasmrtih so tha rajasmity avabodhatah / 
badhitva svam asambodham hitvà vyddhatvam atmanah // 514 // 
rajyabhisekam Gpnoti 0700 simhasanam pituh / 
avüptarüjasümutoüt tatpraptau mapi cestate // 515 // 
mohàdhyastüátmavyadhatvün mohadhvamsütirekatah / ` 
rajaputratvasampraptau nümyat kimcid apeksate // 516 // 
yathà tathayam brahmaiva brahmasambodhamatratah / 
buddhindriyasariradiv Gtmatvam pratipedivan // 517 // 

[“In support of the view that the assertion “Thou art that” states 
identity and that the passages dealing with creation etc. (ChUp. 6, 2, 1 ff.) 
are subordinate to that assertion, he introduces a parable that has been 
composed by Dravidacarya.”] 

"In this connexion some tell a beautiful tale to bring out clearly the 
meaning which is intended here. : 

Formerly there was a young prince, the son of an emperor, and, due 
to an infection of some disease, he went mad. Having lost the notion that 
he was a king, he made for the woods in his bewilderment. He was adopted 
by hunters and thought that he was a hunter himself: and for a long time 
he acted and dressed as they did, living in a tribal settlement without 
any memory of his royal status. Then, by the beneficial use of medicinal 
herbs, his mind was cured and, in accordance with his real nature, his self- 
esteem rose beyond the level of hunters. Still, although his mind turned 
away from their habits, appearance and activities, he did not give up the 
hunters’ way. of life for his memory alone bad not yet returned. By some 
report a friend of his father's, who knew what his status and duties 
were in reality, got to know him and approached him without guile: and 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 311 ` 

as he himself had concluded from the other's carriage, acts, nobility and the 
marks of imperial stature, he told him that he was a prince. By knowing 
that he was a prince his memory was restored: his ignorance about himself 
was superseded and he gave up what was of the hunter in himself. Having 
arrived at his father's throne he underwent the ceremony of the royal 
consecration, and when he had been restored as a prince he deviated from 
his position never more. Having regained his princely status by the mere 
difference that the disappearance of his illusion made (for it was illusion that 
his notion of being a hunter was suggested to his real self), he had nothing 
left to desire. Likewise this person, who is really Brahman, is led by his 
mere unconsciousness of Brahman to attribute to his mind, senses, body etc. 

XIXe. The same story is referred to in Samkhyasttra 4, 1 rajaputravat tat- 
tvopadesat “on account of the instruction about the true nature, as 
in the case of the royal prince" and described by Vijfianabhiksu, 
Samkhyapravacanabhasya ad loc. 

—atreyam dkhyayika-kascid rajaputro gandarksajanmanad puran 
nihsüritah $abarena kenacit posito ‘ham $abara ity abhimanyamana 
aste / tam jivantam jñātvā kascid amatyah prabodhayati na tvam 
Sabaro rājaputro siti / sa yathà jhatity eva candalabhimanam 
tyaktvd tattvikam rajabhadvam evalambate rüjüham asmiti, evam 
eva .... 

— “The story about this is as follows: a certain royal prince was 
abducted from his town by a bear and reared by a tribesman and 
he lived in the mistaken conviction that he himself was a tribesman. 
Having discovered that the prince was alive a minister revealed to 
him that he was not a tribesman but a royal prince. And even as 
he gave up at once his notion that he was an outcaste and was 
restored to his true nature of royalty with the true knowledge: “I 
am a king," in a like manner etc..." : 

— gandarksa is further unknown; it is either a bear characterized 
by heavy jowls, or a rhinoceros (ganda), the latter meaning being 
less plausible. 

INDEX I 

NOTABLE SANSKRIT TERMS 

amSa 44; 48; 187; 192 asa 290 

amSin 44; 48 asat 3ff. 

akhandakala 213 asamkucita 237 

anga 285 asatkaryavada 41; 208 
acit 183 ahamkara 193; 224; 231 
acidvastu 194 ahimsa 248 

aja 9; 253 akara 187; 212 

ajà 9; 253 : akasa 193; 221; 223 ff; 231 
animan 11 atman 10; 12; passim; 235 
anu 234 atmaguna 248 

adrsta 280 atmamananasila 183 
advitiya 9; 11; 47; 190 "is atmavastu 239 
advaitavada 188 atmavalokana 286 
adhikara 271 adesa 67; 190 
adhikarin 269 adestr 190 

adhisthatr 9; 11; 190; 207 adharadheyabhava 235 
adhisthana 11; 209; 216 * apas 7; 193; 233 
adhyayana 285 abhi 5; 10 

adhyasa 201; 212 : a-YAT 11; 194 
anavastha 216 ayatana 11; 194 
anirvacaniyapratyanika 217 | arambhana 11; 12 
anudhyana 236; 248 arambhanadhikarana 4; 46 
anumana 206 | arjava 248 

antaryamin 185 asrama 184 

anna 7; 9; 193; 231 B i ' sa 290 

anyatahsiddha 202 i itikartavyatā 184 
anyasādhana 202 iştapūrta 278 

anvaya 63 utpattyasambhavādhikaraņa 38 
anvitābhidhāna 269 udāraguņa 213 
apahatapāpman 188 M uddesya 270f. 

api 290 . upakrama 66; 200 
apurusartha 234 - upapanna 210 

apürva 270; 277; 279; 280 i upasamhāra 66; 200 
apauruseya 50; 196; 253; 294 upastha 224 

appa 235 ` upadanakarana 233 
abhaya 281 upādhi 15; 42; 184; 221 
abhimāna 185; 212; 215; 297 upāsana 57; 239; 252 
abhihitānvaya 269 ekajivavada 216 
abhyupagamavada 63 ekarati 238 

ambhamsi 224 ; ekarasa 238 

arthavada 51; 54f; 57; 213; 267 _ ekavakyata 200 
avastha 205 ekasvabhava 238 
avidyà 44; 185; 2091.; 216; 249 ` ` aitadatmya 195 
avyakta 233 aisvarya 183 

asubha 184 aupadanaka 280 

314 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

kapi 290 

kapyasa 290 

kam 290 

kara 224 

karanamantra 284 

karira 274 

karman 16; 32; 184; 249 

karmayoga 281 

karmendriya 223 

kalacika 282 

kalyanaguna 183; 184; 213 

kastha 213 

karya 51 ff.; 267 5.; 

karyata 269 

karyatva 270 

kidrsa 217 

kirtana 248 

krti 2701. 

krtyuddesya 279 ff. 

kriyamananuvadin 284 

kriya 272 

ksama 248 

ksanti 248 

ksetrajüa 265 

ksepartha 217 

gandha 224 

guna 55 

gunavrtti 64 

grhastha 184 

gotva 203 

gauh 20; 198 

caksus 224 

caturhotr 279 

cit 183 

cidvastu 194 

cetana 215 

caitanya 215 

codana 51; 277; 279 

chandas 294 

japa 285 

jahadajahallaksana 63 

jihva 224 

jiva 200; 231 

jivatman 184; 193 

jüatr 218 

jüana 32; 59ff.; 611.; 183f; 198; 215; 218; 
passim 

jfanabhramsa 185 

jnanasvaripa 186; 212 

jüapti 61; 201 

jneya 218 

tajjalan 242 

tattva 35; 216 

tanu 137; 239 

tantra 20 

tanmatra 224; 231 

tapas 9; 10; 248 

tamasa 224; 252 

tiryane 231 

tejas 7; 9; 183; 193; 224; 233 
taijasa 224 

trikona 203 

tvac 224 

dama 248 

daya 248 

daharavidyà 26; 38; 68; 246; 258 
daivata 246 
dvyatmakata/tva 204; 227; 228; 244 
dharma 35; 198 
dharmabhütajüana 185, 215 
dhatu 210 

dhrti 299 

dhairya 183 
dhyananiyogavada 56 
namaskrti 248 
nàmarüpa 184; 193 
nàrayana 184; 187; 260 
nàsika 224 

nityah 185 
nimittakarana 233 
nimesa 213 

niyantr 236 

niyoga 53; 272 ff.; 
niyojya 273 ff. 
niradhisthana 209 
niradhisthanabhrama 209 
niravadya 196; 232 
niralambana 209 
nirbhugna 27; 246 
nirvana 239 
nirvanamaya 238 
nirvikalpaka 202; 204 
nirvikar(y)a 196; 232 
nivrtti 252 
nisprapancikarananiyogavada 53; 56 
nyaya 211; 280 

pada 210; 293 
padasamghata 293 
padartha 193 

para 184 

parajyotis 187 

paratattva 187 
parabrahma 187 

paramapurusartha 53; 234 

paramavyoman 183 
paramatman 184; 187 
paramartha 57; 245 
parardha 213 

parinama 15; 17; 26; 186; 209 
parinamavada 26; 186 
parinispanna 51; 267 

patha 213 

padau 224 

payu 224 

purusa 183; 231 

purusottama 187 
purusartha 234 
prthaksiddhyanarha 196; 235 
prthaksthitipravrttyanarha 195 
prthaganupalambha 227 
prakarana 66 ff. 

prakara 196; 203; 227 
prakaraprakaribhava 183; 235 
prakasa 215 

prakrti 193; 196; 215; 231; 233 
prakrti (2) 194 
prakrtyartha 279 

pratijna 67; 190 

pratistha 12; 54; 269 
pratyaksa 202; 206 
pratyaksadyaparicchedya 197 
pratyaya 194 

pradhana 224 

prapanca 187 

prapatti 237 

prabhu 278 

pramatr 188 

pramana 197; 206; 220 
pravrtti 252 

prasasana 190 

pranin 215 

bala 183 

buddhi 231; 238; 252 
buddhindriya 223 
buddhyutpatti 268 
brahmacarin 184 

brahman passim; 239 
brahmana 285 m 
bhakti 184; 237; 239 passim 
bhaktiyoga 237; 249 
bhagavan 18 

bhàva 265 

bhàvanà 265 

bhavanatraya 265 

bhása 294 

bhagya 24; 31 

VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 315 

bhinnabhinnatva 227 
bhita 224; 231 
bhütadi 224 

bhitala 219 
bhedábhedavada 42; 188 
bhogya 245 
mat/mant 230 
matu(p) 62; 230 
matvarthiyapratyaya 230 
manas 5; 223 f.; 231 
manusya 231 
manomaya 283 
mantra 51; 55; 213; 267 
mala 243 

mahat 193; 231; 288 f. 
mahattattva 224; 283 
mahabhita 193; 221 
mahasala 7 

mithya 190; 216 
muni 183 

muhirta 213 

mila 194 

mauna 183 

YAJ 272 

yajana 272 

yatana 248 

yatha 206 

yaga 279 

yukti 206 

rasa 224; 238 

rajasa 224 

rupa 7; 187; 224; 243 
laksana 59; 203 
laksana 59 ff.; 200 
laksanartha 59 
laksita 219 

linadi 272 

linga 293 

lila 192 

vana 11; 207 
vanaprastha 184 
vandana 248 

varna 184 
varnasrama 184 
vastu 194 
vastusvarüpa 228 
vakya 24 ff.; 31 
vakyabheda 55; 284 
vikyasabda 293 
vakyasesa 280 
vakyartha 293 

vac 11ff.; 224 

316 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

vayu 193; 224 

vasanà 215; 220 

vikàra 17; 47; 191; 196; 205; 233; 234 
vikasa 233f. 

vidhi 51 f.; 57; 213; 267; 277; 285 
vibhu 221 

viyat 193 

viyadadhikarana 193 

vivarta 15; 42; 206; 209 
vivartavada 26; 42 

VIS 260 

viSistavidhi 55; 284 

viSesana 59; 198 

visesanartha 59 

visnu 183; 260 

virya 183 

vrksa 11; 207 

vrtti 24 

vedana 239; 255 

vedabahya 261 

vesa 248 

vestita 237 

vaikarika 224 

vaibhava 187; 229 

vyakta 233 

vyatireka 63 

vyavasthita 226 

vyavahara 31; 37; 208 
vyavaharahetu 227 

vyapaka 183; 236 
vyapin 183 
vyutpatti 196 
Sakti 183; 187 
sabda 50 ff.; 224; 268 
Sabdapramana 50 ff. 
Sabdadvaita 15 

Sama 248 

Sarira 187; 239 
Sarirasariribhàva 183 
sastra 285 

Sega 17; 44; 48; 183; 239 
Sesasayin 183 

Sesin 44; 48; 183; 198 
Sodhanavakya 58; 198 
gauca 248 

Érotra 223 ff. 

sadgunya 183 ' 
samvedana 228 

samsarga 239 

samsara 239 

samsrsta 184 

samskara 293 

samsthàna 192; 227; 230 
samketa 196 

samketayitr 269 

samkucita 185 

samkoca 233 f. 

samghata 224 

sat 3f.; 67; 187; 193; 207 
satkaranavada 18 
satkaryavada 18; 25; 190 
satya 14; 61; 190 
satyakama 189 

satyatva 61 

satyasamkalpa 189; 195; 234 
sadasadanirvacaniya 210 
sadvidya 3 ff. 

samnyasin 184 
samastaheyapratyanika 196 
sarga 239 

sattvika 224 

sadhana 276 

sadhya 206; 273; 276 
sadhyavikala 206 
samanadhikaranya 65; 187; 200 
samanyatodrsta 207 

sasna 203 

süksma 205 

süri 185 

stuti 248 

stotra 285 

sthüla 205 

sparsa 224 

smrti 248 

svabhava 185 
svayamprakasa 202 
svarüpa 183f.; 204; 233 
svarupanirupanadharma 186; 198 
svarga 273 ff. 

svargakama 269; 273 ff. 
heya 184; 234 

homa 279 

INDEX If 

_ ANCIENT INDIAN AUTHORS REFERRED TO OUTSIDE THE TEXT 

Annambhatta 203; 208; 293 
Anandagiri 19; 27; 235 
Appaya Diksita 216 

Atreya (= Janka q.v.) 25f. 
Atreya (= Tanka) 28 
Upavarsa 19; 20-24 

Audulomi 28 

Kapardi 18; 29; 251 

Kumarila 39; 40; 56; 220; 267; 284 
Kure$a 23 

Kullüka 236 

Krtakotikavi 23 

Guhadeva 18; 29; 261 

Jaimini 21; 33; 39; 57 
Janka 18, 24-30; 251; 290 
Tankacarya 27 

Devasvamin 221, 

Dramida 18; 24-30; 54; 195; 251; 290 
Dravida 27 

Dharmaraja 63 f.; 209 
Nrsimhasramin 25 

Padmapada 21; 63 
Praparicahrdayakara 20; 221. 
Prabhakara 39-51; 270 
Badarayana 15; 21; 24; 28; 38 
Bodhayana 18-24; 29; 250 
Brahmadatta 23; 25 
Brahmanandin (Janka) 25; 28 
Bhartrprapanca 25; 29 
Bhartrmitra 28 

Bhartrhari 25 

Bhavadasa 22 

Bharuci 18; 29; 251 

Bhaskara 15f.; 19f.; 23; 25-27; 29; 38; 42; 
43; 183; 188; 221 ff. 

Mandanamisra 41 f. 

Madhusüdana Sarasvati 26; 60 

Madhva 1; 23; 36; 244 

Yamuna 15; 24-27; 37 f.; 42-48; 62; 183; 249; 
299 

Yadavaprakasa 188 

Ramananda 19 

Ramanuja 4; 11; 15 passim 

Vacaspati 217 

Vimuktatman 42; 202; 211 

Venkathanatha 20; 23; 29; 32; 37 

Vedantadesika, see pr. 

Vyàsa 38; 197 

Sankara 15f.; 18-21; 23; 25; 29; 35f.; 38; 
40-42; 49; 53; 57; 59f.; 62-56; 183; 188; 
199; 201; passim 

Sabarasvamin 19f.; 22f.; 39; 284; 293 

Salikanatha 40; 42; 204; 273; 275; 276; 277 

Srinivasa 37; 213; 215 

Srivatsankamisra 24 

Sarvajüatman 25f.; 29; 42; 58; 60; 63 

SudarSanasiri 23; 29; 63; passim 

Sure$vara 21; 27; 63 

Hamsayogin 27 

ADDENDUM 

The emendation proposed in Introduction, note 73 (sampradayah / atah samééritah 
for DvivEDIN's impossible sampradéyamatah) is to be rejected in favour of the reading 
sampradáyágatah found in the oldest MS of Bhiskara’s Brahmasütrabhasya, the palm- 
leaf grantha, R6123 of the Madras Government Sanskrit Manuscripts Library; 5 other 
MSS consulted have DvivEDIN'S lectio. The passage now reads: “This [sc. parindma- 
paksah], being the traditional view-point, has been adopted by the Authors of the 
Vakya and the Vrtti on the Chandogya”, 

p. 73, n. 5 A2 

81, 1 yasyatma sariram 

95, 6 malapratyanikànantajüananandaikasvarüpam svabhavikanavadhikatisaya- 
parimito... 

99, 4 Sariram 

101, 8 eva hi brahmavyatiriktatvena 
105, 15 yatha karyantaranvitam 

120, 9 delete danda 

133, 1 add danda after svarad iti 
158, 9 add danda before manomayah 

guo p gm 

Citations in Sabara Bhásya—by D. V. Garge. Royal 8vo. pp. xii -+ 312. 
1952. Hs. 16/- [D 19] 

Rgvedic Legends through the Ages—by H. L. Hariyappa, Crown 4to, 
pp. xxii + 123-330. 1953. Rs. 15/- [D 30] 

Evolution of Malayalam—by A. C. Sekhar. Crown 4to. pp. viii + 220. 
1953. Rs. 16/- [D 31] 

Nominal Composition in. Middle Indo-Aryan—by G. V. Davane, Crown 
410, pp. viii + 220. 1956. Rs. 16/-. [D 32] | 

The Judicial System of the Marathas—by V. T. Gune Crown 40. 
pp. xxxv + 391 + 2 maps + 1 plate. 1953. Rs. 20/- [D 37] 

Linguistic Peculiarities of Jianesvari— (with an Index Verborum) —by 
M. G. Panse. Royal 8९०. pp. xii --655. 1953. Rs. 20/- [D 38] 

A Concordance of Sanskrit Dhütwpüthas (with Index of Meanings) —by 
G. B. Palsule. Crown 4to, pp. iv + 202. 1955. Rs. 12/-. [D 51] 
Pleistocene Studies in the Malaprabhà Basin—by R. V. Joshi. Crown 4to, 
pp. 116 and 9 plates. 1955. Rs. 15/. [D 52] i . 

Social Differentiation and Differentiation in Emoluments—by Y. B. 
Damle. Crown 4to, pp. 180. 1955. Rs. 14/. [D 57] 

History of Jaina Monachism—by S. B. Deo. Crown 4to, pp. 648, 1956. 
Rs. 20/-. [D. 58] f 

SOURCES OF INDO-ARYAN LEXICOGRAPHY 

Anekārthatilaka of Mahipa, critically edited by M. M. Patkar. Royal 
Svo, pp. viji- 4 -- 215 4-2. 1947. Rs. 6/-. [L 4] 
Words beginning with a in the Udyogaparvan—by E. D. Kulkarni, Demi 
4to, [L 10] (in press) 

Koáakalpataru of Visvanatha, critically edited with notes and index 
verborum. by S. M. Katre [L 14] (in press) 

‘Amaramandana of Krsnasüri, critically edited by V. Raghavan. Royal 

8vo, pp. 43., 1949. Rs. 3/- [L 16] 
Kagakrtsna-Sabdakalépa-Dhatupatha, with an old Kannada commen- 
tary by Cannavira, edited by A. N. Narasimhia. Crown 8vo, pp. xvii 
+442, 1952. Rs. 5/- [L 21] : 
Saradiyakhyanamamala of Harsakirti, critically edited with glossary. by 
M. M. Patkar. Royal 8vo, pp. x + 102. 1951. Rs. 5/- [L 23] 
Sivakosa of Sivadatta, critically edited with notes and index verborum 
by R. G. Harshe, Royal 8vo, pp. vi + liii -+ 210, 1952. Rs. 12/- [L 24] 
Nünürtharatnamálà of Irugapa Dandadhinatha. criticallv edited by. B. R. 
Sharma.. Royal 8vo, pp. vi + 280. 1954. Rs, 15/- [L 26] A 
Nanarthamanjari of Rāghava, critically edited by A. V. Krishnamurthy 

- Sharma Royal 8vo, pp. viii + 253. 1954. Rs. 15/- [L 27] 

Li&günuéüsana of Durgasimha, critically edited by D. G. Koparkar. 
Royal 8vo, pp. xix -- 87. 1952. Rs. 8/- [L 29] i 
Salihétra of Bhoia, critically edited by E. D. Kulkarni. . Royal 8vo, ` 
pp.xxii4- 70. 1953. Rs. 8/- [L 33] — * 
Ekürthanümamàla and Dvyaksaranémamala of Saubhari, critically edited ` 
by E. D. Kulkarni Royal 8vo, pp. vii + 61. 1955. Rs. 4/- [L 34] 
Candravydkarana of Candragomin, critically edited by K. C. Chatterii, 
Part I, Chs. 1-3, Demi 8vo., pp. vi -++ 352, 1953. Rs. 12/-. [L 35-1] 
(Part II in press) ; 

15. 
16. 

Sabdaratnavali of Mathuresa, critically edited by K. C. Chatterji. [L 36] 
- (in press) 

Kavikalpadruma of Vopadeva, critically edited by G. B. Palsule, 
Royal 8vo, pp. xxxviii + 102. 1954. Rs. 6/-. [L 39] 

Namamélika of Bhoja, critically edited by E. D. Kulkarni and V. D. 
Gokhale Royal 8vo, pp. iv + 3 + 103. 1955. Rs. 6/- [L. 50] 

DECCAN COLLEGE HAND-BOOK. SERIES 

Prehistory in India. Four Broadcast Talks on Early Man—by F. E 
"Zeuner. Crown 8vo.,pp. 39-+ 16 plates. 1951. Rs. 2/8/- [H 22] 

Archaeology and Indiam Umiversities—by H. D. Sankalia. Demi 8vo, 
pp. 17. 1952. As. 8. ~- = 
The Grammatical Structure of the Dravidian Languages—by Jules 

` Bloch (Authorised English translation from the original French by 

R. G. Harshe). Demi 8vo, pp. xxxiv -+ 127. 1954. Rs. ८/- [H 42] 
An Introduction to Indian Textual Criticism (2nd edition)—by S. M. 
Katre. Demi 8vo., pp. xvii +148. 1954. Rs. 6/- [H 46] 

. Dhwvanivicira—by N. G. Kalelkar. Crown 8vo., pp. xiii + 194. 1955. 

Rs. 5/- [H 47] 

Lectures in Linguistics—by O. L. C. Aguilar. _ Crown 8vo, pp. ix + 128. 

1954. Rs. 4/- [H 48] 

Quarterly Bulletin of the Institute. 

_ Annual Subscription Rs. 20/- (inclusive of postage and packing charges) 

to be paid strictly in advance. 

So far 15 complete Volumes (each containing four numbers) have been 

published, out of which the first five are not available for sale. > 
Vol. XVII (No. 1 published, rest in press). í E 
Wak, occasional publication of the Sanskrit Dictionary Department of ~ 

the Institute. Rs. 10/- per number. So far four numbers have been - 
published, No. 5 in press. ~- ट 

OTHER PUBLICATIONS 

REID Indiaw Antiquity, Volumes 1-9, Rs. 20/: per Volume. 
Vi, S. Sukthankar Memorial Edition, 2 Vols. Rs. 30/- per set.