LIBRARY OF PHILOSOPHY 

‘Asay beeen from the eriginal programme printed in Erdmann’s 
History of Philosphy under the date 1890, the Library of Philo- 
cophy was designed ss 2 contribution tothe History of Modeen 
Phiksopby under the heads: Sat of different Schools of Thought 
—Sensationaat, Realist, [dealnt, Jnviivist; secondly of cif 
ferent Subjecte—Prychology, Ethics, Mathetice, Political Phil 
sophy, ‘Theology. While muck had been done io England in 
tracing the coure of evohution in mature, story, ecopamica, 
mol, and religion, Site had been done in acing the develop- 
meat of thought on these subjects. Yet “the evolution of opinion 
is part of the whole evolution”. 

By the co-operstion of dufierent writer un carrying out this 
plan it wan hoped that thoroughness and completeness of teat: 
rent, otherwnse usatounable, right be secueed, It wan belived 
luo thet from writers maisly Brith snd Amencan fuller con- 
siderason of English Philosophy than i¢ bad Litherto reoeved 
might be looked for. In the earier series of books cootuing, 
among others, Bosanquet's History of atheter, Plexder's 
Ratwnel Theology since Kant, Albee’ History of Engh Viele 
avianom, Danaz’s Philowphy ond Pobtical Economy, Bee's 
Hidary of Prychlogy, Ritchie's Natarel Rag, thee objecte were 
tw a large extent effected. 

In the meantime ongisal work of a hugh order was bong 
produced both in Hngland and America by eock wnten. aa 
Bradley, Btout, Bertrand Rome, Bikini, Urban, Montague, und 
other, and new interest in foreign works, German, French, and 
Tialian, which bad either become clasical or were attracting 
public enenson, had developed, Thee scope of the Library thus 

Dbeckme extended into somthing more international, end it io 
centering on the Gf decade of ite exietence in che hape thet it 
may contribute inthe highest id of thought to that Intellectual 
(Co-operation which is one of the most significant objects of the 
League of Nations and kindeed organizations, 

GENERAL EDITOR 

LIBRARY OF PHILOSOPHY 
(OORRAL warren: 
PROFESGOR J. H. MUIRHEAD, LL.D. 
ANALYTIC PSYCHOLOGY By Prf.G.¥ Swot, Two Yolo. sth 

pariiay 

ATTENTION Gy Prof. W.R.Pibsbery. 20! leprndon, 
HISTORY OF ASTHETIC By B Rmamgiet. ih Injranon. 4h 
‘Batnon 

IRSTORY OF ENGLISH UTULITARIANISM 3) Fel, Af. 
HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY By J.B. Erinasn. 
‘Vol Asczee Wo Manone. 30 pron. 
Yulrt Soon “te 
Vel, fer Hace a Tagen, 
WOSTORY OF PSYCHOLOGY By Pr GA Bret 
WL), doceme 29 Parut. 
Vail. Mmuwvi en Rant Moomes Pe, 
Vouk Mou Poremtocy 
MATTER AND ROMORY By Yes. Barwon Traold 
NEM Pal Wein” eh ogres be 
NATURAL RIGHTS. By DG Races rd Rin 
YULDSOMEY AND POLITICAL ECONOMY By Dr { Bene, 4th 
‘gran 

DEVELOPMENT OF THEOLOGY SINCE KANT By 0, 
‘Paster 

‘THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF MIND By G.W.F Brg, Tromdaind 

by Prof. J.B. Babe 

‘TOME AND FREE WILL By Profan: eepon. Trandate by F.1. 
‘Pognn. 1th Segre 

‘VALUATION: THE THEORY OF VALUE By Prof W.M. Urea, 

‘THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE RELIGIOUS LIFE By Pret... 
‘Shatin. tad Bas. 

LIBRARY OF PHILOSOFHY—ons, 

SOCIAL PURPOSE By Principal B. J. W. Kethesngion and Pet 
"TH Metbesd sad iapramon, 

‘TO MATHEMATICAL PHILOSOPHY By 

‘Detuod Resell, PRSW ged Inpro 

GOD AND PERSONALITY (Gareao Lacruem) By Pro. Clot 
‘CE Weenbs Gre Th ant Papeton, 

DIVINE PERSONALITY AND HUMAN LIFE (Goreso Lacrowm) 
"Oy Pret. Clament . ). Webs. (Part TL) tnd Japon 

‘MODERN PHILOSOPHY By Gude dx Rugpers, Thovletd by 
"A: laoard Haomay od RG. Colpo. 

‘THE ANALYSIS OF MIND Ry Bercand Rumell, 2.9, gd Jagr. 
em 

DIALOGUES ON METAPHYSICS By Nek Malsbanche. Tra 
etal by Merma Guat. 

INDIAN PHILOSOPHY By Prof. S. Radhabrniman. sf Bee, Too 

‘CONTEMPORARY BRITISH PHILOSOPHY Eaved by Prof, J. 
‘Maat Tio Pod. 

‘TU, WAYS OF KNOWING on, Tix Miranes or Puncuary By 
rol. WP Montuave. ad nornnen. 

ATTHEOWY OF DIRECT REALIEM, sv ont RATION o® Riausor 
‘w Teese Dy] B Tuer. 

‘THE GOODWILL: A BTUDY INTHE COMERENCE THEORY OF 
‘GOODNESS By HJ. Pas. 

PUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS OF LIFE: AN ESSAY ON 
CCTIZENGHITP AS PURSUIT OF VALUES By Pr J. 5 

‘THR INTRELIGINLE WORLD. METAPHYSICS AND VALUE 
By Pot, W.M. Usha 

CONTEMPORARY AMRRICAN PHILOSOPHY BAted by Pr, 
‘George P, Ads and Pro. Wen. Pepersl Mente” Tie Vou 

WeGELS SCIENCE OF LOGIC Tanta by WY. H. Jobuton and 
“EG. Sovahes. To Va 

IDENTETY AND REALITY 2y Ema Meyeron. Troma hy Katt 
Laver 

COLERIDGE AS PHILOSOPHER By Pro, J. HL Mehaad, 

MORAL SENSE By Jumes Bea. 

THE PLATONIC TRADITION IK ANGLO-SAXON PHILO- 
‘SOPHY By Prot JH. Mure 

‘Librare of Philosophy 

EDITED BY J, H. MUIRHEAD, LL.D. 

IDEAS: 
GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO PURE 
PHENOMENOLOGY 

IDEAS: 

OmNERAL ‘To PURE PHENOMENOLOG: 

By EDMUND HUSSERL 

W, R. BOYCE GIBSON, MA, D.Sc. (Oxon) 

LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD. 
NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

7M Come ice Phsapia wes pocahad Bae 3 

At rg med 

wt patron 

AUTHOW'S PREFACE TO 1HE ENGLISH ZDITION 

‘My the suthoe of thus work, winch fit sppeared in the year 
1913, be permitted to contribute to the English Bdstion cerain 
expltzations that may prove of use to the reader, both before 
snd on bo reads? 

‘Under the ile “A Pur o ‘Transcenents! Phescmenslogy" the 
work here presented secs to found anew sciznce—thongh, indeed, 
the whole course of philosophical developeaent ince Dexarter 
Jams been prepanng the way for t—a science covenng a new field 
of experience excharely in ow, hat of "Transcendental Sub- 
Jectivity”. Thue Tramscenderta! Subjecumty does not wgnify 
the outcome of any sprculsiveayzthes, but with its tranzcen- 
ental experience, capacities, domgs, isan absolutely independent 
real of direct experience, elthough for reauona of an eaental 
seo tha ofa remained isacotable, Traneendental experience 
in sia theoretcal and, at fit, descriptive branng, beconoen 
vulable oly theough radical iteration of that mast dpe 
sabon under whnch an experience of the maura world runs ity 
course, « readjuimest of wwwpoist which, athe method of 
“epprouch tothe sphere of transceadental phenomenclgy, i called 
“phenomenological reduction”. 

‘In the work before us trmecendental phenomenclogy is not 
founded ay the expineal scicace of the expancal facts of this 
field of experience, Whatever fact present themselves eve oxly 
ss woxmplessicilar in these ont gezeral aspect to the expiieal 
iturtratona wed by mathematicians; mc, s fact, othe sctual 
snutable dispositions of mumbers cn the abocus amis us in 
their merely exeamplary capacity, to grasp with maght, and 10 
‘ther pure generality the scice 2 3, 4. .#8 mach, pure mumbece 
1 toch, and the propostions of pure anthem releuve to 

‘on the ‘eal avon lng), whch ap 
rata, though as pure powibilty only, the empincal ld of 
fact oF tranaccndetal eubjectinty with is factual (faktucken) 
‘xpetiences, equating these with pore intutable powbiltin that 

” PURE PHEROMENOLOGY 

can be modified at wil, wets ost asta prior the indiswohble 
eascatalstrvctares of transcendental ebectivty, which perist 
fn and through all imaginable motificetiecs. Since the reduction 
tthe trmomndeam! and, with it, thin further roducion to the 
Eidos i the method of approach tothe feld of work of che ew 
seicave, it follows (and we stress the point in airance) hat the 
proper starting-point forthe systematic unrwvellng of this wence 
‘cain the chapters which tet of the reductiona we have indicted, 
(nly from this poston can the reader, who follows with inoee 
sympathy the indications proffered step by step, judge whether 
someting charncteistically new bas realy been worked out here 
worked out, we tay, and not constructed, deewn from real, 
en intvition of exeuta) Being, and dencrbed accordingly. 

Eidetc phenomenology is restricted in this book to che rem 
‘of pure eidetic “‘denription”, that i to the realm of esteatial 
strucrure of trazwoendeneal abjecivty immediatly tranmparent 
‘othe mind, For thin couaittes in isef already a eyteratcally 
velf-contained infiirode of cqental characternies, Thus uo 
‘ttmpt ie made 10 carry owt syrcematically the transcendental 
Ldoomtedge that om be beincd through lopcal deduction. Heze 
‘we have one diference (though not the only ene) between che 
‘whole manner ofthis new # prin sexcce aad tht of the mutter 
‘utical disciplines, ‘These are “deductree™ sciences, ond thet 
rmosoe tht in thee achatfialytheotetial mode of development 
‘mediate deductive knowledge playe an incompazably greater pert 
thas the immediate axiomatic knowledge upon which all the 
deductions wre bused, An infsitade of deductions rets on a very 
few sxe. 

But in the tramcendental sphere we have an infniude of 
knowledge previous to all deduction, knowledge whose mediated 
‘mncxions (thos of iatranonal ixpcaran) Eave nothing to do 
‘with deduction, and being extirely ints prove refractory 10 
every methodially devised scheme af couxrucare symbol. 

‘A note of warning mey be uttered here agelsat » misunder- 
vtanling thet hon frequently arisen. Whee, in am anticipatory 
‘ein it is stated right from the wart that, according othe wsther’s 
views (Qo be evablished in thowe further portions of the whole 

AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION 19 

‘work which art sill wo be published), all radially sient 
philesoply reat on the bass of phenomenology, hatin a further 
came it fs pheuomruclogicl ptulosophy vight through, this does 
noe mean. to wey that philaophy uacif wn an a prio sient 
Throughout. The ak which this bok wan planned to carry cut, 
that of establubing x mience of the cidetic cence of a tran- 
scendental ubjectivity, ison far ws utcaz be Grom carrying the 
conviction with st that ptilosophy itaclf is cane» ac 
‘prior. A plane at the mathematical sence, these great logic 
sme fr corrspondiag sciences of ct, wookd eles ead 
tu to ancipace the contrary. The science of fict in the strict 
come, the pecuinely mil ecence of nature, han fret become 
ponaible through the independent elaboration of a “pure” mithe= 
ination of natuze, The aciece of pare possiblities must erery~ 
‘where precede the science of rea fact, and give i the guidance 
af tw concen iogic, So is it also ia the case of tranmndental 
‘philosophy, even though the dignety of the service rendeced here 
bby a pymean of the transcendestal «priori far more exalted. 
‘The undentanding, of et any cate the eure grup, of the dae 
Ciaetian between traicendenl phenamenoley aod “ciptive", 
e; wit is often called sowadapr, ‘phowomewolpical” 
‘a problem tat wa rl bags gest dial wih, whic 
indeed nee grounded 1m the very watuze of the cae, Tt hos le 
0 which even thinkers who eobscrbe 10 
‘the phenomenelogial Line of thought are mobject. Some attempt 
tm clacify the sitntion should prove useful. 
“Tha change of stazxpoine which in thin work bear the same 
phenomezolagical reduction (tansceniectsl-phenomenological 
‘We now ay, t0 be moce definite) is effected by me, ax the aully 
3 bai, 
in the 
ccdinary aenee of the term, ax thi human person living amang 
thers in the world. As « peycholgiat, I take an my cheze chip 
‘egpe of being axe Wie, in its general spect, the uman being 
1s “poychical”. Turning inwaréa in pore reflexion, following 
m be sore precise), and vetting sade a the peychophyeicl 

“ FORE PHENOMENOLOGY 

(questions which mate man as ¢ corporeal being, I obtain ax 
vigia! and pure descriptive keowledge of the paycbical life an 
it nin tue, the most orgiaal information being obtained from 
mymlf, because here alone is perception the medium. Uf, as 
‘sften dene, desciptces of all sert, which atch themwclvee 
truely and truly tothe data of intuition, ane referred to an phen- 
rmenologial, there ere grow» up, on the pure basis of inner 
Intuition, of the intuition of the soul's own emenon, » pleno- 
smenological prychalogy. A right form of mathod (on this point 
‘we ball have something further $0 my) gives ua ia. point of 
‘act not only acamty, superficially caumsicasory deveriptionn, but 
2 great wcli-vupparting science; the latter, however, properly 
speating, only when, at pomible sls bere, ane Give vers before 
‘omelf an goal a ecleace which deals aot with the factual deta 
ofthis incar wphere of istiion, bet withthe emence, inguitiog, 
that in, aRer the invariant, easatally charctricic etrcturea of 
‘oul, of prychical life ia genera, 

Te we now perform the transcendeotal-phenorsenclogical 
redurtioa, this wanaformation ofthe natural end peychologcally 
inward standpoiat whereby it ls trerworadentahaed, the peyebo- 
logical subjecavicy lesen jus that which eaakes it something real 
Jn the world that lies before ws; it ooe the meaning of the soul 
sm beloagizg to body thar ein in an ebjective, spatio-temporal 
[Nature. Thi trassformation of meaning concetss myvelf, above 
A, the“ ofthe paycbological and subsequently transcendent 
inquire forthe tine being. Poarted an real (rich, Tom now 
‘no longer 2 human Ego ix the univenal, exvientilly posited 
‘world, but exchaively 2 subject for which tha world hus being, 
cad purely, iadeed, ar chat which sppeus to me, i presented 
10 me, and of which T am conscious in some way or other, 96 
‘that the real being of the work! thereby remaine considered, 
‘unquestioned, and is valley left cut of acoount, Now if tran- 
swondental deaciption pases no joigmtnt whmocrer upon the 
‘world, and upon my human Ego as belonging tothe world, end 
Sf, inthis doverigtion, the trasucencntal Ego exit (i) nbuaiely 
sm and for itself prior to all ooumic being (which Sst wins in 
snd through ir existential waidiy) it ail wt the same time 

AUTHOR'S PREFACE 70 THE ENGLIGH DITION +5 
evident that, at every convertion of meening which concera the 
phecomecclogiza-peychalogcal cntent of the woul ata whale, 
‘hia very content by wily putting cn unother existential meaning 
(Seincina) becomes tanscendeotal-phesomencbogial, jor ws 
sonverely the Iter, oo reverticg to the macinal peychologis! 
standpoint, becomes occe ages peycbalogicl. Necualy'this 
correspondence must still hold good if, prior to all ianeret in 

development of peychologialwcieace, and ofa “demcipive”™ 
‘e"phenomanclogion!peychalagy” ia petiole, a tamecsadental 
phecomenology i act up under the lading af « philosophical 
‘de, wo that Yarongh pheromenclogcal reduction the tramscen- 
dantal Ego in directy set wp nc the focus of refeian, and ede 
‘he there of 2 tnmacendental description. We have tun 4 

aboruted) pheaomenstogiea peycbology and « tranecodenial 
phenomenology. To cach cidebe ar expire! determination of, 
‘the ove fide there must correspond « parle Famure on. the 
‘aber. And yet thie whole cotect sx payctology considered foun 
‘the natural standpoint wy « pontive sence, therfore and related 
to the world as spread belore wis entirely coo-phibsophical, 
whereas “the earn” content from the tasucendentalsandpeit, 
sand therefore a tranicendental phenomenology, i a pilosopbical 
veicace—indeed, on close te, the bras philosophical science, 
Prepising on dewcrpive Knee the tracacenental groand which 
remans beaceforch the exchaive ground for all philosophical 
Inowlodge. Here in fact Ie the cue dificobis inthe way of 
sax derstanding, ance it mnt be felt at Sevan x most un- 
reonuble demand that rich 1 “naanee” spnoging from a mere 
‘ange of wandpoine should poms such great, end iced, for 
all geauinn phuloophy, exch decaive signicance, The wholly 
‘unique moaning ofthis “nuance” can be cleazly appreciated only 
‘when he wha philacphises baa reached a radial undermapding 
eh acto we wt be grep t ing under the de 
“philosophy”, aad ealy in vo fa a hein comassined to look for 
vornething difecing in principle fom postive eccaoe: the theo- 
ree control, that is, of somethiag other than the world 
oneeaibly grea to us throogh experisice. From wack under 

a PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
standing with oor's own seif, carind out in really radial 
sand consist wry, there optings xp of seceaicy « motivt- 
tion which compels the phileophizing Ego to reflect back oa 
that very subjeciviny of hie, which ix all his experience and 
komedi ofthe aatucal wor}, both eel wei posible, i in the 
lant resartthe Ego that experience and knows, ands thus areedy 
remuppoted ia all the satura sl-baowledge of the “burn Ego 
‘who experiences, think, and acts naturally in the works”. To 
ether word: from thin source apcicgs the phenomanological 
‘transposition a9 ax absolute coquiresnent, if philosophy geneeliy 
into work ot its distinctive purpovca pan 1 basin of original 
experience, ands contrive to begin at ll I can makes begianing, 
tnd generally epesking develop all ita further phikophcat 
revource, only an x science working from the tmumscendental- 
‘Pulowophicd standpoint, For this very reason the immediate 
1 prion phenamenslogy (pertayed io thin work in ity actoad 

2 that which dorecly prepares the transcendental 
Tamia) ia the “ew philoophy” in vael, the philowophy of the 
Depinsg. Only when thia motiruon (which stunds in need of 
‘very mimmte and comprehensive anata) has become a vital 
sand compelling insight, dooe it became clear tht the “change 
in the ehading”, which at first appears vo strange, transforming 
1s it dooe « puro peychology of the snner life into « selfatyled 
‘wansceadenal phenomenalogy, determines the being and non 
‘bemg of philowophy— «plulowpty which know with thorough 
(ing scientific aseurance what ita own distincuve meaning calla 
for a che Baas and che method of ics mguiry. In the light of 
och self-compreheasion, we understand for the fit time thet 
deopeat and truly radical ccamung of "'peychologiam’ (that i, of 
‘rasacendental peychologiem) a» the error that pervert the pure 
smeaning of phabeophy, proposing ait dos to found pkilowophy 
‘0a peychology, ca the pote science ofthe lif of che nou}. Thi 
pervention perce atmodifed when, ia eyzpatiy with our own 
‘procedure, the pure paycbology of the inner life is eet up alo 
su an a prioréacience; even thea it vemaie 4 postive eciec, 
and can provide s basis for postive science only, never for 
hilosopy, 

AUTHONS PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION cy 
Tn the course of many year of brooding over these matter, the 
‘evthor hat followed op difereat Hnea of Saquiy, all equilly 
[Pomible, ia dhe attempt exlibit in an abeolsely trmmparent 
and compelling way the satere of euch motivation a propela 
beyond the aural postive realm of life and. science, nd 
nevewsltatee the transcendental transposition, the “phenameno- 
logical Redsction. They are the ways of renching the starting 
pole of x vers philnophy, asd aa they umm be thought out 
{in conucious reflexion, they thamwcives belong propery to tbe 
‘Weginning, a» is pesnible, deed, aaly within the begianer a» 
Ihe rica upon, himaelf. For each of these waye the point of 
eperare ia, of cee, the neural uzaophintonted standpoint 
‘of positive reality (Pons) which the workd of experience has 
‘the bua of ite being, and iv confewsedly “taken for granted” 
(ae mature of nach Being Sever haviag been queeteced). Ta the 
‘work here prsested (Beocad Section, second chapter, §33 £), 
‘tho mathor elected thet way of approach, which thon pppecred 
‘to him the moet effective Ie develope as « course of eelf-refesion 

‘the inner Lf, orm we might lo my, a « “phenorsenaogiea 
‘reflexion in the ordinary psychological sense, It lends eventually 

‘t muan with body and soul, who lives in the weld with ocr men, 
Tivo the life of the world, end wo ferth. Coatiouing this elf: 
rederion, 1 now aloo become sware that my ows phencmeno- 
egically nelf-contained essence can be posized in an abmdste sense, 
sat [am the Bgo who invest the being of the world which Iva 

” ‘PUR FERNOMENOLOGY 
‘sonutatly speak about with exiental validity, wx uo exience 
(Sey) which win for me from my ows Liv pure cuznce 
‘meaning vod wobwatised vali. I cagnelé ws tie idridead 
crepe hn, te open ni Bed of par 

‘which the anthorhad hoped to be able ro supply very soon ater 
the fet, aa a sequel thet bad bers planned st the mae cmv 
vei it. 

‘The objectiane rnised aguinat Chin Idealinm and ica alleged 
‘Slips veriounly impeded the reception ofthe work, us though 
fim easatlal signticance lay in any way in this nictch of ity 
philosophical import: wheres this was no more than # means 
devised in the intent of the problem of « poutble abjaire 
, foe winning thie necemary icaight: thet the 
thas problem refer wo beck to the go th 
and for steel; ad that shia Ego, mu the promuppontion of the 
Inowledge of the world, cannct be ead resin prevuppoved me 

al 

AUTHOR'S FREYACE TO THE ENOLI8H EDITION 15 
amenoogical radurtion, tht ia, through “Epoché”. 1 might hare 
been better advised if, without nltering the omental coanesinne 
cof cho expositian, I had lft open the Sina} decaion in favour of 
transcendental Tdealim, and contcated myel! with mating Gear 
tht teins of thought of crucial philosophic! nigicance with 
‘trend that is towards Ideals seccnsarily mie bere, and zmurt 
by all mesos be thought out; 20 that to this end one nveds i 
ny case to umke nue of the ground of tramecadzntal ubjetivity. 
1 muse not beatae, Bowever, to wtato quite explicitly thet 
in regard to transcendenal-phenomenological Kdealna, 1 have 
‘nothing whatsoever to take buck, chet now an ever J hold every 
farm of current philovophicsl cealiam to be in principle sbevrd, 
0 no low every idenlura to which is ity own argument thet 
‘ealinm stands contzasisd, and which in fact it refuse, Given 
a deeper uderstnding af my expenion, the vlipintic objection 
should never have bees raised an an objection ageinst pheno- 
smenalogicalideaSam, but only ws an abjecion to ee inceraplte- 
news of my exposition. Stil, one should not overlook what i the 
‘dlcal eoeatal in all pilewaphising to which, in thin book, 
path will be opened. Over against the thinking, rich in pr 
scupportions, which has an ix premines the work, wciznoe, and 
‘oundry waderstandiogs bearing ox method, and rooted in the 
cjentiSe tradition an « whale, x radical form of the autonamy 
‘of knowledge ia bere setve, in which every forss of datum given 
in advance and all Being taken for granted, jn vet out ao invalid, 
‘od there is 4 reversion to that which i already preeuppeoed 
‘split inal presopposing xd fs all questioning andl newering, 
‘nd berewith of necensty exist already, immediate snd persistent. 
‘This is the fit to be freely and exprenly posted, and wth 
A selkerulence which precedes al conceivable instances of self- 
ridence, and is contuned implicit in them al, Althongh i ie 
‘only with the phenomenclogia! reduction which would convert 
(hin radicalinm into oaecious work, that get work-pérforming 
pilosophising begins the whale preparstory eSezion bas eready 
ben carried through, snd precicly is this epiit Ht is pheno- 
‘messlogicl, though stil! unconsciously so. i fllows, therefore, 
‘ht ie piece of pare vel reScaion revealing nrginal slf-evi- 

” ‘PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
dent facta ;and, ssoreover, when it exhibitain thse facta (though 
Sncompletey) the cuties of Ldalism, it far ox cam be from 
‘elag one ofthe usual belancings between [dealin and Realism, 
nd cannot be affected by the arguments involved in any oftheir 

‘evel bald rm une te improves td completers 
hut may eventually prove necessary, even an the reality af rivers 
‘and mountain ranges, which the Serr explocer hav really vees 

os bogetber with ales caegoree ofthe bject, aod Ekewise all 

f work, and shen thse ol iceligibe an tracert 
omelette, Whroce it carly fellows chat transcendental pheno- 
smenclogial desea ene apecial philosophical than a theory 
tanong Obert; that trsacadenal plmamesoloy, reer, 
cnmerte accor, i, itl, even when me word is spoken Sone 
cxralog Idedian, universal Zdeating worked out ws « science. 
‘And it proves # through Its own metzing s2 trnactndenal 
science in cach of it pect onstintive domi. But we abo 
reed to make clearly explicit the foméemean and meatal 

AGLHORS PRIFACE TO THE ENGLISH BDITION 31 
‘and chat form of Idealim which in popclarcealism ia oppoted 
‘to it nit incompatible opposite. Asd is the very fst place Int 
thie be ead: Our phenomenciogicalidealian does not deny the 
penitve exietence of the real (reales) world and of Nature—in 
‘the dat place as though it eld it 0 be an iluaion. Ita sole task 
and service ia tm clarify the meaning of this werk, the procise 
foes in which everyone scoops i, and with undeniable cight, 
eu raaly casting (@iAlch seid). That it exieer—given m3 it 
su a univore out there (dareemde) in an experience tht i con= 
(nuns, and Beld persistently together throogh 2 thread of wides 
sproed Uunanimity—that ia quite xhubiable. It is qulte another 
‘cantderation, although ia the light ofthe discussions in the text 
of this wock ane of grt philowophical importance, thatthe cox 
Ninuance of experinoe in the fate vader nach form of usivemt) 
sagroement is x mere (although reseoasble) presumption, and thst 
scoocdiogly the aoz-existence of the world, atbough ata whit 
iin in pint of fact the object of» weanimoun experience, alway 
remains thishabe, The result of the phesomeoologica! clara 
tion of che meening of the manner of exineace ofthe rel world 
(aod, ehdeticlly, of a eal world generally) in tat only tan 
soodental subjectivity has ontologically the measing of Abvolute 
‘Being, thit it only i nos-relative, tat is relative only to itself; 
‘where tho reel word indeed exit, but ix reepect of ewsen00 
‘i relative to transcendental subjectivity, and in vuck a way that 
it can have ioe menning a» existing (enone) reality enly a the 
fnteutional meaning-product of trrmcendental pbjectivity. But 
that fre sting ite foll meaning when the phenomenological 
lisclonare of the transcendental Ego is vo far advanced that the 
‘experience of fallow-ubjects implicit in it kaa won its reduction 
10 transcendental experience; ia other words, when the se 
intecprettion carried out purely ou the basis of traecenderal 
‘experience has fed to the ksowledge ofthe real andl whole meaning 
of the tascendeatal subjectivity, which, for the Bao reflecting 
st the time means tha: “T, the transcendestal,abeolute , an F 
«mm in my ova life of trmscendental conscioumem; but besides 
‘mywef, the fllow-subjecta who in thia fe of mine reveal them- 
salve ws co-tranecendenta, within. the tratacendental eoiety of 

a PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

“Oumsalves, which imcttanewaaly reveals tel." Je ia thus wish. 
the (atemubjectiney, which in the phecomccologial reduction 
Ja reached empirical giveaness on 2 transcendental vel, snc 

‘hon ituelf teamsceodental, that the rel (resi) work Se con 
stad un “objective” aa being there far everyone. 

‘The world bas this meaning, whether we sre amaze of it oF 
not. But bow could we ever be aware of it priar to the pheno- 
smenological reduction which fist brig the trwocadestal rub 
{ectivity aa our abeohate Being into the focus of experience? So 
Tang’ o4 i¢ war only dhe peychologca! eobjctvty that vas 
recognized, und one sought post it ws beolute, and to vnder~ 
‘rand the work! a it corcat, the remul could only be an sbeurd 
deals, « paychological Ideulnm—the very type which the 
‘equally abnurd caiam has ws its counteepart. Now by sch 1 
fave won their way to the genuine transcendental abjectvity 
it can umuredly be ton that the great ideal of the eighteenth 
century, Berkeley and Hume on the one side, Leibniz on the 
‘other, lad, properly speaking, aleady reached beyood peycho- 
logical wubjectvity the vengs it bears within the xtra) war, 
But since the contrast betwena peychological and transcendental 
subjectivity recaioed unexplsine’, end the ali<dominant ane 
‘utionaliam of the school of Locke could oot render ineligible 
the covetinutag of what i real ms « performasce giving to ub 
Jectvity mening and true being, the uxirithel and unphilo- 
sophical unfit fought out an the fed of mature reoed in 
‘vogue forthe tizas tha fllawed, and there prevailed a petverso 
interpretation of the meaning which the grest ideale bus really 
intended yt to bene without ating ht meaning eetaly 

"Tie nw pebcalcs wit she tr gas i fa 
gag (he Geet since the Edam) will contribute fancesching 
sxiruaces, claricatian, and completions of what fr thers, had 
‘already been begun in the Lapitche Uitermchangen (1900-1902), 
‘228 then in the Ze, 0 that the cla to have aet going the 
‘necessary beginnings of a philosophy, “which cen present iteeif 
mt x wien”, cannot well be segurded as acdeception. In any 
(ue be whe far decuea inte of peclaingonaoerlng « New 

AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION 4 

‘Adlantis has really wandered In the trackiem wilds of « Dew 
cuttinnat and undeetaben bite of ringin exkvaton, will mt alle 
[imuelf to be diverted by the refuale of gengraphers who jadge 
thr report i che fight f eheir own experiences and habits of 
‘though, and on the siseagth of shia exept themeelres from 
all the rouble of making 2 joormcy wo the land proclaimed to 
benew. 

‘There ia wll cos point that cala for « remark, In the eyes of 
‘hove who set ade the phenomenological reduction as a philo- 
sophiclly relevant eccemtriisy (whereby, to be mur, tory deaeroy 
the whole meaning of the work and of my phenomewolog), and 
leave sathiog remaining bur a a grit peychology, it ofan 
hhappena that thiareaiual paychology ia identified en to is main 
‘import with Frau Brentano's paycholagy of intentionality, Great 
indeed 5 ia the reapect and gratitude with which the nuthor 
remambers thin gifted thinker ux his teacher, und wtrongly coo 
vinoed wo he st thst his convesnon of the acbolantic concept of 
intentiarality into a descriptive root-omorpt of psychology toa 
stitutes « reat discovery, apart from which phenomenology could 
nat have come into being a all; none the leas we su distioguial 
4 caveatialy diferent the author's pure peycbology imphectly 
ccomined in th twacsceademal pheaozconlogy und the poy- 
chology of Brentano. Thi holde god also of is "peychognceis” 
Timed to puze description a. the region of inner experiance. 
Jt ls indeed “phenomenological” peychology if, a» ha often 
Ihappenes atthe preset tie, we aze to give the tte “pheno 

to every peychologeal inquiry conducted purely 
within the framework of “inaer expeneate”, and, grouping all 
auch studies together, 10 speck further of a phenomenclogical 
‘aychology. For this later diseiptine, quite spar from its axme, 
faker us back, naturally, to John ‘Locke and 10 hiv school, 
{nclading Joba Stuart Mil. Our can thn soy thet David Hume's 
‘Treats give the in sptematic sketch of« pure phenomenology, 
{hth ender the mene of pray step esp 

™ FORE PHENOMENOLOGY 
questions, it ia thia whole “phenomenological” schoel which 
alone calla here for our consideration. Charactrinie of it and of 
itu peychology isthe conception nt forth in Locke's “white pape” 
simile of the pure soul as x complex or heap of temporally co- 
minting and aycenasive daca, which run their course under rules 
perdy their own, partly peychophyvicl. St would thus be the 

sain typea of these “sesse-data™; dota of the “inner seus! 
Inver experience, and fkewise the lemencary basic focms af the 
paychical compl; thet of explanainry paychology to eck out 
the rule of genetic formations and tranafoctatiana, euch asin 
the case of natural science, and an similar lines of method. And 
quite naturally 20, since the pure peychical being or the paychical 
lie is regarded as a nature-resembng flow of events ia & quati= 
space of consciousness, On grounds of principle, we may any 

‘data" be blown along is 1 callective whole “atomistaly”, 
ough in accordance with empizial lam, Uke heaps of ound, 

thom ss pert of wholes which by necessity, whether 
cexaptial oa prior, ean alone operate wa wach pari, zd pein- 

i 

fettored to this inherited naturliom, though in vitor of is having 
Introduced ints paychology a0 « was caccept, descriptive in type 
snd unvermain scope, that of Intentional, bun worked therein 
sna reforming factor. 

‘The caentaly new intusace which in resacesdeatally directed 
phonomenclogy becomes active for descriptive peycbology, and 
is now completely changing the whole apoct ofthis peycholoay, 
fin whole method, the seting of is comerete aims, is the insight 
that a concrete descrieion of thr sphere of conscious 24 « 
self-contained. wpbere of intentionality (it & never otherwise 

AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE ENGLISH EDITION 2s 
concretely glen), » concrete description, for inatance, of pet 
ceptions or recollections, and oo forth, also calle, of neces, 
for 3 description ofthe object an such, refered to in intentioaal 
experiences, an such, we wey, indicating thereby thet they belong 

the carrent experience itself an ite objectively 
bctive meming”. Furbermore, that ce and the 
same intention abject av euch, fom the viewpoint of descriptive 
paychology, is um ideal indicator of « group of ways of being 
conacions that are proper toi, whote sytem of typial erences 
‘alla esenially with the typical articlstion of the intentional 
jeer Tt does aot auce to aay that every comaciomancas ia 4 
‘onsciouscess-of cn th links perhapy of Brentano's clevication 
(to which T eansot mubserbe) sto “presentations”, “Judgments”, 
“"phenozune of Jove und of hats": but one amert question che 
diferent eategriee of objects in their pure objectivity as objects 
of posible consciousness, and question back to the eovectial 
confquritions of possible “maniflds” to be aynubeticlly con- 
‘ected, through which an object ofthe relevant category can alan 
‘elnown nthe aime, that i, as that which can be known through 
experiences of very difering description, dlifering sod always 
ifering will again, but abvaye renzictod tothe descriptive types 
of wok ways of couacioutnem ax beloog to it easetially ond 
4 rior, Tho reference to the fact that every object ls ether 
‘experienced or thight ce sought atte a8 th end, and oo forth, 
‘is only « first step, and wil tela us very Lisle. The tak of x 
phenomeaslogical “ecamutin” of ebjects refered to at the 
lose of thie book, in a traxacendestal ting, itis trv, finds its 
place ere, ely thet now it ia ceneeived st projected back upon 
the natural peyehological 
afartutoely, the srcemry evening of the diferesce boteen 

ecae peychology, Zot even phesomenslogic) peychology, fas 
had this effect upon the msjrity of profeinnal peychologin 
(Qmbo are wont to be very frugal, moreover, in all chat cancers 
‘hilosopay), that they filed eo aotice at all the radical pepcho- 
logical reform which was invalved in the txsoendent}; they 

“ ‘PORE PHENOMENOLOGY 

Sntegpreted sy urteraaces an intimation that a peychologits 
they were not catexracd ia any way with phecemeaslagy, of 
swith any part of it. Eves the few wha mocod here that it was 
very relent to peycbology, and sought to make it socemible, 
Ihave not grasped the whole messing and wope of an intentional 
smd eeustitsive pbenemensogy, and ave not sen that bee for 
the ft time, in contrue with naturalistic peychology from 62 
cuter standpoint, a peycbology comes to words asd deeds, @ 
peychology in which the lf of the soul is made ineligible 
{ts mom intimate and ocgially inuisional casence, and that thie 
riginalintuitional emesce lic in a “onnwituting” of meaning- 
fecmutions in modes of exateatia validity, which is perpetually 
sm snc iocamatly rgaising ine afreah—triely, in tha 
agate of intentional actions, whereby exiteaia (vende) objects 
of the mont varied grades right up to the level of an abjective 
‘world are there for the Ego at cceaion dessands, 

‘Ic wns, marenver, not widhout reson that the peycbological 
reform made is fir eatry as the conceals! implication of 
‘tamcendeutl refano. For coly 2 compulsion grounded op the 
philcwopbically transcendental probes, an urge towards extreme 
radicaliom in the clearing wp of the resin which knowledge 
tnd object atand to each cher in the conscious life fell, necer- 
sarily led to a univerm) and concrete phenomenology of cox 
teiouaneen, which received ite primary orientation from the 
sntentional object. Io the tresation to the paychology of the 
‘tural standpeint, itis thea obvious tht so intentional paycholony 
Ina « quite different weaning from that ofthe traionn uf the 
school of Locke or of thst of Brentano. A. von Meinsog sso, 
although, in writings that sppeared subsequently to my Logical 
‘Srues, hie teaching comes here ed there into tosch woth ay 
‘on, iano way tobe regarded ete ts an exception: be remain 
bound 10 Braman Iedicg conceptions, or 20 paychologaal 
secatticaliam, aa doce the entire peychologs of the modcra 
‘radition and the whole peychology ofthe peeext day. 

"The present work, however, a2 2 philophies) testiec does 
ot inclade peycbalogical reform among its themes, although it 
shold not be wholly uckg in indications bearing on « yeauine 

AUTHOR'S PREFACE To THE ENGLISH EDITION 27 
{intentional peychology. Even as ptilosophical, moreover, itu tak 
in limited It dove act chim to be anyching mare than an attempt 
(hat bas been growing through decades of eeditstion exchusively 
directed to thia one end: t0 discover 2 radio! beplealng of & 
philosophy which, to repest the Kantian phmse, "will be able 
(tn present itelf an scence”. The ideal af « philosopher, to think 
‘ot nooner of later logic, xm ethic, « merapyeic, and wo forth, 

given ground of our experience of x world, presupposed a9 
‘vomething that exins as » matter of coune, ‘That they do it 
‘causes thoes all to have problems in respect oftheir foundation», 
and paradozee of their owe, « condition which « submequent and 

theory of tmowindge fir sek to remedy, For this very 
reason the puttive wcienees are unpbilosophioal, thry are ot 
‘ultimate, abvoluce acienom. A philosophy with problematic 
foundations, with paradonse which aris from the obeouity of 

i 

‘through the hante to have done with them, had thin for it con- 
sequence, thet ws had and bere many wel ever new philoanphical 
“yyw” ox “divectioa”, but not the one philosophy which 

a PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

sa Tica undenlies all the philosophies that can be imagined, 
Philcsopy, ot it moves towarda im realization, i cot « relatively 
Incomplete acience improving a» it goes naturally forward. Tote 
lie embeded ia Sta meaning a philosophy x radkalinn in the 
ruatter of foundations, an absolute frosdom from all presup- 
ovine, « securing fo itseif an abeabss hax: the totality of 
revuppostions that can be “taken for granted”. But that t00 
must faelf be fit clarified throngh corresponding reficalons, 
4nd the abaoitely binding quality of its requirement id bare, 
‘That these ceflzions become wore and mere interwoven 1 
thought advances, exd Kead evencually t 3 whole wien, to & 
ckenve af Beginnings, a “fae philesophy that al philosophical 
iaciplnes the very (cundations of all wcicuces whalsoever, spring 
from itn ratrix~all thia rout needa have remained implicit ince 
the redicallam wus lacking without which philosophy geotrally 
‘ould not be, couMt not even mabe a art. The true 
beginning most have becs irretrievably fost in beginning with 
‘Peesuppouitions of « pottve kind. Lacking aa did dhe tadiional 
schemes of philosophy the eutbusinas of «fint beginsing, they 
dao lacked what is vt and mont spel 
smplical round acquire throug orgical well-acvty, and 
therewith that rmness of basis, that genulneseae of root, which 
sfoas maken real philowpby possible. The author's oxavictinns 
on such lines have become increasingly vel-cvident sa his work 
progremed, If thes bees obliged, ov practic! grounds, tn lower 
‘the ideal of the philompher to thet of « downright beginner, be 
‘has at fou in hia old age reached for himelf the complet cox 
‘tinty that he skould thus call hielf a beginner. He could 
‘lout hope, were Methoselah's wpan of days alloted him, to 
be ail able to become « philosopter. Be has alesys been able 
ta follow up the problems ther iam fram the Beginning, and 
rbparly from wit is fr fora descriptive phonomesology, the 
Doginnlg ofthe beginning, and te develop it cooceetcy im whut 
‘of work. The far borisons 
| phiksephy, the chief struct formatimas, 
Sirah prectiinls: bere Stoel ere; ao eel 
troupe of problems aod the methods of approech on essential 

AUTHORS FREPACE TO THE ENCLISH EDITION 19 
fines have boon made clr, The author ves the infinite open 
carat of the ut philaoply, the “promised iad” on which 
be Limi will ever et fot. This confidence may wake a ese, 
‘bur ke each sce for hlnaalf wher it baa cor vome grind 8 
‘the fagzente laid before him ms phesomenclogy ini beginning, 
Gladly would be hope tt those who come after will uke 3p 
shen fet ventures, carry them wendy forward, ye, 20d irprove 
tlao their grat Gfciacics, defects of incompleteness whch 
annet indeed be moided in the begiacings of wclentife work, 

Bat when all is said, thin work of sxine can belp 20 one who 
has azeady fixed his philbsopby and kin philbsophlcal method, 
‘who has thus never learnt to know the despair of oo who as 
the misfortune 10 be is lowe with phikophy, end who at the 
very outset of hin tndie, placed amid the chave of philouophiva, 
with hla choice to uake, realize thet he haa relly 20 choice at 
all, wage no ene of these has en care to free itself from pre= 
tuppetitons, and mane hao eprang fom the radical etude of 
tutonernoustelf-eaponsibility which the meaning of » philosophy 
demands. He who believes that be can oppeal to the “Frith 
idee” of experiance ia the curent enue of tbat term, orto the 
“ammured remit" of the exact sciences, ox to expecintaial or 
Physiological peycbology, otto # constantly impraved Topic and 
mathematics, and ve for, acd therein find precises for hin 
philosophy, cannot have omch ensoeptbilty for the coutents of 
(hin book. He is unable w bring to hie reading an ittetnive 
tavern, noe cam he fold tha the time ane fort Dave been rel) 
spent which the eympathetic understanding of wach 4 wty of 
beginning demands. Oaly be who is binself eriving to reach 

‘The 
progress since 1913 mary be eefered to the recently published. 
‘writing exttle! "Formule und tranazendentale Logik, Verusch 
clner Keith der logiachen Vernamit™ (inthe Jairbuch f. Phdeo- 
semoligis wad phdzomesolpiiche Forschang, BA. X, 1925). Also 
tp Nia Certesanichen Mediation, an extended elaboration of 

» PURE FEENOMENOLOOY 
the fone lectures which be ad the pleasure of giving font in 
the spring of gaa at the University of Lama, and in th lat 
Year in an emeaially mature form ot the Sorbonse in Pacis, 
"They farish once agin though mereiy in anna em Tarodvesion 
te phmemanalogial philosophy, but canaia ex ewental nipple 
‘nest in the detailed textment of che fisdamental probes of 
teurscendexal imerwjeciviey, wherewith the welipautie objec- 
tion completely callapece. They wil peesuzably eppear szal- 
tancnaly with thin English editor of the Iden in x reach 
rendering in the Dulles oe la Soci de Pllowpiis, In the 
tne year 2 German edition ehould be sppecting, published by 
‘Niemaye of Halle wd.8,cotaining es adaioaal mater x verod 
Indust nc the no f the a » paral 
(a tha fine of + macctl wince) and sararal 

ferclog extn fs pr muti pry ander 
‘taken a9 intial probles. At « later wage only Is it shown 
how, tarting from this discussion, which, Hike all at as pre- 
seded, remaioa on natural ground, the Copemicen reves to 
the trutcendectl vtandpiat finda ie ative. At the same tiene 
1 veces of publications mm beiag stated im my Jalriack: the 
fomerete pomenologicd uti whick T have dried wa the 
yas went by, tocar up ry ows iad, and forthe vafoguardig 
Of the stracure of phesaemecalogy. 

Tn concsion, lot me thank my ows Lonoured fiend, Pofeesoe 
‘W..I Boyoe Cibsaa, for che dsictrened labour iyetved in chi 
‘tansation. Ie fle 20 with son hope hex we thorough and 
oe carne «thinker tubes vo gret €2inteeet in ny eft to 
furnih philosophy with x scientific beginning a0 to take mpon 
bimaelé the tranalating of this extensive work, the language of 
which aso dificult, even for Germans. 

TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE 

In Lagos (Hd. 1), 1930, conceives philosophy a» a ‘rigocwus 
science’, and sims st a radical ceconstractian of sts ben and 
rtbod, Since the year 1900, which saw the fire edition of 

to Metapiysic being reervod for ser teataent, it 
xyrenly sated othe froat page of the third lnpreunon of thn 
‘Tdem (Hallo, Max Nicmeyer, 1928), the “Ficet Book’, wad, ar 
such, earn the title Allgemeine Eixftlrwng in die reine Phliwo~ 

beip towards the slockating of the meaning of the wxt from 
Professor Huser] himself, for whoes gentrous ikidnes 10 me 

1 Bed BH ining Pbhaed by Das Nm at 

menological paychology given Asti on “Phenomenology’ 
inthe Founsrach Btn of the Burydopadie Brteanice, Tome 
thao aang helpful woggeaons a my owe eodecte of the 

‘The trataletor is decply indebted to his publishers, George 
‘Alles ic Unwin Led, of Ruskin House, and especialy tothe Editor 
‘ef the Library of Philosophy, Profesor J. H. Miche, for the 

‘TRANSLATORS PREFACE a 
{interest and care they have takca in the publahing ofthis Exglah 
‘yenios of Edmund Humct's fundameatat work. Profemor Muir. 
fhead gremed the yeature from the oumct with gemiar and 
Saocming empathy, and hia wggestions for the improverent 
of tho Englah text, ever sice the fire MS. cams into his hanes, 
rave been move helpf. Tt has been a constrat safaction 10 
realize that tho editarbip of the present translation vas in the 
competent bands of 1 diningxiched «scholar. 

a conciusion, I owe to my wife not only the typing of the 
(MS. of the complete tex, but many happy suggeations and 
{improreresaa in the wording. The tranalation owes mich to her 
scholarly cae. 

1, with the interests ofthe reader in mind, the trumlatar may 
veaeare on « word of advice, st would be this: Should the fst 
‘chapter ofthe fit Sectioa—mich reste of logical peliinarien, 
tnd forms the Wink of connexion with the later Logical Stier 
Drove by reason of its comprestion difical or unaxtisfying to 
the uniitiate, let him puss on tothe Sesand Chapter, and make 
tat the aartng-point of hin rading, reserving to himmelf, of 
couse, the privilege of reurning to the omitted chapter when he 
Jas become more fuer with the drift of the main argument, 
sd fala th need fo further fight on ts logical bas. 

WR BOYCE GIPSON 

CONTENTS 

avraats Prrice vo nas Braue Eorrot 

‘ie 
tg indepen end dependently. Conereem so Teer 
48 igen end exaery ete spare of ren mane 

“Sree seers * Pe 
Si, Coodinins oft peal cdetnoen 

Rs wensre re 

‘Te Reus os Peas Commune on 
4p Tir arr werd creo ercinnto pa 
S08 par yal ay at ele ene or 
146 sig raceme wnt se univ te? 

‘ine secTION 

PROCEDURE OF FURE PHENOMENOLOGY IN 
RESPECT OF METHODS AND PROBLEMS 

Commas Graces ov Fas Camco a 
Fis De ewe tong a 
Vr. Rest the bmn protany of the aber of expemnce 

soma um Noo, TUE OAPI - 

is 

EE Kod rst ccc ate erpnsone The sama 

iE 20, Newurce wowese tod sme eonwrmat rainy The 
eer rm se 

04 New ted noma thre och Joma rey 
Sot Tiger dakar etre of Bas 

106 Taha ete open Gartstew, Coad remit Hy 

‘Tmene of rox Nomoncour: Sree: Rasen OF tie 
hme 

(bop Tim eee nt nme pan ol (ru. The ne 
el eee 
40 sik tng ee Dace fee 

REE 

%ONEE LaeE a is 

a 

BEE 

out aracehind scans, Ta Tham” 
Ngee wo dhe alse oo Ké 

frag The prtroamte naam of the “Lown”. Maung and 
— us 
(6125, Th eumfcng ako in dh opty of ep grein 
ta eee ae 
$i Ripe emigre to prin of the ema of 2 

FOURTH SECTION 
REASON AND REALITY (WIRKLICHREIT) 

Ramage Mesos 2 art vores Oar 
Trek Laredo a 

AN14ODUCIION 

Pure Phenomenology, to which we are bere seeking ths way, 
‘whose unique position in cogerd to all othir sciences we with 
tm muke clear, aod to set fort an the mowt Fordamental region, 
af philaophy, ie an eentially new aclenee, which in virne of 
ita own goreming peculiarity lies fer removed from out ordinary 
thinking, and bas not util our own day therefore shown 47. 
impulse to develop. Jt cals ilf a wieace of “phenemens”, 
(Othe sciences, Jong knows to us, abo treat of phenomena, ‘Thun 
rane fears peychalogy referred ta sa x acienoe of peychical, and 
rarural science an a acience of physical “appearances” or pheno- 
mens, So in tistory we bear speak cocssionally of historical, 
and in the cultural sciences of culeural phenomena, and similarty 
for all sciences that dest with realities. Now iferenty ws the 
‘word “phenomenon” may be used in wach content, and diverse 
1 ray be the meanings which earn tia certin that pheno- 

4 seats wy, thin isthe feat and by 

no ence ety tak which we mut cary out i fll fe would 

pis the ground of phenacenslogy 20d grap its dininctive 
‘ature ecientically. 

Ta theft deeds there bus bee mack kof hmcmtnclogy 
in German philosophy and papcholog. In presumed ngzeement 
with the Logical Studie." Phecomesoloey i concived 39 2 
sub-domain of empirical prychology. es x regio® containing 
immaeat" deseciztinos of paychcal vente (Bekebmin), which 
‘tech io their understanding ofthis imanence—soesaine icitly 

Certs, gee nd er apne 

2. Hamed, Lagi 
(gpd ne tot Ts an natn Boe 
‘eke oft ard cane 

* PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

‘within che fremework fa inner experince (farang). My protnt 
‘gsios this nterpoerson has epparealy been of cul we, and 
‘the accompanying cincdstions, which warply delinm's some at 
Jean ofthe mala pants of thr difference, ave nxt been ndermsd 
cor have been heedlealy ect aude, ‘Thence al the completely 
expry replioe—exapy because the plain meening of my statenztt 
‘wan mitned—to my trticnm af the peychelogical method, 
<iciem which inne way denied the value af moder prychology, 
And in no sense depeeciated the experizental work caried out 
bby mex of dininetion, bt exposed ccrain, in the lee sense 
of the term, radial defict of method on the removal of which, 
in my opinion, the easing of paychology to a higher ach 
forehand no extrcedinary extesion af Ss fiekl of wark rust 
depend. ‘There wil ell be occasion to deal briefly with 

supertunus defence cf peychology apna my presumed“ 
1 mention thin dlgpure here that 1 cary esto from the ube 
‘mont emphatically, in face of prevailing end far-apreading eal 
inuerpretations, thatthe pare phenemeaclogy, to which in what 
follows we would pcepare « way of appreach, the se which 
cemarged for the fmt time in the Lapin! Stust, and bas 
revealed an ever richer acd deeper meaning to me ea ray thought 
han dwelt on i throogh the let tn year, i at payehalagy, xd 
that it ia not accidental defimizations end comiderations of ter. 
sminology, bt ground of riciple, which farbidit being counted 
«a peychology. Grest ms i the importance which phesomerslony 
‘mult claim to pomens for peyeholegy im the matic of method, 
provides for it tis itl? (i 
nly an Beience af ideas) as lela ideasEable with pryhology 

DRPRODUCTION “ 
their correbies; thug? ia view ofthe prevailing babs of though, 
4 demands 20 oral efoct to sce this. That we should sot 
cide all previous babita of chought, ace draugh and bre 
dows the mental barrens which cheno habits have eet along tbe 
‘arisonn of ous thinking, aad io ful intelinctual freedom prooecd 
tw lay hold on those geauinepbilowophice! probleme atl amlting 
compitely fresh fermularicn which the Lbereted horime oa al 
tides dincloe to we—thene ace bard demands. Yer nothing Lows 
4a required. What makes the approgciation ofthe escatial axture 
of plemomenclogy, the understending of the peculiar meaning 
cf ita form of inquiry, and ina relation to all other scieacen (29 
‘peychology in puricules) vo extraanizarly difcuk, is thet in 
‘sddtion wo all other adjutenents @ ne tay of leaking at thingy 
‘in meceomry, one that coctrert at every foint with the natural 
attitude of experience and thought. To move freely slong thie 
ew wey without ever rovertng to the old viewpoint, to learn 
1 see what stands before cur ye, to datioguiah, to detenhe, 
‘ale, moreover, for exacting end laborious wudics. 

‘Te wil be the chief tak of this Pret Book to search out way 
in which the excemive dificaies of peactreting tata this new 
vworid can be overcome a it wee bit by bit. We shall start from. 
‘the mandpoint af everyday life, from the work) 9 it voofranta 
i, from coasciounmes as i presents itself in paychologicd 
‘experience, and shall lay hare che preesppositions eawestial 
this viewpoint. We shall then develop » method of “phenomneno- 
Togial Retuctiom”, according to whick we may set mide the 
limitatice 0 Lowiedge essentially involved in every natare- 
tliretel form af fvestigetion, deflecting the rerictod Kine of 
vision proper to it, ustil we Eave eventually before ua the fee 
‘outlook wpoo “tramsonodentally” puriSed phenamens, snd there 
ih the fal of phamememlagy ta or owe ope eae of 

NT ee hs of ce schianry satch emat 
sore firmly, and in conformity wich the bian of the times, os 
also with inter sfinitice of the eubjece-catter, cmacet tem with 

prpchology. 
‘Paychelagy las acnnce of expticsee Keeping te the eoromary 

“4 PURE PEENOMENOLOGY 
erase of the word mxpecience (Brfalrang), this bow s twofold 
meaning: 

Tayehology is « science of fact (Tateacen), of “rxttrs of 
fct"—in Hume's ease of the word. 

Prychology isu ncirne of rei (Reaidtn) The 
mena which it handles as peychalogieal “phenomenology” are 
ral events which ws noch, in so frau hry havo rel existe 
(Daven, take thets place with the real Subjects 10 which they 
Delong ia the one spatiotemporal weld, the awed reais, 

‘As over agsint this paycbological “phenomenology”, pare oF 
traxiceneatal phesomensogy OT be exabshd not ot 0 ice of 
acts, bat ox 0 wince of cnet! Being (on "videtic™ Science): » 
‘ciecee which aime cachuively at eablishing “knowledge of 
‘ewences" (Weemerheacnene) aod abolvtly mo "fects", The 
correapoading, Reduction which leads from the peychologial 
‘phesoraenon tothe pure “essence”, or in respect of che judging 
thought, om factual Cexapicieal”) to “easatial™ univeradity, 
4 the eidate Redon. 

In the second place the phanonens of tremcredeta!phenomoligy 
tell be characterved at now.real (eral), Other rections, the 
eprcificallytamucendestal, “purify” the peyehologica phenoroens 
‘rom that whic Jade tex reality, ane iberewith setting ix the 
seal “world. Que phenemenchogy thould be w theary of eseaxal 
Being, dealing not with res, but with trnwoendeatally reduced 
heaorens. 

‘What this all afi when more clonely cumwiered will se 

italics, in piace of the single division of sciences into realistic 
tnd idea (0 ito empirical nd friar’) which nuniverly 
‘sloped, two divisions are preferred, corresponding to the two 
pais of opposiea: Fact and Eneace, Real and not-Raal. The 
‘Ginetion comeyed by thia trefeld opposiion seplacing that 
between real and idea wl ad « thoreughasing juiGcaion in 
‘the ater conrac of our iron (es mater off, nthe Becond 

mxraouucrION “s 

‘Book. Ir will be shown thet the concept of reality cequites 2 
fundemectal Uaitmion in virte of which difterence muse be 
tet up between real Being and individual (purely temporal} Being. 
‘The tramition to the pure Emexce provides an the one wide 3 
enowledge of the eestial nature of the Real, oa the ether, in 
respect of the domain left over, knowlege of the exsental mature 
of the non-real (real) It will teanspice furter that all ran~ 

singular facta are a¢ all arllable for andy, and the question of 
the reitian which « factual study of wach « Rind) may bear ta 
the idea of a Metaphysic, con be conaiered only is the con- 
‘stung vere of inventignticns, 

In the fst Book we aball teat not oniy of the genera! theory 
cf the phenomenslogical Redvctions which make the trscct- 
dentally purified conacloossese with ite ementia) correlates pet- 
ceptible (acids) and accesible; we aball also setk (0 Win 
afin ideas of the mont genera! stuctires of this pure con- 
scionaneat, und through ther agency of the ment general group 
of probleca, directions of etudy and methods which pertin to 
the pew science, 

To the second Book we make « thorough inquiry into certain 
spevially important sts of problexa the setemstic formation 
of which and solation under types ia the precoashion for brisging 
{nto real clearness the dificult relstions of phenomenology to thr 
physical sciences of nature, to paychology, and to the sciences 
‘af the mind, end on_another side alsa ta he a fir’ sciences w 
1 callctive whale. The phenomenologice! sheiches here traced 
{in avtline ofr also the welcorae means of comidersly deepening 
the understanding af phenomenclogy reached in the frt Book, 
and of winaing from itu immecae cir of problem «far vice 
content af kanwlcige, 

A thind and concluding Book is dodicotnd 1 the Idea of 
Philosophy. The iaaight willbe swakened that enuine phikaophy, 

“ PURE PEENOMENOLOGY 
the ides of which io to resize the idea of Absokste Knowledge, 
bas ite roots in pure phenomenclogy, end this im so carneet 5 
‘sense that the aysiecnatically rigorous grounding asd developroect 
of thin fi ofall pbwophite asin the perp precoiion 
ofa metaphaics and ether philosophy “which would sapee 
Yea adr” 

Since phenomenology is here to be catabliched ax 9 science 
of Exsential Beings an « priori, or, as we also sy, cidetic 
‘cience—it wil be wmeful 10. preface the lnbours devoted €0 
phesomenclogy ‘self with « seciw of fundamental disrmioes 
‘epon Exsence (Was) and the Belace of Emential Beng, and 
{rth defence am agua natzatnm ofthe orpoa end doris 
shorty ofthis Knowledge of Emacs. 

‘We bring to x clay these iotroductoey wanda with # sbott 
terminological discussion. Following my custom in the Logical 
‘Shader, Tevoid on fr an pombe the exprenionn «prio and 
2 porteriort, partly on account of the confuxing cbscurities and 
ssabigutne which infec thie oriaary une, but so becuse of 
the aototions philosophical theories which as an evi? heritage 
from the past are interwoven with thera. Only in contexts which 
lend thers singlenee of wane, and only asthe equivalent of other 
concomitant terms to which we have sesigned cleer and univocal 
smosning, abou they De ued, especialy when we ae concerned 
to note the eympethetic accord with historical paris. 

"The expreaiona Zsa and Idol are not quite in sch evil odour 
1s rescds coating ambiguitice,thoug they auf onthe whole 
prety bacly in thia expec, a the frequent mixiseepettions 
‘f my Logical Sade ave rae roe ‘ol en painfully enough, 
‘Ans further incentive to & change of terminology, may maton 
the neod ta Laep the highly importa Keawian concept ofthe fda 
free from all contact with the general conoapte of (tot formal 
cr material) eweuce. I theeiore make use, m2 foreign expremion, 
ofthe terminclogialy unspent Bide, and ae German exprion 
of « term whose equivocadaca wre harms, though af men 
‘reastons the word Wasa (Euence ot Emcatial Beiog). 

1 would alas bave been plawed to dispense withthe hewily 
den woed Rat foalyT could bare found x wufable eubtcte. 

itl only, as a rule, afer protracied inquinics than they can be 
‘Gaally cleared up ad determina: ut is often indipemble to 
rake use of a set of speoch-forma which group together i an 
arderly way 4 mamber of correst cxprosions bearing closly 
‘oquivalnt meanings, the individual mesabers of the group being 
teemineloglaally dstiogsished xe from the other. Definition 
cancot take the same form ia philosophy ae it doct in mathe- 
matic; the imitation of mathematical procedure i invacably in 
this ceapect not only untruth but perverse ad mot haraful 
jn to consequence. Moreover, the foreguing terminclogial 
‘aprearions should by meme of obvious sxx determinetr indi- 
cations maintain theor Sed meaning throughout the ours of 
the inguiry, whit all cove erica) comparigns with phil 
vophical tradition in this o other sepects, if oa to prevent the 
undue expansion of this week, must be omitted, 

FIRST SECTION 

THE NATURE AND KNOWLEDGE OF 
BSSENTIAL BEING 

FIRST CHAPTER 
FACT AND ESSENCE 

§). Narmar Krownoes ow Exrmumes 

‘Natura knowedge begins with experience (Brfahrwop) and re- 
stn ethin experience. Thus in that theoretical pesitom which 
‘we call the “aarural”standpoist, the total eld of possible research 
ia indicated by a single word: that ‘a, the Worl. ‘Tho acences 
prope tothla origina! standpoint sre seandingly in their collec- 
tive unity sciences of the Weed, and o lang an thin atedpoint in 
‘theonly dominant one, the concepts “true Being”, "seal (edrAce) 
Being”, ie, real expircal (vale) Being, ani—since all that in 
real come to sef-coscentration is the form of x come unigy— 
“Being in the World” are mesninge thet coincide, 

‘Brery sckace Ka its ows object-domaia an field of research, 
and tu al that it hoow, i, in thin connesian, to allie correct 
auwections, there correspond at original sources of the reasoned 
justia that support thec certain intuitions in which objecta 
fof the region appear an seifgiven acd in pert at Jatt an giowe 
fa imental (origiatrer)ccne, The objrctivng (or deter) ia~ 
tuition ofthe fir, “satura” aphre of hnowledge and of alta 
sclenon ia natural experience, andthe primordia! dxtor experience 
{a perception in tho ordinary sense ofthe term, To have something 
real primordall given, eto "become xware” oft and perceive” 
itn simple intuition, ore une and the same thing. In “outer per- 
ceptnn” we have primordial experience of physical thing, but 
smesmory 0€ anticipatory expecttion thie is nolanger the cae; we 
Ihave primordial experience of cureloes and vr sates of onacious- 
‘ein the so-alled inner or elf-perception, but not of others and 
Chair vst expelencen ln ead chrough “emparhy”. We “bebald 

» PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
the living expciences of other” through the perarption of thie 
‘bodily behaviour. Tia behaling in the cas of empathy i indeed 
‘naitional daar, yet mo lange = primordialy ducer ect, The 
‘ther man and his peychla! life is indeed apprehended ws “bere 
in pers”, and im union with his body, but, ale the body, i 
not given to our comsciouanes ax primordial. 

"The World ia the totality of objets that caa be known through 
experience (Srfabrung), known in tera of orderly theoretical 
‘thought on the basin af direct prennt (aka) cxpecence. hit 
4 not the place to dlacas in greater dztail che method proper to 
1 science of experience oc to consider how auch a acleace justin 
ft aim to wazacend the earrow feamework of dizect empirical 
tevenneas, Under sciences of the Ward, that a sciences developed, 
‘rom the natural wandpoint are included not only all no-caled 
‘ataral scenet, 0 the mote extended a4 well we in the muromer 
wone of that tarm, the viencen of material nature, But tse the 
vciences of azical beings (Wee), with their prychophysicat 
ature, physiology, paychology, soda forth. All so-aled mental 
seiacar ao come under thiabead—istoy, the culture] eiences, 
‘the sacalgicaldiciplines of every kind, whereby we 
Teave it an open question whether they are to be bei virailar to 
‘the mutual sciences or place ia opposition to them, be chewnelres 
sccepted as natucal sciences or as sclences of an ewsentaly Dew 
pe, 

G2. Facr. oumwunaur or Fact 20 Basovcr 
‘Sciences of experience ace sciewes of “ft. Tas acts ofcagnition 
‘which undetBe our experiencing posit the Real in indiidval form, 
ov i ae having apeti-tempors)exatence, ms vomething existing 
‘in tir time-spo, ving thia particular duration ofits owe and & 
real content which in ite emence could jost a» well bare been 
‘resent in vay other time-apet: posta t, moreover, ss something 
‘which is presenta thin place in tia particalar phytic shape (or 
in there given united to« body of this shape), where yet the mame 
zeal being right jst 10 wel so far as itn own escace i cxtceraed, 
be present st exy other place, and in eny othor form, and might 
Whewise change whilet remaining in fact uochanged, of change 

FACT AND ESSENCE 8 
ctherwine than the way in which it actally doce. Indrvidual 
‘Being of every hind in, to peak quite geoerDy, Yacidanal”, It 
4s vorand-so, but ewentally i could be ocher thas iti, Bven f 
efaite laws of tana obit according to which tuch and such 
Aefinite consequences amt in far: follow when such and such 
al cuadtiona are ia fact present, nc laws express only ordering 
that do in fact obtain, which right rum quite differently, ane 
already preanppose peraining 8 initio tho nen f objects 
of powible experience, that the object thus ordered by them, 
‘when cnnaidered in theamelrs, are acidectal 

But the import of thi contingeacy, which i there called cstter- 
offctnens (Tutchichhad), Himite in this respect that Ube 
‘ontingency ia correlative to 8 ecesity which doce not carry the 
mere actuality atu of eld rue of eonpenion obaining between 
‘waporo-apuial facts, but Bas the churcer wf eel necaity, 
and therewith & reltion to asential sorieity, Now when we 
ate that every ft could be “eseclly” once than i a, we 
were sendy expreming thereby shat i Belong. the maning of 
everything contingrt that it should have care being and theemnth 
1 Bidat bbe epprehnded inal its partys and this Exdou comen 
nce ef orig tro of ono nina 
object in not simply and quite georally an indsviual, 

Ih ramming wae bt ages tus vod ts 
"nial" it an tec proper wade of bing ts own supply of 
creat predcablen which must qualify (pve “Being wt it is 

ill), if other secondary relative determinations are to qualify 
it sla, Tho, for example, every tae in nd for itl ha an. 
coveatia! nature, end at the liedt the univers moening-essence 
“tons in penal”, or rater the sooutic ix geterl—unilerstood 
inthe pure wenaeof« phase or aspect intutvey Geivabie fom the 
individual tone (eter in ita ingleess, oc through competion 
‘with other an "comma learnt"). Bo too every material thing 
‘nan x own eaverdal ceiratives, and st the iit the universal 
derivnive “material thing in gener", with time-determination- 
Along tothe atence ofthe adie! con avo belong to nother 
(adicidecl, and the Brondect roeracice of evel Being, of the 

kind we have been indicating through the belp of examples, 
iri" or "ceri finn, 

$3. Remora Tesomr aro Teorvaeat. Dereon 
Ai fest “exscoce” ndiated that which in te ltinate welt -beng 

‘which ia iteif not to be understood as empirical but an caveats! 
pomiblty. The obyct of euch inaght ix then the corresponding 
‘pare easence or cidos, whether it be the highest category or ue 
ofits specializations, right down tothe fully “oonerete". 

"Thin invight which goes the ewence and in the last rewort it 
promod cra can ye adequate xd en mach we can caily procure 
‘it, for instance, frocs the easential nature of « vounds; but it can 
tho be mote oF less naperfect. “inadequate”, eb that not only in 
reapect of tu greater or lever clearnes and dicticrere, Tt belong 
tothe ype of development pecoliar to ceria cxtcgarien of iat 

and represented ooly in inadequate “one-sided” empicia int 
ons. Tha Bokia foe every emence celted to the hinge, and 
‘ndond for ali the usentsl cempanente of extension and muteri- 
ality cespetively; it even bolis good, if we look more closely 
(cubeequent analyecs will make that evident) for al realities pene- 
rally, whereby indeed the vague expressions ‘aoeaidedoeas’ 
and ‘oresidodnem recave determinate meanings, end different 
inde of inadequacy are separated out oce fram the other. 
Here the preliminary indication will wafice thet already on 
(grounds of principle the spatial shape of the physical thing can, 
‘be given only in some single pecepective aspect; alo thet spare 
fram this ixadequacy whach clings tothe unfolding of any wees 
of cootimuoly connected intusons and penis in site of all 
that ia thereby acquired, every phyuial propecty nwa on into 

WACK AND ESSENCE ss 
infiites of experience: and that every zultipliciy of experiene, 
‘however lenghily drawn 0: sl leven the way open to cloner and 
oval thing Germination; and sooo, i nic. 

(OF whatcrer Hind the individual insiton may be, whether 
segue or not, t can paw off ito ewvenealInestion, and the 
later, whether correspondingy edequets or not, as the charectex 
fa drtoe act. And this meana that— 

‘The cance (Bidet tom object of anes typ. Just a the data of 
individual or eniticalntuition it on indie objet the data of 
tential inion a re ete. 

Hare we havo not x mee euperfca! mulogy, but » radical 
comunity of saree. Event inagh so tition, jut ws the 
ldeti objectia allan object. The eneraition of the correla 
tive, sounaly attached concepts "isuition” and “object Sot « 
‘anual whim, but ia compellingly demanded by the very sara of 
things.» Empirical intuition, more vpecifialy vexwe-erperience, 
fn conacioumee ofan india! object, and a en ruling agency 
“brings sv giveaneie™: a peseptee, to primordial gieanes, 
tw the couscioursem of gragping the object a “s primardial way’ 
{nis “ody alfbood. Oa guite similar ixes enti! intuition 
{a the canacioonness of something, of en “objec”, « vometbing 
towards which its pance is diecied, « vometbing ‘wel-given” 
‘within it; but which can thea be “presented” in other act, vaguely 
ar Gatinely thought, unde the wabject of true md fate pica: 
(ons— inthe cate indeed with every “bjt” in the mscatarily 
‘sxteuded seas proper to Formal Logic. Every posible object oF 
0 pot it lagically, oery met of peal toe predicaion”, bas 
indeed dts ron ways, thet af predicative thinking above all, of 
coming under glance thet presents, istuca, mect it eventually 
4m fts "bodily wfhood” and “aya hold oP" i, ‘Tus easasial 
Annight ctu, mod ca iwight in che preguant exwe ofthe 
‘termand uot amece, and possibly « vague, representation i is « 

na 

rh. Sia inatee 

s PORE PINOM:NOLOGT 
‘ebmondlal doe Yuin, groping the eaence in ita “boty” 
talibood? But, onthe ther hed, in an ineition of «funda 
‘moenaly amir an aoa! Lind, namely i contrat the pes of 
‘nguiton which belong a corelatves to che object matin of ther 
‘angorica, and more epecicaly 1» intuition in the ordiney 
‘narrovrsete, tht i, iadvidoa iotuiton, 

‘Tein undoubtedly inthe intcingic azure of cuenta intuition 
‘that it should ret ox what «chief factor of individual intuition, 
namely the striving fr thi, the vite presence of idividasl 
ft, though it doce nor, to be 

cra that ho eave! intuition is pombe without the free 
pomsibilry of directing one's glnce to 2m individual caumterperd 
and of ehaping ax illustration; just ae cantrariwise no individual 
Joruition ia potable witsout the Gee pomibilty of carying out 
‘an set of ideation and therein directing one's glance spon the 
corresponding emence which exemplifes itself in something 
individually visble; but chat doe» not ater the fact thr th 20 
‘inds of tatition differ in principle, ond in, escetions of the kind 
‘we hare jt been making i is oly tbe een] relations between 
‘them that desire themselves. Thus, tothe easetil diferenoes 
‘ofthe intuitionn correspond the caentia) relations between 
“exnsance” (bere clearly inthe sea of individu eanercte being) 

FACT AND ESHENCE 2 

$4, Ramet buscar 2D ram Posy oF Facr, Kovowexnan oF 
Rasmices Teomrewoay or Ais. Knowuanox ov Facrs 

‘The Hides the pare come, cm be exemplified intuitively in the 
data of experience, dae of perception, memory, and sofotth, but 
Just oo readily ako te the mare dete of foncy (Phaniexie), Heace, 
‘with the wim of groping am exvence isl in ita primordial form, we. 

imaginatioe 
TF inthe play of fancy we being uptialehapes of one sart o¢ 
another to birth, melodies, social happenioge, end aa forth, or ive 
rough fcttoce acta of everyday life, of vatisfuction oe lie 
tisfactio, of volta nd the like, we ean throug “ideation” 
secure fro this source primordial end even on occasion adequate 
‘sight into pure emencen is manifld wariety:cmences t may be, 
cf epatial shape ia general, of melody ot such, of social bappening 
a ach, and ve fort, oe ofthe shape, melody, ete of the relevant 
special type. Itisn matter of indigereace inthis coroerin whethoe 
wack thingy have ever becx givex i sctunl experiense or aot. 
Could feee make-believe through some sort of prychological 
smiruce lead to the imagining of something fundasnennlly new in 
{ind (exaory deta, for inatance) winch never occurred in anyane’s 
experiences, nar ever will that would not affect in any way the 
primordial givennsss of the corresponding essences, althougs 
Inmayined data are never under eny cicstmancea real data. 
 Sllowseesentally from all thie thet the farting ofthe econ, 
With the istutive sppeehrusion that immediately ascorapanie it, 
dct mat imply any poiting of indioidval rstence whatsoooer} 
‘pure ewoncial truths do not make the dightost cxertion concerning 
facts; bence from them albee we are 20t abe to infer even the 
‘ettea truth coasering the fct-woeid. Just ax to thinks fact of 
‘to exprem it needa the grounding of experience (to far on the 
tential releooncy of wach ticking weaerily demande 11), 90 
thought concerning pure ewence—the trmixed chought, ait 
that which connec ewmecce end facta together—oceds for 

2 PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
itu pring and support an insight imo the ossences of 
things. 

5. Jupoumern xt0or Esamce ano Jovcumes or Leric 
Geom 

‘We have will to consider the following point: Judgments about 
emmocs und ouential relationships on the one bend, and on the 
other hand eldetic judgments is general, in the broad sense 
which we must cansider them, are not che ease things eet 
evorladge has net exces ait cbjct-mattr in all its propeiions; 
and wht ia cloaly connected with thi ntuinon of the Ewen 
ts we have vo far undentood tae a consciousneas analogous 10 
‘atund experience, to the apprehension of comcreto existence 
(Dasa); aod wherein an essence ia ejectouly grasped, in a2 
individual inthe expeneec of extare is ot tha only cnsciout- 
neue which includes the eweace whilit excluding the positing of 
ny coneete eidnce, We es be itultively aware of exvenoen and 
can apprebend them after «certain fahion without thelr becoming 
objects about which”, 

Lat un att from judgments. Speaking more accurately, out 
concer in with the diflerence berwers judgeoenis about etc, 
and judgments which in an indeterminate universal way, and 
‘uamizgd with ary poniting of what w individual, el joe abot 
the indiidual, but purely or on stance of esertal being, xd in 
secordance with the rubric im gmera?, Thos, i pure geometry, 
wwe judge aa a rule mot about the eidoe “wrnight, ‘angle’, 
‘crangle, ‘conic section’, etc but about the aight ise and 
‘nle in gesera or “as auch”, about individual triangles general, 
cole vetions ia general. Suck univeral juigroeas Dave the 
charncter of anential geuraiy, of pure”. 0,99 oneaso wyn, of 

or the auke of simplicity, let us assome thet we are dealing with 
“axious”, with judgments immedicely obvious to which all 
other judgments lead back sa their ground of mediation. Buch 
jodguents—o far an they treat of ixdvidual inwanoes inthe way 
jum indiomed, aa we bere mesume that they do—cequite fr their 

PACT AND ESSENCE ” 
nostic grounding, tht ix their being made open to imight, « 
scrain cuenta viion which (a 2 modifed tease) could alsa be 
desigated w8 emcotial npprebecaion; and oven the later, 9 well 
1 the casential intuition which confer objectivity, rata on having 
am swncenea of individul imizsoe of the encnee, bet not ot 
(heir being experienced an empirlatiy real. Maceuves, sere pre= 
seatstionn of fancy or rather fency-‘warenemen eulfice 1 5 Us 
thee instanoww; of chet conceraing which we are aware Wo Ae 
"appears, but is not gragpe ux cmeretely 
cxining. When, for iarance, wo judge in an ewentially geners! 
sray (with 2 generality that ix “unconditionsd” and pare”) that 
‘a colour in general ia different from & sound i gener", the 
Judgment confirma what we have jor been esying. An fwtanoe 
of the exsence ‘colour’ and an inaance of the eeence ‘sound’ 
‘ne intniiely “present”, and indeed ar instzcing their own 
‘veencetfancy-intuicos (oot involving the positing of concrete 
‘exisnce) and eel intuition are present atthe sae tz and 
inn certain way, though the Iter does sot fanetion as an intuition 
‘which abjectife dhe cmecce. But it beloags to the ewenee of the 
situation that we are free at any tne to pas over tothe carespond= 
ing usndpoint from which dh esuence i objected, and Ut the 
‘essiblir of doing this isu fact an exsetial one. Ye beeping with 
‘the changed standpoint the judgment would also muff change, 
tnd wuld nua as folows: The eamence (tbe genus") Colour i 
‘thar thar the eence (tegen) Sound, And oleae, 
Coaverselyeomry jag trating of Ruencat can be tronyformed 
ciclo ine cn encondiioally were! janet conerning 
fctanct of tht ence as suck. Io thin seapect fare judpeentt 
ralsing to Harence (pre idee judgment) eve cme ity, 
shatrow their lapicel farm may happen to be. What x comzon to 
them i that they posit no individual being even when io pure 
ential genealty they judge about what is individua. 

FS, Song Frepusanerat Concave. Gmemancrr ano Neco 
Bidet julgog, cidcic jadpamt cc edeic proportion, edeic 
south (0: eur propeiica)—thewe idese mnnifenty belong to tht 

° PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
same system. Consected with then fa alo the correlate of the 
‘third ofthese ideun:tbe plain cet fact (Sahuerhal) (on vabait 
ng within cidevictuth):and the correlate ofthe fat two Idea 
‘te eidaic fart in the modified scone of that which it i mzely 
‘fetvaned 16 be i. the vease ofthe judged content aa wich; and 
‘ia way ox mary not peo rable. 

Every ebdeti division and individuation ofan eidesicaly general 
ct in called, jun: this, an ental neem. Becta! 
ewerality ond sential necesita thas correlates. The vee ofthe 
‘term "pecemity” kere vacates somuewhat oo w to conform to the 
aached correlainea: the corresponding judgments are slo 
‘termed “necemary”, But iti imparcantt> take note of che dee 
tinctlons, and above all not to cele to easeaia) generality (at ie 
ordinarily dane) a ite necomy. The conscoumcan of wnoece- 
‘sty, or more specially w conaciouenes of judgment, in which 
‘we becoms aware of x ceraio matter ms the epeifation of an 
idetic generalty, i called apedsicic, tbe judgment itsll, che 
proposition, an apodictc (180 apodectcaly—"‘apoeumry") con- 
‘sequent of the genera proposition to which tis related, The proper 
tition we have stad concersing che relstons between generality, 
ecenity, apodeicticity can ako be conceived io & more general 
vray, mo 28 to hak! good for any realm of dimcoure, and nat only 
{for euch as ace purely eidetc. Dut with the ede limitation they 
obeiously win a dsticetive sad ypecaly important zeexing. 

"The connetion of edetic judging abou the isdividual a genera 
with the poring ofthe indicia ma cmcreta existent in luo ery 
{portant The essential generality is trasaferre to an icvidual, 
t ta am indeterminately genera) ronge of individuals, pouted 
1 concretely rasting. Every “application” of geemetrial trate 
‘cave in nature (pov a real) bas ite place here. The mbject- 
amatier set down at cea is thea fect, 0 Sar as ite real contcut 1» 
Sniihual, be it dei mca, iw farm its the inaacelng 
(Pariascbog) of an emertal geceraity. 

One should aot confute the werent general of mala 
lens with exeatial geuraty. Tee propostion “all bodiea are 
berry” does uot indeed taks any determinate potectial ching 
vethin the universe mbe a concrete existent. And yet it hs not the 

FACE AND HSEENCE « 
uncanditanal geatcaity of cidtically general proposition in vo 
fur as, in accordance with its meaning as 2 natural lw, it co- 
ina to cary with ia reference to concrete existence (Daslanet- 
sun), to that, anely, of Nacure te of tempoco-spetial realty: 
all bodice —ia Matar, all “real bodies are hexey. On the other 
‘hand, the proportion “l! materia! things are extended” haa cdetic 
vildityand can be taken an pure eiderc ifthe refereace ta con= 
crete eirece conveyed by tbe mbject is excluded w irrelevant 
1 eaten that which haa fs pare groundia the euence ofa raterial 
thing, and in the ewence of extension, that which we can bring 
rome to insight as “unconditioned” generality. This ls dooc by 
‘bringing the exsence of « material ching (any fctitious image of 
1 thing of tia type wil ere serve mx buss) to peter] given 
eat, and then in this objective eonaciousnest completing the 
_mecal spt equired for the "imaight” fr the primordia gee 
‘Deas, that is, of the essential content which the foregoing proposi- 
tion openiy cxpremed. Tat the rel in pace Cormeapoods to truths 
of ach a bind is nota mere fact (Fake), but ma apecil develop 
ment of emeatis} lw ax areal secant, Th elemet of fact 
‘thia coanexion is only the reality itelf which serves ex bass for 
‘the eppliatian, 

$7. Sct or Facte ako Scmnces ov an Easnyer 
object and emence, acd which is auch that to eech individual 
object u state of eomntial being belongs at itr emence, just ax 
conversely to each casence there covrespoade « series of posible 
individula a it fctunl inwtancings (Vraicerhonge), isthe ground 
for 1 corresponding recipcocal relationship between sciences of 
fact and sciences of the emence. There we pare scimcer of mattia! 
bring such an pare logic, pure mathematice, pune time-thecry, 
‘space-theory, theary of mavernent, et. 

‘Teese, in all dir thought-couseructines, are free throughout 
from any poaitings of actual fact; or, what comes to the same 
thing, ie thon me experience qua experience, Le, que conacioumen. 
tur spprebends or sete up reli or concrete being, can sabe weer 

“ FURS FHENOMENOLOGY 
the famction of rapplying a lgical gromd. Where experiense 
functions in them, it i not ot experience. The geomeer who 
deus hin figures oa the blackboard produces in so doing strokes 
‘that are actually chere on a board that ie actully there. But bis 
experience of what he thus produces, gua experince, afore fut 
anlitde ground for his sight and thoogbt of the georastical mene 
(cs dow the physical act of production itself. Whether o¢ no be 
thereby volfers haltocisation, and whether instead of actually 
dering the Tinea he drama hi ines and garni « world of fancy, 
doce nor really matter, The shaded of acturs behaves quite 
diferently. He observes and experiments, i2., he faes whet i 
conoreely there jst 20 be experienc it; experinct for hit it ot 
‘at that 1s grounds, and fo which mere aging could newer 
‘bo » mubstiute. For chin very remoa science of fast md wieter 

‘sctut! but eoseatil celatccabign, ential dit and not experi- 
eu bu the act chat eupin th nina groans, 

‘9 itis with all the eidetic nelences Easentin! contents which 
are media, which emeage w data in eed throug the madiating 
Insight of thought, and indeed on principles tat are throughout 
‘immediatly cnxpareat, ae grounded in eaentialcoptent (oF 

that from the beginning and in all at fllome furter it sukes 
{known nn factual meaning thst i not edetcally vai inthe meaae 
that it could ether be brought without cedition tn primordial 
ivennese (a being iomedianly gromded in eoences of which 
‘eo have poze insight), or could be “inkered™ thagh pure 
consequential reasoning froma “axiomatic” faci memingy of 
thi expe. 

Glosely consaced with the foregaing coonideraans is the 
‘procical Teal of exoct cide sleet, wolch In tith the more 
‘eat mtberatice fret trught us to realize: To confer the highest 
‘Bde of rationality on every adetc aience by esdacing wll the 

YACL AND 2800 4 
mediated mental steps to mere ssbecmptions wader the definitively 
smerutized exiows of the eidetc fk! concerned, und in vo far 
“Yormal" or “pare lgio in the rodeatseaxe of a mathede 
sivas!) wan ot fel tha acizace primarily in question with 
the oo-aperation of ul the axiom of tis lane dsciplise. 

1s cane coancsion ance again with the forging in the Idea of 
“wathematination”, which, ake inthis tothe Leal just characutr- 
in, 2a cognitive Ines, of great peaccal ienportnoc for all 
exact” eidetc diacipizes, whose whsle ware of knowledge (a 
in gromnty, for instance) is wrapped up ia x scheme of pare 
deductive ecesity within the broad generality of vooe few exon. 
‘Thin in not the place to go into much enter mare closely. 

$8, Lermneemnevcr oF nor Scumcm oF Fact AND o Eason 

ellowing what we have mi, tin lear thatthe meaning of cdetic 
scence eacdes ix principle cory owimilation of ake sheoreicel 
emits of mprical slows, "The references to reality which appear 
in che imamedintly valid premises of theve scicoces reappear in 
Al the mediated positions. From facia folow abwaya nothing but 
, 

1, however, al eidetic science is xtrinacally independent of 
all aciesoe of fact, the opposite obtains, on tbe other hand, in 
reapost of the science of fast itaelt. No fully deoloped sinot of 
act could wsbeist unmixed wits eidetc knowledge, and in conse- 
(quent Eulepnince of ede: sient formal or weateril, For ix the 
firs place iin cbvicos that xx eempciodlucience, wherever it nds 
‘grounds fo its judgmeats through mediate reasoning, mutt pro- 
seed according to the formal principles used by fecal hgle. 
‘And generally, sace like every science it ia direced towanks 
‘objects, t mut be bound by the lame which pertain tothe easence 
fiji in genre, Theceyy it eotera imo sels with the 
(up of format-ontslopical Cacplines, whic, besides formal iogle 
‘in the narrower sesue ofthe ter, inches the diacipines which 
2 Oe he sat of yn Lag x maths sora cf th cocaine 

tne Sat ohne ote Lane So 
toe err docunbon coder Gis bed fmm, Secon 3, Ck 

6 PORE PHENOMENOLOGY 
Gguret formerly under the formal “matbnis sncersalt* (hs 
srichmetic lo, pure analyst, theory of menifelés). Moreover, and 
a the second place, every fact includes an extemal factor of 
mesteial onder, sed every eidetic truth pertsining to the pure 
sence Go included mr fmnth ew Gat hd te gms 

sence, Seva ts proper place wichin x bighet material genus, & 
“pion” of empiiod object. To the pure regional emtctoe 
belongs then 2 regional eidasc sinc, or, at we can ho Bey, & 
‘rapona nslagy. We sour beret thet in the regia easeate, 
oc inthe diferest genera which eater into it se components, thers 
are grounded nysters of knowledge wo rich and ao ramified tit 
Se worth while, iavng cegue to this apsteinatic develogment, to 
peak of « science of of » whole connected group of ontslogical 
cipions ‘to the several generic component of 
the region, We shall beable to onvince ourselves very fully ofthe 
{Fest eateat to which this preroppostion ia actully full. 
In accordance herewith every empincal vdence which finda 
‘ordered place withis the scope of « (given) region wil he ewextally 
related to the cexioral us well es to the formal octlopicl dine 
splines. Wo can capreas tht alo in thin wry: Beary factual 
science (empirical vience) hs eaetil Ubortical Bes i ite 
nbolopie. For it ia quite edf-crideat (eapporig thatthe sorump- 
tion we have made Solds good) thatthe sich eupply of Knowledge 
‘which refor ix a pure, aneoionaly valid way to all posible 
object ofthe regioo—wo far mit petaza in part tothe empty form, 
of objectivity in gesezal, in part to the vidos of the region which 
Prescot a it were 3 seca material frm ofall rgions} objec 
‘—eannot be void of tigietnes for the windy of the empirical 
fu 

In this way, fot instance, the edetc wieace of physical nature 
in gencel (the Ontology of natare)correrponds to all the artural 
science disciplines, wo far fodeed ss az Eidos that oun be sppre- 

FACT AND SSaENCE % 

Jhended mss purity, the “eaence” store general, with an inf 
rite weak of incluced cascatal coates:s, correponiis to actual 
ature. If we conetract the fia of completely ratiomatined 
cpricliceace of nator, eof «cence theta progrcased 90 
{far omits cheartical side that every particulr incorporated in the 
sane ie refered back toma movt savers] and mow Sundar) 
‘rounul,it in then clear thatthe raxaton ofthis La ie exentialy 
dependent on the calivaton of the corresponding eidetic since: 
ot only then on that of the formal mathais which w related 
rusilady to all the sciences, but, in particular, on that of the 
material oniobgical ducipine which aaalpee oct the cartel 
bring of Nature, and consequently alao all extn! arcolationn 

‘Nature's objeciviien a wach, in rational purty, i, afer the 
siletic pattern. And this holds good, of course, for ail egioun 
indifferently. 

From the viewpoint of praca inoeedee alto, we tight expect 
{in advanoe that the more an expirica science epproxinats 1 
‘the “rational” sage, the stage of “‘eract” nomoogical science, 
ea the greater che exeat to which ite structure ia ordered on the 
bars of well-developed exetic disciplines, ad to ita oma advantage 
draws upon them for the grounding of is ews propositions, the 
(greater wl be the increase in scope and power of thowe practical 
services which are the frit of knowedge. 

in support we may appeal w the development ofthe rational 
ences of Navure, de phyical sciences. Ther ern of greatness 
‘takes its rise in the modern age precisely from this, thet the 
‘prometry which in che anciest word (end in 1 essential in the 
school of Flats) had already been developed on pure cide linea 
te 1 high pitch of perfecson wan at one aweep and in the grand 
syle ade fralful for phyaial method. Iti early realised tat 
Sti the easence ofa material thing to bea re extens, and that con 
sequal parmetry it x odalopical duipine relating toon sential 
‘Phas of rch thinghoad, the satel form. Ba cin furthe realized 
‘that the iver (a8 we woold may, the roponel)eAmence of the 
‘Thing reaches mich farther. The evidence for this in thet forth- 
‘wlth developesmt took the Ke of shaping 1 series of wee tt- 
pliner be set slocgnide geometry and called to dicharze the 

“ PURE PHENOMENOLOGT 
tame fonction of retonaitng hs expel. The glenda outburte 
ofthe seavbeonaticl ecienoes formal med material eprings fron this 
‘expule, With pamioose weal chey were fled or orgie a 
are “ratinal” acenees (idee entolaiy, an we would wey) nad 
{deed (ia the dawn af the modezn weed and mac beyond taf) 
‘not an thelr own sesount, but fo the ake ofthe empisial cicntes, 
‘They then bore abundantly the Raped for frit io the parallel 
evelopeent of the rational physica we adaire wo mich, 

4130, Reco ano Carmosr, Tex ANALYTIC Renton 
‘xm om CaTeocan 

1 we place oucseiven in imagination with any eidetic science, 
<¢4,,in the Ontalgy of Netur, we fi ourselves cizectd normally, 
st any eae, not towards emence a objects, but towards the objects 
of the eweaces wach in the cae we Inve select’ are borzate 
‘tthe Regios me elt Nature, But we obsecve thereby that “fact” 
in wide for diverse thoug connect ormamona, wach o “thing”, 
, elation", “eobwrstive meaning” (ft, “group”, 

ordee” wad ao forth, Which we claly not equivalest but refer 
‘back st ines to 2 type of jetty which bas, 20 to epett, the 
prerogative of being primaly origisal, an in renpect of which 
All thera pose in a certsin orcwe aa mere diferenntions. In the 
instance choves the Thing steif has eanurally thin prerogative ax 
sgsint the property of thing, relation, und wo forth. But thin i 
precisely a fngment of that formal order which mut be cleared 
tp if our tlk about object and objece-egion ls not to retxin in 
‘oafusion. From thin laricmios to which we devote the following 
‘eBexioas, the raportant cowapt of the category an eclated to the 

—— 

Catagay i 

‘on eatery of erp” refewm preci othe erat agian 
og t the region of physical nature; but on the other hand tet 
‘the matial region ppecied in relation to the forme of rion in 
gmerl, 0, which comes to the moe thing, tothe formal se: 
(lft & peer end th “formal colgoriet” belonging ti. 
‘Let us Seve make thio not umimporant remack: Feemal and 

FACE AND sBastCs & 
material outage appear ut St sight to belong to the wame 
‘eve, fa to Far a the formal cannes of an object in general end 
‘the regional emence appear ox both siden to ply tbe ame part. 
‘One i therefore iclined to wpe of material regions rather than 
of regions impli a Deetfore, adm wt the “formal raion” 
in lgamest wih the. If we adopt this for of words, we need 
‘ta be x Hite cautions. On the onc side rom the material, which 
4a certain sense axe the exams “propery rele". But on the 
‘cher side stands what ia st eidetic but sone the Jem fundgrneat- 
ly and enenlly diferent: mare ssumiel form, which is indeed 
fn suence, but a eampltey “ampey” one, a2 casence which nthe 
Seahion of ox empty form fs ll paode ext, i ferme 
‘ndvermliy has even the highest materi) generates mabordin- 
std to it, wd preseribes deme to these through the formal truths 
hich belong to it. The so-called “formal region” in on at eme- 
‘thing co-ordinate with the mara) region (he regions pure md 
szople) 1 is properly mo repo a ll bas the pars form ofragion in 
ever; it hm all regaca with all this esata diverition of 
extn and (hou indeed ni foment than sie bp 

‘We tke our sart from formal omalogy (catccied alwy> 9s 
‘pure loge in ta fall exicaaion o an to cover the mathe soer- 
li) hich, as we know, inthe dtc aiace of joe x peoeral, 
In the view of thin siece, objec in everything ind al that in, nd 
‘rutis in endow vaiery und Ginributed sroong the many dit- 
ciples of the matin om i fact be act door to x ks easing. 
‘Bot a whole they led beck to mall wet of immediate or havic 
‘wutha, which a che pure login! diciplines function we “axis”. 
[Now we define the pave cal bei omer whic igure is theo 
sinew gical categorie oc catagories of the lpia region ‘bjct- 
general, Through these concepts xa they figure in the total 

“ PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
sytem of sxincsa the logical eomence of objec-in-general is 
deeemised, and the uncundiinally noscamary end cansttstive 
eoermisatons of a3 objet we mach, a something or ther—90 far 
if abould permit af being Something at all—are epeescd. 
Sinoe the pure logical in the sense we have curked out with 
Adeokite prechion dewerminca the conacgt of the “asabical” an 
opposed to the “eymthaica”, 2 concept which alone is philo- 
sophicaly (and indeed fundarmectaly) important, We are wont 19 
designate these cuzgorien wa exotica, 
"Aa cramples of logical categorize we may cite such concepts a8 
propery, relative quality, substentiee scaning (fact), reletion, 
Sdestity, equality, group (collection), xuber (Ansahi), whole and 
‘art, gen sod species ete. But the “‘muaing-caiepuriet” tho, 
‘the fundamental concepts of the varios ‘nds of propositions, 
tf their elements and forms, which belong to the eaence of the 
‘proposition (epophanni), have their proper place here, and they 
fave it, folowing our deBcitiog, with reference to the etmetial 
trata which link together “object-n-geceral” and “‘mesning-in- 
fru nd on morn och a ht se 
sonseréng mening can be trmafermed into pure trotha son- 
tering the bjt. expel forth seen tha “pepe 
o, oren when it saiemenss concern rocanings exchuively, 
‘belong in the fall inclonive sense to formal Ontology. None the 
Jas the messing-cateocies mast be separnied off a8 9 Froup 
having it owa distinctive character, and the remaining ones set 

valent. cs the eos had esp a He ea of easag, 

FACT AND ESSENCE © 
‘but on the other ako, and to beter fcc, the formal emencea 
themeelves which foi their esprenion io thewe meanings. Por 
inatane, the “eategacy” auniacrive meaning, plurality aed che 
like, ulimatmty mean the formal cides substantive messing 
‘gocnally, purity generally and the like. The equivocetin it 
flgerors nly 00 Tanga oan has net lest to eeparnte clec'y 
‘what muse here be seperated onal occasions: “meaning” and chat 
which i virtne of ita mening permite of being expressed; and. 
agtin: meaniog and objectivity meant. Ia the terminological 
interest ons can expremly distinguish between catyroripal con- 
apts (a reanings) and caloorical ennce. 

Sis, Smacrica Onprerrveres awe Utrnuxre Somermata, 
Sreracricat. Cernconres 

We have sil to draw an amporzant diction inthe damn of 

cblectivtes generally, which sesppears reBected within the 

Sera tary of mann he anion (dere om "pie 

between “ryatacical forms” and “eynisctical wub- 

‘or Vleroents” (Stan). Concomitantly with this divinction 

thre pers dving of femal coogi! erga tee 

terticad catagories and mBstratie categories, which must now be 
sore covely considered. 

By ryetactial objectriiee we wodervand wich a5 re desired 
froma other objectivites by means of “ryntactial formr”. Toe 
‘eategorie which correspond to cheae forma we call tytarticel 
categories. To the Iter belong, for exaropie the categoria: sub- 
tants meaning, relation, coment quality, unity, plurality, 
‘numerical quantity (Axeek, order, ordinal number, end wo forth, 
In itn copentiat spect we can describe the stostinn bre existing 
a follows: Every object, o frau it an be readeced more explicit 
tnd related to other object, and is ix brief logically determinable, 
fae on diferent ayntactica fers aa corcelaes ofthe thinking 
‘mia determining Fraction objection of « higher grade ure 
constituted: qualities and qualitatively determined objects, rele- 
‘ona between roth and ach objects, pluralcics of nites, ember 
of ordered verien, objects aa bearece of determinstions through 

» PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
crdinal numbering, and vo forth. IF the thinking i predictive, 
there gradually emerge cxpromicos end corexpanisng apapbantc 
complenes of meansag which reflect the eystctica ebjeivtics 
scoarding to al their forme and dinavona in scien of raeaxingy 
‘at exactly coreapond with them. Ail these “categorical obje= 
‘iriies” can function ax objectrties in general, and again aa 
substrata of categorical constructions, the etc {us bra once 
spin [lor further consructiacs), und oo for. Conversely every 
ch construrtion pointe back i a eelfevidest way to atinate 
Andatrata, to objec of x Soe or loweat grade; thus to objec 
‘ehach are no longer contractions of ryntactorcategorsal hind, 
‘which contain in themselves to further vestige of those ontological 
forma which are mere coerelate of toe functions of thought (to 
wttrbute, cancel relate, connect, count, et). The formal region 
of objecunty in general divides up accordingly into ultimaie 
aubatrata md apntacical obyctrtes, The later we call racic 
derivative of the correspocding substrete, tm which alto, ah We 
tt preeatl lara all"“Iaduvxiala” belang. When we rpeak of 
{individual propery, indindual eatin, and so forth, theeedecived 
objects are atarally bemng called afer the aubetzata from which 
Ahoy are densved. 

‘We mould add the following remark: We can eso reach the 
ultimate syntactically formlese substrata from the ade ofthe forma) 
theory of meanings: every propcsition toa every posible member 
if Ie cootainn the so-called “terms an ebecrta of its apopbastic 
forms. They can be ters m a merely relative acawe, they x2 
‘themselves concain frm (ete phi form, attribute, ad he 
like) Dut in aay cae we reach back asd necenarily 20 to stata 
forms timate eubsert, vthic zo longer contain in themselvea 
Any veange of syntactic formatica.* 

s Lapel Ste, Yo, Sth ray, Sarad Secnen ep. 4 
Ct 

«Tiger the mre Ged acme of the teary a 

ACY AND ESGENUK ” 

fra, Geen ano Sven 

‘We now nted to draw within she realm of cwpencts una whole & 
new set of catogorical Gatinesocs. Every exsense, whether it hes 
content a ia empty (and therefore purely Jogi) ha ts proper 
place ina graded veces of eovence, ina graded eerias of genaraicy 
and sperfcity, The verica ceccstniy pouteatea two Tiits that 
sewer coaksce. Moving downward we reach the lonest abcifc 
iffrencs or, yaw elo may, the eit inlortarj and we me 
‘upwards through the casences f genus and peces to Aighert 
me. Eidetc singulaitien ur ewence, which incaed have neots- 
tasily “enore general" exsences a8 their gener, but no further 
‘pecifictions in relation co which they dhemeelves might be 
(genera (peaximate or mediate, higher penec). Likewise that gems 
inthe hight which no longer bas exy gras abort. 

‘In this sense, la the pure logical ream of meanings, “caning 
‘in general” isthe higbest res; every determinate form uf proposi- 
‘ton oF ofits componesta an eidetic singulsity; proposition in 
ener « mediating genus. Numerical quextty in general (Anzah!) 
ia Ukewise « highest genus. Two, three, and 40 forth are it Jomert 
difereaces. or videtic singularities. In the sphere of postive 
content, thing ia earn, for instance, or very qulity, spatial 
shape, experience (Ericbai) in genera! sre highest geacra; thn 
cewtetial elements pertaining co detersinate things, determinate 
sconocy qualities, epatial shapes, vital experiences a» vuch, wre 
eldetic singularities, paucaing Uhery positive content. 

Ic in a cack of thee enentil elations (not cla, ie. group, 
relations) indicated by the terms gemm and species, atin the 
‘more pacific eoence the mare generis “imzedintely or medictaly 
contained” in & defiite wae to be understood is. and throngh 
‘ldetic intuition and in accordance with the specific typeof Being 
‘nteaded. For this very reason roszy inquires would bring the 
‘elation of eidetic gemus end specia to ebdesic division under the 
setion of the “pen” co the “abole”, Here “whole” and “pert 
‘ear laden’ the widest conceptual meaning of “‘ontsining" and 
“contained”. and of thia the csdric sian of kind to kind ia 
specideaton, Thus the eidetic singular implica al the generaitics 

n PURE PIIENOMENOTOGY 
‘ihich lie above ic, and these om their side “le one in the otbee”” 
{in graded order, the bigheralmaga withia the lower. 

13. Gresatseamos ap Fossucizarion 
Askar dninetion mort be drown between therlatiang of geoeral- 
Jaton and specialisation on the one band, at on the other che 
reduction of what ho material coment to formal generality of a 
rely lpeal hind, o conversely the prover of filing with con- 
fant what ie logically formal. Ta other words: generation ia 
something wholly diferent from formaliation, which play 00 
racked « part, for instance, in mathematical analyis, Spcialin- 
ion i sho something enrely diferent from dformaksahon, the 
lig out” ofan campy Iogizo-mathematical form, or of «formal 
truth, 

In sympathy with thia disition, the smboriiastion of sn 
ence under the forma generat of ane lial eatencesbould 
fot be coxhied with the subordization of an easence under ita 
ligher generic eoences, Ths, for example the eesence triangle t 
tubordmated tothe highest genus, spa] tape; the euenoe red 
to the highest genus, exanry quay. On the other hand, red, 
twiaage, und a2) exencea Bomogencons 
subordiaated under the categorical tle 
relation to them all has ia 20 sese the character of x generic 
nsece, rather lacs tea chacacier i rape of ther ll. Tocogard 
“easence' a peczcaly slated to emence with x potivecoatent 
would be just os perverse an to mincterpret object in general 
(coopty somembat) at the geaus ofall object sndieriminatly, 
and thea nacurally without more ado atthe exe end enly highett 
emus, asthe genus af ll gecara. One should eater deigna 11 
artl-ootaogical categories at edeic singularities, which have 
‘her highest genus in the eaence formal-ontlogica-caegary 
in gener”, On sicilar groonds i is cles that every definite 
inference, if may be ne that i serving the iteeste of physio, 
inthe iatancing of «deiee por-lgical form of infeence, every 
ebsite propuaion uf physics the insancing of» propositional 
faren and vo forth. But pare forma ae sat gener to propositions 

PACT AND ESSENCE n 

cor inferences with « pouitvecantent, but are themselves only the 
lamest diftecentations of the pare logical genera propaition, 
inkrenoe reapectively, which He al siti genera have as their 
turammum geous “mmcaning-in-gence”, The Sing out of cmpty 
forma of & logical marae (and in mathest seicersais there are no 
forma that sre at empty) thon an “operation” whichis ttally 
diferent from the genuine opecaization which ertends to the 

af difereatitinn, The assestion holds good universally; 
‘ths, for inatance, the trauition fom apace to the “Euclidean 
rmanifcld” is uo generalaation, but reduction to “formal” 
renersly. 

‘For the junifcation of thia radical division, ain al rch sea, 
wwe must fal back on essential intuition, which at once teaches 
un that eutenial forma of a logical charter (the categorie Sor 
Instance) do not “Hie” within the materia! content of iafime 
specie as dca red in ia unspecified geneclty within the diferent 
‘andes of red, or a8 “colour” in red cr biue, and thet they are not 
st all “within” che in that atriet vente which umght claim sufl- 
cient community with 8 part-relaon i the ordinary narrow vente 
‘ofthe term to justify us i npeaing ofits being comand init, 

1No lenathy disqusiion is needed ¢o indicate that the sh 
sumption of an individual, in general of this there, undet at 
‘eatence(e proces which hae diffrent character sccording at we 
‘re dealing with wn infin saci oe With 4 genus) ia not 10 be 
confuse wth the subordination of sn ewsence under ith higher 
species or under 3 genus. 

‘We would lbewise do no more than indicate the tople of 
catenins with fa varied pect relating more particulary to the 
‘Sanction of essences in univeeal judgment and clearly requiring 
tobe adjuated roche diferences we have bees considering. Every 
‘asence which ia not an iafime specie haa wn ideic extention, 22 
‘etecaion of spot diferences, nd inthe last resort at any rate 
‘of eidetic singulaitis. Bvery formal easence has oe thc other hand 
inn Sormal or "wathematical” eens. Further, ery erence ib 
uch han its extension of indideal unin, an idea) comoeptual 
totality of pombe particulars to which it can be releted chrough 
1 thought tte bot eidetic and universal. The topic ofegprial 

™ FURS PHENOMENOLOGY 
srtencon bus vorething race tn add: the imitation tou aphore af 
cqmurete xstace through 1 reference to concrete existence woven, 
fn with it and axnulling the pure usiverality, All thin tranlart 
{omlf naturally from exsences to “concepts” as meaning. 

$14, Sumsrmarren Cavmoons. Tr Suserearivn Esa ano 
‘nun rien 

‘Weeonulde further the distinction between “fall” srinta "ath 

Tibem, he medications of te empey Sse Tas aces 
in xno wea ef empty a poor; it bas x fxd soatent, same, 
sate totality of the poitivecoatects belonging to the sructure of 
‘pure Logic as mathe weinerokis with ache categorical objecivi- 
tics at of which the ame build hersevenup. Thu every mbject- 
smarter which expresca any wyllopinc or anthmetica exiom or 
‘hearer, every form of inference, evcy rumencal digit, every 
-mumber-comper, every function of pure exalyia, every Euclidean 
‘ noa-Buelidean manifold propecly defined throug dhe analys, 
bas ie place hore, 

"Wenow urn ou atenion tothe clan of objectives with pote 
tive content, Flere we rmach altima emné-lodn sata nthe 
mucus ofall ryziactical constructions. To these nucle belong 
the nubsrativecateorite, which vortthersscien cut wader the two 
‘min altemstive headings: “wltunate submansive (Sackhaliges) 
asec” an thirthere”or pare eyntactcally frrbe individual 
‘unit, The ter dividual” which suggests itself ao readily is bere 
‘upmuitable jut boomuse the indivisbility. at abwaye vito be ade 
definite, which the woed's meaning camry abonld not be taken 
‘up into thn concept, but reserved cathe for the special and quite 
indispensable concept ‘individual. We thecefort take over the 
Avioteean expression 7 1, which verbally at any rate doce 
‘at clude thia mening. 

‘We have contrasted the formlesuleste cence and the “his 
‘there’ we must 2ow i the eoventalceaneaion obtaining berreen 

PACT AND s85ENCH ” 
‘hen, which conan in this, hat every ‘this-cher’ hoe itr enteral 
substantive quality pomeming the character of « formlese sub- 
snzativeeaseace inthe sense we have assigned. 

$35, Domwomr ano Dereoutr Osjzcrs. Concuron ax 

‘We till needa Farther basic dutinction, that between éndgpcdent 
and dependst objet. A cater or or swans, ia dependest, 
a0 far anit neceasarily refers toa wibweatum of which i is che 
form. Substrnsum md form are exseacea which point the one to 
the other and are not chinkable “apart”. In this broadest sens, 
the pure logial form, eg. the categorical form Object in respect 
ofall objective materaly the category Eaveate in reapect ofall 
determinate eneences, sod 40 fart, is dependent, Let ve daregnrd 
thove relations af dependence, and connect» fruitful concept of 
dependence or indepecdence with aystexs that show genuine 
‘ovtent, with relations af “being contend ix”, bing one with, a5, 
(on occasion, bring connected with in the stsicer vena of the tera, 
‘Of wpecal interest to us here ia the potion a it concerns the 
ultimate sbatraa,axd, to narrow the field wil farther, che sob- 
soatine subyuntive (Sachhaltiger) cxencen. ‘Two possibilities 
remain open, that ax essence of this kind in conjunction with 
soother shal be the foundation of the unity ofa single eaense, oe 
‘that it shall aot do so. In the Sat case there arve relations which 
‘remain to be deveibed mare clowely, posubly of one-sided or 
mutual dependence, and in respect of the eidetic and individual 
ember thet fall under the tmited ewencee there results the 
-apodeictially nesemary consequence that there canbe Bo spembers 
ofthe onc exsence tha ae ant determined shrougs exances whith 
shave at leet generic comunity withthe other exsence.* Sensory 
‘quay, for instance, points apcesarty to some wort of difference 
‘in exteraity. Estenaly again i necemarily the wpread of some 
quality waited with t and “enveloping” it. A pave of “incresee” 
‘eating, shall we say. to the exegery of intenity i ponible only 
fon datnid cain the Lind Sob, Vel. Tied Boog xpealiy 
{a Garenentnc sop umvunt st me ais 

* PORE PHENOMENOLOGY 
‘a immanent in « qualiative context, and x content of auch 2 io 
in in raze not thinkable spat from sone degree of increase. An 
appearing us realized experience of cerain definite kind is 
imposible cacept a the appearing of an “appearing agency a5 
such”, and likewive conversely. And so forth 

‘Fromallthathere reas important determinations ofthe formal- 
<xteporial concepts Individual, Concretam. and Aberactum. A 
dependent eseence in called am Alvtrectum, ax. absolutely well 
umaining [independest] ewence a Concrete. A thisthcre, of 
‘thich the mbatancive (Sochhaltiga) exseace in « Coneesum, in 
‘alled an Indeidua. 

‘i we being the “operation” ef generalisation under the concept 
of logical “rdication”, we may ay: che Individual it the 
Primondia object demanded on purely lope grounds, the logic 
‘Absolute to wich al! logical modifications refer om back. 

1 goea without eying tat a cancretus isan eidetic singularity, 
since spades und genera (cxpresions which ordinarily cxchode 
the loweat difeentntions) are is prisciple dependent. Eidetie 
Hagaleriiet fl cordingly inca abtract and concrete. 

Bietic angular which are contained in & concretion 
shcrnaives ere necomarily “aetarogensous”, having regard tothe 
formal-oniologica! law, that tro eidetic nignlaiie of one and the 
‘ame gram cxanot be bound together withio the nity of a ringle 
‘ewsence, or mt we aso say: the lowest dtfecentetinne of « genus 
see autully “incompuible". Accordingly every singalacity 
‘which finds its place within « concretuen leads, when regarded an 
1 Sifferenaton, to & seperee eye of specie und genera, act 
‘thus alao to separate rurama genera. Focizstance, within the unity 
of «thing us phenommenos the definite shape eads tothe summa 
sgowoe patil shape in general, the definite colour to visual quality 
genera. Meanwhile the lowest difcrentistioos within « con 
ceetum, inteed of being mally exeive, cn also overlap exch 
mbar; a, fr instance, physical properties both prenuppore and 
‘nchide in thenaeles spatial detersinations. Thea the eummt 
Uber sao art not motel exchsire. 

‘Ana further developevent genera dridein ¢ charactriatc and 
‘fexdamestal way into each ax have concre:s and auch a have 

FACT AND ESSENCE n 
sortase suboedioated ia them. We apeak more conrenleatly of 
fowcrts and alert gona, despite the mmbiguity which now 
srachea to the adjective. Forno one can eaters the thought af 
falling conrete genera themsches for conse ia the argial 
seaue of that term. Where accuracy demsze, we rust fall back, 
3 the chumry cxpreni: genera of concrete or of sbatraca 
reapectively. Aa examples of concrete genera we have rea! ching, 
‘inal phantom (visual abape appeacing with sensory flea}, 
‘tal experince, and so far. I contrat with thew, spat 
shape vnul quay, and the ke, are examples of wbetract gener, 

$16, Recto aNp Cartooey im cme Som oy SpeTANTIVE 
‘Manes, Srrmaric Cocnrrions 4 ravoey 

‘With the concepts “Individel” and "Concreum', the concept 

ho of Region, vo fosdamestal for scentibe then, is defined 

Aaclasioe generic unity belonging to concratnt, that in, the ewsental 
vallary coanenion of the summa penere which belong 10 the 
omen if 

cxpt aud its regional subdivisions are thin not free to vary in 
‘these syntheteal truth; the seplacg of the reletively centant 
terme by variables gies no formal logical la, ofthe Kind which 
‘as « place in characteristic fuabian i the cave of all “analytic” 
estes. The ayvem of synthetic truthe which have cheit 

(round in the regional exence constitute the content of the 
‘eglona! satology. The tots of the ftdamasta! truth mmong 
thene, of the raploual esitmu, Limatemend define for athe 
‘yelam of regional categories. These concepts exprese nat mezely, 
ss do caseapu generals, eposiications of purely logical cete- 

* PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
‘sie, but ae datingsabed by this, thet by catans of reginal 
‘xls they expen the fearures acaBr to the regicaalexeaoe, 
a expat eile gecrabty what mat Belong a prt” and 

ya india objact of the reron. The appli- 
cation of such (sot pure logical) concepts to given indiiduala 
a epodeic end moomoo necemry, un reqlted, mere 

cove, through the regional (xathedc) axioms. 

I, deepite nomble differences ix fondamental ouock which 
sr cot incompatible however with an inner afinity,o0e wishen 
to muloain approval of Kent's Critique of the Remon, one an 
‘only to intanpet the reglonal axiom as eyhenccopeiton 0 prin, 
and we should then have m many imeductble cues of rich 
fortoa of knowledge as there are regions, The “thetic primary 
concepts” eatoores would be the region! primary concepts 
(fried catcotally to the repion Ia question and itm eyuthetic 
principles), and we shold Ive ox samy diferent groupe of 
‘sateoret at there are regions 10 be ditinguisbot. 

‘On this undentanting formal Ontclazy tee itt place, ov 
ard, ia the samme series i the ropianal (che striely “materi”, 
“teyatheos” ontologies). is reyanal concept “object” determines 
(cl. pra, § 10) the formal oysters of etioms, and thereby the 
system of formal (“amalyti) categris. ‘Therein Us, in fact, 
1 furiotion ofthe palin, despite al the emcotal differences 
‘which brve been trough forward, 

4x7, Conctonons o7 THe Locicat, Conscomanions 

‘We have ao far been coacerned ently with pure logical coo 
siderations, teeping ler of every “satel” sphere, oF, m4 WE 

gical in kind. Toe peeian tank was 0 draw 3p @ sce om the 
foundation of gore Logic, at a somple of the lgially riginated 

FACT AND BSSENCE ” 

leading of “tytetc a priori principles”. af empirical scenes 
(prvtiad se their coe regia! entclepe, and on meely on the 
‘are loge which Ia common all sciences. 

‘From thia position chore emarges tho Gis idee of « tok that 
at we: To deucmine withio the cccuit of our individual 
{naltons the highest genre of concrtc, and in hia way to rffet 
1 ditvbation of all intitle individual exiconce according to 
‘istatial rgions, cach of whic, since the ditinction ret an 
‘the mort radical cascatial groupe, eearky of om Kins of principio 
(9 etic end on empirical tees (or groxp Of wiences). More- 
cor, the nda distinction in no way bar out iomeroming and 
perth ovecapping. "Thus, fr instance, “material hing” and 
aout” are different existential ergs, aod yet ube Inter han ita 

in the formar, md there fliowe therefrom the grounding 
ofthe theory of the soul in the thaory af the body. 

"The problem of « radi) “clamificaon" ofthe ecizncen io in 
the maln the problem of the separating of the regio ad for 
this aguia we need, wx preimicary, pure loge! studies of the 
‘nd we have ber been bre utlining. But of crue we peed 
sho, on the other band, Pheoomenslogy—shout which we sil 
‘inom nothing. 

SECOND CHAPTER 
NATURALISTIC MISCONSTRUCTIONS 

‘ould become a ocience of the Essential Being of things), and 
ling ix postion in reged to all empirical sence, 
‘and thus also to paychology. But—and much depends on this 

sre hv dt up we have presuppose nodking, not eten the eon- 
apt of philosophy, aad we intead to lnld on to thie policy 
tnnocltth. The phisephic Zen, which we propose to adopt, 

[NATUBALISTIC MISCONSIRUCLIONS. & 

of the tbecrtival content of af precions philoophy, we shall abstaie 
from paring any jedpaent at all, od that our whole discussion 
‘thall respect the limits imposed by this abstention. On the other 
hud, we do not nied on Gat scsount to avoid (and indeed oa 
could not aveid) speaking of pilamophy ata, of philosophy a3 
a historical fect, of philosophical movements that have once 
texhted, and Jn» good thongh afica ao ia » bad erao bare 
Uerermized the genecal edentiic convictions of mankind, mest 
rmuriedy indeed i= respect of the fndamestal peeions of 
‘which we have ereted, 

Tein preiely in this connexion that we must coguge in 4 
‘conten wits empizicam, « conten which we can relly Bight 
‘ut within the limita of cue Seo, since the pints stave eee 
permit of being etablahed on « bans of immediacy. I philosophy 
pores “fundamental” principle in the genuine wansc of the 
fern, procpica which ean thereoce be grounded in ther cacaial 
chartcter only through what intuitiea immediately gives, a con- 
towt which emeeras sue ictuen does not depead for Its 
deckion on any philosophical sien, 0a the pomaason of the 
‘dw of pilosopty, nad the profewedly grounded coment of ix 
theory. ‘The croumatance which coped ws to give ble this, 
that "Iden", “Eamanca”, and "oowledge of Emerial Being” 
ave denied by expircis I i oot the plac hereto unfold he 
becca! grounds which should sbow mu just why the vicarious 
trance of the natural science, however greatly indebted for 
thei high sciatic level, an “ernst edatc rounding, 
‘as favoured phslowpbieal expiricam, and hax made it the 
donsiming, acd indeed in the ccs of empirical science 
lense caciuively dominating, exavietin. Tn eny case, within 
theme circles, aad therfore slso among the peycbolopis, there 
promils x howtiey to Kdem witch must evenrodly prove dane 
fferou to the empzical sicaom themesvee; since thereby the 
‘idee grounding ofthese acienes, whichis ix ne seve already 
complded, the cstabihing--wbich mut evearally peeve 
fecmuaryof new aiencon dealing wich Evential Being, and 
indinpeaneble forthe Farther advance of the expitical sciences 
Aeawelee, in deity hindered, What is wid here, a wil tee 

‘Pangonoran Davos Acr 

NATURALISTIC MISCONSTRUCTIONS. ty 

‘the Ident of the fit balf of the nioetcenth century, unfamiliar 
sa ke won with the scimtifc Bnowledge of satu, 0 rly 
impaded the coane of true acience. 

‘Meanetile, all that the ecspivicst bere anys revs on is- 
‘undesstindings 1nd prejadices—bowever good or well meant 
the muctive which origizally ingpired bis, The fundamental 
idefoct of the empiicia's argument Ges in ths, that the basic 
requirement of x retum to the “facts dhamaelve” is detiind 
tar coafoed with the requirement thet all koowledge shall be 
wounded iz axperiou. Accepting the intelligible natura 
limitation of the field of inowable “acts”, he takes for granted 
without further quenion thet experience is the ealy act through 
‘which fata thence ee given. But facts (Sache) ae not 

side do the prejudion ie? Genuine lack of prrjudice docs not 
call for the downright rejection of "judgments foreign to ex 
ferincs", exompt when the judgments’ cum oper maanieg 

he Ber foe proceeding in this inwanee from che 
‘aopiicit ede. Genuine scimce, andthe yexsine shame of Lian 
shih lawardy diminguishs it, demande we ce foundation of 
Al proofs judgments which wa wick ore imenafisely wall, dent 
ing thei wai dicey from primera datr insta, Thewe 
‘gale are divided ss the meaning of the judgrcrs, ox the proper 
ertilnatee ofthe oject nd content the jagmets, praca. 

% PURE PHENOM:NOLOGY 
“The Fundamental regiosa of abject and, coerelatvcly, thr regional 

Insseicte “sevng” (Scher), wot merely the sensory necing of 
experience, but anaing tn guaerl as primordial deter comsciocmet 
of any hind whetwcor, i the uizate source of justification for 
All raonal statement. 1c haw this ight-confecring function only 
because and in so far ab io object-piving in primordial. If me 

tan object standing out in complete clearvam, if purely on 
basis of the secing, and within the limits of whit we arayp 

in expecience mest none the Sew be givex up in the coune of 

NATURALISTIC MISCONSTRUCTIONS "s 

experience under the prespur of » counteeslim which exceeds 
sand acu it, 

$20, Exemucame ano Scerncum 

"Tins for experience” (Srfabrang) we eubstitute the more general 
“Gaouition", and therefore decne to identify acience ix general 
and science of experiance. Moreove,it ia cary 0 vee that he 
who mpparts this MentSeaton and conta the validity of pare 
ridaticthioking ia led into « wepticam which, a zemuine, cancels 
fiaelf through its owe abwoniity* Tr i auliciem to question 
empiricist concerning the source of the validity of ther general 
theta (ct “al waid thought fas ite ground in expercnue 
1 the sole objectiving intuition”) to get them involved in 
Atemoowtable abeuedtin. Direc: experience vee only singular 
‘elements and no generale, and in thos inwuficent, It can make 
‘no appeal to the inten of essences, since it denies each intuition { 
ie mutt clearly rely on indoctioe, and so geneelly on the ayer 
of mediate modes of inferecee thrcogh which the miense of 
‘experience wins is general propositions. Hom fares it now, we 
sank, with the trath of medisted conclouons, be these deductively 
or inductively infered? Ia thin tra (indeed, we could even say, 
the truth of «singular joxgmest) ite something experinoeable, 
‘aod thus fo the last eesort perceptible? Aad bow fares it 
with the grindpies 0a which modes of inference depend, to which 
‘We appeal in caves af doubt ox coict, a, «with the principles 
of che spllogam, the lew of “exeditsd ealry”, and so forth, 
pea which, av to ulti soarcea, oe ere fal! back for justi 
‘cana of all modes of inference? Are thee thezuelvea in their 
‘tum ampisial generlizatiace, or ia not the vary cononption of 
sch « thing involved in radical absurdity? 

‘Without eowing ouneiver © be led here iato any further 
Alscusions, therby merely repecting what ban boca sald she- 
‘wheres thio at any rate abould bate become ces, that the 

. FURS PRENOMENOLOCT 

set out with graster ditincmnem, clearnem, snd precidlon, acd 
‘to have theiz grounds better specified; and the grounding iteelé 
ust follow the very standard to which the moets give expressioa, 
‘Bt we the sue tne Ht Ls minifst that hare at lait there ates 

the abe iaros whieh ino e tyout res 
all knowledge are equally addressed tc Unone thenesthctnetve, 
‘Whereas these philosophers, holding charstecintcally to a0 
adopted stanpoiat, and in ope: costzadiction with thei prin 
ple of freedom fear bis, sat out fom unclanfied, ungrounded 
‘precancnptions; we atact cut from that which andedaer al atad= 
points: from the totty of the intuitively self-given which 

Prior to my theorising redexion, from all that ane cou 

Airey see and lay bold of, provided one doce net allow 
tw be blinded by peejcn, ado Jet to ignore whale cles 
of genuine deta. If by “Position” we are mean the ebeohte 
uobiaed grousulng af all aience on whet is “postive”, Ley 08 

it 

‘valuble sources for the juxiication of knowledge, oot even that 
‘of “modern natural science”. When it is really saraal acleace 
that speaks, we Titen willingly and ou isiples. Hut the Lmguage 
‘of the natal scientios is not abways thet of natuel science 
lief, and is amurely maf so when they apeak of “natural 
philosophy” and the “theory of inomledge of xara ciency”. 
‘Aad itis above all not 6o when they would have vs believe that 
(ener treme auch a8 a axioms expres (propositions auch as 
that o-+ 1=1 +o, that a judgment cannot be enloured, that 

(NATURALISTIC MISCONSTRUCTIONS 
OF overy so sound that difer ix quality oon is lover nd Ge 
other igher, tht a perception & dela « perception of same 
thing nd the Uke) are expreive of fac of experience, where 
ve know in the falas of aight that propositions of this eype 
being to developed exprewian date of eidetic intuition. Bat just 
cn this account i a clear to sa thet the “positivist” confuse at 
«ne time the cardinal dinetona betwees the type of intuition, 
and at anothes, though they nc them as opposed types, xe et 
ot telieg, being bound by their prejudice, to recognise se 
than one of these aa valid, or indeed even a» presenta all, 

§ at, Onscusrras on Tax Ineaaeric Sipe 

Obscurity pris, tobe sure, on the opposite side lao, There 
fandeed ane uecepta pure thougit an api, and thereby dir 
‘cards the theris af the empiriciet; but does not bring to cleat 
‘conacioouness, through reflexion, the fact that there in auch a thing 
pure ition, a mode of being presented in which ewences 
{5 primarily gov an obectn, jst an individal realien are 
riven in empirical intuition ; nor does ane know that every procesr 
9 invight sinooeing jadpment, sad in. particular the Senght into 
unconditionally wmeersal truths, falls under the concept ‘dator 
Intution? which has faded fren of dice sort, above 
1, thaw that rex parallel 1 the legal categorie I in eve chat 
there io talk sbous eelf-cvidence, but iustesd of iw bring brought 
‘4 proces of insight ito tnt ration with rdinay xing, 
ne bears of a “feng of sf-cidence, wack She a rayne 
Zndea vor lends to te judgment» feling-calouring, Such inter 
‘retngs are pomible only song ax coe hes cot leant tn analyee 
{ypen of camciouraes, viewing them purely and in respect of 
thc ewence, imtead of making theories about them fom some 
where up ashore. These socalled focings of wc-cvidenoe, of 
‘nallocual neces and howeves they any otherwise be called, 
ame just theoretically Gomntd facnge® Everyone will congaize 

s PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
thin who ban brought some case of velf-cvidense into view a 
1 realy given object of visoa, xd bas compared it with a cass 
in which evidence of the sume content of jodgmect is Ickng- 
Te aw coc noticed thatthe tacit prewepponition of the ‘ealings 
of evidence’ theory, mamely, that peychologially 2 judgment 
sry remain coma: except in this oar ciscuratance, that it 
‘oe time it ia coloured with feling and at mother sot, is radically 
‘erroneous; that rather the elf-same upper stratus, that of ane 
‘and the mest matexent considered os mete expressed mening, 
in at oe time adjusted point for pomt to "clar-seing 
of fact, whereas st another time, and et this lower level, « quite 
diferent phesomenan ia taking place which i ot intuitive 
((xtutie), but, maybe, « consciousness of fast tat is whelly 
confused and inarticulate, With the aame eight, iodocd, in the 
‘empirical realm one rulght grup the difference between the clear 
and faithful judgment of pereeption and some vague judgment 
concerning the aoe eubject-matter as consuting simply in chit, 
‘that the former is endowed with « "feelag of eee, wnd the 
other not. 

$23, Taw Rernoncn or Puaroxre Rants, Eaacr 2x0 
Concarr 

Ie has ever and anon been a apecit] cause of elence that ax 
“Pltanising reat” we vet up Ideas or Esecaces us objec, 
and tseibe to them at to other objects trac Being, and also 
correletively the capacity 9 be grniped through intuition, just 
18 in the cate of exmpirical reali. We here dimregard that sn} 
most frequent type of superficial reader who foits on the suthor 
‘in own wholly alien conceptions and then haa no difficulty in 
reading aburdites into the suthoe’s statements. If object and 
mpirical object, reakty and empirical reality mem one and the 
saree thing, then no doubt the conception of Ideas as objecia 
snd au rain is perverse “Platonic bypostetioton”, But 

‘haa been done in the Lapkal Studie, the two are sharply 
separated, if Object in defined ax anything whatwever, eg, 8 
‘Tie pote deatet opin the Laps Shakin tod sy Laem at, 
cometh a at web canrioond ew ea, aoe Gt ee 

NATURALISTIC MISCONSTRUCLIONS 
subject of u true {categocical,afirmative)extement, what offence 
‘then oun remain, unless it be wach as eprings from cbecure 
prejudices? Also, T did not discover the generul concept of 
(bjecr, but cay set up in a new farm snmething which ali pure 
logiea propositions demanded, exd at the tame time pointed out 
‘hat ic is in principle indigpenanbe, and therefor alse deter- 
rminative of general ecicrtfic speech. Yr thin wecae indeed, the 
tone-quality ¢, which is « sumerically unique member in the 
tone-tale, or the digit 4 inthe sein of sumber, ox the igure 
of a circ 
‘ny proposition iathe “wor” of propositions in bref, he ideal 
in all so divesiy isan “objeet™. Blindness to idean ia « kind 
of pectue blindsew, which through prejudices reader us incap- 
thle of bringing ito the fed of judgment what we have already 
in ve Beld af intuition. Our ertin i crud see, und 4010 peak 
continuously ae, “ideas”, “exsencea” make use of thea in 
aught, formals jedgmenes cocering emences—enly fom 
‘their epiatemclogia! “standpoint” they explain the same away. 
Belf-evident data are patent, they let theocies chatter shout 
them, but cecain what they are. It i the busiens of theories 
‘tm conform to the data, and the busines of hrories of Imnowledge 
1 dlacriminate the fundemeatal types, and to describe them in 
accordance with their distinctive nature, 

Prejudices in theoretical matters give cemarhableslf-ssurasce, 
‘There cannot be any such thing a8 emsence or, therefore, atuition 

mpinealy teal meatal products of “aberaction”, whieh ark 
themselves on to experiences er peesecations in theie natural 
realey, Accordingly theories of Abstraction are now aealouly 
canstucted, and bere, a ll at eal he section that treat of 
‘ntentonalty (which are indeed lading chapters in Paycbology), 
‘hie expericoee-proed.Prychology i» made rich with davented 
phenomena and with peeholpcal anabet tht ort me amabjet 
tall. Thus idea ce emenzes, thy ay are” concept” and concept 

” PORE PHENOMNOLOGY 

aro “mental cotracton:”, “products of abetraclon”, xd a mach 
‘they murey play x grost past in our thought. “Emenco”, “Iden”, 
 "Eidoa“, auch are only grand “philosophical” naroea fo “sober 
pethologic) fara” (Fadts). Dangerous aames on acount of 
‘he metaphysical suggestions they convey? 

"We reply :exiaialy canoes are “conczpt" fa tha ambiguous 

5.29. Srowranerrr or Ioexnion, Esames, an Ficnion 
‘But, comen the retort, is it not true and self-evident that cox 
‘epte,oF if you prefer, eemmncee, euch as red, house, end so forth, 

NALURALISLIC MISCONS:RUCHONS = gt 
xigintsthrongh abetraicn from individual intuition? And do 
‘we not conatrect concepts at pleesare out of coacepts aleady 
formed? We bave then, carly, to dea here with poyehological 
products. The cat is similar, wo one will perhops sd, to that 
Of arbitrary fictions: the de-playing centaur which we frealy 
‘imagine ia cactxinly x preemtsion we have oureeives constructed. 
We reply: “conceptual ccastruction” sertsnly hea place spem- 
‘tuntoualy, md free fancy likewise, and what inepoatanectaly pros 
duced la of course 2 product af mind. Sut vo far as the Bto- 
playing coatmar is cancerned, it i x pteacatation in the senae 
in which that which i preseated i called presentation, but not 
fm the senue in which presetation stinds verbally for x mental 
‘experiencing. Naturally the oxatacr ieelf w cot mental, it exista 
either in the youl, nor an consciouanost, nor anywhere ele, it 
4a in fact “nothing”, mere “imagication” ; ox, ta be more precise, 
the living experience of imagination is te imagining of w centaur. 
"Te this extent, indeed, “the centaur ab meant", the oetteur ah 
fancied, belongs to the expecieace itelf ax lived. Dut we must 
Ao beware of confusing this lived experience of iraaginstion 
with thit in the experience which in imagined, gue object 
‘imagined.’ Bo aloo what ie engendered in che spantancoun sct 
of abstracting is not the sismer, but the consciousness of the 
‘ewence, und the postion bere ie as follows: thet x primordial 
ator consciouanens ofan coerce (Tdestian)—me are here cleay 
concerned wiih casental reitions—ie in itelf and necessary 
‘poatancoss, whereas to che expiica conwcouress which given 
tus veasory objec spontaneity in cx-amentsl: the individual 
object can “appear”, one mey be svare of it as spprebnded, 
but without being spontaneously “rosied with” it stall Thus 
there re no motives discoverable unless it be thove of mistakex 
Sdentty which orald denasad the ideatscation of the conacens- 
rnebs of the essence with the easence inci, and therefore the 
edution ofthe latter to peychologica terms. 

‘The compariam with our Sctioe-canetrosting consciousness 
‘eight muae stil another doubt, is respect namely of the 
1G oh pate paceman et enn ie 

‘aatence” af exeness. In not the exsence « fiction, ax the 
scoption indeed would Irv it? It ia trap tht asthe co-ordinating 
ion and perception under the moce general concapt 
‘inruting covscioursem” cxtts x doubt on the existence of 
‘objec given In perceptinn, so the comparison drawn abere 
renders wopect the “erinience" of esvenoes, [But it is wth 
emsences as i ia with things] Things can be perceived and 
remessbernd, md therewith recognized oa ‘eal ia 
‘modified ses, a» doubtful or null (Mlusory); fsally avo, in note 
quien diferenly eondifed, m “mere apparition”, or appearing 
4 if real or moll, und 10 forth. Sotoo, precely, with eovmnces 
‘whence it als fellaws that eves they, like othee abject, have 
neanings given theus that are sometisee right, but, ov in the 
cate of fale geomstrical thinking, somrtimacs wrong ax well, But 
‘he apprebeasion and intuitin of essences ian act that be roany 
ori, I purticalaretenta!boight ito primardil dato act,and 
‘an auch enalogas f9 remsory perception, ad nett imagination, 

$24, Tha Prtvearux oF Ata Parwcorss 

‘But enough of euch tepsy-tuny theories! No theory we can 
‘conceive can mislead ws in regard ta the principle of al! principls: 
that every primordial deter Intetion in a source of enthority 
(Rechisquale) for Imowleige, that whalewer prermis icf wm 
“intwbion” in primordia form (ws it were in its bodily realty), 
it tiny 10 be accep a it giver iself ext to be, though only 
veithin the Hits x eich i thew stelf. Let our insight 
(taap thi fct that the theory ise in its corn cmuld not deeive 
its truth except from primordia dats. Every statement which doea 
‘oching more than give expremion to wach data through merely 
unfolding ther meaning and adjusting i accurately i hun realy, 
sx we Inve put it in the introductory words af this chapter, 
ioaing, clied in » genuine sense to provide founda- 
‘ions, frincpéon. Hut this bakds in special measure of the 
cewvential judgments of this clase that are general in form, and 
it into these thatthe term ‘principle’ is nocmally limited. 
in this wesoe the satura seicatit is pecfctly jontiod in fl- 

NATURALISTIC MISOONSTRUCTIONS 3 
lowing the “principle” that In respect of el] mmertons relating 
to fact of natsre we must look far the expéricase upon. which 
they are grounded. For chat ira principle, an amsertion drawn 
immmedianely from sources of general isxight, at wo ean at any 
‘me convinee ourselves by clezing up to our own satisfaction 
‘the meaning of the expressicas used ta foramlating the principle, 
snd bringing out in cheir pure givenness the esrencee that aitach 
1m these. Now the worker i the fuld of ainces, and whasocrer 
‘wea and expreates usiverual propoktions, mur follow « paraliet 
principle; and euch & principle mutt exist, since already indeed 
the principe, juse adeited to be auch, of the grounding ofall 
knowledge of fara in experience is not ise open. exp 
insight, as is indeed true of every principle, and in general of 
a knowlege concerning easences. 

$25. Taw Poarrvut ar Woax a9 Nurmi Scams, rite 
Navona Scunerurr ox Reniacrree Thovon as Poarrvart 

‘Ds facto the pouitivist rejects kaowlodge of ewences ocly when 
he reflects “philasophicaly” and allows himself wo be deceived 
‘through the sophisas of erepircat philosophers, but sot when 
ssa natural scieatiot he thinks himself intn the norma? viewpoint 
nf natura science and gives grounds for bis cocrictions, Far 
then, as is obvious, he lec hime be guided co 0 very large 
extent hy hin eaeatil icaights. As fs well kaown, the pure 
sathematical diciplinos, whether raters) like geometcy ot 
Kinematics, formal (purely fogical) tke arehaete, analysis, 
tnd oo forth, ae the basic meane used by natura acence 
its theoresical work. And i ie open to all to observe that those 
inciplines do net proceot empirically, and are not grounded In 
cherrationa nd experiments on Sgures, ravements, and 10 
{orth an presented in experience. 

Empiscam indeed wil not ace shia, Bat should we take ia 
contention seriouly, chat x0 far from. there being too few 
‘expericnces to vere as grounds, am infinity of experienoee 
‘a-at our service; that im the collctive experince of all acca 
of mankind, even of the roca of beasts that preceded ther, an 

* PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
immense ware of imprestia, eithmetial end geamcwicl, has 
been scoumiiting. and been integrated ic. che shape of habita 
of apprebensian, and that it ia from thie eure that out 
eomezrical inight now draws i inspiration? But whence 
thea the knowledge of these glloged aosumulsied wtites when 
no one abverves them acienifically or faithfully epocte them? 
Since when bere longforgoticn aad entirly hypothetical ea 
Perlences wupplented actual experiences that have been. mow 
‘carehully mated in their peoper empirical ation and scope atthe 
rounds of « science, and of the moxt exact sciroce at chat? The 
physicist observes and experianeats, and on good grounds will 
‘at be etised with pro-scientlic expericacea, let loa aatinetre 
sppeehenaloaa and hypotheses concerning experiences which are 

Ad to have Been intuired. 
Or should we any, as from another quarver bas An fact been 
ssid, that we owed tha insight of geometry to the “‘experionet 
of ow fancy, drawing them as inductions from exparbwents on 
‘the functioning of foncy? Bat bow then in it, vo rane our counter. 
query, that the physiciet makes. 20 use of each wonderful 
‘xperieoe thrmugh fancy? For ths reason, no doubt, beowe 
‘experiments conducted in imagination would be imagined expeci- 
Sc at gee, movin, ed grog i yO ot 
‘We tahe the mort correct cause, howerer, in ecyurd to all 
‘och interpretations, when, instead of adopting the positon they 
stand for and arguing from that basis, we point to the iniinrc 
ineaning of uatheratical uvertions. 1x order 10 know, snd to 
know indubitbly, what x mathecaticd exioxs states, we must 
‘uot tara to the philosopbical empiric, but 12 comcioumness, 
whersia, ae mathensticiens, we grexp exiomatic mater with 
‘aight into it axiomatic character. If we bold purely 

. quite certain thet in the axioms pure can- 
nuexians between esences find expremice withoot the slightest 
sueietance from facts of experience. Insead of philaophizing 
ind peychologising about geometrical thought aod instian fram 
smn outtide standpoint, we should enter vitally into thes activities, 
see through direct malyeos Gettrmine thei imamanent moaning. 

NATURALISTIC MISCONSTRUCTIONS 93 
1 ay well he that we have inherited diepeitons for kaowledge 
from the knowledgy of purt generations; but for the quorion 
conoerning the meaning zed valur of what we know, the patie 
tory ofthis bering of inowledge is ax indierent an is that 
of ou gold currency to ta real aloe. 

$48, Scenes or man Docuamc axD Sconces oF 11 
‘Partosoensc StaxoroxT 

‘Thro the natural sciecsists speak shout mathematica and every- 

hing cide in x septal vein, but trough their eidetic method 

they Behawe dogmatically. And to their own benefit! Netaral 

‘method fora acience of nature if it in to be carried really through 
‘ad w perfectly a possible ithe form of exact sxtual ecience, 
‘ht thia diction af efiort, whereby i cleared a free path fot 
ftw foquiry into forte, bas boon holf mild by the consideration 

Ciplines which, like the mathematica, are of ancient origin, end 
Ihave become tnasuilable through the mxnetione of tubit, these 
‘done ean tolerate such cisvalostinns; whereas (ae already indi 
cated) when it comes to the eublishing of new disciplines, 
‘equpirial prejudios sxcat exercive their ful power af cbetrestion, 
‘The right attitads to take in the fre-philorophical end, in x good 
‘seam, dogmatic ephere of inquiry, to which all the expitial 

# PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

cnnces (but not these alms) belong, is in full consciousness 
0 card ll wap cogethr with ali “nara pop” and 
“theory of hrooindge, and find the dou of knowledge there where 
they actualy Gace you, whatever dilfeuliea epistemological 
reflexion may mbeequnty use concerning the pouty of such 
ina being there. 

‘There i indeed an navoudable and importst division 

Ihaving 1 direction of inquiry peculiar to iuelf. Homever wif 

NATURALISTIC MISCONSTRUCTIONS =o 
contined the knowlege may be that i directed cowards pure 
‘fac and rem on umight, none Ce let, a tho knowledge i bart 
reflectively buck upon its, the pomilcity of any type of kam 
fedge being valid, including 2 intone and lasghts,appens 
eset with baflisg obscures, and ith diffcalies that are 
Adnmoat insoluble, snore parclaly with reference to the tran- 
sccndcace which the abects of knowledge chim ‘> posse in 
{elation to Knowledge fll. On this very grownd serplicims arc 
‘which force thei wy in the face of all satinon, expercre, ahd 
Inmigh, aod in the toque might develop into factors that ebtract 
‘ha working of the practical waeces, We pe id of these dticalticn 
‘hat concern the form of "dati natural ace (xterm, there- 
{e, which sbould not expres bere any depranation whatanever); 

nat through clay grarping the mous general principle ofall thal, 
‘another rele dae snd hong Rwy nnd, 
wll we ignace the rich and varied problems relating to che 
possi ofthe diferent ands of kzowlede and their rexpective 

SRCOND SECTION 

THE FUNDAMENTAL PHENOMENOLOGICAL 
OUTLOOK 

PTRST CHAPTER 

‘THE THESIS OF THE NATURAL STANDPOINT AND 
ITS SUSPENSION 

5.27. Tex Woato or mz Navors. Stemronc: I amp Mr 
‘Won Asovr Ms 

Our fint outlook upon Life is that of natural homan beings. 
dsaging, judging, feeling, willing, “from the nature! standpoint”, 
‘Let us take clear to ourselves what this mcans in the form of 
timple meditations which we cam beat carry on in the fit 
penton. 

Tam avare of « word, spread out in apace endless, and in 
tim becoming and become, without end. I am aware of i, thet 
cans fi oF wl, 1 iscover it immediately, ntutvely, T experi 
‘200 it. Through sight, touch, bearing, ete inthe dilferet wry of 
sensory perenption, corporeal things sotochow patilly diatri- 
Inuted tre for me simply there, 0 verbal or fgurntive sense 
‘persent, whether or ot I pay them speciel attention by busying 
smypelf with them, considering, thixking, feng, willing. Ania! 
beings alo, peeps men, are immediately therefor me: I ook 
up Toe them, Uhear them encsag towards zn, 1 graxp them 
‘bythe hand; speaking with them, T underwand imeeditely what 
they wre sensing and thinking, te feling chat itr them, whit 
{hey wish or wll. Thay toe wo prosont w= soaices in my fold 
of intuition, evex whes I pay them no attestion, But itis not 
nevenary that they aad other jects keane abould be present 
‘rece in my fli of perception. For me ceal objects are there, 
Aofnite, more oe lee fener, sgrecing with wht is acully 

Tap wich an non of Crp ing i ad Sat 

0 PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
changes into clear intuiting with the bestowing of etzntion, end 
‘even then only panaly and foe he mast pact very imperfect. 

‘But oot even with the added reach of this innulvety clear 
tsk, ditoct or indisinet co-preat margin, which forme & 
fountinuoss sing sound the actual eld of perception, doce thet 
‘word echeast itself which in every waking soomest is 5 some 
sooscious measure "prevet” before me. It reachea rather in a 
{ised order of belng iato he limitesa beyond. What ix acually 
perceived, mad what is moe or lo clearly co-present and deter> 
‘adnate (40 same extent at leat} ia party pervaded, peri girt 
about with 1 dimly apprabendad doth a fringe of indtarminats 
reay. I can pierce it with ys from the ilinmizating focus of 
saaeotion with varying mzcca. Determining represcetstions, dim 
at fit, then livelier, fetch me something out, x chain of wich 
rrcolections ten shape, the circle of determinacy extends ever 
fart, and eventual #0 far thet the connexion with the actual 
‘ald of perception an the immediate environment is extablished, 
But ral he us ere ny of in 

indeterminacy geta audded over with intuitive pomibiltien or 

eres, cod ey te “a he werd a “wo 

focetokened. Moreover, the sane of indaterinary a infinite. The 

misty borison that can never be completely outiined recaine 
neceneary thee. 

‘Aa iti with the world ia its ordered being ox» epatia| present 
‘the aspect T have so far been cocsiderig—o Hkewiae is it 
‘with che work in cexpost to it eral being i ha mccain of 
‘ime, This world now preseat to me, and in every waking ‘cow’ 
obviouly 0, bas its temporal Koriaon,infite in both directions, 
ita knowen ab unknown, itr incantaly alive and its unalive 
‘pt und future. Moving freely within the moment of experience 
‘which brings whac ia peewnt ato ey intuitonal grap, Tom 
follow up these connesioas of the reality which imediaialy 
warrounds ce, I as akift my etcdpoint in space and time, look 
thls way and that, turn temporally forwarda sod backwards; 1 
an provide for myself coartamtty new and moce oc ies clear 
and roeningful perceptions aod cepreactstions, and images tle 
mare or eae clear, in which I make intelsble to mynelf whatever 

‘1HE THESIS OF THE NAIUKAL ETANDFOINT 03 

‘as pomibiy exer really or exppomadiy in the stent order of 
pe and time. 

Tn this way, when consciously emake, I nd moe ota times, 
and without my ever being able to change this, actin relation 
‘to a world which, thovogl its coosant change, msstine one and 
‘eer the sume. Tt fe cocci “present” for me, and T mayelé 
am a seme of it. Therefore this work i sot there for me 
mere world of fats end afr, ct with the mmm inznedicy, 
(2 a world of wales, x world of goods, « practice! world. Without 
farther effort my pact I find che hinge before me furisbed 
‘0 only with the qualita that beit ther postine mates, but 
‘with vabe-charncters such ms beactifl ox ugly, agreeable oF 
Aimpreeabe, plomant or waplesent, and wo forth. ‘Things 
‘their immediacy wand there an object to be wed, the “tab 
with its "ooka, the “plea to dink from”, the "vate", 
“pio”, and ao forth. These values and. precicabtion, they 
‘behing to the cuttin of the “actully preset” ejects as ch, 
limeepective of my turing or not turning to consider theo o¢ 
indeed say other object. "The wxze considerations apply af 
couree just a» well to the men acd beats in, my surroundings 
as to oere things”, They sxe my “rind ar ray “Yoo xy 
servants" o¢ “auperians”, “strangers” or “‘elatives", end 50 

E 

BRE 

f a8, Tx “Coco. My Neroun. Wospasornace wc Tet 
Toast, Wontne-s90vr are 

Tt then to hie woe, the worl bik fd ye and which 
‘sole my woridsboutans, tht the cxngics forme of my wasield 
nd biting yonteetr of conmcionsem sand related cheeving 
nthe intron of research the Bringing of meaning into om 
‘mprual form ticoughs description; comparing and catngcishing, 
callctiog and costing, presuppening and inferring, the ther 
Ing activity of couscioutew, in soc, in it disferet ares and 
stages, Related to it Ubewise are the diver cis and wttes of 
veut and wil: approval and Guspproval, joy sol wor, 
‘sire vod svesion, bope and fea, decinlon and wsin. Ail these, 

= FURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
‘together with che shear acia of the go, io which T become 
‘scquainced with the world an immadicely given mse, thaoogh 
spontancons tenleaccs t> turn cowards it sed to grap it, Are 
Included under the one Cartesian expression: Copie, In the 
azure urge of lie I live contionatly in this fandewnetal frm 
of all “wahefal” Bvng, whether in wicion I do or do not ssert 
the comida, sed whether Tox or az not “reBectively” concerned. 
‘with the Reo and the eagitare. Sf Sax so concerned, 1 nem coplio 
‘hae Become livingly active, which for ita part is not reflected 
‘upon, and v0 not objective for me. 

Tata peetent to mse cootinually = tommane who perceives, 
‘representa, thinks, feels, devices, and eo forth; and for the mort 
‘part herein I fod myself related ia. yoesent experience to the 
fct-world which is constantly about me, But 1 em mot abwaye 
10 related, nox every copido in which T Sve a for it cite 
‘things, mn, objects or cootests of one hind oe stother. Pertspe 
Tm bwied with pore somber and che laws they symbolize: 
orhing of this sort is preset i the world about ac thin work 
of rel fu", Ac yet che world of murbers leo in there for 
te, athe fl of abjecta with which Taco arihmedcally buss 
‘while Tem thos vecopied some numbers or corwtractons of 
‘umerieal Kid will be atthe focun of vision, git hy an ats 
retical horizon partly defined, partly not; but obviouly this 
beiogethere fora, like the beiag there at wll, sozething very 
diferent from this, The arithmetical world ir there for me only 
sahen aad vo log oF I cccapy Che ioncical sLandpcint. But tbe 
atral word, the works in the ordinary sease of the word, is 
contanily therefor me, v0 long. 28 I fre naturally and Jook in 
{tu direction. I gm then wt the “natural endpoint”, which in just 
‘cher way of atating the name thing. And there is no need to 
modify these conclusions when 1 proceed to sppropria® to myrelf 
the arithcetial world, ad other emer “wotida”, by adopting 
the corresponding stanipoint. The natural world sill roneiar 
“preset, amt the natural stendpeit aftr ws ell before, 
sod in thiaronpect wutiturbed by the adoption of new adjoint. 
1 say copia ia active oly ithe woride proper tothe new vand- 
sing. the mural word remics usconsidered; it is 2ow the 

‘THe THESIS OP THE NATURAL STANDPOINT 205 
background foe any constiousnens us act, but it ia ot the acing 
phere within which an arithmatical world fads its true and proper 
‘Hee, The to worlds are pesent togehe= but directed, xpert, 
‘hut is, érom their relation to the Ezo, in vite of which I can 
freely direct my glance oe my acts to the ane ox to the athe. 

525. Tru "Ormn” Eoo-svayecr ano raz Lnracapecrren 
Nanna, Woatn-sbovt-scz 

Whnever olde guod for wo peracally, alas ald goody a8 T 
‘mow, foe all other men wom I fod preaat xa my world-about- 
ine, Expeelencing them a men, J understand sod take the ak 
Egosubjecs, unite lke mpell, and related to Geir extn 
tmroundings. But thin in much wus that I gppeehend the workd- 
sboutthem and the word-about-me objectively as one and the 
fame work, which diferym each case only thsuugh sexing 
sonsciouunes difeectly. Each hat his place whence he sec the 
‘hicgs that ae praet, and each exjys accordingly diferent 
appeurasees ofthe things For each agua, the Seld of pereption 
sed mecunrysctuallypreaat we diferent, quite apart tea the 
fect chat even thar whlch ‘a bere istersublectively Anown in 
common is known in different ways, diferent apprehended, 
thom diferent grades of eleroeu, snd o forth, Deaate al this, 
‘we rome 19 understandings with our neighbour, and set xp in 
onmmoa an objective spato-terpecs! fct-world au the eord 
shoal ws that i there far x ll, end to hick we nce me the 
Tes blog, 

$30, Tas Guana. Troms or ‘nor Neronad, Staxoeoner 
‘Tat which we have eubmitted towards the cheracterition of 
‘what ia given to ue from the zataral etandpoint, and thereby 
of the nasueal tandpaint fell, wan 2 piooe of pure description 
‘Pri to all “theory. Tn these wosdies we wand bodily wlof from 
all heories, and by ‘theocies’ se here mean anticipatory ideas 
of every kind. Only a facts of our exrironment, not ax sgenciet 

x6 PURE PHENOMENOLOGT 
fer uniting faci validly togtber, do theocies conser us at wll 
‘Dut we do aot ae ourselves the tuk of contiouing the pure de 
‘scription and nsing it tou sytecaticaly inca and exhaustive 
harecterition of the dats, in their full ength and. breath, 
iecoersbe frm the tatoral sacpoint (or from any stundpint, 
swe might add, that cam be iit up with the same in 4 commas 
conics) A task euch os this can and mest~ar scetibe—be 
‘undertaken, and itis one of extnerdinary importance, shove 
te far scarcely noticed. Here it in not our to attempt. For 
tus who are erving towards the eatrancogte of 
‘logy nll the neoettary work in thin direction has already beer. 
cared out; the few features pertaining to the natural stun 
point which we need are af ¢ quite general character, and eve 
Adready figured io our descriptions, and been wuficintly ond 
fully clarified, We even made a opeial point of vecuing thin ull 
‘meanure of clearest. 

‘We emphasise x ot isaportent point once ngs in the wen- 
tenoen that follow: I find continually presest and standing over 
tusiaat me the one spatio-temporal fce-world to which T are 
belong, s do all ther men found in it and related in the same 
‘way to it, This “fae-world”, asthe word already tele vt, 1 fd 
to Be out there and ale tabs i just ar it goes tall to me ar rome 
thing tht exits nt there. ADI doubting and rejecting ofthe deta 
of the natural word leaves atanding the general shart of the 
‘nitral standpoint. "The word in ws fact-worid always there; 
atthe mont it la at odd points “other” than T myppaned, this o¢ 
that under euch names an “silusion”, “balucination”, end the 
ike, ust be wtrock out of it, wo to apes; but the “i remain. 
ever, in the nenae ofthe general thesia, a worid that han ita being 
‘nt there, To brow it more comprehensively, rare trostwortity, 
ruoce perfectly than the nuive lore of experience ia able to do, 
And to solve all the problems of mente koowletge which offer 
‘themselves upon ita ground, that is the goal of the sciences ofthe 
natural Mandpoat. 

‘THE THES OF THE NATCRAL STANDPOINT 107 

4S 31. Resto, Atrmumon op tam Naronat, Tests 
“Ducoenenon”, “Beicnmna” 

Inca now of remaining ot this Mandpott, or propos 66 ater 

it radically. Que aim must be to eonvice ourselves of the pou 
bility of this aeration on grounds of principle, 

‘The Genera! Thesis scacding to which the real work. shout 
soe isa alten naw merely ina geeral vay a2 vometing 
pprehended, but ea 4 fac-wenld that ha it bang xt there, dora 
ol cont of course ia art proper, in wx articulate jxgroent 
sboxt existence. It is and remuine something al! the time the 
standpowt ia wopted, that i, ic endures penisestly daring the 
‘whole course of ous life of natural endeavour. What has beex 
at any te perceived erly ar abycurely made present, in abort 
everything out of the world of nature known through experience 
od prt any thiskang, bears in itv totality and in all iia 
articulated pections the character “present” “out there", 
cdiaracter which can function emestally an the ground of support 
for an explicit (predicative) existential judgment which is in 
agreement with the charset it ia grounded upon. If we expres 
thit seme judgment, we ow guite well that in vo doing we 
ave simply pot int the fore of statement and grasped ue 
‘prediction what azeady lay somebow in the original experience, 
sr lay there ww the chareces of something “present to one's 

‘We eax treat the potential and unexpresed thesis exicy 
swe do the thesia of the explicit judgmen. A procedure ofthis 
ort, pomiBle at any tine, in, far icaance, the atiompt to dowd 
omyibing which Descartes, with an eaticely diferent end in tiem, 
‘with the purpose of seting up an sbsolvtely icdubitable epbere 
of Being, undertook t carry through. We link oo bere, but sd 
direcdy and exphabaally that this aticropt to doubt everything 
should serve only at & device of metho, helping sto tre 
certain pointe which by iis meane, 22 thoogh secloded in ite 
emence, rust be broaghtclescly to light, 

‘Tho ettempt to doubts crecything has is place ix the eas 
of our perfect fondo. We can atiompt fo dade anything esd 

a PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
everything, however coavinecd we may be cmosrting what we 
doubt, even though the evidence which seale our sararance is 
ccumpletly adequate. 

‘Lat us consider what is eaetaly irotoed in om oct ofthis ind 
Hie who artempes to doubs is asempting to doube “Being” of 
tame form oc uther, or it may be Being expanded into auc 
peodlcstive forme a5 “It ia", “It is this oc thus”, sod the like. 
"The attempt dove aot sfect the form of Being fel. He who 
Moab for utance, whether an object, whove Beiog be doce sat 
doubt, is cooazuted in wach and much « way, doubt the wey 
1 continued. We can obviouly tazafer thin wy of epeaking 
from the douhang to the attempt at doubting. 1¢ ix clear that 
wwe cannot doubt the Being of anything, and in the vame act of 
conacioumces (aod the unifywng form of sieultncity) being 
‘What i aubatanive to thu Being under the terms of the Natural 
"Thesis o confer epon tthe character of "being actualy there” 
(corkanden}. Or to put the sume in anotber way: we cannot At 
‘once doubt and hold far certain one and the same quality of 
‘Being, Tein likewise clear thatthe atte to doubt axy object 
of awarencas in rapect of fn being actualy there macorrly 
conditions certain suspension (Anfhebong) of the hens; and it ib 
spreceely this that interes we. Tt nox a tamaforation of the 
‘hela Lto its antithss, of pomtve into negeave; ie is abo fot 
1 tracxformation into presumption, suggestion, isdecsion, doubt 
(an one or another sense of the weed); euch shiting indeed is 
fot at our fee pleasure. Rather is it eowcthing quite miu. We 
1 Net abondon the thd we ewe adopled, we make no change 
Ie nr comico, which zeraina in iif what ic is a0 fong ab 
we donot intrduce new mctives of judgment, which we precely 
refrain fom doing. And ye te thea undergoes « otifction— 
‘lt resnining in fel what ii we ot it ere Moat of 
scion”, we “comme a, “bracket it”. 1 will remainn thee 
like the bracketed in the bracket, Kix the disemanected ouside 
‘he connexion gem. We cas alo my: The theta expr 
su Bred (Erich), bat we make “no ww” of it, and by tha, of 
curse, we do cot indicate privation (an when we my of tbe 
fgnorsnt that be makes no use of 2 cerisia thesis); in thin case 

‘THE THESIS OF THE NATURAL STANDPOINT 109 

rather, a2 with all panilel expeeatons, we are dealing with 
Indicator that point wo 4 definite but snus form of coactoure, 
‘which casa at the mrigialsmple thas (tether t acral 
‘even prodicaively party exiaomce of not), and transrsives it 
in a quite peculiar way. This tranvabeng és concern of nr fall 
freedom, and is opposed to all cognitive atttades that would set 
themocles up aa co-ordinate wih te hes, and yet wit the 
amity of "simulanety” remaun mncomnpatibie with t,x» indeed 
fe a in general with all waitudes whatsoever ix the erct senae 
ofthe word. 

In th avtompt to doodt plied to a thesis which, as we pre 
‘mippote, in certain and tenaciously held, the "disconnexion” 
‘hes place in and with » madiSeanon of the amithets, namely, 
with the “apportion” (Anatmene) of Non-Being, which is thus 
‘the partial bei ofthe atempt to dovbt, With Desarten this is 
0 machely the case tht cae can ay that his univertal stem 
a doubt is just an areropt at univer denial. We dleegurd 
thin pouibility Here, we are not interested in every analytic 
component of the attempt to doubt, nor thereloce in ita exact 
and comply mulicing analyis. We extract ony he phenomenon 
Of “rch o “cmectng hehe ebay noc ed 
(o thee of the setempt ta donb, aktough 2¢ san be demached 
from it with special exe, but cx3 appes: in ther contests alo, 
and with no lem caso indcpendraliy. In reaton to every thesia 
and wholly uneoeroed we can wae this pecnbr trey, a certain 
(fring from fadgnent wick 1 cmpatile with the washokor and 
sashaheble becaur elcidencing conciction of Trath, The thea 
in “pus out af action”, bracketed, pastes off itm the modified 
statun of a “bracketed thesia”, and the jodament stir ito 
"rachted jigs”. 

Naturally one should net simply identify this enaacioumess 
with that of “mere suppenl”, that aymaphe, for instance, are 

1 & Fog; for hereby mo dcomaccting of 4 living coor 
i that goes on Eving takes place, skhoogh from another 

Again, we ze not concerned here with enppon in che vase of 
“mondag" oc taking for rented, whic in the equivocal ape 

‘paciad, whatever be the region ox category to which it belongs. 
‘What in seant in this case in that every thesis related to thir 
bjectioity toast be Bicomectad znd changed inte its 
cqnsterpert. On eloaee vem, mareover, the ‘bracketing’ i 
4 from the outer betor wited ta the vphere of 

‘= the capenmion ‘to put aut of action’ better 1 
of the Act or of Conacioumess. 

4.32, Tm Parmoscmovocteat. devys) 

We cam now Jot the univeral émext in th sharply defined 
and ated aa me ave gives to it sep into the place of the 
‘Carveien attempt xt univer) doubt, But on good grounds we 
inde the univeenaity of tia dons. Rex wece it mn iclusive e9 
it iso groerl capable of being, then woe every thera and every 

‘can be modified freely to any ement, and every objec- 
‘ivity thet wo can judge ar critisize can be bracketed, no Bld 
‘would bo leftover fer unmodied judgments, to ey nothing of 
faclenee. But our design is just 29 discover a new scientific 
domain, wach as might be won prechely through the wethed of 
bemsan, tem oly Gemegh = chdaly Ueed foen 

ic 

‘Tre timiting cousideration can be indicated in x wor! 

We pu ont of action the zeneral thesis which Selonge to the 
satuace of the natural stendpoint, me place in brackets whatever 
it includes reapecting the natare of Being: this mute natural 
‘world ", present 
cour band” ane wil ever mzain thee, ina “fact-world” of which 
‘wa continue to be coxacioos, even thaugh it pleases us to put 
iin beucket, 

TET do tia, ux I ar filly fre to do, T do wot chen deny chia 
world", a5 though I were 2 sophie, J do ot donbt that tix 
‘rem shougs I were. weeptic; at Ite the “phencmatalogial” 

‘LAB VHLISIS OF THE NATURAL SUANDPOINT rr 

Gers, which completely bers me from wong sy indgment that 
‘cancers spatiotemporal extesce (Desi). 

"Than lf smear ehick relate fo this natura! world, eoough they 
and never so firm to me, though they Gill me with wondering 
sudmiration, though T am far fram any thought of objecting to 
them in the leet degre, F dscomsect them all, F sake ebalsicly 
no use of ther standards, I do wot appropiate single one of the 
Proportion that exter ext thei systems, een though thir evidential 
‘ae it perfect, J take nome of tha, no one of them serves me for 
4 foundetion~vo long, that ia, a8 it ia undersiood, in che may 
these sence themselves underatzad ity ona truth comctening the 
kis of tia world. I may exept it only after I hove placed tt 
the bracket, That toeusa: nly ia the rodibed omesiownnees 
of the judgment wit appear ix discotmerios, and pit at eh 
Sagres wishin the icicce as its propsiioe, « propastion which 
Claims tobe cad and hoe ealiy J recopise and make we of. 
‘The éroxe here in question will not be confused with that 
‘which posi demas, and against which, at we were com~ 
pelle to admit itis elf am offender. We are not concerned 
at pretent with removing the preconceptions whch trovble the 
‘ure ponltvty (Sachichhes) of reveare, wth the consdtoting 
of ¢ acience “fre Gom theory” and “fee from maetaphyoce” by 
bringing all the grounding back to the sedate data, nar with 
he means of reaching such ends, coscerning whee valve there 
5s faded no question. What i demand lies along another line, 
‘The whole world ua placed within the matureeting and pre- 

‘tanifert ix and through the Exkings of our experiences, bax now 
‘ho validity for us, it mat be set in brackees, untested indeed but 
‘duo uncontetted. Similry all theories and siences, positivist 
ct otherwise, which relte to this wocld, however good they may 
‘be, muccamb to the mame fate. 

SECOND CHAPTER 
CONSCIOUSNESS AND NATURAL REALITY 

113. lermerrion Concamninc “Pont” om ““Teanscexmoern 

‘Consciouaness” as PHENOMENCLOGICAL RISIDUUM 
‘We have feart to understand the mosning of the pheaomeno 
logical deo, but we are still quite in the dark an to im service- 
sbilny. Tu the frat place st is not clear to what eatent the 
Imitation of the total fe ot the éroxs, a8 discussed an the 
previous pages, involves « real narrowing of its general wope, 
For what can romcin over when the whale world is bracketed, 
inching nailer ad all car thosking (ogee)? 

‘Sxnor the reader alredy knons thatthe interest which gaverna 
these’ Meditstions'concema anew esdetic science, he will indeed 
a fit expect the world a fact to naccursb to the diaconnexion, 
Inut not the world ax Hider, nor any other apbere of Easentst 
Being. The dwsonnecting of the world doce not as matter of 
fact msn the daconnecting of the mumber veces, fr inutance, 
and the aithmebe relative to st. 

However, we de Bot tae thin path, nor does our geal Li in ie 
direction, That goal we could alto refes to ma the winning of 
new region of Bong, the ditinciroe character of which has not Jet 
‘tern defined, & cegion of individual Being, lke every renuine 
region. We roost Jars the sequel to teach us whut thet sore 
precisely means 

We proceed in the fire inveance by showing up simply and 
rectly what we se; sod munce the Being to be thus shown up 
neither more nar lus thas that which we refer ta on easetial 
rounds an “pute experiences (Eviebmuze)", "pure conmcusnnes” 
‘ith its pure ‘coreats of conaciousres”, and an the ether side 
ita “pure Ego", we observe that isu from the Ego, the con 
viowsoess, the experience a8 gen to am from the natural stand 
point, that we take cur eat. 

1 the real human being, ax « real objact like others in the 
natural world. T carry out capitation, “acta of consciouances” 
in both x marrower and a wier sense, and these act, = belonging 

CONSCIOUSNESS AND NATURAL REALITY ta 
1 this human nsbject, are events of the sesze natusal wor, And 
all my remaining experiences (Erlebic) likewine, out of whose 
changing stream the specific acts of the Ego shine forth in 60 
Sntinctive a way, pic into one ancther, eater into combinations, 
fad wre being incesmntly modified. Now ini widest connotation 
the exprosion “‘seuvioumes/" (then indeed lem wited for 
‘purpons) includes af experiences (Erebwine), and entrenched in 
fhe natura standpoint a9 we are orc in our scintifc thinking, 
rounded thece mn babi that ave mont Srmly eatabiahed since 
they have never mised us, we take al hese data af prchologicas 
reflexion ws ceal workd-events, at the experince (Brice) of 
animal beings, Bo natant 1s to sce them aly in thin 
ight thas, though acqueinted already with the posibilty of « 
chamge of wandpoiat, and on the search for the new demain of 
beta, we fil to potice thet it is from out these cenirea 
of experience (Eretnéne) themacives that trough the adoption of 
the new elazdpoint che new domain emerges. Connected with 
Chis che oct that instead of keeping our eyes turned toward 
these centres of experience, we rursed them avay and sought 
the new objects in the oonological reat of arthmasic, geometry, 
and the tke, whereby indeed nothing truly new was 10 be won, 
"This we fa our eyes steadily poo the sphere of Conactousness 
sd etuy what itis that we nd immanent is At it, without 
having yet carried out the pheaomesclogical penaiara of the 
foment of jodgment, we rubjec: thin sphere of Consciousneta 

‘svential nature to a systematic though in 20 sense 
‘eahaoatire analyois, What we lack above alli 2 certain geneeal 
insight into the ewence of coudoumes é goural, and quite 
specially algo af comscioomen, wo far ov ic and through its 
‘cstemis) Being, the “natura!” fact-world cones to be known, I 
‘these suds we go 40 far 1s ia needed to furiah the ful insight 
at which we have boct aiming, to wit, that Conaioures in tel? 
Aa bring of itr ow which én itr brace emiguenes of nates 
remains affected by the phenemeclegical dsconnasion. It there- 
fore reumiaa over 2 "phtmememclpicl rexideem’, a2 region 
of Being which i im principle uzique, and can become in face 
‘the feki of n ew science—the science f Paeaomenslogy. 

um ‘PURE PHEROMENOLOGY 

‘Through this insight the “phenomannlogical” bro wil for 
‘he fit time deserve fv maze; to exerci it in full comciousness 
ofits ioport wilt tur out ta be the necessary operation which 
readers pore" comciournen, acceBle 10 wr, and mbsequently the 
hole pAenomanobgizal ragice. And Una ‘we shal) be eble to 
understand why this region and the new science attached ¢o It 
wis fated 10 remain unknows. From the patra! wandpout 
nothing can be sees except the natural werld. 80 long a» the 
powuibilty of the phenccsenologicl eundpoist em aot graxped, 
and the method af relating the objectives which emerge There: 
with te « primordial form of apprehension had not been devised, 
the phenomenclogical world mat needs have reuaised wnksows, 
and indeed barely divined at all. 

‘We woud add yet the following 2 our termoology: Important 
swotives which have their ground in epistemological requiremsenta 
Justify un in refering to “pure” conscioutnens, af which muuch 
fs yet to be wid, nso an trancondertal conrcioumest, and the 
capertion thrmugh which it ia acquired a8 traxscrdental broxt, 
‘On grounde of method this operation wil wpit up into different 
scp of “discomvexion” or “brecietisg”, and chia our method 
wll eanume the character of x graded reduction. Foc tha cen, 
‘we propows (9 wpeak, and even prepoaderatingly, of phemaneno- 
logical reducsions (Chong, in reapect of this unity a9 « whole, 
‘we would speak ia usizary form of the phrcomenological reduc 
tlon). From the epistemological viewpotat we would also speak 
of tramcendental reductions. Moccover, thee and elf cur terms 
smut be understood exclusively in accordance with the senan 
‘which our presentations iodicate for thes, but net in any otber 
‘one which history o the terminotogcal habits ofthe reader may 
fevoxt. 

4 34. Tor Bsernce oF Consciovmams as Thome of Teoma 

‘We start with» scien of observations within which we are not 
Lwoubled with any pheaomesologial bec. We ae diected 
sn "ter wed, sod, without Forking the astral sxmpoint, 
reflect paycholoicatly on our Ego sad ite experience (Bebo), 

CONSCIOUSNESS AND NATURAL REALITY 5 

‘We kavy oureves, pracy 68 we wosld have done if we bed 
never beard of the mew viewpelnt, with she aneatial astare of 
the conscionmar of someting”, fllowiog, fos isttance, Our sou 
scioumen of the existence of toateial things, ving bodiea sad 
‘en, o€ that of techni! and Leary works, and 10 far, We 
tudhere to our genera principle chat cach individual eveat has 
ita ewence that can be geupped in ta eidetie purity, and in this 
purty cust belong to & fiekd eveible to erdetic inquiry. In 
{ecordance herewith the univeea fact of sature ceaveyed by the 
‘worda “T am’, “I this, “I bave a world over aguinet me" and 
the lke, has alo its casenial content, and it: 

‘by way of ilusreton certaia conscious experience chosen at an 
dom, tad in their individuality just on they we in their natured 
secting un real facts of Inuman life, and we mabe these prevent 
‘tw ourselves through memory or in the free play of fancy. On 
the ground uf ikatrations such ws these, which we earume 02 
De presented with perfec clearaes, we grasp mnd &x in adequate 
ideation the pure esecaces that interest us. The indrvidual facts, 
‘the fact-characer of the natural world im general, thereby excapes 
one eran sri al ct wee cor gl 

‘We lit all further the theme of our inquiry, Tm tle mn: 
Coneciourscer, or mare distinctiy Oonriour experience (Brlabas) 
in general, 0 be taken ix am excecucy wide seme, about whoa 

‘exact defininon we ae fortunately aot concerned. Exact definitions 
da not lie at the threshold of anahynie of che kind we are bece 

every cae of “I perceive, T remember, I fancy, 
I jodge, fet, desire, wil”, and all expeciennes of the Ego that 
in any sry resemble the foregoing, in ull the counts Suctuations 
‘of their wpecial pattern. The Ego itelf eo which they are all 
related, or which in very differing waye “lives in" them, active, 
Deveive, spontaneous, in receptive ar any ether “stitade”, md 

v6 URE PHENOMENOLOGY 
indeed the Ego i aty and every sate, x love at fn out of 
‘considratan. We shall be conccrocd with i eter, and fundamen 
‘ally. For the present there is mficient ochee matecial to serve 
4 ippect for mur analyia acd grap of the esental. And we 
‘ull find oursclres forthwith referred thereby 1a enveloping 
‘onneaiona of experience which compel us 10 widen our 600: 
ception of a conscious experience beyoed this circle of specific 
cngitations, 

"We stall cuaier conssious experiences ir the comeretefolles 
aud entiety with which they Sgure in theis concrete content—the 
‘ream of experience—and t0 which they are closely ttched 
‘through their awa proper euence. Tt then becomes evident chat 
‘every experience in the stream which our releicn ean lay hold 
has is oem camer ope We intiton, + “content” which can 
the considered in ita singularity in end for self. We shall be 
concamed to grap this individual contect of the omiatio in 

‘pure sigulavty, and to deacrbe 5¢ in its general features, 
‘cashing everything which is not to be found ia the capitis 
‘wit isin icf, We rua wise describe the mit of concious 
far which i Secanded by the inti nature of the copttinc, 
and 90 necemurity demanded that they could not be without this 
unity. 

435. Tue Coon as “Act”, Twe Mona Fost oF 
‘Mascntan Acroary 

‘Let un stact with an example. In front of me, inthe dim light, 
lies thin whita paper. 1 see it, touch it, This perceptes) tecing. 
and tiuching of the paper as the full concrete experience of the 
paper tat bes hece a given in tat precisely with these quien, 
‘preclaely with thie relative lack of clearness, with thie imperfect 
Aefition, appearing to ze from this particular angle—ia« emgs- 
Jatie, a conscious experience. The paper inelf with it objective 
qualities, ita extension in apace, its objective postion in regard 
to that epatial thing Tall xy body, in ne repitatio, but cagitetne, 
ot percepinal experience, but something peroelved. Now that 
‘which in perceived can itself very well be & conscious wxpetiences 

CONSCIOUSNESS AND NATURAL REALITY nny 
‘but Ht wvident that an cbjece much axa material thing, this 
‘oper, for iorance, as given in perceptual experience, is in prin- 
ciple other than an experience, x being of » completely diferent 
ind, 

‘Before pumming this point Santer, let us amplify the tla 
tratan, In pereption propecly vo-caled, a an explicit swnrepees 
(Grookeen), Tum turned towards the object, to the piper, for 
nse, I appretend it as being thie bere and now. The appre 
henaioa in sagling out, every perceived object ving « back- 
(ound in experiece. Around and about the paper he books, 
penvila, inkovell, and ao forth, and these in a certain tense are 
‘Seo “perenived”,percopeualy here, in che "eld of iam’ 
tout whilt 1 was turned towards the pape there was so turning 
in ther direction, nor any apprebesding of them, not even in 
st vecandary tense. They appeared aod yet were not singled cut, 
‘were not posted oa their own account. Every perception of » 
‘thing fim rach « 20ae of bacdground isto (or background 
vereoees, if “intuiting” already includes the wate of being 
‘rrned towards), and this alo is “concious experienc more 
‘briefly a “cocacicusness of" all indeed that in point of fact Lice 
{in the co-perveived objective “background. We are not taking 
Ihre of course of that which ia to be found ax an “objective” 
tlementin the objective apace to which the background in quetion 
muy belong, ofall the things and thing-like events which a valid 
‘and peogrentive experience may evablsh there, What we my 
applies exchusively to that zoae of conscioutncaa which beloage 
1 the model ewence of « perception a» “being torned towards 
an object”, and further to thar which belongs to the proper 
‘emsence of this zone itself. But it is here implied that certain 
indications of the original experience are pomsible, which we 
refer ta ana fos cursing of the “look”—not precisely not merely 
of the physionl but of te" menit look”—from the paper at ft 
decried to objects which had already azpeared before, of which 
‘we had been “implicitly” aware, and whereof enbeepint to the 
Aircting af oae's lok thither we ae expticitiy anare, peceiving 
‘them "atentiely”, or “aoteing them cear by”, 

‘We are aware of things nar af in perception, but slap cane 

nt FORE PHENOMANOLOGY 
scious in rocolections ja representation visilarto recollections, 
‘and also inthe fre play of fancy; and thie in “clear intucien” 
it may be, or without noticeable perceptibly afer the manner 
of dim” preseatstions; they fost par. ws is diferent “charace 
‘cisions areal, posible, facie and so forth, AU hat we bare 
‘rated concerning percepeusl experiences elds good, obviously, 
of these other experiences, essentially diferent i they are. 
‘We aball cot think of confoving the object of hich me are amare 
under these forma of consciousness (the fansy-shaped nympbs, 
for icazamee) with the conscious expericnce themeclres which 
ze a conciousness of theon. Then, sein, we know that iti the 
femence of all ch expenenoce—takig the waza, wa always, in 
their concrete fullnew—to show that remarlable modification 
‘which tranfess conseouscem is the mde of acta orintation 
to consclouanes In the mode of nennectaty and converely. At 
the one time the experince iy 10 to peat, “explicitly” aware of 
ftw objective content, tthe other implicitly and merely poteatialy, 
"The objertive factor, whether in pererption, mesery, oF 42ey, 
say already be appearing to us, but ow mental goat is not yet 
“daca” foward, wor eve in secondary vena, w may nothing 
of bing “busied with it in some wpecal way. 

Siar cemarka apply to all snd any ofthe cagtationer in the 
sense illustrated by Descartes! mut of the tery, to all expectencea 
af thought, feeling axd will, excopt that, an will be emphasized 
(in the sext paragraph, the “dinctedineas towards", the "being 
‘urmed towarda”, which isthe distinctive mark of focal scualicy, 
doa sot coincide, min the fevocrite beeaee simplest examples 
of sentry presentations, with singling oot and noting the abjecta 
‘wo are amare of. tina cbviouly true ofall wach experiences 
‘hat the focal ia git about wich x “ous” of the marginal; the 
stream of experience con never cout wholly of focel actoatiis, 
‘These deed deurmine, ia x very general venue which mat be 
tended beyond the cscle of ou hurtin, and throug the 
contrast with marginal acrabties already dwn, the prepeast 
meaning of the expremion “sogite”, "I have comcinmsen of 
something”, “I perform an act af consciongoee™, fo order ta 
beep thin welb-ertblabed concept parely apersis, we propose 

CONBCIOUENESE AND NATURAL REALITY 119 
to reserve for it exchuively the Cartesian expronises eopito and 
polsrialploharnce huokiprernipetrgatatctr 
x the lke, we expramly indicate the modified use we are uaking 
of che term. 

‘We can define « “wahyfal" Byo a1 oar thst within instream 
of experience is comnwally conscious inthe specif form of the 
capita; which, of course, deca sot moean that it can and doce 
boring these experiences persistently of in general to predictive 
‘expreason, Ego-tubjecta include animals. But, according to what 
‘we have enid above, it belongs to the exmence af the strexm of 
experience of awake‘ul Self ha thecansisuoualy prolonged chain 
of captions ia conatancly ins medium of dormant 
scraslty (Inahivalitét), which ie ever prepared 10 pase off ito 
‘be meh mose (dlrvabd ws convene he mat iat the 
dormant, 

$36. Iermeriona, Heranencr. Exreniencs ¢ Ganoat 

However deustie the change which the expesiences of a wakeful 
CConicownea undergo is thes traniion into the dormant ste, 
the experiences an mandifed share the eaetial ature of the 
criginal experiences i= ax iroportat respect. It belongy 96 = 
aenecl feature to the essence of every actual cote tobe a cm 
fcionmnens of aomctbing. But accoring to what we have already 
aid, the modified ciate Kewse and sn te nm wey Cows 
inom, ad ofthe tone wetting oo with the corresponding 
unmodified consiousnen. Tus the erential property of Can 
sciouanes in ia geoeal form in proerved in the modiSestion, 
‘All expeiencen which ave theve ewe=talproperca i commen 
tv aso called “itentnalcxpeione™ (eo in he very te 
‘str of ce Lope! Seat); 3 fran they wr» copscourvent 
of vomething they are mui to be “intentionally related” to. thin 
seamrhing. 

‘We mit, however, be quite clear on this pint that thew i 
0 gurtion here of relation betwen © pychaigcalcomt—colled 
ssperitce (Brit) —end ses other Pal exist (Date) ealad 
Objct—oe of» pyclepical emesionsaiiag between the one 

tte PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

snd the other ix abjictioe racilty. On the costrary, wr are com- 
cxrned with experience isthe eerie puri, with pure nee, 

Aetion, fo intance, the Gtian of thin or thet constr « Per 
cmption, che perception of ita “real” object; « Judgment, the 
judgment cancerning ita eubject-matter, and 20 forth, thin does 
oe relate to the experimental facta» lived within the world, 
raart specifically within some given paychologial contest, but 
(0 the pure emence grasped ideationally ax pure ides. Ia the very 
tseznce ofan experieae ice detenmined not ealy that, but eso 

1 dormast lies included the variety of wokeful cxpttion, into 
which it can be diferentaed through the modication wt have 
slready referred to a8 “the noticing of what wen previoly 
‘wnnaticed" 

‘Unies experienat in the sider vente we undernand whatsrer 
i to be found is the stream of experience, oot oaly therefore 
intentional experiences, enpifation seta und potential taken 
their ful eoecetenen, but al the sel (rele) phases tobe found 
4m this stream and is ia concrete sections 

Fur icin easly seca that nat every real phase of the concrete 

‘of an intestiona experience hat itwelf the baie chorecter 
4f intentionality, the property of being 1 "coaciousneas of tome 
hing”. This the ease, for isatance, with ll sory date, which 
ley oo great « part in che pecoeptive intuitions of thing, In 
‘the experience of the percepsian of tia whitepaper, mare closely 
{in those compouert of t related to che paper’ quality of white- 
‘eas, we discover through propetiy drested saticing the semscry 
datum “white”. This “whitenese™ is something thet belongs 
inseparably to the emence of the eanerete perception, ms» real 
(vel) conezete constitutive portion of it. Aa the contest stich 
resents the whiteness of the paper anit sppease tos iti the 
dearer of wn jateationaity, but not Sielf « consciousness of 
someting. The same boldo good af other data of experience, 

(CONSCIOUANESE AND NATURAL REALITY zt 

of the eo-calladsemmry faking, for iatance, We shallbe xpeaking 
of these at greater ‘eageh in a later contert. 

$37. Tame “Diucrooeane” or tas Pees Boo ov ta Car, 
jw Tua Novicoto Tu? Arran 

‘Though we are unable a this point to proceed farther with our 
Aescripive aneipis of intentional experiences in thei ewential 
ature, ws would single ur cersia aspect as noteworthy in 
‘relaion to further developments. If an intentional experitace 
4a scoush, eared out, that i, after the mannee of the cat, the 
subject “direct” imelf within it towards the intentional object, 
‘To the capt itself belongs a2 imascnt “glancing-towards the 
beet, « directedness which from another side springs fort Sram 
‘the “Ego”, which can therfire never be absent. "This glancing of 
‘the Ege towarde socsething iain barcony withthe act involved, 
perceptive in pererption, fanciful in fancy, approving in approval, 
‘volitional in will, and 30 forth. Thia eoeans,cherefore, that this 
Iving in onav glace, ix one's metal eye, which Tonge to 
the ance of the copite, to the nc a wach, ie Dt in itself ix tra 
4 proper act, and in particular shoul! not be oomfored with « 
perceiving (in however wide a vense this term be used), o¢ with 
‘ny other eypen of act related to perception. It whould be notied 
that intemal object of x cansciousneas (understood a6 the 
leqter's full correlate) ia by 0 means to be identified with 
‘hprabended object. We a0 coukazed without farther thought 
to include the being apprehended in the concept of the object 
(Cf that generally which standa over age the subject), ni0ce 
fn 40 Gar as we think of it and say socoething about it, we have 
‘made it ista an object ix the wcase of something apprehended. 
Ja the widest neue ofthe word, apprehending an cbject (Rrferrs) 
‘xineidea with maindf lly heeding it (acter), 2d noting its nature 
(bemerhen), whether aneatively 28 2 special cate, ot cursory, 
‘Provided at lear that these expressions are used inthe cortomary 
senae, TBs Reading or apbrckending iz nok to be identified withthe 
modus of “cogitd™ ix general, that of schuslty, but ween mere 
closely with « pecialactmadar which every consciousness oc every 

ts PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

‘ctwhich dows not yct ponsesnt can anne. Should it do this 
‘ceantccalcbject snot onlykzown n'a geceral wey wed brought 
‘within the directed glance of the ind, but is 22 spprobended 
sna noted object. A tmning rowards a ‘Thing, to be sure, canoe 
take place otherwive thax in the way of npprebension, and the 
nme ho good ofall ejected thet are plany rarnrabe": 
Ihre 2 urning tomar (be tere ia fancy) sco ipo wn “appre 
fending" end "bending". Bue to the act of abut 

turned towards values i act af joy ta the eajoyed, in ats of 
love to the beloved, in acting to the atinn, nd witht mppre~ 
Ienlng all this, The inemsinal object suber, that which ip 
‘aloe, exjoyed, beloved, hoped as each, the ation 1 scisa, 
Dooues am appretended abject through 1 distnctirely 
‘objectifying” tare of thonght. Uf ono is turned townris some 
snatier sbgorbod in appreciation, the apprehexalen of the satier 
sno doubt ineladed inthe total etude; but iti not the mor 
‘atic in geocral, but the mettercalad or the sale which is 
(oe the poise wil concer us more in det Iacer on) the compte 
Aatonioul corlate of the act of taboo. ‘Ta to be turned 
‘in appreciation towards some matter” dors not slready imply 
“having” the value “for objet” in the wpecial vease of object 
apprehended, ax idced we mount have the object if we are to 
predicate nating of it; mod similwly ia regard to all logical 
oa which are related to it. 

‘Teun in neta Tee those of appretistion we have an Sxtentnal 
objec in a double nce: we caus dainguah berween the “abject 
smattr” pore end simple and the fall intentional objet, rc coeee- 
sponding to thin, x double ilens, twofold direstedness. f we 
ae directed tomarda sous rater in ac act of appreciation, the 
Alrection towne the matter in question ia & noting and app 
‘heading of it; bot we are direted"—only zat in an eppreheodng 
sexy—zin co the value, Not merely the representing af thy matter 
fn quastion, bus abc the apprasatng which inchadesthiarepre- 
venting, bas the modus of acsualty. 

‘But we amt hasten to ad that ic i ooly i repect of 
simple sts of vahmilon that dhe meter stnde v0 imply. 
Jn gene, ats of seatiment aod wil are conslideted upon 

(CONECIOUSNESS AND NATURAL REALITY ray 
higher level, and the intentions! objectivity who diferentistes 
imalf accordingly: there ia ako 1 complicating of the waye ia 
‘which the objects incuded in the unitary total objectivity come 
under the directed mental glace, But in any exe the following 
saaln propositions held good — 
‘In tory et tie mote of handing (Achtvambet) obit noay. 
‘Bat wheroor tis not the plas commeioumnen of « mjecimaticr, 
‘wherever some Further “tiade towarda” the subject-mater it 
‘in much conscioounens, abjpcmaor and fall inten 
‘anal object (“eubject-matee™ and inatance), kee 
Ieeding the ojec ed mentally sratnizing it, mparste ot the om 
am the othr. But # the ance time the posiblty of « modi- 
feation remains an emential propery of these grounded acts, 
4 modification whereby this fll iteasional objects become 
noticed and in this sense “represented jects, whic no, from 
thee side, become capable of serving a1 bavea for explanations, 
‘elatens, conceptual rendering, and predications, Thank co thie 
bjectifiatian we find facing vain the atural sitiog, ate there- 
foce at members of the natural world, not natural things merely, 
tru valun and procucal objec of every bind, ction, recta with 
street-lighting arrangements, dwellings, furniture, workn of art, 
books, tools, nd vo forth. 

498. Renamons ox Acts. Ihawwmer «oc Taanscomeet 
Parcernors 

‘We ad the folowing: Living inthe engito we hive not got tbe 
opitatio consciously before us a8 insentiaal object; but it can 
at any time become this: to ft essence Belongs in principle the 
Ponaibilry af a “reflaice” dieting of the maxtal glance towaria 
itl rurally in the form of new copatio and by way of « 
imple xpprehecsion. In acer words, every copitti can become 
‘the object of a no-alled “inner pererption”, and eventually the 
object of & rofeaie raleatin, an epprora) ot disapproval, aad 
40 forth, The sare hakds good in comerpoasingly modified ways, 
‘not nly Of roa! acts im the seme of acts of perception (Aiton. 
(Precions), bt also of sa of which we ave wware “in” fency, 

ay FURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
“i” memory.or “in” empathy, whea we undecrtand nd re-live 
the scta of others. We can reSect “ia” memory, empathy, snd 
‘0 arth, ard in these various possible modifications mabo the 
scar we are “therein aware of into object of our epprebeoiing 
and of the stitode-cxpreating act which are grounded in the 

‘spprbenion. 
"We connect with the foregoing the datnetion between sran- 
‘eendent snd immanene perorptone and ace generally, We sro 
‘talking about inmer and outer perception a chere are serious 
objections 10 thin way af speaking. We give the following 
explanations 

Under acts iamaneniy directed, or,» pot it more generally, 
under intetional experiences bemneetly related, we inchide those 
‘tu which aro ervntally 20 constited that Gheir intentional 
bjt, hen thar ent al, akong tothe rom sire ef experience 
«0 thamueoer, Wo beve so inesnce of thin wherever a activ 
relued to an ct (a copitato to a copia) ofthe mae Rigo, o¢ 
eawine an at to 2 given semble allet of the samme Ego, 20d 
ve forth, Comeiouanens and ite object build up in individual 
say yard tg eh cpm, 

Tstetional experiences for which this doee not hold good are 

srancendetly directed, ot, for oatace, a wn dicesed towers 
‘esences, o¢ towards the intentional experiences of ocber gos 
‘with other experience eames Htewise all acts direeted vpen 
‘this, upon rain guocally, awe have wil to ehow, 
nthe cue of x icananely directed, o, more briefly, manta 
(Che socalled inner”) perception, prcpton and pecvced eamen- 
filly coamitate ox wemdhated unity, tbat of & ringla concrete 
sagitetio. The perceiving here 20 compeals its object i ivelf that 
i can be eeparaed frac it only through abstraction, wad an 
something erenilly capable of ractn aloe. If the perceived 
‘a a5 intentional experience, ws when we reflect upou some ail 
Lirely coaviction (eapresed, it may be, in the form: Iam om- 
winced thet—) we have «sez of two intention experiences, of 
‘which wt eat the superimposed one in dependent, and, moebove, 
‘ot merely grounded ia the deeperlying, but at the ame tine 
‘newationaly dzected towards it. 

‘CONSCIOSNESS AND NATURAL REALITY rap 
‘Thin type of rea (race) “secontinedea” (in ecm & 
imitate oly) i 1 ditactine character of temeneet perception 
dof the mental attndes founded pes it it lacking in towt 
‘of the other omer of inmanent eelationthip between inteaticaal 
experiences a, for inacancc,is the remembering of remembering. 
‘The remembered menenbering of yererday does not Belang 2 
‘the present remembering as « real constituent of tx concrete 
airy, The present remembering could still etnin it om full 
sents) nate, even cough yesterday's in truth sever took 
place, while the latter, on the other fumd, amuning that it really 
happesed, belongs nocaarily with it to ane and the mime 
unbroken stream of experience, whick through manifold concrete 
experiences medistes coatsnscusly berween the two, In this 
‘respect transcendent perceptions and the other transcendently 
‘elated inteatiooal experiences are cleazly ordered very differenti, 
‘The perception of a thing not only doce not cootain in itself, 
nica real (rellan) conutination, the thing ite, it ia alsa without 
cary eentia unity with it, in exience naturally prevuppoee 
A woity determined purely iy the proper uence of tha experioncet 
themacloar can Be only the amity of the stream of experience, o€, 
which ia the mame thing, it is exly with experiensen thet a0 
experience ean be bound into one whole of which the exsesce 
init tuaity caeelope those experiences’ ews menses nd i 
rounded within them. Thia proposition will become mil clearer 
‘the sequel and ina grea aigaifeance will horome apparent, 

439, Covsetotiess ao Nevora Reacier, Tux Vorw o7 
‘rae “Mo ox THe Srarer”™ 

‘Nl the eatentil characteristics of experimce and conscloursene 
‘hich we bave reathed are for us neosisary steps towards the 
itainment of the end which is unceasingly drewing us on, the 
iacavery, sumaly, of the eence of chit “pure” conticumet 
‘which ia to fix the limit of the phenomenological Seld, Our 
inqusies were eidetic; but the individual emtancea ofthe eaencas 
‘re have referred to as experimer, stream of experience, “con- 
sciousness” fal its senses, belonged us real eventa tothe natural 

6 PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

world. To that extent we eve net abendamed the ground of 
‘the natural wandpoint. Individual conscioumess i interwores 
‘with the natural sordd in a tefl wey: itis ome mane came 
sclournens, or that of some sen or Best, and in x large number 
st lems of ts partculciztions iti x crocicouness of this world, 
In respect mow of this ntnateettachonet with th real world, shat 
1 mr by tang Dat comcirnens as om erence “ef its oom", 
thar with other consciousncat it constitutes 1 sefcontained 
commasion determined purty thongh ti, itt owe cxsece, the 
ccomerion, namely, of the atzcam of canaciousneas? Moreover, 
nce we van iucepeet conaciouaness in the widest scnee 10 cover 
fevennully whatever the cancepe of expercare includes, the 
_qoevtion concerns the expesience-eream’s own etetial nate 
‘nd that ofall ta components. To what extent, inthe Sst place, 
‘mort the materia! world be fundamentally different in Kind, 
ached from the eaperiencs's owe crsetil nature? And if it ib 
this, if over agxinat all cooscioucem and che ewental being 
‘proper to ttf a chat which ie “Yorcen’™ and “ther, ow cat, 
consclourzes be iermones with it, and consequently with the 
‘whale world that i» ables (9 consciounsesa? For it in nary to 
canvince oneself thatthe materia! world i not jont any portion 
of the natural world, bat ft fundarectal wa to wich all 
ther rea beg is enesilly raed. e wil falls to Inchode the 
oul of men and animals; acd the urw factor which these intro 
dyoa ia fet andl foremowt their “expeciescing™ together with their 
conscious relationship to the world eurronnding them. But here 
cnmcioumer aad thixglood form a comecied whole, connected 
‘within the particular peycbological nities which we call anhoala, 
tc inthe lat resore within the real wally of the world ara whale. 
Can the unity of « whole be other than made eae throogh the 
aecatial proper eatuze of 13 par, which emt therefore have 
one commit of ance iste af «fundamental eterogenety? 
"To be cleat, Jet un seck out the nltimata vourees whesee the 
mera} choas of the woeld which 1 adopt when ling up the 
Scare eandpoiat deve ite nowshment, thereby enabling me 
sn camacoun being to cover over ngnat re en exiting world 
‘of thing, to scribe fo myelin tn ward a body, and 10 find 

CONSCIOUANESS AND NATURAL REALITY 127 
for mysef within this world proper place This late source 
in obviounly seneory expericace. For our parpose, however, it ia 
‘suBcient ta consider emery perception, which in a certain proper 
tease plays among experiencing acia the part of a2 original 
sxperiene, whence al ather crpericacing acts draw a chief part 
of theis power to serve asa ground. Every perczving sonscivut> 
‘eas ban this pecularzy, Dar i i the concious of the 
‘embodied (lobfegee) self presence of ax indiidnal objet, which 
on is own side and in « pure Joical ose af the term ip am 
{individual or some logico-caegoreal medication of the tame 
1s oue own ioetane, that of mecwory perception, or, in distinctes 
terms, perception of « world af thing, the logical individual is 
the Thing; und itis wuficient for ux to treat the perception of 
things an representing all other pecceptions (of propertiey,pro- 
cents, and the like). 

"The natural wakeful life of cur Ego it « custinuoun pereiving, 
scrul or potential. The world of thingy and our body within it 
are cootianoualy present to our perception. How then does and 
‘ean Cowasourntt ssf neparate out an 4 concrete shing in tal, 
from that withm it, of which we are comeciour, camely, the 
read beng," see rasan “ed fo 

T meditate Sr us would the max “x the street”. I ee and 
rnp the thing ielf i ie body realty, I a true that I vorme- 
times doocive myself, aad not oaly in repect ofthe peeceied 

in not then “gumuine”. But if it a f, that is 
‘im peegeace in the aceual context of experience, eventually with 
the help of correct empirical thinking, the the perceived thing 

‘object fae hich comes into coumart with it im vome sstonich- 
ing wey. 

+ Capra ts Bsa 

at PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

S 4p. “Panaane™ ano “Scotoers” Quan. "Tus Boot 
Gres Tmana "Min Arraanace” or rat “Parvu- 

aur Tun” 
‘nan in the rset” mined by weit Ihave indulged 
‘the fadinain to opin out mch though ae hese, new, a8 "a 
sman of science”, I call 19 nix the faite dninetion betwee 

arsed ihe ls cones of the thing on prises 10 3 ix bly 
form, It cannot therefore mean even the thing as lying in oxtural 
scnible space; in other words, i phyucal space cannot be the 
sqace ofthe world of bodily perception: etherwie it would alo 
{3 under the Beek objection. 

(CONSCIOUSNESS AND NATURAL REALITY — 2y 

“The "tras Bang” would therefore be entirely and fundamentally 
snathing thet Ut defied otarele thon ot that wick is gine ix 

{sneer cceminaon, song whch taut in be exhaned 
{he sec pul. Th ig rly exe ps the mere 
"Geom enply X hid come the baer of athena 
serach erpoaig mathe formal, we 

i given in perception verver In the rigorous method of netural 
science foe the valid determination, open to ezyone ta carry aut 
and to vecify throug bis own insight of th transcendent being 
whose “rymbol” i ia. The sensory content ofthat which in given 
in peroeption itself continues indeed to be reckoned as otber than 
‘tho trv thing anti in elf, bot the mutation, the bearer (the 
‘empty X) ofthe perceived determinations ai cootinuce to count 
‘that which ie determined through exact method in the form, 
‘of phyical predicates. Al physica! hnewledgesercet according, 
land 6x the reverse net, a an indicator of the course of poxntle 
‘experience ith the teary things fod in them and the ocr 
recat in hich they ewe. Ths it eipe us to find ous way about 
inthe world of actual esperetce ix which we all ive and act, 

§ 4. Thue Ren. Narous or Pancersion ato ems TrarocenDan? 
Onset 
All thin being presupposed, what it we ark, that beloape to 
he concrete real mature (vetlen Bactands) of the perception isi, 
= copitatio? Net the phyvicl thing, e9 is obvicut: radually 
transcendent as it ia, rupgoendent over againat the mole world 
‘of appearance”, But eoen the later, though we refer toit habitually 
a ‘marely rabjective”, dose not belong in allie dettl of things 
‘und erent to the real nature of perexption, but i» oppomed 10 

~ PURE PERNOMNOLOGY 
ie an “uvoecendent”. Let ms consider thia mare claely. We have 
indeed already wpokze of the tramwomdence of the thing, but 
nly in paning. It concerns us now to win « deeper imight into 
the relation of the trmscendet o the Conscious that Yaw it, 
and vn se how this murual conneaion, which bas its own riddle, 
in to be understood. 

‘We ahut off the whole of physics and the whole domain of 
sheoretical thoughe. We rman within the framework of plain 
‘ntition and the syathescs that belong to it, including pereeptsoa. 

hen evident that intuit and the incuted, perecption and 
the thing perecived, though ewentialy elated to each otber, are 
in principle and of caceaity mot rally (rl) and cxrmtially one 
and ited. 

We wtare by taking 2 example, Xecping this table steadily 
{in view a I go round it, changing may poerioa in apace all the 
‘ame, I have contisually the coxaciowsneas of tbe bodily presence 
cet thereof thia woe end self-tane table, which in itl remaina 
‘unchanged throughout. But the pezoxption of the table 1 ant 
‘that changes coctiaumualy, it 8 « continuum af changing pet- 
cxptions I clove ry eyes. My other senses ae icactive i relation 
to the table. I have Bow no perception of it, T open iy eyésy 
and the perception returas. The perception? Let ws be more 
‘sccunte, Under no circumstances does i reuen (0 6 
Ally the sete. Only the table ia the sume, kxoven an identical 
through the nyzthete consciomnean which connects the new 
perception with the recollection. ‘The peresived thing can be, 
vtbout being perceived, without may being aware of it even a6 
potential only (inthe way of insctuslity x previously! deaenbed), 
and pethape without inelf changing at all. But the perception 
‘tell is what it in within the meady Sow of conaciousness, xod 
i» inelf comantly in tha; the perceptual cow ia ever passing 
‘over into the adjacent conacionsceas of the jui-pust, a neW now 
simultaneously gleams forth, and so on. The perceived thing is 
(geneeal, and all ta part, apeca, zd phases, whether the quality 
be primary or secondary, are tecewnrily irmeccodeat to the 
Pererption, and on che seme grounds ovesywbere, ‘The colour 

ees 

CONSCIOUSNESS AND NATURAL REALITY ut 
of the thing ween is not i0 principle 4 teal phase of the con 
sciousams of colour; it appear, but oren while it in sppeacing 
‘heeppearunce can and ses be comtinssy changing, expericace 
show. The sane colour nppess “in” continuously varying pat- 
tems of peripective calee-cariaion. Similsly for evexy sesuory 
quality and likewise for every spaial shape! Ove and the same 
shape (given ar bodily the same) sppeara continnowaly ever again 
"in avotber way”, in. ever-dffenisg perepactive variations of 
shape. That is + ncceaary atate of thinge, and ut ban obvioasly 
(¢ mare general bearing. Far itis only inthe interest of simplicity 
that we have illustrated our point by refereace to » thing tet 
appears uncharged in perception. The tramafer to changes of 
any othee sort ina perfectly sep provecding. 

‘An epirca consciousness of sl]-ame thing thet looks “lle 
row is object, and in wo doing is continaaly confining th wity 
Wf som em etal an same pona © menos 

{tem of ecntinaoas patterns of appearances end peripective varia: 
(eer dh fan ly 
own which appear in perception manifent thensetoes perspetoely 

in defsite conti, Every Sterminate features tit ow etter 
of peropectve variation; aad for each of these features, as for 
the thing a8 « whole, the fllowing holds good, namely, that it 
remains one and the sare forthe coaseiouxsees that is grasping, 
it unites reclletion and freh pesception symbetically together, 
deapte interuption in the cotiouity of the coune of actual 
perception. 

‘We now see alo what i is that realy and indubitably belongs 
‘to the real mature of the concrete intentional experiences which 
‘we refer to here sx perceptions of things. Whilt the thing ia 
‘the intentional unity, that which we are conseins of aa one and 
self-identical within the continsously ordered flow af perceptual 
patterns 1s they pass of the one into the other, these pattern 
‘themuelves have aloraye their defini dexripive natare (Bertond), 
which is exencilly corelated with that unity. To every phase 
‘of perception there necessarily belougy, for ineance, » definite 
content in the way of perspective variations of colour, shape, 
std so forth. They are enunted azcane the “rower data", dats 

om FURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
of a particular region with datersinate divnion, which within 
‘every much division gather togrtzer into concrete anita of 
expecience an pour (sessry "flee"; which, Sarthe, in WH 

concrete unity of peroption through “apprakensio”, xd, ix this 
ccsonling, execae the “eshte (dertllondé) action”, ox in 
“unvon with jt contrat chat which we all the “appearing of 
colour, shape, and so forth. This, ate interweaving itelt with 
well further feature, constitutes the real nature (Bertand) of 
‘perception, which w the conaciouancsa of ute identical thing 
derived throagh the confvence imo one amy of apprehension, 
confluence grounded in the enentil Briag of the spprehensicns 
nied, and agra through the pomibily, grounded in the very 
cena of diflerat nites ofthis hind, of epethane of ideation, 
‘We mum beep this poimt clesly before ovr eye, that the 
nemory data which exercise the function of preacatiog colour, 
smoothness, shape, and 4 forts perpectnally (the function of 
iting") lifer wholly and in principe from vols, moct>- 
‘ean, shape sinplictir,m short, fom al the genie aspect which 
«thing ca show. The perspective cariaton (the Abschtung”) 
though similar to the perpected ceriabe (the "Algo. 
chatter", difert from i pouriclly aad in principle. The pet- 
‘spective variation i an experience. But experience ia posible 
‘only as experience, and not a something spatial. The per- 
pected variable, However, ‘principle powible only an 
pata) Gc in indcod pati! ia its easence), but not poetible 
an experience. In particular itis slo nonsense to take the per- 
pective shaperaciton (that af a trangle, for intence) for 
something spaial and capable of being in epece, md whoever 
doce this is confuing ie with the perpected variable, thn hope 
‘hat masifors itself through the appearanocs. How further we 
ise to axperato with eytematic thoroughness the difirest rel 
(races) phasca of the perception as coptatio (ae ceotrared with 
the phases ofthe cog2atim whch tazscenda i}, end ta charnc- 
terize them im accordance with their meeurl divisions, very 
‘ificul co wae, im art, that i theme fer inquires om 9 lage 
veal, 

CONSCIOUSNESS AND NATURAL REALITY 133 

a. Buna a8 Conctovinats 2 Beane as Reacrry. Irene 
Dovencs xarwam tax Moves oF TOON 

‘The saion we have jut completed lefts with the transcendence 
of the thing over agricat the perception of it, and at 0 further 
consequence, aver against exery cosacoutsem geacrlly which 
fern to the thing; one merely ia the sce that the thing a8 3 
real (reels) consticuent part of cocsciousress is 28 0 mutter of 
‘act not to be found—the whele sruation eather coocernsexdese 
iawight: ia ably scondiioad generality or necemty, + thing 
cannot be given 49 realy immanent in any pouible pereeption 
, generilly, 9 any pomible conseiousncas. Thus a bane and 
aunt difference ures between Bring as Experience sod Brg 
Thing, In principle it i « property of the cegiontl exsence 
experience (move pecially of the regional subdivision coptate), 
tht is pecceivable through iracanent peroeption, but it is of 
the envenca of a epatial thing that this iv not powble, When, 
1 deeper analysis teachey,it belongs tothe encace of everything 
wiving inttion thet ix unity with the given thing othcr data 
snalogous to things can be apprehended through lotang in the 
spproprate direction, detachable erat, ed wages in the muke- 
‘up of what appears ox x ching—"oimatdksion”, for instance, 
in theie ranovn specications precisely the suze holds good for 
‘them toa: they are in principe transeendest eis, 

Before punuing somewhat farther thin opposition becwees 
immanence and transcendence, me isert he following remark: 
‘par fom perception we ido vty of tention pees, 

‘which emessiallyexclade the eal immancoce of thee intentional 
bjeces, whatever foe the ret the nature of these object may be 
"Thin hoki, for iatance, of evecy representative stivity: of every 
secalction, of the apprebcasion through empathy of the cox- 
seioumnens of others, and ve fork. Neturlly we should ot 
sonfuse this trancesdence with thet which ia here coaceraing 
us, The inabilcy to be perceived ixzcanectiy, and therefore, 
enenily,tofind « place in the oysters of expericace belongs ix 
Ssucnoe and “in principle” alagether to the thing an such t0 

1 Wes te tar “en preg” nampa hea ths werk onl 
signees seme, Wr scoed rr igheet tad avast eal 
Secale or moments oon ent 

od PURE PRANOMENOLOGY 

covery cealty in that peauine seose which we have al to fix and 
sake clear. Thua dhe Thing itm, simpler, we call transoc- 
deat, In an doing we give vise & the most fundamental and 
pivotal diference between ways of being, Ut between Cov 
ioamnatt and Realty. 

‘This opposition between immaneoce nd trangccndesce, at 
‘our expedition tus further brought out, ia accompanied by & 
Sondamental difference in the wode of Kieg given. Iman 2x4 
‘ranmoendent perexption do aot oly dif genecally ia thi, that 
‘he intentional object which has ts Indgment in the character 
of the bodily lf is in the ane case really immanent in the 
perodiing, but not wo is the the case they differ much more 
‘through 2 mode of being given which exbodies the difference 
in tn eowental form, and conveys it tans madandis nto 11! the 
representational modifications of perveption, and into the corre 
Taged intotaonn of memory and fancy. We perceive the Thing. 
through the “perspective” manifesianiona of all ite devenninite 
qualia wick in any given case are “real”, asd wtricly “fall” 
‘eshin the pereeption. de eqpeionce has 0 prrypectoes (Bin 
rll schatet sch wiht ob). Tt ia ot an aocidental capce of 
the Thing nor an accidest of “our humes constitution” thet 
“out” peebeption can reach the things themaelves only and merely 
through their perspective modicaticos. On the contrary, it 
vient, and it fllawn from tho tvendal nature of spat thing- 
hood (asd am the widest seove incusve of “visual axiom”) 
‘that Beng of tia apeccs can, in principle,be given in pereeptons 
nly by way of perpective manifestason; and ic follows Hkewse 
from the eweats) ature of coptitime, of cxpeciences in. 
‘Beoerl that they exclade these perepectve ehadings; a, other- 
‘Wie stated, when refering to that which ban beng 2 this rian, 
saything of the nature of “appearing”. ox se-revealing through 
perwpective variations, hua simply no meaning. Where there ja 
10 Being in apace, it is vemelea to wpesicof werig Srom different 
standpoints with « changing ecicatstion, and racer the diferent 
sapecta thereby opened up, or through varying appearance und 
erapectveshadings; onthe other band, tj am emestal necee- 
sityto be apprehended a noch with apodeitc inaight that spats! 

CONSCIOUBNESS AND NATURAL REALITY 335 
‘Being in genera cam be perceived by any Ego actualor pomibleonly 
‘when preacazed in the way described. I: can “appear” caly with 
1 certs “orientation”, which nocewesiy carries with i akeiched 
cut im advance the ayster of arringemests which makes fresh 
‘orientations poweible, each of which aguin correspond toa certain 
“way of appearing”, which we peskape express as « being 
presented from this or that “aspect”, and vo forth, If we take 
the reference ra ways of appearing to apply to ways of experiencing 
(it can alo, ax clear from the description we have jurt gives, 
bear a correlative cane meaning), it comes to saying this, that 
it belongs tothe emental nature of ceria poculint!y constructed 
Iypet of experimcr, or, mare specifically, peculiarly constructed 
ccancrete perceptong, that the inteadonal element in chem in 
‘known as spatial thing anc that te seal posibilty of pening 
raver into determinate, ordered, continoos perceptua! pateras, 
‘which can always be exatiaued, and are therefore never exhausted, 
belongs to tele very eavence, Ice then i Ube enema etructare 
of thee pattern-groupe that they eaablish the tunity of « ingly 
‘ntratinal conacincmmes: tha comscioursous of a single perceptaal 
thing appearing wih ever-increasing completeness, fram end- 
Jeaaly new poists of view, and with ever-richer deiteminstions, 
(On the other hand,» spatial thing la ao other thes an intestinal 
‘nity, which, in principle, can be given only atthe unity ef wich 
ways of appearing. 

$43. Lumer ow & Foxoasenerat, Exaon 

Te iv hn a fundamental exor to suppose thet perception end 
very ccher type of the inttion of things, each alter ite own 
manner) fils come isto contact with the thing ito, We aro 
told tht the thing in itself and in ie ilfsem ia ot given to 
‘ns thee what every extent (Srieuas) is principle ponseres is 
the potably of seving things ot they plinly ane, and, more 
vpecfcaly, of perceiving thers in en adequate perception which 
Gres u the bodily aif tke! any mediation Siregh "abpear- 
mee”. God, the Subjex of ebmolutely perio: knowl, md 
therefore alo of every pouible wlequits pereextion, satantiy 

os FURE FEENOMENOLOGY 
ponscascn what to us Solte beings ts denied, the perocption of 
things in themselves. 

‘Br ths view in nonsensical Ie impica that there is no ementia 
Aiference booween tranaceadeat sod imanest, tht in the pot 
(ulated divine iarcton a pata thing ia aed (rela) content, 
nd indeed an expericace itll, cocoest of the wtremm of 
the divine consciousness andthe divine experience. The thought 
that Ube transcendence of the thing ia that of an mage OF 2m 
Ianproved misleading bere. The image-theury is often relcualy 
stacked snd signtheary subatnted foc it. But the one and 
the other alike are sot only incarect but necaczsical, The mpatial 
thing which we see is, despite all it trezcendence, perceived, 
‘wn ate conaciounly aware of it given in ts embodiad form. We 
se ot given am image or x sign Se te lace. We rust not sub- 
sats the contciouanen of» ign or an image fara perepti. 

Betwom perception on the one Band x2d, ec the ates, the 
praentation of rmbt form of on image ov mecning there 
4 an unbridgeable and emesil diflerece. With these typeof 
presentation we soit something, in the conscioudem that it 
copies something else or indicates its reaning; and though we 
slzeady have the one is the Seid of ineiton, we are not directed 
fovea it bur through the medssm of a saendry sppreheanen 
are durscted towards the ocr, ua which is copied o indionte, 
‘There in noting of allthis in perception, as litle ax in plain 
recollection or fey. 

"Though seta of iumediate incition we intut « “uelf". No 
apprehensions et « higher lee ae bul up ox the bala ofthese 
‘apprehending acts of intuition; nothing in therefore Laown for 
ohh the inmuited might crve asa ign’ ot “mage”. And for 
‘this reuon, therefore, it Ss aid to be imoneditely intited aa 

5 peception, i wil uniquely characterized 8 
ily" a coatratted with the madibed character of “hovering 
‘before the ind”, or being "premstad tn ie” in memary or fre 

CONSCIOUSNESS AND NATURAL REALDY x7 
we completly mi up these modes of presentation with their 
casotially diferent controctions, ad carreatively the data cor~ 
respondingly presented: Ora plain presextaion with symbolic 
iuerpetation (ehother on Use bis of ange or tgs) ad down 
right plain perception with both of these. The pereption of 
‘things dove not present scmecing that in not presente tmgh 
it were a recollenion or a fancy; it presents and apprehend « 
‘Self in ita bodily presence, It does this ix socordanse with the 
pprebeaded object's ewe suesniag, and to wuppowe that it acts 
erwinc ia just to run coupter ta i ow proper sent. Mareovee, 
if itn a quemtion, as it is here, of the perception of things, 
‘ential mature it (© be x percpton that wodks through per~ 
spective: and carreltively it belongs to the meaning of im 
iateational objct ofthe thing ar givex within tna be pereivabe, 
i principle, only through peccepticns of wach « kind, perceptions 
‘that imply perepectives. 

$4. Tax Mey Prmioumus Beovo or rm Teatacnner, 
‘re Angora Bima or mu Taannrt 
‘Accersin inadequacy beloags, frthe, tothe perception of things, 
land thit too ia ax exsenia! necessity. In principle « thing can 
‘be fren only “in ane oft aspect”, and thet not only masa 
reompletely, n some sense or other imperfetly, but precely 
thet which presentanoa through perspectives prcrben. Aig. 
‘sneceasurity gives in ce "mods of appecreg”,and the neceeary 
actors in thin case are « mucier of what it “relly presreted”, 
sm outlying zone of apprehension onsvtng of marvel "ce-dta” 

nt PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

J i i tin aay cee we 
stribed node (Sti) I points formord fo powible patierna of pes 
cxption, which, condnually pesing of into one azother,calnce 
jn the unity of » single peroption in which the cextinoously 
enduring thing in ever new sexce of perepectives reveals cret 
vysin now “expecta” (or retreces the ld). Meanwhile the wub- 
sidinry co-apprehended phases of the thing come gradually into 
the focus of real presentation. ax real data, the indetermizacee 
define themaclves sore clearly to tum at length into clear data 
‘thomaclyou; cactranwise, what is clear passes beck isto the 
unclear, the pretented into the noa-presented, and ao fort, To 
remain for coer incomplts after ths fathien is an ineradicable 
vential of the correlation Thing and. Thing-percetion. If the 
meaning of Thg get decrmiaed though what is giren in 
‘Thing-pereeption (und wht else could determine the messing?) 
ft must require suck incompletenee, and we axe referred of 
necenity to unifed and contunuese eres of pomible peroeptons 
‘which, developed from oy woe ofthe, stretch out ito infinite 
umber of directions in tvtematicsrcly ordered wey, 2 each, 
direction endlemly, and always dominated throughout by some 
‘unity of metning. In principle a margin of determinable indeter- 
sminacy kways romana over, bowerer far we go aloog out 
cempiiteal way, aad however extended the continue of sctual 
perceptions of the mame thing which we may have ereamured, No 
(Ged can ater thie in any way, any more then He can the equation 
1 sfe2 = 4, ar the stability of any other casei] truth, 

Oc broad lines we can always see that trimocodent Being io 
gover], whatever ite geour may be, when understood ww Being 
for an Ego, can become a dat only in wry analogous 10 that 
in whieh a thing in give, than any through appearances. Ocber- 
‘wive i would really be e Being. which could also become itnza- 
‘neat; whereas what is immanentiy perceable i this and nothing 
more. Only when we fal into the confusions we have indicated 
bore, and bave ow clavad up, cat we hold it poasble that one 
‘zed the sume could at oe time be given Ghrough appearance 
the form of trateceadent perception, and at another throngh 

CONSCIDUGNASS AND NATURAL REALIIY 139 

Sul, Jt un Gist develop from the ather side slso the specibe 
‘contrast benwecn Thing and Expericae (Blais). Reperience, we 
id docs not present ite Tie implice that the perception of 
cxperience Js pliin insight into something which in peroptiot 
ft given (orto bo giver) at “‘alolate", and nat a» 23 identity 
uniting eiades of appearance through perspective contiana, All 
tht we have stated concerning the giveanesa of thing bere luce 
its meaning, end we mum being this home to ourselves in detail 
‘with ful clearnem. The experince of «feeling baa no perepectives, 
IC Tlook ups it, Ihave before ee an absolute; ic hat 20 aspects 
‘which might prevent cherschres now in this way, and cow in 
that. In thought I can think traly ar faloely about it, ut thet 
which is here at the forus of mental viioa is there nbsolutely 
‘with ite quulides, i» iozeuity, and so ford. Contatiwise, the 
tome of w voli with ita objective identity ie gven through per- 
spectives, it has its changing forme of appearance. Thy difer 
sccording us T approach the vialin or recede fem it, according 
sem in the ouneert ball elf or lites Ubrough ta lowed doors, 
and uo forth, No way of appearing claim to rank a giving its 
dota abeohutely, abtbough & certain type, appearing a8 ermal 
within the compaae of my pracica! interes, bas a certain advan 
‘tage; in the concert all, at the “right” spot, I hear the tt 
"Tl "ral" sunt. Bo Khewse we ny of evrythng 
fm vinualreltions tht ic has x noroal appearance; we my 
cf the ealou, the form, and the thing as a whole which we see 
in oedinary daylight, and narmlly oxleneed i regard to us, an 
‘the thing really loka, that is ite real colour, and the ike. But 
‘tat paints only ta a Aiad of rcondary objectification within the 
compaas ofthe tral sbjeciScation of the thing, a we can easily 
convince ourselves. Iti indeed char that, we were to bold 
fart 0 the “normal” form of appearance ws the one and enly 
fore, and cut away all other varieties of eppeazance and the 
‘vectial connexons with them, no vestige of the meaning of 
thn givennea ofthe thing would be left over. 

"We therefore maintain’ whereas it isan cmentia mak of what 
i given through appearances that no one ofthese given the maste 
in question in an “beolui” farm ingtend of presecting just one 

oa PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
side of i, t in am essential mark of what is immancnily given 
recicly to give an absolutc thet simply cannot cxihit mpects 
‘and vay them perspectinly. It is sls indeed self-evident thet 
the perspective varying sensory contents themselves, which, a» 
zeal (ra) belong to our experience of the perception of the 
‘hing, function, na donb, for something other an perepective 
‘yrations, but wre not themscives sanifeated in tum through 
perspective varincn. 

‘Wert nats the following distinction also: Bren an experince 
(Erin) is not, an4 never is, perceived in its completeness, it 
fanact be grasped adequately in it fll unity, It ie encutaly 
something that fows, and raring fron: the present moment We 
cam wwim after it, cur gaze refctvely torad toward it whilst 
the stretcher we leave in oar wate are lovt to our perception. 
Only in the form of retention oF in the form of retrospective 
remembrance have we any cossciouaneas of what ha imate 
tlistely Bowed past ws, And ia the ler resor the whole stream 
of any experience is 2 unity of experience, of which it it in 
einciple impomible “wwimming with i” to obtain « onmmplete 
perceptual gayp. But this incompleteness or “unperfection” which 
Delonge to he eaence of our perception of experience iv fundan 
mentally other than that which ia of the easence of “transcen- 
dane” perception, perception through x proventaton txt varien 
‘peropectively through much « thing as appearance. 

All the waye of beiog given, and the diference Bermocn these 
‘which we find in the sphere of peroeption,ceappeas, in modified 
form, ia the modifcatioes cowscird sith reproduction, The pre 
sccrings of things ar set out through prescarations whereby the 
perepective varittions themselves, the spprehezsions, end thos 
the pbenocsena in their entiery and hough end through, are 
smodified & reproduction. We have also reproductions of x= 
periences and seis of reproductive iamition in the manner of 
proscatation and of refiexion jx proceistion. Here oxtucally 
‘there iso hine of reproduced permpestive variations. 

‘We now add the folowing cme of contort It sof the ewence 
‘of presentations t2 show gradual diferense of relative lexan 
or dimsees. Obviouy also this diffrence in degree of perfoc~ 

CONSCIOUSNESS AND NAYORAL REALITY gt 
tio ian nothing to do with that which retes eo the condiona 
under which perpectiely varying appearances we given to un, A 
pemecttion thet in nore oe lou clear doe notin iv graded 
anges of charset pas through changes of pecepesive in the 
tame pose o that whic: has Uped our em terminology, wes 
sre any that vail configuration, every quality thet cota 
change persectively 

{in manifld way, whether the preeetatin in lear or obscure. 
‘The mpmaiaond pratt of «thing fan ite diferent pom 
of graded laren, and this indeed (or every form of 

liffrces which we make in the sphere of percepton itvelf 
under the headings clear and unclear, distinct and indistinct 
sion, abow indeed x certain analogy with the differences in 
clears just refeered to, so far, that ia, a8 we are concerned 
Jn ether case with gradual increanca and decreases in the ullnew 
with which the presented materia is given, but that even these 
‘ifermoen beloag to different dimexaioas, 

45. Unemonvan Exetuincs, Urrencarran Renton 

{we live ourseives into these positions, wo shall understand aso 
the fllowing cmentin ference in the wey ia which experecioea 

(Bribie) acd things stand to one exother in respect of chet 
perccibilit. 

1 in mack of the ype of Being peculiar to experience thit 
perceptual insight cam dizet ite immediste, unobstractnd gue 
upon every seal experince, and so enter into the life of « 
‘Primordial prescce. This imaight operates at = "rcBeaion”, ad 
ie ha thin remarkable pecaliciy that cht which is hun appre- 
bended throsgh perception is, in principle, characterized as 
somthing which not naly ie and eadurea within the gue of 
perception, but abeody wor Sefore this guze wan directed to 
"all experiences are cotacioun expsienea”: thi els wpe 
ally with rerpect to ixoetional experience that they Are not 
nly the coneciouaness of something, and as mach preseat not 

* PURE FHENOMXNULOGY 
merely whes they are objects of a reflective conscivumes, but 
that when unrelected ox they ar already there ana "beckground”, 
sod therefore is principle, aad at fint ia an anulogisa) emu, 
socilale for perception, ike uncoticed things in our exteraal Geld 
cof vision, Thee canbe avilable only ix wo fara they ae abready, 
‘us unnoticed, object of coxaciousness ina certain gene, and that 
means, in their cas, when they appear. Not al! things full this 
conultion: the Geld ‘of view of my sttcation which inludes all 
‘that appear ia not endless. On the other hand, unreSective 
‘experience rut also full certain conditions af preparetnss, 
‘though in quite different way more i conformity with tu own 
‘ame, Te canaot “appear”. It fulfil these conditions aane the 
leas at al times through the mere saanner of ite existence, and 
ine for chat sare Ego to which c belanga whaso pare pervonal 
faze ox oceasion lives “in” i. Tt in only because zeferion ad 
teaperience have the etetial pecularites which are here otly 
‘hinted at thet we cam know exythung about experiences that we 
do not reflect on, ad therefore also about the reflexions them- 
selves. And it goes without mying that the modifcations of 
caperiencen in reproduction (and retestiot) run, mutatis mutans, 
(on sila tne, 

‘Let a carry the contrat farther. We sce tha iti the intrintie 
nature of an experience to be perciveble though refasson. Things 
sho wre pereivabie, on prisaple, and in perception they are 
‘apprehended as things of the world thet mound me. Alto they 
belang to thia world without being perceived, they are Uuun there 
{far the Ega coen then. Sil, in genera, not vo tha a glance noting 
thee prevece could be vent ix thei direction |The beckground 
ares taken asthe fel of ehser notceabilty,iachudes indeed only 

tmnall partion of the world that mounds me. The viatemest 

in there” means ratber thet from actual perceptions and their 
‘background of real tppearenceapoarBle seen of perceptions lea 
up under motoer that ne cocetant snd continnow and girt about 
(unnoticed backgrounds) with eve-cbanging Gelds of thingy; 
And wo further tll we reack those etems of peceeptions is which 
the Thing in question appears and is spprchended. In principle 
‘we cake esata! atcraton bere when inthe pace ofa eingle 

CONSCIOVENESS AND NATURAL BEALITY 43 

go we consider a plurliy of Egos. Only chrough the retion 
of pombe reiprocty of understanding can Tideatify the wold 
cof my experience with that of others, nd atthe same ie each 
ft Ubraugh the overflowings of ther experience. A tranmendence 
which dispensed with the soremd syremaically motived coo 
necion with my exiting sphere of actsal peroxption would be 
1 compictely groundlew sarumption; a texacendence which dia 
essed with the sume, on principle, would be amet. ‘The 
[rracace of what ig actually nt perceived in the world of things 
fn thea of this qe, and is easctially diferent from that mode 
of Being of which we are intrinneally scuble, the Being of our 
own inward experiences. 

$48. Ieouaramcrrr oF Lawxers, Dowtamiry or 
Taawenmee Pecernox 

From all this importast consequences fallow. Every iumanent 
perception necemarly guarantees the existence (Basten) ofits 
chject. If reflective apprehension is directed to my experkce, 
T apprebend an absolute Gelf hove existrace (Doses) in, in 
Principle, undenable, that , the joxght that it doe not exit 
is, in principle, impouible; it would be nonsense to eoaitsln the 
potebilty uf an experience giom in mth « ey nt truly wasting, 
‘The viceem of experiesce which is mine, tht, samely, of the 
no wha is thinking, may be to ever 9o great an extent uncom: 
prebended, usknown i ft pest and ficure reach, yet a8 soon 
an lor towards the flowing Ife and into the real present 
fr flows through, and in ve doing grap myself as the pure 
tubject ofthis life (what thac means will expresly concers us 
ata later stage), T ony forts acd because T mutt: om, this 
Life in Tlives gen, 

‘To every stream of expenenee, and to every Ego as euch, here 
belong principe, the poseblity of seruring tha el-evidence: 
cach of un bears in himself the warrant of be abnolute exiteace 
{Daina} wo a Funemental powiblty. But sit not conceivabley 
cone might an, that ax Ego might have only fences in its stream 
of experience, chat the Iter might consist af nothing beyond 

ms PURE PHENOMENOLOGT 
fictive intutionn? Such an Ego would thas discover ealy tive 
citeiomr; itn reficxiss, by the very nazure of this experiential 
medias, would be exclunivelyreSsaion with the 

‘But that ie obvious nonsease. That which foats before the mind 
ray be x mere fiction; the floating Self, the frion-produring 
consciourneas, Is not self imagined, and the pounbilty of & 
perceiving recxion which lays hold ox absolute existence belongs 
4 its emence at it doce to every experience. No nonsense ice 
in the posibility thar al alien comsciouaneas which T posit in 
the experience of empathy docs not exist. But wy enspathy and 
‘my conscioumceas in geeral ia given in x primera) and 
sbuolute sense, not ocly cwontally but existential. This 
peivileged position olde only for oatself aad for the wircam 
of oxpescnce to which the wef in related; bere only i» there, 
und cmt thee be, anything of the mature of immanent pet~ 
npn, 

Tn cotrant to this ities we know, an exemtalfeture of the 
thing-werld that no pereeptioa, however perfect rt say be, give 
tu anything absolute wits is does; and with this the fol- 
lowing is eweatally conaected, merely, at every experience 
(Brfekrung), however far w extends, Jeven open the pourdiliry 
that what is given, despite the pervntent conacicursoes ofits 
‘only ve-presence, doce maf exist It in an emetialy valid law 
(Oat existence in the frm of thing i mever demanded at ntcrry 
Ay srt of te pivcmury, lu in 2 certain way in always contingent. 
‘That means: Zt can almayn happen that the further course of 
caperience will compel to abandon what ban already bora set 
dow sod justified ia the Hight of empirical conons of righia. 
Te was, 00 we afterwards a7, rece illusion, baiucinston, mecely 
‘a ooberest dream, snd the like, Moreover, inthis sphere of given 
data the open powtbiity remains of changes in apprebersion, 
‘the turning of an appearance over into aoe which cannot anite 
‘with it harmoniously, and therewith an infuence of Seer empirical 
positions on ealce ones whereby the intentional objects of there 
“earlce pouting aufler, ve > wpeak, x porhamacus reconstructca 
~-eventunliiee which ia the aphere of eubjct-expericace (rishi) 
are cuseaially excluded. In the sbeolute epbere, opposition, 

CONSCIOUSNESS AND NATURAL REALITY 145 
‘thaion, and being-therwine have no place. is a aphere ef the 
sbichnely trbtshed (atakter Paton). 

Tn every way, then, i ia ler tat eveything which i there 
for me in the acl of ching in on grocade of principle nly & 
_prenomptoe raclicy; that I aro, om the contrary, for whom ft 
ib there (Cacading hat which io imputed to Ur shing-wodd 
"by me") I mel a my experience ins scualy aa adroate 
Realsy (Wirhbcbhe), given trough « posting that ia uncon 
Aitioned and simply indusoluble. 

‘The thei of ry pre Ego andi parton fe, eich "ancy" 
end plan indaetabl, Car rznd pone oth har of the world 
‘ehh ir “contingent. AU corporeal gen thing ei can 
(aot be, no carpornly foceexpeioncig can alo not Be: that 
fa the cael law, which defies thin noceasey aad that coa~ 

tingency. 

Obviously thes the ontic necesity of the actual present 
‘experiencing is no pare ementi! nsoomity, that ia, ne pure 
ddetic specication of wm eosential Law; it in the anccamty of 
fact (Eektem), and. called ‘neceasity’ because an evsential aw 
in lavelved in the fact, and here indeed in its exatence as wich. 
"The ideal poriblty of «reexin whick bas the essential character 
of a self-evident unuhaheable exstentic! thes has it» round in 
‘the emeatial nature of a pure Egon gmseralend of an experiencing 
dngeveral 

‘The refrnions io which we bave bean indulging sleo make 
4 clear that 2¢ proofs drewn from the expirical eansderation 
of the warld can be concsived which could uemure un with abnolute 
certainty of the world's exitence. The world is not doubtful in 
the ene that there are cational grounds which might be plted 

‘peatiple never exeluded. Every 

Septal pore Reve is pox one poder eooeid! 

and orereoms, Nothing x thereby altered in the absolute Being 

1 gear & pe ety oy oe pr et le 

Sepcaypetg te hak ra Set fa deme eden 
‘be Tegal ae 

ws URE PEIENOMENOLOGT 
of experiences, indeed these remain presupponed in all thie all 
the time. 

‘With this conclusion our study has reached ita climer. Wo 
Ihave won the knowledge we needed. In the exents! connexions 
it Kan revealed to us already involved the mot important of the 
premises on which depend these inferences we would drow 
sonoeming the detachabilsy in principle of the whole natural 
world from the domain of canaciouancan, the aphere in which 
caperiences have their being; inferences ia which, a4 we can 
readily canvince ourselves, « cxaind, though not filly developed, 
‘thought ofthe quite otherwise oriented medststzna of Descartes 
‘comes ut lat to im own. To reach our final goal we shail eed 
indeed 10 add in the sequel a few supplementary discweions, 
‘which for the reat will not trouble us t20 much. Meanwhile let 
ur draw our conclusions proviasnally within acorapas of Limited 
bearing. 

THIRD CHAPTER 
‘THE REGION OF PURE CONSCIOUSNESS 

S47. Tax Nevo, Won as Conmmars or Conscioomems 
Tn connexion with the seme of the lat chapter we ad the 
following consideration: In point of fat the course of our huraan 
experiences (Erjakrangen) is such that it compela our reason to 
‘pase beyocd intutively given things (thove of the Cartesian 
‘mapéatio) and. place at their basis a “phyical truth”. But it 
might alto havo beea difterentiy ordered. Not caly might human 
dovekapment have never ovecrepped the pro-eientiSc wage and 
Deen doomed never to averstep i «0 that the piysical world 
‘might indeed retain it truth whilst we sbould snow nothing 
bout it; the phyvical world might hove been other than ft 
with systema of law other thin tho actally prevailing, It ia 
luo conceivable that our lntuitabie world should be the last, 
and “beyond” it no physical world tail, Je, thatthe things o« 
erosive should lick mathematical end physical determimcy, 
‘thatthe data of experience should exclude every type of physics 
similar (0 our. The conaesiona within experience would then 
‘be ourrespondingly other than they actualy are, and ofa diferent 
‘ype, inummach as the empirical motives which are basi for the 
formation of physical concepes and jodgrents would then have 
lapsed, Yet on the whole, witbin the compam of the ditor 
intuitions included under the tite “simple expercare" (peep. 
ion, remembrance, apd 20 forth), “things” might ail present 
thomaelres 49 sizila to the things we know, maintaining them- 
selves conticunnaly in appearance-patiere a intentional mites. 

But we can go farther in this diestion; when we mextally 
destroy the cbjectivity of things—es cocreate of empiric] cou 
velouinen—ther ia nothing to lint vs, We must aheays bear 
im mind that what shings are (the things sbout which sloae we 
ver speak, and canceening whose being or noo-being, so being 
‘ar notao being, we ean aloe contend and reach rational decisions), 
thay areas thing of experience. Experience alone preecibea theit 
smeming, and indeed, when we are desig with ching that are 

ws PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
forged. on fac, i a actual experience in its definitely ordered 
cexpirical connexions which docs the prescnbing. But if we can 
subject the form under which cur experience is izwardly ved, 
‘and in particular the basic experience of the perception of things 
‘9 an aidetic ody, looking oct for thei ewextal necenttcs and 
‘pomibiliies (ax we can obviously do}, and on these linea alo 
ideally track down the madifcations af empirical comexions 
‘hat are esendally pouible with their motivations: “the real 
‘world, wt incalled, the comelate of our fates! expericase, thn 
‘precnta tact ax a qpeca! cave of varion poutble aolds and non= 
‘worlds, which, on their aide, wre no other than corelater of the 
ctsentilly posible cartons of the idea“ enpricl courciouren, 
‘wish ian more ar Yew orderly empisia! comnexkin, We mst 
therefore not Jet ourselves be deccived by any talk about the 
transcendence of the thing over agaiet conecionmess or about 
i "Being in uel”. The geauine concept of thing-ranscendence, 
which in the vtndard whereby al} eatiogal statements about 
transcendence are measured, cannet be extracted from any source 
‘other than the perception's cw exeatl content, or the definitely 
frtculated connexions which we call evidential (oumetenden) 
experience, Tee Men of this tramcendenoe i thus the eldetic 
correlate ofthe pure idea of thie evidential experience. 

‘This hake of every conceivable hind of craneniense which 
might be treated ws real or pouible. Ax objec thet Aer being 
sn aif (0x rich srender it never such 0810 Be ont of relation to 
comiouratt and ts Ego. The thing is thing of the world about 
sm even the thing tht isnot seen and the really posible thing, 

‘THE RSGION OF PURE CONSCIOUSNESS a4 
seantly taking up new motivations exd transforming such aa have 
sdready taken ehape. Motraions dfs ia reapect of the somtcai> 
‘which mack our apprebexsion of them or their own definition, 
being more of les richly organized, mare oF lem reticted oF 
‘vagoc in content according ms they concern thing already “known” 
cr “wholly unkown" and “well undiscovered”, or ele, in regard 
(0 the ween thing, concern what we know of will ignore about 
it, Our exchaive conser is with the cacntia! comfpwatios of 
och aystec which underlie pure eldetical cesearch in all ite 
pomible development. I isan exseata? requirement that what 
cans already reolier, but is not yet actully experienced, eax 
come to be given, and that that then means that it belongs to 
the undetermined but determinable carpal feld of my accual 
‘perience atthe tame being, But this marginal Geld is the coc 
relate of the compooeats of indeterminscy which ewentally 
depend 0a the thing-experiences themes, and these com 
Ponente—alwaye oo ewsental grounds—leave open powiblities 
of fling out which are imo senus arbitrary, but fredesiated 
‘in acordance with ther errata! type and ace, in beef, mouvated, 
All actual experience refer beyond feet to poauble experiences, 
‘which themselves aguin point to new pomble experiences, and 
120 in infiniti. Arc all this taken place according to eaentally 
efit specifcationa and forms of order which conform necee- 
sarily toa prior types. 

Every hypothetical construction of practical life and of empitial 
scence ia related to this shifting but ever-present horizon through 
‘which the work-thesa eceives ita eavntial meaning. 

§ 48, Looieat Poumcerr ww Rew Anraprry of 4 Women 
‘Oumnice Ova Own 
‘The hypothetical sesumption of » Real Something cuwide this 
‘world it indeed « logically” pomible one, and there ia clecly 
no formal contradiction in making it. But if we question che 
euseatial conditions of is validiy, che Kind of evidence 
eft, bet se unbeaten An 
Pemcnecslapel polcoot 

‘al ere sgpar > be remus aw woes or Se 
dialtone 

ws PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
(Goomeioeng) decane og ita very seaming and the suture of 
‘he evidential generally ox determined im prbxcple thrvogh the 
‘thesis of « transendent—however we may generalize correctly 
‘ta eserialnaturo~are perceive thatthe trangeadent mt needs 
be axperzuaabl, aad aot merely by an Ego conjured into being 
ss ax copty Logics) powbily bat by way actual Ego, a0 the 
ecoocatable(ounsetbere nity of ia nematic experictce. ut 
‘ee can ant (we are indeed tot pot far enough advanced hereto be 
thle to give detailed grounds fr the view) that what in percive 
ble by ane Ego rast ix rine be coascinable by soar Ego. 
‘And though or 4 matter of fort t i aot true thot everyone mile 
‘or can wand in a eelaton of exmpathy of inward undervanding 
with every other one a9 we curcives, for instmoe, we unable 
to sand with the wplits that may frequent the remote wary 
‘wodkis, yet ia paint of peintipe there exit etentlat porate 
he op of on endendig, penton, eee dt 
vwoelda of point of fact may all be 
Tried gee heath ee empl exes 

jective works, the correlate of the wnitary world of minds 
(Gf the univers extension of the human. soramenity), If we 
think this over, the logict? pomibibty on formal grounde of 
exit outaide the wold, the one spatio-temporal world whieh 
in fined through or sctut experience is ween to be really non- 
ease, If thery are worlds or real things at ll, the empirical 
rotivationa which constitste them mumt be able fo resch into 
tay expecienor, and hat of every vingle Ego isthe renner which 
in ita genera features bas been decribed shore. "Tig 00 dubs 
xine and worlds of things which ceonot be dofinitely wct out 
‘in any Auoan experience, but that bas its purely factual grownda 
4 the face Limits of thin experience 

549. Amour Comsciovsass as Ramvoux arron Tar 
Nowonme or raz Wom 

‘What we have sad doce not imply, on the other hand, that there 

mast be 2 world or thing of some tart. The existence of « world 

is che correlate of certain experience patteron marked out by 

HE ANLIDN OF PUA CONSCIOUSNESS 352 
certain osorntial formations. But it is wot at all clear chat actus) 
experiences can run their course enly when they abow these 
‘patterns; we omunot exec wich patterns purely from the erence 
of perception in genera, end from the vareticn of empirical 
incutlos which play thei pert in the peroopta! function, On 
‘the contrary, it is que conceivable thet ic is ot only in single 
‘nstmoce that experience through cant dimolves inte illusion, 
sand that every illasion doca not anit were de facto proclaim « 
deeper truth, and every ooilict im its proper place be precisely 
‘hat is demanded by more widely connected awtems for wala 
taining the barmoay of the whale; itis concrible that our 
cxperiencing fanction swarms wich oppositions that cannot be 
tvened out cither for ua or in theanciven, chat experience shawe 
Self all at once cbatinately set agninee the suggeation that the 
‘things it puts togetber should persist harmonioutly to the end, 
‘nd that ita connectedness, mach av it in, lcks the fixed order- 
schemes of perspectives, apprebcations, and eppearancea~thit 
‘world, in thor, exsts'no longer. It might happex, moreover, 
that tow certain extent wil, sgh ualiary formations might be 
constisted, fleeting coacentrtion-ceatres for inuiticas which 
‘were the sire mnalogues of thing-intutions, being wholly fo 
capable of conatiruting seli-preservng “realcea”, usities thst 
enduro and "exiet in thecmelves whether peresived of Dot 
Let us cow bring in the results we reached st the clos of 
tho lant chapter; let ua think of the pomibility of noo-Being 
which belongs essentinly 0 every Thing-like trenmcmdence: ft 
‘in then evident thet the Being of conscioumas, of every sream 
of experience generlly, thought would indeed be inevitably 
modified by a malig of the thng-vrld, would nat be ofectad 
theraby ia tt sou proper extence. Modified, ceraiziyt For the 
rallifying ofthe world meno, correlative, just cis, that im every 
stream of experience (the full etream, both wayn endless, of the 
‘experiences of an Ego) certain ordered empirical connexion, ex! 
sccardingly also systema of theorising reasoo which take their 
ogy from these, would be excisded. Bxt this does notivetve 
‘the exclusion of other experiences and cxperintia! syvteme, 

oy PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

‘That no raat Hing, Sone that consciously presenta and mani- 
fera itelf through appearmeca, is necetary for the Bring 
of cmacvamas alf (2 the widet vense of the ream of 
experience). 

‘Towaanent Being is thrforewithost dealt absolute ints sete, 
thes in principe wale indige ad exited, 

(On the other hand, the world of the transcendent "ve?" i elated 
savexeroeily 10 comciaumes, wo indeed to lgial comeplont, ut 
do chat acne. 

‘That has already been made clear ja x very gener] way ia the 
wtalyees already carried out (im the foregoing paragrapha). What 
fn eroracendent in goon through certain capiricl commexions, 
Given. directly and with increasing competences through per- 
aptusl contimea hermeniouly developed, end chrough certain 
methodic thought-forms grounded in experience, i reached ever 
more fully and iramesitaly theoretic decenminationn af increaing 
‘tanaparency and unceasing progreniveness. Let us asume that 
‘cunsclouanaes with fe axpericntil content and its flaw ie really 
0 articulated in itself thatthe subject of conscicoees in the 
free theoetbeal play of expirkal activity ad thought could carey 
al wack connexion to completion (wherewith we sbould have 
1 reckoa in the help given through mutial undermandig with 
‘other Egos and steams of experience); Jet un further assume 
that the peoper arrangements for cocaciou-functioning are i 
fact satisfied, and the as regards the courses of conscionsntne 
ftnelf ther ie wothinglachung which might io any way be required 
for the appearance of a unitary world end the ations! theocetcal 
lsowledge of che mme. We ak now, prewupposing allthis is it 
still concivab is it not on the enatizry sbexrd, thatthe corre- 
sponding trawocademtal wool! uhoold st be? 

‘We thun sce that consciousness (inward experience) and real 
“Being rein no see co-ardiaee farms of Being, living as friendly 
neighbour, and oceasiocaly entering into “relation” ar some 
‘reciprocal “connexion”, Only that which is ewentaly related 
‘to an othe, each related clement Inving its own proper easence, 
snd on the sme lines athe other, can in a tru sense be mid 
‘eo form a voonexion with thet other or build up a whole with 

‘THE REGION OF PURE CONSCIOUENESS 155, 
it, Hoth immancat oc abaolute Being and transcendent Being are 
indeed “being” (tend) and “chject”, and exch bas, moreover, 
4a objective determining context; but it is evident that whit 
thn on sither aide gow by the came of object md objective 
determination beare ths same came oly when we speak in terme 
of the empty logical categorie, Beoween: the mms of con- 
sciousmeas tnd reality rrwons veritable abya, Here « Being which 
snuaiferts elf perspecively, never giving itw¥ abwolutely, merely 
contingent and relaive; there a Acccaary atid abwolote Being, 
fundamentally incapable of being given through appesrance and 
pecwpective-patterna, 

‘tin thus clear thet in apie of ll tk—well-grounded mo doubt 
jn the meaning ntended—of a real Being of the huoin Ego, and 
iw conscions experiences ix the world and of all that belongs 
thereto in any way in respect of peychophyvical conmexi 
‘at in apits ofall this, Conaciournoe, capridered ints "parity", 
‘ust be reckoned us sif contained ryiton of Being, ws « oyster of 
Aral Bring, ito which nothing can pesetate, abd from 
‘which nothing can cieape; which has 0 spatio-temporal 
ceuerice, and can be inalde no spatiotemporal eystems; which 
‘cannot experience cxuality frome anything nor exert couaity 
‘upon anything, it being presuppovrd that caurality bears the 
socal seoue of naturel causality a2 a relation of dependence 
between realities, 

On the other side, the whole spatintempera! world, to which 
1mm and the buman Ego chim tn belng ot vobordizate wgular 
realitien, ia sccording 10 (is oom meaning mrt intetional Being, 
1a Being, therefore, which has the merely secondery. retire 
erase of a Being for « conscioumneas. It in « Being which coa- 
sciouaness in ita own experiences (Erfahrangen) posite, and is, in 
principle, iaitable and determizable only athe clement com- 
‘oa to the [harmoniously]: motivated appearance-maniflds, but 
‘er and beyond thi, ia jut nothing at al. 

4 (Da Nort "Bnranang”- Tins word expan ost 1958 moet the 
feet ioe of hn arb tna Bt tw oa cr rat 
of ta thew pebbated mt] 

oy FURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

$50, Te Pumiosmvovooca: Vawronr ano Pune Con 
secu as ne Fan or Pimmosmonccr 

‘Thun the messing which “Being” bears i2 common epooch it 
procicly inverted, The being which for vs in fat, i in lelf 

in what itis only in “relation” tothe Gr. Tria t 
13 though «Blind legal deree had ordained thatthe ordo ef con- 
eaio ronan must dizectitelf according to the onde ct comesio 
‘dearane. Reality, that ofthe thing taken omely a aloo that ofthe 
‘whole world, eeecataly lacks independence, And in speakiag of 
savence we adopt here eur mn ciqocoun wae of te terms Reality 
in not in self something absotte, binding ialf to another only 
ina secondary way, iti, abuolstely speaking, noching at ll than 
10 “absalutreanznce” wintnoewer, thas the ementality of sor 
‘thing which x principle i ondyintentional, ofyieown,canaciourly 
rovcstsd as an appearance. 

‘Now let ua turn our thouyts back agin tothe fire chapter, 
to our reflexions upon pheacescaclogil reduction, Tt in now 
clear in point of fact that over againet the natural thnoretical 
standpoint, whose corelate is the world, a new etandpoist cust 
be avaiable which in vice of the awitching off of thiv peycho- 
physical tomlty of nature lenves something over—the whole 
Ald of absolote consciourneas. Thos sated of living malvely 
in expesiace (Erfahray), atd subjecting what we expericnoc, 
teansendent natize, to theoretical inquiries, we perform the 
*pbenomesological reduction". In other words: nmead of naively 
carrying ut the nts proper tothe nature-cocsieuingconucios~ 
‘em with in transocadet theaes and allowing ourselves ta beled 
by motive tha operate thersin ttl other trnucendent theset, 
nd oo forth—svo set al ee thea “out of tet”, we take 80 
partia them, we direct the lance of apprchemion nd theoretical 
Snguiry 10 pore comcimess in its cum condo Being Xe in thin 
‘which semaine over ae the “phenomenclogic rsiduum’’ we 
were in quert of: remaiss over, we sey, slthoogh we have 
"“Buspeades” the whale woe'd with all things, ving creature, 
nen, ourselves inched. We lave iterlly Jor nothing, but have 
‘won the whole of Abyoiute Being, which, propely understood, 

"THE REGION OF PURE CONECIOUSNESS «us 
conceals in iaelf al ranscendences, “constituting” them within 
‘alt. 

‘Let us robe this clear to ourselves in detil. At che natant 
«tape we imply carry on al the acta though which the world 
in therefor us. We lie navely unseBcsve in our pereetring md 
‘apericacing, in thom shetic acta in which the unica of things 
spear tous, and not only appear but ar given with the samp of 
“preseanscas” and “reality”, When we punue oars acience, 
‘we carry out reflexions ordered in accordance with the logic af 
capericnce, refixiona in which these realities, given and taken 
aldke, are determined in terme of thought, in which also on the 
{round of much directly experienced and determined trenscco- 
<dencea fresb inferences are drawn. At the phenomenological 
standpoint, acting om Kanes of general priacple, we tir wp 
Peformance fli wocs cogitative tse i.e" place ibe 
‘wht a boea carried out, “we do not emocatethove uneas” with 
‘ur mew inguiries; instead of living fv thes and carrying thom 
‘at, wo carryout act of reflec directed eowarc team, xn these 
wwe upprehend as the abrolce Being which they are. We now lve 
centiely in wuch nt ofthe necocd level, whone datz tho infinite 
fick of abuotute experiences —the bani iid of Phenomenology, 

S51, Tum booxr oe raz Tusacnmnea, Pamnmuay 
Rarumiors 
We can all perform acta of reflexion, to be sure, and bring them 
‘within the spprebeading glance of conssiouaneas; but each re 
lesion is not yet phexomenolapical, nor is the apprehended 
‘caniciouesens pure consciousness. Racial diseusions of the kind 
‘we have undertaken are therefore necesetzy in order to penetrate 
10 the knowledge that therein, indeed can be, my nach thing ax 
the field of pure conscioutneat, which ia aot « portion of natin: 
itself; and thie it ia vo lede shat Nerure ia possible oaly 20 a3 
Antestioma] unity withia this Gel and grounded in immanent 
‘orgunizatinns. They are neceasary tha: we may further know thet 
1 amity euch a0 cis in piven adjusted to theoreti reacarch ia 
‘quite diferent vetting fm: thet in which the comaciousseas which 

ot FURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
“‘conaticutes” this unity, 20d a0 every abnolute consciousness 
‘whatzocrr is prsented and made un object of inquiry. ‘They are 
Ueceaaary Ut in face ofthe philsephie poverty in which we waste 
cour energies, covecing it with the fie name of « world-view 
rounded jo nataralsczoce, i wall become clear thatthe tran 
scradenta study of conscioumness dove not mean nature-esearch, 
‘ind may not presuppose this a premise, since fom tx temsoct- 
dental standpoint Natur iain principle placed within the bracket, 
"Thy are neceamy in order chat we should kow that this detach 
ranat from the whole world in the farm of « phenomenalogical 
reilution ia something totaly diferent from the mere abeteaction 
of certain components of an ecxbracing orgaasation, whether the 
‘connerisns be aecewary or merely factual. If conscious experi- 
‘ences were inconceivable apart from thei iamerlcing with Narore 
in the very way ia which colours are inconceivable apart from 
cxtevion, we could no Took on conscousseas 98 42 absohte 
region for ite alone in the sense in which we saust actually do 
0, But we cust ace that varomgh much “abmtraction” from Nature 
‘we could win only what mas narurl, never pure transcendental 
comcioumen. And apsin, phesomenclogical reduetan does not 
‘token a mete cestriction ofthe judgment to « conarcted portion 
‘of the totaly of real Being. [nal he particular sciences of reality 
‘the theoretical iateret is confined to apecial domsine of the veal 
‘universe, the others remuining anconuidered except in so far ws 
real threads of eonzexioa crowing to an¢ fro compel inquirie of 
‘s mediating kind. In this sense roechaics “abetrats from optical 
event, physics is general and ia the wident sense of the term from 
the peychologcal. For this eapon, aa every man of scimce kiows, 
‘no darain of rexity i ioleted, the whole worl iain the Ins recort 
‘vingle “Nature”, und all che netural sciences aricultions of 
cone Natural Science. With the realm of expeceaces on abyolute 
‘xmenoes the cue in radically and essential different t's abut of. 
fae within Self, and yet has n0 boundaries which igha parte 
itfrom othee regions. For that which it would bound of fom itself 
‘would need ta bein seatial community wich it. Butt inthe whole 
of Absolute Being inthe definite sense iresed by our scalyon. 
Te ia azentcly independent ofall Being ofthe type of a wocld or 

Liste MELHON Or PUR CONSCIOUENESS 157 
[Narareand it has no and of these for ita eitence (Easton). The 
‘existence of what i nazar? cansat condition the cxiteace of 
consciousness ince it wis an the correlate of consciousness it 
‘ts only no frau construc ite wishin ordered oegenizatioa 
of conaciousnena, 
Note 

In pausing we note the following: Let it be waned to prevent ise 
‘undartandings. If the element of fact (Fakttitdt) in the given 
order of the course of coeaciouantss, is iy diffeeatstion foto 
individuals end the tlesdoy imcnanent in them gives legitimate 
cceasion forthe question covering the grounds of thin mame ord, 
the theological principle which right ratienaly be prewupposed 
bere cet, for emental reasons, be acoepted wt @franrendince 
‘inthe renee of work-rranscendence, fore is ell-evident In advance 
fom the positions we have aeady eatablished, that wou}d be am 
bvurd citcl, The governing priscipie ofthe Absolute cunt be 
{and in the Abyolute inelf and through pare and absolute re- 
flexiaa. In other words since « world-God ia evidently impovsible, 
snd ince, onthe ather and, the imzaanence of God inthe abao- 
Jnte Consclousnes cancer be grasped ax isamanence in the vena 
of Being as experienca (Bria) (which would be 20 Jee ebeord), 
there oust be in the absolute stream of comscioustom and ith 
{nGnites other ways of mazifesting the transcendent then the 
snorting of thing lke realities auntie of appearaocs that 
agree together; axd fully there must be ctuitive manifestations 
‘ta which theociaing thought cax adjur fvelf, and by following 
‘the indication of which ina reasccable apisit we might come to 
‘understand the single rule of the sumed theological principle. 
T's then alo evident that this rule could not be taken se cans, 
in che wenae ofthe satura concept af caurlity, whichis lowered 
‘tw the pitch suited to realities and tothe Functional pytemee proper 
1 their peculiar eovence. 

However, that door not cance ur here any further, Our 
immediate, conceraa ot theslogy but pheasmoesology, bOWETEE 
important the bearing of the later on the former may indirectly 
be, The fundamen considerations we here rained 0 far at they 

a PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
‘were indiapenmible, heve served to open up the ceslm of the 
‘Absolute asthe reeerch-domain proper to Phencmenclogy. 

§ 52. Sorrumoncraxr Rocuws. Tax Puratcat, Taxo ano at 
“Usarnowe Cans oF Avreamasican” 

at we still need to add something by way of sopplemnt, Our 
lust reBexiona bore chiefly on the thing of the enwory inapiati, 
und we paid inadequate attention a the physical thing, foe which 
‘the ching that appears to vee (what is given in peroeption) must 
function “mere appearance", ouch an thosgh it wer something 
purely subjective". Meamwhile it follows fram our previous 
stun that this mere aubjectvity should mot be canfuned (a iti 
to frequently) with an expercatial eubjectivity, an thongh the 
perceived things in their perceptual qualities were themes 
apericocra, Marnover, it camot be the inteudad meaning of 
scientiie worker (eapecially whea we do not judge thee by whit 
‘they my but by the real agnicasce ofthis wet) bat the thing 
‘that appear nan ifson or a Ely image ofthe “true” physical 
thing. Similarly the atatersent that the apparent determinations are 
“ipa” of the tree determinations is isleading.* 

‘Should we then may on the lines ofthe “Rakion” 4 fashionable 
in our day: what ia really perceived (avd, lathe Sev eanse of the 
{erm, appears) in to be regarded from it side ax xppearance oF 
instinctive beds of momething ele inwardly lento it andseparaied 
rom iti Aod sot the later be reckoned on thearetca! prownds oa 
malty which foe the purpose of explaining the may in Which we 

a loog as we fil co keep persistently in mind and to justify 
scientifically the meuaing of thing girennem which lin in the 
wi abner Spend ig any a $43.79. 196-72. 

‘THE REGION OF PURE CONSCIOUSNESS — 155 

ental nature of experience, end therefore ala of “thing in 
several” the meaning which mpplica the abackte scar of a} 
‘ational tatements concerning things, Whatever coaficis with 
thin meaning ia eves sbeurd 5a the wticteat sca of thet tomy. 
and thia holds undoubtedly of al epiatemclogial theories of the 
type deseribed. 

Tt can be easily shown that, if the unkzown came we lave 
somred exits (tf) at al, i amt be principle perceptible wad 
‘experienceable, if tot by us, at lat for ocber Egos who vee beter 
sand farther than we do. We are not concerned bere with any 
‘empty, paychological poulbility, but with an esneatil posubllity 
pomeasing coment and validity, Further, we should need so shaw 
‘hatthepowible peroeption ise aguin.and withemventalnccesity, 
smut be perception through appearancer and that we have there. 
{fore fallen nt en inevitable revere i fiat. Again, woabould 
red to point out tbat an explanation of the perceptually given 
‘events through causal realities hypothetically aneumed, through 
‘vnkzown eatitia of the natare of thing (a, for inwtuce, the 
‘explanation of ceraiz planetary discurbances throug: the assump 
‘eof ail uaknera sew planet Reine) someting tet 

‘principle fram in the neote of a physica 
ooeieiae petool amg a oeage papas! ooo 
ot explanation eter the nye of stozs, fons end the lke. Bo tooon, 
similar ince much ele could be diacumed end developed, 

Tt a aot our duty to eater into a systemically exbaseuivedie- 
cuasion ofall wach relatocs, I ia enough for our purpase to bring 
certain main points inte clea relief. 

Returning then, lt us take the postin, cil texted, that in 
hrytical method the percicad thing emifia shways and in principle 
Ary he thi Ath Ue pi snk end wimtiy 

‘The oe pps 6 evi te se pred 
‘on an earlier page, in which we nought 12 determine more closely 

wo PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

te meaning of current phrases used by the physics end i. 
particular the acaae of the tadiional separation hetwoen primary 
And tesendary qualities. After exuding obvious suisinterprets- 
tions, we ax thar “the thing we est experience” pives ua “the 
mere this”, ax “empty 2”, which become the beeer of the exact 
phyacal determinations whith do not themaclves fll within 

property-so-called. The “ployvially true thing” ia 
thus “in principle differently determined” from that which is 
riven “bodily” in perception fact. ‘The later dnplays purly 
‘seouory features which are precimly not phyvical. 

‘Nave the lea, the two expositions are comparble enough, and 
‘we do not need to challenge that isterreation of tho phyeical 
‘lewpoiat tall seioualy We bave only undersaad it corey. 
(On no account should we fll into che fundameatally perverse 
opy-and-tign-thoaries which, without taking the physical thing 
pecially into account, we cooskered at an earlier stage 20d 
likewie diaposed of ia ica moet genera form.* An image or eign 
‘oints to eocathing that Lies beyood it, which, coukt it but pase 
‘over into another farm of presentatcn, into that of «dator intuition, 
right “tole” be apprehended. A vign end copy does vot ane 
snousce” in i elf che self that i lgniied (or eopied). Hut the 
physica thing is nothing foreign to that which appear in a vessory 
body, but vomething thar manifers itef in i and 
‘indeed in « pritwordia! way, « way that is alvo pried in that it 
‘arts an easentia} grounds which canaot be annulled. Moreover, 
even the vemory determining-content of the x which functions 
vw dearer of the physic determinations doce not clothe the 
latter in ax aben dese that conceal them: rnber it iv only ix 30 
far wn the isthe mbject of tbe sensory determinations that i i 
tdao beet of the phyaical, which ox ita side emewnces elf fe 
the sensory. In principle thing, the precise thing of which the 
hysict speaks, cox in accordance with what has bees already 
ct out in deta) be given only seasoriy, in sensory "aps of 
“appearance”, and itis the dential element which appear inthe 
shiting continuity of these waya of appearance which the phyuicet 
{in relation to all cxperienceable (Gr perceived or perccinable} 

Ch ngee, banre ae. 

‘nx RAWION OF PURE CONSCIOUSNESS 16 
eens which can come under considerten a» “conditioning 
Circumstances", subjects to x coum! mnalpin, to an ioguiry into 
real neceuary connexiora. The thing which be observes, with 
‘which he experiments, which he wo cantioually, hums, plaocs 
on the weak, “brings to che fusing-furnece”, thin and no other 
‘hing ia the abject of phymcal predicates, inccitw it thar has the 
‘weight, mam, tenperstze, elecrical resistance, and wo forth, So 
too iin the peracived processes and connexion themselves which 
sre defined through concept wach a9 force, accalerution, ecerey, 
‘tom, lon, and vo forth. The thing that appear t9 sense, which 
haa the seaaory propertin of sbape, colour, emell and tare, is 
therefore far from being » sign for something ele, though to 8 
certain extent «sign for doef, 

‘Only so much can be mid: The thing thet appears with such 
snd wuch sensory properties under the given phenacornl oon 
ditions is, fr the phy, who for such things generally, and i 
‘the farm nf releyet cmoeuso becween the appearances, has 
Already feed the phytic determinations om general Sine, the nigh 
and aymbol for & wealth of cousl propertice ofthis wate thing, 
which a nich declre their presence in specie and familar 
‘relations of depeadeace among sppearonces. Whats there declared 
‘even when cevealed in intencianal usiues of coascioes experi= 
excer—ia clearly, in principe, tramcendent. 

Tis clear from the foregoing wat eco the higher (rmscondense 
ofthe phyeal ching doce nately ony reaching ont heyond the world 
for couse thal wean for any Ege that fusctoes on the 
abject of anode ny ofthe ein of empat. 

"Taratuation ae genzelly tiated ath, that physical thought 
builds itself up on the basis of aatural experience (Brfatern) (or 
‘of the natural thea, which i exeablihes), Fallmay the rion 
swotices which the connexions of experiznce amggeat, it 14 com~ 
pelled to adapt certain forme of apprebending ite material, to 
construct auch intentenal systeme a8 the rence of the case xy 

re, and to utilize them for the tAeoreial determination of 
things 22 experienced thzough scase. Out of this springs up the 
‘opposition berwees the Thing of the plain sensory tmagiatio and 
the Thing of the phyeical inicio, end on the later eide grow? 

ae FORE PHENOMENOLOGY 
up al the idea! entologia! thought-constructiana which expreaa 
(emaclres in physica! oxccpes, and davive their seeming wa ey 
should do exclusively from che method of mature! sence. 

1 the expirizal logical rewon, under che rubric Physica, thus 
‘roa inta shape an intentional correlate of s higher levelphyeical 
ature ont of mature ait painly appeare—i is pure mythology to 
act up what the reason xo trawpareety puts inte our hands, 
‘which i nn enone thas the determination of the manure given t0 ub 
‘nnenple intuition in trms ofthe fare of enerience an an ethos 
‘world af ching reaitin in themselves, x hypothetical mberructore 
devised to wabeerve the cxmval explanation of appetrances. 

Seasary things ore thun connected with phyvical thiggs, nnd 
that most sbaurdly, shrug eowliy. But ia 0 ding ordinary 
‘Realinm oxnfunes, by reuon oftheir “mere mbjecinty" asary 
sppesrances, 2 the sppearing objec as such (which are infact 
sdccady transcendent) wit the absolste experienoen which comsi- 
‘ate thera —conuses them, thats, with expeciences ofthe appear- 
ing, of the cxpirical (wfalrender) conscomsuns generally. The 
confusion is rife in tht form, at way rate, that one apeaks au though 
objective physiea were concerned to explain noc the appearances 
af thing to the verae of the eppenring hinge, br inthe enne of 
the cmntuting expire of the experiencing cousioueneas, 
(Causality which belong in principle tothe eystem of the consti- 
‘uted intestional word, and bas no meaning except is thia world, 
innotanly made isto mythical bond of union betwees “abjecive” 
physical Being and the “mbjoctve Being” which appear in imme- 
diate experience—the “merely subjective” things cf seane with Ube 
“eccondery quiltine”—but through the usjutifed tranxiion 
rum the Inter to the consciousness thet exortute it, uaality 
ia made ino x bond between plyical Being on tha oar basd and 

"Taeceby Phynical Being is made co reat on mythical absolute 

ey while chat wich i rly abvolute the pure conxciosaness 
‘uch, jena even sea. Thun the iplied pbrurty at of rureing 
physical nature, chia atcatioal coreite of logically determining 
‘thought, into an abecluer, pases ennodiced; with the rel thet 

"THE REGION OF FORE CONSCIOUSNESS 265 
this Nature which defines the dnecly determined world of things 
in terms of the logic of experience, and in thin Function in fully 
doom, this Necure—to week behind which far something cae i 
semeleae—is made into an unkzawa salty which cam aver be 
iaef apprehended, nor through exy ditnctve quality of is own, 
‘tw which now isusribed the ble of causal reality ix reaion tothe 
‘fax of aubjeccive appearances and empirical experience. 

Tn these minanderwandings, 0 doubt, the fact that « false 
iaterpertation as Been pat upon the neavory wintitbity 
charscteritic of el categorical unties of thought, ore particu, 
of coure, of those whase conection i highly randited,exrcaes 
an iffsence thet is anything but alight: end it is nooo the lu 
true tha the mixaerption ofthe tendency so maful to practical 
nomledge of supplying weasory pictures, or “model” to these 
‘unitin of thought, haa also exerind eansiderable fshorsce, What 
‘i unintaitable to wens bes boen taken wx nrmboically reprenatiog 
‘concealed entity which could be made eimply wcso-intuitble 
through improvements in the orgusimation of our idea, and the 
supdels have served at inuitable ecbemtc picture of tia hidden 
thing; tic function was therefore vier to that of those proble- 
rmutic drawings of antediluvian forms of life which the paleontslo= 
iat aetches on tbe strength of woz mnegre data, The tramparen? 
meaning ofthe constructive forms of thought as mckin ieregerded, 
‘Ta aso the fue that the bypechetcal clement fe bound up with 
the work of syztheve thinking. Bena divine physica enmnot mate 
categoria thought-determizatians of reales itutable in the 
pina, ordinary way, as Lets ws divine comipoteace can bricg it 
shea hs tipi fom shal be uae er ye on the 

"i ie ia nla nd cigs app 
_nruch ant nay have induced in us 1 senate need for « complete 
clansifying of ell the celevant relationships, we now aoe clenly at 
any rae, nd our own purposes require his, chat the transcendence 
of the thing is, ix principle, the trantoendence of am 
aint (Sent) which eonatioutes fel? within consciousnen and 
remain fetteod to cocsciouuneas, and the regard we pay to the 
mathematically grounded science of Nature (whatever the special 

a PURE PRRNOMANOLOGY 
‘enigmas may be to which its Leowhge gives rine) doo nue aoc 
‘ur remus in the leas, 

1 needed no pantcular discumion to show ua thet all thet we 
‘have brought home to ourvelves in repect to the objecivies of 
(Nature, considered a2 “mere fact (Sacha), cust bold good for 
all the asioogical and praia! cbjostivitoe, mathe objects, 
<cukur] creations, and o forth which are grounded on ther. And 
{finally sewae for athe transcenlenoca generally, constituted in 
secordance with the requirements of conscimunsas, 

$53. Anmania ax Prrewococteas, Coseiocmes 

"Therein « furthar extension ofthe scape of our studies which is 
very important, We have drawn the whole of materia) nature 
within the ambi of ue established conclusioes, bot thet which 
appear to ws through sense, and the phyvcal nature which it 
pounded init as x higher level of Imowledge. But how fare it 
‘With ovina! rahe, with en ac! beat? And in repect of ther 
soula and prycRcal enperioncen? The work init fullness in fat 
ot merely phyical bet peyebological. All wrmems of conscious 
‘ene bound up with animated bodies should beng ta ie, me 
denisbly. Thus ox he oma and conscioutnasthoald be the Absolute, 
‘within Which everything trancendest ia constituted, 26d jo the 
lant resort che whole papchological wack; nd an the aber hand 
sonsciousneas should be sebrdiacte real ccont with this world, 
ow does thie tally? 

‘Let us make cle to ourselves Low conscloutsom, #0 0 wpetk, 
cater into the real world, how that which in abvolue in ie can 
slbandoa is rumanence an put onthe character of tumacendenee 

vee ut once that it can do thin aly in viene of a certin pes 
ticipation in transcendence in its Set and primordial sense, and 
thit obvioonly in the transcendence of material Nature. Only 
through the empiri! relation to the body doc consciousneat 
‘become cea ina bun and animal ncae, and onty thereby does 
it win a place in Nase's space and time—the time which ia 
phpeeally measured. We recalec eo that it is only through the 
comecting of consclouscese mad Body icto a natural unity chet 

‘THB REGION OF PURE CONSCIOUSNESS — 65, 
‘ean be emmpisicallyintuited that mech x thing sx mutual under= 
standing between the snizal serore that belang to one workin 
‘pensble, and tha only thereby can every mbjct that knows find 
Defoe it» fll world containing itself wad otbec subjects, and wt 
the same time inow it for one and the same world about us 
belonging in common to ite! und wll cher eubjects. 

‘A peculiar type of apprebending or experiencing, « peculiar 
type af “apperczpcion™, complete what is brought about by thin 
so-caled "linking-on”, this realization of canciomness, Whatever 
{hia spperomption muy const of, whatever special type of mati- 
fearon it may demand, oo mnch ia quite obvious, that cour 
scjousema ite in thowe apperceptive ineerweevinge, in this 
eychologcal elation ta the corporeal forfia sathing ofits own 
‘sential nature, und can aimilate nothing that is fornign to is 
cows ewence, which would indeed be absurd, Corporee! Beiog i 
in principle a Being that appear, declaring tell chrough sensory 
perepectives. The consciousness that ia nazurilly apperccived, 
the stream of experieces, piven ag human exd animal st once, 
in close exaptica! connexion with corporeaity, does sot itself 
‘ecome of course theagh this opperception something that 
‘eppearn perepectively. 

‘Ana yo it has become someting other thn it wan: avery pat 
cof Nature. felt ii what ti ts caseotial ature is absolute. 
‘Ba iti nt grapes in ie sbelute ewe, in ite Sowing thisncan, 

itvelf: tate of consciouanens appeara which isthe atte of x elf- 
‘deatical rat ego-subject. This ego-rubject declares in and through 
thin etate of ennacionanens ite éndibidaal real proper, audit i at 
properties whick manifeet this unity through conscious states 
that wa become tare of che ego-subject un united with the bodily 
appearance. Thun on the plow of appearance the peychophytical 
‘natural nity, man or beast, is constitated ax 2 unity that reat om 
‘bodify fowudations and corresponds to the grounding fusction of 
spperception. 

‘As with every tritucendence-iowtizuting appereeption, ap bere 
‘so we ane presented with 22 eapntilly tenfold poled of oe. 

ao PURE FEENOMENOLOGY 

in the ons, the apprebeoding plance is tarned towards the spper 
ved chjoc: through the very act of apprehending, at it were, 
‘through which the transcendent object in aet up in the ath, he 
pprebcading look pace beck is refceton ta the pure apprehend 
ing cocuciousoess itself. We have thes, to take our own cae, 08 
‘the one ide the pychological pat of oem in which the glance in 
recent upon experience asthe masurl wtandpoint dictates, upod 
sn experience of joy for instance, as an imu sate of feeling of 
mas or an wail. Ox the other side we have wores together with 
this, as an emeatt! ponabiey, the phenomenological paint of sien, 
aceoeding to which, al! ranacendences heving been dcoanected, 
tho glasce is directed in reflection upon the abvolute pure can 
scioutnes, giving us the xpperveption of wx sbeolute experience 
{nite intinte eubjectve low; 90 i is, to revert to ous previous 
femmes, with che wlective experience of joy ov an sbaclutt 
phenomenalogical deter, yet under the intense of x function 
tf tpprebenaion which eximaiee it, the fonction, camely, of 
“coking manifest the atte of consciousnem of x buman eno- 
subject linked to the sppearaoce we eall x body. The “pare” 
experience “lies” in x certain vecse in whet is peychologically 
ayperceived, ia Un experience an wbjective burn oanditions 
‘with its own exsence it taken oa the form of peychcalwubjectivity, 
sod therewith the intentional relation to eaa’s Fgo and mum's 
‘body. IF the experience in question—the feeling of joy in the 
‘cammple selected tones thiaimectional form and it mighe quite 
conceivably do ac), it euffern a change, certainly, but only coe 
‘which simplifies it into poe comcioumess, wo that it loves al its 
seaning as a nutund event, 

$54. Tam Siner Coprarom, Tr Taasacoennir PetewoLooicas 
Bermune: Conran axo Rmarvs, ran Tran 
semeomerat, Exrmmmics Neceuaxy aM AMSOLUTE 
[Let us suppose that we hive bean syperctivingeccording to the 
natin! peter, but that oxrapperceptiona have bezn comically 
invalid, vo that all ccberet (sisson) connesioos io which 
copirial unites might take atape bere become impossible; in 

‘THE REGION OF PURE CONSCIOUENESS 17 
‘other wards, let ws imagine inthe epist of he foregning exposition™ 
‘atthe whale of nature—and the physica inthe fine intanoe— 
‘nae boen “annulled”, there would then be 20 more bodies and 
Cherefore no men. AL a man Tabould so lneger be, ad again T 
should have 20 oeighbours. But my comcioureat, however fs 
states of experience might vay, would remain an absolute stream 
of experience with its own dinctive emesce. Were something 
‘ll left over eaabling wi to grasp the experiences an “tats” of @ 
_parvona) Ego, in and through whowe changes me-identicl peruons! 
‘properties were manifested, we x4 break up these apprehensionn 
‘ho, do sary with the inteatonal farma which bring them isto 
‘shape, and reduce them to pure experiences. Been peyehicel 
itater point to the ordering conitions of sbechte experince 
jn which chey are consizuted aod take on the intentions) end in 
‘ta way transcendent form “nate of comcutmtt”, 

‘Certainly an ineorporeal end, paredoseal as it cy sound, even 
an inanimate and aoa-persoaal conaciounaaa ia conceivable 
1 etream of experience is which the intentional empirical unite, 
body, soot, emprica ego-eubject do not take shape, ix which all 
these expirical concept, and therefore alo that of experdenc tx 
{he pgehabopeal ae (as experienes of 1 pezwon, eo erica 0), 
‘have nothing to wupport them, and at any rate no validity. Al 
‘empirical units, and therefore peychologiad experience sls0, 
are indicators of ablate rye of experience, soe ebow quite 
Aisioctiveeesata formation, besides wick stil ther formations 
are conctivabie; all are fo the tame seme transcendent, merely 
saative,coutingeat. We mnt bring ourelves to vee tha in taking 
for granted tht every experience of cneself or another haa empirical 
‘ality wa the peycholagical nd peychophysical wate of cousciow- 
‘eo of animal subjects, me are indeed fully justified, but caly 
‘within the relevant limi; chat over aguinut the empisial experi- 
ence, aod at the sirens om which it depends for it very meaning, 
stands the almlue experience, and that this ia not ametaphypical 
construction but with appropriate shifting of the mumdpaint 
Induhitably manifs i al i wbeolutenea and immediately given 
{in funution, We mutt convince cumelves thet ie feyehical fo 

+ fami, 

a PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
tmeral in the pecholegicl rene, that peychial persoasincs, 
perchicl propertin, expericooes or states are apical unite, and 
re therefore x celities of every Hind nd degree, mere unite of 
ta intestinal “constingion”—ia their owe sesve truly exiting 
(reek sis nn and on expicial 
determinable and yet zoerey intentional”, 
Bittle mercy Scie” To ha at ty ca et 
shyotuesenae i therefore sbeard, 

$55. Concuusom. Au. Reatrry Exo rsmovox "Tun Dis- 
evune oF Maxine”, No "Susyeorive Foaacun 

Ts » certain ven and with proper cae inthe ose of words we 
ry even say ht ll eal wis ar “oni of mawng" Usiien 
‘of meaning presuppowe Cet me repeat it with explasis: not 
{rough deduction from metaphysical postales of ny devcrption, 
‘but bocmase we cxx pont to 1 io acr ctucive whlly doubt-eee 
proved) a taz-geingcomelourne, which, enti iabsoute 
‘nd not dependent in kx turn on sense bestowed ont fom emote 
suze. If the concept of reality ia derived from natwralrelitica, 
‘rom the unites af poubie experience, then “universe, "Nature 
18 hole”, meanest so ch a the totaly of realtionsbut to 
‘Weatity the same with de tai of Being, sad herewith to ake 
absolute, in imply sonsense. Ae abate realy iat ar walid 
‘av around squat, Raalty and world, seco coed, ae just te ttle 
for certain valid sti of moaning, same, uniie of "meaning" 
related 10 cectin organiztiona of pure absolate contcouess 
‘hich dispense measiog nd abow forth ia validity in eertin 
stiately fed, specie ways. 

Te xayone object, wits scerente ta theme diecaons of ours, 
that they eansforss the whole woed into aubjecive usin 
throw thrmscrea ino th ams of m“icaliem such Berkley’ 
wwe ct only make anawer that he has not gratpod the mooning of 
‘theve dlscusioos, We vebtact jut av Ince from the pleninude of 
the world's Being, from the totality ofall reali, me we do from 
(he plenary peometcial Being of wguare when we deny fwbt in 
thin case isdeed cam plainly be tabex for gracted) tht it s round. 

THE pEctON OF Puna cONECOURNESS ip 
Jct hn ery elit” or dc bt at 
‘ther supe rae, ich nd oka 
enty tone ening oe en age Se 
making the world absclate in u philovophical sense, which ia wholly 
reg ie pi ch wet ek a apt 
‘Thin outlook iv altogether catural, it pervades our unsophisticated 
teen eects cnt gs sy er, 
SoS cir reread Muy Sos en ae 
Pbimegtina a epg eacoatenracin mo 
got wet oi ha he we ng 
‘rei oan" wih prayer lt 
‘Soin tn fe A ng td 
fhe benno i ese ef ste a 
3 nal af ahaa op vont 
éatuitional beris, and contains an infinite wealth of insight-rocted 
‘tw of hh se wor eat ae 
‘not yot nhown chat this is vo, it will first become clear to us in the 
‘course af aur inquirien. 

‘We would remark in conchasion that the generality with which 
‘we have viated thene last reexions coareraing the constituting 
of the natural work! in absolute consciousnest should give 00. 
tne Th ne me wl se pe: eS 
‘een peo ot agnn at wee tbs ag 
Epa ean be ae gee ws ng 
4 ndash Bd, ape es ag ne ro 
descriptive statements consistently genera] in character items of 
Svc hve hea ceuly an esol ere 
‘The need for closer development and the flling of vacant gape 
‘ay ey wal sd bee Tat pon 
‘will contribute substantially to the more concrete sbaping and 
‘Biling out of the previous outlines. But we must note that our aim 
Sarr en fe ded ty och dea 
cca aretha Rao” 
Spc he bom of yo eb 
Lng seme 
spake 

10 PORE PHENOMENOLOGY 
clarify certsin general thoughts which may belp ms in noquiring the 
‘dea of » pure transcendental consciousness, Wet is enential far 
‘ur purpose isto see upec evidence thet the phenocsenological 
reduction, ana meana of disconnecting wa from the surural aud 
point and is general thesis, is pomible, and the, when carried ovt, 
the absolute or pure transcendental conscemaneas ia Inft aver a 
rexiduuc, to which i is chen abvurd bo ascribe reality (Reakta). 

FOURTH CHAPTER 
‘THE PHENOMENOLOGICAL REDUCTIONS 

$56. Tae Quesrion Concanane Tus Exton oF Tm PE 
oromowoareas. Remoerion. Tae NATURAL AND 1 
‘Manrrat Screwces 
‘The disconnenian from Nature was far vs the mthodolagical 
seams wherehy the dicetion ofthe meatal gence upon the pure 
‘rungcendental cxciousness becomes et all possible, Now that 
we have brought it wickin the focus of mental vison i ill remaina 
useful to consider, conversely, wBat in general, in the interests of 
sm inguity into the nature of pure consciousness, most reais 
disconnected, and whether the necraary Guconnexiom coecern 
the phere of Nature only. From the wie of the pbenomeno- 
logical ecience which we propose to establinh this amounts to the 
query, “Which sconces does t drs from while leaving ita pure 
‘meaning unimpaired? Which should it depear on x already gem, 
nd which shoud it not depend oa? Wich then peed to dé 
‘veacheted2” Tt lie ic the peculiar end essential asture of picoo- 
menology axa science of “origins” that wach questions of method 
which Lie remote from the interest of every ussophiatoated 
(dojraati) science austin i own case be a matter of carefal 
reBecion. 

In the Sit place i oes without aying that with the ruapending 
of the natural wid, physical aod paychological, all individual 
bjestivtes which ae constituted through the functional ac 
of conciousness in valuation and in practice art sutpended—all 
varieties of cultural expression, works of the technica usd of the 
fine zt, ofthe sciences alo (o far aa we accept them an cebura! 
facts od noc me validity-yvtema), eatetic end practical valu of 
every shape snd form. Naturalis the name sense are alo realities 
cf such kinds as state, maral custom, law, religion. Therewith 
ll therienzt ateral esd mental, with the entice koawledge they 
lave accumulated, sndogo dtconnecon us riences whith require 
for their development the maura standpoint. 

™ PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

Ss7- "Tem Quariom or tax Soarmason or tam Pins E00 
Dials are just tone nating point, Man ma nar being 
sad a8 pezsoa linked with other in a personal band, the unking 
‘bond of “society”, is wurpended, wo (co whitever powessea a 
sana! assure. But how fares it then with the pare Ege? Us even 
the phenomenological Ego which finds things proested to it 
‘brought through the phesarsenclogica! reductin to tumscendental 
sotkingneas? Let us reduce wll we reach the wcem of pure 
consciousness. In celexien every captatio on being caried ut 
takes the explicit form cop, Doce it Jone this form when we 
rake use of a teasozndenta! reduction? 

‘So much it cear from the out, that after carying this reduc- 
‘won through, we alll sever stumble seco the pure Kgo os ax 
experience sroong others within the Bux of mild experiences 
‘which aurvives ap transcendental rexduuim; noc thal we meet it 
0 conatitutive Bit of experience appearing with the experience 
‘of which iia un integral part and sgais disappeating. The Ego 
spear to be permcently, even sesomanly, thee, and this 
‘Permanence i cbviunly not that of» solid unahihing experience, 
(OF x “zal idea", On the conurary, it belong to every experizace 
that cocaes and steams pas, ita “glance” goes “through” every 
sctual cops, and towards the object, This veal rey changes 
swith every caite, abooing forth afreah with each new one as it 
come ad disappecing with Butte Eig resi ve identical, 
Jnpriacple,et eny tate, every coittio ca change, can come end 
‘go,evex though it may be open to doubt whether ech a seeanarity 
Detiahable, and not merely, an we find it, pernbable ix ota! of 
fact. But is contrast the gure Ego appears to be necerary in 
‘principle, and a9 that which reaize absolutely elt-idetical ia 
all val aad pomible changes of espeieace, it can tno seme be 
reckoned a1 ¢ reel pert or pase ofthe expericaom themacles, 

‘a overy actual copio i ives out is life in« special sense, but 
‘al experiensts abo within the mects] background beleng to it 
nd ito ther, acd al of them, as belonging t ene single stream 
of experieoce, tht, namely, wich is mine, matt pera: of being 
‘ranafermed ito sctaal eptatias oof being inwarily ehsorbed 

THE PHENOMENOLOGICAL REDUCTIONS ima 
into much; inthe wocda of Kant, The ‘F het? sett be able fo 

sccompany all my, 
‘fa cexiduum af the phenomenclogics! nuspensin ofthe woeld 
ad the empiical aubjectvicy tat belong to it there remaice 4 
pure Ego (¢ fundamentally different enc, then, for eich separate 
ftream of experiences), « pute poriar tazaceadence simultane 
cosly presents itelf—4 sen-constinuted srmscendense—a fran 
sade tx immanact, ven the imeedintlycamental part which 
this tumsceadece plea i every cgit, we abould not be free to 
spend it, although for many inquiries the problem of the pure 
‘Rgo can remain in mapenre, But we will count the pure Ego as 
phesemesologeal dati: only so far as the incnedinte and clearly 
seeriaizable pecuiacey of ics ental nature seacher, sa it x 
‘nga wih pure cmon, mera a ara ene 
Tk which reach out beyond thes limita abou be disean- 
‘We shall find cccasioa, moreover, to devote 4 epoca 
chapter in the Beomod Book of thin whole work othe dificult 
ised by the pure Ego and also by the need to render 
snouts the provisional postion which we ave here sted. 

Ml 

| 

$58. Tim Tavecmomes or Goo Stiream 

After abandoning thenataral wo:ld,we strike in our courvesnotbet 
‘transcendence, which ia not given like the pure Ego immediately 
“united to consciaurenin te reduced state, but comeeto knowledge 
in highly mediated form, standing over against the transcendence 
cof the world a i it were ita polsr opposite. We refer to the tran: 
scendence of God.’The reduction of the natural world to conacious- 

1 Ip the Lage Sd po te gare ofthe pur Exe svg! 
pi ea fe arte se = Soon my cee epee 
Sea ee eae ee 
2) comes tarry tbe rac oe of at 

oo chs send sa comic way 
Spee ties 

™ PURE PHENOMENCLOGY 
es hat a pet of which caning an desing 
sciencea can be supplied. This very word, vo Sr 

fos Romese posts wins Weg anacans is 
‘theoretical thought of the mathematically grounded aaturl 
sciences as the “appearance” of « phyricelnarere that conforma to 
exact natural Ine, And eince the ratimabty which the fact-wod 
shows is not in axy senar auch a the casence demands, there lea 
concealed inal thi a woaderfal telat. 

‘Further: the systematic study ofall eologice which are to be 
ound in the empirical work! itself, the concrete evoutian af the 
sens of oxpuslama, for instance, wp to man, and within the 
‘evolution of bmanity, che growth of caltaze with ite care for 
the spritand 9 fort, i ot exhausted by the explanations ofall 
och erations by the natura scence out of tho given concrete 
‘aviroument and in conformity with natural laws. On the oon- 
‘anry, the ramitioa ¢o pare conscious through the rorthod of 
‘transcendental reduction leada necesaaily to the question son~ 
cerning the ground of what now presen itl! ws the insitable 
sctulity (Fakeind) of the earrespoeding caratituting onsciout- 
sew. 1 in not concrete actuality (Fohrem) in gener, but con 
‘erm sctunlity atthe source of pomible and real values extending 
{indefinitely which compels us to uk sfter the “ground” —arhich 
nf pours ua aot chen the meaning of mubstactive cause, We pian 
by all that night iced to the aume principe from the aid of the 
‘eligioun eeacisanes, even though fox argument reat an ration- 
sly geounded eociven. Whit concerns us here, after merely 
touching on the difermt groupingy of rock rational grounds 
for the existence of » "divine Being beyeed the wid, ia that 
this existence should not only transcend the world, but obviously 
Alaa the “abaclte" Cocsciocamen. It would thus be an “lvoe” 
fino ttely diferent sure from the Abolate of Conscious, wx 0, 
the other hand it would be 2 trawcondert ie a totaly diffrent 
‘sews from the tranacendeat in the sense ofthe world. 

‘We saturally extend the pheomesological redaction to this 
““Rowoluie” and to te “Traneceadent™. It should remain dis 
ceanected from the field of rear will to be crested, wo far as 
thins tbe a Geldof pure Consciousness, 

‘HE PHENOMENOLOGICAL REODCTIONS x75, 

59. Tum Trmcmmonce or max Emeric. Tex Someone 

Pons Loowe as Marsans Unerarauis 
‘An we have ecapended individual eaten in every sense, 20 now 
‘we sec to mupend all other varitia of the “ranuccaulem”. "Thin 
sMfcets the seca of the "general object, the macnoes. They 100 
sre in certain way “‘srazacendent™ to pure consciousness, and 
rut to be really found in it. Meaowhile we cannot disconect 
‘eanscendents indefinitely, trumeendental purcetion cannot 
‘mein the disconnecting of lf taascendencs, since otherwise 4 
‘pure conscioueness might indeed renin over, but no poubilty of 
‘science of pure comscioumnem, 

‘We proceed to make thiacler, Let wa atexpt the moat extensive 
Aiscoanecting of the eidatic eanoctrable, xad with t therefore that 
ofall eideticacienees. To every ephere of individual Being which 
am be separated off wx epioa—the term “Being” ie here gives 
{ta wideet logical meaning —there belongs an ontology; to physical 
ature foriowemnce as ntslogy of nature, to anizality sm tology 
of anizalty—al these, whetber maturely developed or disciplines 
sect up for the rt time, auzcumb to the reduction, Over oust 
‘the material ontologies wtands the “Yorral” ootology (in unison. 
swith the formal logic of thovght-memings), sod belonging to it 
the quusi-region “object in genera”. If we try to dlscomnect this 
‘lv, we are met by Goubts wich will a dhe peroe time affect the 
possibilty of wimicies disconnecting ofthe eietie. 

‘Tue following lise of thought impremes ill on us. The 
Prxposes of wicace demand thst we should tack on to every 
domain of being certain eidetic pees, not prociacy a felda of 
rexcarch, but at placen where the Rnowiedge of eaeatial fore 
can be ordered, places to which the works in the domain in 
question rust alwaye peactrate whenever thir fatreat fice in the 
‘theoretical motien which are linked together within the esecace 
‘proper to this domain. Above all, everyciextiéc worker mat be 
ffee to make spel ta fora logie (or forma extelogy). For 
‘whatever he faquires into will always here the character of a 
‘object, end that which halda yood formate for objects in general 
(eropertics, cantents generally, ext the like), that aloo 3s hiv 

oa PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
‘concer. And homerer be conceives conceges and propositions, 
saws inferences, axa ac forth, that whick forma logic decrees 
with formu geazrality concerning szeanings of this type and 
lasses of wach meanings concerns him ithe sare way wit doee 
‘very special worker. Thenefre it concern the phenomecclogist 
sao, Every pure expericace also Sada its place under the widert 
Jogical meaning of object. Tauro it would seem—e cannot 
suspend formu loge nd feral cxtslogy. 0 wo and far obviosaly 
similar reasons, we cannot nuspend general Noetica, which ex- 
‘presses our exensal insight ito the ewonality or iraionlity of 
the judging activity generally, the meaning-couteat of which is 
Aeterained aoly in Sorzal generality. 

Bt if we look st the mazer more closely, there opens up the 
pemsiilsy under cerain provion of placing focral logic ia 
“beaches”, and herewith all whe <iciplines of formal Mthrsis 
(Glgetae,theory of muccbere, theory of macifolds, and to fort). 
ori wo may ike for granted that the inguiry of phenomeology 
into Pare Cansciouanese set itself ne needs vt itvelf co other 
‘tank chan that of making wach descriptive analy moan be 
soled into pure intuition, the theoretical framework of the 
mucheruatical disciplines and all the theocems which develop 
snthin ie cant be of any eervice. Where the formation of eta 
cepta and judemeaia docs not proceed constructively, where no 
aytters of dinted deduction are bust wp, the forma theory of 
deductive amtems generally, a we have it rantsematice, cot 
function an the tstrument of material reearch. 

Conscicusarss in the light af pure tatwition. The logical propositions 
to which it might find cecasioa to refer would thus throughout 
be nga! acon wech ta the principle of contradiction, whoxe 
‘univer and bach ality, bree it co sake rasaparent 
by the bap of emaple taken from tbe data of in own oman, 
We can shereface expel incude focal loge andthe entre 
eld of Mauhexs geaenly i= our diacoomecing #wox, and in 
this reapect enovince curectves of te legitimacy of the andand 
‘which, a» pheaomenclogas, we wish to flow. Ts claim sothing 

‘THE FENOMANOLOGICAL MEDUCIIONS x77 
‘at como make eenialysrmaperens to ceri! by rferesce 
{ Comciourmut end oa purely immancatal aes, 

‘Wa this undemtandlng we wai at once tbe explicit aowledge 
that 1 descriptive phenomenalogy is ia. principle independent 
of all thse disciplines. Tia concution i not without is ex 
Dartance in respect tothe philwopSis appreciation of the value 
Af phenomenology, and ic Unerefore serves our purpose to ecard 
it ere aright way. 

$60. Tex Sumrmmon 67 si Mertauat-Bmoene Duscortsem 
‘As regards the eldetic Sields of study on thx material 
of thee i of much outwanding sgniicance for us that the im- 
possiblity of dixcnzexion can be talen for gracted: that, tbe 
‘asta! domain ofthe phescmenologically poried consciousness 
igelf, Bren whea we st ourselves the tak of studying purt on 
velcumeas in ita particolasized epeciScations, after the mace? 
therefore of a saenee of facts, though notin an exparioo-pryehor 
logical wenge (since we are moving within the Kits imposed upon 
tu by our phenamenoiogical disconnexion from the world), we 
could not dipease with the « pier! coomounness. A acleace of 
focta cannot alienate the right of making use of che ementiltrutha 
‘which relae tothe individual bjectvtien of is oo dowasin. New 
ic & oar direc ixtantion, m fllawn from what we have erendy 
said inthe Introduction to thia work, to establish phenomeaciogy 
itvelt wa eidri ecence, ws the theory af the esental nature of 
the tranmcepdenally purifed consciousese 

Te we do tha, pheoomssology Brings under its own eis all 
“immanentel exunce’”, i, those which within the indyidual 
luappenings of « stream of consciousness, ond nowhere ele, get 
arioulrized infux-eoaditiened expesicoces of rome sort other. 
[Now itis of fundamental impertasce o nee that y wo eae olf 
ssiment belong to this special czce, that, an the contrary, the 
dltinesion derwoen demancal and trarucendent which bolés good 
{foc individual objectvities holds on prectely similar Lines fot the 
correspanding. ecace. Tua “ising”, “opata! shape”, “move- 
mint”, “colour of « thing", end eo forth; also “naan”, “bomman 

URE PHENOMENOLOGY 

ing”, “soul”, and “peychcal experience” (perience in the 
paychological aceac), “person”, “quality of chancizr”, end the 
like, are transcendent essences. If we wish to construct « phene- 
menology a3 a pare dscriptice theory of the exental nature of 
she immanent formations of Comcinwnen, of the events which 
‘under the Limitations af the phenomenological mmpention can be 
‘geurped within the steam of experiznoes, we mnt exclude from 
‘thin Lite Geld everthing that ie transocndeatly individual, 
therefore nlo a the trowcendent exencer, whose logical position 
lice rather in the theary of the exsential ature of the relevant 
transcandent objec 

“Thun in ita imenanence it moat admit no poitng of rack erence 
the form of Being, wo watersents touching thet validity oF non 
validity, oF concerning the ideal poubility of objectives thet 
shall correspond to them; nar may i enabtich any Jame bearing 
anther erential nature. 

To phesomeaclogy that proposes really to limi ite! to the 
region of pure experience, no tranmcendent-eidetic regioan and 
iacpliaes can contnbote, in principle, any promisee at all. 
‘ince, then, it in ove parpoe, in canfarwuty with dhe wandard 
ready refered ¢o above, to give to phenomenology precisely 
‘this purity of eoursructiog, aad wines ionsen of the greatest philo- 
sophical import depeod on deliberately preserving this purity 
‘throughout, we axpresly assction ox exiouion of the orignal 
reduction to all twanscendent-esdetic domains and the ontop 
which belong to thea, 

So, jont ax we disconnect the seal Netuwe of phytic 
and the expirical natural sciences, we disconnect abo the eietic 

the sciences whic stndy what belonge casentally 
tothe pbyuical objectivity of Neture as wach. Geomet 
the “pure” plyica of matter enter the Drakee. Sins, jor ax 
‘we hare mapended all sciences dealing with the matare 
cf suimala and all meni) seicasce concerning personal beingy ix 
personal relationships, concerning men an mbjects of history, e2 
bearers of culure, and treating who of the cuter! inettutions 
‘theavelves, and so forth, we also auspend now the edetic cienrsa 
‘which eoreapond to these objectives, We do eo, im avance and 

‘THe YHRNOMENOLOGICAL REDUCTIONS — 17 
i Sen} for, an everyone knows, thee sidetic arimows (rational 
peychology, vocilogy, for inatance) have uot ax yet received a 
Droper grounding, at any rate none that is pore and free from all 
objection. 

‘With reference to che philosophic functions hich phenowen- 
‘ology in called co wndertake, it also advisable here agua co tate 
‘explicitly that in the investigations caried out above the alvolte 
independocs of penomenalagy of al sciences, including the ede 
‘clces in their material bearing, bos bees firey extabliahed. 

‘The given extensions of the phenomenological reduction fave 
obviously not the Fundamental imporance which attachea to the 
original phin discumerion from the natural woeld and the 
sciences which relate to it. Through thie pri reduction it Grat 
came possible to foeus attention oa the phenomenalogical fed 
fa i opens ofS Oe Tes mie heen 

the firs, are thus aeetdary, but by 0 mem there- 
Er of eal ingore. 

$61, Tam Memooovoorca: Tseruxtance oF nar SremDexns 
‘Timor or Pumvowmeouccien, Reovenioks 

Arystematic thory ofthe phesomenological reiuctions ma whole 
such a we have here attexpted to outline has greet importance for 
pPhenomesslogical method (end in the wequel for the method of 
‘transcendental philosophical reeeare’ generally). Its explicit 
“brucketings” have thia bearing oa method that they continually 
semind vn thatthe relevant apberes of Being 2nd Kaowlodge le, 
fan principle, cue those which require to be oti in the wy 
rope: t9 transcendental phenomenciogy, and that every intra 

the phenomeaciogical domain exuld but be tsken immediately 
‘oe granted, win the case with domnioe thet pence netura 
‘empirical scting, oc could we bot reach ie hrough a sere tranal- 
‘tou from the empirical tothe edetcsemdpoine, mathe geametelal 
domain can be reached, ahall we my, starting from the empirically 
pedal, ¢ would not then stand is need of any elbornts reductions 

ste PURE FHENOMENOLOGY 
‘with the dificult considerations arising thesefrem, Marcove, if 
‘perstnt temptations to 2 fallacious coetbmis did not exit, 
‘more purticaty ia the interreton of che objeriviea of the 
‘sdctic disciplines, we should mot have zetded co separate #0 
carefully the single eee in the proses. semptstions are 
0 wrong that they even testes those who in cera particular 
lanai have reed thertcives from ll gearra misconceptions. 
‘We nate in the fist place the extmardinaily widenprad dis- 
‘owition of our time ta ilerprat the cides gpchalgically. Even 
‘any wha call cheusatves ideas bavoyieMod tit; and indeed, 
senerally speaking, the inhscace of empiricist views on eat 
thinkary has beea » sxroog axe, Thom who whe idem cr ences 
for “mental onacrsctions”, who with respect to the operations of 
‘canuciousnen through which “concept” of clour wl ebape re 
require, drum from inrited examples of tags with colours 
and shapes, confuse the conecioussee of thee even, colout 
and thape resating from the uomentary Aatuition, with theer 
ceoces themuelve,ancibe tothe Bow of eonecioussce an x real 
att of it what isin prinlple transcendent to it. But hat aon che 
ane had + corruption of paychology fr it affects the purity of 
‘the empirical eoaseionsneas; on the other hand (and that ia what 
bere concerns us), i ia 8 cacruption af phenamenalgy. If thes 
the region we are secking isto be saliy discovered, it in west 
imports that we shoul reach cles understanding co this post. 
‘But we compas thia eet naturally wen we follow our own truck, 
‘theft instance by s geen juriscation of the eideiceneraly, 
and then, an x moce specific wtp in connexion with the theory of 
phenomenologica! reduction, by the auspending of the eidetic, 
"This wuspensioa bad indeed t9 be confined to the eideics of 
the transoendent individual sbjectvitien in all the meanings 
which thew tracendenees bear. A new a5d fundamental phate 
‘of thia whole question mast bere be coxaidered. Granted that we 
hve already fred ourveive from the tendency t0 interpre 
‘exsenoce and cxsentia] contents paychologicaly, it as new and big 
tap farther forward which doce net by aay mouza follow the 
vic step a8 & matter of course, when the frusfal dininction 
hich me have briefly indicrted aa thet berween dreaaaent snd 

‘THE PHENOMENOLOGICAL REDUCTIONS — oi: 
transcendent enence ‘a percived xod consistently cbecrred oa a 
czmions. On the one side cmcneae of th fermions of comtcoms- 
‘eat dtelf, on the other easences of individual evente which 
eumicend coascioamen, emetons therefore of that which aly 
“declares” itaelf in foemations of connciouenee; “cxnatnting” 
elf, for instance, though sensory xppearznom, a indeed 
‘Capeciouance require. 

Tn may ov cae, a any at, the second step, though theft 
Jad bona taken before it, gave me great éiffcuty, No attentive 
reader of the Logical Sudice could ow mise this. The Sire 
step i there cared oot with uxheuieting decsion:the right ofthe 
‘ides to be its own self a» agaiast the aterpt to Interpret it 
poychologicaly i untied in Setai—very auch agisa the nense 
ofthe tae which reacted so vehemently agisat “Platooisn” and 
“Logical Abyolutin’”, But an roger the wocond sep, in certain 
hectic a in thse conceming the logio-categorial objectives 
and the object-giring cocaciousnem of thee, itis quite decaively 
taken, whereas is ther developments ofthe eae volume there 
obvious cation, nua far, azely, a the concept ofthe logical 
ropeition i referred now to the logico-cazgoricl cbjectvity, 
sd now to the correspoeding emence immanect is the judging 
thought. Iti indeed hard for the beginner in phenomenclogy te 
Jearn to mate ix reflesion the diferent wandpeints of conscroun- 
stat with their diferent abject coca. Bur that hols forall 
rvenoe-domaia which do not theauelves beg to the irars- 
rence relatiomhips of conscivumncas. Tis aight must be won 
not only in respect of the formul-lgica and the oatalogicel 
‘aeoeca and easedor-conten (thas for easesces such a8” propos 

manifold” and wo forth), but alan in repect of the easencea whi 
are taken from the ephere of the natural workd (buch 28 “thing” 
“bodily abape", “aan”, ‘pereon””, und vo forth). An indication of 
his insight athe phenomealogica reduction in its extended form. 
‘The controlling practical thought which this exiension brings 
‘with it that, a9» matter of principle, not only he epbere of the 
tural world but all these cietic spheres ap well ehould, in 2e- 
spect of ther trae Being, provide no dats forthe phenomenologiet; 

that an x guaramee foe the purty af ita cogion of research they 
should be bracketed in reepect of che judgmenta they contain, 
‘thet nota ningle theorem, not even an eaiona, should be taken from 
‘ny of the related sciences, nor be allowed as premioe fur pheno 
smecahicl purpreaoy wane grt setbodsagicl impr 

[have just made une of the term “dogratist” We shall co that 
‘ao mecely antlogica) mmc of that word is bere intended, but that 
an afnity with the Theory of Knowledge in implied in the very 
‘ature of the tate. Thece is good ream at tia point for thinking 
cf the epistemological oppouiion between. dogmstien and cxi~ 
<i, und for designating a deme a the seenoes which yiekd 
t che redution, For it i clear from eseetial sources that the 
sciences which wre bracketed are rely jart those and all hove 
‘which wand in need of ertiises" and iodeed of citicism which 
‘they are not able on prinegle to supply thezacive, and that, oc, 
the other hand, the science which bas the unique function of 
tritcaing all Ube others aod itacf at the same time is noce otber 
‘tan phenomenelogy.* To put it more precisely: It iv the dis- 
‘inetive peewliaity of phenomenology to inciude all sciznoca and 
‘dl forms of haowiedge i the scope of ite eidetic universality, end 
indeed ia teapect of all chat which is Smmnditely transparent in 
them, of wt least would be so, if they were genuine forma of 
noreedge. The meming and legitimacy of all the immediate 
seartiog points pomible and of all immediate steps in posible 
sethed coms within ia fuiaicton, Therefore all cidetic (4 
sccaditionaly and anivensally vali) forms of knowiedge lie 
<xeloned in phenomenology, and though them the root-problesa 
of “poaibity”, ax bearing on any scence or form of knowledge 
i is pint 506. Faesoreology us tes Ge wre ind fr she 

‘THE PHENOMENOLOGICAL REDUCTIONS — 15 
cone may cart to consider, ceive an newer. Ax applic, pheno 
taanelogy roppiis the definitive eri of every fundamentally 
ditinetscience, an in patina there with the Stal determination 
af the eenes in which their object cas be ssid 10 “be”. Tt wlso 
‘laren thie methodology in the Right of Soe principles. Ie Sa 
erefore not varprising that phenomensiogy is wy it were tho 
secret longing of the whole philowphy of modern times. The 
‘undasnemal though of Dewcarmes in ita wonderful profundiy ia 
sdeeady preming towards it; Hane ageis,» pyebologialpislo- 
soph of the vebool of Locke, almost cata is domain, but hia 
yet are dazfed. The fatto perceive it erly 4» Kant, whowe 
{Festt intuitions fine become quia clear to us afer we have 
‘brought the distinctive features of the phenomenological feld 
{nt the for of full conacioemes, It thea becomes evidemt to uh 
that Kant's mental gaze rated on this fe. alshough he was not 
yetable to epproprat tend recoguiz it m the ome From which 
to work up on bia wa linea rigorous science af Essential Deg. 
‘Thun the Trwsacendental Deduction of the fr edition of the 
Critique of Pace Reasc, for instance, already moves wicty on 
phenomenological ground; but Kant misinterpret the eum e 
paycbologial, and therefore eventually abasdens it of his own 
accord. 

‘Meapwhile we are anticipating subsequent developments 
(hove of the Third Book of this whole work). The anticipatory 
atement may serve to justify us im referring to the group of 
sciences subject to reduction us dogmatic and opposing phexo- 
menology to them as seience of a wholly dierent dimension. 
‘At the mine time we draw parallel cantras Between 1 dapmatis 
tod 1 plunomenolpical standpelnt in which case the natural stand- 
point abviourly omnes under the dogmatic es 2 xpecal cov, 

Nowe 

‘The fact that the epscife phecamecologia! ruspensions 
ves have put forward are indcpeadeat of the eidetic euypension 
of individual existence megpests the query whether within the 
‘ompuu ofthe former ax empirical xieace (Tattachewmnncacha) 

imenology. It ie anawered in s way when we come to see why it 
ib that every arene €9 begin naively with « phenomenologial 
seicoce on a basa of fact lefere comping the phenomenological 
‘theary of encarta! being ia mere somsense, Tecan be thown that 
there cennot be by the nde of the exre-phenomenclogical iciencon 
of fact « phenomenclogical science of ft thet rane parallel 10 
them and ia co-ordinate with them, aod Sut on the ground that 
(ha fal epprsiseat of al acienore of fact lead to tho uniting 
within single nyztem ofthe pbewomenological coanexions core: 
‘ponding to all thete seicocee, conperiona that have o exoerete 
reference and function a8 pomibiies with » concrete beanng: 
end that thin interconnected unity is no other than the Gald af the 
phenomenological scence of fact that wan felt to be lacking, This 
science in o0e ofits main aspects ia tha the "phenccaenslogical 
‘wanefurmatin" of the endinary scienocs of fact, made pomible 
throwgh idetic phesomenclogy, axé the only quemion that 
‘remains over isthe extent to which something, farber can be 
done fron the potion thus achieved. 

THIRD SECTION 

PROCEDURE OF PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
IN RESPECT OF METHODS AND PROBLEMS 

xIRST CHAPTER 
PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS OF METHOD 

$69. Tax Brac, Inroxcinca roe Pumvouonotooy oF 
Consmmexnont or Mzrac> 

If we observe tho rules (Normen) which the phenamenstogial 
‘eduction prescribe for wri, an they require usta do, we etietly 
‘cupend all tranzceadences; if we tale experiences pure, in 
sccordance with their own eieeaiel metus, then after all we here 
set dows there upens up before ve x Sed of eidetc knowledge. 
(Once the dfcatie of the Sent beginnings have bean oreronme, 
‘wo petorve it vtretbing eoclmly in every direction, The variety 
cof the species and forms of experiece with thir eatential natures 
‘eal and inteatlonal is indeed inexhauatble; and eacrespondingly 
ceclew is the variety of the exential eonnexions and apodeictially 
‘neceeary truths that have their ground is those. Thus this infin 
field of te o prim of consciouscew whick in iu unique ringularity 
das never yot come to its own, never wrctly been wea at wl, mt 
tow be brought wider exktivation and the full value of frufage 
drawn frova it. Hut how foe the right beginning? Jn pint of 
fact, tho beginning is bere the meet dificult thing of all and 
the sitution out of the ontiny, The rine field dow not tie 
tpcead before our gaze crowed with given products, 0 that me 
could slmply geaap them, confident of being able to make them 
objec ofa seience; nor can we be sure of the roetbod we need 
for our advance. 

For when we week to press forward on oor ows ssoount and 
{increase ous knowledge of this new field, we lack the dete ofthe 
natural standpoint, atura objec in particalar, which through 
long-standing experience and the thaught-pracic of millenniums 
have beoouse thoroughly fuiliar through heir variou datisctive 
properties, their clensents, nd their lew. Here the unknown wil 
‘borders on the known. All methodica! labour ettsches itself to 
act, ail improvements of method to methods aleady ix vic; ut 
ccancern generally merely withthe developing of special method 
‘which ft in with the already prescribed end well-ecablished 

oy FORE PHENOMENOLOGY 
requizenents of an approved scicatiic canon of method in 
seoctal, and in the work of discovery they tals their lead from 
these requirements, 

“How dificrent in phenomenology! Its not only that pier tall 
satter-deterining method it nanis eceady in seed of a method, 
0 us to being into the focus of spprebemsion the content of the 
‘ure trnacendental consciousness; sat ony that i calla furtber- 
more fer a wesrlacme dvesion of mind from natural ata of which 
we are conrantly consis acd with which the newly intended 
object in amit were interwoven, so that we ar always is danger of| 
canfaing the one with the bee; there als lacking al that hep 
‘ux oo euuch in the aphare of natural object, the famliarty won, 
from practised intuitions, the favour conferced by ways of thinking 
{eft ready to one's hand and traiticnal methods grown wcxooth 
1 their tank, vena well-erablshed method in his eld wil ack, 
‘te hopeful confeace which derives is nourstnent from various 
‘nuconsful and approved applications if the recogzized seienoen 
snd eho pune. 

Phevomenology which tay receatly come forward bar 
tel to econ WE real veep eget har ety 
tw develo it mcthod, to wis new forms of knowlcdge from new 
‘inl of aateca thas to ceach the onmpletet clears cencer- 
ing the rocaning and the ealiity ofthe method which ru esable 
ito Bod ts own apsint all vecous critics. 

Whence it fllowe—and this i very auch exore important an 
4 relates to x matter of principle—ttat phenomenology is bound 
‘byitsemential neture to make th clair af being “int” philosopby 
and to provide the means forall the rational cticim that needs 
‘abe performed ths it therefore demands the completes freedom. 
fom all swarptions and absolute refexive insight in celation to 
‘el. ita wn eaten cate to relic the competent clez~ 

For these reasons the painstaking eforts spent in winning 
lnsighe into the basic growsds of the meted, into that which 
‘ight from the cute and continnoutly throughout ity whole 
development in decisive for the mew eciesce, Inve 1 significance 

PUSLIMINARY CONSIDARATIONS OF M1H0D 1p 

for phenomenclogy which ia quite different from thet which 
analogous efforts could ever have for ote seinacoe, 

$64, Tae Sexe.somrpcoo of rim PHRKOMENOLOGET 

‘Let us consider fist u doubt a to method which might at once 
‘heck the Eat stepe we take. 

‘We disconnect the whole natural werk and ll eidetic spares 
‘of the transcendent onder, atd abould thereby reach 3 “pure” 
concious. But did we uot ay jut sow “we” disconnect, and 
an we 1 phenomenalogistn st oureloes out of actoa, we who 
sell remain mesuber of the natral world? 

‘We may soon conc ouraeives ths there it uo ral dificult, 
provide we have not shied the rearing of the “diconnecting 
‘We can even continse undsrirbed to apeak esi ots eapacity as 
atonal human bongs we have to speak; for as pheoomenclogiet 
‘we should not cease ro remais natural human beings nd to set 
‘vurvelves dawn ws wock alvin our epeecs. But ass pieceof method, 
tnd in respect ofthe set propositions which are to fod their place 
in the fundamental work ox Paracmenslogy all > be brought 
‘ut, we apply to curelve the rule of phesomesological reduction 
‘which beurs ox our own expici! axidecr as wel an on that of 
ther beings, forbidding ua to introduce a propaition which con 
‘ins, implicitly or explicit, woch references to the natural Order. 
So far asthe refereace to individual exstesce ia concerned, tbe 
phenomeoologiat proceeds ike any other eietic worker, ¢4., the 
‘eometer. Ta their scien teaninen geocaece Srequestly epeak 
of themes and their work; but the eubject who thinks out 
‘mathematics does aot enter an such into tbe eidetic content of 
‘ue mathematical propositions themeelre, 

$65. Tru Rarsumecnoe Pemencmonocy Rac 10 cro Own Sin 

‘Agais, it might be a stumbling-block to someone that wheres 
from the phmomenclogicll mamdpoiat we direct our mental 
sence toward this or chat pure expecience with a view to studying 
5, the experienoes of this inquiry itself, of thin mdoption af « 

od FORE FRENOMENOLOGY 
standpoiat and this direction ofthe meatal glance, then in their 
‘loenomenniogical purity, choold beloog o the domals of whet ia 
‘0 be shaded, 

“That wo isnot a dial. It is precisely the meme in prycholoay, 
and the case is aime in logics) aoetica, The thinking of the 
ychologat i itself something peychological, che thinking of the 
logician vomething logical, camely, an coming ite within escape 
ofthe logical corms. This buci-refereece upon oneself would be 
1 oarer for concern only if upon the phcnamenclogsa, paytho- 
Joga), and logical knowledge of thin morsentary thinking of thin 
momentary thinker depended tae knowldge ofall thre matteca 
in the relevant aphere of study, whichis, mo anyoor cAn 9c, a 
bean! presupposition. 

intr tha a certain diclty atacher co all dicipline that 
see referred Dack upon thensselves, apd is. tia respect chat the 
firt introduction to thets, wp also'the Smt seious inquiry into 
thie import, most operate with certain secearin of method 
‘hich they have frst in the sequel to shape in » sciemtieally 
elaquate way. With: preliniary and preparatory conwidertiant 
‘oth of matter and method, the sketch of new science could never 
‘be outlined. Bot the concepta and the other metbodic elements 
with which poychology, phenorenclogy, and so forth, i thels 
borinaings, operate in auch preparatory treatise, are themselves 
peychelogial, phenomenclegicl, and so forth, ead ft soquire 
their acientifc impress withic the sytem of the science already 
rounded. 

Obviously no relly eeioue doubt which might hinder the real 
evelopment of ruch sciences a4 of phenomenclogy in particular 
‘eed dlaturh ua in this dlzection. LF it Egores an scietce wx 
the lt of mere imei ition, pure “deecrigson” science 
of Emental Being, the general nature of ee procedre is given in 
sdvance os something tha errs no forther explanation. It haa to 
place before its own eyes us izatances ceria pure conscious event, 
‘to brit these to complete clearoew, end within this zane of rleat- 
‘eee to wubject them to analysand the epptchenion of thir 
‘exsence, to follow up the ewentia] eonnesions that can be clearly 
‘understood, to grasp what is momentarily perocived in txthful 

PRELDCINARY CONSIDERATIONS OF METHOD 51 
‘conceptual expresnons, of which the caning is prearibed purely 
dy the object perceived or in some way transparently undertood. 
1 tis procedure in ita unsophisticated feem serves at fat only to 
make one tt home iat new domain, to practise seeing, apprehend- 
ing, analysing generally within it, and 1 enovarage wore acquain 
tance with it dus, ecientific relieaion upom the exsential nature 
of the procedure uself,upen the easential eature of the typen of 
‘prevatanion which play cheir par within it, upon essence, per- 
formance, conditions of complete carmen sad icaght, sa wel as 
of compleely rue and steady conceptual expression, and more of 
the mine Lind, undertakes the fanesin of x general and logically 
rigorous methodic grounding. Followed up deliberately, it kes 
0 the character und rank of acentic method; and this, ia way 
siven cme, in the application of rigorously formulated methodic 
standards, perms of the practice of a limitag and improving 
Criticism, The ements relation of penamenclogy to ts own welt 
‘ee reveals itself im this, chat what there is methodic reflexion 
under the rubric: clearness, insight, expresion, snd the Hk, is 
‘considered and established, itself belongs on ita own vide to the 
Phenomenological main, tat alltbe reflexive anaes ae pheno- 
rcnologcal analy of the eaential nature of things, and the 
‘methodological insight» obtained in respect of tbeit onablish- 
ent come under the very nore which they formulae, Thu 
it must be possible through fresh refeioas to convince oat- 
elf on every occasion that watements in the methodologie! 
propositions aa be given with complete clarnen, that the 
concepts utilized really and truly answer to what iv gen, and 
we forth. 

‘What has jast been aid obviously olin good forall method 
logical inguiries which rvlte to phenomenology, however 
widely we might extead their Limits, and wo we can under- 
stand that this whole work which aims at preparing the way for 
Yemeni i gh eta Phseombgial 

co PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

§66. Farmers, Exssecom oF mar Comm Grom. 
‘Unuarcoow Taos 

‘Larus fellow up alle farther the moe geaeclof athe etbodo- 
legit thoughts which have Egured the previous paregraghs, 
3a phenamennlogy which clas to be nothing beyond a Theory 
of Eecotial Being developed wrhia « medium of pure iitcn, 
let wn earry throngh by the help af geren exampics of pure tan- 
sccadental consciouaeta cnn af insight ino mich Being und fate 
‘hem conceptually oc terainoloically. The words we uso may be 
drive from coramen vpeech, they mary be exbiguow, and in 
repet of their nifting senae also vague. In vo far min the way 
‘factual cxpremion they are “‘congrocat” with te intuitively gives 
ata, hey take on « define meaning as ches hie at mae artval 
tnd lar meaning; me from thie pout they can be rendered 
wieaticaly determinate 

‘Brerything indeed ia ot dane wien we have setted how the 
‘word ato be applied so an to fit ately the Satorivelyeppre- 
headed ewveace, even suppening thet in regard to chi intuitive 
prehension everything 3 exactly as it should be, Science in 
‘pense only whea the results of thought can be preserved inthe 
foem of hnawiedge and remain availabe for further thinking an 
‘pits of propositions Gtintly state in scordance with logical 
requirements but lacking the clear mupport of presentations, end 
20, understood without insight, or eae actualized efter the manner 
‘judgment. Te eequire, of coure, epeial provisions, both 
subjective and object, fr setting up at will (nd on an inter- 
_ubjective basis) the propriate ground end the actual isight. 

Gerreane to allthis is abo the cequizeznent thet the sume word 
and proposition sb! be unsecbiguowsly coceated wih cetxia 
ccwenoes that canbe intuitively apprehended and coowtitwe their 
coupled "meaning". On the ground of iariton and Thustretire 
single data to which we have grown fcr, hey il be furnished 
vith distinct and unique memings (“canceling as it were other 
forward through the force of bait) and in much x way that in sl 
the pomible contents in which thongs may be active they exin- 

PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS OF METHOD 195 
‘in their developed concept, while they love the capscity to 
adept themnelves (o ether intsitive data with other completed 
‘ommnoes, And since in the knguages in general use foreign tech 
ical terms ace, 90 far as pomtble, evcided and on good grounds 
1t fee constant neceseity, in face of the existing ambiguities 
ondinary speech, tobe caubous and frequendy ret whether sword 
‘feed for use Ina previous content may be employed in some new 
context in a seaae which is rally the am ax before. But thi ia 
‘ot the place to go mare cloely ‘nto these and similar rule (ito 
such, for ioxtance, sp relate 19 wleace aa shaped through inter- 
‘ubjective intercourse). 

$67. Muruop or Cuaxoncanon. Tos “Nason AND 
“Rewormes” of Gram Data 

(OF greater interest to us are certain comnderations of suthod 
which, intead of seating t0 the verbal expression, reat to the 
‘avence 1nd the euental conmensone which they once fixated and 
now expreas. Ifthe glance of inguiy is turned towarde experience, 
{ese will gearilly be preseed with certs eins ofeartent 
tnd vague esac of dence which prevent thei bau eeplayed 
tw reaching. conclusive raul, whether siogular or idetic. The 
‘matter would stand otherwise if, interertod not wo much in the 
‘experiences for theie own ake ws inthe manner oftheir prevent 
tion, we wished to stdy the cuemtal nance of emptinew and 
‘agucnem themselves, fot these on their vide a2€ not vague but 
are prescuted with flex clearness. Bus if thet itself which is 
‘aque known, the unclear douangizage, shall we say, of memory 
cor fancy, produces it own exexce, that which it produces 
aly be vornething imperfect where the el inbiton which 
lunuectie cur spprehension of the essence are on a lower plane of 
clearsem, oo ako are the appeekmuionr of the estence, nd corrcla~ 
‘iraly the objet apprehended hon 22 “ecloer” roraning, it ham its 
isorderly mixtures, ta lack of proper distinctions boch within 
and without. It in imposible or “only oughly” peal ta Beise 
‘whether what ia apprehended now here and now there ithe attoe 
(the same Being) ar someting diferent: it cannot be determined 

16 PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
what componsots are really present, and what the components 
‘which already abow chenselves in vague seief, and give but 
‘wavering indvation oftheir awa presence, 

‘We must then bring to the normal dinance, to complatecleerne, 
vwbat any tie Sours before us sifting and unclear and more 
(or lees far removed, inhutionally, yo that cur intuitions of the 
‘ewence may be given « corresponding value in which the intended 
‘xseoces and cagentialreationn ere given to the Fullest posible 

sadvanage. 

‘Appreboasion of Ue eaence lw accordunly ite own grader of 
learnt, just aa ithe case ofthe particalar which Gout before 
‘ur guae. But for exery ewence, jst ax for the corrspanting 
‘phase of it rnderdual counterpart, thee exit, #0 to wpeth, a 
‘leat nearnen, in whuch 8 gevennee in reapect ofthe graded 
tenes sbsoline, Le, pore vel giversem. The objective slerent 
oes aot ely mectobe's paz us “uel” ve gener nd we are ot 
only aware of a» “given, but « confrou usa « elf given én 
tts party, ehaly ond entirely as iin elf Bo far asx venige of 
‘unelearaeas remuns over, 40 far too doce « factor of ebacitity 
ater into the "wel"gsven phase, which therefore does 20. pase 
within the ciccle of light reserved for that which is given pure. 
In the case of fll wreeornest, the polar oppourte of full lexrae08, 
the phase of greens, is not reached at wl, coascouanees 1 
"obeure intiats wo Jeger, a the wsct sense 30 lenges "give 
jeer” a all We seus uocordingly atte the cater a ollowe:— 

‘ator consciourats i tba fragman! seme of the erm wn’ ht 
Intstable over agains the emovatable, the clear over aginst the 
‘hare, these sce paral oppenices, Simerly: Grader of 
‘iver, of intuitabitty, of elearaen. The sero-ust is obscurity, 
‘the nity i full area, nrubity,prenness. 

Bur genase i: tha cansenen is aot ‘0 be undetood as 
peimerdalgienness, therfore nota grencran ofthe perceptual 
ye, We dant ity sh ag” with “perl 
_ioen”, sath the “embodiai trict ene, “gave” 
se aligien” may be ted indicat acco tad 
the me of the super-suficcat expression should nerve oly 
exclude pera i that wider oe in which it aad of ery 

PRELIMINARY CONGIDERATIONS OF METHOD 195 
hing preseatod that it iy given in presentation (though nybe 

5 etal woes: « 

<onaclous experience, or, 2 put i more cleatty, whether the pure 
go "arms fomerdt” a “piven cotter” and eveately “gragn” 
tt ot does not do ao, Tus, far inmanse, “given perceptwiae", 
inst of being antamoat to “perceived” isthe mrict and wera 
sense of the mppribensiona af tia given object ait iy 
em no mere than “ready to be perceived”: Ubawine " 
fancy-wine” need not mess vo mach ss prmped thrsgh a more- 
iment of faney", and so generally, end indeed with respect aio 
fo all grades of clearmees or bgority. We may refer tna i 
sdvance tothe “readinen", which ata later tage we wil dicuse 
morn tlonely, but Je it be also sated that under the heading 
‘rreanen, bere 20 contrary indication is edded or obviously 
fiplied by the concent, we sedrsand es en inched fattor tha 
tehe appribended, and, where che givenncaa of the ewence 
‘rnvemed, the being apprehended primordaly. 

Ts 

a PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

(peaies or lower clearseas—a tone or 2 colons, far instance, Let 
tu exchede all apprebensions which reach beyond the intuitively 
‘Bren, We have then to deal with ecrial gradations that develop 
within the frameworkia which the ictutable can reall be intuteds 
‘nnuizabiity a8 wock under the rubric cearsea admit af continu- 
cs diferences ofthe intenaive type, the intensities tating from, 
zero, but cheing atthe upper ead with «fied limiting value. To 
Chis, cue might ey, the lower grade, ia a cersin esse, point 
foeward; when we fook at « Gower in some mode of imperfeet 
clearness, we “mezn” the colour ait in “in ise!” and this i 
precisely that which ia given when the claroess is perfect, And 
{et we mut not allow oursehes to be Jed satray by the metaphor 
‘of “poiating”—es though one thing were 1 sign for another—and 
‘one shoal be jut ax chary of apeaking here (we recall what we 
have already aoted once before) of exhibiting the clear “in 
Smelt" through the unelear: as the property of w thing, maybe, 
“exhibits” tx inntion throughs veasory phases, naculy, through, 
perepectine appearances, The graded difference of clearness are 
proper Uonghout lo th mode of bing given. 

Te in quite ctherwise when an apprehension thet reaches bryoad 
what in intuitively given weaves empty apprehensions lata cho 
zea intuitive apprehension, for now, by deprece a it weee, an 
Increasing ameunt of what is exapily yrvented can become 
infaitable, a of what ia already intutable expeily presented. Thus 
‘the procedure of making clear 19 onttef consis bere in two 
interconnected seta of proceser: rendering intaitable and enhancing 
‘the clarnes of what is sreody intitle. 

Tn there words we have described the exnmtal tare of the 
orm procar af making somthing cieer. For es cule no pure 
‘ntulsons are present, and there are no pare e=pty presentations 
‘pimting over into pur inouitions; it is the impere iatwtionr which, 
‘intermediate rates ranybe, play che chief pert, bringing their 
objective matter on certuia sides or in certain phaues intuitively 
Defore us, and on other sides or in other phases yiclding mere 

PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS OF METHOD 67 

§69, Tux Merson oy Arranomoine Esmmeas wits Prarict 
Cue 

Perfectly cae epprchosion as this sdvamage, cat in View of ta 
own caveats) nature if permita wa with absolute certainty to 
ideafy and distinguish, to rdbte and make explicit, enables 

‘briefly, to cary out “with inight all “logial” acts. Under th 
lam comme the act of apprehending the etree, to wise objective 
correlates, msalreidy ested above the dinetions of earness,20¥ 
zat familia us, ae tranakrred,jurt a on the otbe se the 
rethodologicl knowledge we have ast gained is ranaferred tobe 
bjaative of vecuring that the cazence sal be perfectly pracated. 

"Thus in general the method whuch in « basic part of the method 
of eideuc cence enerallyia coe oF going forward step by wep. Th 
‘articular intuitions whlch minister to the apprehension of the 
memnce may be areedy sufcienily clear to reader poole » 
completely dear gravy of tome essential geaecaly, and yet not #0 
‘Hoque ot satay he main intention; Ure ie lack of clearooe 
su regards the clover definitions ofthe interwoven ewences; thus 
‘we need ta sratnize our Duvtrative fasten more cluely oto 
contrive othees that are better euited, in which the pertinent single 
features let confured and obucure veand oat und can than be 
transformed into data ofthe clearest kind. 

‘Wo can always bring the data neares to us even in the sone of 
Bicwre appreheation. Woat ia obsezrely prescutzd comes close 
(© usin is ona peculiar wry, eventaaly knocking st the door 
of intuition, though it need not for that remoa pasa over the 
‘threabolt (ead perbaps cannot do so “on account of paychological 
‘reiatances”). 

‘We have further to coxaies that shat pines to at the moment 
dar 0 determingbe margin, not yet deerme, wd pouesing its 
‘wa way of effecting the trasaician through 1 procese of “un- 
folding”, of veparting out into eerioe of presenatizns wt Gat it 
may be pulting ooce maar itn obscurity, thea energing once 
gain in the presentational ephere, until the object referred to 
(des Inimrts) paves into the brightly Ut cirde of perfor 
preseataton. 

ot ‘PORE paeNoMeNLocY 

Further, we would dew auton tothe poist tht it would be 
Bring tao for to ty that al sf-avideateppechenton of theese 
‘Semands thet the nakwned particalart thar concrete fillet 
‘Boal Be fully char Ten quite wicient when grieping events 
iferenons of the moet gearal Lic, a thos betwoen colour and 

fully given, but not a yet the dufereace. That's «shocking way 
‘of putting it, but I couki not see how to avad it. Let the reader 
figure the siruation for hunaell ia viv watuiion. 

§ 70. The Ratz oF Pacarrion ox Ts Meron yor Ccamirenva 
‘ro Basencs. Tue Prrvicacen Poorriow or Pax Faxct 

‘Lets, an futher ste, socentuate soe ofthe spestlly mporant 
features ofthe meihod of appeebending cmence, 

It belongs to the geoecal and exsential nature of immoedsste, 
insti ewence-npprehension (end the points one tate have 
‘trendy ecesged)® that 2 can be casied oat on the bats of the 
‘mere pve framing of particle illustrations, But euch presenting 
wader the form of fancy, fo iaance, ean at we have Just been 
showing, be so perfectly clear ao erable us to see and apprehend 
perfectly the ewentil nature of thzgs. In genera, perception with 
ita primordial dato qual, ead exercal perception, of course, i 
particle, as advantages of te ow: us compared with ll forms of 
repeientation. And this, mareaver, nat merely ax the empiica! 
act whereby we Sx the content of an objective expenence—euch 
fang does not at presxt concern ui—but ws te baas for Ecraly 
centablihing the cmential being of things on phenomenological 
ines, Outer peroxption has it perfect clearness in reapest of ali 
‘objective phimes winch reach their mode of gvennew realy within 
it and em primoedal lines, Bot i¢ sia offer, with the eventaal 
subistance ofthe reflexion decid beck upon it clear and eteady 
eile for general aalyses of a phenorenalogical kind, dtecied 
‘amanda eaveces, and even, ox clover inepection, for analpes of 

+ Ohba oe es. 

PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS OF METHOD 159 
actos wel. Anger rected upon may dopa, quickly modifying 
‘ta content, Tt iv alo not always available like perception, not 
producible at plomure withthe help of conveniene experimental 
pperstas. To study it reflesivly tm i primerdiality mould be 
to etudy an anger in process of dissipation, whlch has its own 
ssazing, no doubt, but perhaps nt that which was tobe rudied, 
‘Outer perception, on the contrary, 10 much more accessible an 

pate” under ebexica, and we are able, withart 
special trouble in ing the conditions of cleaceas und keeping 
‘Within the limit of primoedalty, to study in general is emental 
‘aruce, and tat au ofits om compoceats and emential correlates. 
[if eoe mye thet perceptions ls have their diference of coarnena 
(in relation, namely, the cases of pereepion)eam the dark 
fog, endo forth, we wil not let ourselves be Srawa into Farther 
discussion as to whether these differences are quite so similar to 
those already referred to as they are here asurned to be. Let it 
suffice that perception ia not ordinarily conditioned by fg, xl Unt 
clear perception, as it ia needed, is always at our disposal. 

‘Now if for purposes of method the advantages of primordislity 
‘were very marted, we should have to consider where and how and. 
to what extent i¢ could be realized in the different types of experi- 
‘ence; which of these types come specially neer in this reapect to 
‘the pre-eminently privileged domain of sensory perception, and 
many simile questions, But mit awe can regard al thi. There 
sre reasons why, ia pheaomeaology ax in all eiderc acenoes, 
rnin, ‘ot, to-speak moce accuretely, free fancier, esmume 

rivlged portion over apsint pererptions, nd thst, roe the 
skeet of perception tl, excepting of cours thas of the 

iar peso hin be ah poesia uni ite 
imagery vary moce than he does with percepts of figures or 
‘models; and thia ie true avo of the “pare” geometar, who dia- 
Densee with the methods of algebra. In fancy itis true he must 
‘oil ta secure clear intuitions, and from ths labo the deeing and 
the model seta hire free. But in actual drawing und modelling be 
is rentrcted; in faney he bus pecfect freedom in the arbitrary 
‘ecarting ofthe figures be bas imagined, in running over continmous 

02 PORE PHENOMENOLOGY 

secea of pomible shapes, isthe production therefore of aa infinite 
‘number fnew cations; feeder which opear up him for te 
firs time un eazy into the spacious reals of emental pousbility 
‘wih thes infinite bocisons of caezta) krawiedge. The drawing 
therefore fllow normally efter the constrociona of fancy a0d the 
pure cietic thought built upoo these 281 basis, and nerve chief 
‘a fx tngea inthe proceat already previously gone through, thereby 
stking it entice to bring it hack to conaciournese once agein. Even 
‘whare the thinker "receates™ over the igure, the 2m prOceeck 
cof thought which link themselves onto ic have faney-preceass ux 
‘thee nnaory basa, and itis the reauka of this work of faney which 
{fix the new line on the gure. 

‘Reeping to the move genertl comidertions, the position for 
‘the phenamenclogist, who han to deal with experiences an reduced 
and wich the correlates which ementially belong to them, i 
substantially the same. Tere is alo un infinite number of eovetin 
{orm of the phenomenclogica) kind. The worker in phenomen- 
‘logy, 8 in otber Fields, con make only x limited use of the help 

id through the primordial order of givennew. He bas inde 
at his dxponl mx primordial date all the rain eypesof perception 
‘and representation. He has them as percept ustrasons for 
phenomenology of perceptan, of fancy, af memary, and4o forth. 
For the moet pact he has Likewise at ‘his dapows) in the apbare 
of the primordia! examples for judgment, napposls, feline, 
‘oltions. But ntueally not for alt pomsibie epoca forma, just a8 
lie us the geoseter depends on drawings and models for the 

nite variety of is carporeal types. Here to at all events the 
Freedom of research in the repos of the easence arcemarily 
<decands thet one should operate withthe help of fase. 

tia naturally importot, we the other band (once agin at in 
romety, which has recently and not idly been sntaching great 
‘value to cellecionn af modela and the lik}, to muke sch ise of 
fancy in that service of perfect Searneae which we arehere demand- 
ing, to use it in the free transformation ofthe dee of fancy, but 
previously alo to fructfy it hrough the richest and best cbaerva- 
‘fous poesibie in peissardial anu; necing, of coure that this 
‘rostifying doesnot ionply thet experience as och canbe the round 

FRELDAINARY CONSIUERATIONS OF MANIHOD 301 

of validity. We can deaw extraordinary profit froze what history 
thas to offer un, sad in ail sicher meanare from the gift of art and 
‘particularly of poetry. These are indeed fru of imaginstica, but 
in ceapect ofthe originality of the new formation of the abutdance 
of detailed features, axd the eytcmatic continsity of the mctive 
forces invaived, they greatly excel the performances of our om 
fancy, and moreover, gives the understanding grasp, yaaa through, 
the suggenive power of the medis of artistic presentation with 
quite apecial cage into perictly clear fancice. 

‘Hence, if anyane foves parsdoa, he can rally nay, and say with 
trict truth if he will alow far the amcbipuicy, that the ele 
which maker up the feof phenomenology ar of all eideical sciece 

"fiction", that Getion ia the source wheoce the knowledge of 
‘ermal tetha” drawn it auatenance.! 

570. Tim Promiznt or Tae Pouraruiry ov « Desearprive 
Bene oy Exrommcs 

Jn the preceding pares we have repeatedly described phesomen- 
logy quit frankly aa descriptive veieoce. A fundamental quce- 
‘om of method is epuin raised, and with it a doubt which checks 
ut a ee pres eagerly forward inta the new territory. Ist right (0 
1c phenomenology the cins of pare dexrigton) A dacriptie eddie: 
in hat not nomeingalogeher perverse? 

‘The motives to auch questioning are sufficiently familia (0 al 
of ws, He who, lite ourselves. ie feeling bia way, 90 to speaks in 
1 new eidtiy aching what reseurchen are here possible, what 
‘points to stat from, what reethods to adopt, places involuntenty 
awards the old, highly developed eidetic disciplines, towards 
the muthecatical therefore, and 2 particular twearde geometry 
snd arithmetic. But we notice at once tht so aut own. case these 
<liciplinescanmot he appealed to for guidance, thet the conditions 
Sn thelr ean ae easraly different. There is indeed some danger 
here thatthe novice wha has not yet come secon any bit of genuine 

oo PORE PHENOMENOLOGT 
bility of « phenomenology. Since the mathematical dicplines are 
che oaly aces at che preset time wich could efiectively represent 
the ides of «scent eidetic, the thought a fit does aot suggert 
inelf hat there may be will other rype9 of eideti disciplines, 
rnon-ratbematical in character, and in their whole theoretical 
‘aut radically dierent from the type etzeady known. Hexee, If 
someune Tus allowed hicaelf, on the atrcagth of general cx 
siderations, to be won over to the demand for a phesomeno- 
logical cidetic, the attempt. doomed to miacarry fram the outnet, 
to ertblih suck « ching at 2 mathematic of phenomena, my 
sminkad him ito abuodoning the very ides of x phenomenology 
‘But that agnia would be perverse, 

‘So let us in the mont general way make clear to ourselves the 
Aininctioe wrigunest of the mathematica diaciplines in opparition 
te thet of theory of experienc in ther ers! expec, ead atthe 
same time be clear se te the precise sims and methods which 
‘ould in principle be wrauited for the aphere of experience. 

$72, Cowcume, Asernact, “Maramwarica.” Scomtcas OF 
‘Ewmeriat Bre 

Let un star from the dstinction of menor aed evential ences 
info materia and formal. We eas exctode tbe formal and there- 
withthe whole group of farm, mechematical disciplines, since 
phenomenology abviouly belongs to the material Sete viens, 
Te analogy can give any guidance at alin caters of rethod, its 
inflencn shouldbe fle ment wrongly when we restrict ouraives 
to material mathematical Gaciplines euch an geomesy, and there- 
fore sk in more specific trea whether a phenaraenology mat be 
bait up, o can be Wot up, asa"“eomatry" of experience. 

Ta order to win st this point the requiite insight, we mutt not 
lena sight of sore impoctnt distncsions drawn from the general 
hooey of scene. 

‘Every theoreea wience binds an ideally limited whole of 
being together by relating it to 8 docain of Raowiedge which on 

Ct, wih sitet dengan te fevt cinpes of the flat ston, 
spice eee 

PRELDAINAKY CONSIVERATIONS Or MXHOD 205 

ita tide ia determined through » highce genus. We Gate reach « 
radical unity through everting to the highese geo ofall, 0 the 
celerant region andthe regional components of che gecu, tet i, 
te the highest geaem which uate within the regional gam and 
ave evertally grounded mutually the one in the otber. Tbe 
contruction of the highest concrete gems (the region) out of 
(genera that are partly alerstive, partly grounded inoue wncther 
(ind in thin way enveloping one another), crrespenda to the 
‘onstrution ofthe coacreta tht belang tit out of lower liens 
noes that are parlyahemative, partly grounded in one another; 
> obnaine wich temporal, spat, end material determinations, 
for inatance, in the cae of the Thing. To each region there core- 
sponde x regional Ontology wich « series of ol-limitedreginal 
sciences, which eveatusily reat on one anotber and correspond 
1a the highest geozra which Ive their unity ia the regia. Ta 
subordinate genera correspond mere disciplines or so-called 
eatin, to the genes cone ‘sctioa’, far iowtanoe, the discipline 
‘of the conic sections. Such « discipline, a will be readily grasped, 
than no carpets indepeadence no long as, in ite orms of koowledge 
and its weignings of groznda co koowiedee, it han naturally to 
‘age ef tothe whole basic group of fora of ksowledge con- 
‘cerning the essence which have thes cuit inthe sumumum genus. 

‘According asthe highest genera are regional (concrete) oF oere 
ceompanent of woch gener, are acewer mere o ebtract. ‘The 
Avision corcenponds cbviously to that between concret ad 
bert genera in general: These belong tbea to che omin ot 
one the concrete abject, aia the cietic scence of nature, at 
avother, abstract objects Ite the conSigurstionsof space tim, td 
ration, The esertal relation ofall abstract genera to concrete, 
and inthe lat renort cegional genera, gues toallabetact disciplines 
and fallledged sciences esental connexioa with thow thet sre 
concrete and regiveal. 

Precisely parale! with the divialoa of eidetic acience there 
runs, moreover, « corresponding division of exppiical sciences. 
‘They divide agnin aocording to regions. We have, for inetasce, 
Just one physical aience of nature, and all single natural sciences 

he mine 25,60: 7577 

™~ URE PHENOMENOLOGY 
ave srctly speaking mere lcipine: the impromive balance nat 
nly of idee but of expincal lene else, whith wanda to the 
credo phyvical nature generally proc co any division isto ateral 
phere, pvea these singe sciences heir unity. Moreover different 
‘rpaon em show inercouexin theoogh expiccl rule, a, fot 
{ntance, ie region ofthe phynical end tha ofthe peychica, 

Swe now later af the failiar etc acences, we ote ruck 
by the fact thet chey do not proceed by description, thet gearactry, 
for imtace, doce not grap in single inntioas, deseribe and 
claw in order the lower Sete differen, woe murmbedeae 
‘pial Sguces that can be drawn sn space, a1 do the descriptive 
ftrueal sclences in reapect of crprical natural formations. 
Geometry gives, rather, «few types of fundamectalconetrct, the 
ideas of body, aurface, point, arg, and the Bk, the tase wich 
play the controlling part in the “axioms”. With the help of axioms, 
‘a. of primitive law of Easential Being, it # now is the ponition 
to infer deductively, and in the form of exact determining con- 
¢p0 which feprencat emenoes that remain aa a ree earanged 
from our intuition, all forms that “exist in apace, i.e., all epotial 
forme that are ideally powmble and all che casential relations that 
concern them. The essential generic nature of the domein of 
(geometry, wad ia relation thereto the pure emential nature of 
Spee, is v0 ordered tat geometry can be fully cern of being 
uble ta control, through ite method, with exact precision really 
all che poutbe cases. In ather words, che varery of para forma 
tions generally hae a remarkable logical basic property, to indicate 
‘which we introdace the aumne "defie” menifld or mathematical 
manifold inthe pregnant sens ofthe term”. 

Tt hat the folowing dint feature, that x fle member of 

determines completly and wnembiguoaly ox bas of pare gical 
_ecearity the totaly ofall pou frmatior inthe domain, co that 
pial, teraloce, naling further semaisa op with 

‘We can to petit thus: A manifold of shia type an the dae 
tincive property of being “mathematical, eskeutily defacbe™. 
‘The “definition” Ie iz the apeem of axiomatic concept und 

PRELDAINARY CONSIDERATIONS OF METHOD 20 
xioms, and the “muthematicily-exhaunve" herein tt the 
defining smertins ic eletion to the manifold imply the greatest 
conceivable prejudgmes:—othing farther ia lft undewrnincd. 

‘Aa equivalent of the catoept of x defsite manifold lies alto 
{in the following proposition: 

"Brery prepotivon coxstrucad out of the devigated axiomatic 
‘cncepts, and iz accordance with any lagi frm whatever, is 
ether pure formal implication af she axioes,o formally derivable 
from these a the opposite of what they imply, tha i, formally 
contradicting the axiom; the contradiciory oppanite would then 
‘be a foraal implication of the axioms. Fw « mathaosatlaly definite 
smifld the concepts "tne" and “format impliction of the exis" 
sre oquvalet, and ewe sls the cancepta “fle” and “farmally 
{implied as the oppesite of « focmaliopliation ofthe axiom 

athe pregnant sense of he ter, 
‘The defaitons remais at « syne even when we leave the 
eaters) wpecfcation of the manifeld foly undetermined, thus 
making a generlnadon of the formalising type. Te apitem of 

tring ote moc ens sof pin 

+ Cheam he prt Lagu Uuirchos, Yok 1 4.9, 70.1 
‘ue af the samarpe eee itesdoced toni uw beBnaw of om 
Kertmeerat 

i 
Eek 

16 ‘PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

73. Arruicerion To Tar Pace of PimvoueDioto0r. 
‘Dmcmrnox oo Exacr Deramaran 

low feat then with pene ss compared with geomsty, 
1 the representative of a steral mathematica in general? Te i 
clearthat it belongsta the concaete-cietic disciplines. Experiewsa? 
suena (Brlobuiraese) which are not sbatracta Wot ouncreta 
coumiuse im scope. These, on sich, have many varictics of 
sbetract ples, and the question now ie: Do the highest genera 
‘which belong to these abet phen fore here too domtins for 
definite dacipine, fe “xathemaccal” declines after the peter 
‘of gromeny? Hive we thea ere soto seek afer «definite ayetem 
‘of taioma and to erect deductive theoriea upan jt? In other words, 
have we here also to sotk for “fundazeatal conatruca’” and to 
decive from these sonstroctively, ie deductivly, through apply- 
‘ng the exons coosacently to all ter capential formations ofthe 
Hdorsin und this easential deerrinatona) Now it belongs to the 
very eaence of wich derivation, sod this also into be observed, to 
‘ie determining fotm that is logically ssedited, and it rola, 
even if they ae "shown oa the figure”, cannot in principle be 
fgrmped in immediate intuition. We can aio vet our questi in 
‘these wore: Ia the wean of cocaciosanca« geulne mothematial 
sanifold? Docs it in ita actuality (Fattinitt) resemble physical 
racare. which indeed, if the ideal which leads the phytic in the 
last cesar in valid and is grasped through rgoross coucepes, we 
thould have to designate as x concrete defite manifold? 

tin u very imporeant pecblem of thevvetie scence how to 
seach fully cler conclusions concerning all the questions of 
principle which hare here been mooted; thus, after the Sing of 
the consept of the definite manifold, to consider the neceuary 
cottons which w materially deterained demain snus atinfy if 
It is to corcespoad to thie ides. Oe condition for thi athe ect- 
er of the "conceptual contraction” which isin no seave a mutter 
cof our arbitrary choice and of logical dexterity but in respect of 
the essumed axiomatic concepts, which must however be prescat- 
able in immedicn intuition, presappesea exacner ia the appee- 
ended erence taf. Bot to wat extent “exact” emenone can be 

PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS OF METHOD so 
found in an ewence-domain, and whether exit essences figure io 
the mubeerscture of al emencea apprebeoded in real intitins, 
and therefore ls of all the components of che ewence, these 
(ee matters that depend throughost on the peculiar nature of tbe 
domain. 

‘The problem we have jum been glancing at in inwardly ound 
tp vet the famdamestal and ail nsolved prebless of vetting 
‘out clearly on grounda of principle the relation of “description” with 
109"“dseripioe concepts", to “unarolnguous",asactdetarwinatran” 
‘with it “idea eoneper”; and running pari! to thu, of clearly 
setting out the relation a litle understood between“ Seacrgtive” 
and “explanatory” sciences. Aa attempt bearing in thus direction 
‘all be communicated in tbe sequel to these studics. At this paint 
‘we should not pourpone 120 lang the sain train of our refecoons, 
tnd we are moreover not muficeoty prepare’ to treat euch ques” 
‘ions at present in an exhaustive way. Leto suffice if in what 
follows we jux iat t some points which isa general way we may 
pethaps bring more closely home to eueies. 

$74. Descarrrive axp Exact Scomces 
Let us connect our observanons with the contra we have been 
drawing between geometry end descriptive natural aciense. ‘The 
aeortter in ot mera aetulfoncaanitabe trough senae, 
‘is the decrptve dent of satae. He doe ot, Uke the ater, 
Contract merplobel emeptrol vague ype of cnfguton, 
which on the basis of sensory intuition are directly apprehended, 
tnd, vague #3 they are, eaneeptally or terninologgesily fixed. The 
cptacr of the concept, tbe ciccaatances that they have mobile 
Ales of spplication, ne fet anaching ko them; for hry Are 
flatly indspeaable othe bere of kaowledge they weve, ab 
srw may ale may, they are within thin sphere the only cracnpts 
{uted Ii tchover orto bring te mtable conceptual exprasien 
the incitable corporeal dita i ther ineitiey pier eet 
‘hunter, we mie indeed take thea w= we find thes. And we 
<o not find them etbecwiae can in ur, and piel wnenoe an 
‘in wach case be apprehended only in that essential intuition which 

at PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

#6 be immunity analyeed, "The most pecfect geometry at its 
mont perfect pructcal catral cannot belp the deseripeive sadent 
fof ature to expeeat precisely (inexact gocmntrical ennoeptt) 
Wut which in wo phin, 00 undersunding, and so entirely 
suiuble a way he expremes ix che worda: notched, indested, 
feasahiped, umbellform, and the kke—simple cunceptn which 
ace cxrebially and nat accidentally inenact and ase therefore els0 
‘unnathenalial. 

Geometrical concepts ae “ideal concep they express some 
thing which one cansat “see”; tbeir“oigin”, and therefore thie 
conten abo is eaentally other than that ofthe devriptave concepla 
13 concepta which express the easmtial nature of things ax drawn 
‘Gtectly fom simple inition, and fot snychung “ideal”. Exact 

ave their correlates in easences, which have the characeet 
of "Ides in the Kanon reve. Ove: nguoat these Ideas or ieal 
mene wand the morphological erica, a6 cocelsten of deterip- 
tive concept. 

‘That ideation which give ideal ewenees ideal “tims, which 
cannot on principle be found in any sensory intitin, to which 
1m ovcasion morphological exences “sppcoximate” more or lem, 
ithut ever reaching them, this ideation is something eaentially 
snd radically differen frat spprehenaion ofthe enence through 
timaple “abstraction”, io which 1 pleted “phase” in the world 
of euences in set up an something intrinsically vague a simply 
typical. The amctoncy and clearent datingnshabiidy of generic 
concepls or genetic essences, which heve their scope within the 
{ux f things, should not be confused withthe exactnet ofthe deat 
concept, aad the genera whose scope includes an idcal element 
‘throughout. We ust further realize that exact sd purely devel 
thea cenet can iadoed tit tie efor, but never take each 
bers place; that however far the development of exact ecience, 
the science, that i that operates with am ideal ground-wot, 1 
plsbed, it cannot discharge the original sad authentic taka of 
‘pure desription, 

PAMLIMINARY LONSIDERATIONS Or Mzx1H0D 205 

75. Promsonomo.ocr as Dascarrrve Tesony oF Tus ERENCE 
of Pune Exrmurcan 

‘As coca Phenomenology, it xis at being a decriptice theory 
‘of th essence of pure traracendenma! experiences from the phene- 
‘menologleal standpoint, and like every deacriptive discipline, 
neither idelining nor workiog st the vubvtroccure of things, 
tas Its own justification. Whatever there may be in “redused! 
‘experiences to grap cideticaly in pure intuition, wheter ax «real 
portion of such experience or as iatentional correlate, that i it 
province, and iax vase anaros of abuclute knowledge for it. 

Sei, Yee us see mone eleaty to what extent really sccatific 
<dmeriptiocs canbe vet up on the phenomenclogica fel, with ta 
safhnite numberof eidetic concaeta, and to what vrvices they cas 
be put. 

Tt it pare of the peculiarity of consciousness generally to be 
cootiraally fuctuatng in diferent dimensions, vo that there cn 
‘be no talk of fixing any eideticconcretaor any ofthe phases whic 
‘nterimmedintly into their constitation with conceptual exactoete, 
‘Lat the, foc uatance, an experience ofthe genus “imagery of 
4 thing” anit i piven us either in phenomecologielly immanent 
peroeption or in some other (oF course reduced) intuition. "The 
Phenomenclogically paricelar object (the codetic singularity) 
in then just thi imagery of the thing in the whole wealth of ite 
concretence, precisely ait participates ia the flow of rapericace, 
with the precise determinacy or indeterminacy with which it lets 
its thing appear, som in ths arpect, now in tha, an with nt 
that digtnemnese o miatnen, thet Gserustng clearsee sod inter- 
riltent obecurity, snd wo forth, whichis peculiar toi. Its only 

‘coteciounnese, and takes it x2 an ideally seliuame essence, which 
Ike evsey ampance could pertcularize itelf not only hie of mane 
‘Wut in mumberlea inatancea. We can see at ence that 1 conveptual 
and tarminological fisetion of thie end every similar lowing 2oa- 
<retum in aot to be thought of, and that thin applies to cach of its 
‘anmediate aod to lees owing parts and abstract snpects. 

ne (PORE PHENOMENOLOGY 
If now there i no question ofan ensabiguove determination 
aie ringers in our rea of eaciptin, ii ute othez- 
‘wise with the ewecnces ut a Bigher specific level. These are susceptible 
ef eable dsscron,watbroken self Sdenthy, and werct conceptual 
apprehension, likewise of being araiyeed into component esschicts, 
‘06 scoordingly they may very properly be made subject to the 
sanditions of a comprehensive sciewtific description. 
"Thus we desecbe and determine with rigor 
‘Pevciaion the generic essence of percepcion generally or af subordi- 
Ite wedi eich she perception of pypial hinghood, asia 

ft pomible 10 give compreLensive devcciptions of the coental 
nacre of things. Moreover, jt cag to the very nature of» general 
sppeeheneion of eaences and of gexeral analyis and description 
that bereia no correpeodng dependence of what is done at higher 
sradeson what is done atthe lower. Ln poast of method we eannot 
Insist for iaatanoe, on x systematic wiductve procedure, of & 
‘wrdual moent, rang by rung, vp the aep-ladder of generality, 
‘We nom pote a further consequence. I fllowa from what we 
‘have si thet ll deductive theoriomg is exchue from phenomen= 
logy. Modiate informer are not positively denied it; but vosing 
‘that ais Anowiedge is descriptive acd muat be purely adjted 
(to immanent requirement, it follows thet inferesces, usistultable 
‘waye and mean of erery draczigtion, have only the methodological 
semis of lading us toward the facts which tin the function of 
am ennuing dicert exvental insight to vet before us aa given. 
Analogies which prest upon us ray, prinrto real ntti, upply 
‘us with conjocturea ns to the esemia! relations of things, nd from 
these may be draws inferences thet leds farther forward but 
in the end the ennjectures must be redecmed by the real vision 
af the eateatialcounesioes. So Jang 38 cis in ot done we hare 90 
smut thet me can call phenomenological. 

‘The proming question whether within the eideic domain of 
reduced phenossena (i the domain sa 2 whole oF in vom one ot 
‘ther of ita mubdiviiona) an ideataing proondure may be adapted 

PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS OF METHOD» 
sie by ede with the dexcigtve, mibetzuting for the inciable 
data pure snd rigorously conceived ideale, which might then 
indeed serve nthe Fandemeccal ners for amatheais of experiencen 
‘sd mas coumerpact to daerpice phenomoology, le indeed ot 
tected by the foregoing consicertions. 

‘Much asthe wien we have just completed mast have open 0 
inquiry, they have conaideraly furdaered oor gues, and nat only 
through bringing icto mur field of view series of important 
problems, We re now quite clear thet for che grounding of 
‘Phenomenology there in nothing ta be gained from mare eaalogics, 
I in only a mnlading prejudice co suppose that the hietocial 
method of the « pri scimoce, which are seact dal acieoom 
throughout, most be accepted without qunsion ae the pattern 
for every new method of science, and egpecialiy for our transcen- 
dental phenomenology —aa though al edeisacienoee mnat show 
cone (pe of rohod nly, thet of “exacenaen”, Trenacendentl 
phenomenology us descriptive acience af Easentia! Being belong 
fa fat 10 main can of idee wince wholly other chan that to 
which the mathematical sciences belong. 

SECOND CHAPTER 
GENERAL STRUCTURES OF PURE CONSCIOUSNESS 

76. Tus Tanaar of rue Foctowmo Staves 
‘The real of ermsoendectal consciouscess had proved, asa rtuit 
of phenomenologes] redortion, to bein cera defiite wen, 
realm af "ahaolute” Being. It js the origina! category of Being 
_Eenerlly (or, 28 we sould pats, the original region), ia which all 
‘other regions of Being have thie root to which they ae esentialiy 
‘lated, on which they art therefore one and all dependent in an 
casential may. The doctrine of Categories must take its wat us- 
reservedly from this the most radical of all datincons nf Being — 
[Being ar Caioneness eid Being a8 declring” itself in conacious- 
‘eae, or a4 "trunacendent™ Being, a distinction which, ais clearly 
sappereat,cas be drawn all ts purty wnd properly juried only 
‘through the method of pheascsenological reduction, ‘Toe rela- 
‘am between phenomenology asd all other acences,& toi 
tave frequently vauched 00, but mest go into more deeply at ¢ 
later stage, bave theie ground in ths easeatial relation between 
trencendental and transcendent Being, Theis very roeaniogivoplies 
that the domoam over which pheaomenology rules extends in & 
certsin remarkable way overall be other sciences fram which it 
has none the less disconnected itself. The dscomeenion has alo 
‘the character of change of indbasor sich alters the cals ofthat 
{a sahich the indicator rfes, tof tit change of idicatr be rechoned 
fi that sobre aloe wt reros to alters thereby reinstated eihin the 
‘phenamenalopical sphere. Or to put it metapbovically:the bracketed 
‘matter is not wiped off the pheconenclogia! ale, but only 
backeted, and thereby provided with 1 sige char indicotes the 
luracketing, Taking ix nin with it, the bencketed matter isi 
‘tegrated inthe main thems ofthe inquiry. 

‘eo moet necessary to get « thorough understanding of thin 
positon, together with the diffrent points of view intringic to it. 
To take « pertinent illuration: physical ne mera diacan- 
rnexion, whilst notwithstanding we cantive to have not only 2 
phenomenology of the natura! ecientiicconsiousnens on the wide 

GANGAAL DEMULIUKES Ov FURS CONSCIOUSNESS a3 
‘afm thoughe and expericoce, but also phenomenalogy of natere 
Steelf os correlate of ta natural scientific consciounane,Bimilaty, 
‘Gihough paychology and mencalscisacc are aSected by the See 
ccametion, we bnve 2 phecomesology of man, hia perscay, 
pervonal qualities, and bis conscious course (es a urn being); 
1 phecomenology, further, of the mind of the coramunity, 
social iorituions, ix cubural cretion, and 20 forth. Whatever 
in tranacendens, ia 10 fr ait comes to be canecioualy preven, 

a abject of phenomenological nudy set only onthe side of the 
consciouett of i, of the various conscious ways, far itance, i 
‘which # comes to be given as tsaaccadent, but sls, although 
‘euenuidly bound up with the viewpoin jum noted, as the given, 
‘ad chat which i experienced in it. 

‘There are in this way immense Geld» of phenorsenalogical 
sevearch which have been quite ovetlooked by thoee whe have 
started out from the ide of eperience—expecially when we mart, 
‘1 we all do, with the peycholopeal viewpoint, and have at Bint 
allowed ourselves ta taba over the concept of experience from the 
‘paychology of our ewn time—Gelds of ingiry which wt Get, under 
the infloeace of inner reinences, one is et to be lite inclined to 
recognize ax phenomenological at al. Through thin inclusion of 
bracketed matter. quite peculer and at fet confusing situtions 
aco cruated in the caus of paychology and the science of mind, 
‘To veatrict oneself to the cate of peychology, we may act it down 
‘that consclouanes, a «given dacum of poychological experience, 
snd a umn of animal, i an abject of pychology, of empirical 
ychology in the investigations of empirical science, of eidetic 
peychology in thove ofthe science of Essences. On the other hd, 
‘he whale world, with a paychic individuals and it payee ex- 
periencee—all thin a» corelate of the ubsolote conacowsness— 
fall in modified breckrted form withis phenomenology. ‘Thus 
comtcioursem Gare under differcat forma of epprebenaioe and 
in difercat connexiens, even within phenomenology itself; frat 
in itl es abalute consciousness, then in it coreclat a peycho- 
logical consciousness, which cow Gnds i» place in the natural 
‘world, with ite value altered in 2 oftain way and yer without 
tows af itu own cxnteut es conciousness. These are complicated 

a UAE PHENOMENOLOGY 

coonesions ad extrordinwily important ones. It also depend 
‘an them cht every phenomenological portion conccraing whto- 

chology (which, vic considered sitet in ao wenge phenarseno- 
logical), though the phezomexalogical ostiock i, of the sro, the 
more comprehensive, and at absolute the more radical. To ofall 
‘hia dearly, and then further to clarify filly and inwerdly the 
evential relates between pare phenomenslngy idetic and eznph- 
‘heal paychology, and in the lac resoct mental acience, is of Beep 
concern tn the disciplines here iavaled endo genera philosophy. 
In particular, the peychology wich in being so energetically de- 
eloped in oor owe day can win the redical foundation which itil 
lacks only when, in respect of the sents! connexiona that have 
‘wee. indicated, i commence far-reaching iraight into their atute, 

‘The indiationa that have ust been gen ranke i fel how far 
removed we atill ee from an undentanding of phenowenology, 
‘We bave learnt how to make use ofthe phenomenslogical stand 
‘point, wo have set aside x whole sens of detecting maging 
concerning method, we have defended the clas of pure deecripe 
tian: the Geld of renexrc in free before us, But we do not et 
know wih to mate thenes are, of, more pecially, what aie 
{yper of daxigtion are preserited by the sont peveral dbasion of 
xperences 0 ther exseutial expect. To bring clearness into these 
relations, let us try in the chapters that follow to describe this 
‘most gsteral division acsong exeners by reference to sense of ita 
specially important features. 

‘With theae ew reflexions we donot realy leave behind vs the 
problem of method. The dacussione on roethod which we have 
4 Gar undertaken were decermined by the mow gener insight into 
‘the essential satuce of the aphere of phenomenology. it goea 
‘without saying that a deeper-reaching knowiedg ofthis aphere— 
oti ite details, bt nea ewocping generalities abo Furish 
us with stmdards of method of ticher capacity, with which all 
special raethoda will Rave to tink themselves zp. We do not and 
cazaot bring method to any Seld from beyond its boundaries, 
Formal Logic, or Noetice, does not give method, but the frm of 
powible method, and, usefal ws the knowledge of form can be 

GENERAL SFRCCIURES OF FORE CONSCIOUSNESS ars 
im methedslogical matter, determincte method —not sftcr the 
patter of mere technics pecaliaton, but after the general pe 
‘9 method—is s norm which springs from the main regional 
division of the ephere in question and ita genera wtructural forts, 
snd therefore, init epiterologce ampet it exweatially dependent 
on the knowledge of these structures. 

Hyp. Rerumow 4s var Basse Pecucusery or ni Brien ot 
Exranes, Stop om Runacion 

‘Under the most general peculisrtis of the essential nature of 
the pure aphere of experience we teat in the fee place of “Re- 
Alexion”. We do this on account of is wioren? methodological 
function: phecomenclogieal method procceds entirely through 
scx of rflexion, There ae, however, xs bearing om the funetiogal 
‘apacity of reflexion, and therefore ca the pasiilty of « pheno- 
enalogy generally, certain vepticl doubts, which we would fre 
of al dapone of io «radical way. 

We here aedy bed to ear bo Rell in our previous di 
‘unions. The canelutioas we there reached, before we had paaed 
en to phenomenological ground, we can now, under the strictest 
‘onions of phenomesslogia! reduction, simply take over, 
since thone results merely conceraed what is inwardly ewweatial 
tw the experiences, and therefore, xs we know, euch motter 
remains ware peaseaion tous, ranscendestally purised oaly in 
seqard to the way in which we spprebend ic. We wil rt ofall 
recapitulate what we alceady haow, and seek at once to penetrate 
deeper into the fact of the cae, a6 well ms into that typeof pheno- 
rmenological srudy which reflexion renders both possible and 
imperative. 

‘Brery Ego lives im own cxperieaces, end in thes & 
iuded much that is ceal (vo) and intensonsl. The phrase “Tt 
lives them does not mesa that bolds them: and whatever isin 
‘hens glance”, und that ic apprebends them afer the menner 
of immanent axpericace (Brfakreyg}, or any other inraneatin- 
tuition or presentation. It in ideally powible for ovecy enperlence 
‘included in the glance to be “brought under it"; a reflective 

as PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

ct ofthe Ego is directed towards it, end it om bevomes m object 
‘or the Ego. [eis jor the same a4 regucda the pomible glnces 
‘which the Ego may dizect towarde the compournt elements of 
‘he experience and towards their intesicanlitics (towards that of 
‘ehh they are in the lt resort the covsciousscan), Again, the et 
eine are experiences, and as such can furnish te bsiefor ew 
‘reflexions and soon ad efoto, with a peceeay that ia grounded 
‘on principe. 

"The experience ap realy Tred atthe moment, anit et enters the 
focus of reflex, presents itself ar realy Lived, as being “ow 
but sor only that, it preacat ital ws jos Acc been, 204 20 fat 
sit was unnoticed as precisely such, as not baving been reflected 
a. At the natural stmdpoiat we tke it far granted, without thak- 
ing about it, that experiences do not exist only when we tur 10 
sect them tad gresp them is immanest experience (Bahra); 
tnd tht if in immanent reGexion and as reaised (in ‘pricnary” 
emory) they are will “abject of swarenen", 8 baving “Sum” 
been, then they realy (wih) exinted and were indeed ceally 
lived by we. 

‘We are further canvicced that itis also reftexion which “in” 
the process of recall, and as grounded witbin it tfoems vs con 
reming our former experiences, which were then” prevent, 
“chen” imamanetely perceptible, although not icamanectly per- 
cited. The same holds good, secording eo the naively natural 
‘view, in respect of anticipation (Voreianerang), ot previsions) 
cepecation, At first there comen in the imencdiste"protentoa” 
(ewe might put it), the exter counerpart of tramedistereceatioa, 
and then the anticipation (reproductive in che more proper tense 
‘af the term) which re-prevents in quite sncther way, and is the 
counterpart of recall. Here the intitively expected whereof, 
‘thanks Cathe sellexion possible “in” anticipation, we are aware 
through prevsion a“ peeaetly baba the same time the 
meaning of what will be perceived, jus as the recalled has the 
meaning of mehat has been perocived. Thun we 040 reflct in 
sxticipaton aso, and bring to consciousness experiences of ows 
foc the enjoyment whereof the anticipation itelf did not offer the 
proper wandpoiat, as none the les belonging to the untcpated 

GRNERAL STRUCTURES OF PURE CONSCIOUSNESS 217 
sa such 4a we do cath time weary that we abal/te what is coming, 
‘when, in wo mying, the refecting gleace bse turned tewards the 
coming” perceptual experience. 

‘Refecting feom the natural eandpoiot we mabe al tha lear to 
cunelves, maybe as paychologint, und follow it oot imtoits Further 

‘Now Jet us ser in action the phenommologi! reduction. 
Extblished resuls (within their bracket) are transformed into 
tea that iigatrste extent generalities, nad we can naw nthe 
them our own within the framework of pure ination and eym- 
pathetically study them. For istaoce, in vivid inneition (imagian. 
tive, if yu Hike i) we picare curvlves as involved in thie o that 
cr, in joy, it may be ever a theoretic) train of thou that ia 
sunning its fee and frutfuleourse. We pecorm al the reductions 
snd vee what in in the pure emential natore ofthe phenomene- 
dogical material, We turn then frst towards the pasting tain of 
thought, We develop further the phenomenon is iy Mtr 
spect. During the couse of the enjoyment we cast a reflective 
ilanor on the joy itself It becomes the experience planced at and 
inmmoanently perceived, faswiting thus and thus in the focus 
(Blichy of reflexion, thea sinking away. The fee flor of thought 
sutlers thereby, we are now aware of it inthe modified way, the 
Joyourneas whichis an element in its ux is ementinly and sym- 
pathetically affected we can verify ths, ancl in so doing smart 
‘redirect cue gate thither ence agaic. But let ue set all his wide 
for the present anc consider the following — 

‘The fire reflexion upon the joy finds it sctually present, but 
not at jut beginning, Fein svcady there a8 a paing concern, previ- 
‘oualy expenenced hut 2ot eld before the eye It i evidently open 
‘0 23 to look ano the past daretion and cane of giveots of the 
Joy-producing facto, ta pay atention te the exfieratretches of 
the theoretical course of thinking which engendered it, and alsa 
tothe vision (Bek) previoualy directed to it; to note, an the ethic 
‘tand, bow joy turn in its direetion, and thus, through the con- 
trmat,wppreciate the lack of axy glenoe directed towards the joy 
uring the preceding phatce of the phezomeson. We may als in 
reapect ofthe oy, that nabeequently Became an object of refesin, 

‘flect oa the actof eflexion that object, mndivo render ware 
cffecively clear te diffzence between what inexperienced but not 
‘eticed, md the joy that is aaiad; Wkewise the modification 
‘which came about through the ac Of apprehending, unfolding, 
tnd s0 forth, which emerge wit the redirecting of ce vain. 

‘We can examine sil kis rom phenorocealogical scanépoint end 
idatically, whether uta higher level af generality or following the 
‘ential enaditions which bold far apecial type of experienor, 
‘The whole stream of experience with its experienocs lived after 
the mode of weeflcingconaciource: can be meade the mubject of 
1 eiemige eaiy of the nature of the emence which ubould al 
‘a aymermatic completenese, with reference, morsover, to all the 
ponabilien of inceniona expects oF experience inchaded in chem, 
‘with reference ala more specifically 1 the experiences of modified 
conaciouaness which may be in them and thr intentional agpects, 
In regard tn the later we have become aequainted with example 
in che shape of modifications of experience that are Savotved 
‘intentional phase ia all represetationa, ard can be brought out 
through reflexions cared on “within” them: that of “having 
Jbeen prceived” wbich ies in every memory, that of "about to bs 
perceived” which lies in every expectation. 

‘Tha rudy ofthe wream of casaciouanee takes plac on ite own 
side, through various sou of refiexion of peculiar structure, which 
themselves, agin, belang to dhe scream of experience, and in 
conrespeading ceflesiona of « higher grade can be and indeed 
ate mae na oben fe phewmeclegal eu Fert 

lyon of this Lind thatthe foundations of » general 
Passamcligy Wo bid sul ia soobangd tage 
Apenable to a developeaet is grounded. Similar considerations 
briouly apply to peychology. No headway ia made through vague 
‘alk concerning the wady of experiences through reflexion of— 
‘what is ordinarily ideasied with thie—recalection; tomy nothing 
‘of auch exroncous emo which (preciely because all serious 
‘nalyvs of the exsence i lacking) is wont to introde itself very 
noun, at, far ioupance, char aothing of the nacure of immnent 
‘Perception and observation can pousbly be. 

[Let we po into these matters somewhat more closes. 

GENERAL STRUCTUBRS OF PURE CONSCIOUSNESS arp 

$78. Pumosamococicas Srupy oF Ren xio%s cron Exrexitca 

Reficxion, ws tho foregoing exalyen will ave abown us, is ax 
‘aprenion for aca in which the sam of expecicae (Briabe}, 
‘with ul its eunifold cream (pbascs of experience, istetineaitia) 
ca be gomped and anaijed ic the light of Iu own evidence. 
Tis as we may leo express it, the sasne we give to comacioomnca” 
‘own method for the knowledge of consciousness general. But 
in chia very mocthod it becomes itself he object of possible tzdies, 
‘Reflexion is also the tithe for types of experience which belong 
‘ameially together, and therefore the thease oft leading chapter 
of phenamenciogy, wove Furctin itis to dtinguih che diferent 

“efexinna” and ta wzmlye thera completely in sywtrmatic onder. 

‘In this connexion we mist Git of al be clear oa this pint, hat 
coory sarily of “refesion” han the character of x modification of 
ouriourest,and indeed of wach a modification as every conscous- 
‘eae ot in principle, experience. 

‘We apeakof modification here jus in wo far ex every reflexion 
has ia enectial origin in changes of standpoint, whereby w giveD 
experince or unrelectiveexpericnce-danam undergoes « octain 
‘wanafornatioe into the mode, that is, of rect sonsciourneat 
(cavsciousaana of which we are aware). The gives experience cen 
‘nlf alzeady ponesa the charster of « reflective consciouanees of 
socrething, in which case the modsfcation is of higher grade; 
Dut we are thrown back at last on abeohely irreflctiveraperientey 
zd the real (eel) o intentional data implicit in ther (Debit), 
‘Boory experience caz tow be ranslated 19 scooedance with 
meatal ayo into reflecive modiScations, ane thar slong diferent 
dcetioon whic we abut learn to know more accurately sti. 

‘The furdamental muthodologic? ienportance for phunomed 
‘logy, and an lea for peychology, of the stady of reerions ia 
thelr msentiatneture i cuanifet in thin, thet under the courept 
‘of cefiexion must be inchuded all modes of immanent spprebeasion 
of the ewence, sod on the other hand all rades of immanent 
experience (Erfalren). Bo, for instance, the ismanent perception, 
‘which in point of fact ia 2 efezion, in so far x it preruppones 
shifting of the glance from somerhing we are conacious of objec- 

se PORE FHENOMENOLOGY 
‘ively to the subjective consciousness of it. Likewise, w we have 
rmeatinaed (i the procecing paragraph) when dacantng whet the 
‘tural sandpoint takes for granted, every memory act only admity 
reflective decting ofthe glance upun elf, but aaa that peculiar 
‘eBexion which take plac “in” the recollection nel At fist we 
sr unrlietircly aware in mewory of the dow of x pisce of susie, 
‘cma be, inthe mode of whats “pat”. But to the emence of what 
‘we are thus amare of belongs the pouty of relecting on what 
‘nas been perceived. Similrly in tbe cave of expectation, of the 
‘ooncimuancs that looks forward to “what is coming”, there is 
‘alvnyy the essential pombility of diverting the glance from this 
coming event to ie coming perecivednes. 3 #3 consequence of 
‘these ewentia! connexion thatthe propositions “I remember A” 
and “have perceived A; "I look farward to AY, aoe, "I aball 
are equivalent « prior’ and lomedistely; but only equiva- 
ent, forthe meaning ia « different one. 

“Hire the tak of phenomenology i ta make ayoesatic study 
of al the experimental modiscations which fall under the heeding 
af “reflaion”, together with a the modiextione with which 
they rand in ewendal relation asd which they prengpeu. The 
inor mere on way of coeml oieton welch oy 
fexpereace moat undergo duriog its primordial phase, 20d ic 
‘dition the different hinds of rarsfocmation which canbe thought 
‘fa caried out on every experince ideally in the way of “opers- 
tons". 

Every experience isin iuelf « fow of becoming, it in what itis 
‘within en original ragendering (Rraompan) of wn exseutin type that 
sever changes: 1 ctoatant flow of retentions sod protentions 
stedited by a pricsordial phase which ls itself in Scx, in which the 
Living mow of the experience comes to couscioumest contrasting 
‘with ita “before” and “afr. On te other hand, every experieice 
tas ie purles in diffrent forms of reproduction which cen be 

‘modified counterpart ine recollection, 2 alo in » pomiblesaticipa- 
‘iam, in a pomible fey, and again in repetitions of exch trane- 

GENEMAL SYRUCIURES OF PURE CONSCIOUSNESS 221 

[Natorully we think ofall expetenccs that run panillel to others 
su belonging to 4 common exence-atoek: the pari! member 
‘old win be conscious af the same inensinal object of refer 
ence and conacioun of them in identical modes of givenneas— 
‘identical, provided that they ahare then comcoma clement, choogh 
remaining in other repects open to vation. 

Since the modiScatons we have beea cuniderig belong to 
cry experience a ideally pore ctanges, and therefore in & 
‘certain aenae indkae opeatoes of thought wich canbe conocived 
a caried out on every rch experience, they can be repeated ft 
fafa, and can tao be pectormed on the experience in theit 
mode for. Conversely, arting from any experience which has 
tleeady the characte of mich a modieaton, and remninn then 
always uo characterise in ij, we ae led back to certain orginal 
experiences, to “mprotdoat” which exhibit experiencn that ia 
the phenoaenclogcal eonee ae abvoluely primordl. Ths per- 
ceptona of things a8e primordial experiences in relation to 31 
memories, fancy presentations, and vo forth. They ae priordal 
in the sense in which concrete experieoocs can be that at al, For 
cloaetinapection reveals in their cocccetenem oxy ow, but that 
sways + cootiaususly lowing aluohle primordial phos, that of 
the living now. 

‘We can relate thetemodiScatiose in primacy inane to actual 
srperience of which we are nrefetvely aware, since we an ace 
st once that all noch as we ae refesively aware of aunt participate 
1 ipo in these primary madifeations, iach an they art 
tefleion upon experiences and, wien taken in their full cooerete- 
seas, themuctve experienars of which we are wareflectively sare, 
nd ia nich take on all modifcations. Now ceflxion ielf it 
tszuredly a general modification of x new type—tissell-acting 
of the Bgo upon it experiences, andj apreevent therewith the 
functioning of scta of the eagite (of euch acts in particular as 
‘belong to the lowest, rot fuxdamental stratum, that of she 
simple presentatana) “in” which tbe Ego direct itself upon 
jiu expetiencen; bat precistiy the interweaving of ceficon 
‘with insite or empty sppechensicns, ar comprebeasans, 
makes i necessary thet the seudy of the reBective mediation 

= PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

should be combined withthe ready of the modifications iadicaied 
bore. 

‘Only through acts of experiencing a refected on do we kaow 
anything of the wream of experience and of ita neceattyrelitnt> 
ship o the pure Ego: that it ina fe forthe fee commamza~ 
tian of the conscious prcceaes of ane and the weme pare Eyo; 
‘nd that all the experisoces ofthe seam ae ts own jut in 90 
far wait cap glance at thea or “througts then at what is other 
than and foreign to the Ego. We carvince owselves tit these 
‘experiences cera their mesning and tbeie right even in their 
‘reduced form, and inn general and excatally universal way we 
{rrp the right of auch kinds of experiences generally, just 1s, 
‘arale) therewith, wo grasp the right of emential iris relating 
‘0 experiences in general. 

‘Thus, for inatmce, we greap the abvlete right of immenent 
dercaining lesen, i of immanent perception simphictr, wad 
Indeed in respect of that which s brings mits flow trea primordial 
fiveancay; Ubcwise the abwihte right of tmamanen! retention, 
‘eapect of tht in it of which we ar conscious as “etl!” living nd 
Ihrvng “just happened, bu ofcourse no further thes the oanteat 
cof what is thos characterised reaches; right, fr inseance, in reepect 
‘oft face thar ie was the perception of ound and not of xcalour, 
‘Welikewise grasp the relative righ of imananent recollect, which 
extends jut va far ua the content ofthis merzory, taken by ite, 
shows the genuine character of recollection (isis by 20 meas 
how, in general by every sepect of the remembered), « right 
‘which in hia precise sease cleaves to ectry recollection. Buti i of 
coure « merely “relative righ, one that peemita of oar aking 
how faethe right extends, And 0 fort. 

‘We thus see with completestclewnes» and with the comsciout- 
‘nese of unconditional validity thet st would be absurd to suppose 
‘that experiences are epiatemelogicliy guaranted only in vo far 
‘they ae given tous ix the reflective conaciousnes of iiaanent 
_prroeytion or that we can be woe of thew indeed only in tbe usta 
‘ow of the present moment; thet it would be sbeurd tm doubt 
‘whether that which we discover aa ‘‘still” consciously there when 
‘we item gance backwards (the immediately retsined) ever 

GRNGRAL STRUCTURES OF PURE CONSCIOUANESS 209 
usted; cc agua, to doube whether ia the end eaperiznoes which 
‘pain the Gad af vision ave ot prociely fc reason toa 
Formed ins something tte culo dieest (oes wan they were, 
sande fr. Ia eepartant only that we shack. not allow ourelven 
ta be confused by axrument which, despite al htc formal pre~ 
iron, show an cane of adjuster to the prizitve aoures of 
‘ality thos of pure inzton: we mus side by the “prinple 
af al peincipln”, hat complete armen ja che meaare of al 
‘ruth, and tht tatemenre which give fitful expreaion to theic 
dana need fear nothing fcom the fest anguanens, 

§ 79. Cxrmcat Bxcunses. Prmmoancxo0oy ano Het DICULTEE 
‘or “St-7-0RMRYATION”” 
eis clr from what we tave just sid that phenomenology la 
‘nok affecred by the methodological wepticla which in empuical 
‘peychology has Jed so often 10 parallel case to the denil o in 
oper restriction of the value of inner experience. Recently 
WE J Wat fas noaetbe lea believed that he could ita tia 
scepticism aa againat phenomenology though be bas quite failed 
to grup the distinctive mening of pure phenomenclogy to which 
the Legical Studi have soxght to provide an intrdnction, 

4 PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

irouni of pure reflexion, ubould cancer experiences an auch, 
‘conakdered frvm Uhe wandpoint of their own casence ap Hbersted 
from all natural epperception. Yet beeween the twa there cubist 
limer relstinnahipe, coagraesees, indeed, in no snall meanure, 

“It ia sarcely possible cret to form opiaions concerning the 
‘wey in which one comes to a Lnowiedge of immediate experience. 
For i is neither knowledge aot the object af hnowledye, but 
snmething different. One caznot see how a record concerning the 
‘experience of experience, even if thay been taken, coud be put on 
paper.” "Bur this e always the final queetion ofthe fundamental 
ache of elfstnenton. “1 & fw cuca torr te 

Fegromante 
“Saou realy” "Very dierespnans may Be ha, he now 
‘ds his awn Comment, “am to whet oce in to da with this 

‘experimental peycbology will ubed new Hight ox che topic. Por the 
be et 

GANERAL STRUCTURES OF PURE CONSCIOUSNESS 135 
prablen of phenomenslogy is anc which seoemasly aiea for 
caperimentsl paycbology also. Pechape the lstte's sohtien will 
be roots cautions since it Icke the supporting ama of the 
coverer of phmomenology. In any cave it hae « natural and 
spontaneous bias towards i 

1m view of the pious belief in the omnipotence of inductive 
method which heeathes fom the lines laet quoted (« beicl Wate 
ould hardly be cherishiog when be ie meditating upoa the 
conditions of the peesibilty of thus method), i is truly urprising 

confess hat 2 fumctassl analytic peychology will 
never be able to explain the fact of knowledge’ 

‘in opposition to these ssartions, vo charactzristic of the paycho- 
Joy of the preacnt day, and just ao far a they are peychologicaly 
sndended, we should inthe fet place have o juny the separation 
“above referred to between the peychoiogical kad the phenoraano- 
Jogical questions, ex inthis connexion to ateas the point thet « 
heoomenclogia! doctrine of the easence iu lite called on to 
fake an interet i the methods which might enable the phenomen- 
logit to certify the enitence of thone experiences vehich verve at 
1 basis for bia phenomenslogcal ndings, as the gecmeter 19 
sxpected to be intcate n determining on rorhodical Les how 
‘the exstoce ofthe figures on the boerd or the model inthe cup 
Doers tobe rendered convacing. Geometry und phenomenology, 
au acieners ofthe pure ewence, know sothing peste concerning 
real exixence. It hangs togetber with thin, that clear fictions do 
‘ot only verve these sciences fora foundation ma well as do data of 
sctusl pecception and experience, but to a cermin exent even 
better 

‘Now if phecomenclogy also bas no existential ygments 10 
make concerning experieuces (riebai), thus nn “experimest- 
ings” (Bfakrerges) and “obeecvingn” m the satura sense i. 
‘which a acence of facts must ford wapport in och ety it makes 
one the ley ana fundamental cooditon ofits pomiility, positive 
sGicrmtions concerning uneflective experiences. These it ows 
‘a refering, of, mare sccurecy, to refective intuition of the 
caeeace. Consequestly the sceptical doubts concerning self 
Hae dicey *Eaeatpat. 2 Cnpes B26. 208-0. 

~ PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

observation, in #0 far sa these doxbes epread in x way cary 0 
‘undereiand, from reflexion as immanent to every rezion gene 
rally, come uader the ken of phenezsenslogy lao. 

‘And, indeed, what could we make of plenamenalogy if wo 
“eannct sec how a recard cancerning the experiencing of expesi- 
cence, even if ir bas bees taken, could be put ox paper”? What 
‘sould we make of sf it had to make statements conserning the 
cater of "known" reflective expercaors, but not onering the 
censence of experiences a8 such? What could be done if it were 
“scarocly pomtble even to hold opiniana concerning the way in 
which one comes to 4 knowledge of immediate expenence”, or 
10 8 haowicdge of one's emsence? It may be that che plenomen- 
loist has no existential judgments to pas on the experiences 
‘which come before hun atthe examples an whic hia ideal form 
tions depend. Yee, one rxght abject, but he weet in these iden! 
{armatiaos oaty ideas of thet whuch at the moment he Ina before 
hime an illustration, As fs glance tums towards the experience, 
it fmt becomes that which now oflers ice to his gare; a» be 
{ooks anny, it becomes something eve. The enence apprehended 
is cence only of the reflective experience, and the wsppasibon. 
that through reflexion one can win sbvoluiely valid knowledge 
‘which ia valid for experiences generally, reective or unreictive, 
in wholly ungrounded. “How can we set up soental tates”, 
‘thong it be only ax exscatial pouiilities, “of which we can koow 
nothing?” 

Charly this coocerm every hin of reflexion, altSough in 
phenomenology each separate kind claims to be x source of sbeo- 
Jute knowledge. Tr fancy a cing, it may even be a center hovers 
before my eye. believe myself to Loow tha it runifen itself 
vwnder cectain “roodes of nppearance”, and in certain “sengory 
‘variation of the perspective kind”, appecheraicas and the ike, I 
Delicwe mpslf ta bave the eurtiliraight thet an object of thia 
Mod cas be viewed only usder modes of appoarmer af this 
articular kind, only through these functions of perspective 
smaifestation, sod whatever elbe may play a part here. Bit ob 1 
‘keep xy cemtaurin view, Ihave notin view iss modes of appear- 
‘sn, in perpective data, its eppreended meaning; end when I 

GENDRAL STRUCTURES OF PURE CONBCIOUENEES tay 
comprehend fia eaence, I do not compachond these rod their 
wvence, For thin thre i needed a certain turn of reectiveia- 
‘ight, and this ceadees faid the whole experizae with modifying 
cffect; tos inthe new ideal formation T baye scomthing ee 
before my eyes, and should not maintain that I have reached 
‘mental components of the unredecave experince, T should 
rasineain thas belooge > the execace of «thing ax wach to exhibit 
Stuelf in the form of “appearances”, masifesting inc ia the 
indicated way ia perspective and through sensory deta, which om 
(hse side muse eubral te apprebenson, and a0 for. 

‘The 4iouty obviously bears oa the asalyecs of comucioursens 
‘ho in rape of the “meaning” oF the intentional experiences, of 
‘dl thas which beloagy to the mippose, to the abject ftcexonally 
inferred to, a euch, to the mesning of « statement andthe like, 
Por these ala arc analyen cooducted with x acheme af mpecally 
diveced reflexions. Watt himself goes even so far a8 to aay: 
“Prychology mst veach « clear understanding that with sell. 
observation the objective relation of the experiences to be de- 
seribed io chaaged. Thin change bas pechaps «greater sgeifomnce 
than ose i inclined to believe.”* JE Wate 2 right, we should be 
sainiaaicg 100 much when, i sel-cbservatcn, we vet it down 
Aha we had just been attending here tm his bock ana were cone 
‘inuing to do v0, That held good so doubt prior to reflsion. 
Refleaion, however, changed the ettestive “expenence to be 
dlascibed” and incocd (according ba Wat) rapes ofthe objes- 
tive elation, 

‘Every genuine scopic, whatever its typo and ovation 
ray be,can be recognized by thie fundamental absurdity, thet i 
the argument it use ic presuppotea implicitly, ws the ooaditions 
‘of the powiilty of ts validity, preciely that which it denis in 
iw owmtheses. tinea to recognise the preaence ofthis feature 
fn the argumente we are considering. He who merely says, 1 
doubt the significance of refesion far knowledge, mainaice on 
sbwurdicy. For ap he awcrs his doubt, be cellecs, and to vet this 
‘eertion far au valid prevappones that reflesion har rally wad 
‘without u doubt (for the ca fn baad) the very cognitive value 

ae ta on 

= PURE PHENOMNOLOGY 
‘epon which doubt hos been eat, hat t does ne ale the objective 
elation that the unrflecive experince doe not forfeit ia sence 
through the trantion isto reflexion. 

Further: Is the arguments considered reftenon ie continually 
referred to an a fact and there is much ean to what cours it 
athe same tise very naturally "“urknown”, 
‘unredective experiences are alao ceferred tm sx fats, ramely, at 
‘hone out of which the refecrive grow, Thus hnaedge of 
elective mxperiencen including unreBective refisions ix pre- 
rppased throughout, whilt at the same time the pomibllity of 
tuck boowldge in put in question. "Taat happens, in wo (ar ax 
doube arises an to the pownibility of making any statement ehatio- 
‘ver convening the canteat of unreSective experience and the 
‘work f reflezion upon t: how for des reflexion alter the original 
spend delat iy oo open. by emerge 

orally diferent rom wha it wan? 

verte at sdb aod he ply Wh area 
‘out of it were juetised, there wouk! not remain the slightest 
Jjmtifiation far the certainty that an areBective experience or & 
refletion exita or can exit ata, It w further clear that thin cer~ 
tainty which, at we know, wat the constant premupporition 
throughout cis be knows only through reflexion, and thet it can 
be grounded ax immediate knowledge only on reflective, datoe 
‘imation. Bo to an regarda the swertion of the ceality or pou 
billy of the modiiatiann whack follaw oo refleren. Are the like, 
omerer, given through intuition, they are gives within 
Iinquslonal content; thos it ia absurd to maintain Ube there it 
here nothing Lnowable, nothing respecting the content of the 
lunrefieeted experience ind the (ype of modifications which It 

sanderqoen, 

‘This ruticescealytocxpoe the abeuriry Here aacrebere, 
scetician lous its fore by barking back from verbal scumions 
4 the eweatil intl, the primordial datorianatin and the 
sovereign right wich it pomemce in il, Brerthing dependa 
can whether we realy set this inition inaction, ead ae able 0 
‘ihe the rater in quesion ino the Eight of genuine emental 
dearnoas: whether we can grasp expostions yoch as we have 

GENERAL STRUCTURES OF PURE CONSCIOUSNESS 109 
stmt in the pervious paregraph inthe tame intuitive wy ax 
thac in which they are caried out and presented. 

“The phenomena of refesion arc infact « sphere of pure and 
porkaps of tho clearest data 1 ax enetil init alway atain- 
Ale because immediate; thet, Grom the objectively given, ax auch, 
selective glance caz be tramfered to the objext-ving con 

sod it mibject; rc the perceived, the corporeaiy 

“beret the peecivsg acts feom the reacmabered anit “hovers 
before ut as asch, aa “having been”, to the remezbering: from 
‘the mtatement ay it comes from the given ountcat tothe stating 
sctvity, and oo forth; whereby the persevang comet to be gives 
an a perciving of jurt dun perecved abject, the momentary 
coneciouanene a che cacacionanees of just thie momentary object. 
Tt i evident that ewectally—not therefore om merely sctuental 
rounds, merely “perhaps for us" and our comtingem “peycho- 
logical conatication"—it only Unsough reflexions of this kind 
‘that such « thing ax consciournens or concious content (in rel 
oF intentianal venae)con become Kew, Therefore Geel Hamel 

subject to thia absolute and trazaparect necensity, jst ax surely 
1s Hw to the inp that 2+ x = 1 + a, Bven He could win a 
nowiedge of His consciousaess and itn content only through 
reece, 

‘Thia implica that eexion cannot be estangied in any asti- 
‘nomian conflict with the Idea of perfeet knowledge. Every type 
of being, an we Rave already ad to insit more then once, hae 
‘ways of being given which wre essentially ite om, and therewith 
its own vayo as rogarda metheda of taowledge. Ita wrictlyabwurd 
1 this camnexion to treat emestial pecuharsses as defect, to the 
saxtent even of imputiag them as contingem, empicical defecta to 
"our human" way of knowing. Avothes quetion which mus aloo 
be considered on ines of exsential inaight concerns the pousible 
“range” of this or the: pe of kzowiedge, che quertian bow we 
sare to guard agsinat statements which go beyond what ia really 
sven at the moment and trinecend the eidetc grap; aod still 

‘oF intuition) here ay elmore 

PURE PERNOMENOLOGY 
enother question ia that of the methoda proper to empirical think 

ing:how me humans, oe papchologita may be, mort proceed under 
"We mut ay stress, macearer, cc the point that our repeated 

recourse to insight (wolf 
ment vatementa lke the one already cited: "it in not posable to 

focea any opinions concersing the way in which ene comes to & 
Se eee inane kee eee rae 

knowledge of immediate experience”. From such words ont can 
coaly gather bow strange to modem paycbology ewential analyis 

‘a mo mere form of speaking, but, in the seaae of the Introductory 
Section, signifies the regrew to thet which is ultimate in all 

the piven peycholagical omitima wo as 10 confer on eur human 
lknowiedge a» anoch dugsiry a0 the cave adsita ef, 

RSS ERT AH 
i ea lil HH 
cdl iy ee 

GENERAL STRUCTURES OF PURE CONSCIOUSNESS a3¢ 
shod fos Sxing the soncepta which mort prove determinative 
in all incaaneat peychologcal dexeigtion*» 

athe problem of eefeion here iacamed, he inner consesion 
bborreen phenomenslogy end paychology ia brought home to us 
‘with epecal farce. Every description of Eases! Being vehich 
rales to types of experience provides ax unconditionally wale 
arm for the pomibiines of expiical existence. Netwally thin 
al upplics ix parcular to all the types of experience which 
even for prychological reethed aze part of the mental fe, o it 
Talis good genenlly for all modes of inver experince, Thun 
Phenomenclogy ie the court of appea! fo the fundamental quet= 
‘ann of peychologiced methodology. Tee ener onnclusiane 
hich it bas ruched must be recognized uady ax occasion require, 
adapted by the paychologit ax the condition fer the powbility 
ofall futher developments of method in bis eld. Wht confleta 
with i bear the nam of intrinsic prycholopieel abet, just os 
inthe plyical sphere every confic: wath geometrical truths and 
the truths ofthe cotology of nature in general bears the vamp of 
(atranc abnariy x mata cence 

In accordance berewith we can trace an intrinsic abeurdity of 

a POR: PEENOMENGLOGE 
deceive us) by meses of experimental physics, which indeed pre- 
supposes a every map the suthowity of exenal perception. 

Moreover, whet is bero eated i very genecs) terme should 
besome more convincing is the light of all thet follows, more 
‘ertculrty dheough the Caring discosions concerning the scope 
of eefectine estental icsight. The celdions here touched on 
‘eqween phenomenology {for herween the eideic paychology 
‘which here, for provisional reasoa, ia not yet separated off from 
‘ty end in any cae ia iawardly bound up with it) and peycholoyy 
sac cxpiricalwience are to be discused and clare with all the 
deop probleme they give the Second Book of thia whole 
‘eatne, } am ure ofthis that aca time not 30 very far int i 
‘wil beve become « commonly scoepted canviction that. pheno 
menology (oc edetic pycbology) ia, methodologically, the basic 
science foe empicial peychalogy, just a8 che mutezal (atcha) 
matberatic disciplines (eg.. geometry and kinematics) are 
basic for pyc. 

‘The old catelogcal doctrine, thatthe howled of “polite” 
must precede thal of acteaiie (Wihichhater) x, in my opinion, 
in wo far asi is rightly understood und properly wilied,« really 
reat truth, 

$80. Thm ReATION oF Exemuance To Tae Pont Eco 

‘Among the exsentnl peclasities of a geneal kind, ditinetve of 
‘he trantocodentally purided field of experience, the fet place 
should be Rept for the relation ofthat experience to the “pure” 
Ego. Every "cop", avery act is 2 spaclly marked nee, 
curacterined an act of the Ego, “proceeding from the Ego 
“actually ving” in it. We have sleady spaken on cis pint, end 
cecal in few sentences what we previously worked nt. 

When shersng.# priv omen: ema in ree 
‘ion Tien oftea “busied with somethings asia, obvereing 
nae, fellow i gintve fey what ges on nthe wos of 
fancy. Or T raediate, draw inforences; 1 revoke 4 judgment, 
“efeain” need be from jodging at a. I approve or disapprove, 
Tam glsd ar grieved, I wish, ¢ Twilland do; er agin, I esis” 

GENERAL S1RUCIURES OF PURSE CONSCIOUSNESS 233 
from being glad, from wishing, willing, and action. Ye alt wach uct 
am prescat, actually prescat, In reflexion I apprehend myself 
Iberein aa the human being that Tan. 

But If T performs the phenomenalogical dex, the whole 
world ofthe satura setnng i sumpended, and with "the ma", 
‘The pure experience a» act with ite own proper eatenoe then 20 
saina ma reriduc. Bur ¥ alsa see that the apprehension of the same 
sn human experience, quite apart from the question of existence, 
introduces various features which da nat need to be there, and 

tude", “undergoing arauering from”, as thin of accent wrapped 
nn very ease, that i is jut sorarhing “from the Ego”, or in 
the revece dircctian “to the Ego”: ad this Bge inthe pre Bgo, 
‘ad mo reduction ean get any grip on 

‘We have hitherto ypaken af experiences of the opecia! “cpito™ 
type. The remaining experiences wich mupply the gencral miken 
forthe nctuslity ofthe Epo certainly lack the raed relation 10 
the Ego, of which we have just born speaking. Ana yet they toa 
Ihave theic pare im the pase Ego, and the Iter in them. They 
pclang” to it aa “ta owe", they are fs backerovad of concious 
‘ee ft Beld of freedom. 

‘Yet eatwithstanding these peculiar complictionn with al “ia! 
experiences, the experiencing Bo is still nathing that might be 
taken fer tnlf snd made into an object of inquiry on its oom 

. : 
‘nocoment that could be unravelie, tis in and fo tel ndescri= 
‘ble: pure Ego and nothing farther. 

‘There is therefore oceasion for a variety of important deaceip- 

‘ona, besring on the special forma or wodes of experience ofthe 
cxperiencing Ego, at actually eajoyed, Tn thi 

continue ta distinguiah—despte the necemary ioterrelationship— 
the experewce itl froma the pare Ego ofthe experiencing proces 
snd spun: the fare subjective phase of the wey of exprocig fora 
the renulaiog, Rpo-dioered content of the experience, wo to speak. 

oy PURE PHENOMEKOLOG? 

‘Ths cbere ie a certain, extunrdinarty important rwo-tidedness 
in the euental nature of the aphere of experience, omorring 
‘wich we ean ala say that is experiences we mast datinguish 
Denees a nuletiony end an abjctcelyeroned aspect: fora af 

‘we taught that the “object” of knowledge nigh, in this eapec, 
‘be something analogous to the pare Ego. Homever, the form of 
prem wal jy ial, An we Dan te htt this 

there correrpends to conaiderabe extent st any 
fee lv (dough St my re eopeuen) bere 
diferent weeions of out inquiry, the ane beating on purt subjoc- 
tamty, the ocher ox that whick belongs to the “constitution” of 
‘objectsnty ax refered toa subjective source, We shall Eave much 
10 my about the “imenronal reference of expersaces (and of 
the pure expeniocing Ego) to objects, and aboxt many diferent 
factors of experience and “‘mentionsl correltz" which are 
connected cherewits. Bue sx carprehecuve inquiries topce auch 
1 these can be waded end desexibed azaltially or ynehetcally, 
without concerning ourselves sore deeply with the pure Ho and 
‘the ways in which plays ite opecial part. We cannot indeed help 
touching on it frequenty in #0 far a8 it comes in as x ntematry 
adjunct. 

‘The meditations which we propose ro fllow up ail further in 
Section of our work wil bear by prelerence, oa the objee- 
tiely oviented eapect, a that which feat prevent tel when we 
foruke the naturtl tandpoint. Tae problema indicated in the 
Introductory paragraphs ofthis Section alrendy refer to this aspect 
of objectivity. 

$81. Puromrnovocicat, Toes «xp Tae Tor Conscroussmas 

‘Phenomenological time as « general peculacny of all experiences 
demands a eparatediscomion. 

‘We rut carefully note the Gierence betwees this hewmen 
Jegica tine, tin unitary form of al experiences within 2 xngle 
asveam of experience (iat of enepore Ego), and “abject”, Le, 

GENERAL STRUCTURES OF FURR CONSCIOUSNESS 135 

"Through the phesomensiogicl reduction oonscioueteas has 
‘orcied not cnly its epperceeive “etachment” Gin truth only xm 
image)» material eebty anda retin in pace, merely wecand- 
ary though tbeve be, but nls it weting in coomical time, The vem 
time, which belongs extentally to expeciense aa auch with the 
smoden in which in intrinsic content is prenectnd—and derived 
from these the modaly determined now, before apd afte, emule 
‘uncity, racemion and wo fordh—iw nt tobe merrod by ay tate 
of che wan, by any clock, by any physical meaca, md generally 
canaat be messured tall 

Conical time wands to phenomescloycal time is « relation 
somewst analogous to that in which the “catemity” (epread) 
that bloogs tothe immanent tence of x covcrete sensory Coatent 
(4 vinal “extemity”, maybe, ia the Seld of vimal wnsory dt) 
‘ands to objective spatial “emenion”, to cht, namely, of the 
appearing physical object, canitesting ivelf ia visual "perspec 
Lives” through the medium ofthe seasory data i terns of which 
it appear. Jur asi would be absurd to bring under the same 
(eset emence x sentry phase euch a colour € weed, and the 
phaoe of the thing proper which saruferts itelf peropecively 
‘through it, auch aa the colozr and extension which belong to it a8 
thing, 40 18 it also is reapect of the phenomencloically and 
the comnically exmporal. In experience and it ferent phases, 
trandcendent time can exhubit ‘actin the Form ef appearance; 
‘but in principe therein 20 weaue ether her o eleewbero in sting 
up berwezn the exhibiting nnd che exhibited Sgurasivesziarity 
‘which qa similarity would preeuppove enencas of rasence, 

“Moreaver it should ot be mak, for inmtance, that the way it 
which coune iene declares itself within the phenomenological is 
precisely the eazoc aa that 1 which other real ewsential phases 
‘of the ward preset thecuclven pheaarenslogically. “Toe well 
presentatien of colours and other wessory qualities ef che thing 
(Ge carrsponding womory ata ofthe dierent flde of snes i 
‘to be aur, something evenly dierent, and different agen the 
cli-manifeeation through perapestives of the apatial abapes of 
‘hia in farms of umpreadedaces within the semscy dts. But 
in dhe eaea here cid there is evecywbere commusity of etre, 

a PURE PHENOMEROLOGY 

‘Far the rest, a wil be apparcat ia the light ofthe studios to be 
undertaken lax, Tine isthe ame Sor w compte asf ated 
‘here of problem wad oxe of exceptional difsculty. It willbe seen 
(har in certain sense our peevions expoiion as been slut, anc 
ecesaily no, ctocerning a whole dimeasion, 40 as to malatain 
{re af contosion what Sore becomen trsaparrat from the pheno- 
rmencogical etapdpeint aloes, asd quite apart from the rw 
dimension enoatitstes + acif-consined field of inveatigtin, Tha 
traacerdeatal “Absolute™ which we bave lad bee through the 
redectioas is in trh not ultmatc; it ia something which in 
‘zrain profess and wholly usique senee soowtcutesielf, xxl 
Jas ite prieval source m what ie utimatcly and truly sbeolate, 

‘Fortunately we can leave the exiguas ofthe ime-cansciourness? 
fn our preliminary snaljee without Gopasillg their rigour. In 
the statements chat fellow we done mare than touch thr fsige of 
the question, 

“Thi emetial property which che te “temporaliy” expresses 
{in relation to experiences geoerlly indicates not only vomething 
that Delonge in a general way to every single experience, but 
sacouary form binding perieswithexperiocat. Every re ek 
pericace (me eat thie av nelf-evident on the ground ofthe class 
‘ntuitan of un expeciental cea) is neceae:ly one tht eodees 
‘end vita thi ration it take it place within am endiescoatinsicn 
of duration>—e eancretely led coatisuum, Tt noceomely han 8 
ferupora! purview concreraly filed, end stretching way endlewly 
nal sides. And that at once tell ut at it belongs to oer endless 

‘ta therewith bring its duration to an end—for ixtance, au ax 
rrieace of joy. But the etreum of experience cannct begin and 

steno tw the ween parece oat scared, boughs 2 ec 
Ee ees to rene gc a 

jainap oo Pecemanlans ie ime Zeibm, 
Feet fade Conese 

GENERAL STRUCTURES OP PURS CONSCIOUSNESS 237 
‘at, agin, it helonga tothe acne ofthe sinstion thet the Ego 
St able to dizce ita glance upox: the wey is skich the tempartt 
fetor is being pies, and to Know self-cridenaly (a8 we al! in fact 
do, ving over in intuition what is writen dows for ve) thet 20 
enduring experience in posible unless iia cuntiteted within x 
‘soutinusas flow of ede of girmoene an the usitary factor in tho 
process, oF the duration; furber, that tha mode of givenness of 
the temparal cxpericce in ae! in cum an experience, aldhoogh 
of anew kind and dimensioa. ‘The joy, for iostanes, which begins 
tnd ends, and daring the interval cadres, Ics fie gaze xt min 
{m fa purty, following allt temporal phases. But Tcan also pay 
stcation to in mode of declaring uct: ta che mods ofthe sca 
“Now”, and to this feature ala that wich this very ‘sow’, and in 
principle with erery ‘row’, « new end continuously now ‘now 
Tinks up in necessary continuity, and that iz concert with thie 
every actual now passes into a just vanished, the jot vanished 
‘once agin and continuously so ine ever-new just vanishings of 
the jurt vaniahed, end vo forth. And sizilarly for every ‘now? 
that has been sevey linked oa tots prodcormor. 
"Theo actual now is necemarily something punctux! and remains 
0, 4 foem that persis tirongh combines change of It 
‘the saree with the contimaty of the “yt veiahed” 
Aina of forma wit canta ever new, And it alo eset thi 

iment ruceeion of intentional relationakigr—s corticuocs chain 
of retentions of retentions. The form receives 2 continually fresh 
content; thus to each impression united with the experience of 
‘nas’ x new impression, corresponding to an ever-new point of 
the duration, in continaaly “ancexing inl; the impression 
continuoualy transforma Iteif lato retention, and this continn- 
‘uly inte modified reteation, and wo forth, 

"To all thin must be added continous changes in an opposite 
direction: ‘after’ corresponding to "befamy’, a protentianal con- 
‘aura corresponding 10 the eetentional. 

a PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

$82, Commmumom, Tas Tmo Loot or Exes, 
‘as ay Once tur Laur or ReLenon crow Exrmmece 

‘Bucthere ia sill more tbe uted. Beery presem moment of exper 
ence, even ft be that ofthe intial phase of tx experience feshly 
developing, bas accemmily « afore ax @ Rt. Bt on grounds of 
principle this can be no empty Beevioammees, rere form without 
cantent, mre Donacrac. it has cxccaarly the meaning of a past 
‘ow which this frm containg a post vorething, spa experince, 
Every experience in its feah beginning has necessarily been 
receded in time by experiences the past of experirae is comtinu- 
ally Glled with content. But every present mowent of experience 
that tho, and uccemartly, en after ax @ Kat anal that ag in no 
cmmpy Timi; every present camment of experience, be wt even the 
‘terminal phase of the dursuox of an experienoc that i orang, 
pauses off inna a new ‘cow’, and that necesanly filled with 
cantent, 

"To thia we can aso add the following: necessarily tached to 
tie now-conacournem js the cmacioursess of the just past, ead 
this conseioummens aqui ia itself « now. No experience con coete 
‘with comrrouoen ofthe caring andthe hacing came a hat 
oa. now filled with 4 sew couteat. The stream of experience io 28 
ininite unity, and the form of the strom in one thet saremarity 
eval all the experiences of « pare Bgo—e form cabtsining 
‘wary of fom-systems. 

‘We deler the further elaboration of these insights and the 
{indication of theie vast mnetpphyncal consequences 10 the futher 
trestment held ove for futere publication, 

‘The general peeullaity of expesienccs of which we ave jst 
‘been testing, camidered se pomible data for reflective (immazect) 
peroeptiog, is portion af 9 will moce comprebznuine peculiatty 
‘Which finde expression inthis Low of Essential Being that every 
experience comes ot caly under the mabe af tempers! muceston 
jn an eapeotaly se-contained organization of experiences, but 
‘ho under that of simenezy. This cana thet every pretest 
smomunt of experince has abot it « finge of experience, which 
to share che primendia) now-form, and an such congirute the 

GENRRAL STRUCTURES OF PURE CONSCIOUSNESS 019 
ne primordial fringe of thx pore Ego, ita otal primontial now- 
cconsclouanees. 

"This fringe caters an« ity into che sructare ofthe paw: modes 
swell, Erezy Before, on x mosied Now, in segurd to each foal 
‘aperiense to which ie stds in the relation of a Belore, is the 
cexure af infinite extensions, inchuding whatever belongs 10 the 
aime modified Now. briefly is eacircng strech of “what han 
simultaneously been”. The dewcriptics previously given should 
‘tha be completed by the bringing in of a aew duncown, oe 
‘not ual we do thin have we the stole phcsomenologia! tme- 
field of the pure Bgo, which, From aay one of “ia” expericoces 
fu ceate, it can measure Uaroughout according (0 the three 
dimenwions of before, after, xod at the seme time orn other words, 
the tole, scirbially sory, rigorously elf-concaunod stream of 
‘gar nt of exper, 

Ego, one Stream of experience fed with content aloo, 
atthe dinero, tach Engng oneal eet 
nd progreaing (tick forderadr) throngs x comtsuity of coment 
‘tows ae neceeary corelee. 

‘With this root form of comssonmar the following wanda in easetial 
relation — 

Ifthe glance of the pure Ko, ae the Ego reBecs and peroep™ 
tively understand, reta on some experience, shere existe the 
4 prion poubulty af redirecng the glance to other experiences, 
10 frat the bearing of this comexion extends, But in principle 
this mole connexion ie aver one that is oc can be gives, throught 
1 ningle pore glance. Notuithstanding, even iia in a certain, 
though in an intrinsically diferent, way iomsiively graspable, 
‘sazaly, along the Line of “Aiileemert ie the progressive doelos- 
mest” of iemanent intuitions, from the experience that bas been 
flaaced to new experiences within es fringe and from the faating 
‘of thise to thet of their experience-ringes, and sc forth. Whea 
‘we peak of am experience fringe, we have in mind not only the 

a (FURS PHENOMENOLOGY 
lum of phenomenological uempersity alg the line already 
indicted, but diferences that arse From mew fora in the mode 
of presenting the data. ‘Tram un cxperieace chat han Become the 
object of « persoally drecied glance, and so has the modus of 
the deitrately looked 4, ban ice own fringe of experiences that 
sare not deliberately viewed: that which is grapod in x mode 
of “arrion”, and grasped with increasing cleaess es occasion 
aioes, has a fringe of backgrmund isattcation showing relive 
liference ofcleamess and obacurny, = well as of exmpbasis and 
lack of relief. Thence spring eidetic powultics: the bringing 
of wit is oot the object of « persocally directed Jook within 
‘the focus of pure ments] vain, raning the wnempbatic int relic, 
seul making the obscure clear and ever elearer." 

‘Advancing continuously from axe wpprekeatian (o mother, we 
apprehend in a cersin way, I rexated, the seam of experince 
<4 & unity are, We do nok apprehesd it ike a single experience, 
Dat afte the fashion of an Zee inthe Kantian mw. Tt is nothing 
vet down und asserted at baphazard, but sbvolutely and indubit- 
ably grea, ia a comespondingly wide sense ofthe word “gien’ 
‘This indubsabiny, although also grounded m intuition, hat 
ghite different source frozs that which obuains fo the Being of 
cxperiences, and is therefore giver pore in immanect perception. 
At in procnly the dutinetve feture of an ideation that mentally 
oon Kantian “Idea, yt does nt in oo doing fort che rans- 
parency of is might, that the adequate determination of ita 
‘outent, i this ita the stream of coxaciournem, je unatan- 
tle. At the ane tizae we ace tht there belongs to the wean 
‘of experience, and ite component factors as such, a eres of dis- 
‘nappishable modes of presentation, the syuteaatic study of 
‘which must furnish for the future « sain tank of general 

phenomenology. 

‘We can also draw from our reflexias the ekeially vali and 
selL-evident proposition, thet wo concrete experince £42 pasa a 
‘ndapendent inthe fall rene of the term. Eacks “ean in weed of 

1,06 he “st” oe “frags” mint) we ex eee spn hr, 
ha eae an oe aS Op 1) hn Se” CY) wd Mic 

GENERAL STRUCTURES OF FURE CONSCIOUENESS a9: 
completion” in respect of some eanecred whale, which in form 
sod in Lied ia act something wo ure free 1 chooes, but ore 
rather bosxd to soept. 

Fer intance, if we consider any outer pereeption, shall we 
‘ay ti definite perception oft house tani itsconcretefuloeas, 
there then pertains 0 it ax » nccouary part of its dtrrmitation 
the maperience-conteat; but i is paruculer, necomry, end yet 
“non-esential” par. of ts determication, being such, namely that 
cmp it her neigh perc’ ow mete 

8. Ths the perception ill changer according at the deee- 
tsi ofthe sont sheng, where lowed. ope i 
ference of the genus “perception”, its inner uniquenenm, can be 
‘thought of me remaining identical with el 

‘That two perceptions easentially identi! in eeapect of this 
‘uniqueness should also be identical in rapect of conteat-deter~ 
rmination is in principle impowuble, for they would then be 
individually one perepsin. 

‘At all events, we can see this clealy in the cave of two pers 
ceptions and of two expenences geocraly, which belong 0 one 
stream of expenence. Brary experience isflurnces the (clear oF 
becuse) settang of further 

Claer inupection would further how that two stream of 
eaperiece (pberes of consciousness for two pure Egos) camo 
Se concroed oa baring on cxential content thal sb Unticlly the 
rome; moreover, ws ia evident from the foregoing, no filly. 
determinate experience ofthe ove could ever belang t the thet: 
andy experiences of identically the same epecifcrian oan be 
‘comumoa to them bot (akbough not commen an the vente of 
being individually sential), but never twa experiences which 
in addiion have abeoltely the seme “setting”. 

$94, Ieremmuurrr as ner Mane Pamvoucmovoorcat 
‘Tow 

‘We pase on now co x peculiarity dinctive of experiences, which 
we my deSaitely refer to an the gencral theme of “objectively” 
oriented phenomenology, namely, Intentionairy. It ia to this 

a FORE PNOMNOLUG. 
ertnt a2 eatential peculiarity of the epbere of experience in 
genera, vince all experiences in one way or another participate 
{in intentionality, though we cannot io une acd the ame eames 
say of every experience thar It ba» intentionality, an we can say 
for inwance of every experience which enters ax object into the 
Focua of pouable celexion—be it even am abetract phase of 
cexperience—thet ft an « temporal character. Ic in intentionality 
‘which characterizes concciouonst in the pregrunt sense of the 
‘term, and jot us in describing the whake stream of experience, 
ts et once u atream of consciousness and unity of one cousciow- 

a the preliminary analyse of Bwentia! Being in the Second 
Boctan ofthis work enalyee concerning conscioutea in general, 
we Found it neceeary (ill before the extrance-gete (0 pheno- 
smenology a we were, 454 epeceally iterated in winning our 
‘way in through the method of reduction) to work out i advance 
series of definite sketches of the mast gonera kind, trentig 
of internioaainy in general, end serving ako to delicate the 
"ase" ofthe “copatio™ We made se ofthese and quite advised, 
84 further atage of ous inquiry, although the orginal calyees 
‘woce Bat Ao 9et eaitiod tet tinder the cxprot, autheciasie 
urdasce of phenomesclogia! reducuom. For they concerned 
the experiences! own pure cwence, and could therefore nat be 
adhered by the suspending of the apperceptive viewpoint end 
sited seting of peychology. And since oor present interest 

10 dacuas Intetiwaby, opting the term ana ince fide 
fot anunder of pervanee phasotenloical tractors, 204 to oline 
{the group of problema whick concer the esectnl nature ofthese 
seructnre (00 far am this i pombe in @ genera introduction), 
Jet us cus aver what we have wsid before, reeatng it somewhat 
in sympathy wit our preset ain, which poit ix an eaertaly 
differ erection. 

‘We understood under Tatetionaiy the unique pecaliaity of 
experiences "tobe the sonacourneetof something” It was inthe 
sxplcteoptothat we Govt came acres thin wonderfal propery 
ta which all metephyicalenignan and riddles ofthe *eoretcal 

"Oh apes SH ow Ho es 

GUNAHAL EIHUCIUMES OF FURK CONSCIOUSNESS 243 
reamon lead us eventually back: perceiving is the perceiving of 
something, maybe x thing: judgig, the judging of « certain 
uter; valuation, the vallang of « value; sesh, the wiah forthe 
‘coctent winbed, sad so ox. Acting cancers action, doing exe 
cerns the deed, laving the beloved, joy the object af joy. In every 

upon. the “object” of the correlate of consciousness for the 
irae being, the thing, the fact, and oo forth, and enjoys the 
typically vied canaciowaness of x. But we learnt from pheao- 
‘menologcal reflerio thr this orieneation of te Ego in prementing, 
thinking, valuing ... this wabyfl intercourse with the correlate: 
object, thin direcicdzean townrce it (or indeed away fom it, 
though with the glance upon it all the sume), in ot discoverable 
{in avery experience, whereas inteationaity may always be con 
cealed in It. Thus, for fcatance, it 4 clear that the objective 
background, from which the perceived object af the cgitetio 
cenuergea nthe glance of the Ego single stout, in an objective 
backround in « really experiencecbe sexwe, That is, whilst we 

‘ther, they blend into the usity 
cxomcounly graaped fof objects, Thin ina polenta fd of 
‘perception in the sense thax & special pereerving (en ewarenens 
of the ype capita) can be directed towards everything that thut 
appears; but not in the scase thet the variations of semsary 
‘erepective experienced as present, vanutions of the vin! kind, 
fo inatance, spread out in one single view) fehl, aco incapable 
of being objectively greeped at ll uma the glance of the Ego 
4c cumed towards them, when for the fret time vey shape 
‘henselves ito intuitive appearances of objects. 

‘We must further iachade here experiences thet proceed from 
the backgroud of sccusl conscious, wich a5 of 
pleasare, the eatly shapings of judgment, incipient witbes, and 
a forth, eod from diferent éeptha of background-diaiance, or, 
ss we can alo any, of ferns from or meaner 0 the Bgo, ince 
‘th pure Ego wait ves, mulch, in the passing thought ia the 
centre of reference. A liking, « wish, « judgment, end vo forth, 

oy PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
in 4 apeciic sense be “failed”, namely, hy che Ego, whish 
“ken an active part” in thin Eling (or as in se “fulfiing”™ 
‘of sorrow acaually “cue”; but much modes of commciouness 
sty aleady be “utr 2nd emetge inthe “background” withont 
Deng “fulliled” in thia way. And yet in their own onsential 
satire these Maacent acruaities (inaktwoktaten) are slrendy + 
“eanaciousness of something”. Accordingly we did not inchide 
in the emence af inteationaicy what belong specially to the 
opt, the “elance-towarde” ofthe Ego’s turning-to (an atitode 
si to be unrerwtood aad phsamesclogially weird in nial 
way) "an the cantrary, we have taken this coptiatioto bea pecial 
modality ofthe general fasetioa which we call Iazationalty. 

Note on Teneinslogy 

In the Logical Stadis thie general function in sefered 10 a8 
“‘Aetcharacter", and every concrete expenence of this character 
an an “Act, The persistent cisonderstandings 0 which this 
‘Act-concept has given rise have compelled me (here at i my 
lectures for « mumber of years back) to be more careful m repard 
‘tm terminology, to deka terms more clone, and no longer use 
6 exprewsions ‘Act’ and ‘intentional expecience’ na equivalent 
‘without proper reservations. The segue! will show thet my 
riginal ectconcept i caopletely indiepenaable, but chat it i 
necemary 10 be conmtsnily allowing for the rods) aiflerenco 
between fulfilled and unfulfilled acs. 

Where nothing is said to the contrary, and we are simply 
‘concerned with ats, the proper and, 30 to speak, Foca] set, the 
falfiled acts willbe the ones exclusively intended. 

‘Moreover, we may muke this quite genera! remark, thar inthe 
beginnings of phenemenclgy all concepts or tert ovtt int 
wsertin sense remain uid, alverys prepared to refine upon thei 
‘previous meanings in wycapatsy with the progress made in the 
analysis of cosecioveness and the koowiadge of new pheno- 
rmcnologial sratiictions, and to recognise dierenoce in what 
st fist to our best ing appeared an undiferentieted unity. 

+ Chg Spe 

GENERAL STRUCTURES OF PUBE CONSCIOUSNESS 45 

All selected term have teadenties of meaning due to the con- 
‘nesiane in which they are eacd; they point im the direction 
of cerain relations conceming which it subsequently transpires 
‘very often that they have uhi® auree in more than one caveat] 
stratum; with the accompanying cacelution tht the terminology 
must be more efetively limited or otherwise odie, ‘Tims 
‘tis not unl « very highly developed wage of science has 
‘been reached that we ca count on tenaicalogin being definitely 
‘xed. Iie mileading and radically perverse to apply the formal 
sand eternal standards of a logic of terminclogy to tiene work 
in the Bi stages of progressive effert, and in cheir Sow begizringe 
‘exact (ram them terminologies of the hind fret wed to render 
stable the concluding renulte of great vciectifc dcveopmnents, 
Por the beginning every expromios ia good, and in particular every 
suitably chowea image which bas the quality of directing our 
lance to a phesomesclogial ru thet can be clearly grape. 
‘Clearneas is quite compatible with x certain rangi of indrter- 
rina. ‘The further determing oc elifjung 18 preceely the 
furtber tik, am, on the other hued, the inner azalyin which 
‘proceeds by coe:parsans ot by varying the context: the epiting 
up into components or strats, Thosewho, not content with whit 
5 offered to them a8 intuitively manifet, dermand “defitiona™ 
of the type provided by the “exact” scieaces, or believe thet 
‘with phevomenclogical conorpta wan fram the rough asalysin 
af « couple of illustrations and taien as Srmly fixed thry can 
think theic aeectie thought unbampered by intisem, and 
through much free-lancing Further the eazse of phenomenclogy, 
ceil ao truly boginnes that they bave oot reeped the eapetiah 
nature of phenomesology, cor the method of work which it 
‘icinacaDy deena 

‘What we hire asid applica na fon tu the empsically directed 
‘eycholopical phenomenology in che sease of « description of 
peychologial phenomena, which attaches ioe to wht in imma 
ently exents. 

‘The concept of intentionality, gruped in the indefinite breads 
‘we have given it a a concept which at the threshold of pheao- 
smenoiogy ia quite indiapecaable ms a sarting-poiot wad tosn, 

as PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
‘Thegeneeal messing which it indicates may, prior to clover eudy, 
‘be ever ao vagur; it may present ie in ever so grot a number 
cof exsentialy differen formations; it may be ever no difirals to 
set cut through clear and rigorous analysis what it atricly ia chat 
conmiretes the pure essential narum of imectionality, which 
‘components of the concrete formations properly conta it, and 
‘0 which af these icin ewer fresga—at all events when we 
recognize experiences as intentical, and say of them chat hey 
sre the ennaciounaem of someting, we are considering them from 
14 cinta and highly imporact point of view. In saying this, i 
semaina foe the rest # matter of indifference to us whether the 
alter at inue ix concrete experiences or abstract vinta af 
‘experience, far auch slo can show the peculiarity i question. 

$85, Seuss Dy, TirerioxAt poet 
We aiready intimated above (when we refered to the stream of 
caperince ax 2 unity of consciouscem) chet Zteotionality, apart 
fro its pursling forma and stayes, severed also a univereal 
medium which in tho last resort eclodes with icf alt expe- 
riences, even those that are not characterued as intentional. At 
the level of disceasion to which we have an far been liked, 
which stops short of descending into che obscure depths of the 
ukimate couciounean which constrstes the whole scheme of 
temporal experience, and sccepm experiences rather as they 
prot themecles in imeanent referion as usitry temporal 
acne howe, ingen ie — 

experiences which in the Logical Stadior wese 
disguied “pce oomuan 

3. The experience or phasee of espenence, which are the bearers 
ofthe specific quality of uenrianality. 

‘To the former belong. in the highest onder of generality, 
‘unitary “iene” caperinsen, “tewory content" ruth 29 the data 
cf colour, touch, wound, and the like, which we shall no fonger 
confuse wih the epperring phases of chings, this coloorquality, 
‘their roughness, and so forts, which eather “exhibit™ them 
Yel IT Sh Sindy § va Tce «inary oat efor 
‘se ret be nd cen ma Pept Sr Ari ee pe 

GENERAL STRUCTURES OF PUME CONSCIOUSNESS 47 

selves experientaly through thelr means, Similely ve regurds 
seoale impeesiona of pleanure, pain, ticking, etx, sod also 
the souls phwes of the aphere of “impalses”. Suck concrete 
ats of experience are to be found ws components in concrete 
caperienows of « more comprebeasive kind which sa wholes sre 
Intentional, and indeed x0 that over chose senmlo phases lice 
su it were en “animaing", meaing-Datoacg seatem (or fe 
‘with which the Bertowal off meaning ie esentially bound up), 
a vtraour through whone agency, out ofthe amuile-slemant, ich 
containe in itael) nothing tential, the concrete intentional 
caperience takes form and shape. 

‘Whether each senile experiences i the srenm of experience 
are of neceesity everywhere the subjects of some kind of “ani 
matg eyrshen” which forme chem (ncluding whatever 
features thin in ita turn demands and cecders possible), of, a8 
wwe also my, whether they ever take theic part stenional 
farcoont, does oot heze call for decision. On the other hand, let 
is alo leave undecided inthe fist instance whether the charscters 
‘that enter cently into the setting up of intentionality can find 
ceanoreteerabodraest apart from any amnsiefoundetio. 

‘At all events ia the whole phenomenological domain (i the 
‘whole, chat i, within the wage of constituted temporality, ws met 
way be boeue in mind), this remarkable duality and wnity nf 
sole Thy and izentoaal popdd playn & dominant part In point 
of fct these comocpex of atts ead frm thrust thexeelves tight 
tm the frunt when we being before the ind clear intuitions 
‘fone kind or another or clearly shaped valustions, vervcee, 
‘olkiona,and so forth. Intentional experiences ae thre as nitin 
through the bestowal of meaning (sed here in a very wide sense). 
Sousory data afer theaweiven a8 raters for intentional infor 
ings o bestowals of meaning at diffeeat levels, far euch, that ia, 
‘uw are clementally plain and origina, es we have yet to consider 
roe closely. How well al this sits the case hor roa ail 
snothar side by the theory of “cocreltes”. And es regards the 
‘poaibilites left open abore, they might also be entitled formlat 
‘stterial and iematerial former. 

‘We add she following in the interest of terminology: The 

a PORE PHENOMENOLOGY 

cexpcemion ‘primary contet” ap loage= seems to ua walficienty 
Sa taro bend ce cent any epee 
camot be mied ta indicate this concept, since our catomary 
‘reference 10 senry perenptions, sensory intstives generally, 
sensocy delight, andthe ice, stand inthe way. whereby aot merely 
Ihylnic but alo inentional experiences are described 1a vemicry 
clearly, too, the expressions “‘szere” or “pre” senuory experiences 
lo nat improve matters owing 10 the new ambiguities to which 
they sre now exposed. Marsover, the term “‘exsory" kat in 
suddvion ite own ambiguities, which cleave to it in the pheno- 
‘enological reduction. Apart trom the double meaning. exem- 
plied inthe contrast berween “senae-bemtowing” and “sensory”, 
tm ambiguity which, perplexing ait oocrioully in xn acately 
be avoided any longer. the fllowing consideration must be noted 

in a sarvow sense indicates the phenomenological 
retidvam of thet which io mediated through the “senses” in 
‘sormal outer peroctian, Subsequent to the reduction an vart= 
tial afinity between the relevant “sensory” data of the external 
inguitiona reveals itmef, and there carrmponds to it 8 unique 
generic emence, x fusdements! concept of phenomenology. 
Moreave, in further and exentaty unitary seose, wenability 
Inchides the sensory felings snd iexpubes also which have their 
coma. generic unity, and oa the other fand an essential afinty 
cof a general kind 9 well with those srsibilies in the narrower 
scone of the term, and al tia apart from the common banis of 
meaning which the fanctional concept of fy expresen In addition. 
‘Both together compelled che old tranaer ofthe orignal narrower 
meaning of sensbilcy ta the spheres of semtimment and wil, to 
the intentional experiences, sarely, ix which seasory data of 
the spheres here indicated pry theie past ax fanesianing “‘mate~ 
ial", ‘Thus, a oll events, we need a nem term which shall express 
the whole group through its unity of function and ita contrat 
‘with the formative characters, and we choose for thi» puspoce 
the expreasion hyetic oF materia data, abo pliniy and simply 
material (Sto). Where it concerns us to awakes & memory for 
‘he okt and, ia their woy, unavoidable expressions, we ay rome 
(Geamndly, oF even ser {ebalchs) material, 

GRNERAL STRUCTURES OF PURE CONSCIOUENESS 219 
‘What forms the metriala into intestical experiences and 
brings in the epecisc element of intextialty ix the mime a 
thie which gives ite apeciic messing to our use of the term, 

2 te co meting of whichis the consejcxmem, Now aioe 
the terms ‘phases of conscicumen’, ‘ewereneee', and all 
simile: corwtructlons, and the term ‘intentSana? phates’ Vtewisc 
have betome quite uruable Doug manifold equivocetions, 
which will clearly reveal themselves In the following pages, we 
jtcoduce the term mote fae, er, cour briefly pu, mac, These 
roca constitute the specifications of “Nowe” tu the wider were 
of the term, which in al the actual forme af life which belong 
to it brings us back to coptatoner, and then to istentional 
txperiences generally, and therewith inchoden wll that (and eater. 
Ally only that) which ie the eidetic premonition of th idea of 
4 Norm, At the sane time it ia not an nweloore feature that 
the word “Nous” in ons of itn ouacanding eneanings recalls the 
word ["meaning” oe] “sens (Sinn), alcboogh the “bextra of 
esac” which taken place in the morc phases inches a vaiety 
of things, aad only a8 ite basis a “sense-bestowal” an adjunct 
ta the pregnant concept of sexu (Sint). 

‘There would abso be good grounds for referring to this noetic 
sie of experiences othe snyehicel, For through the reference 
(0 foncf and poychicl, the scrutiny of the philosophical pey- 
chologist was directed with » certain show of preference to thit 
Which the term intentionality conveys, whercas the sensory 
phases were referred tothe body and its sensory sctivities. This 
old terdhecy finds it most madera impresa in Brentano's wepara- 
‘Son of the “peychical” from “phyaical phenousena”. It is par- 
ticularly important, aisce it blazed « feah til foe the develop- 
ment of phecomerology—eithough Brentase Simae!f remained 
‘uringer to phesomenclogic! growad, and alchoogh with bis 
abarp dintnction be filed t0 reach that far which he sought, 
namely the separation of the empirical domaizs of peychslogy 
snd the phyvica! natural sciences. What concerma us here par 
‘eularly in this matter is only the following: Brentano did ant 
‘deed find the concept of the meteral pe, and far this reason, 

4 URE PHNOM: NOLOGT 

‘tht be ek no aceount of the seperation on srounéa of principle 
of the “physical phroomcm” as mancrial phases (somvory dots) 
from the “physical phencmena” a che object: phases that 
appear in the noetic apprchesaian of the forme: (the cxlour of 
1 thing, the shape of thing, and the hz); bur en aga thin 
the marked off ox the other side the concept of the“ pychiral 
‘heaumenan" in ane of ia wo clar-ovt drtessinatioa, through 
fhe unique feature of Iatenscnality. Thereby be beotght the 
paychica” im hat oumtanding sense ofthe vere which did not 
supersede the Iutarial meaning of the word, but gare it & 
cerain rw scoconution wthia the Sold of view of our 
own time, 

‘Buran tgsina the wae of che ward “ peychiel” ax the equivalent 
of intentionality, there ia this fo usge, that it would be without 
‘oy dest unmatable to indicate the paychicl in this senae, and 
the paychical nthe seaze of the peychologica} (of thet which 
{athe disinctive object of peycholog) inthe mn wy. Moreover, 
{in reapece of this latter concept there ia « diagreeable ambiguity 
‘which has ita source ia the fuiliar drift towarda » “paychology 
without «soul And there sfurtbec this closely connected poist, 
‘hat under che heading of che paycheal, expecially of che sctnlly 
peyehiaal in opponition to tbe comesponding “peychical dit- 
owitions”, we thiak preferably of the experioces in the unity 
of the empivially giren etream of experience. But it is now 
‘unavoidable to designate ws alo parchical, or as objects of 
‘aychnlony, the real beste ofthis paychical quality, the animal 
atures of their “soula” and their payehcaly rel’ properties, 
‘Tha "paychalogy without « soul” confones, we would veature 
to think, the muapensian of the wou-enity in the sea of thin 
tr that aebulous metsphyeic of the woul with the surpensicn of 
‘the sou! generaly, cht i, of the payshic realty given empicically 
‘at fact, whone eujetioe sats are the experiences. This reality 
4 in no sense the mere etream of experience, bound to the body 
sad empirically eegusted in certain ways, fer mich ralings the 
‘dinponitionr-concepes are mere indicators. However that my be, 
the exiting ambiguities, and ebove all the cercumetmoe thet the 
concept of the peychiea! which at present prevail do cat embody 

GRNRRAL STROCTURES OF PURE CONSCIOUENESE 41 
the specific mack of ismmtionality, render the word wielese for 
‘cur parposes. 

‘We therefoce hold to the word movie, and exy 

The streem of phenommolopical being has « taojeld bed: @ 
materiel end: 

"Phenomennlogical releocs and araiyet which epeclly 
concern the material may be called Aplatically phmenehpeal, 
4, 00 the othee wide, those that rete to noetic phen xy be 
raferred tomo nonticlly phenomenological. The ioconparbly sore 
Inport end Gutfl analyses belong tothe nowial vide, 

496, Dur Foncrronat Paosunes 

Yet the greatet probleme of all are the foutional froben, oF 
thove of Uhe "concaing of the objective field of comeciwenen". 
‘They concern the way in whch, for inrtmce, in reqpect of 
[Nature noeeer, aumating the material, and weeving themselves 
into unitary aanifelds, into continu syntheses, 00 bring into 
‘being the conaciowanees of something, thet im and through it the 

jective unity of the feld of objects (Gapenstandichhit) xoay 
permit of being oonsncently “declared”, “sbown forth”, and 

“Function” in ths serac (totally erent fom the mathematical) 
is seething oly unique, pede nthe pare wero the 

‘ness chrough and through, the source ofall reeean end unreasor, 
al right and wrong, al eairy and iosion, al value and diavalue, 
all deed snl misdeed. Thus consciousness is tote cals different 
from that which sensational tahep it solely to be, fom whit 
in point of fact ia in cel? meazingless and iratioesl matesial, 
‘hough expable, tobe sure of rationalisation. What this ationalisa~ 

a FURS FEANOMENULOGY 
tian amounts ‘0 ia a point which we call goon fara better to 
underetad. 

“The viewpoint of Function isthe ccatral viewpoint of pheno- 
smenoiogy; the inguircs whuch zediste fom it cover the while 
pomeaniogical phere pectry aazly, and in the last resort all 
phenomenclogical scales eater its service in one farm of 
smother aa istegeal portons or as Jowes grades. Tnucad of the 
single expeciences being analped und compared, deacibed and 
ania, ll reatment of detail a governed by the “teleologrss” 
i fimetion ix making “pathetic unity” poosble, ‘Tbe 
treatment considers from the stanpeist of the exsence the 
sarigcs conscious groupings whichis the experiences themselves, 
in theit hapeauings of meaning, in their nocses generally, ae «8 
it were prefigered, needing to be just drown ous from them; wt, 
for nstance, nthe sphere of experience (Eyfahrang) and eroprical 
thinking, functional mathod rams te the many forma of conecious 
continua and of broken conneioca of conscious riperiencee 
inwardly united through x comman thread of meaning, Uo 
the unifying conscouanees of axe and the same cbjctve, appear 
ing cow in thin yume, now io that, prescating ialf intuitively 
oF determined by thougit. I weeks to inquire how thin vell= 
sume factor, baw objecave unstien of every kind, immanent, 
bat nat ceal, are “known' oc “supposed, how the identity of 
have rippovitioos 1 coneicuted by canecious formations of very 
diferent type yet of essentially peescribed structure, and how 
‘hese formations sboali be described on strict methodical ine. 
‘And it sec further ea inquire how correspending to the double 
heading “ema” and “unreston”, the unity of the objective 
‘onteat of every objective region and category can and must 
{in acoondance with conscious ight be "browgit act” oe “broken 
up” repectively:haped inthe format of reBectiveconscistene, 
‘more clowely" oc “thew” determined, or eve cas completly 

illusion”. In consexion herewith come all the 
ditinction which bea the fuilar yet enigmatic titles: “reality” 
and “iusion”, “rue” reality, “lawory realty”, “roe” values, 
“illusory” ox disvalues, and sn fords, ber: folowed by che 
siompt to clear them up on phenomesological Hinze, 

GENERAL STRUCTURES OF FURE CONSCIOUSNERS 233 

‘We must therfore sexdy ix che mort genera) and compre- 
Densive way how objective ustica of every region and category 
are cosclouly coacrored™, We muse show ryeecoutcaly how 
all she socnesinoe of our re! end possible cocacioumess of them 
8 eseatal ponies are prescibed by Chis enenta! natere: 
the wimple ar secondary intuitions intentionally slated ta ther, 
the thought-formationa of lowcr and ghee levels, the confused 
cr the tha, the expreseed oe the not-expremed, the pr-sciectic 
tnd the scientific, up tothe laftiet formation of strict eheoretical 
science, All fundemeccal types of possible cousciousncas, and the 
‘odifcations, fauna, xynthcaca which easly belong to thee, 
‘ust be mode plain to ight and wystexaticaly uti’ in their 
idetc generality od phenomenological punty; how through 
their oam casence they prefigure all posnnlives (znd impoe- 
bile) of tng, bow the exsang objec following casts Save 
that aze ahaoltely Axed isthe correlate of conscious connexions 
of a quite definite emential content, jomt an conversely the being 
of oymems thus articulated is equivalent tothe existing object, 
and this abways with reference ta all regions of Being and all 
srader of generality right down to the coacretcatse of Being 
inci 

From its pure eidetic standpoint which “euspanda’” the rane 
scendent in every shape axa frm, phenaxeaology eames inevit- 
Aly on ta ewn ground of pare consauanan fo this whole sytem 
of probleme which ae sraseradevial inthe spac rue, and for 
thir reeon it mecitn the te of Trewcondento! Phewomenaley. 
On its own ground it must come to the point, mot of treating 
‘experiences 38 20 rach dead raters, x "syatemp of content, 
‘which simpy act, but mean nothing, ines nothing, with ther 
clement and ordered coratructions, their cawen and wob-clanen; 
tout rather of matcring its oom iatintcally peru group of 
‘prodlans which oresece experiences «2 Scena ad hat purely 
irough its edaicenence wa “consiosce-af”- 

‘Naturally pare lyltés Ends ie proper place in subordination 
tothe phenomenology ofthe transcendental cnmciraness,Mare- 
cover, it Ban the character of « aefcoatsised diecipline, and a4 
such bas a value i itself; but oo the other hasd, and from the 

oy PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
functional viewpoint, is wis signicance from the fact that it 
Sumishes a woof that cua enter into the intentional tupur, material 
that can exter into itextinaal formations. Not enly in poist of 
Aiicky, but wl ie regad to the relative rank ofthe problems 
te considered, from the somépoint af the ica of an abeokte 
Inowlotge, i sttode chacly below aoete and functional pheas- 
ssencogy (¢ws aspece, moreover, which in etrcmnee should not 
ve separated, 

‘We proceed ow to derekp the subject mare fully in che 
following chapeer. 

Nets 

Seumpf, in bin important Berin Academy Ease, uaea the word 
“fuaetion’ in the conntsion “peychical function” in opposition 
to that which be calle “appearance”. Te distinction ia intended 
ss a peychological one, and ax wack fe in with the oppavitian 
swerve ne up (end applied in paychological sense coly) between 
“gts” end ‘primary contents”. It shouldbe noted thet the erm 
in question beer « couple diferent meaning i our exponitons 
from that which the dstiogisbed scentint has given ther. With 
superficial readers of the wriange on both siden it han already 
Frequently happened that they have confused Scumpt's concept 
of phenomenology (as doctrine of “appearances") with my own, 
Brampf's phenomenology woukl correspond to whet we set out 
above under the ttle hrletic, any cht our exporiton, from the 
‘seandpaint of method, a esacetially conditioned by the enreloping 
easacmork of tinaceadental phenomenology. Ou the other hand, 
the iden of hyletics co ipo trate ice from phenomenology 
on to the ground of an eidesic psychology, within the Limits of 
which, a6 we take it, Stama?s “phenomenology” would fd its 
proper place. 

1 ©. Seano, Emchnnang od parca Pekuonen” ip, 3 sl “Zoe 
Rees fe Sere epi oe LR Po 

THIRD CHAPTER 
NOESIS AND NOEMA 

43 87. Inmmonvctorr Roum 

‘The poculiasity of intentional expericace is in ite geoeral form 
‘asly indicated; we all understand the expression “conciousness 
of something”, expecially in the iluatratiana which we esake for 
warelvea. The harder i it 1 gramp the phenomenological peci 
Tarts of the cocreaponding exsence purely and correctiy. That 
this heading cuarks of « vant Feld of tilizme dicoverica, and 
cidetic discoveries at that, sill eema to the majority of philar 
sophers and paychologiat (if we rary judge from the iterarare om 
the subject) to be vomething strange even to-day. Far uo headway 
‘nme by simply eecing und saying that every preseatingrelers 
‘4 prasented, every judgment to something judged, and eo forth; 
nor faderd if in addition one pointe to Logic, Epiatemology, a 
chica, with their nomerous velf-evidences, and smiceter these av 
belonging to the ewental eature of intenioclity. That is also 
a very simple wry of claiming that the phenomecolagica doctrine 
of the emence in something primitively old, « new nave for the 
(old Logie und euch disciplines ax may need ta be ranked with 
it, For until we have grasped the teanacendestal standpoint in 
ita usiquencas, and cealy appropreted the pure pheaomendlogica 
(round, though we muy iséced use the word phenomenclogy, 
‘we have not got the thing ivelf. Moreover, the mere shihing 
of the standpoint, the mere efecting of the phesommologial 
seduction, doen aot waice to bring wach thing es phenoramalogy 
‘out of pure lagi. For how far lial, and wimilrly pare 2ato- 

menological, and to what phenorecclogical strata they ety ia 
tmny given context belong, thia ia is no sense obviows at fint 
sight. On the comtrary, there lie conceaied here the mort dificult 
‘problema of all, the meaning of which in naturally hidden from 
Al those who have not as yet any Inkling of che bavle distinctions 
‘upon which all the others depend. As a mutter of fact Gf 1 may 

«s PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
yeuture & judgment bused oo say own expesience), itis Song 
and tharuy way that Jada from the insights of pure logic, from 
thous af the theary of meaning, from ontclogica! and noctical 
inalghts, ard Lkewise from the current normative and peycho- 
logical theory of knowledge, ws the epprehension of isaneneat- 
peychological and then phesomenslogical data, ad Ilya all 
the exsatia! connesina which mabe the eransocneatal eelatons 
ineligible «priv. Similar considerations apply, wherescever We 
fx our effort on the amp! to Saul xy through from ebjective 
inights tothe phenomenological that essentially belong them, 
"Thus “consciouanens of serthing” a tone and the ume tine 
very obvious and highly obscure. The false tcacks into which 
ur fit elcxina fad usy as wo thzead dhe mae, easily geoerte 
2 veepticises which deaute the incoaversent probless in all ts 
bearinge. Not a few sbut themselves out ahogether trom the 
seat becuse they cannot bring thermelves to grap intentional 
caperience, the experience of peroepiaa, for instance, m commpany 
‘With its own proper execs a mich. They do nat mcveed becee 
they cannot replace the practice of living in perception, their 
sttenuian titted towards tha peroeved object both in obvervation 
and in cheoretialinguury, by that of directing their glance upon 
the perceiving fel or upen the may mm which the percelved 
object with ta ditingnishing fearares is presented, asd of taking 
that which preseata ire in the izxanent analy of the essence 
justo i atanly doca ponent tel. If che ng standpoint bak 
‘been won und entresched through practice, if above all there 
‘has boon soquired the courage to foliow up the clear eaentn! 
lata ith ae eatire sbaenex of all perjudec, snd indifference 10 
all current and boerewed theories, frra rez follow forthwith, 
the same for all who adopt the eame potition. There fellow = 
well-established pomiiltca the power of paming ox eo others 
‘what one has seen oacself o tenting the descriptions of ethers, 
sing oct intrusive phruce void of meming they bave sipped 
4a unnoticed, and of exposing and eliminating errors which here 
‘oo are poibl, aa they are in every sphere in which validity 
‘counts Sor something, by « further appea! to inmution. But now 
to the matter themselves) 

‘NOESIS AMD NOEMA ast 

$88, Rew (Rams) axp Iermnomas Pacroas of Exreammice, 
‘Tw Nomen 

1K, a hu» been one custam i the present meditations generally, 

\wt Jook out for diizetioos of a very general kind, wich 2s can 
‘be grasped at once ox the very threabold af phenomcnolony, 20 
tm apea, and are determinative fara further methodical advance, 
wwe at anes mumble acrows what, ix reepect of iteationaby, is 
1 quite fandameatal distinction, eamtly that between the froper 
conponents of the intcanoral experiences, ane their intentional 
‘eurrlaes,0¢ the components of thes. 10 the prelimunary ees 
inquiries of the Second Section of this wock wo have 
tlready touched oa ths distinction Ithelped wa, inthe traniion 
from the natural weandpoést to the phesorenclogical, to mabe 
clear the uniqueness of the phenomenological sphere. But that 
ihn this mare hl, within he fewer of he enter 
eatal reduction, it should scquire a radical impoctanoe 
Aiesing te oie problemas of penomeeclegy—ths could 
‘ot at that time be suapected. Thet oo the one lind we have 
to distinguish the para and pheses which we fiad through 3 real 
(Pralle exes ofthe experince in Which we treat the experience 
49 ao object Tike any ater, sod quewtion concerning its parts ot 
the dependent phases which build it up on rea (eet) lines. Bus 
‘on the other band the intentional experience isthe coneciounnen 
of something, and w so in the form iis etscce preseriben 58 
memory, fot intance, oa» judgnsect, or a8 wil, and wo forth: 
nd vo we can sak what ca ie esi an emental Hines concerning 
this “of something". 

Brery inceutonal experience, thanks to ita noetic phase is 
oeti, it i ita easentia!cature to barbour in itself a “meaning 
of some sort, t may be macy meanings, and on the ground of 
‘hia pift of meaning, ad in harmony therewith, to develop further 
phasea which through it become themselves “meanizgfil”, Such 
noetic phases inchode, for imamcc, the directing of che place 
of the pare Bago upoa the object “intended” by i in virtue of 
it gift of meaning, upon tha: wich "it law ini nd es oene- 

sh fae peta, 

at PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
thing meant”; furter, the sppeebeosion of chia object, tbe meaty 
rep of it whilot che plesce ban aitid to other objects which 
ave entered within th circle of coniecture”; kewiae the efeta 
cf bringing out, resting, ‘prebiotics ting 
tp the various atituden of belie, prevemption, vahucien, and 

10 forth. Ail this say be discovered in the relevant expericooce, 
Ihgweverdificrentlyeoomttuted they may be, and however variable 
in themacives. Now truly ax this lastative sees of phase 
‘points to real (reall) componeate of the experiences, it alto 
poi, chrough the rubric ‘meaning’, to companenta that are 
wee ral. 

Correspanding at a2 points to the manifold data of the teal 
(acl) noetic soatent, thee i 4 vancty of data divglayebte 
really pure (mrkick reer intition, and ina correhtive “noemetic 
‘content, or belly “nooma"—terma which we hall henceforth be 
continually wing. 

‘Pecceptcn, for fnatance, bay itp tans, and atthe base of this 
‘ca perceptual meaning.’ tha i, the pereiord ax ck, Siilely, 
‘the recollection, wen it occur, ban on en own tt remembered 
<r uch preity a it i “soeant” end “cocaciounly tnown” in its 
0 pun judging Is at ica own the jadged 5 such, pleasure 
the pleating oe such, and wo forth. We must everywhere take the 
‘mocmatie correlate, which {ia a very extended meaning of the 
tern) in bere referred to as “ieanicg™” (Sint) precinly no 1 fies 
“igumanent” ia the experience of peroction, of judgment, of 
Inking, and vo fort, ie, if we question in pr frm tht exporence 
‘ilo we Sind it there prevented to us. 

‘We can make our mesnung ext fully clear though the help 
of am illustrative analyia {which we propose to cay out in the 
Tight of pure intuiian). < 

‘Let ws suppone that we are loaking with pleasure in a garden 
ats blomoaing apple-tree, a the fresb young green of tbe Jewn, 
and so forth. The perception and the pleasure hat acconspaniee 
lea oriomly nh wich the et preted end 

ai Se 0 Pe Seb 9 “ning a 
SSRI rae Set a ore wee 
yy tar, foe waa Eales Se Bs Sy, Pas oe 

"ee of nets ite Go ek Sly. aoe 

‘NOBSIS AND NOEKA a 
‘ives pleanure. From the marscal standpoint the spple-tece Ia 
something that exists in the transcendent realty of wpace, mul 
the peroeption an well x the pieansre« paychical este which we 
enjoy an real human beings. Betwoen the ame snd the other ceal 
‘being (Resien), the real man or the real perception on the one 
hand, and the cea! apple-tree on the other, there eubuist seal 
relations, Naw in each tonditions of experiznco, and in certain 
cases it may be thatthe peroeption i 

and that the in apple-trec that eds befare us, does 
not exit in the “real” objective world. The objective relation 
‘which wae prcriouly thought of ap cally eubsinting in now 
disturbed. Nothing remaiza but the perception; chere is nothing 
‘val out thereto whch it relates. 

‘Let ws now pase over tothe plesomeclgica) standpoint, The 
‘runscendent world enters its “bracket”; in reapect of its real 
boeing we use the dinconmecing tre. We now mk what thece 
4a todiacover,cn ewential lines, is the semus of poetic 
‘of perceptioe und plearure-valuation. Together with the whole 

physical and peychical world the real ubsisteace ofthe objective 
relation between percept and perceived is suspended and yet 
‘a relation between perception and perceived (as Mhewive between 
‘the pleasure and that which pleases) i obriculy left over, 
elation which in io easential nature comen before us in " 
imvmmence”, purely, that i, on the growd of the phenomena 
logically reduced experience of perception and please, an it fits 
into the transcendental etrena of experience. This i tho very 
situation we are now coocerned with, the pure pheaomenologial 
‘ution. Tt may be that phesomenclogy tas alo something to 
say coucering hallvcimtions, Ubssinos, and deceptive perctp- 
fiona geveraly, and it bas perhaps x great deal to may about them; 
‘but it ia evident that here, in the part they playin the natura 
netting, they Gall away before the phenomeslogical surpensin. 

Here in regen to the perception, and uho © aay xbizariy 
cootigued nenua of such perceptions {ef wewere to abecrve 
the blossoming tree ambulonds), we ave no such qoestion 19 put 
s whether anything correspon to it io "Whe" real word, ‘Thin 
onited (thoiche} reality, oot judgment ia tu be the assure 

on URE PHENOMENOLOGY 
‘of it, a imply aot chere for un And yet everything remain, 
10 0 peal, a of old, Bren the phenomoenalogicaly rected per 
Srp eri pcepion of “is spleen bom, 

aod wo fort" and Hhewie the duced planar, 
plein hei tan pcr. Test a red 
the lane shade of coneat from al che pane, quale, charscare 
smth ick i eppeeed &x this peeepion, ed “i” this planes 
‘proved “‘Seaxtifat, “charming”, and the ke. 

‘From our phenomcanlogal wamdpeint we can and rau put 
the question of essence: What i he “perceined er ruck"? What 
tet phase doce arbor ox lf a fs capacity ex nema? 
‘We win the reply to our quenon as we wait in pure urrender, 
on what ia casntally goes We can then describe "that which 
appeare an wack” Githfully and ix the light af perfect salf- 
‘evidence. As juat one other expression for this we have, “tbe 
describing of perception in its noematic sapect™. 

§%. Nomertc Srampans 1m Srarmann Conceone 
Ruaurr, Tre Nozua ov rar Precemiocicat, Semma 

{ia clear that ll hase deneriptve statement, though very similar 
in send to ststewents concerning realty, have undergone» 
radicat modiSeation of weaning: jum an the described ill, 
‘hough it gure “the samme exactly” a til emething radically 
ther than twa, vet, nt speak, of an ivetig ebange 
of nigncare, “Ta” the reduced pereeption (a the pheDossenc- 
Leg pee expose) we Sd iogig wf sect 

‘the pereeived at ench, and under mich titlen a» 
Nowa Bing’, “pas "ee "Skog" mad on for 
‘The inverted commar are cearly guint; they express that 
change of signature, tbe correspending radical modification of 
the mousing of the words. The ter plain and simple, the thing 
fn manure, js at ferent mit can be from his perceeed tet a7 
1veh, which ts perospmel meaning belonge to the pesception, and 
‘hat inseparably. The tree plain and simple can bura sway, 
resolve ite ito its checial elements, and so forth. But the 
‘ocazing—the meaning of chit parerpion, something that belongs 

‘NOEATS AND NORMA se 
eceumrily ta its mecace—canot bare sway: it haa no chemical 
demand, no forces, no real propestica. 

‘Whaccver in purely imscent and reduced form ia peculisr 
to the experience, and cannot be thought away from it, an tin 
in Hae, and in itn cidesc weting pares o ipo into the Bidos, 
ia separated from wll Nerure end phyoice, and sot lew from 
il papchology by veriable abyuca; aod crem this image, being 
atutainic a not ung enough to indice the dierence. 

‘The perecptual meaning belange of course ao to the pheno- 
menologically wnreduced perception (to the perception in iu 
prychologicl wense). lms we can ere ckarly woe at ance 
how the phenomenological reduction can ful6l for the pey- 
hologist the methodically weful funtion of fxg the woeratic 
meaning in sharp distinetion from the object pure and vimple, 
‘dof resagusing ita belonging imseparsbly to the peycbological 
‘tence of the atentiona experience whlch would then be appre- 
had aa ral. 

‘On both siden, whether the standpoint be paychological oF 
phenomenological, we must wmidvously wee to it that the “per- 
cived" an meaning iacludes sothing (thus nothing whould be 
tuceibed 9 it on the ground of “indirect information”) thet dose 
‘on “really appeas” ia that which in the given case ia the pec- 
cxprual manifestation of the appearing reality, and precisely in 
the mode, the way of presextation ia which we arc nware of it 
in the sctual perception. A wuique had of reflexion roay ox every 
cceation detect this meaning, sit is inmanent in perception, 
tnd it ia only to that which is apprehended init thatthe pheno- 
senological judgment ew 0 adjurt itll and give fitful 
expression. 

$90. Tae “Nomurte Maucxo” axp tax Dieriecriow 2 
Twa “Downe a0 “Raa. (Werucene Oapeers” 
‘Like pereeption, every intentional expericnce—and this is indeed 
the foadamental cack of all imentianaliry—bes ite “intentional 
Le, ta objective meaning. Or to repeat the mzpe i 
‘words: To have » meaning, or to have semething “in mind”, is 

oe PURE PHENOMANOLOGY 

‘he cardinal feture of ell coomiotanen, tht on wcoount of which 
it in noc only experience generally but meaningful, “noetic”. 

15 the eximple wo took and eaalysed, that which stood out 
a fun “meaning” or “sense”, does pot of coure exiaust th full, 
era; correrpondngty the noatis side of imentiona experience 
ddoca not coast exchasively of the strict “sease-piving” phase 
‘to which "sunse” or “meaning” specifically belongs aa currelete. 
‘We shal! preseatly show that the fll cma consist i « nexus 
cf noerisic phases, and that the specie sensc-phase supplice 
aly « kind of necesary nucleic layer in which further phases 
are ssceialy grounded, whick fr that reason, no doubt, thowgh 
with en enlargement of the corm’s maning, we should designate 
seaye phates. 

‘But et uo at fre wand far by the only clear conclusion we 
have reached. Iotentonal experience, so we showed, is un- 
‘doubtedly vo organized tht, given « suitable viewpoint "sera 
‘aan be extracel from it The situation which defines this meaning 
or us, the eircurantance, tamely, thatthe non-existence (or the 
being peenusded ofthe noc-exsteace) ofthe presented or ideally 
coaetructed object un ix plain and simple senee Cannot stealth 
prevented object as uch from the relevant presesation (tod #0 
roma the exiting inceatianal experience generally), that w di 
‘inetion aust therefore be drawn berween them, could not rein 
concealed. The difference, exiking m9 iti, ould not excape the 
inprem of literary speech. As « matier of fat, the ochalatic 
istinetion between “nesta”, “centional”, or “émmonent 

cbjct wn the ove hand, and “rea” ebjet on the other, pine 
tack to it. Meaawile, the slep from a Grit appreheasion of a 
istnrion aocting the satore of covaiomnes, 10 its tight, 
phenomenologially puze fixation and correct valuation, iv an 
inmmenne wep forward and prcly thi ep, whch for» con- 
‘Hareat end fuithal pheaomenclogy i the decinive one, Wab 20% 
talon. Th decisive fame Bes before al inthe absolutely fifa 
desrition of that which ray lice before one in pbesomeno- 
Jogieal purity, and in beeping at « distance all imtecpeetrtions 
‘hat tramoend the given. In this region wppelltons already 
smonnce interpretation, and often very false ones. Such betrry 

NOBSIS AND NORMA a 
themselves here through wach expresicaa as “rental”, “immna- 

‘A too eusy suggestion lies ready to band: Ie experience the 
inention is given with its imcetional object, wick ms suck beoage 
laepazably to it, thun lives rally (rae) within it. What the 
rxperiece intends, preseuts, etc. is sod remsina with it, whether 
the corveepoading "eal object” (aieliche Objet) exas in reality 
oF no, or bas bers annihilated in the interval, and na fort, 

‘But Uf we try i tie way to separate the real objet (in the 
‘caro of umier pererptian the perceived thing of nature) from the 
intentional abject, placing the Incec an “izimanent” to percep 
‘dam within experience an x rea factor (ral), we are beset by 
the diffcuky duit sow tow realities aust confrent each other, 
‘whereas only axa of thas is present and possible, T perocve the 
thing, the objct of mature, tbe tee there inthe garden; that 
seul nothing else i the cea object of the perceiving“ 

1 ecu tants eso ene “ime image” of he a 
‘te that stands out there befare ae, is nowise gia, and to ape 
pose much « ching by way of assumption leads only to absurdity. 
"The copy an x real (reel element in pryebologkally-real per- 
cxptian would agnin be a realy (ee Rela) that fnctioned for 
scotber a image, But coold do thin anky through 1 repre~ 

which for the fox Sane 

1 funetioned consciously for another 
tech cers wherenth c ecnd intndaslty bused on te et 
would be secemary. But it in ne less evident that each one of 
these waya of being conscious already calls for the distinction 
bermets immanent and real object, and thus containa in itmelf 
the very problem that was to kare been solred through the 
csocatruction. Over and above this the constructian in the cum 
of perception ia mubject to the objection which we discumed in 
sen earlier context; to charge the perceptice of the physical with 
representative functions means fee an image 
‘conaciousnens which from the descriptive viewpoint is comeinuted 

+ Champa bn FFE 

on PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
in an caentially different way, Sell dhe cain point Yew here, 
thin in merihing a represeataive Fonction to peroetion, and 
consequently to every inteational experience, we unavoidably 
being in xa endles regrese (aa can be neen at once from our own 
critic). 

1a the face of eroen auch an theae, we mms abide by what 
fn given in pure experience, and place it within its frame of 
learoo just 42 it comes into our bande. The “real” object io 
then tobe “bracketed. Let wa coder what this moxne: artng, 
sn mem in our natural setting, the cel object in the thing out 
there, We sce it, we face it, we have curned cur eyes towarit 
it end fixed chemo spon i and an we find i there in apace over 
aninat vs, 90 we describe it end make our tatemesta concerning 
i In the mater of values we Ukewise ke up an attirede; this 
that we vee facing us in space pleewe ue or determines ws to 
ction; what there pcesents self we lay hold of, wodk It up, and 
10 forth. If we now carry ant the phesorenological reductin, 
‘every tranacecdent setting, that above al which in bound up with 
perception, receives ios mampending. bracket, which envelope all 
‘the derivative st, every perceprualjudgmect wit the vahsttona 
‘pounded in ity and eveatualiy the judgment of value, and 20 
forth, What it comes to inthis: we sur all these perceptions, 
Judgmensa, and vo forth, but oaly on coctition that they be 
remanded and described ws the eaemtalines which they are in 
heroines; if asyibing in thecn or in relation to them a presented 
sm vell-eviient, that we extaliah and Sorify. But we allow 
Judgment that makes acy use of the affrmation that posits 
eal” thing or “tasacendeat” arare ana whole cr “co-opernea" 
in vetting up these posicous. As phenamenolopisis we avoid all 
och aSirmatons. But if we “de aot place cunelves on trie 
round”, do not “co-operate with them, we do not for tht 
‘reason cast thea sway. They aze there stil, and belong eaten- 
tally » the pheoemenoa ws » very part of it, Rather, we con- 
template thexs curacroe;inead of working with them, we make 
‘them into objec; and we take the thea of poeeption und i. 
cnmpenrate alo comtioent portoes of the phenomenon. 
So thea we ask gecerally, Lzping to the clar meaning of 

[NOESIS AND NORMA os 
these murpecaons, what ia it “ies” velf-cridenly before us in 
tho whole “reduced” phenocamza? Naw in perception ther lice 
lao tia that it haa 1h naematic metnéng it “perceived wy wuch”, 
‘hia tee blemomiag Out therein space”—underetood as unde 
the inveried soenmaathat in fact which belongs to che emence 
of the phanomenalogically reduced perception—in short, ita 
correlate, To speak ix mo image: The "bencheting” which per 
ception hon undergone prevents any judgment being peased on 
the perceived reality (2 any judgmese that bes it grovad ix 
‘the immodified perneption, and therefore socept Ix thes nits 
wn). But it doea not bisder any judgment to the effect thet 
perocption isthe consciousness ofa eal world (provided the cheuis 
‘thereat in not set in setion) and it doce net hinder epy deacrption 
of this percepraily appearing “real world as auch’ wich the 
special moder ia which we are comaioualy aware of thin reality 
1 appeansg, £4. siply as perocived, merely “one-auded”, in 
tha or that ecieattion, and 9 forth, We must ow see it wath 
scrupulous minutenent that wo do cot put into the experience 

‘which ia not relly inched in the emence, and that 
‘we “lay icin precisely in che way in which itazeedy “Lice” in 
the eaence inet, 

§ 9%. Bxrmatow 10 ran Faxramsr RrAcas o7 Iereerronancry 

Whit has Btheto been sare filly dacumed with reference to 
perception rally holds good ofall ype of robo! espero 
In matmory, aftr redvcton, we Gnd the remembered as wach 
in expocaton, the spect au exch; i Saginative fat, the 
Socio w ick. 

Ta" ach of these expeicncn there “mela" x nocmatio 
roewzisg, and Lower chely vtcelaed, indeed, 10 far a8 6 
cena micless ia cencerned, cantialy selfaame, the lier 
‘rine in dire experince, & ier i Kid nose the ime 
‘when the experiences ier in Lind; she commen. ground bere 
in ae lear eiferaatly fumed, and ascemarily a0. Te objet 
cmidared may bei every cae» blomorsing ter, sod in every 
cage thi tree my 80 appear that the ical deseciptina of hat 

a6 PORE PHENOMENOLOGY 
which appear sa nach nsceassily mcs identical expremioas. Yet 
‘he noematiecorrelatea ae for this very ragon evenly diferent 

for perception, fancy, imogiaative presexatin, ratmory, and 40 

hus ete hopes 9 ec To 
poral raliy”, at another ex Szticn, then agein ax secaletion 
‘brought before the mind, and so forth. 

‘Thaw are characters which we fads iaseparsbe features of 
the peroived, fancied, remembered, etc, ux such; of the meaning 
‘of paresption, the meaning of fancy, the owaning of memory, and 
su racenarily belonging £2 thas in correlation with the repectoe 
(yee of metic experiences. 

‘Trou, where our interest Lien im describing the intentional 
corres fcthfully end completly, we must oever collect soch 
dna in x biphamed way, but group together characters that 
‘conform (0 cartin exsestial lam, ad fix their isaport wth 
conceptual arictnes. 

‘We observe from hia that wichin the cmplte notin (an me 
‘bad in. fact previounly decared) we mort separate ou x enentelly 
diferent cecain vrata which greap themselea about » central 
“uclat", the wbeer “ebjntion meaning”, thet which 50 our 
casmples wat somrthing that could be Gwerywbere decribed 
4 purely identical objective terms, beceose In the specibcally 
ferent though parallel expecences there could be an identical 
clement. We sec at the mune time, if we agnia set atde che 
‘rackets suspending the thos, that running parallel with end 
correponding to the diferent concept of meaning, diferent 
crap of emelifd elciti at be itngae, of 

npc”, namely, the idcotieal element 
prone pity adie ran tienes dep eesianry 

sod third tne exhibited in Sgured form in «picture, and 40 
foxth, indicates only one central concept. Mean! 
rclicinay, let this iadionn lice, 

‘We now glance round within the aphere of conecloumet, 
‘aking x socewar wider mweep, aed, by turning to the mal ways 
of being comseloun, seek to get to Rnow the noetic-noetntic 
‘arucrurts. As we fallow up the ral indications, wo ae at the 
focar time winning direct mrersce step by sep of the horn 

NOUSIS ANU NUEMA a 
_reigg validity of the fundlamencal corseiation between noesis std 

$92. Tax Tuseromastioss oF Arrmerion nt REGARD SoTH 10 
‘Nowns asm Namen 

{In ou preliminary chapter wo have nzeady spoken sire than 
ance of « species of remarhabletransfoematioas of conscious 
‘which out acre all other kinds of iatentiomal cocurrence, ate! 
continte therefore a quite genera siructure of consciousness 
ani generis, We spoke mtapborically of « ‘meatal glance” or 
“glancing ry" ofthe poze Ego, of ita turnings towards und awny. 
We benughe the phones belonging (o this context unde 
‘unty und inco completely clear and distinc rele, Wherever 
op et" Ain” sett thy ley Ge he prt witout 
any phmomenalogic) seperation trom other pbecomena, snd 

tle mized with we Ung re refered ween of ten. 
‘We on our side wih to resi the word ateatian, and in aston 
tw aperk of attentional tranformations, bat exclusively with reler- 
ence tosuch a we oortdes ave dainty eparsisd cut, inclusive 
of the groupe of interconnected pueoomens tesaformations {0 
tbe moe fully decribed in che won. 

‘Oar concern here is with « veries of transformations posible 
dealer, which steady preroypose 4 poetic wocieus and cersin 
charactrining phases ofa different order wiych necrasrily belong 
‘ait, trmaformatine which do not of thecaelves work any change 
in the noematic fects which beloog to thia aocsin, snd yet 
‘hibit modiications of the stale experience on is noeti us well 
1800 its socmatc tice. The glancing cay ofthe pure Ego poses 
now through this, now through that noetic Laer, or (ofa the 
‘se, fo instance, of memories) right throug thin or tht inter- 
akted seat, sontine dinely, sometime a relisted, 
‘Wahine ental gin fal of potenti! nomen er of nati objec, 
‘we glace now a: wome nial ea the Gee whichis perprually 
‘present, Bow ae this or thit put <24 phar of tbe same; then 
siguin a «hing sanding ene by, oc at wmxxecamplee organization 
ad proces, Budiealy we direct ocr glance townrda sme object 

8 PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

‘of recollection which chatom to oocur to wt. Our glance, inated 
of puning through the noves of peeeption, which fx comtinuox 
sod unitary way, thongh varioaly ericlted, comstioue for ux 
the steadily uppecring world of things, gout through 1 noesa of 
cemembrance into a world of memory, nove about in the ltier, 
‘wandering ara xd dere, passes on to oeesotes of thes Levels, 
into works of fancy, wx 90 fort. 

For the sake of simplicity Jet us renin in one intentional 
stratum, that of the worid of perorpton, which in simple ot 
tainty is just out there. Let us fx i idea and in rexpect of i 
‘noeourtic context some thing of which we are pecoeptvely aware 
(or wome occurrence connected with it, joat ms we fx in its full 
‘immanent emeace the whole concrete consciousnen of the thing, 
oF the occurence ia the correapanding section of phenomeno- 
logical duration, Ten the fing wo of the bean of stention 
‘n fa own appennted circuit belongs to this idea, For the besa 
alto ia = phase of experince. It in then evideat that moden of 
sdterrtion ofthe fixed experience are posable which we indice 
by the rubric “alterations in the divcibutien of attention and 
itn modes”. Ie a clear thatthe msenatic factor ofthe experience 
hare remain the sme in 90 far as ean now everywhere be sid: 
Lat the sazae objective culty be characterised always 1» cor- 
poreally extent, prevening ite in the wane mode of appear 
nce, the muze ericaations and manifesting character We outy 
bbe made aware, moreover, of this or of that pat of ion somteat 
‘throagh the maze mades of indeterminate intimation x54 unin- 
‘tational socepresentation. We draw ont certs parallel norma. 
<lesanas and compare hem, nad the sleraion we will suppose 
conuises merely in this, that in one owe of comparison this 
‘objective phase has the “preference”. end ix the other thet; or 
tat one and the aume phase ‘a atone time “primarily noted”, 
st asother sated only in a secondary way. ox saly “just ated” 
slong with something cle, if it ia not indeed “completely un 
aotiad”, athongh still contiming to uppear. There are indeed 
ferent modes whick Belang specifically @ stieation an mach, 
‘Tho group of actaabey-nader vegaritea itself of therewith fre 
the mde of non-armulicy; from that which we plinly eal! 

NOMSIB AND NOEMA oy 
Inauention, the mode, so vo apeat, of the dead enjoyment of 

coaly those of the experience foelf in its noetic aspect, at shat 
they also covee is noon tht, an the noexatic wide without 
rvjudice tothe identia) xoematic nuclew—they exhibit « new 
lass of charucteriations. It is saual t compare attention with 
an ilumivating Halt. What ia tended to, in the epecifc anse, 
subsists in the mere or lew bright cone of light, but ein alto 
shelvt off inte the talf-atadow and isto the full darknews, Little 
ss the Image sulices to inculcate with the proper distinctness 
all motes calling for phenomenological fing, i sei significant 
1s pointing to changes iz that which appears a» euch. hit 
eration Of the lighting doen uot ater that which appears ta 
nd through the meaning it conveys, but beightnees and darkaces 
modify its mode of sppeaing; they are 10 be found in the 
Aicecting of the plance to the nomic object and there described. 

tix obvious, moreover, that tbe modicatioaa in the poems 
are not of such & kind that they simply aaoex to something that 
‘romaine the came throughout some merely extemal addition; on 
‘the contrary, uur emecrn ia with the secemary woden of the 
‘way in which the oeltidentical presets itself. 

Looked at mare clowly, however, the stustion at thia paint 
ia not that the whole soematic contest, characterized us occasion 
thas determined ix terme ofthe odoa “attentional” (it atteronal 
Jareet 40 to npeak), mast be upeld as « conanant over aguiant all 
sbitrary modifications ofthe sctentian. On the cootrary, looking, 
‘the matter from the moete side, we observe tha: certain noes, 
whether of necesity or following sci posible of their 
ature, ae conuitioned by modes of ettentin, and in particular 
through positive attention ia the quite epecial seas of the term. 
‘Al "enacted act”, the “actual postions oneured”,¢ thet of 
"sting out” a decision which enda « dow, that of setting mide, 
of the positing of a subject, and the coomequent adjurtment of 
‘the predicaze, making 2 wlustion and that “Yor the sake of 
another", the asttude in « choice, and vo forth thin pre- 
‘eupposes positive attention to tat fo which T take up » postion. 

” PURE FUENOMENOLOGY 
But ielnaves unsiered the fact that shia function ofthe wandering 
leoce, which sltcenately ealacgea and retccta io montal span, 
Iignilics a spacial divin af correlate meadifcationsnoctic ond 
somatic of which the syeteuatic eudy on cxseatial lines is ona 
ofthe faxdameoeal tks of peers! pbeaomenclgy. 

‘The attentinna! formatices in thir modss of ectuaity, poses 
in n very epecial ease the character of majatoiy, wd ll the 
functions which are modalized through these modes, of pre- 
oppom them, a opacon thar geaara win thereby thi character 
tho. The ancading ray gives itself out a9 redisting frum ths 
‘Pure Ego snd as terminating in the objective, being directed 
twwards it or devieting from it. The shaft of wttention is not 
sepante from the Bap, but itself ip and renaina peesoasl, The 
“ebject” Ua referred to, isthe goal aimed at, set in relation to 
‘the Bo nly and by the Ego itvel!), but i mo iself "aubjeeive™, 
‘Am attitude which Dears the pervonal ray in Steet is thereby a1 
‘ct ofthe Bgo cl; the Ege docs ar nfs fre ox tooditioned. 
‘The Ego, #0 we also expremed, “lives” is woch acta, This life 
doce net signify the being of acy “oomtents” of way Kind in & 
seam of coateta, but « vaziery of desribuble ways in which 
‘the pur Ego in curtain intentions) experience, whic have the 
‘general mode of the copit, lives therein ax the “fee ewsence”” 
‘which itis, ‘The expresion “ax fee extence” refers, however, 
to nothing more than such modes of life a the going Feely ot 
af onwell, or ging back upon soewel, spontaneous doing, 
‘experiencing something from object, euffering, ani wo fort, 
‘What goes on in the rtream of experience outside the pers 
say or copia ia characterized in un eamctially different way 
Yea outside the Ego's sctulity, acd yet, en has already been 
Srvtkod in x previous content, it sil belongs to the Eo in 60 
as anit athe Feld of potentiality for the Eye's free ats, 

0 munch towards the general characterisation of the oeto- 

‘NORSIS AND NOEMA a 

99. "Temacnox zo vax Norrc-Nomexric Smx0cToars Of TH 
Hiaum Seigax or Comecsovarase 

In the acres of discumions Which immediately follow we wish 
1m canaidar certain etrucares of the “higher” sphere of conscious 
nee, in which @ mumber of moses are Balt up, the ams above the 
the, within the wxiy of 6 concrete e=perimcy, wad in empathy 
wherewith the soematic carrelate likewise ate consolidated. Foe 
the law of the emease unjremully artord rons to thin cfcct: 
‘No nostic phase without « moematic phate that hlonge spetfially 
fou 

‘Brea in the case of the higher-level norses—tabing these in 
their concrete completenesy—there figures an Use moematic side 
1 central nacleus which at Swt obtrudes inelf prominestly, the 
“amount (vermeiae) objectivity at auch”, the objectivity in inverted 
‘commas a the phecomenelogict) reduction decande, There alsa 
‘this central nocass must be understzod in procinly that modified 
cbjective wae in which it ia fact « noems, the consciously 
known a toch. Subsequently it will be vena thut bere too thia 

oa URE PHENOMENOLOGY 
1 evablah, i the cae ofthe normata of che changing epeci- 
fications of a stable species (og., pervepticn), what is casentially 
determined according to law through the epecies itself, and what 
‘rough the diGirestaiog specifeatioas. Bet the dettemination 
is vnc; im ie phe of iv eee te ae oo 

$94. Nowus ano Nomus ne ram Sruens on rmx Juvoaner 

‘From this phere of derivative (fender) emenccs ict up take 
‘9 ta iastance the peadicativejudgnt. "The noeaa ofthe fading 
‘Pree, i of the omerete experience ofthe judgment, ithe 
"judged content of the judgment ax nich”, but that fs noching 
ther, ot my rate 90 far anim chit ucleor is concerned, than 
‘what we ordinarily refer to simply an the fudged. 

1 order to grep the Full ncaa, we mot one it a we find 
4 in realty (wir), in te full noematse coneretenee in which 
‘we are aware of itis concrete judging. ‘The fudged coctent of 
the judgaenr in not to be confused with the matier judged about. 
‘Whea che judging proces sbaper itself on the bass of # per~ 
ceiving ox other plainly “posiiog act of presenting, the noems 
‘of the preventing act beenmes part of the jodging act eakes in 
itn full ooeretzoom (just au the presenting Soma eso beoomes 
‘© ceastiutive part of the eweace of the concrete noses of the 
Jocroent), and within it tes oo eta forms, The provented 
(such) receives the form of the apophantic mubject or object, 
snd the like. For the sake of simplicity we oaglot Bexe for the 
‘moauent the higher lyer of verbal “expremion’, These “objecta 
concerning which”, in particular the objects we utilize for the 
subjess of cur judgments, are the maaier judged about. Toe 
‘whole that is formed out of thers, the whale somemhot (Wat) or 
conte ofthe fadpent gua content, and in addition taken exactly 
‘wh the concrete featuring, 204 inthe form of sremnttion in which 
‘we are "re of” it in experience, cooxitutza the full ormatic 
corelate, the “meanieg” (aie eidert seme) of the judgment 
experienced. To put it mare peegnantly, # is the “meaning a» 

‘NOESIS AND HOEMA mn 
‘we huve it through the way in which iti» given to ws”, vo far 
su this way of being given i traceabe init asa feature. 
‘But the pheuomesological reaction must aot here be over: 
looked, demanding of uy, if we wish to obuain the pure nocma 
four judgeneat a experienced, tht we "bracker” the delivery 
of the judgmect, If we do thi, we fd facing unin their pheno 
imesoloyis! purty the full cnescte eateane of the judgment 13 
‘aperieaced, or, a we now expres it, the mei of i juipman!, 
‘eptrehended concretely at tinct, wna the moeme of th judgement 
‘which belonge to the noosa, and ia neconarlly one with it, ic. the 
“ddored judgment” a Bidos,and here asin in phenomenological 
posity, 
"Tho paychologicrs evecywhere will take offeace at this; they 
are sleeady disinclined oo distingsiah between judging x2 
empirical experience and judgment an “Idee”, a essence. This 
<rtinetion, o far aa we are concerond, needs no fartber deface. 
But oven coe who sccepia it ia chaeaged. Foc be ia required 
‘0 revoguiee that this one distinction nowise wuSices, end that 
‘there are many ideas we need to determine which inthe events! 
acure ofa judgmest'sinteationalcy fall oo two different ski, 
Te must sbove all be reongnitad that bere, an with all itentional 
caperincee, the two aides, noosis and noema, most be dinio- 
[Biabed on principle 
‘We would note here, by way of critica, that the concept 
of “intentional” 104 “epistemological” mumnct' which were extab- 
lished in the Lopical Src are indeed correctly stated, but art 
snl capable of « second interpreason so far at they can be 
tundarstood in principle, aa expressing aot enly noctic but also 
Aoecatic emeccee, and that the noets rendering an eatied out 
there ina oceakded way & preclaely nat the one needed for the 
anion of the vonexpt of the pare logical jgzmeat {the coacegt 
‘which pure logic in the sexae of pore mathesia demsnds, in 
ceantrast with the nostic eacoept of judgment in the noeticn of 
normative logic). Te dstnetion bermeea the paming of « 
saat sod the Jadgnant o pened, which ban elcady erblshed 
ite Ia erinary epeech, can pot in the right direction, namely, 
* Gh Lage Sidi, Vo, Fa Sty $36,482. 

” PURE PRENOMENOLOGT 
‘hat an crvletoly related to the judgment as experienced we 
Ihave the judgment riper es nocms, 

"Tala then i what wo ubould understand ws tho “judgment”, 
‘ar the proputiton in the pre logical seme, only that pure logic 
ia not imerested in the noemn ic all it bearings, but only ia wo 
‘er ww it ty thought of a» ceckasively devine? through 
rerrower meee; acd in Sing this more clnely the wtempted 
iatinction of the Lapa! Stadir considered above has shown 
the way. If, thing our eta from 2 definite jodgmamt op we 

‘experinnce it, we seek for the full noeme, we must, an above 
feted, tbe “te fulgnent poly ve ee er of 
this experience, whereas in the proceedings of forma logic the 
idee of “the” judgment bas» far wider range, A vell-evident 
Jodemnent “Sis P” and “the mame” blind judgment are noematl- 
‘aly diferent, but ebare an ideatical kerael of meaning which 
for the treaknent af foro) logic ia alone determinative. The 
ifereace ie emia to the one sready touched oo between the 
‘otra uf & pereption and that of « parallel presestation which 
tan before ithe eae object with precuely the ame determining 
cootent, characterised i the mane wey (as “certainly being, 
“drubeully being”, wad the Ibe). Tae Binds of act wre dffereut, 
and there sill rexasins wide nope in othec ways for phecoroeno- 
logical differences, but the aoematic content is the same, And 
‘we ada this further poist tht corresponding to the idea of the 
Jodgmret wo we have jowe characterized it, «2 iden which voo- 
stisstn th fundamental concept of formal logic (that disiptine 

[NOaBIB AND NOEMA as 

All tht we have jurt been sesing holds uso for other formas 
of nostic knowledge, aad matully, co tke x special inmseco, 
for all euch forms os are emcatialy related to jodgmenta 28 
predicative certsisties, and with the corresponding miggertions, 
‘preeumptioos, doubts, and rejections. The ngreement, moreover, 
‘an reach ao far that inthe nooma we bere a cantent of mening 
veyohere the same, provided only with different “characteriza- 
toma”. The sme is P” a» sowwaticnacias can be the “conta?” 
of a certainty, x muggeeted pomibilty, a provemption, ct. In the 
rocms the “'S is PY does not wand alone; im proportion anit 
fa thought aut ms content it 4 something’ dependent; we are 

the “null, te. characters to which i thes eniery he rodi> 
fying inverted comman belocg, and me correlate are specif 
‘cated to the otic experimta! phases of bolting snehing v8 
onaible, m probable, as mall and void, ete. 

‘Herewith, as we mo nt cace, two fondemectal omoepts af the 
"couten of 6 judgrent” different, and timilasly foe the content 
‘of nsuppostion, the contest of « question, and sofort, Logciios 
‘ot infrequently wo wpeak ofthe content of « jodgunent thst (even 
‘without aking the necesuzy divtinction) either the nostic or 

& 

pre chances of he fet we ms execs me i) aad 
Coreen cee teenie © te, 1s deecipoces aod mouetat 
ihipmes. Ae en chpeuty Mand ahaa, Shed te fs 

a 

“ URE PHENOMENOLOGY 
‘the nonaaionlagical conopt Jodgment'—the to concepta 
tre have previounly arated iy a the cae may be, clay 
‘Released: Ruaning parallel wih thew, ead of cure withost ever 
flushing with them ec wish one anutber, we lave the core 
speang pao enya pions quam, abl 
wo ave a second meaning of the coment a's judgment, 
a "caatent” which the jodgment ean have dentis!y ix common 
‘wih w premungion (er 4 provaming), with question (or & 
‘emioning), ead eer act-nocmura or ee-noces, 

S95. Tux Ansocovs Darrxcrons i rms Semumat oF 
‘Smernaerr ax Was, 

‘Aasloyous comsideraticca apply then, 28 one may easly convince 
‘oneself, to the epberes of metimeat and will, to experiences of 

Plemure md displenure, to valation in every sense, 10 Wish, 
eciion, and practical action; these are all experiences whisk 
coetain many ane often varied ftentanal strtiSeation, noetic, 
‘ad abo, correlatively, noematie. 

‘Moreover, the tatifoties, epeaking peoerally, ae 90 ordered 
‘tat the uppermost strata of the phenomenon a2 5 whole can 
all eway without the raidur comping to be « concrete xmmplete 
intentional experience, end that conversely also a concrete 
experience can receive new noetc stratum of an jnckaive 
character; an when, for isatance, “valuation” as a dependent 
hase vtraties ioe? over wud above a oaverete presentation, or 
soaverselyfalla away agin. 

‘When » perceiving, Sncying, judging, and the Like lie in thi 
‘ay at the bao of stratum of valoaion that completely covers 
it, we have, in the sratified Back asa whle, called, ater i highest 
stu 2 oanerete expecience af valuation, diferent nomata, 
ifirmt meanings. The perceived a2 euch belongs «9 mocaning 
specifically to the pereeviag, but enters into the measitg of the 
conerete valuing, powiding tha meaning with « basa. Zn coere- 
spoodence herewith we most eepactively dntguish the objec, 
‘things, qualiet, the vicious metier which and ost ia tbe 
valuing a having vale, and the corresponding noemsta of the 

NOsIS AND NORMA, an 
pesentations, jndgmenis, md the ike upon which the conscious 
‘ness of value rery; snd on the other band the chjecta and the 
cmeats of value themselves, or the moematic modifications 
corresponding to these, aad thea groenlly the comple 
oerats (Nocmes) which Delong to the concrete comicioument 
of wake. 

Lat wo firt note, by way of explanation, thet in the ineerocs 
cf grester dipinctnes we ace well advised (bere and in ocher 
analogous cases) to latroduce consis dixinguishing relative tzrma, 
in order the beer to keep veparoe wortful object and object 
of worth, worthfil firt and fact of wort, worthfu! quality and 
‘quality of worth (which in foelf once agua equivocal). We wpeak 
cf some mere “fcr” a being worthul, baving « warth-claracte, 
‘worthfubwar; nad in ancther diection of concrete worth itself, ot 
‘worthfulvas i the object (Wertebfoeltat: ebjectiiod value). We 
peak i cimilaty parallel terms of the pica mibstentive menieg 

(position of affairs, a2 of the plain meonng or position ty tam 
frie, weet rig tartan of 

‘eben meaning a2 1 supporting foundation. Wortul- 
twin be objet nade sce Sol bap i er 
aa a8 sory objective stratum. The meaning, in terma of value 
fla ia ituelf its own pia ecbutantive meaning, the atribute 
af value, that of posivity likewise, and, over and above this, 
-worthfuloem. 

‘We must farther distinguish becwoen worhfuiness in the 
object plain a ize andl worthfalna in the object der the 
severed commer, which lies in the naw. Jt as the peroeived 
su wich stands over agunat the perciving in x sense which 
ceacludes any question concerning tbe geauinenass of the per- 
‘ceived, no stands che valoed as noch is relation to the valuing, 
fd agsin so that the Being of the Value (of the valved thing 
‘andes tear being of value) remains uncnosidered. For the sppre- 
tension of the soem all affrmationa beaiag on actuality mast 
be sumpended, And again, we must observe well thet the ful 
"meaning" oF the valing incu its What (den War dace, 
together with the whole fullness of realization which marks our 
sevrenesa of & in the experience of value under consideration; 

* PURE PHENOMENOLOCT 
and chat worcfuloew in the object [objectifid wah], under 
the inverted comsaat, io not, without furber quetion, the fll 

"The dininciona we bawe drawn may be carried throngh 00 
vicllarUnes inthe ere ofthe Wil. 

‘On the one side we have the naokiion we mak: et any moment, 
‘with al she experionon whic demscd itm aban, which indeed 
ie fachadea withia itself when taken in a concretenen. A variety 
‘of nowtc planes beloogy to it Voiiceal sffrmariama prexippose 
‘tiernasins i cegad to value, postings of ching, nd the like, 
On the other hed, we Gnd the rook ms x unique type of 
shepen in the et belong epic the domain 
of will, sod abviouly grounded ix other end 
‘Sanplons inthe sje, If thes w plessoensleyes we 
srnpond all oar ral sfirmutions, the pheoomesan of wil, 8 « 
Phenomenalogically pure intenticeal experience, retains it “eed 
euch", na « moeme proper to the wall; the “wills meaning" 
(Pidlmeminong), and in the precise way in which ft mubaiate we 
"apoaning” inthis will (oo full ewestility), and wish whatever 
4a willed “inal its ramifications”, 

‘We spoke jst ow of “meenizg” (Meimang). This word throrts 
Mae upoa un beer at every point, ax do uo the ward “ease” 
(Sinn) and “ceocepralsigicance” (Bedeteng). To the function 
of maaning (Manet, oxintending (Verarinn), cortaponda then 
the mwoniag as maon! (Meine); to the signifying in conceptual 

smocisional ranafr infected with so many smblguitier—and not 
least slo with wach ax are through gliding over into thowe 
correlative sata, which it ahould be the function of science to 
beep stsitly sod syetecatcally spart—hat ont cannot be too 
careful In dealing with them. Our tresiment of theve topica 
st present foe t2 move on emential lines within the universe 
of “inteatioul experience” taken io its widest scope. Dut the 
tse of the term “menting” (Mine), = above, ix mocmally 
surriied within nexomer ares, which function, bowever, tf the 
‘me Gant ta subverate of the phenomena of the wider field of 

\NOESIS AND NOEMA = 

inguiry. The woed can therefore be used 1s «Jogi term (and 
‘tho remark applica to ies wter-expremions alto) aly within these 
‘asromer sre For the generalities of oot trextment our newly 
soined term, axd the llosttive umaires that socompany our 
‘troduction of them, will certsiniy nerve wh mere eectively. 

$96, Tuousnion ro rex Caurrms suar Fotzow. Conecvamie 
‘Rew 

We have bestowed such great care, though on geoenal Enea, on 
‘working out the diflerence beeween uocaia end norma (wbere 
by docin we uadervtand the concrete completely iateationsl 
‘experience as modified through the stresting of ita noctic com- 
‘oneats) because the graxp and mastery of i i of the greatest 
consequence for phenomenclagy, i indeed quite deciave fr itt 
proper grounding, Ax Scat sight it appears to be concerning Iself 
‘With whit is obviow: every consciousness is the consciousness 
of vomething, and the modes of consciousoess are very difereut. 
Bit oo nearer approach we realized the great diffcutien, They 
concern the undenvtanding of the made of being of the noeca, 
the way in which it should “lio” in expetienoe, end. become 
“cooseioutly knowa"” there. They concern quite particularly the 
clear-cut sepuration between the ses! (raeer) porions of ane's 
whole experience which belong to tbe experitocing itelf, and 
those which belong to the norms, and ebould be steibuttd to 
it as i06 own, Algo the correct rticolation in partied etroctuten 
of nocais and noems, which fllowa on the seperation between, 
them, gives trouble enough. Eves if we have skeady happily 
vormpleted certain rosin vectiou of the line of separating in 
quettion, taking presentations and judgment as our material, 
‘nce it ia here that the oceasion for the cleavage frst efer itself, 
od logic has alreedy carried out in this feld valuable, thous, 
‘not even remotely woficest, prelsainery werk, it ned tol and 
self-discipline in respect of the paral distinctions eoncemning 
"acta of the heart", aot caly to povrulate and assert thew, but 
really to fring them out ciazly ae they ore actually given 
too. 

the choughe upwards, it meat be our tak here ta carry out 
portions of phenomenclogy in x syvematic way. None the fous 
(tar sia demand thet we sbauld pencirete mare deeply into these 
smacers than hitherto, and deft dhe beginnings of such inguitica, 
‘This ls neceaary ic order to elaify tbe neetico-nomaticsroc- 
ture, o far at leant a8 to make their significance undemtood 6» 
regards the etudy ofthe problems nad methods of pheromenalogy. 
‘A Siving pictre of the fritflaes of phenomesology, of the 
treatnen of its problese, of ie way of proceeding, cax be won 
‘nly when domain after domuis bas been scully trassped and the 
probleat-rsts it pounce opeced up for oll to me. But cachanch 
docaain Wil be really covered and come hose to cur feeling a4 1 
firm ground for work only trough carying out phenomeooloyical 
fenclags and clearing, whereby also the seaning ofthe problems 
bre tobe solved ex fet be sade italigble, The analyven and 
indications of furter probleaa which are will to follow should 
‘conform strictly tm this concept, aa ined the previous ones 
in part bave already doce. And though the novice may think 
that the ruterial Iaadled ia complicated, we sre rally Hiitiog 

ae 
ah val 

FOURTH CHAPTER 

‘THEORY OF THE NOETIC-NOEMATIC STRUCTURES: 
‘ELABORATION OF THE PROBLEMS 

Sor. Tw Hmane aro Nome Puss a8 Reat (Rexx), 

‘Tax Nomune as Nowa Puss or Exrmimce 
Ta the previous chapter, when introducing the ditinetion between 
etic and noematic, we made vse of the expremion rea (relier) 
sd intentional anal. Let thet be our point of conenion with 
whet foows. A phenoraenologically pure experisace bas ite real 
(rollin) components, For szolicity’s wk let us Erdt oneatrea 
1 nnaic experiences of the loweet level, aod therefore to those 
in which the intentionality a not complisated by a namber of 
oetica ayers auperposed one on the other ofthe hind we noted 
tn the cae of acts of thought, felng, and wil. 

‘By may of tusraion ler ua take 4 sensory perception, the 
simple perception of » tre, which we pet ax 00 us We pint 
out into the garden, when, in w unitary art of constionsses, we, 
see thin tee there, at ose moment appearing to be ratings, thea, 
teureed by the wind, and preacting slag moden of eppeacance 
‘whieh differ grea in so far ax during the course uf our con- 
‘inued observation we shift our epatis position ia regard to it, 
stepping to the window reaybe, or chang the paisa nf bead 
oc eyes, and at the same time perhapa relaxing the mechani. 
of sccommodation or tightening it up. Js thia way the unity of 
1 Bingle perception cax include in itself « great variety of eaodi- 
‘ications, which we, an observicg from the nefara! standpoint, 
sutribule now to the real object an dtr changes, now to a real 
(racer) and poitve (wirkichen) selaionahip to our real (rele) 
‘poychophysical subjeciviey, and lary to thn subjectivity uel. 
But we have now to describe wht remaize over as phenomeno- 
Jogi residuum, when we effet the reduction to "pure imme 
‘Benes, and what i tht cave should count ar areal reales integral 
bart of ihe pore experience, wd wha: sbould vot be vo regurded. 
‘Aad we have then to be fully clear about this, that whit the 
“perceived tree at such”, or, altersatey, the fall nema which 

AMBONY OF fs NOBLIGNOMEATIC S1MUCLURES ats 
ia not affected by the mospending of te reality (irkichh) of 
‘tho tre itself and the whe seal wocld, doen indced belong 10 
‘the casnce of the perceyeual experience in itself, on the other 
‘hand thie noma, with ita “tree™ in inverted camara in as Kila 
contained raster (reall) inthe ercption tit tha tee of the real 
snared order (inhib). 
‘What do. we realy (vel) find in the perception at pare 
experience, included within it m the par, pence, and fodviible 
‘phmcr of « whole, are included in chat vume whale? Wo have 
tdready deawn atestion to such gencine, tel (reli) commen 
(00 « previous ovcation under the tide of seater and soetic 
‘ouuinsents. Let ua now coctagt them witk the noemstis facts, 
"The colour of the tree-runk, as we are avare of it under the 
conditions of pure pereption, ie precisely “he ene” as that 
‘which before the phenowcootogica reduction we (06 “astral” 
‘buman beings, at any mite, prioe to say aduixtare of phyical 
Xxnowladgn) took to be that of the real (wirlichen) tee, Now thir 
aa bracketed, beloage to the noema. Butitdoca not belong, 
to the peroopeual experience os «real (eller) integral past of ft, 
sldhough we also fod inthe expecience “a colour-like wmething”, 
imarely, the “vensory colour”, the let phase of the concrete 
‘experience ia which the noemaitie or “objective” colour" manifests 
inet in orying prepetoa”, 
‘But obe and the ame cocmatic ealour of which we art that 
awnze ar selbsame, in ite unchanged within the unity of « 
ceantisucusly changing peroeptosl conciournes, rune through 
its permpective variations in « continuous variety of mawory 
colours. We see a eree unchanged in colour—ita ows volar 2 
1 tree—whilt the positions of the eyes, the relative orientations, 
change ix any reepecs, the glance wandery comelemly over the 
‘trunk nd branches, while we wep neazer at the mine time, wad 
hun in. different wayy excite the fow of percepoul experience. 
‘Let ue now start semiory eflenioa, reflerion upon the pevapetive 
‘aviation: we apprehend these ax self-evident data, and axe also 
sble, shifting the wandpcint and che direction of attention, t0 
‘lace them with full evident! certainty in relation with the 
socrespoeding objective phases, recognize them as corresponding, 

” PURE FHENOMANOLOGT 
sad thereby aluo te without further diticulty thatthe peepeetive 
colouration, for inane, whick belong toseme fid colour 
fa thing ar relate! to thet Exod exlour aa continvoun “riety” 
4 related vo “unity*, 

‘We crm wis, oa carying out the phenomenological reduction, 
the genera ewer inaight hat the object ‘ue’ in peneption 
‘a pouro! can. oaly then appear ws objectively determined jurt a8 
it uppeare in the peroeption, wes the byletic plane (of, abould 
‘2 coctimious series of perceptions be im queeticn, the comtinuous 
Inpletis transforoations) wre just these mad no others. Ths it 
follows that every alteration of the hyletc content of the per~ 
‘ception, when it doce not cance the perceptual consciousness 
outright, mart at leart have the roma that chat which was 
appearing Decoses objectively “enother”, either in lief or i 
‘the mode of erientation which marks the manner of i appearing, 
sad wo farth. 

‘All coonidered, i is also quite beyond doubt that “unity” and 
‘wearcty" bere belong to totally diferent Simard 0 indeed 
at coery byte ebecoent busi place as x reat (reve) itegral 
rt io the concrete experience, whereas that which “exhibits” 
tal ni variety and “raion perapectively” han its place in che 

‘But, as we hare previouly pot i, the material ements are 
“enloted” through noedc pases, they undergo (while the Ego 
in cummed ot to tec, but to the object) “formu chapings”” 
‘Aaffamenen), “is of weasing”, which we grap, in refleiva, 
‘upon aod with the material emeats, Whence it immediately 
follows that not oaly the hyletic phases (the sensory colouss, 
sounds, et), but also the asizating spprebensiooe—or faking 
oth together, the appesring ofthe colour, the nound, and every 
och quality ofthe abject—belong to the “real” (elle) coa- 
stinaon of the experience. 

‘The folowing holds good geaecty: perception is inet isthe 
perception of fir abject, and to every componeat which “objec 
‘ively directed description picks out is the object, there carte- 
sponds « real {rv component of the perceptins; but only 40 
far, be I cbeerved, a the deeriptina eds fathfaly tothe object 

‘MEORY O¥ ‘HE NOETICNOEMATIC STRUCTURES 1%) 
ast 22 i “secs before ws" in thir perception itself, Alzo we 
‘ean indicate all these noetic compooctin only by falling back oa 
‘the noroatic cbject ad iv phases, end refering, aballwe ney, (© 
the conscioumess, more clearly the percepousl coniclousness of 
the trunk of « treo, or of the colour af the rusk, and oo forth, 
(On the other hand, our deliberations skewed chet the rea! 
(rail) experiential unity of hyletic and noete facsoes in vealy 
igerent from that of the factors of the noma “of which we 
fro aware” witha that tame unity; and again, from the oni 

‘experience in a completely aiferet sense from that in which 

bie luton ofthe dep polens of knowledge sng 
the ewectial nature, aad the ponibiity of sbjectively valid know 
ledge af the ranecendent. The “trascendents” redoction pei 
tien dec in repost of reality (Wiklchit): but che residue 
thereby Jeft over belong the moemste with the noematic unity 
‘which Iie in them chemaelves nd with these the made in which 
‘whut a real (Reale) in npecically given ia coonioumnem fel aad 
‘ur comscioumess becomes wware of it. The knowindge that it is 
ere throughout quexion of det and therefore snconditocally 

1 ‘PURG PunhOmeNOLOGY 
ecomary connexions opens 2 hig 63d of inquiry, that of the 
‘emseatal relations between the noetic and tbe noraatc, batwoos, 
‘the experience and the correlte of cxnseionaneas. But this lat- 
sectioned tithe for the nmesce iocades the objectivity of om 
scionancat, «5 such, and at che same tine the nocmatic forms 
in which eaything i iateeded or given. Within the wphere form 
which we have drown ur iDusration there fre: grows up the 
geocrl amurance that perception daca not const in jut being 
‘the object presently before ane, but tha ix belongs (a prin) to 
the proper caseace of the perception to have “its” object, end 
to have it asthe uuityof « criaée nowautic comtent (Bertani), 
‘which for other peceeptions of “the muse” object is always 
sornething diffrent agin, thoug always aeesilly prescribed 
fn sdrance; and that preciily beloaga to the eaence of the 
prevent object when objectively determined in wocb and wock » 
‘way, to be noemutie is perceptions of the descriptive type in 
_quettan, and to be this nowbere ele, and wo forth. 

§ 98. Move or Bune ov vax Name. Docrums or Fora ron 
‘Nonsm an yon Noenath 

‘To complete the discussion, ouch will rms to be added. Tt 
should be closely noted in the fr place that every transition 
from 1 pbenommnoa to the reflexion which snalyoes it reakter 
(rea, oto the fuxetion of « quite diferent hind which andyien 
ite noema, genernien new phesoment, end thst we should be 
falling into erro if we confused the esew phesomma which in 
1 certain seare are ramsformations of tbe old with these old ones, 
sind erie to the farmer whet is respectively rel or poeratic 
in the later. For instance, we have 20 intention of saying that 
‘the material contcots, it might be the perepectvely varying coloms- 
unten, are present ia the percapteal experience precaely 
‘they we in the axalyuing experizace. There, to consider the ont 
point only, they were contained on real (rede) pias, but they 
‘were not perceived therrin, mot objectively appreheodcd, wo they 
ru io the exabeing expecicoce, where they gure a the termint 
of noete funetions whick were not previouly provest. Although 

THEORY OF THE NOETICNOEMATIC ETRUCTIRES ty 
‘eae matesal onatencs ate furtbax bueened with the Functions 
sonncmed in their presetation, yt these too have undergone 
0 omental change (though Sadeed along enother dimension), 
(Ff thin wo shall have more tw ony Inter. The Gatinesion bab 
obriouly an emextal bearing ox phevomesclogical method, 

‘Having made thi remark, let ua turn our atenion ‘0 the 
following points which concern the special theme of our inguin, 
Tn the feat place every experiance ia oo articulated ot to leave 
pen the itrnaic possibility of dizecting the gle upon it and 
it real (reli) component, and Likewise in the onntrary diec- 
ton wpea the nous, ¢g, the vera tree a exch. Now what Sa 
‘ives through this Iter glance a indeed itsel, opicallywpeaing, 

ert, bot ove that ia wholly dependent. Tis ete consints 
cxclosivey in ia “percip;" except that the ceming of thin 
fiatement a about an fr moved a it can be from that of 
Backeley,siace here the prep doca set casain the eve ans sea 
(ely) constituent 

‘Taian natuallycaried over into the eidetic mode of erestiseat: 
‘the Exdoe of the noema point to che Eidow of the noetic can 
sclounem; beth belong eldeticaly together. Tee istentlonal 
sbject an wach is what tsa the intentional object of «comscous- 
ees that in atilted ts or thus, and 46 the conscouscen 
obit. 

‘Bat deapte this dependence, the soca permit of being 
considered on ite own aocoust, of being compared wih ether 
‘oemat, of being wtudied in reece of ita ponsible tresaferme- 
‘Hone, an an forth. Wa can daft on general linea «pare doctrine of 
swematic forme to which there would correrpand ait correlative 
A general and not lve pose dicrine of the forme of coma, 
noel experienc, with their lic and specially wontic casi. 
enene, 

‘These two doctinee of forme would not of sourve stand 
related to exch other i any sou an imager és © wero, o€ 38 
though they cook! puss over the oat into the other though 
varce change of sigmrars, €g., thsough simply msbwtcting for 
very nocma N the “constiousmem of N°. This indeed alzeady 
fellows from whst we have derslopad above when disauting tha 

a" PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
‘ntercannesion of unitary qualities in the neous of a thing, sd 
jis hyleic vacetiea of perspectivl maniferatios in tbe poesbie 
peroepiona of thinga. 

‘Now it might seer thatthe enue mast hold good in regard 
to the apocically nocical phase also, We could point in pas- 
‘cular 1a the pha which coursve it sa hat « compli warcty 
of byletic deta, of colour or touck, for instance, assumes the 
fusetion of varied perspectiva! shading of one and the me 
objective thing. Indeod, we seed only recall che fact that a» 

‘the other, and then apringing beyond lt and that 
to thew we ure made rare of diferent chjetvises. And doc 
‘ee this already make it csr that te the 

tte, ad ke mie eropondance 1 ne ect, The 

‘ime exortintes unicy, ac, u8 4 mecir of fa, sbows identity 
‘where ia te nocinatc correlate we buve as ent f the Yobjoce™ 
preeated. Weer, for iarance, diferent vetons of an endaring 
fc of pereiving through which the unity of thing ia 

cams show something Sati, this ene tre th resin 
sexchanged within the manning of this perceiving prooese—as we 
seek to orient curneies this way and thet, viewing it pow from 
fm front and now from behind, coting in reper: ofthe visually 
spprehended qualities st eng cae epesthat they we at Gre indis- 
ine and vague, then ditinct and desemminats, a the Ee— 

‘WHEORY OY THE NOETIC-NOEMATIC STRUCTURES sh 

there we become arse of the object subsisting in the noma 
sm rele dential In tho writ sense ofthe wocd, but a the different 
wectoce of it immioest duration oor exoxioumes of it is 
womething noc-ldentical, (ts pars being merely conjoined, and 
con only in vitus of a continuity. 

‘Now, whateer the smount of ruth in all cis, the inferences 
ddeawn ize not quite cormct, and in general the grate castion 
in required in dealing with thee dificule questions. The paral 
lela chat we find bere—and there aze secerl of them which are 
nly too canily confused-—are bewet wits vent difculie tha ei 
stand in great need of being cleared up. We nmat carefully keep 
in view the diference between concrete uoetical experience, the 
caperiencea with their hyletic phases, and the purenoeecs, aaaexe 
ser of me hay, Ap et ep ii he 
‘eas, ands for instance In the ease of perception, the" 
thet enh Lat wn ea hs" an he Spee 
“‘gredicatea"—the noemuic msodiSeations ofthe predieten ofthe 
perceived thing plainly outed as re} normal perception thea 
both it and these predicates are indeed unites au oppesed to the 
mullite of conscious experienc (concrete noescs) with their 
conwitsting function. Bur they are lao unites of mowmeisrulie 
plictin, We recognize thls 40 woos as we draw into the circle 
of our cocsiderstion the noematic chtracteriastioas af the 1oe- 
atic “object” (and its “predicaten"), which bitherto we have 
‘ady neglocted, Thus the colour thst eppeas in certainly a mity 
over agunstsoetic mubipliccies, of those In pandeular whlch have 
1 poetic qualty of apprebecsion. But clover seudy shows that 
to all tanafoematiaca of this character, if not iz the ‘colour 
jimelf, which appears contixuomly, thea inits changing “modes 

‘How that shosid be dhe cae mnt be (and uot oaly for the 
phase of pecotption here favoured for purposes of illustration) 
A theme of wide-enbraring analycs. We shall anal in cura 
the siffcent types of comsciourcest ‘ith their varied noetie 

= PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

characters, and sudy thes closely 0s the baas of the noetio. 
osctic parll. 

‘Bos we mnart sree ths poist in ndveace, thatthe rales 
Yerwoen the smi of the nocmatially “intended” object, of the 
object me have in “mind” (be “Sime”), and the comtincing 
Jormations of cuscincmen (ordo et connie rerse—ordo at con 
‘merle ideeram) thoeld mot be coafsid with the porelaon betee 
ott ead noens, undertood in particular st « paralleliam of 
nortic and corresponding noecutc characte, 

Tt is to thia lut-meutoned panllelinm that the discusions 

$99. Tam Nomeere Nucumms ave rs Durraworiscnio Mass 
1M Tam Sema oy Pumsxtarions ano Reremnerarions 

1 in thos our tak to widen considerably the circle of what ha 
been put forward alnog the two parallel linee of poetic and 
‘mpemuticwiates reepectively, vo ws to reech the full noema end 
the fall nosis. Wat we Inve hitherto had preferably in view, 
‘ot indeed without some prowatiment of the great problems 
‘eluded thereis, s anly x central quckeva, end eves the lacking 
a clearly defined edge. 

‘We reeall in the five place that “objectie meaning”, which 
wwe divcivered on « former page through the camperivon of 
eccsia of differnt typet of preeentatons, of perceptions, 
‘memarins, images, ec, anone to be described ia objective terms 
aly, and even in reciprocally identical term ic the favourably 
sceced Hmiting cate when ax object, tree for instance, remaina 
completly similar in quality and orientation, and in in every 
‘ope in speeded wit ning etre in ke ing 
macin of perception, memory, fancy, ete. In contrast wit 
teen “ppetng we eh sh cine “ere” 
maser (Wis) of is appearing, there remalo, a we pass from nna 
{ind of intuition or other fora of presentation to another, the 
ferences in the me of perma, 

‘We are made amare of this tentioal cement at onc tims ia 

chomp bse wm as 

YHEORY OF ‘THE NOETICNOKMATIC STRUCTURES ope 
‘primordial’ wag, e exctber “thoagh manor", then again 
imaginacioely”, and e fort. But whac are thereby indisted 
sre characirt i the “appearing tre a: ra", Gacoverable when 
‘the lance ia directed fo the soematic corte, and not 9 the 
caperico anc fn real (ree) watz of being. Tis sot “wage 
of buing conto” in the venue of noetie phase that are rendered 
though these exprsicas, bot Oayt iv ohick that of whch 
re owersitulf nad ox rack presenta itselt. As feararen of the 

‘On the one hand we have the plain reproductive modification, 
the plain representation, nd this, remarkably enough, fgwes & 
ts om stent mater a the modification of romething othr hat 
stalf, The representation refers un back to perception is 

= 
& 

pine pare (wri tho pare w aco 
‘hich we ey, for intance, that it bangs on the wal) which 

veri do not only refer ux back to those of the fit, but alo 
1 Reefer cases ofthe nein, af, $19 $20. 

om FURS FRENOMENOLOGY 
prewuppese certain compliadoca: the Incr with referease to 
the distinction berwoes the “pichur™ nod the "copy", w dir 
‘Gncton which belongs aoematically to the eaeeatial catare of 
comneioumneas. We alo sce from cis that the noema eve holds 
‘wichla mel «par ofcharaccers which rlertoesch other slbougs 
thay Velong to diferent objecta of presentation. 

Fioall, the sgn-ferichng preeiationr with the analogous 
comerast of sign und. thing Rpmifed offer « type of modifying 
oemadl characters (to which there correspond, ax everywbers, 

‘which ia nely relsted to the preceding, but 

Nomis axo Nowea, ix Accompancs wrra Eacorru. Laws 

experience. We cas bring thin explicdy before ua by fro 
reflecting “in” memory (which on iy side is u representative 
oodificstion of 1 primordial at of eefeting), and than finding 

‘THEORY OF THE NOFTICNOMMALIC STRUCTURES 293 
the ounnected expecicace characterised as “baving boca ii 
‘under the form of memory. Among the experiences so cherac- 
‘xriaed, whether ov reflect upen them o¢ no, memories thernetves 
may now appear, characterised an “memoriee that have been 
lives", and we cam glace through and past them on fo renes 
bered matter of the second level. And then within che connected 
aperiencea modified ia this wtoundary way memocies oan once 
mare appear, and s0 idatte i infitom. 

‘A ore change of sigmature (che preciee nature of which we 
‘will presently learn to undersn) tranalates all vbene erent into 
the type of foe fancy: we have faacies in fancies, and an from 
‘00 level to another the dovetlling can be indefinitely carted ca, 

Qn similar nea we may alto ae wistrer. Every reprenentation 

jurt below it reprmenative rodiGeations of percep, which 
through reflexion which fuactians so wonderfully in this prosemt 
of representrtion are brougt 10 the focus of conscious appre- 
henson; within the unity of the phenomenon of represeatatian 
‘we may find the production of commocen, expecations, tances, 
nd to forth, adjoining those of aod the actif repre: 
sotaton invelved in the whale process sty themoelves belong 
‘0 any one of these types, and allthis at dlereat tage. 

‘This also bolds good of the complex types prevenistion #8 
copy wad presentation as tiga, 12 us take un example which shown 
very compliceted and yet lightly grasped constructions of per- 
ceptions out of perceptions of « tiger Jeel. A name on being 
‘mentioned reminds ua of the Dresden Gallery and of our It 
iit there: we wander through the rosus, end wtand before 
picture of Teniers which represent « picture gallery. Whea we 
consider that pictues of the Iter would in their tama portray 
ietares which on their pat echbinet readable tnseripiona nd 
forth, we can meanize what interwesving of presentations aul 
‘what links of cooneaion between the dicerndble fortunes in the 
vetiea of pictures, can really be vet up. Bot for the Mustang of 
ar right fio esceet, in particu of ox inaght into the Steal 
possibilty of caring ox the dovetiing processes indefinitely, 
‘we do not cand to caneider wuch complisted cases m theve, 

oy PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

§ ror, Cuamacrmarics or Lavars as Soca, Doraxorr Tres 
oe “Rarurion” 
all much canatruzsa of enccemive levels, which at every joint 
of thee structure comin vome modiSestion of the processes of 
representation, and often a0» repetition, iis clear thet mammal 
Of corranponding tigen in the contruction ace progremively being 
cconstnvted. In the consciousness that we have of « copying 
‘proce, st the second mage, an "izoage” inna is characterized 
vecond-level image, or as the image of am imuge. If we rezall 

‘To every poetic Level there belongs 2 lee! charac, 
serving as ine of indicator, the pomemion of which wampe 

‘preseatation" “ef the 

on” does not here 
sean presentational expercaoe, axd the woed “ol” does not 
‘expres the relation of coaucioanca oi objet. Iti, ait were, 

"This becomes clearer us we dices « actcing glance of the 
‘Ego xpan the objective field of consciousness. The gimce peae- 
‘(rates through the soemata of the series of levels, reaching the 
bec of the et ioe, and here holding it weady wilt 20 loge 
Petenrating through and beyond @. But the glance can wander 
ao from toe! $8 ioe, and inead of simply paring through 

"MMBORY OF THE NOBTICNORMATIC STRUCTURES ses 

‘thera al, a rates diveene with Sang effet upon what in given 
ack in turn, and that ether ia a “traghgformerd” or in a 
safecting Kine of isk. 

a the example cad above, the glance can remain ot the 
Jen of the Dresden Gallery: we go back “in recollection" to 
Dresden, aod walk throug the gully. Again, wil immed 
in reellction, we can get sbeccbed ic the picture, and now 
find muacives io the picture works, Thor, in & pictute-son- 
sciouanes of the second ievel we tura to the peinted piceue of 
the gillery, and gee ot the picture pointed within it; o¢ out 
reflexion, paneing from lrel ta Jere, is turned upon the noes, 
sd 10 forth, 

‘Thia varity ofthe pomible izetions in which our glance can, 
‘urn belonge eweatilly to the manifold of mutually related and 
reciprocally grounded iatesticalites, and wherever we find 
analogour groucding—and ia what follom we shall get 10 
now many more of quite another Kind—thece wise anaiogoun 
posites of change of reflexion. 

Tr eed ot be said how greatly these relationships and in 
need of penetrating sient study on emential line. 

$104, Teanarrion To Naw Dounstions 1 Chusacemzenon 
Tt m clear that in reapect of all che peculiae characteriations 
ine have come acrom in the etracrurally diversified domain of 
modification through varatioas in the farm of representation, 
‘We raat diatinguiah, and am the grounds azexdy alleged, between, 
the noeti and the noematie. Te nematic “oblecta”—the abject 
sm copy ox the copied objec. the object functioning w si 

“sign for" "signified" —are unis of whick 
‘we have evident awareness in expecrace, but which yet transoend 
waperience, But if thia is so, then characters which stand out 
sm them aa we consciouly apprehend them, and, when wo direct 
our glance upon them, are greped we shir usifying feeares, 
‘canzot pomibiy be regarded 25 cal (reels) phases of expericoce, 
How the two stand related to each other, chat which in a veal 

~~ PURE FHENOMENOLOCT 
(Geel) comsinuent of experince, and tht in it of which we ae 
sryace vs nonereal, may be a marscs proeating the mow dificult 
robicas; none the ess we moat keep the Ewo separnio it every 
polar, and jaan es mach indeed in respec ofthe noematic mules, 
ofthe “imentional object at muck’ (when 2 ta “objective” mode 
‘of peescatstion}, which functions 1s the paming bearer of the 
Socratic “charters”, ws ia rexpact lan of the charactor then 
selres. 

‘Dur of characters mach en these that cleave to the noceatic 
sucka, there are sill other instances of quite diferent type, 
‘nd of these the modes of stachenent to the auclena vary widely. 
‘They cama under radially difermd genre, oie caliclly 
ierent dimcraions of characterintion, 90 0 epeak. And we would 
paint out from the avtet that all charnctery will to be indicate 
In this connexion, of that have alresdy been indicated (cere 
Sng fe meme avicndecipne ein), hr ¢ 

waioersal phenorenclogcal renge of application, And though in 
to Rt ecuett ofthe wow & prcterces Ste ee 
‘onal experiences that have the relatively sroplst constsuon, 
for auch sn can be grouped together under x defini and funda 
‘meatal concept of “prerstatoa", and furnish the necemary 
bus fr al! other intentions! expericocen, the sume smu fon 
and characteristic differences belong slo to all these derived 
mndierin) experiences, md ceowequently 20 all intetioel 
‘xperiaces generally. The situation ten in thi that o all nea 
and of neceeity we are rware of 3 norman suceus, « “avers 
of the objec" that must be characterized sorachow, 20d indond 
bby differences, akeruative und curually exchsive, elected from. 
each gous, 

$10}. Cxamacrs Durotcriet oF Banc axo ar Brom 
Locking around sow for new charesters, our atenten ia frst 
‘drawn to the fact that intecinkod with the groupe of characters 
previmaly texted, we have characte which ae clearly of a 
hal dierent pe, seme, he carr of Hab. Aa ace 

charuceers, comelatvely related to modes of Being—as “donic” 

‘THEORY OF THE NOBTICNOFMATIC STRUCTURBS «W7 
cr "bekisf characters” —one may cits me clone Linked with intuit 
15le preriny the grepulbl pret ell) 
factor In normal perception, and funcioning theres 

ff realty” tnd, nee lop ty penepal eaneunce of 
quivalet; wo it corresponds ix the uppescing “objec” 
socmatis correlate the ontis! character “res!” (wirkécl). ‘The 
tare noetie or Boematic chamcesr ia shown in the " 
which muxy accompany all repeated represcctation, in “are” 
recollection of every kind, whether in respect to what ln been, 
‘0 what now i, or 10 what will bein tbe Eorure (min anticiptive 
‘expecta. Soc ace “thetic” acs, acta that “pit” Being, In 
making we of this expresioa, however, we mart bear in mind 
‘hat when it abo points tm aa act, ar to some apecial cuntal 
setinade the reference must be ignored. 

"That whach appears in the way of peroeption or recollection 
owned in the region, we bare 40 far been considering the 
character of “cea!” (wihbch) Being siplicter, of “certain Being 
ao we ulvo ary wher contrasting it with other ontical character, 
For thin character can be modiSod, aad even in relation to OE 
and the race phenomenca,tranalortsed through actu modifying 
procenscs. The way of “certain” bf can pass over iutn that of 
suggestion o€ pronenpeion, oF into that of question aad dosbt; and, 
coording to the line taken, that which appears (characterized 
in repect of that Gest order of characternstions which tabes in 
the "primordial", the “reproductive”, and the Whe} will wlopt 
the outzal madadier ofthe “poralle”, the “probabl’”, the “gees 
tlonable”, and the “doutfad” reepectively. 

For iutance, a perotived objec etanda out chere at Ssnt es 
1 plain matter of coune, « certainty. Suddenly we ure doubtful 
‘whether wo Lave not bora made tbe vita of t mere “illxioa”, 
whether what we see ox hear, et, i not “mere seeming". Or 
cae thet which appears preserves ta ontical ceruinty, but we 
fre unceriin with regard to some onc tr other of itn ses 

‘The ‘suggeats" 2 man, Téen a contrary 
saggeation sets ia: x might be x moving tree, which in the 
(ona af the wood resembles 1 max in ection. But the “weight” 
Of the cae “possibilty” ia now considerably reinforced, mad we 

” (FORE FEENOMENOLOGY 
lide in is favour perbape, deiniely peemuming tht “it wna 
carey a wee". 

Similsly the modaltion of Being change, ex this far mace 
Arequenly inthe conse of recolieian, ad no indeed ann great 

x exchange thei signature putely 

‘within the linita of intuition or of obacue preseeaton, without 
57 typeof “thinking” in the specific ener of te tea, 000+ 
‘cept and predictive jodgment paying any part inthe mater tall. 

‘We ace at the same tne that the phenomone in this cotiext 
‘mummon ua to varioes eosidetacy stodies, that chancery of 
verse types ecerge (e4the “decided, the “ewighr” of pou- 
‘ilk, and the lke), aad that a parcular, ab, the queetion 
concerning the essential aves of accasional character, a5 con- 
cerning the whale vtructure of noemata md nomen, at orpaised 
1a conformity with eaental awn, cll or deeper inretigaion. 

Tr maffces us bere as elewhere to have vet out the grobems 
fn thet proper connenias. 

§ 104. Donte Mongieras as Moorrcarion 

Wich repet to the arin of belief-modaitien wi which me 
ace now epecully concerned, we bave still to point out thet in 
it ce epin the entnaocing, specially intonal meaning f 
{he word nedifcatio’ cores toi own, the reming we have 
thine our previous scales ofthe seen of oct and 
Soematic charactes. In the acrie we are now concered with 
the cartainy of belo clay plage the pat of the emote, 
oF, an me auld aty ber, the “anmadated" rector of the 
‘say of bl. Cocengonding to this wt cxrelative, the ental 
‘erate rare and ipl ihe nommeti being “arn” ore”) 
functions 1s the root form ofall modes of Bn point of 
‘fact, all antical characters which spring from it, the pecificso- 
torbecalledcndatea of Bing conicn in the vary meaning (hey 
beara baci-releence t the tootform, The “ponble” rates 
te dtalf just a2 much a “being posibl the “probable”, 
"dub "quentonable” 20 mech va “being pecbale™, "being 
oubtfl and quesionable” "The intectocality of the nea i 

THEORY OF THE NOFTICNOEMATIC STRUCTURES 299 
srflected in these noematic celatons, and we agin fee! driven 
‘to apeak directly of a “aneeatic intrtiosalty” at “poral” ta 
‘he ort propery wo called. 

‘These conalderationa may then be applied tothe fll "poison", 
fia to the unica which functionally uaite « meaniog-nncleas 
‘with an ential charseer 

For the ret itis convenieat to epply the term roodaty of 
Being to the wile arica of these ontical charecier, vo a also 
1 include under i the unmodified “Being”, whenever i needs 
‘to be treated ae « member of thi eric; cock onthe arithmetician 
Ako inches the unit “ooe” under the came "number". In a 
similar senae we generalize the veal meacing of doxio modali- 
tics, whereunder often, with « conscious sense of ambiguity, we 
tall bring tagetber the parallel rcanings of the noetic ad the 
‘noeentic. 

‘We rauvt pry heed further to the ambiguities of the word 
“eet, when we refer to warodalixed Being a9 "being oer 
tin”; and not only is this cexpect that it senetimes means the 
Aoetis and voratiows the soematic “being certein”. Jt xian 
secves, foe inatance (and the usage is very ennfusing) to express 
the corzelae of affirmation, the “yes” 4 counterpart to “no” 
and “not" Tha uange most be wtcly excluded. The meanings 
‘of words are constantly shifting within the limits of immediste 
logical equivalence. Bat wor busines i to pet ot the equivalences 
tvecywhere, aod to prone of sharply whatever reference to 
phenomens of an exsentialy diferent nature say Turk behind 
the equivalent concept. 

"The: certivude of belif ia beicf in ita plain end slmple form, 
belief in che progount sense of tbe tec. As » matt af fact, 

= PURE PEENOMENOLOGY 
wader thet ‘Delle? —er, often under the ttle, her vey mise 
leading though wed by many, Jusgment.” A proper expresionis 
seeded which takes this naiguc posto ite aesoun, and faces 
coery reminder of the populr tendency 9 plz cuticude oa 
aera withthe other anodes of beef We itroduce thot 
primary” Meh (Crane) oc Prete (Ura) ws matahly 
‘expressing the intentions! back-reference of all “modalities of 
‘belt which we have prevouly aficned, We not frter thet 
‘te aball be unig thi ter expres (renal, "onic 

‘The radially fale doctrine, according to which « gene 
‘Beli (or “Judgmene”) simply eps wp Soto eerainry, sop 
pol, anc wo forth, ws though the relation could be expressed 
by apioniag cut # sei of coordinate apecies (at whatever pot 

¥ 
i 
ae 
it 
a 
ie 
eh 
i 
: 
ul 

‘il hoe cols ex an ther oe ening 
the consequences of cur phezomenclagial conchaions, 

oeaning of thia form of speech requires thet it be powible for 
‘our mental glence to vary ia incidence is n way which ix indeed 
‘mentally characteristic of itentionalties of higher level. Thit 
‘pomibility, moreover, in setully realized. On the one Aand, living 
‘Within the probebiliy-conssoumess, ia en atmosphere Of pre- 
‘mumptica, we cat jock towands sehat ia probable; but on the 
other hand vowards the peabability itmlf and ax such, that it 
towards the momatic object iv the character which the pre 
‘munption-noesia bas given it. But the “object” with fa own 

‘THEORY OF THE NOETIC-NORMATIC STRUCTURES yor 
ssosning together with tis pobebilty-<haracor ifm the cond 
‘lempoin sows aa Babe (ond): conseiousnens in elation to thin 
‘el socreingly be et of plain belie im tbe ured seme 
of the term. Jue In the masse may we cas Live ournelres into a 
Fombily-eocacianens (in “mggesin"), er iano quetnaing 

snd doubtfs! erirode, the glancr dimen to what we are are 
‘of w possible, questcable, doubtful. But we can also Yok upan 
the pamibilvin, upon the quesamaic end doubeful situations 
4» such, and eventually, rendering the insight explicit, grasp the 
state of being posible ve questionable or doubtful = cu 
stirtive character of the objec east, a inthis vense predicable 

"Weare ths able to sat in «general wy this highly remarkable 
peculiarity of the eaentin! mature of things, tnt worry experiecy 
i rdaion to all the woetc phaser which through its noes shape 
‘honedoe host the “intentional object at machi” fonctions ax blef= 
cmaconnert inthe tede of the Pratodaue; ut hs we can alo my: 
[Not only does every addition of new or modification of old 
roetic charnctey coraticute urw apewatic characters, but there 
with ow iio net ontcal object consttate themselves for oan- 
sciouaneas; to the noematic charscter there cormapand predic: 
Able characte inhereat in the abject meant, and indeed ws real 
(wirhice), end not eere apdiscd predicables. 
‘Thewe statements will gain in ernest when we have become 
soiree wh mow noon perso eed. 

$106. Arroussron ao Necarton Torna wen Tram 
‘Nomuarte Commas 
As ill a further modification tha hacks back to the protodass, 
tnd indeed one tha in virtue of ta coven intentional beck 
reference wo every varity of bebcfcodality uy very well be 
reckoned a of & higher grade, ia rjctog, with ia analogue 
cceqponc; or, more vpeccllyexprewnd, matics and afr 
tion. Beary cegetion isthe negation of somthing, and tha Gome- 
thing pola ta beck om thin er that modal of boli, Thos 

- PURE FRENOMSNDLOG. 
oeically negstion ia the “modification” of ome “postion” 
the lamer term signifying cot an afirmatioc, but « “sting down’ 
(Seesang) in the exraded sense of rome form of beSet-modality, 

Ti oww nematic form. of service ia the “canceling” of the 
conespoading porting chartctr, it specie correlate ia the 
camcalation character we designate ws “ast”. The canceling mack 
of negation srkrs out smacthing ponte, or, to wpeak core com 
cexcaly,a “posted meoning” (Sets), usd indeed through the ca2- 
calling ofits specie peaitional charectr, ic. ts ential modal. 
‘Thereby thie character and che poted statement itself appear 
mmdifection” of something cu Or to tate the same thing 
dliferenuy: through the cranformation of the pin oimiciour 
‘am of Being into the correpending consciournes of negution, 
the plain charntrr “being” (eiend) taro in the poem in thet 
‘ot “nat being. 

Tn an analogous way, out of the “powible”, the “probsbi, 
‘the “quonionable”, we get the “izpemible" the “improbable”, 
the “unquestionable. And therewith the whole noecaa i modi 
Sad he whole “ened meg” tbe nin veo ems 
fulloes. 

Justa, to peak in aa ioage, negation cancels, 90 does affrma- 
ion underin; it “eoufi™ a ponton dy “accepting it instead 
of “removing” i ne angution does. That also proven « stice 
‘of noematic modifications that ras parallel withthe modifcatioen 
in the way of cancelition; but that cansot be followed up here 
aay furthee. 

‘Hitherto we have ignored what is peculiar in the "srutnde" 
of the pare Ego, which inand through rejection, mare epescally 
‘hit af the negating type, “directs” itself pain the matter 
rejected, the being that & to be cancelled, a4 in efrmaion it 
inclines tac tat whic i affirmed, and directa tel! tmords 
‘it, Thin desceptve ide alan ofthe whale matter abould net be 
overlooked, and cll, on ts own account, for analytic study. 

‘And so sguin we mut do jutie lcewie tothe ciumatance 
thet following the dovetling of itzationalitne in woe avother, 
iifeent directions of the mental glance may be taken tx occmon, 
ssuggets, We can live within the negating consciousness, in other 

TMBORY OF THE NORTICNORMATIC STRUCTURES 363 
‘words, we “oarry out” the neguion; the glance Of the Ego i 
then dirctnd wo that which undergoes cancellation. But we ca 
tlio direct the glance i 4 conprebmesve way upon the canceled 
och, upon that which ia pocided with the cancling mark 
‘the lcter thea wanda forth sew “objet, and idee i the 
‘lain original deste mode “bei” (sie). Tat new sandpoist 
oes not gentrae the new cancal objec we are already ware 
‘of what me reject in ko cazcalled charnciercvea in the “carrying 
‘ut of out rejection; bat it is oly atthe new sandpoiat that 
‘the charactr bocomen a determination that can be priced of 
the necratic kernel of meaning. Gimilar remaria apply of coarse 
‘mallirmstion ako. 

‘Thus In this diectioa a8 wel there Ke probes calling for 
1 phenozxcologial unas of exeence* 

$107. Raman Bobencanors 

‘What we hare slay done in the way of starting ech scaly 
exables un to take at once the following further sep ithe 
direction of incremiog istight. 

Since what ia negeted and alfred (Net und Afirmet) is 
‘lye an objet that i, it can, lke everthing we are concious 
‘of aa made of Being, be afimad ar denied, There follows theo, 
fn camoemce of the very conattation of Being, which wt every 
step rence itu own suture, xn ideally infec of reiterated 
modifcatiot. ‘Toss the Sort sep in thin direction gives us the 
“not nothing”, the "not- imposible”, “not-woquestionsble”, 
““not-imprabebly being” sade forth. 

‘The tens holds good, ax can be izimediately nex an losing 
beck, of nl the modifications of Being whick have been referred 
to om previous pages, We cio bring consioualy before murecrea 
nce ngain that something is pomible, probable, quéstionsble, 
nd v0 forth, in the made of posit, probability, question- 
“2 re mero Se aan oa 
Serr oe Site mera oe eee reg eee 
RE deen SiS Cage er et 

oa URE PHENOMENOLOGY 

shiny, and to the coctic formationa these somespecd the noe- 
suatiecotical formacians. Iti poosble tat it in pouibl, thet it 
in probable, quentcnable; fa probable chet itis pombe, that 
it be probable, and simibty for all wach complications. Thea 
sgsin, to the formations of the bigher levels there correepoad 
AMfirmed and negated postions, which once mare can be modified, 
sod in his way nnn, peaking ieally, we wander off ito incity, 
‘Weare fr frou being concerned here with mere verbal repetitions, 
‘As wings, wo necd only brag to mind the Theary of Probe 
‘ity and fo applications, wherein possibilities and probabtca 
‘re continually being considered, denied, doubted, presumed, 
‘quemioued, exabtihed, and wo forth. 

‘ut we mast alway remember, when speaking of modificatioas 
in this connexion, thet the reference may be, ex the one band 
104 pombe traafocmuen ofthe phenomena, ts toa possible 
sctual operation; and oa tbe other band vo the auch more 
interesting emential property ofthe neeses or aoemats of hurting 
Duck, in vie of their own exentia) nacre, mod without any 
sccompanying regard aa to their genem to something other, 
eomathing waunodifed, But whether we take the ane viewpoint 
or the other, we mand is ether cae oo. pure phenorenological 
‘pound. For when we speak here of transformation and georas, 
‘ur sole cancer ia with easentil heppesingy of » phenomco0- 
Jopical charecter, and our worda have not the leat reference to 
cecpircalexpecienoet oa tara facts. 

$108, Nomamca Ceaacrs axe nor Deroaaren 
‘moves “Rarii0n” 
-aoceeary in egard to each new group of soma ahd noeentia 
‘which we Ive browght to clear censciouanea that we abould 
wwrure ounelves afresh of uhe fandarsental bit of knowledge 
‘which runs vo counter to the habia of thought of the peycho- 
logins, that the ditincloa between neesis and nsema must be 
cal and correctly dexwa, in fact exactly a faithful description 
require. If one has akeedy become fexikar with the pore 
‘immanent description of the emence(« point which oo many fail 

THEORY OF THE NOSTIGNOEMATIC STRUCTURES 35 
1m mach who otherwise think bighly of deacription), 204 has come 
1 the undereandéng that consiowaness mune sbenys hrve meribed 
to 1 an intentional object that belongs to if, sud incapable of 
being deacibed ac immanent Lines, there intl» great temp 
(ation to apprehend xoematic cbareczrs, and expecially the one 
sme have just been cocaidcring, or mare “determination of flexion”. 
We undertand, sa we rol the current nd marrow conception 
‘of refexion, whit tha means. to wit: detecminationa which nserue 
10 the intentional objec through the lr being ciered te dhe 
So of gcc in wich ty Sure pc x techies 
‘Thus tho negated, the armed, andthe lke, are to be reached 
in this way, that the object of the “judgmem” io relealon is 
‘characterized us veguted when the reflexion bears ox the negating, 
4 affirmed when Mt bear oo the affieung, us probable when i 
Deary an the presuming, and go everywhere, But thie view in 
1 mere subjective construction,’ which already proclanms its 
perveniy through the face ther sf thcae predicates were really 
1 more than eeating predicates of reBexin, they coukt be en 
aly inthe actual reflecting opox the act-aapoct and i relation 
1 it, But they aze evidently not given through such ceexioo. 
"We graxp what coucerza the corrlte an wack through the glance 
‘being turned directly on the correlate itself, We grap the negated, 
the affirmed, the powible, the quevtionable, ad 0 forth, ot 
rectly qualtying the appearing object ws such, In no wise do 
we bere glance back uper the act. Conversely the coetic predi- 
cates which ecoergy throug such reflexion are fax from tinving 
the aame meaning as the noeeutie predicates in question. Con- 
nected with this ia the fact thet even from the standpoint of 
truch Soot-being’ ia larly anly equivalent to 20d not identical 
‘with “being calidly arguted”; similarly “being pomibl’ ia not 
‘deatical with “being belé pouible in « valid way", and the like. 
1f we will meoded further witness, natural epeecb, mnembas- 
smued hy any paychoiogical prejudices, would here supply it. 
‘Looking into the mereoscope we say that the pyramid that here 
‘sppeace in “thing”, is mre “busian”, That which appesrs, 
* Cf Laplante, Vol, Seth Se 4 pe 9 

Po PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
3 each, ia the obvious aubject of predicstiog, and we ate 19 
this coems of a Thing (which ix in no sense 2 Thing) whterec 
‘harecter we dacover iit, even the nothingness. Only we must 
hare che courage here, s8 everywhere io pheasmemdlogy, a seorpt 
{n the pheaoesenon what really preseots imelf to mental insight, 
snd in tha farm in which it so preseam itself, and instead of 
‘wining its meaning to dexcrbe it homely. All choorien must 
udjunt themaives to these denriptioas. 

(109, ‘Tax Nevresisre-Mosorrexnion 
‘Amang the modiScations which relate to the aphere of Belief, 
‘wr have mill to indicate one of the highest importsnoe which 
‘cups » position al by tet, and abould therefore ino way 
bb placed on a li with thoes vo far dined, The unique way 

‘the ciroumatance that it ia eniy an we touch the deeper str 
of inquiry that ita ewo distinctive characte in opened up—as 
avin no apc comeninn with the opin of but eer 
1 highly important modibention of conuciousnene of general 
‘eed—jonkbes'we in ping bee more dled tet 
seat. We shall alse have the opportunity thereby of bringing 
under discussion « renuine modification of Belief which we have 
yet to comsider, with which the new modification in queatioa 
ray very eusly be confused, namely, tat of Amumption, 
‘We are dealing sow with « modification which ic « oertin 
senie completely removes and renders pometies every daxic 
modality to which i i relied, but in « totally dierent way 

so baby, h Goat mating, A "peso maing ch 

comacioun eoacierpart of all performance: io mexraeaton. It 

Se ald in cy eng of prema eig ot 
“caving postponed 

EELLogr vin peter wit "Sng w rc cbr 
Singr thin medication ban never beea sceatealy set ot, 

UMMONY OF enc MOKTIC-NOKMATIC SIRUCTURES 507 

sod bas therefore aot deca Sed cerminalogially (when the 
‘wpic bea been touche ox it has alwayn been confused with other 
‘modifcation), and since there in 20 unequivocal aus frit even 
in ordinary speech, we can anly reach by exveloping tactca 
‘mod by a gradual process of elimization. For all the expression 
‘we have jut collected to serve ax » preliminary indication of 
‘what i means contain some earplus of raeaning. An acbitrary 
doing of some hind ia everywhere included in the meaning 
indicated, whereas care uhculd be no hin of thie in the meaning 
swe are necking to fix. We therefoce wt It ade. The ceult of 
{tis doing kus oxrtainly » distinctive content, which, apart rors 
‘the face that it “opings from” the deing (which woud of course 
‘leo be x phenorsenalogcal datum), cen be considered in ill, 
in detachanest from all such acbitsarinean as socsthing both 
‘omible und actual withis the sphere of expericace, Let us then 
‘exchide all volitional elements from: the ‘leaving postponed’, and 
tha avoid ioterpretiog it 30 of whet is doubtfl or 

z 
hk 

anges serianaly a belief, the presumption ant seriouly 2 pre- 
sumption, the denying not seriouly x denying. It in "nentratinad” 
belief, presumption, denial, and the like, and thei 

‘epeat thoua of the unmodified expecienowt thigh in 2 xtdisally 
soodified way: the simply being, the being pousible, probable, 
qecrtionable, likewise the noc-being, and all thet kar bots pre- 

related to that of which we have previous apakea 20 sauch, 
‘hich is ho eo inportant for preparing the way ito pheno: 
smeanlogy. The ponitings pure end simple, the postings that 

‘sot deen neutralized, have ss comeliced results “positions’ 
(Sétee), which are collectively characterized ns “tates of being" 
(-Seinde’), Fan, pcbbiliy, quent, non bing, 
tnd yea-being—all that is itself something “which 

_ FURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
terized we wach inthe create, sad “intended” (vormant ws cat 
in conscioumen. But the neutralized positings are easextatly 
Gintinguisbed by thia mack, thet thei coralatr contain ming 
‘hat can be pasted, nothing that con be relly peedicated; in. m0 
respect does the neutral exaciousreas play towards that of whlch 
ita usar the part of « “balie!™, 

110, NuorRaLzme Consesoumees ax rar Cxrrioat AUTHORITY 
‘or ux Reasow. Ther Narva or ABRMEG 

Te ie clear that we tae here « realy vsique peculiarity of Con- 
‘ciounoeas. The procf is tht the non-neutrlied nocsce, the 
ocsen fropely socalled, ure combally subject to the critical 
atherly of the veauon, whereas ts the Cex of the waxtraead 
oct, the queton concerning resis ond wares er me meng. 
‘Likewise, corelatively, for the moenata, Every noema charas- 
terized asin tate of being (oe cerns), or on pombe, provamable, 
\qutationable, all, aod aa forth, can be so characterised either 
“"elidly" o¢ “ixvaidly”; it cam “vertably” be, powibly be, it 
fam be nothing at all, and so ferth. Are nopoca! “posit, oa 
the contrary, nothing: ii mat on affrmatery conscouras, The 
"amere shoughe” of realities, pomiilitra, x so fort, "mua 
‘0 pretension” in regard to realty, it in sether to be recognized 
‘8 correct nor rejected incorrect, 
‘All mere suppose (Sichdenhe) can indeed be translated into 
an sunemption oF snpponton (Anseten), snd thia pew modification 
(Gost uo in the cave af suppons is subject unecadtnnaly 10 the 
thinkee'aaxtteary peleresce. But ‘nuppoiting’ (Assets) angi. 
skin to positing (Srenm), the meppnion gina kind of “poiion” 
(Sots), only that tia « quite unique madifstin of the postion 
‘of belief, which contrat with the main seriea dscumed shore, 
following » wde-oe of itu om. Ue can eater an n member (a2 
‘¢ eappouion in the form of the “antecedent” ar conmquext 
of a hypothetical proposition) into the nity of pontions (Sot+ 
snag) which permit of rational judpments being pened upon 
come unde the rule of reoeal valution. 
We cannot my of x mere uncertain thought tht ia coerect of 

‘THEORY OF THE ROETICNOEMATIC STROCIURES 389 
incorrect, but we can oy tis of the woppostin tha exer into 
4 hypothetical judgment. It la 9 fundamental er to ova 
the one aod the other, end t ovelock the equvoastion which 
Jie in our reference to mere wipponal or 2 mere thonght. 

Ta addition we have the similarly miseading equivoction 
‘which iin the word ‘te tink’, when it aver naw tothe 
Gite rpecialyphere ofthe thought that Gcriminates, ppc, 
And expreses logical Uooogit ia mec enue of the tees ad 
‘ow eo the positional a wach, which, m we bere bad it directly 
in view, daca sot call fo any daesimsinsting nse foe any appre- 
reading inthe way of prediction. 

We find all the happeciags here cvosidered in the sphere of 
aero sesory insti (with thei tematons into obscure pre- 
‘ecwtation) (0 which we have ia the fat insiaace aaigned « 
preferential postion. 

Sarr. Nevrutterr-Moomicarion ano Fancy 

But yet another dangerous ambiguity of the expresion “mete 
suppoa"” comm in fr enneieration. We mat protect aureeves 
bce aguinat «very closely besetting confusion, namely, that 
‘beeneen anraity-modifection and fancy. The cosfusing element 
Tere, and ove bot lightly to be disestangled, lcs een that 6aney 
sitet infact u peutraity modification, that in spite of is being 
(of 90 mpecial a type it sigaiicance ia univenal and epplicable to 
«al experiences, and that it aloo playe its part ic moot of the 
formations of wappoul, und cust then be ditinguiabed from the 
overe) neutralty-modiSeation with it ranifld furuaticas thn, 
‘conform to all te sypea ofthe posting furction. 

More closely staced, the proces of fancy in ycneral is the 
nentrabity- modification of the “pociting” ect of representation, wad 
therefore of remembering in the widest conceimable omnes of 
‘the term. 

‘We must norice here that in ordinary apecch representetion’ 

0 URE PHENOMENOLOGY 

(Reproduction) and fancy cot acrona cach other. We employ the 
‘aprenions i tach a wey tat, i cxalocmity with out OM 
satya, we leave the genera) word ‘sepreenttion” with itt 
messing undeeraised in rapect of the quewion whether the 
“gong act t expeeses ia « proper or x seutrakaed one. 
Hepresatatioos geneailly divide them ino the tro groups: 
monorss of every kind and thle nwirelity modifications, How 
ver, a will be further apparcat," thin vision eqmnat be acepted, 
sa geraine chasification. 

‘On the other bund, every expesience genenlly (very realy 
living ane, 90 to apesk) is an experience “hich is proces”. It 
balongs to ita very eacace thit it abould be able to reflect ox. 
that mime easence in which it fa scemmariy characterized as thet 
(hick crrainly end presently iz. In accocdanec with this Uae 
‘corresponds to every experience, as 10 every individual Being of 
hich we ae peimordally aware, a series of ideally posible 
smemory-modifcauans. To experiencing, us the primordial con 
inanest of experience, these carrespand wt pomible parallels 
memories of the sue experience, and therefore also fancie 
its nevtrlity-modifcations. Se ic ia for every experience, 
however the direction of the glance of the pore Ego may be 
‘ondeed. The following may serve by wry of elucidation :— 
“Whenever me may have represented cbjecte of one kind ar 
ether—Je us at once suppone that i io x mere world of fancy. 
sod that we have ou attection tamed tomarde it—it then fellows 
1m pertaining to the exsence of the fancy-sctive consciousness 
hue not aaly the fancy-werld itself, but also, at the sare time, 
the perceiving activity which has "phn" it, i modified ito the 
form of fancy. We turn our atenion to chia world and vo thr 
“pereiving within the fancy” (ie. to the seutalsy-modifation 
sf the memery), yet only then wen, ar we prevooaly pot it, 
‘we “rect within the fancy”. But it x of fundamental ipotance 
‘0 to confuse tis modiication, which ideally can at any tira 
‘ye carried out, and would tramfer every experience, even the 

siemens he me eo meng of “i 
PS race Since ed Comnems 309) 

THEORY OF THE NOETIC-NOEMATIC STRUCTURES 913 

fancy-nahing experience ittelf, into the mare fancy which exactly 
ccarespotda to i, or, what wnnenis do ihe sone thing, into the 

‘we can set over agulast every “parting” experience. In his 
eapect meroary is 6 quite special form of positing expecience. 

tonabiity, the cooseiouaness of doubt, of negutin, efirmation, 
supponicion, and sa forth, 

‘We can aatsfy ourtelves with the belp af sn illutrtion that 
tho newtrality-modifcation of the normal perception which posit 

fia object with unmodified certainty isthe newiral concious: 
of the pichre object, which we Gad ws» componectin our ordinary 
observation of « depicted aration percepively prevented. Let 
(ry to make thie clear, and et ua mippone that we are abuerving 
Dares engraving, "The Kaight, Death, and the Devil”, 

‘We distinguish here in the frst place the norma! perception 
‘of which the correlate i the “engraved print ow thing, chia print 
{in he portfolio. 

‘We distinguish ia the second place the perceptive coascious- 
‘nem within which inthe black lines of tbe pierre thee appear 
to nthe mall cnlouleanEgues, “sight on borscback”, “death”, 
and “devil”, In wathetc observation we do not corwider these 
tn the objects (Objekien); we bxve our stzation fixed on whut 
is portrayed “in she picture", core precisely, on the “depicted” 
realities, the kxight of leah aod blood, und 90 forth. 

‘Tast which mam the depusing pouibie and mediates i, 
sumely, the conscioumeas of the “pictace” (of the scall grey 
jn which through the derived noeae something other, 
sizilriy, present tela Jepictes"), now encxample 
for the netzalty-modifeation of the perception. This sepicting 
‘Picnae-object stands before us nether os bing nor ot x00 ben, 
or in way other patonal maby or rather, we ae amare 
ss havig its being, though only « quasi-being, in the neutality- 
modification of Being. 

‘at iti jm the same with the objact depicted, if wo abe up 
1 proaly esthetic uticude, 20d view the exe agen a “mere 

a PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
picture”, without imparting to ic dhe acamp of Being or non 
Being, of pomible Being or probable Being, and the lite. But, 
a can cleely be seen, that does ot mean any privaien, but « 
modification, thar of arraiinatioe, Only we should not reprewest 
in an» transforming openttion caried cat ox 2 previous position. 
‘Occasionally indeed it oan be this, None the leas it need aot 
bet 

(ira, Reeazanisry oy vam Faact-Mooinicanon at Socata 
Lawns; Now-amaarasusry oy nam Nevnausre-Moor- 
‘carton 

‘The radical dierence berwees fancy isthe wee of a neutraicng 

presentaxon, and 4 nevislising medication geneelly, reveda 

itvels—i we our emphasize snd somewtt sarply, chia wldisonal 

decisive point of difference—in the fet that the 

‘4 pesentation is npeatabe(terierbar (here are faacion of wo 
sable level, fancien “in” fancies), wherean the repetition 

(Wiederbolong) of the wevtralising “operation” is erenticly 

‘Our amertion thet it ia pouible to repeat io this way sepro- 
ductive (a8 tho copy-raaking) moadifstions would ween ta have 
set with prety geaeel eppouiion. That atrude wil nt be 
changed until practice ia general phenomenological analysis 
sore wideapet than ithe ete a resat. So ong one eat 
‘experiences as “contents” or as mental “cements”, which in 
spite of al the fahiccable atacks against atemising aod kypor- 
tataing payehology are atl looked poa es «Kod of minte 
‘matter, $0 long as the belief sccording?y prevails that itis posaihle 
tw fx the diffarmce between “contarts of sepmatian’” nad xha 
corresponding “cones of fancy" only through material chas- 
acters of “ineenairy", “fine, and the lke, no improvement is 
tobe looked for. 

‘One must first lara to ase that we ste concerned here with 
1 diference in the concious, that che faney-image therefore 
not a mere faded datare of semee, But im tu own way a Foy 
ofthe correspending sense-datuca; Further, thet this “of” cannot 

‘THRORY OF THE NOETICNOEMATIC STRUCTURES 315 
Gnd ign way in throughs any Bawever drastic, of the 
‘nteasty, or the coutedt, ec. ofthe secse-danzm in question. 

He who is versed in the art of eBeesiog um sotaciomaneas (and 
Juan previously earat ia u general way co ave the data of isimn- 
‘ounity) will without furtber difficulty wee the levels of conscious 
‘eas which la before us lo the fancy suet in in x fancy or the 
‘memory in x toemory oF = fancy. He will then also see what Lea 
in the casential cocatruction of these eurcessive formations, 
namely, that cowry fancy at = higher love can pase freely over 
into a dinect fancy of that which in the former case is fancied 
‘nly indivecly, wherem this free possibility does not obtain in 
the teansitioa from ferry to the cereipomding perception. Heze 
ana challenge to apoatancty there opecs up 3 chasm which the 
pure Hgo ean creas only in the essentially new form of realizing 

™ PORE PHENOMENOLOGY 
tide, which we are xill usable to do withoot, adope thet of 

‘The difference txtweca the scoalty acd the potentiality of 
‘he pasting procen vomia in clove reaion to the actualy 
ferences af eecaon and inatemtin, of which wo have pre 
‘oul pees. bt fn way ein with tm. By ng 

Ito seoount, the yener] dixinction 
Serween the scaly sad somactety of the diced of 
‘the Ego in ateston becomes infect with a dinuble meaning, 
‘oe, slternstivey, chee alipe ito whe cancept of the exprenion 
“actualley’« double meaning, the eeventi) necure of which we 
smut make clase. 

‘The neutrabity-modiication came before vs in owed eoatront 
‘with rea! belief, peewmnpiion, and the Like, with be. peculiarly 
oes concious of “rece thing anes ato” «bei, 

and uo forth; of, to peak in teem ofthe correlative, 
Sn canerat with being “realy” (eicich) before “oneal, o 
having “realy posited” that which i that which probably 
end 40 forth, and act having really ponte ic i the mode of « 
mere "sanding undecided”. Bot froma the outet we aso pointed 
‘ut che enexcaly diferent nicude af x non-tevtal and » neutral 
‘oosciousnes respectively with respect 10 the potentiality ofthe 
positing Retin. Out of erry “real” (wilt) conecioumens 
‘we can drew farh varie postings potcally inchided i i, 
‘and thane are then rea! (wiAlce)povtings: in whatever i selly 
reat, in « thetic nnse, there rel predicabes ie concealed, But 
1 Deutral consciousness “coataion” in itself co “real” (eirhtich) 
predicables of any Kind. The unfoing of ite concent ehrough 
‘the foral austen of atection, through x turing tothe diferent 
predioetea of the abject we are ware of, gies as zens nothing 
‘vax noveral sta or madied predicates. Thin diferent type of 
potentiaey, ecconding a the ‘coastioustest is néaital cr na 
‘agora, this remarkable fac that the general potentiality of the 
receed ghncinge of stencion thus bifireater, now calle for 
deeper inquiry. 
‘The reflesioan ofthe lat paragraph but one left un with shia 

"OLE ssp UREN ene cashew 

‘AMBORY O¥ Tex NOETICNORMATIC STRUCTURES 515 
sent, thet every real experinace an «present sist of being—or, 
‘ee cam sho vay, a2 the temporal unity comrinuted in the 
henoereaclogisltme-conecioumaas ears in catia charscer 
‘with i in w certain way, jot Se something thet bon been prec. 
‘To every accual present site of experience there socesponds 
inden (della neuraicy-modeation, meselya pomble preset 
tate of fancy-erpesience whlch exactly comerpunde to It ia 
contest. Every wach experince ia th form of fancy ia charac 
terized not an being relly ‘bot as being “a though” 
(Gleicheam) 1 were present. It iain fat exactly 28 though 000 
‘were carmparing the noematic date of some peroption or other 
With thove of an active state of fancy (Eaneifal coatemaplation) 
which corresponds tt poecaey in iden (idee). Every perceives 
item ia characterised wx ‘relly present Being”; every parale) 
icem in the form of fancy is characterized as the sane is comtent, 
Dut an "snere Hcy", “se though ke were preseat Being, Thus — 
‘The original tine-onaciomnes itelf fonctions ax « perceptual 
‘onscounat, and han 28 cgunterpat in & corresponding fancy- 
consciousness, 

"Thin alienreloping time-comcioamem, however, in net of 
course 4 continuous Sonancat perception inthe pregnant vee, 
in, in the seus of 25 actual pity perceiving, wbich is ielf 
an experience inoue sense, Ising ia immanest time, baving 
present duration, conatited in the time-comcionsnas, In other 
words, te not of cour « continuous iar reflecting, in which 
caperiencea pated in the specie sease were to be grasped at 
esting (rend) and nesally objected. 
‘Amangexperictotatheve ne some that stand os, calle amo 
ent reflexions, moce wpecifally exeaneat perceptions, which as 
dlireted upon theie objects apprehend Being actually exd post 
Js, Bevide tae, amang the ine expeiontes, these ar peroctions 
‘that point to # tranacendeat object, thet similarly pouit Being, 
‘the vo-clled external perceptions. “Pweypton'” ia the normal 
ease of the Word. dota not only iaticare generally thet this o¢ 
thus thing appaart to the Ego & ambodiod remac, bat thatthe 
Ego in omar of the appearing thing, grape it mo rely being 
‘ere, und porta it, This actuality af the ace of pouting it as 

Pry PURE PEENOMENOLOGY 
being there i, in acouniance with previves Gadings, neutralized 
in the peroeptive conscouanem of ox imoge. With the glance 
turned fowarca the “image” (sat towarde chat of which itis the 
2093), we do not apprebent unying ret (Werlich) as object, 
thor an image, « Getos. The “apprebeasion’ has che wtuaity of 
the direcing activity, br in oot “eal” (wirklich) appreheaaiaa, 
but mere apprcheasion in the modiSed farm of the “at if" 

“Treg whe of th eta fe fom te Sto, th 
axteatinal actuality of the seutralined position pases 
cl teige opp bet Santor ht 
‘made of the "ea if* iti not appechended. Inthe eavetia! natire 
f this situation und im porencalcy there Sie possibilities for 
‘ctu directing ofthe mental gence, which, weve, never give 
‘hac hereto acunitin in the way of pouting. 

‘Tho conditions are similar when we coropere “acral” (oot- 
neutral, really positing) recaacdons wth tose in which that 
‘which iv reneasbered, through # diverting ofthe ghmce pepe, 
sil appear indeed, but is 20 longer actually poived. ‘The poten- 
tility of the parting of that which “ll” appears here scum 
thet rege te wey of etecn te pig Si ely 
spprehcoding eopatione in general, bot eoch wn all ezictoeos 
"really" (wird) epprebeod end wcrualy pout. a the neutraity- 
oifiations of memecicy 2, ia mere fans, welave once apni 
‘the attentions) potentialities of which the translation inta 
sctualitien gives "'cts”(ogatonr indeed, but wholly seutalized 
‘et, donic posting after the mode ofthe ‘aif. We wre xware 
of the fancied object not as "realy" present, pest oe future; it 
only “overs”, at that which possesses 0 posited actuality. 
No mere directing of the giance can oct this neutrality side, 
jum oe Hite ae in other cases it can generate positional 
seu. 

‘very perception fet the cbasration oil wrve vs for further 
‘Mluetration—has ita perceptas) background. The epccifcaly 
spprebended thing hasta erniemmen, which appear perosptively 
‘with i, lacking all npecial placing in the ephere of that whick is 

‘THEORY OF THE NOETIC-NOEMATIC STRUCTURES 317 

‘out there, yet adjusted to the nanese of the eavzoped thing. It 
‘too ln an eaviconsnent “that realy in”, xd itis a feature of oxr 
awareness of it that itis intrically poral foe weal ences 

Functlonalty posit Being to dices themselves towards it ft 
ain certain mcamue 4 wy of potetalpoiige. Sai in with 
erory in respect of ite Background of recellection, ot wlso with 
perception, oc, it may be, memacy ia reapect of its Kings of 
recationa and protntions, of recollections that hark back and 
recollections that anicipate, whic, ia greater of lew abundance, 
and changing off and on thei grade of clearace, prem forward, 
tout do ot pase into scrul thetic fore. In all these cases the 
sctualittion of the “poteatia! postings” secemuily lead through 
corresponding directings of the real glace (etectional 
‘sctualty) to further and yet further actual postings, and this 
‘belonge to the esnence of thee situations. But if wo pee over 
4 the parallel neutrality modSctions, everyting tranaaten itll 
‘into the modication of che ‘en i, even the ‘potestiling” itl. 
"The image-chject ox faacy-ohject Ins also (and neceesrily) 
screntional buckgrouads. Agpin, the word “background” is atte 
fo potenti) dsectiocs of inteest and “apprehensions”. But tha 
fining f the iataeve in the dizetion of reality doce not leat 
0 pricciple to penitings, but always nly to positings of the 
modiied Kind. 

Similar comideratioes and the poiat is one that wll pecially 
interors ue—apply tothe moda varistions of the specie theses 
of belief (the dasie primary thes), to the presumptions, sug- 
srestioas, questiocs, and s0 forth, aud similarly to denials xd 
sification, The correlates in them of which we are conacious, 
the pou, probability, malty and the ike, com uadergo daxic 

thesame time specific "abjectivation; but whilst 
‘the presuxing, questioning, rejecting, efiming, 
and the Ukr, we carry ust Do doaic primary thence, thmugh 
‘We do indeed carry out other “thes” in the sense of wneceeary 
eserilintion of the concept, cnmely, grunmption-thees, qu 
Pioabikytheet, deniabthewe, end oo forth, But we con always 
pus the corresponding danic judgments: the ideal powity of 
ringing 60 actuality the potentiates involved in theca fam ite 

a8 FORE PHENOMENOLOGY 
(gound in the ssi axis of the phenowcanlogical vinution + 
‘Thin scoulization, agua, when it deals from the outset wit 

ceual thes, always leads to ean! cheses us potentially Saved 
Sn the Sait chines. LF we tranaate the intial these into the 
epeich of nevenlty, potentiality ia trated into the mame 
spewch, fn mere fancy we prosune ek querians, ea Ua like, 
sil our previous conchuaions wl bold good, but wich » changed 
sigurare. Al che dovc thaws and modalities of Being derived 
‘rommthe oigial actor the at-noema, exd through che possible 
shitings ofthe foew of stenton, are Sow nestoslised. 

$214. Fumnom Coxomoaxe Nevraurre-Moomcanion 1x0 
‘run Pormerianiry or Tex Tram 
‘The diflerence between nom-ecutml and arvtr! onniciousnese, 
if we aro to follow the analysea we have made, concern conscious 
experiences net merely in the sttotional modor of the eopio, 
‘but also in that of etentina) eub-focal scralty, Ht then mas 
ftuelf felt in the twofeid demeanour of these “backgrounds” of 
conscionnnens ec the occasion of their atteational tranafarmtion 
imo “foreprounds”, or, to speak rare vticly, on their rans- 
formation into etentignal actusltien wherewith the original 
‘experience poues over into a doxic eait, indeed into & proto- 

belongs to the eweatial nature of every inteatocal experience 

‘The situation, owe may ale pusit itis: tat he metratity- 
radifcation ia not a specific rodibestion aached to the actad 
Aheoey, the nly once that ae truly cheves, but eoncera « fs 

‘THEORY OF THE NOETICNOEMATIC STRUCTURES xp 
‘More closaly descsibed our topic ix as fellows — 
Contciourast gmerally, of whatever Kind end farm it may be, 

1 traoerzed by « radical clavage. Inthe Sext place there beloogs, 

‘1 we know, to every consciousness in whith the pure Ego does 

‘ot from the oust Eve at “bringing ic about”, which dherefore 

‘hus nok from the outaet the form of the “cite”, the eseentisly 

‘Pomble modification which trazafee ic into this (area. Now there 

‘are tee fundamental pomiiltin connactnd with the way in which 

‘antsowner i brought abost within the modi evs, ox otherwise 

To avery copito thers bolongs a counterpart thet exactly comre- 
sponds ith it, and ia auch that its neem poutses in the parallel 

oning”, copie, wherean the other a tbe “shed” of a. st, 
1 ack improperly no-cd, coi Vt doen nat “really” post. 
‘The one relly eects something; the other the were reflexion 
of an efieet. 

Corcerpoiting to thus we have the radical difereace of the 
serrata ox the one side the constizated noematic fect which 
tha the character f the unmodied, real effect, no the ether the 
‘mere thot” of te exactly corresponding eect. The rel and 
‘the modified earrepocd idealier with absolute pression, and yet 
Dave hol the tame amentel nate. Fer the medication is tne 
forred tothe emence; tothe primerdial eznce thee corresponds 
{8 counder-estence wy 8 “shadow” af the name essence. 

Tn the metaphocical speech concerning whadows, reflexion, and 
fenage, there ahould of coune be no maggetioa of mee itxion 
cr doceithil intention, for thar veal 322 or positial core 
Istea would be given. Noe need the waraing be cenewed against 
the other taadency 60 realy t bend, to confone the mndiiation 
Dee in quotion with the fanep-medifcation which lkewive 
creates for every expericace—aa the preweat phase af expesience 
‘ate antonio of ia outers ew ey 

be matt pron. finesse apertencen ito two 

» PURE PIENOMENOLOGY 
lasees, which are to one another os reality to the ineffectual 
amicrocing ofthe soemntic function, prociies its mesning to un 
There (ea wn leave the donic domain) inthe following fmdanental 

‘Every copia ini itself ites a primary form of dons posting 
or not. But hy virus of x nytem af ws, which agus belong 10 
‘the ewenta! nature of cocsciousnny init bic sera, very 
cope cabo trmaferred to 4 priaary potting af » denic type, 
ie only in compler way, and in particular ws fllown; every 
"thetic characte” in toe beoudert ecrae of the term, which can 
arirtes itself am coerlate of x soetis "exis" (used bere in & 
correspondingly broad sense) in the noems of the cate to which 
it belongs, undergoes transformation into an cote chaser, xd 
‘herewith takes on the form of « madly of Being with th 
widest range of msning. In this way the character "probable", 
‘which in the noematic corte of presumption, and indeed 
speciieally of the “act-haracter” of the thesis” of prenumption, 
4a wwch, changes into probable Bei; Klkewise the noemutic 
charocter of the “questonsble”, thin speciSc, correlate af the 
hes of questccabilcy, changes into the fora of questionable 
ing; the correlate of negation iso the Corr af won-bint: all 
ofthese mere forms which hav, wo to apes, raben on the atazap 
of the acu primary danic thesia. But this reaches farther util, 
‘We shall be finding ground for extending the thet eancept 10 
overall artapherea, and therefore slo for spesking, for instance, 
‘of plcanuse-theses, wia-theses, willthsse, with eer nocmwtic 
ccorrelatives, "pleasing", “wished for". “as it peactclly abould 
be", anu the like. These correlates sso, through the transfer, 
Possible a prion, of the set in question int x primary doxic 
‘thers, sesums the form of modalities of Being with an extremely 
tended range of metsig; thus "pleming”, “wiahed for", ‘ss 
it ubould be”, and s0 forth, become predicahle, for in the actual 
owing ofthe root-beliet we nrecuoscious of these as bing pleas- 
ing, wibed for, xod vo forth! But, m thee examples, we re to 
understand the tuner me ixplying thi ic preserves te nocom 
‘of the original expesience ix is whole exents} quality, with thls 

* Compr, the emerson th eo 105. 20. 

‘THEORY OF THE NOETIC-NOEMATIC STRUCTURES 3: 

vole exceptioa, that the mode of presentation of date will hare 
‘hanged with the tranver in vome laa-conforning way. This 
‘Pointy bomerer, wil! peed to be farther developed. 

‘Tho two cases are rudely distinguished in thin rcapect, that 
the protedias, nthe cise may be, ix ether a real, $0 to peak 
really Yelieved belief, or lve itn nervless counsepast, mee 
‘nsppoual (of Being simpicter. poasible Being, end oo frth). 
‘Whar rerees, through procemes of inward change frac that 
dri trssaformation ofthe original experience, whether develop 
‘ments of its aoezate eoaatitvent into rea primary doxie pot 
fgg, or an unfokling into protodenic eutabte exclusively, that 
predetermined with abwlute rigour Ueough the exenial natere 
of the intentional experience in querton. Thus from the outpet 
1 firm conceptual system of potetal onicol postings ie traced 
An the very emence of ery sonarus experence, and indeed, 
following the prefigured articuletion of the coneciousness in 
quetion, a fe of pomible ral postings o of pomible neutral 

“audow-poxtings”. 

‘And sguin: concinamen in gexeral ws v0 aroculaied at to be 
of « twofold type: exiginal and shadow, pool and neural 
consciotanen. The distinguishing feature of the one is thet its 
dae potectaity leads 10 real pening dowic acts, and of the 
cher Ut it gives rise only ta the shadow-pictuces of wach acts, 
‘only to neutrality modifications of theme: in other words, that 
it contina ia its noeratic conntinntion nothing that can be 
oaialiy grasped, oc, which amounutto the rare thing, 90 real” 
(wieiche)noema, but only i counter-xage. Morenver, neutral 
‘apericnces are restricted just to one form of doxic portional: 
that which beloags 10 them at dats of the immanent time- 
‘canaciouanens, determining them a8 the modified conaciovsntas 
of modified noes. 

‘Tho expeenions “posiioal” end “neutral” should from tow 
sn serve our terminological aseds, Every experience, whether it 
bans the form of the cepts, wether st in ox i noe in any special 
‘enee act, comes under this opposition. Thus juntionelity Jost 
‘ot imply the presence of 2 sea] postin oc the performing act 

Chae Bt ep ere 

aa PURE FAENOMANOLOGY 
through which iris xteblshed; ft expremes only «certain potential 
‘sapacity for earrying out acteal acu of doxic positing. et let 
tus inelude under the concept of positions) expeciense the cue 
In which ax experience ia from the outst 2 positon already 
ertbliahed, o suggestion which is les likely to give offence aa 
to each conspleted positing there belonge « plurality of poteeial 

poatings. 

‘The diffrence between pantimabty and mivabity expremes, 
‘thas been already shown, no property pecular to belief-positngs 
oly, no mere kind of belef-medifcrnon such an presuming, 
questioning, und the lke, oc, ix other directions, emnuming, 
enrying,sfiming, thus not the intentional varibons of «primary 
modus of belief in the preguumt vee of tbe term. Ic in fact, 
su we Kad seated 18 advance, a datenchon the nate of com: 
ciuanes of a universal kind, but ove which 1 the cour of our 
_anulia yppears, and on 400d grounds tobe connected with the 
datinebon already specelly indgated 1m the narrow sphere of 
the daxic copto between pessional (.2., acto, real) belief and 
ita oovira counterpart (the mere “muppoel”). Indeed, there has 

thar hinds of act-churacter, ed therefore all typat of con 
‘sevouaneas geceealy. 

$105, Avucations, Tar Exrmam Concarr oF Act, 
‘Acr-Fouriamers 2x0 Tarouas 10 Act 
1 in important to take eo account again some observations 
‘ready made, "The copie in gecena w expt isteanonaly, The 
camoept of istenoonal experience geoerally already prewsppouce 
the opposition between potentiality axd actualy, snd that in tw 
gulls geneal menting, ia 60 far a ic i only ix the tanaloce 
to the explict capo snd in efeion ox experience that las uot 
‘een made explicit and on its noetie-toecatic curtis, that 
‘we arc able to sow that it conceals withinitelf fotemianaltng, 
oF cocmuta which are pecslar to it. Consider, for inatane, the 
+ Claman FRPP 0. 

‘THEORY OF THE NOETICNOEMATIC STRUCTURES ys 
cceacioureas of the wncbeecved but wsbeequently sbacrable 
background in perception, manery, and so fort. The elicit 
iumiopal expeience is 2 “completed” “T think”. But the ame 
‘] think” cam also pam over into an “nfullled” condition 
through changes in che proce of attention, The experience af 
4 fullled peropton, « fuliled judgment, feeling or volition, 
doce not dimppear when the stiection ‘urna “exclusively” to 
something now, end the Ego consequently “lives” exsiunrely 
in a ew copln, The earie copio “rings of", enka into 
“ebeouiey", but wll condinues fo experince « mified form 
of Being. Similarly egittonr io the background of experience 
‘pro their way up, sorties following the path of recolectian 
oF neuilly modified, sometimes wonodised. For isstnce, « 
‘belie, «seal belie, “ation” wishin uo; we alendy believe before 
ver bnew 1”. Under cerain cxtdivions Hhewise movemects of 
peace of dipleaure, desires, even reels, ae already tively 
before we "ve" “in them, bere we caty out the cai proper, 
‘efor the Bg “gets buxy" joing, plowing, desiring, wiling, 

“Thue the colo iaiatn i act (xd Goro the ear it i ws 
sich thet we have introduced the concept) the act proper of 
pecceving, judging, pleasing, and wo farts, Bat oo the other hand 
the whole atrscrare of expeceace in che ceven deserved, with 
allt thoes end nace character, coma the same, thrgh 
At lacks this developed actualy. Let up then separate core , 
clearly ful act rom ace thet are mot filed; the ter are 
cether acta “that have mained fulllcent” or paler $0 act 
(Attrigengs). We could avo quite well we the lat word quite 
‘Benerally for tc shat are sot flied. Such imopultvewtcingn 
«ce Lived with all zs intentional, bt the Ego doe not ive 
in them a8 a fling sojst". Toeraby the concept of Act is 
tatended in defnice sad wholly fedipenaable sean. Tho fle 
filled acts, of, at ia a serain reapect io bee to cll then 
rerpect af th fact, nasal, that we ar ere dealing with pro- 
camea), the ats x proces of falfiment, compen wit tht 
road seme we term “tttndr” (SteBumgeaknen), while the 
ference to atruden i the pregnant venge of Us ter pints 
rack to camoliated (fendi) wo maya to be cused mare 

™ PURE PrinNOMENOLOGY 
fully ot later stage: for intance, to aetades of hate, or ofthe 
Inter to the betred, which, on ics side, has elready been con 
stinated foe conscloumnene within somes of « lower level 6 
pervon or thing which ia out chee; ettinste, aflemative oF 
‘eqative, tothe claim to have Being, axd the like, would kawian 
belong tere. 

Tt fa now clear that acts in the broader sense, just sia the 
tae of the specibic capitation, carry with them the diferencee 
‘berween nestrlicy and positionalty, which already prior to the 
tramafoematioa into roplatioer are‘noematialy and thtially 
ciectve, only shat we fire perecive these eects through actu 
inthe narrower tease, throughs capitation, Tan postings, which 
nay be positings ix the modus ofthe “as if, ae arendy realy 
peeient in thea together with the noeses at'x who to which 
these porting belong: se idea) enndltion being pressppaed 
that they do not, sympathetically with the ersaformation enrich 
‘heir intention and otherwise get shered. in any cae we can 
exclude these changes (and sie especially the isentianal carich- 
rmenta und rbapings which pase into the ow of experience 
afte the tranaforeatia). 

‘Thmughout our whole sien of disceaicen under the title 
“Neutrality” the doxic postings he «privileged place, Neutrality 
‘was indicted under the rubric potectalay. Rverything reated 
An tha, that woery thetic act character generally (every set-in 
‘hoa" che intention in pleaare-giviag valuation and will, 
the spelficchacacter af the positing ac x pleasing and in willing) 
conceal in tr emontal bing character ofthe pomar'doe thes, 
‘ehh ‘clades wh” it certain wayt. According ws the sct- 
ineartfon concerned i sat neutralised oF is neutralised, 90 it 
‘with the done thesia included int, bere thought of ax che primary 
[er proo-jhei. 

‘Thin prleceace gies tothe dexie prisary thesis wil be les 
smashed in the anayaes that fellow. It wil be clear tht the 
cumfermly to law in the real ofcaencea which we have brought 
tut in our inquires demand caser deercixation vo furan Sstly 
snd in general the doe madalie (the pectic seaue which 
tho icludes aaeueptions) most replace or reprevent the daxic 

"THEORY OF THE NOETICNOEMATIC STRUCTURES 335 
primary theowe 20 the ““donic theses” incloded in all thea, 
‘ut whhin this general preference for doaie modalitica che dic 
rimry chesis, che cevninry chat marie bei, bas che quite 
apecial advantage hat these modalities theneseves must be trary 
formed inen theses of bet, so that ance again all neutrality 
hae it indicator in the donic potentsliry and in the quite special 
messing which it bear in relation te the primary thers. The 
smaner in which the donic in general “covers” all the varitir 
of the thetic will in thi connexion receive ita clocr detez- 
‘Now the proposition which have becn set dowa provisionally 
in thei wider generality (aking though they may be in ctrein 
respects), and made rally clear only ia epecal act-pheret, need 
{or thei foundation a brvader basis. So far we have not die. 
‘cuned at all deeply the paralletiem of noesis and oem in all 
‘the intentional domains, Tie main theme of the prevent section 
‘of the book brings ita own motive to bear in urgiag the exteasion 
of the anaes, fa carying ovt thie extension what we have tet 
out in general concerning the nevtrality-modieation will atthe 
ae time be confirmed ead completed 

416, ‘Taanermore zo New Avavruss, Tut Seconpanr Nowsas 
‘an Tua Noparic Conen.ires 

So far we have been atudying x series of general features In 

the structure of owes snd noemete within a large and yet 

vecy limited framework. Our studies, to be wie, have been on 

Noexis mud Noema brings with it. Our sudies, deepite 
manifold complicetions they draw into their 
concerned only with xraere underfow of the viream of exper 

= PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

in which we lart indulged, we seleced by preference sensory 
fnritons, iz particular those of appearing cealitio, ws wlsa the 
seaacry prewntetiont which ace derived fiom these intuitions 
shrongh dimming thir boghases, yet are of courve united ent 
‘them through community of kind. The commnce geaus is indicated 
by the term “prmenation”, though we also considered all the 
‘phenomena which essentially belocged co these preseatitions, 
ftuch an the reflective sxutions and presestatioms geocnlly af 
‘which the objects are no Joager sensory things? ‘The univers 
ange within which our sesuks sre valid—eoggested indeed by 
‘he very way in which we have ardered tbe inquiry, Jetving the 
feehng that whatever rught bind us to the Jower dma hak 
benny signsicance—thrasty taelf upon Us aa #000 as 8 
mead the limsts of our research. We then ate that all the 
ferences between » central core of messing (a notion which 
certainly requires further analytis) and the thetic characters 
‘which group thenuelves about i recur, and ao hikawiee do all 
rmodifeations whics—like thane of repreotatian, attention, 
eutrilzation—invade the central meaning slong thtr own line, 
‘Whit leaving it nooe the les so “identical” character. 

We ean now proceed aloag ow dferant directions, leading 
cn both aides to ntentionalitien which are grounded in presen 
‘tutions: either inthe direction of the nomic spt, ot ia thet 
‘Which leads us up to novel though secondary ‘ype of “pontingr”. 

1 we follow thie Iver direction, we conae acroe (us the fint 
and empleat pomible, fre, tat is, from syathencs either ot the 
lower of higher levels) the efector, apettve, vokivonal node 
‘which ce bated on “presentations”, perceptions, memones, 
symbols, and 00 forth, and clay display ix their structure the 
condenses ofa seated formaman. In draling with acts in their 
cexuirery, we now giv prorty everywhere to the postion! forma 
(oot thereby excluding the meatal mbetras), since what uw to 

‘THEORY OF THE NOBTICNOEMATIC STRUCTORES 547 

‘be sald of them also holds good in a wufciently modified form, 
of the carrespending seutaliztions. For example, ex eexthevc 
planar is grounded in x zeutnizy-conssicusni of perceptive 
OF ceproducsive cnateat (Gebil. x joy ar sorrow in a (son- 
neutralized) belief or « modality of beet, a valiotary devise or 
sveraon likewise, but related to something valved ax plantnt, 
beauifl and the dke—and vo forth. 

‘What ineceata us here, before we eater wall nto the divisions 
of thin atrucure, is that with che new nootic phases maw maematis 
‘phawzs,an he coreatve side, slo appear. On the one wide appear 
‘new character, anaigons 19 the moder of belie, bat. themsetoer 
otemsing at dhe mime time, io ther aw cootent, che capacity 
for being dexologically posited; on the other side new verctier 
of “formative ryatheri* unite wich the cocrespandingly new 
‘rarities of phase; there is constuted a nas meaning which ir 
based upon that of the underinag noent, wn at the sant tine 
‘envelops it. The new rmeaning inwroduces a totally mew dtmenton 
of meaning: with it therein constituted no new determining arka 
of the more "material" (Sache), Wat cabwe of the mttrile— 
quelties of value, or concrete objected values: bewuty and 
ugliness, goodseas and badness; or the object for use, the work 
of art, the machioe, the book, the action, the deed, and 0 
forth. 

“Moroover, avery full expericoce of the higher level lbo now 
sts fll correlate « structure cimilrto that which we perccived 
{ertchat) et the Home Jevel of soc. I the moma of the higher 

OF agai, on the ease may be, to the “not at all”, or 
the “yes indeed”, although it would be perverse to pie it place 
a this serien. 

Further, the consciousness in respect of this new character 
‘once again a petiosal consciouanese: the “valusble” can be 
Gexically posited an being valuable, The “eto of being” (send) 

‘which belonge to the “vafuuble” as ds chararverisation can be 
shoughe of ako ax madeliend, at con every “ett of being” or 

= PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
“oerminty™; the conscioumese is then conaciournees of paosble 
ae; the memes” (Sack) oaly ruggets iomlf ax valuabl 
grin, we ace rware of it ws probaly cole, or wo-oahucds 
(ere the meaning doce not go 30 far as “velucleas”, 6 bud, 
‘ply, und the like; what ia expressed in the not-maluable ip 
tnply the canceling of the “vnlaabi). All ech modifations 
alfect the comcioumncee of value, the valuing notes, not 0 & 
‘were external may, but inward, and the same remark applies to 
the nowt alo (ct. below, p.333)- 

‘We find again « variety of deep-reaching changes in the fore 
of the modifications of mention, according a, ia keeping with 
the sakiplicity of easental pouiltes, the atteuive glance 
‘revere the diferent istemional wrets to the “matter alluded 
to and its phanes beyoud—a caberent system off modifications 
with which we are already acquainted ws the lower level—but 
then also on to the values, the eatablithed distnstons of the 
Ligher level through tbe apprehensions whech constitute them; 
aed amin to the soemata x8 vuch, to their characters of, in the 
thee act of reeon, 10 the noenca—end all tisan the diffrent 
specific modes of artertion, maszinal observation, non-cbeervston, 
se the lke. 

‘The sttenpt to unravel hese complisted atructases abarply 
and clase, and to clarify them adequately, necemitutes exceed 
ingly dic inguiries. We mst ak, fr inatance, haw “formative 
seyrubeees of value” are related to those of fat, bow the new 
‘potranic characterisicons (good, beautiful, and wo fortb) etand 
tthe enodalties of belief, how they group themaelves systema 
‘aly in scrce and divisions, and mary similar questions. 

$157. THe Secowourr Twas ano Concuneon oF rar 
‘Docruns oF rar Mosincarions or mx NevrmAte 
tnnig Proce, Tat Gooaar Concarr or “Tim” 
We ave tll 19 consider the reion of the new noetic and 
oemeate sts af craciouines tothe nesting procon, We 
counered this mosasoation with dare pontioalty. Thi, a2 
‘7 cam eal convince oursetves pls in point ff, hat par. 

‘THEORY OF THE NOETICNOEMATIC STRUCTURES 335 

fn the mera now specially before us which we ascibed to it 
in advance ix the mont extended actephere, and have specaty 
ncumsed in that of the sodas of ju Tn the conacioore 
ness of presumption, che “prenumabie”, the “probable” the 
inchaded ‘postionally; and 20 also the “plasani" in the con- 
scioureae of plearare, the “Joyous” ix the comciunaras of jay, 
snd so forth. It lion therein, i, i is avaable for oxic positing, 
sad therefore it is predicable. Accordingly every feeling-son- 
tcianancas (Gemitsbrmartacs) with is new Land of secondary 
{eeling-nocecs comes wader the caneept of positional concious 
‘hem, an we had recat thin concep, in relation to dosic postion 
alti, and larly to positional ceriantce. 
on closer view we shall hove to aay that ia relating tbe 
nevirity-modifcation to the doxic postionalty, important aa 
are th ionighte upo which the relating rots we have in certain 
‘enoe taken 1 roundabovn wey. 
‘Lats fice be clear on this point, tht act of plearare (whither 
“ipefarmed” or wt, vit ect of feing (Geni, and wl 
every Lind, ae “ects”, “intentional experiences”, end that 
Shee ken. inf es ret) eer Sede 
Otherwise expresed, they are in a very wide but exsetialy 
_unitary sense “pouting”, only nat of the dori kind, We carually 
emnarhed above, and quite correctly that act-character generally 
sre “Thever"—theses inn extended sense of the term, and osly 
in w mpelat mows belcfhees or modalities of the same, The 
‘vsetlal analogy of the apeificpleaare-noeaea with the belie 
powitings fs manifest, likewise that of the wiah and will noses, 
and fart, In valving elo, in wishing and in wiling, something 

i them, Tuat indeed ia the source also of ll the parallt 
relatings of the diferene types of consciasaneaa and of al clari- 
ations of the wame trict, the modes of posting (Setemnrten) 
‘were the things clasifed. 

Te belougt to the essence of every intentional experience, 
whatever elee may be found in ia cancrete makeup, 10 pomeet 
‘at fea one “potting characteristic”, one “thesis”, un a rule 
several bound together in x dependency scheme; inthis pluraliry 

oe PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
ne Se then ecemarliy the archer, vo toupeak, uniting al! others 
{a inelf and dominating them throughout. 

‘The highece gueric unity which rates al thme specific Mact- 
character”, thewe “positing” character doce not exclude mental 
and geaerie diferences. Thus the aficctive postings are related 
10 the doxic an ponitings, but do mot by any mauza behing 60 
Intrately together us doa the modalities of bali 

With the generic commmity, in essence, of al positions! 
charsctece, tae of itm soenatic postanal carreatas (of the 
“dhetie characters In the nocratic see"), end if we sake the 
Arter with in beaaier noeratic fovodations, the ment) coc 
munity ofall “positions” (Sita) is eo dew given. But therein 
in the lt resort are grousded these analogies which have at all 
‘itsea been felt co hold berween general ag, geaeral cheory of 
‘ile, and ethics, which, when purnoed ato thes farthest depths, 
Jead to the constituting of general formel discipline on lines 
‘Parle tothe seve formal logic, formal uxilogy, and the formal 
theory of practice.” 

“Thus we ave led back to the gorratined heading, "Theis, v0 
‘which we now cefer the following propontion — 

‘Beary omiciumuss it either actully ar potentially "tutic", 
‘The earlier adopted concept, tht of “actual posting”, and with 
it that of ponbiomalily, undergoes thereby x correaponding exten= 
tion, Aa a consequence, our éoctrie concerning the Deutraliaing 
process and ie relatin to positiolty is trmeferied to the 
‘concept of the “hes” in is extcaded form, Thus the general 
medication which we call the neutralicing belongs to the thetic 
consdommem genailly, whether it be fully carved out or cot, 
and indeed directly ia the foBlowing way: On the ope hand we 
hhave characterized the powtionel thoves by this feature, that they 
tre either actual sheses o¢ may be trmulated into euch; tht they 
asccondingty have noerta that can be posited as “rai”, can be 
schually posted in the extended semse. In opposition to these 
‘we bave the “we if” theses, the thotes improperly wo-cled, the 
‘nefectut eirocings, incapable of carrying an any actual thetic 
functions ia rwpect of their noemaia even when neatralized. The 

+ Ror fr toon of i ty nfo, cao FV, 3. 

‘THEORY OF THE NOETIC-NOEMATIC STRUCTURES 131 
Aliference berween neutrality and postiealty runs paral 10 
that beoween noetic and noemarie; nd in the form ia which it 
in here undertood it omer all sort of thetic charsctery 
Aiccty, without exking the way round through the "portana”, 
in the carow md alone cureat czanng of the word “primary 
oxi postings, yet hrougs which alone f can 

‘Bt thin rate chat the proriey ended to thewe april doxie 
itngs has its deep pontive bai. Ta the Light of our analyace 
it is presely the daxic movdalitin, und in particu the primary 
onic thesia, that ofthe certaioty of beet, which bave the nique 
ixivantge of coving through their pockional potty the 
‘whole wphere of conaciousncas. Bvery thesia of wistcver gems 
‘aa, in conformity with exectul laws, and through the doxie 
churacteriations which belong imaiesably to ite wsetia) nature, 
tbe trasaformed into an actual daxic peniting. A powitenal oct 
ori, but whatever be the “quality” of me posing it ponte 
exiealy; whatevec in posite throug it an ober modes is ponied 
abo a8 being, only not as actully being, And yet scanty om, 
in emence, be produced by way of an “operation” that remains 
possible m principle, Every “natement” (Sata) every statement 
of swith, fr instance, oan thereoce be tranaformed into « doxic 
vtaterent, 10d it i then in © cereain ny both in ame: at once 
4 douic statement and the statement of wih. 

In tha consenon the acherse of eaetial erder, ot we have 
already pointed out, is at fret this, ett prrapatioe of the doaic 
‘prtoms properly ond ix sts wnicerea! bearing 0. dovie modoitie 
tlie, For every aMective expescace, every vahusiea, wish, and 
‘will a charcterised & def ether aa being cetsin or oe being 
uggerted, or t 2 preeumptive or doubefsl alsing, wiahing o€ 
wiling? Valve, for instence, wben uur standpoint i not thet of 
the domic modalities nf position, i precisely not actually peaited 
in im deaic character. We become sware af value in valing, of 
the pleasant in pleanuze, of the joyous in rejicing, but some- 
fimoe wo that in valuing we ase uot quite “more”, or thet the 
‘matter only saggets itself as valoable x pezhape valuable, waiat 
‘we ail retain from making sides i the valuony we pase upon 

rey 

ry PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
‘it, When we lve oureeives into wach modifications of the valiog 
consciousnest, we do not need to tke the daxic point of view. 
[Bot we can do eo if we become abeorbed ie the mpgestnn theals, 

gu, “it suggetslaclf to me ae vabable (pechape valuable)”. 
‘Samiasly for other modalities, 

“All thetic character harbour Waxic modalities of tit hind, wo 
‘wins Uae moun ja that of certainty, doxic primary thea which, 
cm linea of anewatc meaning, clade withthe thc character, 
‘But isos thi also holds for the dazic wariioas, nic primary 
‘heser ze so present in every act (but x0 Songer, ws before, 
oeanticaly ident). 

‘We can thecefore also ony: Every acter abe everyec-corrdate, 
harbour axpicily implicily « "logical factor. Wt can alviys 
‘be made logically explicit, by means, namely, of the eovatal 
gpacealty of the action whereby the noetc eatim of the “set 
of expremion”™ attaches itself to all that ia noetc (or that of 
the cxpremion ine to all thar St oematic), Whemeby i ia 
‘evident that with the tramition to the neutrality: modification 
the xproming ct itl and whut i express are os such 
eutraied. 

results from all this that ll acts grnerally—eoen the ocr of, 
Soaking and cil—ere objecting” att, origina factor iu the"cowe 
‘ong of abjcs, the necemary sources of differeat regions of 
being and of the sesologis that belang therewith. For example: 
the valuing conschousoess constiates over agaoet the mere world 
of positivity the typically new “xinlogical” objectivity, being” 
of anew region, 0 far at any rate mo scusl daz thoes in vit 
ofthe intrinsic nanue ofthe vasing conseiomaness gencraly are 
indicate in advance os ideal poibilties which gre prominence to 
objectives with a new type of contem—valuea—es “intended” 
{in the valuing conscioumnen. In sta of fesing they are fiectvely 
intended; they come, through actasining the Gasic content (Chal) 
of thewe uct, co forms of being meant that are fast dosie und 
then expeealyfogeal. 

‘THEORY OF THE NOETIGNORMATIC STRUCTURES. 399 
very set-consciouuncas which is tot dexialy evtad ot 
w non-doxic, » potentially objectifying function; only the dowic 

seg actully arin on obeying faction. 

“Here lie the deepest ofthe soarves for shedding light on the 
smiversality of the logical, in the last resort that of the predicative 
Idgmeat (lo which we mot add the stebum of toaningSat 
fxpremion which we have not yet wubjected to clover study), and 
from that standgcia we can abo undermand the uldmate grind 
for the univermlity ofthe mopremecy of logic hell, rosecding 
further, we sue the poriity, indeed the necesy, of formal 
And eaters aotic Gaciplines, c,altemativeyof tematic we 
onuoogica) diciplins ementaly rested to the intentionality of 
feeling and wil. We shall take up thin theme later, #2 we rut 
Sire il up cern gape in wat inquiry * 

§ 118, Sremoms o7 Conscioonemr, Sretacrie Fores 

16 we naw look along the second of the two diveetans indicated 
bore," on the forms of sywtheic consciouaness, there appear 
Within out horizon various veaye of soostructing experiences 
through an intentions! connexion, whicb, ax ewenta posiiltes, 
belong partly to al intentional expeciencen generally, partly to 
‘the peculiar features of special pes of theat experiences. One 
consciouaness ia bound sip with another, not only inn serely 
general way, but 90 ms to consitete ome consciousness, of which 
the correlate i oar nocena, and this on ts own side is grounded 
‘the noeaats of the noeses that are liked together, 

‘Wa have oot had i view bere the wnity of th immaanent sau 
comtsionones,ethogh we must not forget it ecing that Sis the 
‘Denveloping unity of all the experiences of a wream of experi- 
ence, and indeed a unity of concen thet binda conaciousnese 
‘with consciousness. Any single experience we may select shapes 
‘tuef within 2 continuoca “criginal® tine-consciourness a8 « 
thi Leched Sutin poenestaegatssAotng t e 
sla reese umdpeist, we are able to note the mode of con- 

1 Fes Rather eudomian of er panes. ine, te ene chaps of 
the Fourth Sesion pp oo © Socp ae 

oy FURE PRENOMENOLOGY 
scious proscotation of the wretches of experience which belong 
to the diferen: sections of experioced duration, and vabseuertly 
torsatc thatthe whale consclounnca which coastiutes tis ity 
sf durmion ia cmeinocoaly cmmpostdcd out of sections in wich 
he sections of the durmtion ax we experience them are con 
‘sinuted and thr the noms, therefore do not only uzits together, 
‘woe coamitete owe nowsia with oor soem (dart of the Sled 
duration of experience), whichis grounded in the noe of the 
ited nomen, And what holda good fora singin experince, hold 
‘good ilo for the whole stream of experience. Forcign 10 each 
ther ax experiences muy enesialy be, they coeatnute hemeelves 
cellecively into one nne-sream, as members of the one phene- 
rmenologil tine, 

“Measishile we have expremly excluded thie primary synthesis 
of the orgioa time-conacSoume (which in not to be conceived 
‘man active end dicrete syutheria) with the forme of inquiry 
‘which belong to it. The ayutbcoes we with now to mpedk of are 
ot those to be found within this tce-comsiousnnt, but within 
the lita of tine def, of concretely Glled phearmenolagical 

the etceam of experience, which i tel no other than the 6lied 
_phenomesological time, On the other hand, we are not proporing 
to discuse—rmortionpoctsnt though they certainly are—the com 
Armomt ipmihee, sacs, for iatance, a veseay belong to every 
canscoyanens that conattutes the chinghood of things in spect. 
‘We aball hee ample opportunity later of getting to know these 
syntheses more closely. We tom our interest rather to the 
articdlaued ryathaes, 10 the distinctive ways in which discrete, 
iscotinuous sc ace bound together in an ertzulted unity, 
inthe unity of a eynthetic at oft higher once. We do not refer 
tos contiouoos wyathesa van “act of higher oeder™! the waiey 
(cee, us nh noematic and ebjective) belongs mes tothe eae 
rade ts thot which i waifed. It is, moreover, omy to sce that 
smack mite of a general Dearing 0 be developed inthe Fllowing 
1 ht Placed Aten, 5. pci. 

AMEDAY OF “80s NOSLIONORMATIC SLAUCLORES 3x 
‘pages applica to continaous syntheses ia the same way as it does 
tw aricuhted, or palpi, thew. 

‘Aa examples of syatbetc acs of higher grade, wo may cite 
‘nthe epbere of the will he el that refer: Beyond "foe the sake 
of another”; and Ukewise in that of acts of fecing, the ploamre 
‘ha rife beyond. the resicing “ith regerd 
likewise vay, “for another's sake”. And s0 with al vanilar act- 
evens ia connexion with the difeat typeu of act. Manifetly 
All ct thot indicate 2 profrece als belacg bese. 

‘We propove to subject to clover consideration another aad in 
«\cenain sense uaiveral group of aymieses. I incloden cllectioe 
(taking together), imctce (concerning the "this or that” 
‘aplcato, rlaimg syntheses, and generally the whole seriea of 
‘yntbeara which determine the formal ontological forma in coa- 
formity with the pure forma of the synthetic objectivitien com 
‘tied within them, ond oc the other hand, with respect to the 
trucwre of the noeaste crestioas, are refected back in the 
spophantic meaning-forws of formal lage (the iogic of proposinons 
‘oenuticaly oriented throughout), 

‘The retion te formal ontology and Joy lredy indicates tat 
‘we are there concerned with an eaectially coped yroup of #yt- 
Uhewes, possensing in respect of the kinds of experience to be 
‘united, which nn their sie wao shouldbe noetc unin of any 
degree of complexity, a range of pausible application that is 
iMseisbly univer. 

beg. Taweronumion oF Pournume iro Moxonnrie Acrs 

‘With regard to aif kinds of articulated symbeses of polytbetic 
ctr, se coutt feat observe the following — 

‘Bvery synthetically unitary consciousness, Lowever many epecial 
theses sod syntheses it may ivoire, possemes the total abject 
‘which belongs oo it a « eyarhetically unizary consciousness. We 
call tw total object in contrast with the objecte wich beloog 
internally to the lower or igher grade members of the eyn- 
thesia, wo far us they al] ssomsbute to it on the principle af eoo- 
olidated grounding (Fndimmg), und fed their place within it. 

ae PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
Brery noes, with ics own distinctive form af siftimintioa, 
though it be 2 dependent strates, contributes its quots to the 
conutinvtion of the tral objec; just as, for iatance, the weblog 
have, whic jn dependent, a8 it in moceaariy grounded in x 
Cconsciouanese of the povtive retera! concerned, canwtcwes the 
bjective vloc-atranum thar of the “quality of valnc”. 
‘Among arw virta auch mu the above must also be reckoned. 
the specially synthetic strata among the ayatheacs of con- 
scionores previonaly indicated ax the mast wzivera, i. all the 
forma which specifically aping from the eyathetic coneciouanees 
ss wach, the farm of union, and the ayathtic forme which attach 
to the component merobere chemacives (in so far an they art 
Included ia the synthesis). 

‘Within the eyntbeticcoraciowsnon, we stud, thereis conattuted 
a ayothetc total object. Buti a “objective™ me « quite different 
‘ense (rom that i which the constituted object of « pin thesis 
i to, The oymtbetic comsoowsnen ot the pare Ego "orithin” ic 
das many rayr turned upon itv object; he plain thetic conscinne- 
‘nem hae only one ach eny. Syreheic collecting ie “phil” 
‘consciournets; it i jurt ope and one and one teken tonether. 
Likewise within « primitive relcing consciousness the relation 
jn constinted a9 a twofekd positing. Acd similasly everywhere. 
Every such many-rayed (polytheic) constitution of synthetic 
bjectivties—which are emeatilly wach that “orginally” we cam 
be aware of them only eyzthetcally~pomseses the easentisl law 
conforming possibilty of trowforming the many-rayed object of 
sruarener inte ome tha is snp oes of rendering obeciog” 
tn dhe specific snve and in 8 ewmothetic uct what is eysnhetcally 
conatiuted in the many-reyed object. 

‘Thus the syathetically coratituted ealecion is objective in 
1 special pene it becomes the object of « pla doxie theais 
through the back eelerence of plain theta to the peimvely 
onstiuted collection refered 10 above, through» peculiar netic 
attachment of a thesis to theeyntheaa. Le ther words, the paral 
comscioumas cam Be eventaliy tanelted into singular contcioas- 
‘nes, which withcawe the plurality fro it 2 oe object, x some 
thing single; the plurality oa it side can now be united with 

|AWMWORY OF THE NOETICNOEMATIC ETBOCTURES 137 
char pluriies aod previous objece placed In relation to thera, 
and 10 fort. 

‘The ituation is clatsly the sama for the digiemcive soncioue- 
‘ety built up a6 i in ox x paceerm wholly exslogous to chat of 
the collective conacioueness, and for ics etic of Bocmatie care 
selena the ome my be. Likewine cut ofthe relating conscious 
ow the arigially and eycibeticaly connleuted relation can. be 
‘when in the form of « plain thesis atached thereso and made 
fiona an abject in the special seme, amd se wich compared 
‘with other relations, and generally cenployed ax « subject of 
predicates, 

But we mutt further ume it completely elf-evident that the 
Admmply objectfied and the synchetcaly unitary we really the 
‘rr, and thatthe thesis or exacted relation vehich comes afer 
doce not add enything of ite own co the eyntbeticcaraciopiem, 
tout jut taken what che Itter gives. What is maniferty also 
‘elf-evideat i the ewentaly diflerent mode of preseottion. 

a Logic thia conformity with low proclime ite through tbe 
Lass of "Deseminative equiosence according to which there 
‘correeponde to every proposition and to every ditinguntable 
formal part of it 4 denominative exprenian: {0 the ttaterent 
‘pel, it we say “8 ia F" corrapande de deinen sat 

ponding tothe relational form “simular”, platy ta the plral 
orn, tod wo forth 4 

‘The concepts which have sprung out of the “denomnatnve 
reductoos”, conceived a exclunvaly deteemined through the 
‘pare fore, rake wp formal-cetqorical modifcetions of the Sea 
of objectty general, and supply the Fansdamenta! conceptual 
material of formal entclogy, and inched therein all formal 
smathessatical daciplines. This statement ia of crucst importasce 
‘oe undernanding the rlatien of forzal logic spophantic logic 
‘0 formal ontology im ins univerm form, 

me PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

(120, Posromaury amp Necruuury nv ra Semb oF 1s 
Sonos 

All rice ayotbsea end we had och coinally before uh 
‘re bil wp on simple dca, the word being underoath 
eaeal ce which we bare Sed dbo ov etbrecing ol “iteo- 
‘Som, ll“ecesbaracer and hey tomate ethene, hes 
‘of a higher level. All our conclusions concerning sctvality, focal. 
‘od wearin, concerning neutalty and pentinality can be 
‘tanalered accodingly—sed oa long werd are acre ta show 
‘Bis the maa. 

‘On the other band «chm ingicy wool! here be needed to 

ilwstentive innsitng cossciuasess which <n ia tide can very 
wrcll be a neutral, « fancy coracinumes. The condizom are 

ing 

Tf we tru now co comer the groopofvyothaes that inlerots 
vs, we recognize at once that in i every qruthess tt dependent, 
0 far atts pontomal character it concer, ont that of the provnding 
‘mer; more exactly, thit its positional (and can be 80 only) 

"THEORY OF THE NOFTICNOEMATIC STRUCTURES. 309 
‘the single members of the collection re real chesea, and not 90 
fn the other cane. Bilas sondins obtain in regard to all the 
ther tyetbeae of the clase refried im the logical eytentcs. 
Pure neutrality can never function for pashan) theses} it mau: 
at leaat undergo the tasaformation into “avppontions”, into 

typorhatical setecdent or consequent clr, mio bypebeti 

$ear, Dm Dene Smeacrics me rex Semmes oF Fannie 
xo Wit 

If we now ask ow the syatheses of this group find expreasion 
fn the ayninctic forma of stated raranings, which the lngical 
theory of positional forme eysematicaly develop, the ceply i» 
ready to hand. ‘Thece are is fect, 00 the anaes cups, dbaic 
‘prtlaer, of, 96 we can ato say, in recallection of the lagico- 
‘earomatia) sypeacticn) forea which tke thew imeem, ae 
‘nmbacts, A» belonging to the specific exomace of dani aca, we 
‘nty cate the ayotactic “and” together wath the plural forma, and 
the syntartic “or” and the positing, as » relating act, of» predi- 
‘ate oo tha bua of s subjec-posting, and ve forth. No one 
HToubza that “belief” and "yudgaect™ in the logical enue belong 
lovely tm each other (even iF ute daca not peapous to identify 
them), and cha entbeses of belief (Glenbene-rynhenn) fd their 
“expremion” inthe forma of watod reeaning, Correct wx this i, 
ne an clay peeve away fpuig tou nt bring 
cout the whole truth. These syatheons “and”, “or”, “it's 

Shecsne™, sad “hue fe Boa the ayes which at Et 
present themselves us donic, are by no meane merely doric. 

in fundamental foc* that such syatheae aloo belong to 
the srit catati) nate of the non-doric theses, and in the 

PURE PHENOMENOLOGY: 
pleasure, calctive wi, and wo forth. Or, ax 1 am eceomtamed 
‘tm expnea lt, there is besides the danic “xxd” (he logical), leo 
sm wiologica and procical “and”. The seme in trun of the word. 
"oe", and all the syntheae therewith consected. For example: 
the mother who glances lovingly t ber Site Bock embrace each 
hill ingly axd all together in owe act of love. The unity of 
‘cnlfective act of love In ot a love and a collective presentation 
tw that end, thougk the Iter may be attached to love as it 
necessary foundation. Loving is itself calectives i in ax many- 
_ayed m the presentation, and perhaps the plural judging which 
“underlie” it. We should apeak sn precicly the amse direct way 
of « ploral loving 1 of « plural presenting or juigiog, "The 
syococtical forma enter into the esemial being of acta of feeling, 
aco, ito the thetic layer apesically pecoie vo them, ‘This 
cannot here be developed forall syntheses; we nnust be content 
‘with the indication offered by the example ort sven. 

‘Dut ee un recall the esential and intimate efniry between 
lors theses and theaes geaerlly, wBich we inguized ita above, 
In every thesis generally, in accord with chet which when fno- 
tioning 04 » love-intention, for inmance, it noematcally fect, 
there lies concealed x dasic thesis running paraliel ta it. Mani- 
‘eatly the parallel between the aymtactical forma which belong 
to the epbere of the onic thesis and these that belosg to all 
‘ther theses (the paallelina between the donc “and”, “or” and 
0 forth, and che valve-poweming snd purposive) is « epecial 
case of the sere cseatial and intimate afiauy. For the sym 
202 of feeling—eyathetic, nacely, m respect of the syntactical 
form bere dincumed-—cantiuteayaibeti objetcine of fein, 
‘which come through corresponding ace to explicit objetfcation. 
‘The beloved group of children a objet of affection 
object, which mesoa, applying what we have carsiSered above 
0 che matter of the correlative, not oniy = positive collective 
object and a love rected toi, bt a collective object of lve. Fust 
ss noctially a eny of love proceeding from the Ego splits up 
into w bundle of raya each of which fs dicted towarda 8 single 
‘object, 20 too there are dintibuted over tbe collective object of 
‘flection sa such sx many svematic cheracters of lee ov there 

‘(TE@ORY OF THDt NOETIC-NORMATIC BTRUCTURES 341 

sce chjctscollocend at che time, and there are su any positional 
charsctere which combine symchcticlly isto the aocmatic uaity 
(of positional character. 

"We soe that all thowe ermmctical forma sre parallel forms, 
ie, that they belong as sauch to the set of feeling (Gem) 
themnelves, with ther specific omapoaram of feeling end syn 
theses of feeling, asco the dou poetonalitca which run parallel 
to them and share the wae capes mete, and rony be extracted 
from them through suitable slancings towards the upper and 
lower levels atthe morscat. Nanurally thi can be traraferred, 
mae min Som endG macatin phrs Toe 

‘nd eaenialy omerals a itelf x dase, apd every 
‘ciel ogaca! rm he grup be coed pe 
{uctor; juntas every pain noemetic correlate containa within tet 
“Out which lo", or socae other modality of Being, end ea ity 
substitu the form of "something" and the fora which other 
wise belong to it. And at all times it i « matier of eateatally 
ons apecia divectings ofthe meatal plc: and of thetic: oe 
‘amthetc-donic modes of procedure inchodet herewith to abape 
out ofan at of fualing in which we ve, 0 to ype, wrappedin 
the feeling, and thus without actuslising the deaic poteailten, 
1 new actin which what wes at Sst only u potential objectivity 
of feeling is transformed into one that $ actual, donc, and it 
ray be, expeesaly explicit. Moreore, it in possible. end in every- 
day life very ural, to ook, for isatance, towards sever] inttional 
‘objects, positing them dexically, and to Fulfil at the same time 
sc rysthetc act of feling, x unitary act of callective pleasure, 
pechape, o & unifying selective act of Feling,of a pleanuce thet 
frroure oc 1 displeasure that rejects; whilt we do not no 80 
far an to give » doxic turn tthe whole phenomenae, We da 
120, Bowerer, when we muke « statement, for instance, concerning 
‘our pleasure inthe many, or in oce out of the many; concerm- 
ing the prferbiity of the one ae compared with the other, end 
the 

‘There ia no need te inst ox the importsce af carefully 

‘carrying out analysen roch ws the above for jocreasing our know 
ledge of the eneotaS axture of exilogical and practi! objes- 

Pa PURE ELROMENOLOOY 
tivitin, memnings nd modes of enaciaunest and therefore alo 
‘of the problems of the “origin” of the chica, mpthetical, end 
covemialyalled eocorpts and judgments (Srhewntate) 

‘Sine ite ot ous proper tk bere to sole phenomenological 
problems, but to eet in aciemtfe reef the main problems of 
Phennenoology, and to indie in adeance the sea of atudy 
‘that bear on theve problems, we cust be cotuent to hare developed 
hat Gr the sates ere eated. 

$122, Mone or Cazenec Ovr Ammievuarap Sri, 
‘Ta “Tums 

"To the ria of thenee and ayrueses there belongs 28 important 
croup of general modifications, and the beief indications of is 
sMture we propane o> give can best beaded at nee and at this 
precie pola, 

‘A eyathoais can be coried ont wep by wep: it becomes, it 
scisea through orginal production, Tha prirocdialty of becoming 
inthe stream of conscivumeas is « quite peculiar ope. The cheis 
or aynheaia becomes, in wo far asthe pure Exe actully advance 
_nep by wep: iuell kes in the wep and “aeps on" with Ie 
fr totaly and actly consists in pouting, psiting ot the 
strength ofthis or that positing us wn antecedent ora cansequest, 
td mo forth; wt does not live within the theca as 8 passive 
Indwelle; the theses cudiate from ix ws from « primary sourse 
of geaeration. Every thesis begsse with s pout of imertin, wath 
1 poine a which th pontng hax ss origin; v0 iin wit the fr 
thevn and wth each fortber one in the aynthetc nesus, This 
“erring” even belooys to the theus 2s woch, 26 » remarkable 
soodun of original ctusity. It somewhat rarmibles the fit, che 
point of ioertion of wit and action. 

ut we abould not couture the genecl and the particular. The 
spoctaneous resolve, the purposive, accomplishing action is om 
‘0 beside other acts; ito nyathesesaze special pyntbeaes among 
nbors, But rack act of wisiover kind can start off in thia spes- 
seity sodas of s toho-tosh cretion teeming, in which the 
pre Ege ateps on the sceme 0 subject of the pontenery, 

‘THEORY OF ‘THE NORTICNOEMATIC STRUCTURES ua 
‘Tata mode of intention pants ove mmadistly and in acaed- 
sce with an omentia! necessity into another node. For inatase, 
the eyprebendig end tablng posction of invalved in persiving 
turna again and without a break in “hewing te on's pron”. 

‘Sill mother now modal alteration supervenes when the thesia 
‘we 4 mere zp towards 4 eysthesis, whoa the pure Ego taken 
new map, and now in che pervaig unity of the aynthetic 
ccomcioumese “ill maincaios™ ix str grarp what it had jot 
(gruped: apprehcading the arw thematic objec or rather appre 
‘bending x now member ofthe tol vbema a9 the primary them, 
but wil keeping the raber previously apprehended ws belonging 
to the sane total thems, For example, when collecting things 
together I do not allow the object just perectively apprehended 
10 alip awry while # ture my apprebending glance to the new 
object. Tn tbe procesa of proving something, 1 go mep by wep 
‘over the choughtw that verve ns preminee: a synthetic step once 
taken, 1 do not abandon it; I do not lve bod of what 1 have 
won, but the rmodue of actuality fas been emectally altered 
through the effective itrodaesion of the new theraa of primary 
erulity. 

‘Moreover, we have aliote deal though it ao wen merely, with 
‘obscurations. The diferences which me have just sought to 
describe present rather, im contrat with the differencea of eleas- 
peat and obscurity, « completely new dimesaion, sithough the 
‘wo kinds of diflerecce ictarlace 20 comay, 

‘We further observe thar these new dieresces, no lem than 
he dierences in clearness and all other istentiona diferercea, 
some under the law of the correlation of ocr and noeaa, 
Thus once again there correspond to the noetic actuality: 
smodiScations of the kind here in queatioa, the nocmatie. That 
fs, the mode of presentation of the “intended (Yermeinten) «2 
such” ia altered ia and through he aiting of the the, othe 
steps of the eynthmis, end thee changes can be sbowa to affect 
the noeraatic conwent a the time being also, and can be trough 
into reef a one of ies atts. 

Te the actualty-oodwe (ja noeuatic parlance the mode of 
presentation)—disegardiog for a soment the changes that are 

ey PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
contimusly in dia neseatny transformed end in accordance 
vith extain drat hyp, chee peri Deng the Jet throughont 
the transformations «2 emextial common clement. Noemsticaly 
socucthng in preserved in the Soom of an identical meng; 02 
the nocti: side the correlate of thin memning, and further the 
‘whale form af erzuisian according to hoses tnd syntheses, 
‘But a new modification of the emence sow ues place. The 
‘pare gu can sathdron incl! wholly from the theses; it rest 
‘he thetic comeates from itn "bold; irene to another theme” 
‘What had just been its thea (cheactic, axislagical, and v0 
forth), with all ta wricuitions more or few obscured, hes not 
inaypeared from consciousoess it ix sill consciously sppre- 
Ihended, but no longer hei in theses eregp. 

"Thin lds good for single theses aa well, ana wl forthe Kinks 
fn « syothess. Taz at present mediating; » whistle froma. the 
rect latracia mz momentarily froax my thema (inthis cast & 
‘thought-thems). A moment in which I ero tamed towards the 
sound, but Soethwith « return tothe old thems! Te apprehension 
cof the sound is not blotted out, we are will conscious of the 
whintle in x modified way, but we colanger bold it ia our mesial 
‘exarp. Ie does not belong to the thema, not even to « parallet 
‘eo. We oti that this poatlity of simakaneous Cheer 
and thematic ayatheses which may cat acrst and “distrd” oach 
othr points (0 ail farther pomible modiBeatons, nd we note 
how che tite-heading “Thema, releted to all the banc pen of 
cn and act-ayatbencs, is itself an important theme for pheno 
smenolopica! ena 

$23, Vacomoss sum Disrincrenss a Mops in 1H 
Feurnurne oF Sriram Acrt 
Let us now consider further modsites of the act of fulflyoent 
‘hich Ii, 20 to apes, in the direction opposite to the fevoured 
modus ofactualicy ait sprig from ita primary wource. A thought, 
‘iample ot decked out with various thetic characters, caa emerge 
‘2 “eapae” thought. It then appears lke « simple presetaton, 
‘wichout uny articulation that is actual and theec. Perhepe we 

REOMY OF THE NORTICNOHAEATIC STRUCTURES 343 
rotall 5 prot, & theory, x conrematian—it “occurs 10 ws". And 
[et wt firt we ave mot cumed towards itt emerges in the “back 
rou”, Then « personal gaace is torned single-ray-nise upoo. 
St, apprekending the relevant nocmatic objectivity in un iortica- 
fate grup. A new proceas cam sow set in; the vague reminiacesce 
‘roses into one that ia distinct and clear; step by stop we recall 
the course of the proof, we “re"-peoduce the thesca ofthe proof 
ind the aynthewe, we "recapitulate ce stages of yeaterctey’s 
onreration 20d the Like. OF courne all wach reproduction in the 
vray of reminiscence, of reprodecing “earlier” origixary pro- 
rductons, in something on-easeatial, It roay be thet we have 
bogus to unfold a new theoretical idea for carrying through « 
complicated theory, at Fret in x vague though unitary way, then 
in definite stpe Freely taen, and ave transformed i int yn 
thetic actulitsen, AU that is here indented can ofcourse be applied 
Sn ssi way bo all Kinde of acta. 

‘Tha important difference between sepuones and didisctnet 
plays an isoporant part ia the phenocsenology of “expressions” 
mill to be discumed, explicit presentations, judgment, acts of 
feeling, and sa fork. We have only ta think ofthe way in which 
Wwe at sccurtomed to grasp the eycthetic comtroctians, will 
very complet, which make up the “ntelleeral content” of our 
reading at any time, and connder what, ia our wnderstending 
of the matter read, ad in reopets of this wo-calied intellectual 
foundstion of the expressions, comes to really prordial 
‘stuslzation, 

$1124, Ti NomeNossane Staarom oF rm “Loans”, 
Maaxene 290 Maeno Sosersine 
Acta of expression, act-strete in the specific “logical” sense, are 
inermoven with al the acts Kithets consitered, and in thr 
ane no Jem shan in the ethers che parle of nocis and 
‘oerng mat be clearly brought ot."The prevalent wad wnevaid~ 
able ambiguity of our way of wpeing, wich is caused by thin 
pani: and ia everywhere operative where the concomizat 
eircusaances are taetioned, operates bo of ewarae when we 

mo PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
‘tah of expreaion and meaning. Ambiguity is dangerous only 80 
long = iis n0e ksown to be wack, or the parle weructurcs 
Ihave not been Sept spar. Bur if that ban been dose, we hare 
nly 1a be careful that we are quite ceria en the occaxon in 
question a to which of the srructeres oor wade must be 
related. 
‘Let ua start fromm the familie distinction berween the scary, 
the no to apeak bodily pect of expression, and ita non-vensory 
mental” aapect. There jx uo need for ua to enter more clowaly 
{neo the dacunion ofthe it sepect, nor upon the wry af 
‘the two aspects, thou we clearly Inve tte-headings here ind 
‘ated foe phesomeralogiea! problems thet sre not unimportant. 
‘We restric our glance exchusvely to “meaning” (Baden), 
xd “meaning socething” (Bede). Orignaliy these words 
relate only to the aphere af epeceh, that of “expeewion", But 
{t i ahnort inevitable, and et the same time an important step 
for knowledge, to exicod the mataning of these words, and to 
rodify chem eutably so that they may be applied in « certain 
‘way 20 the whole soetico-Docratic sphese, 0 all ac, there- 
loco, whether thee are iaterwoven wich exprmaive sts of not! 
“With this ia view we ounelves, whea referring to any intentions) 
cemperiencee, have spoken all long of Sinn” (eens), x word 
which is yeneally used as an equivalent for "Bedewnung™ (mean 
ing), We propose in the teenie of ditinctness to favour the 
‘ord Badeutay (costing st the concepsca! level) when referring 
to the old concep, and more particulary i the complex epeech- 
form “logical” or “expeening” moaning. We use the word. Sra 
(Genve oF Meaning rinplicite) in Suture, a0 before, in ite sone 
cexibracing breadth of application. 
‘Let us supp, 0 tks an exasople, that there ia peresved 
objort out there, an object with « definite meaning, and mono- 
say paste rhs tale Woapertes 
the given meaning more explist, and relte the discriminated 
rts or pases within « urity, following eome such scheme ax 

‘THEORY OF THE NOETICNOEMATIC STRUCTURES 247 
“Thin is whe”. But our asitade here is the primitive one we 
ase wont to fake up as « role and of-hand in x fat plain per- 
cepeual pranp ofa thing. The process makes no call whatsoever 
‘on “expression”, aeither ex expression in the scase of verbal 
sound nor an the ike aa vestal meaning, and bere the iatter 
a alo be preeatindepeadently of the verbal sound (ea i the 
‘ave when this sound is "forgtien”). But if we le “thai” 
x sated “Thin ia white”, u new scatum ia there with the reat, 
sd waiten with the "roeant ax auch” ina pre peroeptive form, 
‘On thee Lines everything reeembered or kecied can, 9 wc, 
Ihave in menaing made move explicit and expreutbe. Wiateec 
fa “cooaat an ouch”, every meaning (Meimmg) in the nocrtic 
sense (and indeed os rotmatic pacleus) of any act whatiocver 
can be expreredcomceptally (durch ‘Bedentungn’). Thus we posit 
quite geasraly the fllowizg:— 

Logical noming (Bedectung i on exprason, 

‘The verbal sound can be referred to ax exprentin oaly because 
the meaning which belongs to ic expromes; it ix in at that tbe 
expremiag originally let, “Expressica’” ia « remarlable form, 
which permio of being adapted to every “meaning” (10 the 
noezatie nucleus), and rane it 40 the realm of the "Logon", 
of the conceptual, und therewith of the “general”, 

Moreover, the tema just used are usdeevivod 1a a quite 
definite wexse, which rust not be confused with other meanings 
‘which the terme edn of. Speshing generally, the terme in 
querion point to « large field of phenomeaologia) anslyes, 
‘hich are fundamental for clarifying the covestial oature of 
Jogil thenking and it correatea. From the coete standpoist 
the rubric “expresing” should indicate special act-stratum 10 
‘which all other acts matt adjust therweles ia their own wy, 
nd with which they must blend recarkably in auch wise that 
every noematc sct-mesnizg, and consequently the relation to 
objectivity which Les fa i, sampe itaelf “oomceptaslly” ia the 
emetic phase of the expressing. A peculiar intextional instrx- 
seat lea before un which eeectially postetees the outstanding 
charecterinic of reecting back as from « mirror every other 
imventicnality sccarding to its farm end content, of sopying it 

2 PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
‘while colour fin ta own way, and thereby of working into 
{2 ian own form of "consepualny”. Yet these Sure of speech 
‘which bere durust themselves upon wr, those of mirroring wad 
copying, mmnt be adopted with easton, aa the iagicatire- 
sae which colours thc applicnan sight aly lead one 

uray. 
Probleme of exceptional diffculey beset the phesomena which 
find their place under the headings ‘meas’ (Bedewto) wn 
“meaning” (Bodeatmg)' Sésce every science, viewed from the 

(theorem, prof, theory, 
trode mean f express oer ta or 
tophern aad peychologita who are guided by general logical 
interests the problems of epreion tod meaning Ho notre of 
all, and are alo the first, geacrally speaking, which, $0 1000 a8 
‘ons seeks seriously co reach their foundations, compel towards 
Phenomensiogical inquiry iato the emectial mature of things? 
"Thence ono is led to the queres how to interpret the “expressing” 
‘of “what is expeessed”, how expressed experiences stand in 
elton to the that ae not expreased, and what changes the 

lanter undergo when expreasion xuperrenee; ove ia shen led to 
the. guemion of Git “aceotonaey" of tot “mason! 
meaning”, of theic “content” aod quality (Le, the set-character 

ache thei) of the dstioetion of this meaning and these phases 

igor toes Ss ah cn lel 

{MEORY O THs NOXTICNORMATIC STRUCTURES 59 
onal, is not geoduative. Ox if ene prefer: ts producto, 
‘itr soematic service, exhawts iteelf in expressing, avi in the form 
{of the mcnpnal wich vt comes withthe expressing. 

Mareover, the expreming strum, from the ide of ic etic 
etaracter, in completely one in cance with that which Grids 
tuprenino, and 1 the covering proces abeocbs iw esence so 
toopletly that we call the expressive presenting ust present 
tnd expressive belief, presumption, doubt, sa themselves ad am 
4 whole, belief, prenrnption, doubt; simlarly we call expressive 
‘ah or will jut win oc will. Te, maraver, an illuminating 
fee that the dflerense between pourbonsity and nevtralay 3 
cGaracterintic ofthe expreaive alo, and we have already con 
Aidered it above. The sxpraning trtum convot have a thei, 
‘antional or nstral, that ig etberwise quid thew the tration 
that sufrs expres, and when the two cover each other we find 
‘ot tw thoes to be ept separste, bt ome thei ony, 

"The attempt to clarify here the relevant structures meets with 
‘considerable difficulties. Already the recognition that after sb- 
structing feom the stratum of sensory verbal sound, there Usa 
before us in reality still another layer which we here presuppose, 
shun io every eate—even in that of « thinking shat is ever 20 
vague, empty, and merely verbal—e stratum of mesning that 
expreues, sal wsubstnmacs ofexpreed meszing— inet one that 
‘s euy to make, noe again in che understecing of the ewenta 
commerions of Gane wratifcations cary. Por we should not hold 
too hard by the metaphor of stratification; expression is not of 
the naguee of mo overaid varnuh or covering garment it 
imental (petige) formation, exercises sew intentional 
influences (Fenttiown) oo the intentional molatriva and 
experiences from the Jeter cordate intentional unluencee 
What tis new iouge in ica turn amounts to must bo suied 
jn mist to the phenomena themselves snd all their emcatial 
‘podideations Of rpecialimporome is the unantending of the 
Aiferent Kids of “gezeality” which there emerge; ox the ane 
band, that which belongs to every expression md phase of 

expreniss, 
0 forth; on the other band, the generality of “general names” 

= PORE PRENOMENOLOGY 
ke “man” a» contrasted with proper names Whe “Bruno”; ce 
‘again, wach o belong toanomence initvelfnyuracically formiew 
‘a carpeted with the difenent generalities of meaning which 
‘neve just been touched on. 

$5. Tex Comrurmo Mooureas w Tm Sranar oF 
Loaica Exenmauon axa tax Mermoo ar Cusnmicanon 

In order to clear up the dificulties bere indicated, special regard 
aunt be hed 0 the dlreom of ectoalig-medis trotod above," 
tw the modalities of the completing of the sct which oonsera 
Al chews and eyutbens, incuding therefore the cxpreatve, Bat 
this in «twofold way. On the ene hand they concern the stratum 
ef reming, the specially logical strxum inelf, om che other 
hand the bask subserss. 

In the course of reading we exo draw out every meazing fully 
ad freely anteulate it, end can connect memnings rymtheticaly 
ogee in the wry already indicated, Through thie onmpletion 
of the acts of meaning is the mode of w-producion we win 
complete ditncnen of “lial” ederstancing. 

"Thin ditinetneas can pase over into vagueneas i al the modes 
hove described; the aextmoe jst rad winks into obey, Jee 
ita ving articulation, ceaser to be our “thema", “wall within 
our grup”. 

‘But we mast separate such distisconen and vagueno from 
Gat which aoc the expresed substrata A distinct under- 
stanuling of word and sentence (or a disinct areulated fulfilling 
of the act of stating) is compatible with the ramus of the 
Jomdation, This vagucnena doce tot bespeak went of clearness 
merely, although it obo does thin, The subyinmum can be & 
ccanfused unity (end mostly ia tia), « unlty that dom st cary 
4s articulation actully in itt, but owes the sume to its merely 
sujuscing itself to te stratus of logical expeenion which i 
really articulate and carried oct in primal actualy. 

‘This ham a highly impoctnt metbodsiagi) significance. We 
call atention to the pent that our previous dscuseana concerning 

+ mpeg 8 343. 

‘AMEORY OF THE NOETIC-NOBMATIC STRUCTURES 33: 

the mhod of egies: with regard to the extent, which 
jn the vital clement of ecience, ed supplementing in cetain 
conta] eapacs, What ia neaded in ander to reach from vague 
‘hdnking 10 wrk, fly enpcit knowledge, wo the dscinct ext 
atthe same time clear fullling of ats of thought, now exaly 
indicted. Ia the fit place all “gical” act (the of meaning 
something), 0 far a dhey were will in te modkm ‘vaguenew’, 
‘mint be trmaiered to the mode of primanitl sposimacert 
scoualiy; we have to st up «sate of complete lai! cnctacs 
But an analogous proceeding most be cxzied oxt ix the baal 

rtrwcum canorruad. Al elf-ovideocing ianigh which beer oa 
relations of a jarly bpd charac, en the eweatil conseions 
of roematie meaninge—thoe thrnfote which we obtain from the 

= PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

§ 126, Coumurrmess ano Gmamacery of Bereasaion 

‘We routs further ley atzeea ox the difference botnets completa 
nd dcomplets exprosion’ “Tha usity of the expressing und the 
‘expemed in the pbeuamenss is indeed that of « cerain con 
(pence, but the upper layer ocd sot exend jo expreming 
funetoa over the extre lower layer. Exprewiaa i complete when 
the stamp of conceptual mecing has been fized upon all the 2yt- 
then forms and viguifcateons of th Loner layer; icocoplete when 
this in only paraly efccand: an when, in regard (a complex 
procens, she arcval of the carriage, package, beiglag quest that 
fave bean long expected; we cll out: the carnage! the puesta 
"This difference of complsznew will naturally cut across that of 
relative leurnean end ditiacense, 
‘An incampleteem of « totally dfferet tod from che une jut 
isconed i that which belongs to che emectual nator of the 
spresioa a such, namely, 09 ie generably, “I would like", 
exprenes Ue wis in x general form the form of ommand, 
‘yay well be" the presumption, or the 
Ay ch td Sor, Bray swe Gaermiis i t 
i 4s ite again expreaed in general form. 
1 tet bo che meaniog of the geaeealicy which belongs to the 
caved nature of the expreaing fonction that it would not ever 
be pouibie for all the specfntieea of che expromed to be 
reflec is che expreation. The vratum af the mesning function 
ia not, and in principle i not, « sort of duplicatica of the lawee 
strata. Many ctrvetoas of varablty inthe lates do not appear 
stalin the moaning whose fusetieg it ix to expres they and 
‘thei correlates do not “exprew themselves at all; 0 is with 
tha medications of relative clearsean end dintnctnns, the atcn- 
‘ional modifications, and ve forth. But in that slo to which the 
speciSe meaning of the speech-form of exprenion points thare 
ce casei differences, ofa respect of the way in which the 
‘nyt forms and the syothesc matersis find expraian, 
‘We rust abo reer bere tm che “dependence” af al formal 
smeanlogs acd ali “eyucategoremsic” meanings geaerilly. ‘The 
Cf Lag! Sai, Yb, Fur Se 16. 

‘THEORY OF THE NOBTICNOEMATIC STRUCTURES 353 
Sool “and”, iP, dha iat? genitive ofthe heaven”, cam 
be uncertod and yet dependent, ia ed of completion. “The 
question Bese is what i stnding ia toed of completion 
benches, asd whet if amounts to Sa seapect of Ge two stata 
and with regard to dhe pousblition of iasompleenan In the 
fenetion that moun is, at, or the othe 

4127, Bormann or Juvounes axo Sxranse10n oF Tar 
‘Nomura of Pause. 

At related to the expan of other act. We have expremive 
sprodcaions in which a “chon it ial” comes to expreian, We 
hheve capranive presumptions, questions, doubts, exprenine 
vwnbes, cocnmands, and v0 forth. Lingunicly we fave here 
forens of sentence whove eters ia n part distinc, while 
et they re of enbiquavsimerpretina: by the de of wines 

woh te men fox of ding wich pounded 

ve nine pay, however, of making the problem bear on 

tr, ox noewes, i mica, persistent overfooking ofthe 

‘tormata, upon which precisely im reflexions on meaning much an 
*Ckeeede 

7 PORE PHANOMINOLOGY 

these the mental glace ie direcend, i prejudicial tothe under- 
standing ofthe masters invived. inorder uzxply 2 seach « olat 
‘where the problems cua be earrecty ae, iia almgetber aecemary 
har we should take Sate acount ce diferent sructures we have 
fndiated we nocd the geocal knowledge of the cocrlaion 
between acetic and nematic us pervading all iseaticaal relations 
sod al thetic and eynshetc erate; tewise the separation of the 
stracum of logical meaning from the subserum co be expressed 
Ahroagh it; farter, the inalght into the directions emeaally 
omible here as elewhere in the aphere of ictentonaity, both 
‘Bose then in reision ead thane Ia which mocicaioun take 
place; but mere particularly we seed the insight into the ways 
{which out of every conciousness tlatntine meonings cf 
‘etic and soematic kind are to be disengaged. The roa-prablon 
te which we are referred back in the Song ran aut, x the whole 
‘omcend sere four lt probiem-analyon own, be forsated 
in — 

Te the madam for the exprening of mowene, this unique 
median of the Logon, yell doicY Doet ¢ me, in cha 
process whereby the exproning of moeming i adjusted 0 che 
‘meaning expremed, clade wnt the dane cement latent if i 
Ail poitonlty? 

‘This would not of couse eachude the pomibility of there being 
‘ious ways of expressing noch experience, those of felng, fot 
fewtance.Asagle ane ofthese Would be the direct plain expremien 
ofthe experince (or of i coca in the cae ofthe correlative 
seeing ofthe term ‘exprmon’)throngh the immediate adjut- 
spent of wn arclated expewicn to the arial experience 
of feeling whereby donc and donc tally together. Ta it would 
Ive ben the don fores 2weing ia pect ofall im component 
aspect within the experience of feeling at made pouible the 
sdjunabilty of se exprewicn, sa an exchuively dozocerc 
‘experienc, 19 he experience of fing, which, xt mach, and in 
respect of al ies membec, ia culties, but hereunder nees- 
sarily denothetic aso. 

‘To speak more stcurely, this ret exprsion if t would 
tbe tme end complete, abould be appiot only to the dic nan 

‘THEORY OF THE NOETIC-NOEMATIC STRUCTURES 356 

smodainad experiences. If I am not certain at to what I wish, 
it fa then aot correct when T say in divect adaptation: May 
8 be F. For all expreming, ecording to he basic interpretton 
wwe have given off, is « done act i the pregnant sense, i, 

bebeving certude« Ths it can exprem only cersintca (eg, ox 
alates of wish or wil). The cxprestion in cmon mush an the 
shove can be readered oaly indiecdy in some vach form 

"Pechape may 8 be PY. Is so far an modalitice make their 
appearance, we mutt, if we woukl secare o 6& wn exprewion 
posal, bave ccoomne to the daric theses with modi ehetiz 
‘cmtent, which, 00 to speat, le concealed ix them. 

‘Letting this interpretion pave ax core we aut oil supe 
plement it by the fellowing consheratcna:— 

‘These exist tall tien 6 namber of elteatie indirect expressions 
involving “roundabout phrases”, Ici part ofthe exsential nate 
of every objectviny an mach, througls whatever act i amy bare 
bem constituted, whether plain end simple, or manifolt and 
synibeticaly grounded, (9 admit of varius pomible ways of 
developing it relsdocaly; thus to ermy act, an act of wishing, 
for inatance, there may be ennexd diferent act relating tit, 
+o itv nore objectivity, to joe noema as « whole: Bakings of 
ubjectthese, predicatetbeses added to these, wheres, maybe, 
Gat which in the origin oct was inteuded o x wish ib 

URE PHENOMENOLOGY 

she idea of dona, enother to clarify the essence of statement oF 
th of he ret devepcan? 
Ser, Yet 
ao ered vier 
‘ee oe 

Hue ui 

anh it 

Ht 

ie 

Halil 

coped 

FOURTH SECTION 

REASON AND REALITY (WIRKLICHKEIT) 

rimey CHAPI ER 

NOEMATIC MEANING AND RELATION TO THE 
‘OBJECT 

5128, Lerzoocenion 
"The phenomenological excursions af the lat chapter have led 
favo peety well ll stetional domains. Adopting fr-resching 
viewpoint, we have followed the line of clearage between ce 
(rely) sad intentional, netic und noensticwualyes. Thus guided, 
‘we bave everywhere come scrose structures that ramified afresh 
‘nceannuly at every poiat. We can no lange: clove our eyes to the 
evidence that this clearags point in fcet0«fundesueta] wructurl 
Gatineion that runs right thewugh all intentional structures, and 
nui cherefore conatiute nleading motive governing the develop- 
‘ment ef phtnomenclogien method, and wat determine the course 
ofall researches that bear 0a the problems of intesticnaliry. 

Ic in also clear that with thie clervage a0 pun « separation 
tha emerged between two radically oppoted and yet atenially 
finerrelated regioan of Being. We have previously stressed the 
point that Consciovanea ia general must count an an independest 
repion of Being. But we then cecogaized that the description on 
sential Kine ofthe nature of conaiouanens leads us back 0 the 
correwponding descrption of tbe object covssiously brown, that 
the correlate of consciousese in inseparae from conscourarse 
and yet not really (rel contaized init. Thu the aoematic wep 
stad elf of as 45 ajetinty that belongs to consciousness nd x 

‘et amigur In this connexion we note the following: Whit object 
‘implicter (hen in the uneodified venue) stand under redically 
ferent nema geero, all meanings of objects ond al noerata 
talen in thet compicienesa, however they may otherwise diter, 
Delong intrinsically to single sopresse geavs, But thea itis vio 
truethatthe euence, coera und noes, are matullyoweparble 
very lowest diffrence on the socouti side points eietically 
back tn lowert differences of the noctic. This oxturally applies 
‘wall formations of geous td epocies. 

‘The knowledge of the exentialtwo-sidednese of intentionality 

* PURE PiteNOMANOLOGY 
jn hm forms of nocrie and ema brings hia coosqance with 
that a aytenatc phecameoslgy sbruld uot Svc ert oom. 
Aidedly towards ral (ele) anapia of experience, aad mee 
‘specdvaly ofthe intentions! Kind. But ce empties to do tit 
{ie fit very gre, bee the hier and manual movers 
fam pychology 10 pheaomennogy brings it about that at 
rater of coure we tke the immenert wdy of par experience, 
the eudy af Or own peoper essence, to be a sadly af thei teal 
components Or buth vides in tut here open up vas domaine 
af ede aguiy, nad he ae comatacly reise to each othe, 
et a it cura out hewp separate for « long ech, In geet 
‘ean thet whic as been taken fr noctiact-analyia han Been 
obtained when the saental glance was directed towards the “meant 

Ta the daemons that saeediaey fellow we propose to dvect 
‘our attentive to che general wructare of the noes und from 1 
point of view whicks haa hitherto been repeatedly refered to by 
‘asoe, but waeyet not the leading ove fr the purpows of noemute 
szalpsa: the phromeoiogicalprobloof the relation of couriou- 
sats to an objectivity hus, above al, itu oecatical aapect. The 
‘norma in elf hua an objeccive reatioc, through it own proper 

ing". If shes we ask how the “caning” of consciousness 
‘rane ef to the “object, ite own object, end in manifold 
seta of very varied noewatc content can yet remain “the seme", 
and how we perceived this in the meaning itself, new structures 
[present thenelven of which the exceptional importance ia at ance 
bvious. For maving forward in this direction and, on the other 
hand, refecting on tbe parallel oeses, we eventually strike the 
question what the ‘claira” of eonsciousscaatn be vealy "elated to” 
an objective, to have an objective “reference”. propery comes to, 
howe objective relations which are "vali" and "iaeaid” are ta be 
made clear phenomenslogialy in the light of the dixiaction 
1 This wile enndonce f oe Lave Sth, Th rar of fe 
‘taraciee ty te'h coondenile erent tang ry ot aca 
‘Sale, bn tae sv el comticred ct wo 7 

roe panes 
(ee nore eracae ht anew) parce of Se Prats be 
Sat ee ien dont pre 

NONMATIC MEANING AND RELATION TO OBJECT x6: 
‘etween soenis and nowma; end thus we find comfrantiag va the 
reat prodiems ofthe Reason which it will be our aim inthis division, 
of cur treatise tm clarify on trmmaceodeats lies and to formulate 
1 phowmenolopical probleme. 

$249, "Commer sam “Ong”; mee Cosrraen as “Maan 
In the previous scales 2 universal socmatic structure played & 
cooriamt part indicated by the separating of of certain normatic 
"wucleas”fraso the changing "charartre™ tha belong eit, whcrehy 
de noe in ita fullest opecifcaion appears drewn into the 
stream of mndifeatioa of various Lads, This suena bas nat yet 
recrived adequate scientific recognition. 11 ood out intuitively e9 
‘unity, and suficcaty dearly to ena us to concern curtelves 
‘ith it in w general way. Tt is naw the proper time to consider it 
rare oeely and to vet ic tthe centre of 
scale. Aa won as this is dane tere exsege datinctions of uni- 
etal importance thet rut through all kinds of act, ad lead the 
‘way to great cusses of material for research. * 

‘We atart from the ordinary equivocal phetses the content of 
consciousnese, Under content we understand the “seeing” of 
‘which we wy that in ie or chroogh ic cacaeoutness refers to an 

r PORE PRENONRNOLOGY 
(pmo, Prir ned os ef como 
Earn mie pega om peste Wak coop ee eh 
Saco oer a St 
te Si tal etal Celt of mca Tad ded rete 
SEA he a ao Wow led Sl le iy de 

the reference of coatciousneay ta is intatioaal objective; fer te 
every noc, in particular to evecy tnetio-noetc phe, these carre- 

NOEMATIC MEANING AND RELATION TO OBIECT x4) 
‘pondl.n phe inthe nocannejn hr later,oet apart over aguipet 
‘te nexus of thetic characteris the noematic mucleun charster- 
‘ned through these. Let wx further recall the “directed glance”, 
‘which under certs cicumetanoe trevercs the pooses (peeing 
‘through the actual cons) traneforming the epecselly thetia 
Phases into mays of che positing aczsalty of the Ryo, and Jee mt 
sccurately nots how this Ego with ta ray ia now “directed upon” 
the objective a apprebendisg what t,o m presuming or wishing, 
snd wa forth, how ite gance penetrates the nowmatic. aocleu 
‘vt will then be obserrant thatthe phrase conceming the relation 
(Qn0ce specially the “direction”) of coosciousnnas tits objective 
pointe tomerde a mort immard phase of the nora. It ia cot the 
anuclem #aelf just indica, but something whic, no to opeak, 
ccomicues the neceary midpoint of the mack» end functions 
1 “bearer of the noeuuie peealiaritien which specially belong 10 
4 of the noemasicaly modified properties, namely, of the “meant 
1 nuh", 

‘As we go more cloely into this, we becoese aware that in fact 
the distinct between “eomtect” end “objec” aut be drawn 
‘ot only in te eave of “consciousness”, of the intectioual experi- 
‘oce, ut alan i that of tbe norma taken 2 dae. Thos the sper 
‘ho refers to-an object and powewes a “content”, “by means of” 
which tafe to the object, the object Being the azine se that of ee 
‘oes; so te ‘paralleinn" is once again thoroughly versed. 

{130. Dmnazanion of mar Esaice “Nomeatic Mausrxo” 

[Let ua approach these remarkable structures still uae closely. 
‘We amplify our refexioa by leeving the attentional raodifctions 
‘uoconsidated, further by restricting ourscves to positional uct, 
in whose theses we absorb ourselves, following the grading of the 
ssvats involved, now i one partial thesis, now in another, wail 
the remaining thesea continue operstive indeed, butin a ecandaty 
way. We stall subsequently make it clear and without furtber 
iffculty thet through simpliSearioas of thie kind our snalyoet 
{owe nothing a univerealvalidiey. We are dealing precisely with an 
(emence which remaina unaffected by such modifications. 

a ‘PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
[Let x then pla ouselres within ving cap, In acordanct 
‘vith Is exert nacre is i quite apace ents “directed” 
‘ia other words, there belongs tn i, noerat 
sn "objectivity" in inverted commeas—with a certain nocoutic 
cumwtation unfolded ts x finitely lined demrption, wise, 
1 the deni of the" masa objectioe fs sit mean” eek 

‘coloured —they all have thelr ‘averted coms, thus bearing * 
‘toenutclly modified reaming. On the ether band far tse desrip- 
in of this itesded objective sa wach all wach expreions 
“peromtively”, “recollecively", “clerly and intitinaaly”, 
/, "given", ae exchadad—tbey belong 10 moathee 
caer {Dissncion) of descriptions, ant to the objective we ae 
ware of, but to the way 4 which we are mer a it, On tbe atte 
and, 50 the ease of an eppearing thing an object, it would fall 
‘arin within che lira of the dvcripton in quertionto say: "in 
Fone" its colour, bape, wad 00 fort ax of such nod auch « wll 
safe bine, “oehind” ithus “a” coleur, but one ti Wot more 
lotly dened”, sad genealy io this wo vet repect it rmaian 
"xdetermined” whether ita thas oF ¥0. 

‘This holds not only for atural objec, bet quite geaetlly— 
for objected values (Wertbjhetdes) fr inatance. The descrip 
tion ofthese applies to the “attr” tended and, in dion, 

ofthat Forrn of, 
ur meaning which commis in valuing ves vay of the tree ay it 
ssppets thai is covered with “glviooly” ceated blowom, Even 
‘the predicate of value have thea their inverted comioas; they are 
the predicates not of «valve simpli, lot of « value-noema, 
herewith, dearly, » fly dependable content in maz off be 
ony norms. recy cocsciocancae bat its “what” (Way, and 
_neabe “in” objective; i in evident that in the case of every wach. 
‘coneciowsnem we must be able ax + matter of principle to cary 
‘ut noemitle decription of thissare cbjetive “exactly anf ia 
smman"; through development und conceptual spprebension of 

NOEMATIC MBANING AND RELATION TO OBJECT ats 
ur data we noquive» definite tem of predicate either formal or 
materia determined in positive form or Ieft “indeterminate” 
Gntendedly “eepty" and these predicates in their modified com 
‘aptaal sat determi the “camdent” of the object-sseeu of the 
‘ema in queetion. 

$231. Tex “Oops”, rae “Dermmoxan X ont 
‘Nomianc Sree” 

‘But the predicates are predicces of “something 
‘hing” bulbogy epee wth ie pedis, wn eel inepe 
ably, tothe sucleus in quaton: tthe central pint of unifos- 
‘inn which we referred to above Ji the nodal post of connexion 
for the predicates, their “bearee”, bat ia. 00 wite their usity i 
the aasua ia which any ayers or'connmian af predicates might 
be called « unity. 1 must be distinguished &rom thse, akbough it 
should not be set slomgade them ad should nok be veparted rom 
them an inversely they thenselves are itr predicates :inoanceivable 
‘without it and yet distinguishable from it. We aby that inthe con- 
tinuous or synthetic proce oF consciouanens we are pecviatetly 
sware of the ineantioaal object, but that jn this experienoe the 
jet i ever “preventing itself iereny; i my be “the some, 
nly given with otber predicates, with another derrmining 

" my apy itself only in diferent aspects whereby 
(he prodicateleftindetereizate te become raore closely deex- 
snlned; or “the” objet may have remained snebanged throughout 
thi serch of givennesa, bot now “i”, the scfsame, changes, 
and through this change becomes mare beautiful or forfeits rome 
of ita utlsy-rale, and so forth. If thi ia always understood 
‘the menatiz description of what is meant athe ine, a8 such, and 
Sf thia description, an is abwayu pomible ia deewn on the level of 
pore adequacy, then the self-ame intestinna) “obj” separees 
‘ul off weif-evidenly from the ahifting and changing “predicates 
‘Thece detaches itself as the central macmatic phate’ the “object”, 
the “objective unity” (Obj), the “uf-same”, the “determinable 
a be cated wih iamanora 
i saree oer Set ot 

“ PURE PHENOMENOLOGY. 
abject of its pombe predicanea”—the pare X ia abutrectioe from 
all gredicater—and it igcamnects ial from these predicates, o¢ 
more accurately frm the predioete-noemats. 

‘To theene object we atack a vaicty of modes of consclousness, 

af thane i thinkable unlne variout intentional experietaxs re 
‘ho wiskable, Sound together ix contiauoes or in propery 
apm polthetic nity, a which" is conseloanly 
‘ruped ss self-sameand yet in x noematically different way the 

mame Saxnething, or as ia cmenan accord the seme "object", 
‘Thue i every noema there lee os point of unification a pure 
‘objective something much a the above, and we ve atthe eam time 

‘modal way contbatary to the total messog. Mercove, thin 
“enodal form” ia to be tundervtood as tha: precisely which the act 
‘the cime peescetbea, ane a euch cherefore rally belange tof 

NOEMATIC MEANING AND RELATION TO OBJECT 367 

‘pocma. ‘The “meaaisg” (Sica) of which we have frequently 
poh ir this norma “object i its adel sting” (“Gaganatond 
im Wi), with whatever the ax featured abooe wa 
able to detect an acfcevident in it and to exprem im cone 
cxptual form 
“Lat ite noted that we were careful to adopt the term “macaning” 
(Sis) fat now and not “nacleus” (Ker). For it will turn out that 
with a view to geting the real, coneree camplete aucteus of the 
‘oem we mrt take into sccount ons further direction in which 
ferences must be draws, a direction which tas not left any 
impeem on the charscterimd description which bas defined 
“meaning” (Sin) for un. Bu heepiag here, in Ue firm instance, 
purely to that which our description grape, “meaning” Sigur ex 
1 baie portion of the aoema. Je changes, apeakingpecerally, from 
oem £9 noema, but ueder certain iscumtances reals abao- 
lutely unebanged, asd may even be chtracrrisnd as “eet 
identicat, in vo far nthe “object modally determined” udmite of 
Deing described both feiderssit) a0 identealy the seme and as 
sbvolutly cachanged. Fc cannot be lacking in any aoems, noe ca 
itn neoeatary centre, the poist of usiiatioa, the pure determina Je 
X, No “meaning” spect from this empty “semechinr”, nor apn 
‘without "determining conten, Bn event, eonreover, that. wach 
qualifications are nat Get ineerted inthe wubwequest exaleis axd 
Aesceiption, but that as condition of the pounbilty af x de- 
seciption that satin Sta own evidence with it, and ptioe 10 
that description, they Tie rally (wikicl) in the carlece of 
conscious. 
‘Trough the bearer of meaning which (ox an eropty X) belongs 
te meaning, s04 the poutbdity, grounded in the ensentia nature of 
Ss twentoor aothaies tue ochte of mente of 
‘any dried grade, not only has every easing (Sian) ta “objet”, 
‘bat diferent meanings reer to the some objec, jut ino Far an 
they can be onganized into ities of menaing, ix which the 
determinable Xr of the vnied msaringe coincide (rar Dichong 
ewencr) wih ane ancther and withthe X of the stad mening of 
‘the ity of macning er considoetion. 
(Our discumion. pases from the monotetic acta to the thetic 

” PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
fon, to be more distinct, to the polythene. Every member of a 
‘thetially artculated coasciousnees bas the provcribed anemic 
cecrocture; each baa its X with its “determining content”; but 
‘addition the xoema of the synthetic tou act, with referencs to 
she "lading" (“arcbonicde”) thous, bas the ayrthetie X and itt 
determining content. The glancing ray of the pore Ego, parting 

nto a plurality of rape, rere in the act of fulflmexe upon the X 
that is coming te aystbetic unity. Under the crmafarmation of the 
<denominatve function the total ryathetc phenomenon is modised, 
sand in ouch « way that 4 cay of actuality rests on the oupresae 
‘ynehetic X. 

$32, Tux Nocume as Mewune oe mar Manx of 175 Fun, 
Ruxmaron 

‘Mesaing (Sion) a8 we have determined icin nat « conerelecavmce 
in the constution ofthe uoema ana whole, but a hind of abetract 
form shat dels in it, If we bold the meen frm, the mearig 
‘ecat” ("Vermeinta”), vat in, with the presie determining 
contrat wherewith it ie meant, there ererges clearly u srroad 
concept of the “object in ita wodal setng’"—ar determined, 
amaly, through the modes in which is roen. If, woreones, we 
luregurd rtentional edifcaions, and 1lldiferescs like those 
cof the modes of fulfilling, we are led to consider—and always vill 
{a the fevoured sphere of posiionalty— the uturntion-diferences 
{a cleraene which, epnerolagially, are v0 determinative. That 
cf which we are obscurely consciou, a wack, and that of which 
‘we ae clearly conscivos asin rexpect of ther socmati eancrete- 
nnn (Kemdreion) very diferent, w much so au sre the experiences 
seu whole, But there ie nothing to hinder the determining cantant 
‘whmeby dhe obscutely grasped object i indicated from being 
sbuclutelyideutisi with that of che clearly grasped object. The 
dacripGca would olocide, and a eyntheic cusscoutaens of unity 
could vo envelop the twafoid comcioornom that i might relly 
‘ba oe and the sume objec: that wat indicated. We sill acrard- 
{ogly reckon the concrete full of the zeezatic contivent is 
‘chen, 

NOEMAIIC MEANING AND RELATION TO OBJECT 369 
quenion as the fal mein, tae maaeiag inthe mon of ws full 
relaaton. 

$199. Ta Nomame Mecenc as Foerrm. Tomei ano 
‘Srrrmncaicy Pour Mauaxos (Poernasa), Posray 
‘Maaseouce ws rior Downs a” PASSEXTATIONE 

‘A careful sppicrbon of these distinctions within all sct-domsins 
‘would now seem to be called for, ogee with 1 eupplemeating 
bck-rference to the tic phave which Sear « special relation 
to the meaning m nowt. in the Lapa! Stair (onder the tle 
Quality) they were incloded from the ovbet widen the omerpt 
of meaning (ofthe “ewence in the mode of meancg”), and wid 
this nig the ovo components “sel cont” (Oeming (Siw) 
sume now interpret and Quality were secodingy. 

Yar it coum ove tbe tw Uae te tr Mein (Sm) 
smecely a that “ideal cnteat™ (Matec, and tea t ales the 
unity of eoeaning and these chante a8 fondnd rnin (Set). 
Wea hue thea angle membered pond maori (0 with pereeptions 
snd other thee ituions) and ramey-mebcred tthe poled 
‘meanings 20ch a9 prmicatve doc posited meaning (sudgmets), 
oaited romani inthe form of prensrptiana with prdicasiely 
‘riculed material and a0 forth. Binge and many membered 
slike am further te poned marine xprening flacare, ih, 
command, an s0 forth. The concept of proposiien (Sts is er 
‘oly extended thereby in an exceptional way thet may alienate 
sqmpatiy, ott rman within the Ei of an important unity of 
‘sence. We mart conatznly boar in mod thet or ua the coaoepen 
‘meaning (Sina) ee ported meaning (ce postion) (Sats) coin 
ethiag of dhe mature of expresion and cancepbul mesning, but 

” PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

stevtam beloaging tothe full tsue ofall noes. ‘To grasp shia 
styseum ini alhenvcloping nent, and dw to relive that i 
fa represented i all crops, hana wide beeing 02 ou way of 
nowledge. Even is the plain anal simple setitons che comcepen 
meaning (Sinn) nd posted meaning (Sets) which belong inepsr- 
ably to the conorpt of object (Geqomtand) have their nsomnary 
catia, and the special concept» itational meaning (Am 
schanoongton) md ported ination eeming (Arachamsnrents) 
‘ant of necessity be cnined. So, for instaee, i the domain of 
caer perception, after abaracting fom the chareter of peroeived- 
‘ute, 1» scathing preset in the noema prise to all developing 
nd conceptual Uonght, we nmuat ext by foree of sion from 
cut the “perceived cbjoct ax wach” the mexsing of object the 
‘hing signee (Dingsnn) of thi arception which changes fran 
‘perception to peroeption (even in reepect of "he same” thing). 
take thin meaning in ful sent, in its intitonal fullest, 
‘there rn « definite snd very important concept of appaaancr. 
‘Te thee smeanungs correypood pouved meanings genecdly: 
Intion-meusings, presecoxtion-meming, perocpeual meanings, 
sd to forth, In ¢ phenomenology of external iestions which, a» 
toch, hus to do aoe wth objects sbwplicite, in the unmodified 
sexe, but with noemata 1s correlates of the notes, concepts 
wh mm the oun here set out somd ia the extme of adimtific 
now we tetur in the Sst piace to che gener hema, we have 
‘before ws tho stl further tack of dstixguahing eyvtematically the 
Fundamental types of mewsig, the plain and the synthetic 
pertining t0 syutbetic ac) reeanings of the fvt and higher 
fenidas Followizg fs part the basic divisions of detemiasiona of 
‘antent, and party the basic forms of emnthetic Formations which 
ply a sular part ix che cue of ll domain of maaniog, end shus 
‘hing cverything inte scomunt wich 4 pier, bok at in form 
snd ita content, a determinative fr the genera! teucture of esean- 
Jngs,commnca toa wperes of concourse ar peu 1 grn6- 
realy limated spheres, we ascend to the idee of 2 rystonaticond 
smloeral dace of the forma of meaning. 1 in addition we bring 
under coandention the eyteratic distinction of the positing 

NOEMATIC MEANING AND RELATION TO OBTECT sor 
charectry, we have alu caied ut tthe same time a yeenctle 
treatment of ype (Typit) of pnton (Sete). 

$14. Thm Arorttome FomuaL Doorn 

‘A. main tank her i shatch out x epeematic “analy format 
soceine of “gal” meaning, 0 ported predicetoe meanings, of 
"jodgment i the vows of formal ogc which takes into srount 
nly the forma of the ausivtic or predict sythens, leaving 
undetermined the siguifcas terms which cater into these form, 
Although this task isu opel one, t hu wl « utivetal bearing 
in this way tht he tal prodiatve eysdhaisinicatn the clea 
of all pomible meaning-types of poutble operations; the opert- 
‘ioc of anagaa phan) end of the Zsking of tho element in 
telatioal pater aze everysbere equily eppcable: as i the 
‘nletan of the determining quality t itn subject, af the part 10 
the whole, ofthe relate to its eubjet of reference, andro forth. 
Kntezwoven with these wre the operat of coajunction, d- 
Junction, nd typothetial corzeaion. Al thon prior to eny sate- 
‘ent and prior also ta the expressive or “conceptual” mode of 
spprebension which emerges for the fir tae wih the matemeat- 
{rm an clings to al forma ad contents (AMatrien) as waiSicet 

expresticn, 

"This focmal doctrine, which we have already touched on, in 
ea, weveral times, which according t our inductions coomates 
‘the ‘iminicaly neceseury aubawatumy for sciatic mathen 
aioe, jones its aation through the remks of or present 
inquiries, Gnding its home within the genezal ideally conceived 
formal doctrine of meanings generally, ad it Ist plate of origin 
in moematie phenocenolony. 

‘Let a approach the whale maticx more closely. 

‘The sualtc-rytacticl operations, we sui, are possihe opert- 
na for sll pouble meanings an postions whatever determining 
content the noematic memning in quertion (which 3 indeed no 
‘cher than the “meant” (carmela) objet au wach, end in the mode 
4a which ia cootent is presented at the Gime) may inchodo “ae 
developed” in its But it cam aba be developed, and aay ane 

mm PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
ofthe opecudons which i eawentiaty connected withthe devlop- 
‘meena! “analy” weit permit of bing cared ot. The apubetic 
forma whick (row Gp ic thia way (a acord with the grammatical 
“npameren”, we ealed them aso the syacacal) ae quce well 
defaed, belong t 2 wellesablshed syne of forma, can be 
iboknd rough sbetarivn aed praped conceptoaDy and through 
the madium of expression. Thus, for jxme, we can teat tat 
‘which is perecived ux uch fa pia pereepetve teas, 

sot blak”, and the ke. Each new step beings ws a new mecning 
in the place of the origina! single-mecabered meaning we have 4 
somibetic meaning posted, which, according 10 the lew of the 
xproiitity of oll posited protodonic measinge, may be brought 
1 exprenlon or to prediative masecent. Witis the articulated 
meanings that are posted each merober I i nyotactce! form 
originating to che anaigic symbesia 

Lat us suppove thatthe postings which belong t these forma 
of easing are donc primary pontige: there grow up tun dierent 
forms of judgments in che logical same (opophentic propriions). 
"The aim before us, that of dctermiaig all Cesc fort « rior, af 
contcling wich systematic thoroughness the incitely werifeld 
Jornal cocstrvctions, yet all deimited ix eunformity with lew, 
Points ut to the Ten of a formal doctrine of epophontc root, 
 alactic. 

‘The postings, a in panicular the synthetic positing ava whole, 
com ako be dosic medals. We premme, let us euppone, and 
develop the apposition in the modus“ pressanably” aware of, oF 
something ia quertionable, and we develop the questionable is 
‘onudlousese which riots the wee of being quesionnbe, and 
so forth. If we bring the noematiccoceiste of these modalities 
1 eapteaaion (“B might well be P*, “Te $ P?” and che lke), and 
if we do the sume alo forthe plaix proscar: judgment itself, 
s0:9e abo expres afirmation and denial (eg.,“S i not P”, “But 
8 is PY," in sxrtaily, realy P°>, she concept of form fo then 
<xtended, and sols the ides ofthe Formal doctrine of proponisons. 
‘The form is naw multiply deternined, partly thrsagh the stskct 

NORMATIC MEANING AND RELATION TO OMECT 373 
syotnctcal forme, partly theoogh the dexic modsitin. A tor 
theais, moreover, sways semains belonging tothe total meaning. 
owitd, end a dais thesis inches init. At the same tine every 
uch posited meaning and the conceptual “expression” which 
directly fait cm, thzoagh a development of meaning od predica- 
tion which tramsorms the moodal characteristic into « predicate, 
be tranaioroed into « wtted messing, with 1 judgment which 
Il cosa Go edi os cr Sina Sx fre 
(6, "Kein crea, iti probable hut 8 ls P*). 
‘Swe he moles feat iy wi cry 
hast, with the meanings and postions of the spheres of focig 
(Gomis) and of wil, with the syntheses that specially belong 
to them and the corapoadiag sods of expression. The goal 
of the new formal doctrines of posted meanings, and epecfically 
of these meanings ithe farm of python, is then easly iodine, 
“Moreover, we sce thet in ¢ mitably exenied formal doctrine of 
onde paitona-—when i. juat the ene: way ws with the wooden 
of Being we also tcansler the mode of shall nd sould (if the 
analogical phrase be allowed) to the cowtent (Mater) ofthe jug- 
smat—th formal decrin of all puitons w once ngwin ceficted, 
What this trae means ic needs no lng expaitio to say, but 
a the rent calla for exemplifying inaances. Instead of sizing 
“May 8 be Pw ay “May it that § be Pitan wie (nat 

Fhennowenalegy, 

syvtematic elaboration ofthese formal doctrine, wherein, x may 
tbe Lear froma the apephentic form, we can deduce from primitive 
ssiomntc besic formadions the eysecatc posits of ll further 

‘hat the hong lpn le ine formal cry fees 
10g, to by ron of he conaied Scio of his ntret oe 
ss voting spurt wicoot cling my underranding bee of tt 
Socmnte ad soci yatrme a wich I phezonecslogially 

m PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

interworea,-thet the phenemenclogiet takes in the fall range of its 
ecionahipa. His pret ta int flow up the phesomenoloical 
Intertacings of essences is lf divections. Every plain axiomatic 
cxhibson of » bic ogi exnerpt boounes a new heading fot 
phenomenologiad inquiries. Thet which hes already been plainly 
fet ast in heat logical grocralcy wt “polio raningn” (aa In 
judgmens), a categcial or hypececica propeiion, m nevibu- 
tive deterinatinn, somizalaed adjective o misive, sd the His, 
fen sag, 40 soem ot is anceaguinexbedied in th corespond 
{ng noematicconnerins between ewences, whence the pane of 
the Deora dew i ford, vo ditiule wd fr-renching plana of 
pure phenomenology. 

$135. Onscr am Congcroomans. Taavernion To Ta 
Praroemoiocr or Reson 

‘As every intentional experience huss noems and therein s meening 
‘heuigh which it ia related to the abject, ao, iverey, everything 
‘that wo all by the maze of Object, thet of which we wpeak, what 
‘we tee before ua realty, hold to be puable or probable, think 
fin Bowever vane m way, is 90 far azeady object of conscioy- 
fas; etd chia rex tat whatever the wold an wealicy may be 
ar be called rt be repreventod within the limite of real xd 
Possible conuciourncas by cormeapoading meanings end positions, 
fled more or ees with iatcional content. When therefore 
phesomenology performs it “euapending” aperstioas, when 
a trmucendexal it brackets all actual poviting of reali 
(Reakiitn) sad carrica cut the other beacketings, a we hve 
previously desribed them, we can now understand in the ligt 
fa deeper remon the memmg and the lgiizoary af th earlier 
thes: that whaterex ie pheaomnclogicaly disconnected remaina 
il, wid a cron change of signanue, within the framework of 
pheuomenclogy.* ‘The real reler} and ual poukiviin (Wirk- 
Ucttalm), which come under the suspending clause, are Te7re- 
sented im the phenooxalogial sphere by the whole nerus of 
sorreepoiding Semnings md ponitions (Sinacu und Size. 
+ cht. 

‘NORMALIC MEANING AND RELATION TO OBIECT ns 

‘Thee, for example, cvery rea! natural thing is represented by 
11 the mesnings and sigaiicase postions with Uzir Soctunting 
‘ing, chrough which. a» oo end vo determined and further 0 be 
determined, it Sgures 2 the correla of posible isterlonal 
foie; precast tw by te vrais the fall 
What amousts hereto the same thing, by the sytem 
Ua pestis "cjcive mode of eppning ich oan 
tbe noemedally constiuned a el-idemicl. Bur this consisting 
relaten in the Srvtinatesce to mm emerially poorble individual 
cotacioumess, then also to « poutble eacaruniry conscloomest, 
ile, tm an exentily pomible plumaty of persona! centr of 
‘cormcioumess and errcams of censcloosnrss eajoying mtual 
fnteroune, end for wham ox thing ae the selE-anne objective 
real entry must be given and ideasiediateemubjectively It mut 
‘ot be forgot that all our discuiona, including therefore the 
nes now before us, are to be wnilenood in the sense of the 
Phenomenological reductions and in eidete generality 
‘On the other band, to evry thing, aod eventutly to the whale 
‘world of thins, with the one space and the exe time, there carre- 
spond the mica of pouble nowtc eveta of the pombe expeti= 
h0ee of particular individuals und commisity-onits that relate 
‘© theas eens, experiences which, an paral to the noematic 
smenifolia previously treated, contain ix their own essence this 
peculiar feature of being related to this war! of things chrongh 
thei import and posited meaning, In them sccording!y there 
appear the celevant mazifolds of hyleic dave, with the appropriate 
“upprehenaioos”, thesic act-charactem, and’ so fect, which in 
their oomected nity make up what we call the empirical am- 
siousnen of this thinghood. Over agaist the thing ia ita unity 
stande un infinite ideal macifeld of aowtc experieace of u quite 
ddeeerminateexental conte, aver which, deapte the cndleursam, 
‘proper oversight can sill be kept, all the experiences agreeing 
in Ges that they are 2 commcioamen of “the same” object. This 
uumimiy in evidenced in the sphere of conscivamneas iself 
through expecicoces which on Gz ide nguin belong with the rest 
te the group which we bare here deli, 
‘For tha imitation to the empicied comcioumem was intended 

we FURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

nly by wry of uation, ws was ano the reniiction to “ibingn” 
ef the “nc”. Breryihag, however fr we stretch the framework, 
sad on whatever fev! of generality end particularity we may alo 
‘ba moving—evea down to the lewest canereor—is ementaly pre- 
Squred. As the epbere of experience ix determined in soos’ 
sce with its csentil and tranaccndental structure ox rigorously 
antorasiag 10 low, oo is every pombe conetroction on esse 
lines according to nocss end nocme fixedly determined, jutt 
‘ery pomible figure that can be cxnetructed in eace is somehire 
‘eermined through the ewan manure of apece, socording 0 
‘unconditionally valid dispenaatinns of lew sul order. What 02 
Doth sides ts here caled pomibllcy (ededc eximence) lo thus 
aboolately socomary posabllry, aa abnolutely frm joiat in the 
shaclutely Grn suture ofan edetceyutem. The goal of inquiry 
‘ist know thin prt aciecieally, Ls. to stp tntn hao 
form and to control it eytematically dhrough concepts and formula- 
tons of lay which spring from pure caveat) intuition ALI the 
fundamental diatinctions drawn by formal catology and the theory 
of categories tached to it—the doctrine eoncersing the division 
of the regions of Being and their eatca categories, ws alo con- 
‘coming the connieution of the material ontolagion drt it thesn— 
sre, wwe shall undentand io detail an we preas further forward, 
the tain headings of phenomenological retin. And to thr sheet 
eceuaarily correspon! coctic-Doesatie wyizie of xmcces which 
smmae permit of being eywemicaly described and determined 
sccording to pomhiltes nd necemien. 

If we consider mose cloeely whet the ewential connexion 
between object snd conaciouanets so characerited ia the above 
‘treatment mean and must meen, me become concious of wf 
scnbiguity, and on following it up we notice that we ave facing & 
crucial tring: poist ix our inquires, We asta to an object 
variety of “posted roemings”, of alternatively of experiences 
‘oweming & certain noemusic context, end in euch s way indeed 
‘tar dhrough it syncbees of @ pris identification wre pou, 
whereby te object oxo and unat resin the sume. The X inthe 
‘diferent acts of nct-noemaia fursinbed with a difering “deter 
mining conte” a neomety knows ox the name, But 5 realy 

NOEMATIC MEANING AND RELATION TO ODIECT 57 

he camel Aad 1s the object taf rel? Could It not be neal while 
‘tho various agrecing and oven intutinally saturated posted 
memingy—whatcver their essential content migot be—fulfled 
‘thir Fonstion scouting >the mesrurs of consciourson? 

‘We are not intervted io the fact-workd of conscloumess snd 
the fulfling of it fancions, bt ia the rsexsal problema which 
righ here need formulating. Consciosmaess, or the concious 
subject lself, pater fagments about reality, aka quetions about 
{think it probeble or doubss it, resolves the doubt and thereby 
amen "erdit ofthe reanan”. Mont not the ensence of thi judicial 
right and corelatively the eavnce of sealty”—relaed all kinds 
of objects, and follewing ll the exegorca, formal aid reglanal— 
permit of being clearly underrtood within the syetem of emential 
‘cannexioon af the trmpcendental conciousness, thus in x purely 

wy? 

“There wae then sn seabiguity in what we wid aboot the noetic- 
noemutie “constitution” of objectives, ¢g,, txingcbjectivities, 
1 any cme, we wore then thinking expecaly of “real” objects, of 
‘things ofthe “real world”, or a let of a" real weld in general. 
‘Dut what dhen does this “reat” meen for objec which are indeed 
{ven to consciousness, yee anly dhrough ceenings and postions? 
‘What docs it mem for the posited meanings thecseves, for the 
ditereniating of the essences of these noeanat, or of the panel 
rnocses? What reac i forthe particular modes of is canetructon 
acoaeding t fora and fulloem? Hove dors this wtrucareapeciyitell 
inaympathy with the special regions of objecn? ‘The queation then 
is haw n the apictof phenorcenclogiclacience we ae todasenibe, 
octically and noecrtically, all the connesiona of consciousness 
which render neceaary a pain object (ond tie in common wpesch 
tdaye meane vel object) precisely Inia character aa real But 
i the anended sense of the term tn objoct—" whether it ie rel or 
‘at"—in“conaticuted” within cemsin consexios af conaciroanemt 
‘which bear ia theumelveew trazeparect unity vo far at they carry 
with thera easentally the conscournese af an identical X, 

1a factour trestment does not concern relsca (Wrkichheiten) 
rarely, in whatever pregnant scose the tena be wed. Queatices 
concerning realiny ure to be found iz oll forms of knowledge ax 

na URE PEENOMENOLOGT 
such, gven in our own, the phmomenclogial, which rele 10 
the posible cootinution of chen: tay all have thet Cora 
in Mobjoca” which are menct to posse “real Being". When i 
‘he sommatclly “meant ideatiy of cha X “real idetity”—4o it 
may every be ssked—inetead of beg “merely” meant, and 
‘whut doe tia "merely cant” (oormeaf) mesa? 

"Thm we mat dovonex new erin of reflective studi co the 
problems of resity (WiediAbed)sad tothe coreitive problema 
of the mtione! consciousness which ln ost chia realty within 
ial 

SECOND CHAFTSR 
PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE REASON 

‘When we apeak of objects aimplicter, we scan 2 « role real 
joc tht truly are and belong to this or that extegory of Being. 
‘Whatever we asert thm concerning vbject—provided we speak 
reuourhy-—wve ma wbait, wheter ax meme of spoken, 10 
“logical srownding", “proof” (Asmaciten), direct “ison, o 
snedisied “inet”, In the logical phere, in that of extent, 
"that mich tray or really (whlch a" ond thas which tration. 
lly demowstrabie” (Aumonshar) are intrinsically crvalated; son 
forall dosic modalses antical or poutieal. Of cone, the possi- 

of a radocal deromustration (dmmeinag) which stands bere 
in question in oot to be underatocd ax erupirea! but 2x “ideal”, 
9 an exsential pomibiny. 

4136, Tw Finer Banc Fosos or nu Rarionat Conscioonsmss: 
‘rae Pumvonocas. Dazox “Vision” 

Jf we mow aak what ora bya raticaal vetting forth (Asouednen), 
i.e, wherein the rational cosines consists, we find st once ic 
the intuitive represesting of emumples and the bepinsings of 
casential exaysis caried out upon them the source of several 
tinctinae — 

‘We have ix the fst place the disenction betweea positional 
experiences in which what is wet down soquires primordial iven- 
ss, und those in which it does sot acquire such givemsees} 
erween “perceting,” “sein” acts, thot is—andestod i o brood 
seate—and now-prceiing” act. 

"Thus « resollectve consciowmess, for example tht of 1 land 
capt, in not given in « primordial sense; the iandacepe ia oot 
 pevocived es though me were realy secng it. In stating tia we have 
‘ot wished to ay thatthe reclective consionmest bas no nde- 
‘perdcot right of ia own, but jurt that tla no one f “acting”. 
Pheammenology presents an salogus of this opposition for all 
{yper of pontional experitces, We can, for instance, podicste ia 

o PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

‘a*bind” way thet af 114.4) we can, however, cary out 
‘the same judgment with iaight. Te postive fect (Sachoerhal), 
the wyathetic objecting which comeaponds to the eymtbesis of, 
Judqment, is then peisscdially given, grasped in ptimoedial way. 

Te i thin no loagee after the living fiflmest ofthe insight, for 
the ler panes off at nce ito the obscurity of « retentional 
modification. Te later may indeed ixve x rational advantage 
‘over any other disor confused consciousness of the ame noezatic 
ameming, over an “unthisking” reproduction, for intance, of 
someting once previouly learnt sod perhape with insight; but 
itiaen longer a soracioucem primordial gen. 

"These dinizciens do net concer the pute measingand postin, 
foc this athe ume for both members of every ach purof examples, 
and may slo be consciously and ixniively grasped ae ideation! 
very time, "The dinaction coneeens the wey in which the merr 
meaning or pasitioe, which an x rere nbetactor requires 1 pts in 
‘the way of supplenearog pass in the fall developement (Kon- 
eaten) of the occa of coraciovense i ri fed wut, 

Fullness of mewsing snot the only requisite; we are alto con- 
‘ermed with the mode (Wis) of te Sling out. Oow mode of experi- 
fencing the meaning is the “‘andice”, whereby we are made 
aac ofthe “ent object a9 uch” throvgh direct meatal vison, 
and ws « parccwariy oumanding cate we have that wherein the 
mode of direct vision ia the primordial objeto mode. The 
meaning inthe pecceptoa of the endecape is pereeptiely Sled 
cut, an we become sare ofthe perceived object with tcc, 

sod of the “embodied”. We Sed similar ditinetona in all set- 
sphere, The sivstian bs agaist to mpace in che paalelistic 
scm, «noetc and a noematc. Inthe noematc setting we fd the 
character of embodiment (au the primordia! wate of being flied 
‘ut)biest with pure meaning, and the muonig samped oth thir 
cheracer wow Jontions at tht faaaton ofthe noemeliccharecier 
‘of positonaiy, or, which here measo the sume thing, the cntcal 
<haexcer. The parallel hoe good ofthe nowtic netting alo, 

A spuife character of retimalty pertains, weer 10 that of 
positional av its nn, a ditto which 5 Sh any th 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE REASON ott 

xmtlal ae when ie ia pasting grounded no merely in meaning 
avnerlly but in» fille ov, primordial dor meaning. 

"lee and in every hind af raicaal ennscioumnan the phrase 
Pelonging ta recive the messing of “xing its own". Far 
Inseance: To the corporeal appeazng of « thing there bang in 
sll ewes positon. Ita not only sam wth thin appearing in 

smotisated". And thin socana that the posing tas io erginal 
cron of legitimacy the prinaordal giveneess. tn other form oF 
‘Brenaes the ground of legitimacy need not exactly be wanring; 
‘what is, however, lacking isthe prerogative of the original ground 
‘which play ita ouratending part inthe relative appreciatian of the 

"The porting af the eaeace or essential relationaipa “primor- 
<dlaly given in our oision of Besemtial Bring Lerine “belonga” to 
ipo“ he "eign def giean 
Te is reapoable and, as believing certinae, oigsally motivated 
pening it ha the specific character of “that which wndereamdi" 
(or srachonden) 15 the poicng ea “bind one, ifthe meanings 
‘ofthe words are determined on the bats of» dics se-bachyrounul 
of which we ae only coafusedly aware, tbe rational character of 
thoioxigh ia necemarily lacking; with suc x ode of gircanca if 
‘were atl to use this word here) of the ssifcen fact (Sachoer- 
Aah), or, aheratively, with much noerastic eccurpeniment of 
the auclen of messing, the ebacurer of reason ia ezetilly 
‘compatible. On the atker hand, this dows ant exclude useoendary 
rational character, sv the example of the imperiet reproduction 

a it Meentce™ 
ero camelly tc whe eatin hilo 
‘being inueligible in terme of the noera a» well uv of the nocais. 
"The refereoee to motieation fia cxreieatly the relion between 
the (aaetNe) positing (Setem) and the noematic caning posited 
( Sata) ue made of tational sareration (E-filtheit). The tapree- 

PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
san “nifendent pooled mooning” io in eaezatic mcdesng a 
oe 

"The eloldmeating ofthe word wil-evdance its aplication 
ste norte characters or fllaces (eg. ei-erdence of judging), 
‘saw to noematic positions (eg. self-evident logical judgment, 
‘ef-vident ated meaning) Sas cae of the gener and peseatary 
‘tmbiguhie of the expreniona relard to Use phage of carreltion 
Tevwora nots and soca. The phenomenalogis indication of 
the route they epting fr render them harlow, and even 
‘rmin t recoqnine thie iaSapenaeilty. 

‘We have yet to note that the expresion "fulmen (Brflhong) 
ta» wil mother ambiguity whoch Kes in « que other direction 
st one the ie “allman of atnton’” a «characer which the 
‘etal chais tse ox through thr apecial mode of meming; at 
‘another it in precisely the peculiarity of this mode itself of the 
‘peculiar property af the meaning un question, to conceal “nch 
mouroe” which morirte in accordance with reason. 

fty7. Smx-Remmsce ayo Ter. "PaiMoKDtAl” 4D “Pune” 
Amarone ano Arcomcric mx Evmmice 
‘The pris of cxmmple sotde use of above illustrate at the esne 
UUme « second acd a ohied esentil diference. That which we 
ordizarly cal vel-evidence and sigh (rein nto) ae peitiocal 
doxis tl aso adeguate dator coscitens which "excludes 
Ochernea'"; the thesis is motivated io & quite exceptional way 
through the adesary of the piven mate, ais i the highest 
secee an act of the reason. The anthmetcal emample itrteres 
that for us. In the example of the landscape we Ive indeed 
sexing, but ant the expericace-of ael-erideace (Bolden) in the 
ordinary pregnant meaning ofthe word, 5 “weing ino”. When the 
cimirasted cxaoplce sce looked into moce cloucly, me ar struck 
bye double difermce: in the one example we are trating af 
he conc, in the other of the india; in te veo place tae 
primordial girennes in the eidetic example is adequate; in the 
feaample from the ephere of experience it is taadequate, Both 
dffereoces which intevous under cxraia circametsrees will 

‘FHENOMENOLOGY OF THE REASON fs 
prove of importance in respect to the type of ineight (Bevis) 
invalred. 

Bo far as the feat difeence ie concerned, we may sate on 
‘phenomenological grounds thet the so to speak “asserteric” seeing 
of om indriduat, for inatance, the “svwareseas” of x thing ox of 
econ individual sata of things, in tm fm rational character men 
Tilly itizgniaed from a “apadeic” sing, from the i-meing 
fo ence ox ezetal thts; but ako ikewine fo the 
smondiGcaton of this imseeing, which may take place through a 
mixing of the two, exmely in the case of the application of an 
‘might vo something ameriorially sen, and genestily isthe how 
dg ofthe nacezty of pented particular being wo-xad-to, 

‘Eridenial Vision (Boidews) and Unsight, in the ordinary 
saeaningf (grignonter) seme, are tubes as eeng the mec thing, 
aarutly, spodeictc in-secing. We propose in our terminology to 

the two words. We are is ceal Seed of x mote general 
‘word which shall include ix it» meaning aavertoric ssing and 
spodeicti in-ening, We shoud consider it an 4 phenomenological 
finding of greet importance thet they both realy belong to one 
eberic omenoe, aad that, waderstod in» will more general ways 
Rational Conrcioumers it general designates ¢ sommum gent of 
Mhetic modalidut, ia. which the “seeing”, wsed is ims very wisest 
ena, od an bearing an peimoedahgivennen,eonstcuten a well- 
eBed can. In giving » name to the summnm geaun ane han the 
option either of extending the masning of the word “seeing” (as 
see did jure now, bat going very much farer) or of widening the 
meaning of the word “in-secing” and “evideatial valon” (Bel- 
sda) Te might be moet aviabieto choose the word : vida ion 
tw stand forthe mont general concept; the expreatioa primordial 
videwial vision would then be avaiable for represeating every 
‘ational thesia characterized by aration of motivation in respect 
ofthe primocdiaity of what primerdaly given. We abou then 
tuve to decide Further between the esertoic and pode forms 
=f evident isin, 45 to leave tothe word farght che speclaltak 
of deslgaating this epodeicic characte, Procanding will fers, we 
‘would pet up un oppotizes furs insight and impywe insight (the 
lador including the cognition of the mesewtty of an element of 

™ YURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
fact, Use Being of which docs not ased to be atfcvidenr) and 
ewise, and in 4 quite general way, we would drown contre 
Ietwetm pre and Smpere sede eh. 

Farther diferences ave ox inquiry deepen, differences 
concerning the buns of motivation and affecting che charsctr of 
the ovidenal visio: for example, the diferece between prey 
formal ("anatyic", “logieal”) aad. material (eyathetioe friar) 
‘ridential ison, Bot ot this point we should net go Deyoad the 
(refer Sudlerions. 

$298, Apsquars ano buoeyvarr Sms-Evmanca 
{Let us cow turn buck to the second of the two diference indicated 
shove, which is closely eommested with ther between. adequate 
snd inadequate givenneas, end gives us occasion at tbe seme time 
to describe on outaarding type af “impure” evidential viion, 
"The povting act (Setewn) grounded ix the corporeal sppearance 
cof the Thing i ded rational, but the appearaice is never mare 
chan acne-sided “imperfect” eppearance not only are we conscious 
{fn orparea frm ofthe very object thet isin procam of pearing, 
tout ofthe ching itself sieplcter, the whole ita caletive though 
only ane-idedlyntoitama adn edition varivualyundetermined 
meaning. But of course chat whic “very” appears muat not be 
ecparated from the Thing as though i were itself x separte thing; 
ft correlate of eaning conaticues 1 depeaden! part within the 
all means of the Thing, x port wtuch can have unity of meaning 
snd independence ealy within 4 whcle wach arcestarily covceale 
in oll componasra of eexptineas and of icdeeermunacy. 

Tn principle «thing ia the real world, « Beng in hu ange, a 
“within the finite limita of appearance appear only “sadoquaely 
‘meataly connected therewith inthe fat that mo ration! powting 
vohich rat oman appracance thot pests itr m0 faogaataly cn 
Ibe “defied”, “avncible”; tat en euch positing in tm par- 
‘Geulariy in equivalent to the dowrightamerton that “the Thing 
jn ret”, bot anly $0 the amertioa “It ia real" on the supposition 
‘thet the advance of experience does nt bing init rin "renger 
rations! motives” which exhibit tbe exiginal positing sa one that 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE REASON ots 
rust be “cancelled” ia the fanter conaeaien. Moreover, the 
poring is ratocaly estiricd only through the appearance (the 
Impecfecly fulflled percepts! exaning) in end for Ioelf, con 
sidered in ha paricaeriaed detail. 

‘The phenomenalogy of the Reanon in the sphere of the types of 
‘ing which can on prizciple be only inadequately given (the 
phere uf eremcendents in the verte of reales (Reafidten) has 
therefore ta study the diffrent occurenoot within this sphere 
‘which have been indicated « prior and In advance, Tt baa ta make 
clear bow the inudequato consciousness of givennen, the partst 
appearing, i related to one and the same determinable X, whilst 
coatinyousy advancing towards ore-feah appearances whih are 
soctinmously pomlng over into one ancther, and alto to indlenie 
the ewenta! pousbltics which here present themselves; how, 
1 the one hand, « sequence of experiences i ponetble here 0 
conantly mtivated on ronal lines through the ronal place- 
‘ments [panting] that ace cootinuousty at one’s dlepssl,namelp, 
the cnurae of experience in which the ezpty pees ofthe apes 
‘ancot that have preceded get led again, ube Indeterminecine more 
lomiy determaned, moving forward ‘ll the time toward a 
thorogchqing Aarecuiout filing ons, with the rosdly increasing 
‘able foe tha goer with ts. On the exec hand, me bave to 
ake clear the opposice pomsbiltien, che cane of the Jasons or 
‘polytheic sytherer ore there ib diemroement determination 
cthanoie of that X wich we ace coral aware of a8 ome a0 
the same—otherwive, that in chan i harmo with the orginal 
bestows af mesning. We have toshow, roorearet, how poshionsl 
‘components of the earlier coure of perceptive wifes ctnellaioe 
tagetber with cheir meaning: how under cersin eicumstinces 
the whole perception explodes, 00 to speak, end breaks up int 
“conficting appeboncon ofthe Thing” na reposition conceening 
he thing; how the theses of these mappostions annul one mother, 
snd in ench anmalling ae modified in « peculiar weyi-or how the 
oe thesis, remaining unmodied, “eoaditiona” the canceling of 
‘the "contrary theia™s und otbercoutingeasies ofthe me hind. 

“Au Farther and cloner objects of study we way note the peouiar 
sundications which the otgina positngy of the Reson suffer 

™ PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
‘oving tothe face tha i the coure of harmonious filing owt they 
‘undergo fenine phesomwealecal nhoncoeat with reapect 1 
‘Ser mosiating “pore” har they increae cantly in “enigh, 
‘hat they tha consandly and exectally pomens weigh, but ene 
that differ gradi, The other ponies ala cll fa nalysi, 
in caper of euch paint a» bow the weight of postings wffre 
(rom “countermatioa”, how in douk they mutually “blance” one 
‘nether, bow ove placemat m rivaly with ancels of “greater” 
‘wright in “outaiphed”, “abendoned”, and 40 forth. 

1s addition, of ace, the crcururxace wach are eantiily 
determinative of the changes in the posuonal characters in che 
eave in which they belong t the portional omlent shuld be 
‘subjected to « comprehensive analyas on estental lines (e.g the 
troumaemoes accompanying the “conta” or the “rivalry” of 
‘appearances, Por here meverywhec, in the phenomecolopical 
phere, there are no contingeacie, no mere matier-f-faxt con 
‘exons (Publ); als evecataly ane defisely motivated. 

i amilar way the inguiy inte the enental naire ofall nds 
of rational act in thir tmnacacy shoul be carted through 19 
‘ounezion with egenert!penorsenology of the netic a xoemate 
‘Bren xxl. 

To coy rigion and category of wouk-be dbjecs corresponds 
phenoesenologically not any a kane kind of moaning or pation, 
fut ln a ane And of primera datorconrcioarset of auch s3ean- 
fing, aul, portsiing ti, Banc of primordial self-idens, 
necatilly motivated through « primitive givessese tht conform 
to the basic divisions just referred to. 

Brexy mnch scf-evideace, the word being uadertood ie che 
extended sense we have given to i a citer adequate, incapable 
in pricipl of being ether “woengthened” cr “weabexnd” thon 
wlth the graded differences of a eight; ox iti inadequct, od 
‘Sarowith capable of tnreaw end decrease. Whether in any given 
contest the former oe the ater kind of self-vidence it pombe 
epend on ita genetic type tin thom prefmbioned, a fis, wd 
to demand the perfection which sef-evidence pomeases in ana 
oUtent (64 thet of coven relations) i other contents which 
cmentaly echade it eon. 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE REASON st 

‘We have ail tia remark to make, that se were obliged to 
‘tanefor the crigina! meaning of the conoepe “adoquiee” end 
“oadequate”, which relates © the sade of preacnston, tothe 
ment poularitien of the ric] postings themeetre,grvstded 
‘them, Wevwrge etabled to do so by the very fact of ter con 
incron, 1a one of hone uneveiable equvorations dus to Cre 
feence, which line their power to harm 20 noon ws one recognises 
‘bem os equivocal, and ts ceriy and conaciealy diengulahed 
the derived fom the ois. 

4139, Srmmormarmcs or Axi Tax Vanurram o” Reson, 
‘Twmormc, Axotoorcat, ae Paacricat, Taos 

‘An sot of positing, whatever it quality may be, bs, ia harmony 
‘wih hac re have tied Neher it Jatseaian and troughs 
the very posing of fs maesning, provided only chat tf atonal; 
‘the rational character ia itself the character of rightans. ‘This 
character “belonge” to it ementialty, aod wot contingeoty at a 
vere fact under the accidental conditions of 20 empirically 
porting Ego, Corrativelyroesing xs ported can ao be wid to 
have sown ightses:it sande within the eons coaniousneaa 
‘equipped with the nowmacc character of rghtnes, which emea- 
Ally Belozgn roartover 1 the panied meaning i a capacity ax 
the noematic thes o qualified togedher wit this cama of eean- 
{ng Or toeate it moc accurately, theee"belongs” tnt» allan 
msde up in this way, which oo fs own se furnishes the ground 
for the raioal charac of the thesia. 

"The posited meaning here haw ie jonicaton (Rack) in il 
‘But it may also be thit “jet something may be tld on behalf of 
poston’; wichout being “foot” recon, cs 2 havea abare of 
remoa, We recil—to lesp within the donicwphere—the peculiar 
ceannetion of the dene medaines wit the protodoma': they all 
potas beck tit. If, on tha ocher hand, we crasider tae riSona) 
characters which belong to these modalities the thought st once 
‘berudes feel upon un that they el, cfr m eaey ory in egsrd 
‘tw conbent md the coxdiions of motivation, point back, wotoepeah, 

+ Sms psa 

* PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
tm one primary ronal character which belonge tm the domaln of 
‘primary belief, on the cone of peicondial and In the lat resort 
perfect sel-evdence. Ie wl be observed that betwren these twa 
Kinda of bacterference there are deep-lying omental con 

“June to india the fllowing: A premsmptian canbe charactar~ 
‘ed a atonal ine, we follow that iit which bart beck to 

cconnexions between the diferent qualities, cotrexinas of 
sreipocal kind, wits the rational characern ‘which are peculiar 
‘0 them, detach chezoelee here, anc in the aml all the bint of 
camasion conoerge bach wpe the primary beef ata ts primary 
reason, gen the “ Trash. 

‘Truth a mnaifestly the correlate ofthe perfect extiona character 

is eidetially taken for 
qraced that truth can be actually piven only where there is 20 
sequal conscious ofthe self-evident, and this applicg therefore 
lao to the ert of this “being ten for granted” aelf that ofthe 

smoming. amay with te oc-evidet poakion, or thetreth "tat 
ia P in peesumable (pecbuble)”; an the other bend also with the 
‘truth, “there is something to be anid for the assertion thar § ia P""; 
sd gen hee in scent be id forthe enerton that SP 

FRENOMRNOLOOY OF THE KEAION st 
4s tue", and oo forth. Al ‘his points ‘0 sweatin! commesions 
‘hth need phenomenolgial inguiie reaching down to fender 
Taras 

Gefcridencs, however, ain Do enae x ees fr exon! 
dtevelopmarts of fe the aphere of belt (and indeed 
{tat of the prodiaive judgment oly), bot belie for al thc 
spheres, end particulacly whee for the importent rational connections 
tha btour the. 

1 therfore cotcrrae the highly dificle andferceaching 
problems of te row in the epbere of the thes of fecing 
‘(Gemitts) and will,’ a3 also their toterlacings with the “eheoretical”, 
inert ramon, The tbeorsea oedema mao if 
cides, haw fa pale in the “ioe nd proce! fath 
te ulfvidence” whereby the rot” af thin at heading comne 

‘oe exprned sod ows? in the form of dora tute, 
namely, in the specifically logical or apophantic. It docs not need 
to be eid tit for dealing with these problems fundamentally we 
Sead eudio of tha hind we have already ateraped to ita: 
‘adie that cooccra the cuenta! rotons casnecing Ow donc 
‘hase with al ther nds of placecent thee of foling (Gant) 
‘and will, and thowe agais that Jeed al! doxic modalities buck to the 
Prova, ven thereby alo we ray Ging eurthes fonder 
{eand from ulate grounds why the saizence of bec! and, 
frrrespoadigly, the wath plays so dorsisens x pre nl fice 
of te rewonsa part wich, forte ret toch anto make vs whe 
fer grand the ix sexpect of «ation the prblea of Rewson in 
{heats aphene mort have pecendeca ofthe problace of the 
Anelegin! aed putin Rees 
A te ti 0 de Serene ma teva Doses eat 
PE oS Ee Oe Tk 
Sire aes i Spm cn sever tg, it 
SES ea nce nse ne ak foe 
pore donee 

= PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

Aup. OCoemoemioy, Waraanre (Bessomnten) Anat mo 
Seu-Bymmce Rquvaumer of max Poin ao 
Nevrmx ences 

Further euudy ia demanded in meapect of the problema aiiered 
‘oy the coemecon of “conranca™ Dachang) which (fe mam only 
sm outstanding case) rout be et pon cxsenial lines Bereen ects 
of the same meming o potion, bt ef diferent rational valet. Foe 
fnance, v el-cvident and « vea-aelfevidest act may be eon 
(qc fx auch x way that in the tunstion from che lis tthe 
former the self-evident act takes on the character of proving 
something to be, the non-elFevident act thet of itil proving 10 
be, The positing with insight thee charscorcses the one functions 
1 “confrentory” of the imsightlacking poniting of the ott. 
‘The “pouited meaning” i “veried” oe “cacfirmed”, tbe imperfect 
ode of givencem i traxaforied ito the periet. The particner 
form thin proces takes er can take in pemcribed by the eweatial 
‘ature cf the relevant types of poitng, or ofthe posited meanings 
in question in their perfected felfleent, For every clase of posted 
smeaniogs the forms of verification tat are intsinially pouible 
mort be clearly laid down ce phesamenclopical izes. 

1 the pouting ia not tracnaal, motivated ponibilitice may be 
<drawo from its ease to sbow that wad ow it can be tracalsted 
into an actual rational peitng thet vers it, It ca be oven that 
i fe not every imperfect se-eridence that here presriben 
conse of faliment which terminates in coreponding primordial 
veléarvidence, of the sasse wort and mening; on the contrary, & 
vrefcation of this primordial tind, wo to wpe, ia intrinaclly 
acide by certain Kinda of wef-evidenee. Tonia roe forinatunct, 
of the reall of s recoection (Rickey) and 
‘wry of al recalecting genealy, and Likewise ementally of em- 
‘pathy to which, inthe vecoad vohuoe of thin book, we shall scribe 
«bats kind of elhevidence (and into whose manure we hall there 
inquire more coeely). In any case, vey important phenomeno= 
Joie themes are therewith indicated. 

‘We rust farther uote thatthe motivated pousbilty of which 
‘we spoke above ia o be aherply distinguished from empty pomis 

FHENOMENOLOGY OF THE REASON pu 
‘ig: in definiely sotiated throug that which the pouted 
meaning with much filing a in given tn it iochudea within inet. 
Tela an exapy pourblty at thin wehing-desk here oni under- 
fide, which a ax proent aval wm eas on ten Segsiatead 
of onus kgs ani really the cae. This foor-nen, ont contrary, 
4 motiated pouty im repect of the deinite perooption 
‘which I am jut exjoying. Fox cray peroeption geoerlly tio 
motivated cousdention thatthe “soeditioas” of perception can 
cage in certain wae, dha “in consequence” the proto cam 
‘pms over correspondingly isto x perceptive vrca of « dente 
‘ype peraribed by the very meaning of ny perception, and tending 
‘0 Gl he permpion and con ita posted ming. 

Tein pact ws geet 
conscioumness and consciousness of givennee; or that in aot the 
‘ase, Tho lates holds in he example we have jor made use of, 
Real sperienc, aod not merely ronning through “pomible” 
erceptiae efter bringing them into conecivurees, mpi area! 
sree of postings wach claim reaity (Rook), mch asthe exstentia 
positings of natural procemses. On the otber band, inthe owe of 
every potting of ax esac ox an emenial potion, che fatuiional 

” PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

Fxq2, Innmmure ao Mastars Renowat Poscrvo, Manian 
‘Smx-Ermmce 

Condesedly a mediate grounding fede back v0 the immediate, 
‘The primary orce of alirightness(Reckén) in veepec of ll demaion 
cof objecta and the positing acta related to them, lice in immedints 
aed mero mowly apesied primrdial tofnecidece, a in the 
primordial givenneas which motivates it. Bu: one can drew further 
from this wnmoe indireedy ia different way: the cational value 
of posting sex which in itself bax no selfevidence can 
be derived from it, or, if it in immediate, strengthened and 
cvofirmed. 

‘Let un consider the let eave, nod with the ad of an expe 
indicate the difficult problema which concern the rvlation of the 
sont eridet immediate rational panting act £0 primordial wif- 
evidence (i our sense ofthe ter, as bearing, that ison the primor- 
4a} naguee of givenoom)- 

rnarploadmgehaceordonyrgart serie d 
crigint and immediate right; considered in und for iomif, it 
‘weigh something, whether tie or mach, # has » “weight”. 
‘Bushs ely cree sad bop gt Ba ep of at 
‘which itreproduces let ws saya pas event there hes int relation 
1 the ect preset ¢ posta he part ad secemarily posits with 
the relevant Seld of view, though ia adi, vague, undetermined 
‘ways brought to clearews and thetic dintictnen the later would 
Ihave fo permi of being developed in « content of recollections 
‘theticaly carried out, aad to terminate in actal perception, the 
‘ctnal "he ot mane.” The sume belds for every wort of remeziber- 
ing in our oy bead use of the term in which it is related to all 
the modes of time, 

Tn positions such ax these, essential insights unmistakably 
eolare themaebres. They point 20 the eesti] connexons with 
the eahibition of which the meanang and the kind of weiflatan 
af which cvery recollection in capable and “stands in need of" 
would be presemed mare clearly. With crery advance frm ope 
recollection ta another in the clarifying canmexions of memory, 
‘which terminate in the perceptual present, the memory gets 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE REASON 33 

strengthened. The vreogthczing i to a certain exteat reciprocal, 
the roemary-weightings are functionally inme depend, each 
eoaieation ia ts contet of memacie has a power which inoreanes 
with the cxeenainn of that content, and is grester chant would dave 
‘bee in more reazicted connezion o& slave by ite. But if the 
developmen reaches through tothe present moment, somthing of 
‘the ight of prception and it self-coidonce shine bck along the hoa 
serie of racoloction. 

‘One could even say: the rationality aad legitimacy (Recht. 
charaheer) of memory springs up is secret through the postr of 
‘perception, which in all conforion and obscurity i will operative 
‘even when the Iawer “lacks i full conwumcation”. 

‘But im any case auch verification ia meded to bring out clearly 
ohat i weicly is that ews the mediated reflexion of perceptual 
nahocity Wabewelomanroeetid). Memory bas ita owe Hind of 
alaguncy in that it cx bleed what in “relly rememberoa” with 
‘what is not rezaembered, or aguin in te fac that diferent recol- 
lectiane cam tke place and yet pum to the unity of one memory; 
‘whereas through the receding of the horizon of memory which 
thor place in acaa! recall, the srice of recollections which then 
open out divide no thatthe one angle memary-piche “explodes”, 
sod scatters in « plurlty of mutualy incompatible memory: 
Intudons, whereby there would be cocarrences to describe 
similar to thoee which (x « manner that clearly permit of being 
‘entensively geneniized) we have hail ooonion to point out in 
respect of perceptioaa.* 

‘All thin ray serve to indicate by way of iumention large and 
Anmpecan groupe of problems dealing with the “confring” and 
“wong” of tmmedite rational positing (an aio 10 illustrate she 
vision of rational potting acts into puze and izipure, warueed 
‘cud mized); but above ull we may grapp bere ane sense in which 
itis valid to say thet all mediate ratioeal powting, end in fortber 
sequence, a rational cognition tha is predicative snd conoeptusl, 
‘tarow us back upon se-enidene. We are toundernand, of coure, 
that anly be primordia? seifevidence i an “rigise!” woes 
cf nuthorey (Rechipoel), ad the ration postings of memory, 

2 he, S20, SS 

a PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

for instasee, and vo of all reproductive ste, incon that of 
empathy, are nat ocigina, nnd rein cee ways “etre 

We may, however, daw from the source af the primordilly 
ven in chapes end forma ofa quite diffrest mould, 

(One such form has airady been indicated by the way: the 
‘weakening of rational valves in the conticuots tranaition from 
ving sell-cvidence to noa-sll-evience, But let ws sow indicate 
x enenially different group of case where a posited msening ia 
smoditey obied, witha synthetic comasion f-eldet wt every 
[ink of it, to grace that are immediately self-evident, Therewith 
‘exergea a new and general type of rational positions, of «diferent 
rutional charscer, phesamenclgically, from immediate self. 
evidence. So here alan we bave « kind of dened “madite wi 
sidence”—the kind for which as a rule che exprewicn “roedate 
snlfevidenct in exchsivelyreverved. ‘This derived ef evidential 
lraracter in puch i ite emeatial nature thet can exes only with 
the lt lok of a system of ponitions wluch, stating with thowe 
that are immedistely acfevident, taken diferent forma an its 
‘une proceeds, every step in advance beng supported on gromnds 
of velf-evidence; wbereby these vel-cvidences ar patyimunedist, 
partly already derived; party transparent, partly sot; primordia), 
«ar nonepimordial. Therewic x new fed ofthe phenomenological 
‘theory af rewon i indicated. Our tak here isto wdy, fron the 
tide both of the neeis and rhe comma, the general and the epeclal 
“event” of the eaeatial order of reins eadiate pporting, 
‘roving of every kind and form, and ia all these epherea what- 
scorer; to refer to their pheacmennogicl otigint the different 
“ principts” af och proof, which ae of eseataly diferent Kind, 
{or insance, scoaedng oi testa of objectives thet ere presented 
immanent or tumgcendent, adequate or inadequate; and to 
make these “principles” "intelligible" chrough thin ukimate 
refereoce, not omitting to take into account all the phenamecc 
logical strata involved. 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE BEASON a9 

Sua, Been aro er Te oF Ranson 

‘Woh the general understanding ofthe exsence ofthe resson-—ond 
‘hia ia the goal of the group of ingusiaindicaned—of the reas 
stretched to its widest 20 cover all carci of the porting act, 
aching the azilogica! ead the pracical, the general lcidaton, 
ofthe seal correlations which uxite the idea of re (maha) 
‘Being wish the deus of truth, cemen and consciousness mort 
‘ro be secured. 

[I this direction we very soon ech # genet! insight, are 
that aot merely “object the tly and “en be raboaaly posited” 
‘bu aso “ny being”, aden objec to be posited in ex orignal 
exfoct ther of the Reason, art equivalcat careless. ‘The 
ject would not be given to thi rational chi in a incomplete 
nd merely “partial” form. Tae meaniog which underis it aa tt 
smuceral would not is any prescribed direction lying within one's 
meatal reach leave any “open” pomililitcs for the determinable 
2X: po determinablisy which wan not already 1 exablished do- 
‘termination, no meaning thet was xt fully determined and its 

‘ening limits vet. Since the these of the reeroa should be a 
‘origaal oco, it mnt tuve ign rational ground in the primordial 
vemuse of ‘hat which io in w ill nezae determined: The X io 
‘ot only aieant in ie fall determina, but theresn priswordiatly 
wivex, The import of the indicated equivalence is thes 
falloms:— 

To evmy objct “that ly is" toe intrinsically correpouds 
(ia the a priori of the uocmnitionad yeseality of tha enmnce) 
the ioe of pourble concours in which the object ielf cam be 
_Brmped ina promerdia! ead aloo perfectly adequate way. Convery, 
‘when this poseibiy is guaranteed the cbject i oo “that which 
truly i”. 

"Thin coo io bere opecially signifoent, namely, that we fd 
elinisely pessoa ia the eeeatial aakare of evecy catagory of 
farmatioe yntbesis (which inthe carelace of ery category ofthe 
cbjert) the powible shape, perfect ar imperfect, which it cam 
cnmeretely take, Agno, ia preacribed on ewentn Enos for every 
inmperfoc eyuthens of this kind how # may perfect ial, haw itn 

a PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
eating cary be coxpletnd, intutanally Gill, end bow the in- 
tuldon tm be Ferber enriched. 

‘Every category af the objet (every region and every oxtgory 
in our own moce restricted and preguant senee cf the term) i 8 
rneral eveace which ost itself be brought on grounds of prin- 
ip to adequate giveancas. i its adoguate mana it esr 
anaparens (cnichoge) gneral rae for every special object of 
‘whlch we become amare in the earety of concrete experiences 
(hes manne so he my at ied 
parcculaisies ‘but m emences, as cnocreta of the 
Tremclae peso tech rare hw en jt 
subordinate to ito be brought in eapect of im meaning and 
sade of penta tf nino abr pel 

developing 

(hin we know with apokictc certxnty —are, ite all Ching deterzi- 
utions, necemarily spatial; this gives « lew-cocforming rule for 
‘the poncble epatial modes of coespletan i renpect of the invisible 
sides ofthe appearing thing, s le which, in it full development, 
‘we call pure geametry. As further determinations of x Thing wo 
lurve the temporal acd the material deteraimstions. To these, in 
‘thei tara, aew rules apply for possible (cot therefore freely die 
porable) completions of meming, asd in further sequence for 
pomible thetic intstioas or eppearaates, The exsentia! contest 
these ay poem, the tenes to which thelr mutter conforms, 
so the cr for demi he hrc wih te Sra 

sf sgpmbensicn, normatc or noetic, may Ingitimtely ponte, 
(his tool all prescribes « pia, 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE REASON 37 

$43, Tam Apeguara Puzsorrarton oF & Tein as 4 1064 0 
ru Korux Spor 

‘Yet bedoe we grapple with theweprobleaw, 1 portscipt ia neded 
to remove the ilwory sense of contradiction with our peeviout 
xponsion (38). Thore we remarked that an principle we could 
‘only bave inadeqantely appearing (therefore ako only inadequately 
pereeivable) objects. But we cause not overlook the modifying 
‘qualifcation we rasdo: inadequately perceivale, we wid, eithie 
the faite lini of appeorance. There are cbjecis—and all trans 
scendent objects, all “realitet” (Raakirw) which are included 
under the rubric Neture oc Woeld re here incsdect— which cannot 
‘be given with complete deteiacy and with sisilaty complete 
Antuitabity In ny limited faite conacioutoem, 

‘But os “Fae” (in the Kantian sense), the compte givens is 
verihiss jrosribed—as 4 connexion of tndlem proceaes of 
sontinaous appearing, sbaclutely Seed in fm ewential type, oF, 
1 the Geld for these processes, a continaon of appeoratzas deter 
mined « primi, powsoming <iferent but deterainste dimessians, 
overed by an establabed diopemation of meatal order. 

‘This contiaunm is mor closely defined a infinite in all drec- 
tioas, consisting in all ito phases of eppesranoes of the ame 
Adeuerminable X, ta order 18 9 comnacid system mu wo deter- 
‘mined ua to its ewental content that any o0e of its fine when 
caviedcontinvounly forward gives x harmoniou rte of eppent- 
sacs (which a itself to be designed aso unity of mobile appear 
sce), wherein the give X, ever one aod the mame, in with 
‘unbeuken consistency “mare closely” and sever “otberwite”” 
determined. 

Tf oor 9 ulf-contained unity of the course covered, a finite act 
therefore dt lo rable caly within the limits of is finitude, 5s 
in viru of the pervaive infty of the comiauum unthinkabte 
(it would give os abeurd fate infniy), the idea of thia ontisuucs 
and the idea of the completed givens thereby prefigort lis, 
‘anae the Ina, frenrpareat before t—opea to insight as only an 
“Idea” can be, designating through is exten mature a te of 
night that ral itso. 

ws PURE PRENOMENOLOGY 
‘The idea of an infinley essentially motivated is not itself a0 
Infinity; Ue bsg hat ths ity ia iocically incapable of 
‘being given docs not exclode but rather demands the trewparent 
(irencons ofthe Lies ofthis iniy, 

$144, Reatrry 12m Paniommuar Devan Consesoveume: 
‘Concise Dereasrrareo 

“Thun ie reais as» rate tht the Fidos True-Beng in corels- 
ely equivaleat to the Eidon Adeqaatelygiven-Being snd Belng 
‘that at be posted an elevidest; mi te, moreover, in the 
Aeoue either of Gite ghveancas or of givennass ia Qe form of an 
‘dea, Im the one caso Being is “immanrat” Being, Being m= 9 
completed expedlence or noceutic correlne of experience; in 
the other case it is rcacendent Being, ic, Being whoee “om 
secendence” rata precisely inthe infitode of the noematic cores 
whic it deraande o onical “catia”, 

‘Where the date inition in adapuate wn immanent, the sense 
(Glen) primorially filed ove, though ot indeed the sores 
‘ipl, onleocs with the objet. The object in jx thu which 
in pruped and posited in adequate intuition a5 « primordial Bell, 
foauperent ia virur of in primonaity, and abeoltely tans 
‘parent in vitue of the corpleteneoe of the meaning and its 
complete primordial fiiag-aut (Erfethog), 

Where the dato ishution i of « aucouding charter, the 
hjpctive factor cannot come to be adequately givea: wht can 
lone be given ere ia the dae of euch « facie, ox of it meaning 
and “opisterooogical vseace”, and therewith an @ pier rale for 
the well-ordered infnition of imadoqeate experience, 

(On the mround of experiences thet eve at times been enjoyed 
‘end of thie re (ce vaced yates of rules which cover their cae) 
wp cotnot indeed unansbiguously far how th: further coume 
ef experience matt proceed. On the cotrary there rams ope, 
counts poubilsies which, howerec, are prefigured according 
10 type thoough the very ily organized a print ordesing. The 
item of geomet! rake deerme vith abeclute precon. 
sll Ue pomible forms of motion which might mupplenent the lt 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE REASON 09 

of obeerved movement hese and sow before ux, but it docs ant 
indicate « single rel coune for the motion of the objec that is 
really moving. How the enpircal thought which grounded in 
experience comes here ia the eacoe; how anything of the mature 
‘of the ecieatic demerminaton of thingie pardcalay mt empiti- 
cally poaited unita(inAaiém) wich yet inchode ax infini aumaber 
(of pomible determinations ll varied in meaning, i at all posible 
hhow, within the topic (Then) of Nature we can reach the goal of 
‘umumbiguous detcrinatin, ‘= xcoordance with che Pina of ths 
natural object or event, ee. (which asthe Zea of an individual 
particular is folly determinate): this ll beloogs to x new otracom 
of inquiry. It belongs to the phesomesclogy of the reson in it 
Apeilic experiencing, more periclaly to the phyuical, pyco- 
Joical, and, in general, natural scientific ceasan, which refers the 
‘ntalogical and noctc rules whach belong tthe acioce of experi 
‘ence a euch bck to it phesomenclogial sources. But Ut means 
‘that it seks out and eideically invenigues the phamommological 
struts, noetic and noematic, ia which the ectent ofthese rules is 
ernbeded. 

Sis45. Cnmea, Consmuaarion or rie PRENORENOLOGY OF 
Saz-Bvmence 
18 is clear from the foregoing trestment tht the phenemenoligy 
of the Reason, notice in a Praguant ssa ofthe term, which propoece 
‘to eubject to intultive cemarch not indeed conscionnneas generally, 
‘but the rational conmcimumen, throughout presupposes general 
phenomenology. "That—ia the reaim of positionaliy!—dhetie 
‘onscioumens of soery hind (Gathung) sande wader certain norm in 
itvelfa phenomenciogical ft; the unrms are no ther then eanental 
ava which relate t certsix noeti-noemaric connexions to be 
igoconmly analyead and described is respect of their hind and 
fopey, Naturally we have evecyehere to reckon with “weracren”” 
do, an the negative counterpart of reason, juste» the phesomen- 
2 A ds ocaranat whan tema the chery Seer vt pty 

‘Sheen, Wao aet cee, ber ly game oni, mete tees ny 

- FURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
ology of scltevidence inches in itself thet of ion counterpart, 
akan. The gomral actin of the sence of wifeoeencs wit 
its mayocs bearing on ewe Gntactinna of the moat general 
find conedectes « relatively oma akhough fundemena! portion 
ofthe phenomenology of Reuea. ‘Therein we confrm—end the 
considerasions we have jut advanced may lady woe to make 
the point que clear —what was bel maintained wt the begining 
ofthis book a agin perverse suerpretions of the soening of 
eteridence. 

Scif-cridence, in fact, i» not amy sort of cuascious indicamr 
iced toa judgment (and codinaily Ss cay 0 relation 0 judg 
‘nent thae ane peaks af seievidence) wed calling to wy iie'a 
imyuccal voice frm « beter world: Here is the Truth! m though 
sch « voice had anything to ey t foe eps Uke cursalves wad 
bad sotto make good its tide co eathoriy, We do not aeed wy 
longer to get even with sexptical comdeations, nor 10 cormider 
sringiviogs ofthe old type which cancot be overcame through ay 
theory of sclf-evidence that aks it 1 mates of indicaton and 
flings: the dovbx, namely, whether 1 miicious demon (af 
‘Cartesian Invention) oa feeful lernin of de actunl cour of 
‘he world might not bring c abou that every false judgrocat were 
Provided with this indicat, thi feehng cf intellectual neceity or 
Irascendeat obligtion, aod the lke. If we get dows to the 
‘eleraat phenoesena themselves and stdy them in the framework 
cof 2 pheummenoiagical reduction, we recognise with ecxapicte 
Gearnese that we are ere dealing wh » gtite special mode of 
porting (end with nodhing so litle dhecefoce with » cotext 
Aifized socachow 10 the act, with an appendage of any sort 
‘whatoever), « mode of porting which beloogs 10 idetcally de- 
termined essences conxinsive of the soem (eg, the modus of 
inmight into eovesil being which in x primordial way gives ex 
rginaltrmepareney to th make ap of the noema}. Ons reongniacs 
further that once aguin exsentil lows govern the relation of thove 
‘Praitional acta which do not pomew this special cmittioa to 
1 CLK ia, Wa 1), ty, 34 P44 6: In 
repel Be wie ote Sr Sty serpin pease prerane 

{iracaag teh panies of iv cone deed Se ec Ses 
"iter, toe we epee of te Een econo 4s BPS. 

PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE REASON or 
wock as do posseas it; that chore fa euch 2 thing, for instance, 
crtotioument of the "falfinent of the intention”, of rothorsing 
and strengthening with special reference to the thetic characters, 
[fat at there are aso the conreaponding oppored characters of the 
pring of ll cxthority and poner. We Further recognize thatthe 
fogieal principles require « profound phesamcaslogical lucida 
tion, ead thax che principle of contadicisn, for iasuance, takes 
tus back to the euental consexions of peesible confirmation znd 
pomible invalidation (er, alematively, rational caccllatien) 
Speaking generaiy, we obtain the inight that we have here and 
at every paint m do, not with cantingent fae bot with eidetc 
-eventutitia which stand in their ede consesinna,end therefore 
dye wha: obtain in the Eidos fuoctous pax: absolutely gmail 
thle sundard forthe fact. fn this phenomenological chapter we 
tho get cher on this point, thet every patina expeiene (2, 
‘an experience of judgmest of any bind) can become sef-erident 
in the sume way, and more npecifially not every much experience 
an becocpe immediately sel-evident; further, that all modes of 

HAA 
i 

- FORE PHENOMENOLOGY 
noes in regard to all general etrctnnl forms, with the paral 
thee srucrures, the stratications inthe nocma, such a raaa- 
ing, the subjece-bearer of meming. thrtic charscrm, coucrete 
fullest beboves ua tall wyathatic wnioetions to maka fly 
ear how there tks place doen uot merely acts of binding 
‘snenlly, bot a binding into the unity of one ac. In parila, 
‘laity and analytic insight come ro un respect of eany such 
‘qustloon a: bow identifying unifcations are posible, Bow here 
smal thers the drocominable X acquires 2 determinate and valid 
‘ake, and bow this Seca the determization of meaning ed 
‘heir vacancie, i, thee panes of indeterminacy; ad ia reapect 
‘iho of wock mater as atsisive fullamms (Fadl), and forme of 
‘oatnmation, of proof abd of progreive Knowledge a it pees 
‘roa lowe to higher Jevels of cooacounnca, 

"These studies in stionay, however, andl hat go aloog with 
‘thea, ar cxzad out from, the “cscendeot” the phenome 
logial standpoint. No judgmeat there caried ut io fadgmeant 
‘ne natun bass, prosopposing m backround the tess of natural 
realty, pot even where the tudy in quattion is the phenomenology 
ofthe convcioumeen of reality, of Ue knowledge of xarese, of the 
‘eaknation of natural ulus and iaight fam their bearings. We 
eck out evecywhere th formations ofthe noeses md the noecits, 
we hatch out a apstemate and cidtic rorpbalogy, std set oul 
svecywhere che easertal cocecien and powdbiltion; the Der wt 
necomary porate, a, wafying forme of corspeibilty pre- 
secihed by th ementialnanien of things and git about with een 
Ail Kame. “Object” m we everywbece voderstnd it w te for 
mental consesicas of cnacioumam; fiat comes forward 36 
‘noematic X, the eubjeccbearer of diffrent coenta) types of 
meanings and postions It wppear ferther onthe site for certain 
comenio of the reson, edetically considered, in which the 
contsioed X that unifion i terme of meazing receiv is rational 
placing. 

‘Ay similar sites for determinate, cidetialy circumscribed 
{priya co be feed though inguities into emenoes, and uniting 
""teleologkally” eansected formations of cocioutter, te Dave 
stch expreeions nt “possible”, “probable”, “doubtful” object 

the reference therefore to a reel element, but that also mere 

aco 
‘etlonally ordered ewential connexioas, whose correlate “real 
abject”, which therefore cc ta own side aces eatin at xn 
indica of fly detrsied symene of caxocinus forastizon 
teleological unified. 

THIRD CHAPTER 

GRADES OF GENERALITY IN THE ORDERING OF 
‘Tile PROBLEMS OF THE THEORETIC REASON 

‘Our meditations upon the forms of inguisy prope to plrsamen- 
ology of the reason have vo far bees proceeding on x plane of 
_prarrlty which did not permit the cuenta! ramifcatios of the 
‘robles ried and this coonenicma withthe formal and ecgiooal 
‘tologics co stand ut at all cleat. La thin respect we mnt try 
10 be moce specif, vay x0 will the Full easing of the pheno- 
rmenological eidtics of the ressan and the whole wesith of its 
problema be revealed to us, 

$46. No Mor: Gmasa: Paoatna 

‘Let us get back tothe sources of al fois of roca inquiry and 
fallow theea in cheir ramifyings ts systcanstically 2» pomible. 

"The tithe of the problem which ia its scope covers phenomenokogy 
in ito euticety i> Intentionality. "This indeed expresses the funda- 
smeotal property of canseiouee all peenomecolgia probiem, 
‘nchciog the hyletie, Snd their endered place within it, Thus 
Phepomenalngy starts off with problems of intetionality, but 
At Gat quite geneally and withoct doewing into ica own circle 
of conidertion the qoestion of the real (or tre) Being uf wit 
‘wo are concious af when we art coaucfout. We Jee unconsidered 
the fot that psoas cooscusneat with ts thee charac can, 
‘in the mont gezeral sense of the term, be designated an “vente: 
positing” (Vermin), 204 finds is necessary place an euch under 
the rational oppositions of validity an invabdity, We were able 
‘toapproach these problens only in the lst chapters, with reference 
‘tm the mein atrurreres of contcouinsst which we had leet 10 
‘ondertand inthe interval. And since exe concern was with eidetis 
beginnings, we carried oct the matynen wits che greaent pombe 
senenliy, m indeed the nevre of the cane deranged. Is all 
cidecc opheres the steric prosutre i frum higher to lower 
groerny, thoogh enalis, shen on He tal, may atach ise 

PROBLEMS OF THE THEORSTIC REASON 425 
to pertialase. We apa of seas end th rational thesis enero, 
‘of primordial and derived, of adequate and inadequate sel-evi- 
<deoce, of evential insight and individual wellevidenoe, and the 
Uke. The descriptions we vttlived alredy presupposed a exit- 
sive phecomenologial bis, « whole series of diffical divtnetnaa 
‘which we had worked out for oumetres in the chapters rewing of 
‘the mont general etraceuree of cacaciousness. Without the concepts 
meaning, poited meaning, mening penited pd flied (eaten 
logical tence fm che leauge ofthe Logical Sti), i is quite 
Inapomible to reach the rnc! formulation of any problem of the 
‘thooretia! reeton. These concept prereppore others agen and 
the claevages of sannee Ut earepand io ther: the dilferenioes 
of poutinalty and neutrality, those of the these charsctem and 
‘ther contents of meaning (Aatrin), the separating out of the 
prcular modifcatioas of esence which do not come under the 
idoa ‘posited meaning, ws, for int, the ateotional mediSon- 
tioas, and so forth. At these time, dit we say not undermte 
te scape ofthe malyon ropiced in the mont genera brats of 
heoretical reason of which we are bere speaking, we wre the 
fact tat the csetil dexsiptons ofthe It chaps should count 
aly as mere beginnings. As erywhere le, soalao here, we were 
aly eying ut our mahodi inimtion to prepare vo much fen 
(ground for every intriaacally sew stratum that cught be pictured 
te field of plenoromnolagicl inquirise w to make thee Inter 
scour, formuiate the intial and Futdarental problema that relate 
to these, and out free glances towards the eacirling line of 
‘probes in the far dice. 

$47. Risancarnons of Tex Proauine. Fomias. Loot, 
‘Axiotosr, ako Pans 

‘The general phenomenslogy of che reason difereatiaten wa we 

‘take into account farther structural differmoes which have 2 

depending cn the fundamental type of checis in quewtion, on the 

differences between basic {ecNichr) and. desived theses, nd the 

‘Gdlerwnces which cron with these of unilateral (ingiodrige) theece 

os PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
sand ryshess. "The can groupe of problems a the rmscn (pesi 
Jer f scaviencs) melas the main types ofthese, and tho 
posing material (Srimmgwnatrion) which these ninntally 
flerond. At che eu, of Coane, come the prtedens, the dosiz 
saodalen withthe cntical modaliion Ut correepond ta them. 
In pursing auch cads of the theoreeal reson wo coms 
ecesearlym the proton on which depends th proper andertand- 
ing of Fermal Lage ata fre ofthe there reson, wd of the 
Delt dcp wh Tine eed Formal dey ond 

‘Tull ml ack a the it pce wth ete cule 
cxneerning the purely formal doctrine of poxians (Sitar), end 
in particular of ryuthatc potions, relating to the predicatve dori: 
symbals, a also che nyatbecc form thae belong to the doxie 
modalities, and fanber to the uc of feeling (Gaméf) mnd will 
(the farms of preference, for insta, thate of valsing aad willing 
"in the interests of anotbe", the forms of the sxiclogial “and” 
oc") La thee farm’ doctrines we axe concerned with the 
‘pore farm of synthetic postions (Sexe x their noeratc pect, 
‘without bringing into quetio ther atonal vaity or invalidity. 
‘Thun they do not yet belong to che rates of the doctrine of 
raioaliy, 

‘But at soca as we throw out these questions, and propound 
‘thn ined for postions ganerlly wo fer ux thay re conunivd 
‘exchosively determined through pure forme, we arein the ephere 
cf Formal Logic and of the purl forza! disciplines mentioned 
above, which ae cacatially buik up upon the toerespending 
{formal doctrines ss their undezlying strats, Ja the synthetic forme— 
‘which we wuch manifrty poessppowe urach thet conceroe the 
‘these or postions ofthe relevant poutona!catepory, whit leaving 
St apciclly indeterminate—thee Ke «fron cnditons of pole 
‘id saich come fo expression i he esta! lw of the dips 
in che pure forme of the prediction 
(saslytc) antes « priv condition of the polity of danic 
‘rational cartaity, cx in nowt tema, of patie th. In thu 
setting it out objectively, we obtain Formal Logic in the narrowest 

PROBES OF 1th LRYORELIC REASON 427 
ease of the word; forma! Apophanss (fee forma) Logic of “judg 
‘uas"} which thos han its bane ix the farmal theory of these 
“judgment”. 

lle ceca apply tm the nym belonging to the spheres 
of feeling (Gomi) mad wil, sad to ches nocmasic correlate, t2 
‘Geictypea of nyatbaic“poitiona” therefore, whereof the ayste- 
matic formal docarine must guia famiah the bass forthe con 
strntln of the doctrines of foreal validity. In the pare wpatbetle 
forme of thous upheres (x, fr izaance, in the connzzioas of cule 
‘nd encana) there are i realty conccaled the conditions of the 
fourlity of enbleical ond proctical “tath”. Theceby, through 
the “objection”, which takes place abo In act of feling 
(Gomi), for Inara, a} axiclogica! and peactil retinal is 
converted, in the way we have leat to xndertand, ato dome 
tionality, end noeentically nto truth, objectively int rey; we 
speak of true or rel ends, means, grounds of preference, and 90 
forth. 

‘Special phenomenological fquiven of en exemsly iexportmt 
kind ere concerned with each one of thee connexion, Akeady the 
fahion in which te formal dicipliog jst ied are character 
laed is phenoraenologica!, and prerupposes many af the rensts of 
‘tur enalyes. The woeker i pure dag, “dogmatically” treated, 
(grape zough abstraction the apophactis forms (“proposition 
a pense” of “judgment”, catrgoccal, bypothetial, cunjunctive, 
injunctive, and 10 forth), and atablshes for them asioans of 
forma truth. He knows nething of unalyc eyathests, of ewentnl 
relations, sonic mad owmatic, of the incorporation within the 
onance-aytense of pure conscousseas of dhe esoences he am 
‘extrac and conceprully determined; in is ingrcs he wudicn 
‘part what om be fuly onSerstacd only inthis fullnas of exsetial 
sonperton. It la phenomenology whlch, by severing tothe sures. 
of intuition in trsacendentaliy puried conacioumms, make i 
clear to on what in preety invlred ia the fact that we sore. 
times apeak of formal ecditons of rath, sometimes vf these of 
Inowledge. I enlightens us in » general way concerning exe 
sd metal relate i neapect of the concept knowledge, wll 
evidence, truth, bing (obec, postive coment, snd wo Fort); it 

oo PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
teaches us to undecrimd the nructare of the judging protean 
of the judgment, che way in which che wructure of the poem 
determines mnowicdge, bow the “pasted meming” thereby plays 
‘ty apecia part, and agua the varying posibty of its cogaiive 
“ulloesa” It abo which modes o ling out re cxsential cou- 
ions for the eeional character of se-evidence, which types of 
telf-eidence are in question on any occasion, end so forts. In 
Dartculr it enables us to oedertend that the a print ieuthe of 
Logit concern emvential councsions between the poss of the 
‘ntuitioe filing oot f the posited meaning (whereby the care 
sponding positive content stains spathedc intuition) nd of the 
‘pare ryiheic frm of the posited meaning (che pure logical form), 
nd dh hat pooebiity it tthe same tre the conditin of pousle 
‘aldity Gta). 

esto hue that on elser seratiny » twofold diminctian ast 
Anere be made, corresponding to the correitinn of noes and noet, 
In the formal Apopbansis (in tbe syllogom, for instance) our 
acoumse is of judgments as poetic proponitions and their 
“formal truth". The standpoint is neesstc throoghoxt. On the 
other hand, in formal apophante mort, tho vexadpoint ia netic, 
and ar tlk is of ratiralty,corectess ofthe judging-procas, 
Handarde of correctness 1 Ind down (euareprocvs) und these 
with relation to the forms of the propositions. For icstance, we 
cannot maintain that a contradiction ie trie; be wha jodges in 
secondence with the forme of premine of the valid inforemil 
moods “imust” draw dhe conchaions prope tothe corespamting 
foc, and vo forth. These paralleh are at ence ineligible when 
‘considered in « phenomenologial canserion, ‘The events which 
caneern the at of jadging, the aves and Kcewie the cmetially 
scocresponding event i the aoe, of the Apoptams are studied 
precacly im their nesesary interoanexion and win the full 
aru of conaiounccan. 

"The same contldertions Doki, of courte, for the remsining 
formal disciplines in respect of ‘the parliciam of soetic md 
oemutic arderings, 

PROBLEMS OF THE THEORETIC REASON — 409 

$48, Promames oF nox Turosrrcar Reason 49 Haaana on 
Poenas Owroioay 

Shifting var exientation, we pas from these dicilines to che 
corresponding Onteoper. Paenomznoleyically, the connerion is 
slzeady given tvoug’s the grasn adjortzents of meseal vision 
‘hut a70 sen to be posible, and can be carried out within each 
ct; whereby the comstitmenia thus made vale are rexipocally 
Interommedied through 2 network of ewexinl lows. The prizary 
point of view Jooks townrds the objective; noematic reflection 
leeds tothe moemati, noctic reflection tothe nootc comeene, By 
sbetraction feo these concenaa the dnciplizes that ete easeert 
1 extract pure forma; formal Apeptantic extrecting nocratic, 
snd the penile noetic, noede forms And just ws these fort are 
‘ound mutually together through enental laws, so are they bot 
united with ontic forma, which can be gruaped throughs glancing 
‘back to the ootic eonaticuem (Bestinds), 

‘Brery formal-logical law cay be trasaforrsed into an equivalent 
formal-ontological tw. The judgment, instead of being pened 
‘upon judgments will now bear upan eubatantive meanings (Fae), 
nd again upon object tated of upon elements of judgments 
(es denominative meetings), and upon chicecsecitie marks 
inmead of upon predicative meanings, wd wo forth, We no loager 
talk of the tuth and valiiey of proponixicns, but of the capri 
fonts of he subeantve meanings (lace), of the Being of 
object, and to forth. 

‘Of course, the phenomenclogcal import (Cehal) of this tratai- 
‘ian isto be made eetr through ceferring it back no that of ee 
standard concepts. 

Furnal Oxealogy, moreover, extcoda far Beyand che ophere of 
such mere tranformationa ofthe formal apoptamc truths, I= 
portam disciplines grow out of it through thows “deaminase 
seductioas” of which we have previously apaten. In the plural 
Jadgment the plum! Gguresas «plural thesis. Through the desanr- 
naive traeition icbecomes the objet, gronp; snd tn the Funda 
‘mental conse ofthe Theory of Grospr grow tp, In this theory 
Judgment are passed opon groupe mt upon objec pontcaing thelr 

ae PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
en peculiar types of properties, relations, and o forth, The ume 
‘bola forthe concepts rdltion, ember et. a the basic conceptn 
of mathematical ixipies. Aa with the merely formal doctrines 
of the propasition, 00 beet we matt eepest oar wattmnent that it 
‘a oo the tak of phenomezalogy to develop these disciplines aed 
fm cary an mathematics, elope exercaes, mad the He. Tt ia 
nly in th asiona and their coanepoual content that phesomea 
logy fads proper subject rarer fo a sasiyss. 

‘What we have said applica automatically Formal Axiolgy end 
Prarie well ax tothe formal entologia to be et slonguide thew 
‘theoretical denidarets, and oeatng of value (a very bend 
‘enie of that term), of goods—in short, of al! the ont spheres 
‘Which ae correlates ofthe affective mud veiiona consciqvanen. 

‘Tha ead will nice thatthe concpt of "formal nielgy” hat 
roamed its ming ith ours of thee ruses Vala, the 
cbjectivitiea af practice, are propecly clawed under the forma) 
Dreading “object” oF “soaething in general, From the standpoint 
sf univeral salytie Ontology Uy are thus meteially determined 
‘objects, the “formal” catalogies af vahes, and the material di 
iplines of practical objectvitin thet belong to them. Ox the other 
‘nand, the analogies which have their ground io the parlielisza of 
the ebetic genera (belief aris modality, valuing, ving), rd the 
syorbeven wad eystacical formations specifcally co-ordinate with 
ther, uve thir force, asd indeed « power so efective that Kast 
isetlydexigeaten the relation ofthe wiling ofthe ed 10 that of 
the means es “analytic”, thereby indeed confing analogy with 
idemiey. Tho analytic proper which belowgs to the predicative 
synthesis of the doxa abould not be confused with itn formal 
Analogue which a relsted ta the ayntbeses ofthe theecs of feling, 
‘nd wil. Profound and importst problems ofthe phenocenlogy 
ff the reaon are involeed in the thorough clearing-up of these 
snalogice utd paraleb. 

ump swt 
1G Ry re Mempo Sate A. 47)" wi to 
(ply Al te mteey cee Ble pees trpeebly 2 nerii # 
[Ti poston, fut Sy eng 9 ura ae” 

PROBLEM OF THs THEORETIC MEASON 411 

4g. Proms or wan Tusomencst, Reason at Bsa: on 
‘rmx Reoiowat Oxvoueces, Tae Prosin or Tax Pemvo- 
wamwowoetca Conrrmmiya Fuxcrios 

After we have discumed the problema of the eheoretica reste 
‘which the formal discipline wets, we ve to effect the tansition 
‘tthe mata ain the fet nwtance athe regia tae. 
‘Every objective region conscioualy cammitcesiteelf. An object 
termined through the regional gemma ba a much, 60 far a itis 
‘rat its mados of being perceptible, cealy or obscurely presest- 
‘hie conceivable, provable, preserbed a rio."Tus we come back 
syxin, in rempect of the grourda of rational, tothe meanings, 
significant postings und cognitive easenoes not tthe ners Fars, 
‘bowever, but retber, since we have in mind the material peoerlity 
Of se rie sad eng asene, wo apts pasting 
‘whowe ditermining content is taken ic its roplnal detecminacy, 
cy ha i hh foo ici nfm 

a ke ws dng duc the rego “oat hing” I wo 
‘correctly undermand what this guidance means, we therewith 

Sogical discipline: th jralow of the generl comtttion” of the 
Prof rein The cal eco, 
oF, expreavd mare brily, "ofthe penersaologicl cuwtnition 
of the Thing tn general”. In yrapathy therewith we alto lara 
10 know the method of inquicy proper to this ending problem. 
‘The very same is then applicable to ery region and evry disi- 
line that role 0 in phesomenclogial contnatin. 

‘What we are copezaed with a a fllows: Toe Idea of the 
"Thing—owe reatrct ounces to this parca regica—hen we 
sun peak oft in epresecind in cocaciounen by the cxcorptual 
thovglt""Thisg", pononing«cestsi Soematicrructure (Bastand) 
‘Toegch poena there ementiliy corepondans dealeltcmtined) 
troup of pouible ooemuta which have their airy bern, hat they 
sxe copube ofa synthetic unitication through che covering leon. 
[the poems, sin this case, in concordant (asim), we Gd 

aa PURB FRENOMENOLOGY 
{nthe grocp intuitional and is particular primordial dator noemate 
lao, whois al the pecially erent (nderertgen)rarmbers 
‘ofthe group Gnd fusineet inthe identifying congrucace (Declame) 
drawing from them, iz the case of positoaliy, canfimstion, 
fullom of ronal power, 

‘Thum we seat fcom che verbal mx perhaps wholly obycore 
peescatation of a Thing, excly as presented to ua. We frecly 
produce ntuitional epresetatoes ofthe ume “Thing”in-general 
‘od, make clear to ourselves the vague meaning of the woe. Since 
‘we wre concerned here with 2 “gener! presentation”, we mut 
proceed with the help of illustrations. We produor random 
fincy intuitions of tingr, free intuitions, shall we ay of wingral 
‘eda, white rvexa, golden mountains, and the like; these would 
inany cae be thingy, md prosentations of them serve therefore fu 
‘Purposes of iatriion just as well es presentations of things 
‘of real experience, Toroogh mach maceral we apprehend in 
‘dea end with intuitive cleamess the essence “Thing” ws the 
ubje of neennie determination cll Enid ang pene 

ifs mnt cer (eng wie a sad en raed 
{in an ealiee context!) that the exsence “thing” is indeed ic thin 
‘ray primordial given, but that this givennees ceanot on priocigis 
be adequate. We ean bring the noema or thing-ueating to the 
‘Point of sdequate provectation; but tbe various thing-mesnings, 
feven when taken in their follnes, do sot eoatain the reyionsl 
cesence “thing” a a primocdilly ivaiable constituent immanent 
in them, just ws Ute indeed as the various memings resting to 
‘ne and the same individual thing coetain the individual extence 
ofthis thing, In other wards whether iti the essence of en idi- 
‘idual thing that concems us ox the reglonal excace of Thing in 
gener, in no cove does a single intuton of « thing or 2 finite 
osed cantina or collection ef thing-intuidenn wufice to obtain 
in adequcte form the desired essence ix the tts fullnes of ia 
(qeratial Getencinaton, An deedapuote ‘aight into the eeeace 
is homever,ahmaye obtainable; andi away has this great ndvane 
‘ye over un empty apprebenaian ofthe easencr, wich es cam be 
+ ChSaein at 

PROBLEMS OF ‘TH VHROREYIC REASON 4c 

Se hye Ren wd ak fe srr me: 
‘im, that i bas the emence 

“Tish good far al gnten of emcal grr, fom te 
caseace of the ivan wp ro the given Thing. 

‘But isan eel inght of genend kind that every inprfect 
(soto (every ‘sadoqume abject giving noma) contsina within 
Stel) a rade forthe idel poly of its perfecting. Ut belnge to 
the cmence af the appearence in cxxtmur form which I have 
before me now—an appearance which gives the emence of the 
centaue fa a merely oaz-ided way—ehat I aeck out the dfrent 
‘mpocts ofthe thing, and in free fancy can determine and render 
intukable what lsat firt undetszmines and lft open. La regard 
tw the development ofthis procem of phantasy, ssi becomes ever 
sce perfectly inuiional and more clearly deteresinative, We Me 
‘in laage meevere fee ages; we ca. ndeed tour orn foe pleare 
cndow the fancied centanrintuitonally with more ckaely deter- 
‘mining propertian wi changes of property; but we are not cow. 
‘platy fre if ouc advance is ta take the form of » covintns 
Xoiriemigen) course of intuition: ix which the determinable 
subject cemains the same and con always remain harsonioualy 
doterminable. We ae, for instance, bound by « lsw-coxfocming 
pace w 1 frame which the idea of 2 pow thlog in poner 
striclly prescribes for us. However arbitrarily we ray vary the 
form of what we fancy, one spatial shape wil inevitably pam over 
nother. 

‘Bt what docs this reference ta rule ox law phenomcanlogically 
mena? What is implied in the fact that the insdequetey given 
‘azn Thing” pence ret forthe curse of pots inttiowy— 
nd therefore manifetly forthe cour of ponible perceptions? 

“The memes is fellows: Te the exeace ofa thing-noeens there 
belong, a2 can be seen with abnolute clarnen, idea) poosbllies, 
of "Hilsnes inthe deowlpment”* of inion of the seme order 
{intinniger), wi isded fo presrbed directions of « determinats 
‘ype (hence with paralld limiblesmees abo in the contzruous 
_fueapoutons of corresponding nocse). We hese real the eater 
‘iseustions concerning the anqsiskion of the “Idea” of Thing in 

* Ck Rant Crit Pr Rant Sis Spemarpment (A. 25), 

“ PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
esertl, end the insight accompanying it, dicuaiona which remain 
valid for every lower ange of generality down tothe lowest soo- 
cresum (Konbration) of the individually dewermined ching, Its 
‘rantomdenct expres Hlf in these linidmnemas in the 
development of innzkions. Apuin snd ever again intuitions may 
ett over int intueeal cantinus, and costmua ulredy given be 
‘ateaded. No thing-peroxption is trmécal and coacsive; epace 
‘dwaya remains for sew perceptions which would determine the 
indeterminaics more closely 20d fil in the perozptual pape. With 
‘every inch advance the determining conteat of the thing-docek 
‘ommtmtly stacked tothe acl-anme thing X in enriched, 1 ia 40 
cascatial insight that cory perception and perceptual manifold ia 
capable of bring extrde; the process ia Ur endow accord 
ingly no intuitive appreheasion of the eweence ofthe ‘Thing can 
‘be eo complete cha a further perception could aot bring i scaxe- 
‘hing noemaically new. 

(On the other hand, wnapprehend os wl-evideat end adequate 
‘tho "Idea’ wf a Thing. We grasp it inthe for procems of running 
throngh the pomibilcs, in the comcioutes ofthe Yimitlences 
ofthe developmeat of intuitions ofthe name order. We thus grag 
tt fret the Idee of che Thing empty of all evtional consent, and 
ofthis individual thing a something which ia given “just wo far" 
the ring in “rn”, bt oro th ma dine 

determinable "in infinizun”. The “and so Sorc is un. abechutely 
‘ndlapeonale phase in the Oing-nocma, and we havea cla icaight 
fin vecemiy. 

‘On the ground of the couscioumem of this Hautes 
presented ia the form of illustrat, we ayprebend further the 
‘Idea ofthe definite directions of infinite Cevloproeot, and that 
Jndeod in the owe of all the intitincal chescels along which out 
‘perception mana, Agsin me apprehend ths repiomal “Fda” of the 
‘Thing su general wm that of the eeifsame something which meis- 
‘tins ine’ end through the properiy determinata 
infin of each replonal channel, and prockinns fief in the 
debinitely articulated infinite sevice of moemaia that beloag to 
thom 

Tefellome then that ike the Thing itself every gusty that beSoagn 

PRONLEMG OF THE THEORETIC REASON 4s 

‘tm the thing’ exemial content (Geel), and above all evexy 
cnmaiatve “form in an Idea, ead this holds good of all predoe 
from the gansrility of the region to she Jowett particulary. Io 
lovee det 

‘The Thing ix is ideal eaence presents itelf a vee towperatir, 
nthe meastary form” of Time. Inritve “ideation” (which eve 
ax vision ofthe "Tdea” very specially mecin ita name) teasbes us 
to now the Thing a» necessarily endaring, an in principle ead 
lua cxenaible ix respect of its duration, We grwp ia “pe 
(atuihon’ (for thia ideation is the phenomenologically clarified 
concept of Kant’s pure intuition) the “Ides” of eeaporaity and 
of al the eaten. phavesiactuded ii. 

‘The Thing accoeding to is Iden in further rer extensa i for 
instance, capable i reapect of i epetial relations of infntly 
‘rious changes of abepe, end, where the confpuretioa or change 
cf canfigueation reais identically constaat, of inGnicely varioun 
changes of position; it i "enorable” in iit, We graxp tho 
Mtdea of space wad the Ideas which it seluden, 

Fioally, the Thing is rs matwioli, it ¢ mbvionl unity, aad 
sm euch the unity of coal comenions, endeaaly varied in thelr 
possible wructure. With these epeiScally ral properties also we 
strke pan Ideas. Aifoomponenss ofthe Thiog-1des are themmeres 
eas, each ipdying th “and 1 forth of “endless” poublies 

‘That which we here develop i mot “theory”, na “etephi, 
eencceens ewemial nccesuten, isdimolublyinvatved inthe thing- 
roca, end, cocretively in the thing-pving consciousness, Se- 
canding throughout to be apprchmed with clear insight and 
omtematally studied. 

{i3yo. Conronuarion, Tan Tacio-nsoson a8 "Teswnenoarrt 
Gm 

[Now that we have gut some undertanding of the most general 

poulble hind of the infiniies which the mith of 2 ting 1s 

suck Gin vrpec beh of nena and acer) conceal within elf— 

‘un we cat alan ary: the Idee ofthe Thing and the dimension 

of the infinite which the Ten impliily comtuia—we abl ele 

a6 (PURE FHENOMSNOLOG. 
oun be able to utderetand the exent to which the Thng-rpiat 
say serve 0 «guiding che in phenomeoologial inquiries. 
‘Ansro intuit an individual thing, and continue intiting Hs sove- 
ment, fs epproachings md recedigs, its turings ound md 
abot, tx cages of orn nd qoay, the cael relatlons ia which 
{tstanda, we ran stowgl cota coatinea of the inmuting procens 
correlated with each other i= this way or ix that and usiting 
in ne unity of comcioummen; our glance i thereby dicted to- 
‘wards the intial element, the X of the mening (povtianal or 
eurrlized), the acdfaune one that changes ite urns round, 
and co focth. So it sao, when in re incition we Followup the 
infinite serca of pouble modifications skang the diferent main 
directions, in the coxaciouness of Uimitessses in the develop- 
meat of this prozae of intuoa. And likewise, gsi, when we 
past ove tothe stxndpeint of idetion end make clear maybe the 
regional Idea of the Thing: proceeding there lke the georonter 
inthe freedom and purity cf bis geometrical inten, 

‘Dat all tia give uso knowlege of te proceme of inution 
itself and the exsences aad eeeatalinfinies which belong to, 
or of ita continutine materia or noetio phates, uf ics aoematic 
coamtitvents, of the strat that on the ane sie a8 oo the other are 
Gindogahbable nnd eideticay ible, We do wot se what 
rect aly cxyeening fot taraciney aves oa 
sodifeation of fancy). We therefoce need the change of stand 
‘point, the diferent “reBexions”—tyletic, noetic, noematio— 
(ia their togechemeve righty caled reflexions wince they are 
deviations from the crigaal “stright” direction of the glance 
towards the X) It ia these eeflexions which now open to us 3 vita 
‘ad inwardly coherent field of inquiry, or « stupendous group of 
problesna corning under the Ides of regional Taig. 

‘The question then ariss:— 

Hine er we fe dacrBe ryrtomaticalty the recur end nommate 
ich belong 10 the amity of the intel fresnting Tog 
Tf we reset our stention te the noematic phere, the quent 
suns thns:— 

‘What exyromive form do the manifold positing intutine, the 

PRORLEMS OF THE THEORELIC RRASON 417 
posting atonal mominge” taba in which a res” thing presents 
elf and exhibita (ounoeic) to reaity intuitinally s original 

in themacives and from the pure ec sundpeit, “bring 10 
‘ea appescog” ene and the tare thing, dhe fully determined 
thing a the ime cing, which belo ava nconary corres 10 
thie ‘manifold of fenton and appearance? Phenoocaology ix 
never conteaton principle, with vague alk os obscure generale, 
but ayetematicaly demands « deni clarification, anaes and 
seseripin shedding Hight on Use emcatil eannezians eal peoe- 

‘The repwnat Ides of the ‘Thang, it select) K with the 
Adeeermining content of meaning, ponte ms being this or thm, pre- 
cries rues for the miele of appearances. It conan to thin: they 
are not manifolds im genera, coming together by accident, at 
indeed ulreudy follows froea thin that ia themseive wad on purely 
user lsen thry relate © the Thing, the determinate Thing, 
‘The regional Iden prescribes series of eppearancen that are filly 
determinate, defaately ordered, progresing és infitum, ancl, 
taken in their ieal tou, proasely ited and fsod,w definite 
innee organisation of thesr modes of development, which, for 
‘purpones of inquiry, hang eaentally together with the partial 
eas which are doigrated in a general way at the cumpanents 
‘of the regional Ides of Thing. As « part of this organisation, it 
‘wanapires, for instance, shat the unity of « mere rer extn is 
<occeivable apart from the unity which regulates the idea of the 
172s materia, athough Do res materials 5 conceivable which ia 
ot abo rer artous. ‘The fact eomda out (os avays in cides 
phenomenological intuition) that every sppearmnce of « thing 
‘Decenarly conceals in itel¥ a satura which we call the Thing- 
chena: referring thereby to the apetial form filled out simply 
with “sensory” quatestacking every determination of “sub- 
seantnirg” md “salty” (in inverted commu, to be undemtood 
1s noemunically modiéed), Already the mancited Lise of « mare 

at PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

a extena many wand a0 tte for « weal of phenomenalogial 
problexe, 

‘What in oor innocence of phecomenslogicalnicetin we take 
foc mere facts: tht a pati thing abweye appeat wo “us uname” 
{in certain "erintetion”, orieated, for iaetatce, i the vial eld 
of view sd below, right acd lef, ear and far hat me 
an see thing only atx crtin “depth” or “distance”; that al) 
the changing ditancra ut which it can be oeea are seated to 4 
cxntre of all depth-cricaations “localised” by wa i the head, 
inva thougls famine t> usa an idea! Hang poiat—all tne 
Aeged facts (Faktisittes) concingencica of spatial peroeption 
which are foreign to che “true”, “objective” apace, reveal tee 
elven down t0 the most tivial expire ecbdivisions (Zernder- 
seagen) 2 omental ngcentven. Thus we sce that 20t only for un 
Inman beings, but also for God—as the ideal repesentative of 
sbsolute nowldge—hatever han the character of nepata thing, 
it inimitable only through appearance, wherein i is given, and 
(deed axe be given, se changing “peonpectvely” in varied yet 
sored wep, we hry pone in aging rae 

‘We amut now seek not oly to establish thi as « general thesia, 
‘but to fofow i up ina all perscalar formations The problem 
the “origi ofthe presedation of spa, the deepest phecomenn- 
Joga) ceaning wherest hes never yet been graeped, reduces 
imlf wm the pheaumenologic) analyvin of the asental nature of 
all the scematic (eed noetc) phenomens, whezeia vpace exhibits 
fnelfintotonaliy and a the usity of sppemasces, and of tbe 
escripeve modes of auch exhibiting “constitutes” the spatial 

‘The problem of the conrieting fumcto clearty betokens nothing 
fucther than thst the regulated series of appearances which 
scouarity bold together within the unity of « single appearing 
his pe te rion be theoretically apprebeated 

pie of (hich in and tarough Sts 
cermin "de fer cs be money melt) tat 
‘tay cam be scalyved ned dence in ther own ait pecstaiey, 
snd that the ea-conforming fonction of the correlation betwows the 
cmminasesppecring ject ox ity end the craic iii 

PROBLEMS OF THR THEORETIC REASON arg 

mulipiciter of appearances can be fully een into end ao diarobed, 
cf alli mystics. 

‘This holds good foc the snity which Kin inthe rw exten (ond 
sho the ree temporals), and not lea for the higher, the grounded. 
‘unites which the exprewion “material”. ic, subcantial-camal 
‘hing, indicates. AIl these uniies cooatitute themselves an the 
level of empirical intuition io “manifolds”, and the twosided 
cemential coomexions munt everywhere through all its errata be 
conupletely Uhiminated, a mepeet of meming, fle of mewning, 
of thetic Fumetions, and oo forth. Finally, chere must grow out of 
this the perfect insight into mhat the Fe of the raal Thing rapre- 
sents in the phewommologically pare comcioueers, bow it ie che 
sbsolutely seceuary correlate of « structurally jovestigated end 
‘sentially deveribed noetio-noemutic connexion. 

$152, Suara ov ‘io TeanscmmmersL, ConAITUTON OF TIO, 
‘Tinwe. Suvmurmavtany Comionaricte 

‘Thee inqurin ae emncatally determine by the different forma 
tions and rreta ix the comtieting of the Thing within the Mitt 
Of the primordial enpicial comacicuman, Each formatica xo each 
‘weratom in ic tums this character, that #t constizwtes « mmtty of itr ona, 
which on its aide isa mecerary comnacting~tick in the full coneti~ 
‘tng of dhe Ting. 

If we take porchmss the formation of the plain percaptutl 
emoatiting of the hing, whereof the correlate la the seasocy 
‘thing set out with vemory qualition, we relate ourselves to a single 
ttream af eomaciounen, 2 the pomible perceptions of « angle 
(perceiving penonal wubject. We fd here various strata of unifica- 
tina, the ahamate of rents (ensue), the “ois! hinge” of 
‘higher and lower order, which mort be completely set oat within 
ths order and wnudied with reference to their soetionoematic 
connuttiog, singly and in their ioterconnexions. The oppermos? 
ferent ofthis formation i hat ofthe actontiad conned Thing, 4 
rralny abeady in the epeciée neave of the term, but rexaiaing 
aways counticutively bound to ons empirical subject and its ideal 
ororpria maf. 

ry PURE PtxROMBNOLOGT 

"Th formation sext shove thsi hen the interrbjctce identical 
thing, 2 consttuive esity of higher ecder. Tt» conmtzuton it 
rehtod taxa indefiie plurality of abject chet stad in x relation 
of “mutual undeatsading”. The istembjectve world is the 

‘compat 
of sensory things (Simendingcnhrten) already consivued indi- 
idualy by the any subjects and thus in further sequence to the 
corresponding percepecal manifolie belaging to the diffrent 
fpenonal mbjects and streams of conacounsens; bit befae all to 
the new factor of empathy sd to the question how it plays « 
sonutive part in "objecive” experience and gives unity to 
these separnted reife, 
“Moceover, inguin mst be conducted with the 

‘eee and the conprehenivenese demanded by the nature of the 
‘axe, Thus abore, in conformity with the ims of no Introducticn, 
‘we beld before our mind « mere preliney station, « bie 
tyme of conaciutive apperrmce manifolds, nay," Ube in 
‘which one and the same thing shows contiauouly a ungle aepect 
(cnutinoiy echt). Tae perceptions in thet limite unfolding 
slong ell the astezatic lines of development xpproxizate 10 Ue 
‘purty of the covering relation; the theacs are being oontiaually 
‘sonkrmed. Here we have closer determination only, usver deter- 
rmination otherwine. Ne thing-deerminwson that hap come to be 
{W the outcome of « prenous course of experience (within 
‘his idesly loved system) uodergos “cancellation” and "wubati- 
tution” through other detercinations of that name caregory of 
quality which is formally peseribed through the regional caeace. 
[Nothing cinco the ngreessent, ae there are 50 compensating 
renin thar obliterate a diturbence, to sry noting ofthat “explod- 
ing” of the agreement in which the posted thing ia entirely 
cancelled, But these counter-cases mast be no kas taben into our 
Phenommlogicl reckoning, since they ako ply or might ploy 
thes part in connexion with the posible cantinton of sx. em- 
pirical realty. Te way of fect-inowledge, oof ideally posible 
nowdge, leads Ghrough error, end this already atthe Sewest 
stage of Knowhige, that of the insitive erop of realty. Tot the 

PRONLEMS OF THE THEORETIC REASON 41s 

conses of perception, in which partial breaches af agreement ocenr, 
snd the agreement caz be maintained oniy through “corrections”, 
saat be eputematially devcribed in respect of all it essential 
coretiovents, noetic and nsematic: the changes ic the mode of 
spprebeaion, the peculiar thetic occurences, the transrahngs 
sul dirvaluings of the previounly apprehended a “husion' or 
"deception"; the transition into “cantiee” all unraolved along 
‘certain Lise, and wo fort. Over nginet the continuous eynthenis 
of agreement, the syntheses of caniict, of misinterpretation and 
fering definition, and whatove: they may elee bs cae, must 
come inta their right, for a phenamenslogy of “true reality" the 
‘Phenorenalgy of “wan iin in wholly ‘adiopeciable. 

$951. Tenwerm of ‘nor Peomune or rar ‘Tenescwannea, 
Commrctne Poremion vo Onom Ructons 

1 wil be eaily ene tet what bas been at by way of urtration 
in regard tothe conetiotion of tbe materia) Thing—and indeed ix 
reapect of the eaattuting procem wichin the system of the mani- 
fokia of experience which lie prior to all "thisking"—coust apply 
sa rogania both problem and catthod to all oijec-rgroa, Ta. the 
place of “sensory perceptions” we would then naturally beve the 
{typos uf prinoedil dator acts emeotally attached to the regions 
{fn question, and these acts most be previously vet out and inveet- 
(ted through phenomenon! mals 

‘Very dificult poblema adhere to the étedaing ofthe dierent 
regions, Thy cancion the inteiacings in che commuting for- 
smatioas of cocaciousness, The Thigg ia not anything isolated over 
sauiot the experiencing subject, sa wi have abeady became 
apparent from the indications given above oencerning the inter 
subjective conniration of the “ebjective” wockl of things. But 
thin experiencing subject itelf is constiuted in experiesce an 
eomething real. at man or best, just we the iakerabectoe comm 
fas ure conattsted es exizal communities. 

‘These comumonitin, eftbongh ementilly grounded in paychical 
realtor, which, an ther side, are grounded in the physical, reveal 
hamectves a new qype of sbi of higher order. It can be 

” PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
sen quite geotily that there are many kinds of objectiviian 
‘which dey all pepchologitic sad al naturale mninterpretation, 
‘Boch are ull types of jets Geary 0 vale, all practical objects, 
‘ll concrete cltue!orgesimeons which ws har relitien detonnine 
cur acta! life, the State, for tartance, the Church coe, th or, 
sd 00 forth. All thom sbjceive exties (Objuitien) mas be 
escrbed inthe wy in which they core to be presented secarding 
to their funchentalrypen ead i ther proper arter of furtuaton, 
snd the problns of phenomencopcal shaping (Konto) vet and 
solved in ther cae. 

"The shaping of vnese entities ads back quite naturally to that 
of paychical subject nd af things or their analogues in apace: 
ay are grounded indeed is uch reali, Materia reality 23 the 
Jomest formation remains in the last resort the foundation ofall 
‘xber realten, end therefore undoubtedly the pheoounolagy of 
‘malerialnatws hold fre-minent forton. But locked at without 
prejudice ead referred back phecomenologicaly 10 ita sre, tht 
routed mites, chough grounded, are aw in ype; the new foto, 
amersaver, which ia Cewith continte, can Deve, a8 we Jar. 
indeed frem ementia! intuition, be reduced to the mere vum of 
ther realtice. Thos in fart cory perolior type of rich realtor 
bring with it its oun courtintioe phmomewslary, a therewith 
‘now concrete docrina of the resin, Is. principle our tack remain 
everywhere the same: we hare» bring to hacwledge the complete 
sgptem of conscivos formstions, covering all Yves and stats, 
‘which continue the primordial gveanees of all such objective 
atc, and therewith make inteigible che equivalent, in terms of 
conacouanens, ofthe relevant type of reality”. Everything alo 
‘which we sbould sayin truth 40 ws to exchode the many misundar+ 
‘sanding into which we vo easly fll concerning the coreletoa of 
‘Being and Conscioumment (ror fctance, that al raliry “resol 
itself into papebic factors”) can be stated only on the ground 
of the easeatial connexons of the cumstinuive groupe, ws eppre- 
Iended from the phromenslogics wandpaint end in che Hight 
of inten. 

PROBLEMS OF THE THEORETIC REASON 443 

Sigg. Tr Fra Exreeicn or rar Teoncomnens: Pooaumr. 
‘Tax brooms Casa 

‘Addiscnaian on 50 peners level a hm hitherto bea sions possible 
Cannot awake any adequate ides of the tremendous ext of the 
Invenigmions which we have 30 far a posible roogsizd end 
demanded. To thia ead, for che main types of realities wt lout, « 
vet of deiled senda woutd be needed; we ahould need to proceed 
su we did in respect ofthe forms of inquiry needed for investigating 
the general actu of connciousaess. Meanwbile in the sequel 
to this work the dncumioa which the thought of the preset day 
finds wv abeorbing over the souroveral questions cenceraing whe 
smut relation of the great groupe of acienes bearing the tilas 
‘natunl science, peychology, end science of mind, and eapecaly 
renwering thet teation © phenaromslogy, will tt the maze ioe 
provide the oppornity for bringmg the problexs of phenomeno- 
logical shaping more cloely and more distinctly before wo, Here, 
Iamever, vo muck will already hve become cer that these con- 
‘woversies deal with relly serious probleow, sod! that regions of 
nquity open out which treat of all remiine matiers of principle fn 
the ceria ances. Te “rate of preps noo noting 
lsc than that which centres round the regions ideas in the ahape. 
cf bc concepts and fimdementl forma of owlege, el Sn, 
Indeed omat find, iis yyuemcic vafolding is corresponding 
nginat antoogi 

‘What we have axid can be tranferred from the material to the 
Jormal sphere sn 1a the ocebopcol daeaplon appropri 10 s, 
therefore co all principles and genecaly to all eciences that ceat 
on principles, if we suitably widen the Ides of phenamenalogical 
sping. It ie true that thereby the Tinit of encaicutive research 
20 widens out Unt tia eventually expable of inchaing the whole of 

‘This will ida. favee itelf upon cur notion mt we atk! che 
following sapplerentary cocaiderstions — 

Firat and focemot, the probleas regarding the constituting of 
the object are related to the manifolds of« powsble primordial dater- 
coascioursene—in the case of Things, for inmance, to the soeality 

” PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
of pomtble eperncs, perceptions of coe and the name thing. 
Connected with this i the suppleomentary comideraton of the 
reproductive poaional type of comcioumese and he Inquiry 
inte their cooniruive rion Function, a, which emoant 10 che 
same thing, thee Gancion foe plain intling cogaltin; vndary 
‘the consideration of the obecurely presenting (but pli) cumacious— 
‘nets and the problema af reason and reality which relate to it. Yn 
abort, we keep in the first instance within the mere sphere of 

‘But united with then are the comeapandig inquire reted 
to the functions of the Kgher sphere, the so-led sphere of the 
* anderrtanng” or the rearen', i the marrower scat ofthe term, 
with io analyte, relating and otherwise “logical” (lao then arb 
logical and practical systheee, wth dee “cxpcepeua”eperstions, 
ther utessent ceasing, ther new and roediate fara of ground 
ing. "Thun objectvitin which were at fire given (oc thought of in 
ea w given) in monotheti ate, in vooe experiense, Jet un ty, 
‘an be made nubect the play of eyathtc operations, end through 
nyuthetle objectivities cocaine increaing’y higher formations 
‘thi jn the unity of the total thesis contain plurality of theses, 
sad inthe waty of thelr tral content (Mater) contain & pluruty 
of mutually detachable (oplidernde) contents (Matren). We ca 
collec, ennntruc” cllcetaea (groups) of differing order of Forma 
‘thon (groupe of groupe), we can set in relief “parts” out of the 

ple propertia and proticatca over ngaint their mubjects, 
‘et objects “in relation to” objects, “cake” the one at or pleaure 
into the centre of reference (Refrentn) the other into the object 
refered to, and so forth. We ean earry ut sch ayatheses “really” 
«end “property” -e. under the exaditions of synthetic primordialty: 
the synthetic objectivity bas then, In rexpect ofits aynthede form, 
‘the character of the primordially given (for instance, of the really 
{iven colletion, aubmurtion, retin, and ua forth), end i haa 
the fll character of primocdility ifthe theee tare ity ifthe 
‘tie actcheractrs are primondally motiated ax ralonal, We 
an alo make we of free facet, st in relation the primordially 
given and the guan-given, or cary oot the ayuthenen ugk 
in the mods form. tranafonm what we are thu comms of into 

PROBLEMS Ox JE THEORETIC REASON 5 
‘a “muppoaition” (danats, “comstruct” hypotheses, “drew canse- 
quences” therefrom, oF cay out comparisons and distoctions, 
subject once again the Brencaen or diflerencea theseby gen 12 
syotketic operations, wnitiag with all chs ideatioos, emetial 
poniings o eappontingn, sad so on i afta. 

Moreover, Aca of lower or higher grade of obfecivatian, 
pact ineitonal, pay snintsxonal, it may be whelly confused, 
Tie atthe basis ofthe opernions. In th cas of ebecurty or cone 
fuloa we can make sour business to clear up the eyatbtic“oan- 

(0 opex up the question of their povblity, thelr 
fulfilment (alia) through “apathetic inruitan”; or again, that 
of thar “realey”, that of Uhr redaecbtenns (Kldnarhi!) 
‘theough expict and pei daar aynchets ct, it may be by 
vay of moist “infermoes" or “proofs”. Phnomenologialy all 
‘hese rypes of syntheses coreation with the nymthetie objctvi- 
de Yconatiute" within ther should be mubjected to am toquiry 
with the object of shedding gh oa the diferent modes of presenta 
‘Hom and hes sgaificance fc the“ rel Being” of wuch bjectiviin, 
oF for thet trae posible being or ir reo! probable being, and 
‘rill i reference to all queations of rationality al of troth of 
reality. Hare aloo then we have “potions of phenonreoleice! 
shaping” (Konatittieprolems). 

[Now the logical syntheses are indeed grounded on the lomewt 
‘nee with their pls ad eimple deat becrings or memnige, but 
in puch a way tht the ewential conforms ofthe syztbetis level 
swith Inw and onder, endl expecaily with the Ire of reaton—in 
very wide but defiitely cieumacribed “formal” epbere—are 
independent ofthe special eal boing (Matern ofthe meabexs 
of the syathesis. On thie depends preciely the pouiblity of a 
{vera and forval Logic which sbetraco Grom the “content” of 
logical knowledge and thinks it i indeterminate freely variable 
geocrlity (m "tomething or other"). Inguinal relating to 
the counitating proces dvi eccor ably into thowe which commect 
‘with the formal basic excepts, and tke thee slave a "guiding 
hse” tothe problems of rationality. or of realty ad trath; and 
onthe othe hand ttn the previentiy portrayed, which connect 
‘with the repinal bac concepts, din the fet intance with cha 

“ (PURG FRENOMANULOGY 
concept of Rayon dol, and indect with the qoation Joe an 
individual cxember of voch 3 region comes to be given. With the 
repimal easgorssxad the suds indicated by these, she special 
determination hich the form af nynthenis wncexgons in wittes af the 
‘regional conteat cares to ita cw, and 40 too does the Inffsence 
‘WG he special Bing comer (sc a2 Gad xpromi in 
‘gional aloes) ener pon he regina racy. 

‘Wat bere deed chiouty apie to ll che prea of wet 

‘But kt unut be expresly noted that in these cannezions betwen 
canmtitetive phenocsenclogins and the corresponding formal wd 
material ntclogies there is ne Aint of « gronadling of the former 
the darter, Phenoweslagy doe uot jnige ontoepically wien it 

PRONLEMS OF 1H THSOREIIC REASON ay 
sengnizes en camloica cocept ax propastion we th indicator 
of coctestve nd emenal cnseans, when it wes in tw hse 
‘> iontiverevelions (fiom) which cory their authority 
td ther vadey purly ia hemecie THs genre coacknlon 
Will eccive on 4 lnter Ccemice further confcmaton in x mote 
thocoughgoing treatment which, ix virwe of the importance of 
‘his whole mutes (Sachiag), i exapbatiaty called for. 

‘Acomprcheaive sls of the problems of phenomessoglal 
shaping wich shall take equily ito corateaticn the noctc 
td de noeratic sea of cexscoumem would be mecifetly 
equivalent to « complete phenomenology of the reason in respect. 
of al ies formal pnd roseriel formation, whether non-normal 
(ongevely rrdecal) o¢ sore! (poctvely rational), But we are 
farther compelled to admit that » phenomenology of the reason 
sa complet this would exci wih phesaamenology in genera, 
smd tha i eatersatially carrying oot ll the disciplines of con- 
teioumen which ae demanded wader the cllacive file “ono. 
stort ofthe object” ll nd mandy deerptine of commune 
‘would need be Sncuded. 

ANALYTICAL INDEX 

(Qodatad cn the ocmeenng Tee te pent Geran com 
[Bled by De: Lamere Lammas of Eowinnysorteemge ayo te 
Van a De. Geran Washers daelrahe Secequrr 3953) 

[7a Mare <The rfeeany uh Inde 0 Suan th 
Spegattg ie mas. Toners rec nt eed ed ted 
Fa salmon ragramny Al rics ta Se men hore se eae 
Sete mnng ass Someen tec Where Sure no seswon ether af 
1 droce, the rierstee a a vernon as wins Dr. Laoag ha 

sg sth read tA mm om 
sets mee 
PE ap eels charcoal 
‘Bees barat Rm Sens ee Habe a #5 
poo 

SE Wawady (aia aree 
. vo 

SOE foal fea sogmonien 3 th emp oA. ha Lad 

sanirr, 
LMA (inaiesd won ‘Nene? snk “Dakoound’ Vide ano 
Newacy at Panay 
ae A erm 49K weet 270,14 ks ok 
Auli rection ofthe 8 seb 14, 120; "Orga et 
serene eve tek er rm eT 
tm ett at wy “toy as sme stored 

Ee 
Iolinog 0, nae, avant sh 1008, Bepaen ha, 

Aad aang). si ‘het A. wk pease daccesce 
nrmam) BA Al ta foe ey 1, rey sb nc 

Dove Cpe ens) anes Bo meron 366; Teg ws Bf 
‘Fepeal eve wo tae he be es 29 8, 
a 

Canin, Camating (Dantes), sm ‘Negion'—08, gh, 

ome 
Ts Pete eres come nh te sy 
om eee Tea cpa af Se apres 
mi en Sn ern mn Sth Cm 

Seale it Come 
Comerete Baise, pomcng 7 Omen’) = |<. seo “Smet, ere’. 

See ccamnt CH, 

ANALYLTCAL INDEX 
a 
Sas 
‘Grama nd Pee 

Day Obetaring (wine), it. “nd” phate (Ths expen it 
Tred fee Beemrd Banquets cesbioce <'c pnege af Rees 
Jaan Cmcamparcy Pata. re nierras- OL tae Ta) 

enemies corms), ro 

Dotmmecone taeaat CNomunsbeerans 1484 Lew of Demancate 
‘Tpomieen see 

Depots Cronies), emery D. 154 

Boo come, . 

Brongn ct Dna) Deane eran 7345 
eanve Bee 

LDugrme (Mteron Sow pecie D) = ete sgt (Vi), 
‘ranalipechac (apa ed orasiypg ovat D 19 she et 
ed the pen 2 neat monic nme D0 

tae Steve rn ot oe 
“cm poston) can Poston’ Revere oe 
Sin i eagle nnn Deke rhe 
Sessonoee edt ee Shree Hey ast eed 
ind 

See ere ne eget. Gh. sobemar gd ttre 
‘au ta foemaldorrne f emaly prasad eennge 334197 
Pyke pues ef te Dood erage re 

Tes (Ure ne ay ea rte 

ANALYTICAL INDEX rd 

‘aries Qe ee 
yanlt a arr cmt rie hb 

Swope ec tate 
‘qscoml nctre tora ans utr mcr 

oy Satine (hp Sram), 8.00 erm 46, 
eke a coal venoms ls Plmeamcaley 
Eiirent mes (ae Roan) 23,198, 
ee 

(an dene of hemagy BED gro; are 13092, 108653. 
pen 14 

Juphnaen, 

ofA undone weeny 78 f tmintmm 204, 
rrr 

‘naan 
bse lap eed in comtoaren HeP Dat 
Maer (Mane) 3 

re eapencat)y 3nd odin 7831 
tts of necro Sooner Bt 

aoe 

(peed igarsal 2 te Nowaeed New 
Lew fon tame of cies M, 46 
at erp 

Seed Same eas 
fo 
sie ¥ "¥en 
ae 
SB ES hee mt rn eon te 
eae ak ctr semana 

Bg 

Hin 

ut 

Kacetne, Thory f Neomety fos Taeery of K. 6 

PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 

Malm spy fom (ate) oad onal pon 

md Smal pedir Fp (tad foral oct f era 

ny Fim Se-emecs pataede pend IT 

Machen sngomininy oa Mo Ti coemgt ef ts smth 
Wink aris 13a Snag pasion se 

of Mead ewe 
fab as7 Nous 
mite 

fat, eysinls Mv. apes meenalephe 

= 
oe aS nE 
Lee 

ich M,pnenog bck fo viet ed 
; term 
‘dns "Fore ta oman) Temouenal nop 
“dicagutted vm emma ly 856, 
Merges —tsopinlngenl ence 46, phectnenegy meets 24 
Present roo Bapeen rot of); movered enelaity 

‘Reaaah vee weiner sane sar 
(Preqamy Maseaghinghet secns bat tested by ‘ome. C. 
renee 

Meck note Cg of Nome ad pre Paracas tytn 
‘a ha cnatangharedee spe case enacts oe usta pe 

rare cers Maar teeta 
Remieeoescomeat 
Eo eet err 

re ae 
Sa 3S Ease tenes 

arma wd thc conten wih de sored eerie Ul 
TO Geet ee oS ec a ee] 

ANMATICAL INDEX ron 

Ong shen Somat ee 
“Paral 0. (cho “Lage: 10, of tha war fang sad i 
“aging al etna Secy a end tne Cos 
Wied st vowoer cf cee rat and tic ona to Be Mmeeal 
he teri enema oy ph men ky oem 
Co ae 

Cran mo wre’) O 
"anne of O ta tar ews 15 

Onainey (om), omer Vide Prmertahey? 

i re, 

eo 
por aeab Cees 

a PURE PHENOMENOLOGY 
Famers (se) P(t eect) Pe rem apne 
eee cree ah hae. amen rar sean 
‘Se a aby of cP oy nen semi ly Sa 
SrLMe roe, seem nomeey 28 Toe ttm men 

Pengurce Von i nd perp vacable 4, 9484 

Bird 

dank i 
HA ; 

iy me of Pt 
yay he ® Oat ee eyed mtn 

piece ot a hader eo fib, ecrne Pa 

ete 

Poaare (Caledon groaning of ? 98 

(Govptentc) ¥ 234 (reso “Apephemncr’yeenanl seenoce bees 
(bo room trncho aP tn th poy o wnt onl a © 

‘Peanen (atone) Batata veda! nese oot an een but ROA 
‘Sivrang cova Gren) oh Pm prmary one pmimge 9 

ANALYTICAL IRDEX as 
Troma” may ako be med te cemkew ‘demteten, Deeg! 
maphe? tame rset 

Peep aoraagaripnst enh abe Weste8 

‘Phy, Phy fem ne uated psa, Nee 

Pradnon agenda 

“ipmnnouin ees teal ter fi ale and 
ie 

SR gene perk tages ne ers demise 

i 

Reena (Rasen), Ro te chee enon 94, 96 seein 
"Ge mena seman pr eiomkens of same eral BE 
omer 

“feat (ara) mse ee pte i 102,” 
sed ore pasos tee 

‘aim, panes R tnalneary of yopca® 8. 

‘Rey Pe Neo Tm nnd m «tt bo Ra 
Si We, ean, Sa eer snes ak 

ARALALICAL DEX, w 

Ses rie pemtins man rot en 374 semen 
as Bay ‘cote veer 9, poe, quart 
‘Semrang be eeemenst Rigs preki oBoahy OW) m gets 
(Tes Raw raerrel Once Ore) a efor ora conan 
eo ome gas as opaalaginesw be malades, 
Seen 196 Po. nee of pty ed Bene ga 
Sere Co bere pe oR hs ms means pcm? TSE 

Rascnn, abr, rdaston , 5p, 6 
Re ae Maltod).p Rt he 

sempt tadee 12 Ne awh tad mrmepeoe py he ot 
rtp R rosin Puy comnremmes ors R on gta 5 

1 tao Srna uno ornare 69 te eae 
Ted ten lope tates tern $91 

f tr hod fe on of 

Renrtoroy (ernnrrang), Into of aad asa prep 
‘er wd ream, R mpm B Guanes) nnd w acolo ot 
falls, taght of maicene if a emory ne owe oma 
‘Stews tuodiloon of prego 9p memgere te momar 30, Re 
Sncton eo momerguee 2, ® ae meet a 
‘mca ot puma tre 

ANALYTICAL INDEX oe 

‘Sern ¥- "Poe" 

‘Sapmaen 8m enpocan 29; 8 aod ecm ances aba; Abaya 
cy 

Talancen 14 
Saar (Wma ~ M8. (V), Mer 8. (i) Bo Vis), 
So caeonm (Yok) Commo af Be gemnag of epee 

‘Seong Guten 1 th bend vem pnd dale emer 
Spe td pC Sot 
‘Sh Gauge 9) Seng rfercn we do tot a ok 
seustyeqermocr va ete 

‘Suebliy (abc), compe of 3 SS. 

‘Tyskimee sorts Ste gern shea © 8 emery open 
"Raed el pasommesninnd S502 (she Rede) ree 

= 
{DEO,sgre,» cewases Uden nie unny aoa ea sat 

‘cy —ensmnt snd Go 36 om, 28, hs wel a Oo 
reerereeoey pe 

Tors (Penna) ahaa = nme adatom 146; pemnn. ns 
Tal ter oars ne 8 

Taatdne dena 96 

‘Phong Fn ters vet cn (— Dong) 786 

Ayo A by ho pt 
"islam — pond Gator = es 

Gea Gon mn drt 

ori 
SDSS Ge pesite eed oe el al meee mee 
ae rf, Tsu phous feducnon me conponaie of ta Dove 90 
enetnliy of percusn Sekoaioe 

ANALY CICAL INDEX “o 

‘eg (7 she aay) Tepes (“Arron el (wich) T 
oe 

eee acer sey tr amet feed 
Seneca, pel ctr £36 Pe 

i” 
Groated) gy 260 noua wn coca th orn ef Wil eon 
So dea 9, Wm mee ‘Wilner us, 

ins pacang et 1 4, ry waren 

Linea 
wih oe Seiad Se deme ee’ Cr eyo 
{aroigrome of te frm ef Wt rer ed tare cep 

Wenn 
onda vc mand wd the sof enon 
cgedtmeagete pana 

INDEX TO PROPER NAMES 

hon. 
(ake, fe "hue ow te nn see a 

GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD 
Ugmooms 42 Menmuse Sramens W.C-t 
Care Tove. 94 8. Ciotows Sraerr 
svorey, NEW. Weavano. GquAIx 
Aveuans, Na. 4: AER? Stan 
Tosoero: 77 Weitwaton Sraer, Wes 

he pepe frre ete pre reed ene 

ety cares 
See ee 

Number: The Language of Science 

‘by TOBIAS DANTZIG, PLD 

Dovey tot a see, 
‘Tin wre ematnat scomnt for oe, methemsies! 

geen eder anton Bee wis eas 
Siliegina conepertes = YC Foae Enery 

i 
He 

Philosophy Without Metaphysics 
‘oy EOMOND HOLMES 

eto, 7». 
eset Jor ot atoms Uwe ace so bes wu weet fo 
Riptmed ce ieee Yo Merajayocr aeeery coor metal, 
‘Gitte Ratisy cher he casas fede nvoen em etc at 
Se cove efron eu nach demnndr ae eopeon 
‘Salma base pow 

Spirit in Evolution 
‘rem Anite tS 

by HERBERT F. STANDING, D.Sc 
{iI Coord Frenne aud wer Foy Tort geae 

ay roar wtb te to em Sar tan tes myontion of te 

eater Tou Senses 

‘Shh boa han tng Dues eecded Minny have Yun writing or quite 

‘beer atin hate fen tg apt cra oe ina 

wick — ‘sat De or 
"Se Serer Sv gets ny icky Sawding 

Critique of Love 
as vy FRITZ WITTELS 
‘Bonk Geary cad opty mene ae pcan ater fe adc 

Ethical Principles in Theory and Practice 
‘An Essay in Moral Pailosophy 
by HANS DRIESCH, Ph.D. 
rmanease> ay WH Jonvarox 

y 

Cr ne 

“eae Drm m, of covina 6 Agare to by reckoned with 488 ot 

ERPS F “Sea'taikied i's ac erent 
J 

‘he uinory oat aches hie eal er . 

I 

‘Kant’s Conception of God 
‘Coal Renton eta Metal Dragan 
‘oy F. E. ENGLAND, PRD, BD. 

Dany tn me 
“ay ite omen back ney ten Jewea 
i ora a SOT aes, eras tine Cr 

outed Chane Tae 

Science and the Unseen World 

by Swe ARTHUR EDDIXGTON, PhD 
“tao Yan he Pt We” 
Seottene Lome, 1009 
Fp Impromen ial ab 64, Paper 0 Ob 
seycemt semana cates made dug tn peat 
uthnas te genie acn senna 5 sts Nr Peat 
oul Go in hy sa ie nce why Semel orn 

Mariage and Morals 

Points of View 

1M. 0, WELLS, bas INGE, Sur OLIVER LODGE, J. B 8 
. Br WALPORD DAVIES, G LOWES DIC 

GREY OF 

Bs AREMBISHO? OF TORK, Se JAMES JEANS, Dene 
FALLODON, Bi "BELLO, Si HENRY NEWBOLT 

Ls G tee