The Protestant Ethic and 
the Spirit of Capitalism 

Max Weber 

eee 

Taylor & Fra 

390711N0¥ 

Also available as a printed book 
see title verso for ISBN details 

The Protestant Ethic and 
the Spirit of Capitalism 

‘Max Weber is the one undisputed canonical figure in 
contemporary sociology.’ 
The Times Higher Education Supplement 

‘Weber’s essay is certainly one of the most fruitful 
examinations of the relations between religion and 
social theory which has appeared, and I desire to 
acknowledge my indebtedness to it.’ 

R. H. Tawney, Religion and the Rise of Capitalism 

Max 

Weber 

The Protestant Ethic and 
the Spirit of Capitalism 

Translated by Talcott Parsons 

With an introduction by Anthony Giddens 

m 

o 

l = London and New York 

re} N 
ss“ 

azoqmlinoy ^- 

First published 1930 by Allen and Unwin 
First published by Routledge 1992 

First published in Routledge Classics 2001 
by Routledge 

11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE 

29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001 

Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group 
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2005. 
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s 

collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.” 

© 1930 Max Weber 

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted 
or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in 
any information storage or retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publishers. 

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
A catalog record for this book has been applied for 

ISBN 0-203-99580-5 Master e-book ISBN 

ISBN 0-415—25559-7 (hbk) 
ISBN 0-415—25406-X (pbk) 

CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION BY ANTHONY GIDDENS vii 
TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE XXV 
AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION xxviii 
PART I The Problem 1 
1 Religious Affiliation and Social Stratification 3 
2 The Spirit of Capitalism 13 

3 Luther’s Conception of the Calling: Task of 
the Investigation 39 

PART II The Practical Ethics of the Ascetic Branches of 

Protestantism 51 
4 The Religious Foundations of Worldly Asceticism 53 
A. Calvinism 56 

B. Pietism 80 

C. Methodism 89 

D. The Baptist Sects 92 

vi 

CONTENTS 

5 Asceticism and the Spirit of Capitalism 

NOTES 
INDEX 

102 

126 
263 

INTRODUCTION 

The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism undoubtedly ranks as 
one of the most renowned, and controversial, works of modern 
social science. First published as a two-part article in 1904-5, in 
the Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, of which Weber was 
one of the editors, it immediately provoked a critical debate, in 
which Weber participated actively, and which, some seventy 
years later, has still not gone off the boil. This English translation 
is in fact taken from the revised version of the work, that first 
appeared in Weber’s Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Religionssoziologie (Collected 
Essays on the Sociology of Religion), published in 1920-1 just after 
Weber’s death, and thus contains comments on the critical litera- 
ture to which its initial appearance had given rise. 

Weber wrote The Protestant Ethic at a pivotal period of his intel- 
lectual career, shortly after his recovery from a depressive illness 
that had incapacitated him from serious academic work for a 
period of some four years. Prior to his sickness, most of Weber’s 
works, although definitely presaging the themes developed in 
the later phase of his life, were technical researches in economic 

viii 

INTRODUCTION 

history, economics and jurisprudence. They include studies of 
mediaeval trading law (his doctoral dissertation), the develop- 
ment of Roman land-tenure, and the contemporary socio- 
economic conditions of rural workers in the eastern part of 
Germany. These writings took their inspiration in some substan- 
tial part from the so-called ‘historical school’ of economics 
which, in conscious divergence from British political economy, 
stressed the need to examine economic life within the context of 
the historical development of culture as a whole. Weber always 
remained indebted to this standpoint. But the series of works he 
began on his return to health, and which preoccupied him for 
the remainder of his career, concern a range of problems much 
broader in compass than those covered in the earlier period. The 
Protestant Ethic was a first fruit of these new endeavours. 

An appreciation of what Weber sought to achieve in the book 
demands at least an elementary grasp of two aspects of the cir- 
cumstances in which it was produced: the intellectual climate 
within which he wrote, and the connections between the work 
itself and the massive programme of study that he set himself in 
the second phase of his career. 

1. THE BACKGROUND 

German philosophy, political theory and economics in the nine- 
teenth century were very different from their counterparts in 
Britain. The dominant position of utilitarianism and classical 
political economy in the latter country was not reproduced in 
Germany, where these were held at arm’s length by the influ- 
ence of Idealism and, in the closing decades of the nineteenth 
century, by the growing impact of Marxism. In Britain, J. S. 
Mill’s System of Logic (1843) unified the natural and social sciences 
in a framework that fitted comfortably within existing traditions 
in that country. Mill was Comte’s most distinguished British 
disciple, if sharply critical of some of his excesses. Comte’s 

INTRODUCTION 

positivism never found a ready soil in Germany; and Dilthey’s 
sympathetic but critical reception of Mill’s version of the ‘moral 
sciences’ gave an added impulse to what came to be known as 
the Geisteswissenschaften (originally coined precisely as a translation 
of ‘moral sciences’). The tradition of the Geisteswissenschaften, or 
the ‘hermeneutic’ tradition, stretches back well before Dilthey, 
and from the middle of the eighteenth century onwards was 
intertwined with, but also partly set off from, the broader stream 
of Idealistic philosophy. Those associated with the hermeneutic 
viewpoint insisted upon the differentiation of the sciences of 
nature from the study of man. While we can ‘explain’ natural 
occurrences in terms of the application of causal laws, human 
conduct is intrinsically meaningful, and has to be ‘interpreted’ 
or ‘understood’ in a way which has no counterpart in nature. 
Such an emphasis linked closely with a stress upon the centrality 
of history in the study of human conduct, in economic action as 
in other areas, because the cultural values that lend meanings to 
human life, it was held, are created by specific processes of social 
development. 

Just as he accepted the thesis that history is of focal import- 
ance to the social sciences, Weber adopted the idea that the 
‘understanding’ (Verstehen) of meaning is essential to the explica- 
tion of human action. But he was critical of the notions of ‘intu- 
ition’, ‘empathy’, etc. that were regarded by many others as 
necessarily tied to the interpretative understanding of conduct. 
Most important, he rejected the view that recognition of the 
‘meaningful’ character of human conduct entails that causal 
explanation cannot be undertaken in the social sciences. On the 
level of abstract method, Weber was not able to work out a 
satisfactory reconciliation of the diverse threads that he tried to 
knit together; but his effort at synthesis produced a distinctive 
style of historical study, combining a sensitivity to diverse cul- 
tural meanings with an insistence upon the fundamental causal 
role of ‘material’ factors in influencing the course of history. 

INTRODUCTION 

It was from such an intellectual background that Weber 
approached Marxism, both as a set of doctrines and a political 
force promoting practical ends. Weber was closely associated 
with the Verein fiir Sozialpolitik (Association for Social Policy), a 
group of liberal scholars interested in the promotion of progres- 
sive social reform.' He was a member of the so-called ‘younger 
generation’ associated with the Verein, the first group to acquire a 
sophisticated knowledge of Marxist theory and to attempt to 
creatively employ elements drawn from Marxism — without ever 
accepting it as an overall system of thought, and recoiling from 
its revolutionary politics. While acknowledging the contribu- 
tions of Marx, Weber held a more reserved attitude towards 
Marxism (often being bitterly critical of the works and political 
involvements of some of Marx’s professed followers) than did 
his illustrious contemporary, Sombart. Each shared, however, a 
concern with the origins and likely course of evolution of indus- 
trial capitalism, in Germany specifically and in the West as a 
whole.’ Specifically, they saw the economic conditions that Marx 
believed determined the development and future transformation 
of capitalism as embedded within a unique cultural totality.° 
Both devoted much of their work to identifying the emergence 
of this ‘ethos’ or ‘spirit’ (Geist) of modern Western capitalism. 

2. THE THEMES OF THE PROTESTANT ETHIC 

In seeking to specify the distinctive characteristics of modern 
capitalism in The Protestant Ethic, Weber first of all separates off 
capitalistic enterprise from the pursuit of gain as such. The 
desire for wealth has existed in most times and places, and has in 
itself nothing to do with capitalistic action, which involves a 
regular orientation to the achievement of profit through (nom- 
inally peaceful) economic exchange. ‘Capitalism’, thus defined, 
in the shape of mercantile operations, for instance, has existed in 
various forms of society: in Babylon and Ancient Egypt, China, 

INTRODUCTION 

India and mediaeval Europe. But only in the West, and in rela- 
tively recent times, has capitalistic activity become associated 
with the rational organisation of formally free labour.* By ‘rational organ- 
isation’ of labour here Weber means its routinised, calculated 
administration within continuously functioning enterprises. 

A rationalised capitalistic enterprise implies two things: a dis- 
ciplined labour force, and the regularised investment of capital. 
Each contrasts profoundly with traditional types of economic 
activity. The significance of the former is readily illustrated by 
the experience of those who have set up modern productive 
organisations in communities where they have not previously 
been known. Let us suppose such employers, in order to raise 
productivity, introduce piece-rates, whereby workers can 
improve their wages, in the expectation that this will provide the 
members of their labour force with an incentive to work harder. 
The result may be that the latter actually work less than before: 
because they are interested, not in maximising their daily wage, 
but only in earning enough to satisfy their traditionally estab- 
lished needs. A parallel phenomenon exists among the wealthy 
in traditional forms of society, where those who profit from 
capitalist enterprise do so only in order to acquire money for the 
uses to which it can be put, in buying material comfort, pleasure 
or power. The regular reproduction of capital, involving its con- 
tinual investment and reinvestment for the end of economic 
efficiency, is foreign to traditional types of enterprise. It is 
associated with an outlook of a very specific kind: the continual 
accumulation of wealth for its own sake, rather than for the 
material rewards that it can serve to bring. ‘Man is dominated by 
the making of money, by acquisition as the ultimate purpose of 
his life. Economic acquisition is no longer subordinated to man 
as the means for the satisfaction of his material needs’ (p. 18). 
This, according to Weber, is the essence of the spirit of modern 
capitalism. 

What explains this historically peculiar circumstance of a 

xi 

xii 

INTRODUCTION 

drive to the accumulation of wealth conjoined to an absence of 
interest in the worldly pleasures which it can purchase? It would 
certainly be mistaken, Weber argues, to suppose that it derives 
from the relaxation of traditional moralities: this novel outlook 
is a distinctively moral one, demanding in fact unusual self- 
discipline. The entrepreneurs associated with the development 
of rational capitalism combine the impulse to accumulation with 
a positively frugal life-style. Weber finds the answer in the ‘this- 
worldly asceticism’ of Puritanism, as focused through the con- 
cept of the ‘calling’. The notion of the calling, according to 
Weber, did not exist either in Antiquity or in Catholic theology; 
it was introduced by the Reformation. It refers basically to the 
idea that the highest form of moral obligation of the individual 
is to fulfil his duty in worldly affairs. This projects religious 
behaviour into the day-to-day world, and stands in contrast to 
the Catholic ideal of the monastic life, whose object is to tran- 
scend the demands of mundane existence. Moreover, the moral 
responsibility of the Protestant is cumulative: the cycle of sin, 
repentance and forgiveness, renewed throughout the life of the 
Catholic, is absent in Protestantism. 

Although the idea of the calling was already present in 
Luther’s doctrines, Weber argues, it became more rigorously 
developed in the various Puritan sects: Calvinism, Methodism, 
Pietism and Baptism. Much of Weber’s discussion is in fact con- 
centrated upon the first of these, although he is interested not 
just in Calvin’s doctrines as such but in their later evolution 
within the Calvinist movement. Of the elements in Calvinism 
that Weber singles out for special attention, perhaps the most 
important, for his thesis, is the doctrine of predestination: that 
only some human beings are chosen to be saved from damna- 
tion, the choice being predetermined by God. Calvin himself 
may have been sure of his own salvation, as the instrument of 
Divine prophecy; but none of his followers could be. ‘In its 
extreme inhumanity’, Weber comments, ‘this doctrine must 

INTRODUCTION 

above all have had one consequence for the life of a generation 
which surrendered to its magnificent consistency ... A feeling 
of unprecedented inner loneliness’ (p. 60). From this torment, 
Weber holds, the capitalist spirit was born. On the pastoral level, 
two developments occurred: it became obligatory to regard one- 
self as chosen, lack of certainty being indicative of insufficient 
faith; and the performance of ‘good works’ in worldly activity 
became accepted as the medium whereby such surety could be 
demonstrated. Hence success in a calling eventually came to be 
regarded as a ‘sign’ — never a means — of being one of the elect. 
The accumulation of wealth was morally sanctioned in so far as 
it was combined with a sober, industrious career; wealth was 
condemned only if employed to support a life of idle luxury or 
self-indulgence. 

Calvinism, according to Weber’s argument, supplies the 
moral energy and drive of the capitalist entrepreneur; Weber 
speaks of its doctrines as having an ‘iron consistency’ in the 
bleak discipline which it demands of its adherents. The element 
of ascetic self-control in worldly affairs is certainly there in the 
other Puritan sects also: but they lack the dynamism of Calvin- 
ism. Their impact, Weber suggests, is mainly upon the formation 
of a moral outlook enhancing labour discipline within the lower 
and middle levels of capitalist economic organisation. “The 
virtues favoured by Pietism’, for example, were those ‘of the 
faithful official, clerk, labourer, or domestic worker’ (p. 88). 

3. THE PROTESTANT ETHIC IN THE CONTEXT OF 
WEBER’S OTHER WRITINGS 

For all its fame, The Protestant Ethic is a fragment. It is much shorter 
and less detailed than Weber’s studies of the other ‘world reli- 
gions’: ancient Judaism, Hinduism and Buddhism, and Confu- 
cianism (Weber also planned, but did not complete, a full-scale 
study of Islam). Together, these form an integrated series of 

xiii 

xiv 

INTRODUCTION 

works.’ Neither The Protestant Ethic nor any of the other studies was 
conceived of by Weber as a descriptive account of types of 
religion. They were intended as analyses of divergent modes 
of the rationalisation of culture, and as attempts to trace out 
the significance of such divergencies for socio-economic 
development. 

In his study of India, Weber placed particular emphasis upon 
the period when Hinduism became first established (about four 
or five centuries before the birth of Christ). The beliefs and 
practices grouped together as ‘Hinduism’ vary considerably. 
Weber singles out as especially important for his purposes the 
doctrines of reincarnation and compensation (Karma), each tied 
in closely to the caste system. The conduct of an individual in 
any one incarnation, in terms of the enactment of his caste 
obligations, determines his fate in his next life; the faithful can 
contemplate the possibility of moving up a hierarchy towards 
divinity in the course of successive incarnations. There is an 
important emphasis upon asceticism in Hinduism, but it is, in 
Weber’s term, ‘other-worldly’: that is to say, it is directed 
towards escaping the encumbrances of the material world rather 
than, as in Puritanism, towards the rational mastery of that world 
itself. During the same period at which Hinduism became sys- 
tematised, trade and manufacture reached a peak in India. But 
the influence of Hinduism, and of the emergent caste system 
which interlaced with it, effectively inhibited any economic 
development comparable to modern European capitalism. ‘A 
ritual law,’ Weber remarks, ‘in which every change of occupa- 
tion, every change in work technique, may result in ritual 
degradation is certainly not capable of giving birth to economic 
and technical revolutions from within itself ...’° The phrase 
‘from within itself” is a vital one: Weber’s concerns were with 
the first origins of modern capitalism in Europe, not with its 
subsequent adoption elsewhere. 

As in India, in China at certain periods trade and manufacture 

INTRODUCTION 

reached a fairly high level of evolution; trade and craft guilds 
flourished; there was a monetary system; there existed a 
developed framework of law. All of these elements Weber 
regards as preconditions for the development of rational capital- 
ism in Europe. While the character of Confucianism, as Weber 
portrays it, is very different from Hinduism, it no more pro- 
vided for ‘the incorporation of the acquisitive drive in a this- 
worldly ethic of conduct’’ than did Hinduism. Confucianism is, 
in an important sense, a ‘this-worldly’ religion, but not one 
which embodies ascetic values. The Calvinist ethic introduced 
an activism into the believer’s approach to worldly affairs, a 
drive to mastery in a quest for virtue in the eyes of God, that 
are altogether lacking in Confucianism. Confucian values do 
not promote such a rational instrumentalism, nor do they sanc- 
tify the transcendence of mundane affairs in the manner of 
Hinduism; instead they set as an ideal the harmonious adjust- 
ment of the individual to the established order of things. The 
religiously cultivated man is one who makes his behaviour 
coherent with the intrinsic harmony of the cosmos. An ethic 
which stresses rational adjustment to the world ‘as it is’ could 
not have generated a moral dynamism in economic activity 
comparable to that characteristic of the spirit of European 
capitalism. 

Weber’s other completed study of the ‘world religions’, that 
of ancient Judaism, is also an important element of his overall 
project. For the first origins of Judaism in ancient Palestine mark 
the nexus of circumstances in which certain fundamental differ- 
ences between the religions of the Near and Far East became 
elaborated. The distinctive doctrines forged in Judaism were 
perpetuated in Christianity, and hence incorporated into West- 
ern Culture as a whole. Judaism introduced a tradition of “ethical 
prophecy’, involving the active propagation of a Divine mission, 
that contrasts with the ‘exemplary prophecy’ more characteristic 
of India and China. In the latter type, the prophet offers the 

XV 

xvi 

INTRODUCTION 

example of his own life as a model for his followers to strive 
after: the active missionary zeal characteristic of ethical 
prophecy is lacking in the teachings of the exemplary prophets. 
Judaism and Christianity rest on the tension between sin and 
salvation and that gives them a basic transformative capacity 
which the Far Eastern religions lack, being more contemplative 
in orientation. The opposition between the imperfections of the 
world and the perfection of God, in Christian theodicy, enjoins 
the believer to achieve his salvation through refashioning the 
world in accordance with Divine purpose. Calvinism, for Weber, 
both maximises the moral impulsion deriving from the active 
commitment to the achievement of salvation and focuses it upon 
economic activity. 

The Protestant Ethic, Weber says, traces ‘only one side of the 
causal chain’ connecting Puritanism to modern capitalism 
(p. xxxix). He certainly does not claim that differences in the 
rationalisation of religious ethics he identifies are the only sig- 
nificant influences that separate economic development in the 
West from that of the Eastern civilisations. On the contrary, he 
specifies a number of fundamental socio-economic factors 
which distinguish the European experience from that of India 
and of China, and which were of crucial importance to the 
emergence of modern capitalism. These include the following: 
1. The separation of the productive enterprise from the house- 
hold which, prior to the development of industrial capitalism, 
was much more advanced in the West than it ever became else- 
where. In China, for example, extended kinship units provided 
the major forms of economic co-operation, thus limiting the 
influence both of the guilds and of individual entrepreneurial 
activity. 2. The development of the Western city. In post- 
mediaeval Europe, urban communities reached a high level of 
political autonomy, thus setting off ‘bourgeois’ society from 
agrarian feudalism. In the Eastern civilisations, however, partly 
because of the influence of kinship connections that cut across 

INTRODUCTION 

the urban-rural differentiation, cities remained more embedded 
in the local agrarian economy. 3. The existence, in Europe, of an 
inherited tradition of Roman law, providing a more integrated 
and developed rationalisation of juridical practice than came 
into being elsewhere. 4. This in turn was one factor making 
possible the development of the nation-state, administered by 
full-time bureaucratic officials, beyond anything achieved in the 
Eastern civilisations. The rational-legal system of the Western 
state was in some degree adapted within business organisations 
themselves, as well as providing an overall framework for the 
co-ordination of the capitalist economy. 5. The development of 
double-entry bookkeeping in Europe. In Weber’s view, this was 
a phenomenon of major importance in opening the way for the 
regularising of capitalistic enterprise. 6. That series of changes 
which, as Marx emphasised, prepared the way for the forma- 
tion of a ‘free’ mass of wage-labourers, whose livelihood 
depends upon the sale of labour-power in the market. This 
presupposes the prior erosion of the monopolies over the dis- 
posal of labour which existed in the form of feudal obligations 
(and were maximised in the East in the form of the caste 
system). 

Taken together, these represent a mixture of necessary and 
precipitating conditions which, in conjunction with the moral 
energy of the Puritans, brought about the rise of modern West- 
ern capitalism. But if Puritanism provided that vital spark ignit- 
ing the sequence of change creating industrial capitalism, the 
latter order, once established, eradicates the specifically religious 
elements in the ethic which helped to produce it: 

When asceticism was carried out of monastic cells into every- 
day life, and began to dominate worldly morality, it did its part 
in building the tremendous cosmos of the modern economic 
order ... victorious capitalism, since it rests on mechanical 
foundations, needs its support no longer . . . the idea of duty in 

xvii 

xviii 

INTRODUCTION 

one’s calling prowls about in our lives like the ghost of dead 
religious beliefs. 

(pp. 123-4) 

Here The Protestant Ethic, concerned above all with the origins of 
modern capitalism, connects up with Weber’s sombre indict- 
ment of the latter-day progression of contemporary industrial 
culture as a whole. Puritanism has played a part in creating the 
‘iron cage’ in which modern man has to exist — an increasingly 
bureaucratic order from which the ‘spontaneous enjoyment 
of life’ is ruthlessly expunged. “The Puritan’, Weber concludes, 
‘wanted to work in a calling; we are forced to do so’ (p. 123). 

4. THE CONTROVERSY 

The Protestant Ethic was written with polemical intent, evident in 
various references Weber makes to ‘Idealism’ and ‘Materialism’. 
The study, he says, is ‘a contribution to the understanding of the 
manner in which ideas become effective forces in history’, and 
is directed against economic determinism. The Reformation, and 
the development of the Puritan sects subsequently, cannot be 
explained as ‘a historically necessary result’ of prior economic 
changes (pp. 48-9). It seems clear that Weber has Marxism in 
mind here, or at least the cruder forms of Marxist historical 
analysis which were prominent at the time.* But he is emphatic 
that he does not want to substitute for such a deterministic 
Materialism an equally monistic Idealist account of history (cf. 
p. 125). Rather the work expresses his conviction that there are 
no ‘laws of history’: the emergence of modern capitalism in the 
West was an outcome of an historically specific conjunction of 
events. 

The latent passion of Weber’s account may be glimpsed in the 
comments on Puritanism and its residue with which The Protestant 
Ethic concludes. The ‘iron cage’ is imagery enough to carry 

INTRODUCTION 

Weber’s distaste for the celebration of the mundane and the 
routine he thought central to modern culture. He adds, however, 
a quotation from Goethe: ‘Specialists without spirit, sensualists 
without heart; this nullity imagines that it has attained a level of 
civilisation never before achieved.’ (p. 124) Such sweeping 
evaluation contrasts oddly with the cautious way in which 
Weber surrounds the main theses of the book with a battery of 
qualifications. Perhaps it is this contrast, unexplicated in the 
book itself, although clarified when the work is regarded as one 
element in Weber’s project as a whole, that helped to stimulate 
the controversy to which its publication gave rise. But what 
explains the intensity of the debate which it has aroused; and 
why has the controversy been actively carried on for so long? 

The most important reason for the emotional intensity pro- 
voked by the book is no doubt the fact that the two major terms 
in Weber’s equation, ‘religion’ and ‘capitalism’, were each 
potentially explosive when applied to the interpretation of 
the origins of the modern Western economy. Weber argued for 
the transformative force of certain religious ideas, thus earning 
the opposition of most contemporary Marxists; his characterisa- 
tion of Catholicism as lacking in mundane discipline, and as a 
retarding rather than a stimulating influence upon modern eco- 
nomic development, ensured the hostility of many Catholic his- 
torians; and his analysis of Protestantism, emphasising the role 
of the Puritan sects (whose influence is in turn linked to the 
‘iron cage’ of modern culture), was hardly likely to meet a uni- 
versal welcome from Protestant thinkers. Finally, the use of the 
term ‘capitalism’ was controversial in itself: many were, and 
some still are, inclined to argue that the notion has no useful 
application in economic history. 

The very diversity of responses thus stimulated by The Protestant 
Ethic helps to explain the protracted character of the debate. But 
there are other significant underlying factors. The intellectual 
power of Weber’s arguments derives in no small part from his 

xix 

XX 

INTRODUCTION 

disregard of traditional subject-boundaries, made possible by 
the extraordinary compass of his own scholarship. Con- 
sequently, his work can be approached on several levels: as a 
specific historical thesis, claiming a correlation between Calvin- 
ism and entrepreneurial attitudes; as a causal analysis of the 
influence of Puritanism upon capitalistic activity; as an interpret- 
ation of the origins of key components of modern Western soci- 
ety as a whole; and, set in the context of Weber’s comparative 
studies, as part of an attempt to identify divergent courses in the 
rationalisation of culture in the major civilisations of West and 
East. The controversy over The Protestant Ethic has moved back and 
forward between these levels, embracing along the way not only 
such substantive themes, but also most of the methodological 
issues which Weber wrote the book to help illuminate; and it has 
drawn in a dazzling variety of contributors from economics, 
history and economic history, comparative religion, anthropol- 
ogy and sociology. Moreover, through the works of others who 
have accepted some or all of Weber’s analysis and tried to extend 
elements of it, secondary controversies have sprung into being — 
such as that surrounding R. K. Merton’s account of the influence 
of Protestantism on science in seventeenth-century England.” 

It would be difficult to deny that some of the critical responses 
to The Protestant Ethic, particularly immediately following its ori- 
ginal publication in Germany, and on the first appearance of this 
translation in 1930, were founded upon either direct misunder- 
standings of the claims Weber put forward, or upon an 
inadequate grasp of what he was trying to achieve in the work. 
Some such misinterpretations by his early critics, such as Fischer 
and Rachfahl, were accepted by Weber as partly his responsibil- 
ity.’ These critics, of course, did not have the possibility of 
placing The Protestant Ethic in the context of Weber’s broad range 
of comparative analyses. They can perhaps be forgiven for not 
appreciating the partial character of the study, even if Weber did 
caution his readers as to the limitations on its scope. But it is less 

INTRODUCTION 

easy to excuse the many subsequent critics writing in the 1920s 
and 1930s (including von Below, R. H. Tawney, F. H. Knight, H. 
M. Robertson and P Gordon Walker) who almost completely 
ignored Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Religionssoziologie and Wirtschaft und 
Gesellschaft (Economy and Society).'' Some of the literature of this 
period is quite valueless, at least as relevant to the assessment of 
Weber’s own arguments: as where, for instance, authors took 
Weber to task for suggesting that Calvinism was ‘the’ cause of 
the development of modern capitalism; or where they pointed 
out that some contemporary countries, such as Japan, have 
experienced rapid economic development without possessing 
anything akin to a ‘Protestant ethic’. 

This nonetheless leaves a considerable variety of potentially 
justifiable forms of criticism that have been levelled against 
Weber, incorporated in discussions which stretch from those 
that dismiss his claims out of hand to those which propose 
relatively minor modifications to his work. They can perhaps be 
classified as embodying one or more of the following points of 
view:"? 

1. Weber’s characterisation of Protestantism was faulty. Cri- 
tiques here have been directed to Weber’s treatment of the 
Reformation, to his interpretation of the Puritan sects in 
general, and to Calvinism in particular. It has been held that 
Weber was mistaken in supposing that Luther introduced a 
concept of ‘calling’ which differed from anything previously 
available in scriptural exegesis; and that Calvinist ethics were 
in fact ‘anti-capitalistic’ rather than ever sanctioning the 
accumulation of wealth, even as an indirect end. Others have 
argued that Weber’s exposition of Benjamin Franklin’s ideas, 
which occupies a central place in The Protestant Ethic, as well 
as other aspects of his analysis of American Puritanism, are 
unacceptable.” This is of some significance, if correct, since 
Weber regarded the influence of Puritanism upon business 

xxi 

xxii 

INTRODUCTION 

activity in the United States as being a particularly clear and 
important exemplification of his thesis.’ 

. Weber misinterpreted Catholic doctrine. Critics have pointed 

out that Weber apparently did not study Catholicism in any 
detail, although his argument is based on the notion that 
there were basic differences between it and Protestantism in 
respect of economically relevant values. It has been held that 
post-medizeval Catholicism involves elements positively 
favourable to the ‘capitalist spirit’; and that the Reformation 
is in fact to be seen as a reaction against the latter rather 
than as clearing the ground for its subsequent emergence.” 

. Weber’s statement of the connections between Puritanism 

and modern capitalism is based upon unsatisfactory empir- 
ical materials. This was one of the themes of Fischer and 
Rachfahl, and has been echoed many times since, in various 
forms. It has been noted that the only numerical analysis 
Weber refers to is a study of the economic activities of Catho- 
lics and Protestants in Baden in 1895 — and the accuracy even 
of these figures has been questioned.’ More generally, how- 
ever, critics have pointed out that Weber’s sources are mainly 
Anglo-Saxon, and have claimed that research into economic 
development in the Rhineland, the Netherlands and Switzer- 
land, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, does not 
reveal any close association between Calvinism and capital- 
istic enterprise.” 

. Weber was not justified in drawing as sharp a contrast as he 

tried to do between modern, or ‘rational’ capitalism, and 
preceding types of capitalistic activity. It has been argued, on 
the one hand, that Weber slanted his concept of ‘modern 
capitalism’ in such a way as to make it conform to the elem- 
ents of Puritanism he fastens upon; and on the other, that 
much of what Weber calls the ‘spirit’ of modern capitalism 
was indeed present in prior periods. Tawney accepts the dif- 
ferentiation between Lutheranism and the later Protestant 

INTRODUCTION 

sects, but argues that it was the prior development of the 
‘capitalist spirit’ that moulded the evolution of Puritanism 
rather than vice versa." 

5. Weber mistakes the nature of the causal relation between 
Puritanism and modern capitalism. It is, of course, the con- 
clusion of many of the authors taking one or other of the 
points of view mentioned above that there was no such 
causal relation. At this point, however, the debate broadens 
out into one concerned with abstract problems of historical 
method, and indeed with the very possibility of causal analy- 
sis in history at all. Marxist critics have tended to reject 
Weber's case for a ‘pluralistic’ view of historical causation, 
and some have attempted to reinterpret the thesis of The 
Protestant Ethic, treating the Puritan doctrines Weber analy- 
ses as epiphenomena of previously established economic 
changes." Other authors, not necessarily Marxist, have 
rejected the methodological framework within which Weber 
worked, and have tried to show that this has consequences 
for his account of the origins of the capitalist spirit.” 

How much of Weber’s account survives the tremendous critical 
battering it has received? There are still some who would answer, 
virtually all of it: either most of the criticisms are mistaken, or 
they derive from misunderstandings of Weber’s position.”' I do 
not believe, however, that such a view can be substantiated. It is 
obvious that at least certain of Weber’s critics must be wrong, 
because the literature is partly self-contradictory: the claims 
made by some authors in criticism of Weber contradict those 
made by others. Nonetheless, some of the critiques carry con- 
siderable force, and taken together they represent a formidable 
indictment of Weber’s views. The elements of Weber’s analysis 
that are most definitely called into question, I would say, are: the 
distinctiveness of the notion of the ‘calling’ in Lutheranism;” 
the supposed lack of ‘affinity’ between Catholicism and 

xxiii 

xxiv 

INTRODUCTION 

regularised entrepreneurial activity; and, the very centre-point 
of the thesis, the degree to which Calvinist ethics actually served 
to dignify the accumulation of wealth in the manner suggested 
by Weber. If Weber were wrong on these matters, tracing out the 
consequences for the broad spectrum of his writings would still 
remain a complicated matter. To be at all satisfactory, it would 
involve considering the status of the companion studies of the 
‘world religions’, the general problem of the rationalisation of 
culture — and the methodological framework within which 
Weber worked. No author has yet attempted such a task, and 
perhaps it would need someone with a scholarly range 
approaching that of Weber himself to undertake it with any hope 
of success. 
ANTHONY GIDDENS 
Cambridge, 1976 

TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE 

Max Weber’s essay, Die protestantische Ethik und der Geist des Kapitalismus, 
which is here translated, was first published in the Archiv für 
Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, Volumes XX and XXI, for 1904-5. 
It was reprinted in 1920 as the first study in the ambitious series 
Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Religionssoziologie, which was left unfinished 
by Weber’s untimely death in that same year. For the new print- 
ing he made considerable changes, and appended both new 
material and replies to criticism in footnotes. The translation has, 
however, been made directly from this last edition. Though the 
volume of footnotes is excessively large, so as to form a serious 
detriment to the reader’s enjoyment, it has not seemed advisable 
either to omit any of them or to attempt to incorporate them 
into the text. As it stands it shows most plainly how the problem 
has grown in Weber’s own mind, and it would be a pity to 
destroy that for the sake of artistic perfection. A careful perusal 
of the notes is, however, especially recommended to the reader, 
since a great deal of important material is contained in them. 
The fact that they are printed separately from the main text 
should not be allowed to hinder their use. The translation is, as 
far as is possible, faithful to the text, rather than attempting to 

xxvi 

TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE 

achieve any more than ordinary, clear English style. Nothing has 
been altered, and only a few comments to clarify obscure points 
and to refer the reader to related parts of Weber’s work have 
been added. 

The Introduction, which is placed before the main essay, was 
written by Weber in 1920 for the whole series on the Sociology 
of Religion. It has been included in this translation because it 
gives some of the general background of ideas and problems 
into which Weber himself meant this particular study to fit. That 
has seemed particularly desirable since, in the voluminous 
discussion which has grown up in Germany around Weber’s 
essay, a great deal of misplaced criticism has been due to the 
failure properly to appreciate the scope and limitations of 
the study. While it is impossible to appreciate that fully without 
a thorough study of Weber’s sociological work as a whole, 
this brief introduction should suffice to prevent a great deal of 
misunderstanding. 

The series of which this essay forms a part was, as has been 
said, left unfinished at Weber’s death. The first volume only had 
been prepared for the press by his own hand. Besides the parts 
translated here, it contains a short, closely related study, Die protes- 
tantischen Sekten und der Geist des Kapitalismus; a general introduction to 
the further studies of particular religions which as a whole he 
called Die Wirtschaftsethik der Weltreligionen; and a long study of Con- 
fucianism and Taoism. The second and third volumes, which 
were published after his death, without the thorough revision 
which he had contemplated, contain studies of Hinduism and 
Buddhism and Ancient Judaism. In addition he had done work 
on other studies, notably of Islam, Early Christianity, and 
Talmudic Judaism, which were not yet in a condition fit for 
publication in any form. Nevertheless, enough of the whole ser- 
ies has been preserved to show something of the extraordinary 
breadth and depth of Weber’s grasp of cultural problems. What 
is here presented to English-speaking readers is only a fragment, 

TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE 

but it is a fragment which is in many ways of central significance 

for Weber’s philosophy of history, as well as being of very great 

and very general interest for the thesis it advances to explain 
some of the most important aspects of modern culture. 

TALCOTT PARSONS 

Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A. 

January 1930 

xxvii 

AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION 

A product of modern European civilization, studying any prob- 
lem of universal history, is bound to ask himself to what com- 
bination of circumstances the fact should be attributed that in 
Western civilization, and in Western civilization only, cultural 
phenomena have appeared which (as we like to think) lie in a 
line of development having universal significance and value. 

Only in the West does science exist at a stage of development 
which we recognize to-day as valid. Empirical knowledge, reflec- 
tion on problems of the cosmos and of life, philosophical and 
theological wisdom of the most profound sort, are not confined 
to it, though in the case of the last the full development of a 
systematic theology must be credited to Christianity under the 
influence of Hellenism, since there were only fragments in Islam 
and in a few Indian sects. In short, knowledge and observation of 
great refinement have existed elsewhere, above all in India, 
China, Babylonia, Egypt. But in Babylonia and elsewhere astron- 
omy lacked—which makes its development all the more 
astounding—the mathematical foundation which it first 
received from the Greeks. The Indian geometry had no rational 
proof; that was another product of the Greek intellect, also the 

AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION 

creator of mechanics and physics. The Indian natural sciences, 
though well developed in observation, lacked the method of 
experiment, which was, apart from beginnings in antiquity, 
essentially a product of the Renaissance, as was the modern 
laboratory. Hence medicine, especially in India, though highly 
developed in empirical technique, lacked a biological and par- 
ticularly a biochemical foundation. A rational chemistry has 
been absent from all areas of culture except the West. 

The highly developed historical scholarship of China did not 
have the method of Thucydides. Machiavelli, it is true, had pre- 
decessors in India; but all Indian political thought was lacking in 
a systematic method comparable to that of Aristotle, and, indeed, 
in the possession of rational concepts. Not all the anticipations in 
India (School of Mimamsa), nor the extensive codification espe- 
cially in the Near East, nor all the Indian and other books of law, 
had the strictly systematic forms of thought, so essential to a 
rational jurisprudence, of the Roman law and of the Western law 
under its influence. A structure like the canon law is known only 
to the West. 

A similar statement is true of art. The musical ear of other 
peoples has probably been even more sensitively developed than 
our own, certainly not less so. Polyphonic music of various kinds 
has been widely distributed over the earth. The co-operation of a 
number of instruments and also the singing of parts have existed 
elsewhere. All our rational tone intervals have been known and 
calculated. But rational harmonious music, both counterpoint 
and harmony, formation of the tone material on the basis of 
three triads with the harmonic third; our chromatics and 
enharmonics, not interpreted in terms of space, but, since the 
Renaissance, of harmony; our orchestra, with its string quartet as 
a nucleus, and the organization of ensembles of wind instru- 
ments; our bass accompaniment; our system of notation, which 
has made possible the composition and production of modern 
musical works, and thus their very survival; our sonatas, 

Xxix 

XXX 

AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION 

symphonies, operas; and finally, as means to all these, our fun- 
damental instruments, the organ, piano, violin, etc.; all these 
things are known only in the Occident, although programme 
music, tone poetry, alteration of tones and chromatics, have 
existed in various musical traditions as means of expression. 

In architecture, pointed arches have been used elsewhere as a 
means of decoration, in antiquity and in Asia; presumably the 
combination of pointed arch and cross-arched vault was not 
unknown in the Orient. But the rational use of the Gothic vault 
as a means of distributing pressure and of roofing spaces of all 
forms, and above all as the constructive principle of great 
monumental buildings and the foundation of a style extending to 
sculpture and painting, such as that created by our Middle Ages, 
does not occur elsewhere. The technical basis of our architecture 
came from the Orient. But the Orient lacked that solution of the 
problem of the dome and that type of classic rationalization of 
all art—in painting by the rational utilization of lines and spatial 
perspective—which the Renaissance created for us. There was 
printing in China. But a printed literature, designed only for print 
and only possible through it, and, above all, the Press and period- 
icals, have appeared only in the Occident. Institutions of higher 
education of all possible types, even some superficially similar to 
our universities, or at least academies, have existed (China, 
Islam). But a rational, systematic, and specialized pursuit of sci- 
ence, with trained and specialized personnel, has only existed in 
the West in a sense at all approaching its present dominant place 
in our culture. Above all is this true of the trained official, the 
pillar of both the modern State and of the economic life of the 
West. He forms a type of which there have heretofore only been 
suggestions, which have never remotely approached its present 
importance for the social order. Of course the official, even the 
specialized official, is a very old constituent of the most various 
societies. But no country and no age has ever experienced, in the 
same sense as the modern Occident, the absolute and complete 

AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION 

dependence of its whole existence, of the political, technical, 
and economic conditions of its life, on a specially trained organiza- 
tion of officials. The most important functions of the everyday 
life of society have come to be in the hands of technically, 
commercially, and above all legally trained government officials. 

Organization of political and social groups in feudal classes 
has been common. But even the feudal’ state of rex et regnum in the 
Western sense has only been known to our culture. Even more 
are parliaments of periodically elected representatives, with gov- 
ernment by demagogues and party leaders as ministers respon- 
sible to the parliaments, peculiar to us, although there have, of 
course, been parties, in the sense of organizations for exerting 
influence and gaining control of political power, all over the 
world. In fact, the State itself, in the sense of a political associ- 
ation with a rational, written constitution, rationally ordained 
law, and an administration bound to rational rules or laws, admin- 
istered by trained officials, is known, in this combination of 
characteristics, only in the Occident, despite all other approaches 
to it. 

And the same is true of the most fateful force in our modern 
life, capitalism. The impulse to acquisition, pursuit of gain, of 
money, of the greatest possible amount of money, has in itself 
nothing to do with capitalism. This impulse exists and has 
existed among waiters, physicians, coachmen, artists, prosti- 
tutes, dishonest officials, soldiers, nobles, crusaders, gamblers, 
and beggars. One may say that it has been common to all sorts 
and conditions of men at all times and in all countries of the 
earth, wherever the objective possibility of it is or has been 
given. It should be taught in the kindergarten of cultural history 
that this naive idea of capitalism must be given up once and for 
all. Unlimited greed for gain is not in the least identical with 
capitalism, and is still less its spirit. Capitalism may even be iden- 
tical with the restraint, or at least a rational tempering, of this 
irrational impulse. But capitalism is identical with the pursuit of 

xxxi 

XXxil 

AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION 

profit, and forever renewed profit, by means of continuous, 
rational, capitalistic enterprise. For it must be so: in a wholly 
capitalistic order of society, an individual capitalistic enterprise 
which did not take advantage of its opportunities for profit- 
making would be doomed to extinction. 

Let us now define our terms somewhat more carefully than is 
generally done. We will define a capitalistic economic action as 
one which rests on the expectation of profit by the utilization of 
opportunities for exchange, that is on (formally) peaceful 
chances of profit. Acquisition by force (formally and actually) 
follows its own particular laws, and it is not expedient, however 
little one can forbid this, to place it in the same category with 
action which is, in the last analysis, oriented to profits from 
exchange.” Where capitalistic acquisition is rationally pursued, 
the corresponding action is adjusted to calculations in terms of 
capital. This means that the action is adapted to a systematic 
utilization of goods or personal services as means of acquisition 
in such a way that, at the close of a business period, the balance 
of the enterprise in money assets (or, in the case of a continuous 
enterprise, the periodically estimated money value of assets) 
exceeds the capital, i.e. the estimated value of the material means 
of production used for acquisition in exchange. It makes no 
difference whether it involves a quantity of goods entrusted in 
natura to a travelling merchant, the proceeds of which may con- 
sist in other goods in natura acquired by trade, or whether it 
involves a manufacturing enterprise, the assets of which consist 
of buildings, machinery, cash, raw materials, partly and wholly 
manufactured goods, which are balanced against liabilities. The 
important fact is always that a calculation of capital in terms of 
money is made, whether by modern book-keeping methods or 
in any other way, however primitive and crude. Everything is 
done in terms of balances: at the beginning of the enterprise an 
initial balance, before every individual decision a calculation to 
ascertain its probable profitableness, and at the end a final bal- 

AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION 

ance to ascertain how much profit has been made. For instance, 
the initial balance of a commenda’ transaction would determine an 
agreed money value of the assets put into it (so far as they were 
not in money form already), and a final balance would form the 
estimate on which to base the distribution of profit and loss at 
the end. So far as the transactions are rational, calculation under- 
lies every single action of the partners. That a really accurate 
calculation or estimate may not exist, that the procedure is pure 
guess-work, or simply traditional and conventional, happens 
even to-day in every form of capitalistic enterprise where the 
circumstances do not demand strict accuracy. But these are 
points affecting only the degree of rationality of capitalistic 
acquisition. 

For the purpose of this conception all that matters is that an 
actual adaptation of economic action to a comparison of money 
income with money expenses takes place, no matter how primi- 
tive the form. Now in this sense capitalism and capitalistic enter- 
prises, even with a considerable rationalization of capitalistic 
calculation, have existed in all civilized countries of the earth, so 
far as economic documents permit us to judge. In China, India, 
Babylon, Egypt, Mediterranean antiquity, and the Middle Ages, 
as well as in modern times. These were not merely isolated ven- 
tures, but economic enterprises which were entirely dependent 
on the continual renewal of capitalistic undertakings, and even 
continuous operations. However, trade especially was for a long 
time not continuous like our own, but consisted essentially in a 
series of individual undertakings. Only gradually did the activ- 
ities of even the large merchants acquire an inner cohesion (with 
branch organizations, etc.). In any case, the capitalistic enterprise 
and the capitalistic entrepreneur, not only as occasional but as 
regular entrepreneurs, are very old and were very widespread. 

Now, however, the Occident has developed capitalism both to 
a quantitative extent, and (carrying this quantitative develop- 
ment) in types, forms, and directions which have never existed 

xxxiii 

XXXIV. AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION 

elsewhere. All over the world there have been merchants, whole- 
sale and retail, local and engaged in foreign trade. Loans of all 
kinds have been made, and there have been banks with the most 
various functions, at least comparable to ours of, say, the six- 
teenth century. Sea loans,* commenda, and transactions and 
associations similar to the Kommanditgesellschaft,’ have all been 
widespread, even as continuous businesses. Whenever money 
finances of public bodies have existed, money-lenders have 
appeared, as in Babylon, Hellas, India, China, Rome. They have 
financed wars and piracy, contracts and building operations of 
all sorts. In overseas policy they have functioned as colonial 
entrepreneurs, as planters with slaves, or directly or indirectly 
forced labour, and have farmed domains, offices, and, above all, 
taxes. They have financed party leaders in elections and condottieri 
in civil wars. And, finally, they have been speculators in chances 
for pecuniary gain of all kinds. This kind of entrepreneur, the 
capitalistic adventurer, has existed everywhere. With the excep- 
tion of trade and credit and banking transactions, their activities 
were predominantly of an irrational and speculative character, or 
directed to acquisition by force, above all the acquisition of 
booty, whether directly in war or in the form of continuous 
fiscal booty by exploitation of subjects. 

The capitalism of promoters, large-scale speculators, conces- 
sion hunters, and much modern financial capitalism even in 
peace time, but, above all, the capitalism especially concerned 
with exploiting wars, bears this stamp even in modern Western 
countries, and some, but only some, parts of large-scale inter- 
national trade are closely related to it, to-day as always. 

But in modern times the Occident has developed, in addition 
to this, a very different form of capitalism which has appeared 
nowhere else: the rational capitalistic organization of (formally) 
free labour. Only suggestions of it are found elsewhere. Even the 
organization of unfree labour reached a considerable degree of 
rationality only on plantations and to a very limited extent in the 

AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION 

Ergasteria of antiquity. In the manors, manorial workshops, and 
domestic industries on estates with serf labour it was probably 
somewhat less developed. Even real domestic industries with 
free labour have definitely been proved to have existed in only a 
few isolated cases outside the Occident. The frequent use of day 
labourers led in a very few cases—especially State monopolies, 
which are, however, very different from modern industrial 
organization—to manufacturing organizations, but never to a 
rational organization of apprenticeship in the handicrafts like 
that of our Middle Ages. 

Rational industrial organization, attuned to a regular market, 
and neither to political nor irrationally speculative opportunities 
for profit, is not, however, the only peculiarity of Western capit- 
alism. The modern rational organization of the capitalistic 
enterprise would not have been possible without two other 
important factors in its development: the separation of business 
from the household, which completely dominates modern eco- 
nomic life, and closely connected with it, rational book-keeping. 
A spatial separation of places of work from those of residence 
exists elsewhere, as in the Oriental bazaar and in the ergasteria of 
other cultures. The development of capitalistic associations with 
their own accounts is also found in the Far East, the Near East, 
and in antiquity. But compared to the modern independence of 
business enterprises, those are only small beginnings. The reason 
for this was particularly that the indispensable requisites for this 
independence, our rational business book-keeping and our legal 
separation of corporate from personal property, were entirely 
lacking, or had only begun to develop.® The tendency every- 
where else was for acquisitive enterprises to arise as parts of a 
royal or manorial household (of the oikos), which is, as Rodbertus 
has perceived, with all its superficial similarity, a fundamentally 
different, even opposite, development. 

However, all these peculiarities of Western capitalism have 
derived their significance in the last analysis only from their 

XXXV 

XXXVI 

AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION 

association with the capitalistic organization of labour. Even 
what is generally called commercialization, the development of 
negotiable securities and the rationalization of speculation, the 
exchanges, etc., is connected with it. For without the rational 
capitalistic organization of labour, all this, so far as it was pos- 
sible at all, would have nothing like the same significance, above 
all for the social structure and all the specific problems of the 
modern Occident connected with it. Exact calculation—the basis 
of everything else—is only possible on a basis of free labour.’ 

And just as, or rather because, the world has known no 
rational organization of labour outside the modern Occident, it 
has known no rational socialism. Of course, there has been civic 
economy, a civic food-supply policy, mercantilism and welfare 
policies of princes, rationing, regulation of economic life, pro- 
tectionism, and laissez-faire theories (as in China). The world has 
also known socialistic and communistic experiments of various 
sorts: family, religious, or military communism, State socialism 
(in Egypt), monopolistic cartels, and consumers’ organizations. 
But although there have everywhere been civic market privil- 
eges, companies, guilds, and all sorts of legal differences 
between town and country, the concept of the citizen has not 
existed outside the Occident, and that of the bourgeoisie outside 
the modern Occident. Similarly, the proletariat as a class could 
not exist, because there was no rational organization of free 
labour under regular discipline. Class struggles between creditor 
and debtor classes; landowners and the landless, serfs, or tenants; 
trading interests and consumers or landlords, have existed 
everywhere in various combinations. But even the Western 
medieval struggles between putters-out and their workers exist 
elsewhere only in beginnings. The modern conflict of the large- 
scale industrial entrepreneur and free-wage labourers was 
entirely lacking. And thus there could be no such problems as 
those of socialism. 

Hence in a universal history of culture the central problem for 

AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION XXXVİİ 

us is not, in the last analysis, even from a purely economic view- 
point, the development of capitalistic activity as such, differing in 
different cultures only in form: the adventurer type, or capitalism 
in trade, war, politics, or administration as sources of gain. It is 
rather the origin of this sober bourgeois capitalism with its 
rational organization of free labour. Or in terms of cultural his- 
tory, the problem is that of the origin of the Western bourgeois 
class and of its peculiarities, a problem which is certainly closely 
connected with that of the origin of the capitalistic organization of 
labour, but is not quite the same thing. For the bourgeois as a class 
existed prior to the development of the peculiar modern form of 
capitalism, though, it is true, only in the Western hemisphere. 
Now the peculiar modern Western form of capitalism has 
been, at first sight, strongly influenced by the development of 
technical possibilities. Its rationality is to-day essentially depend- 
ent on the calculability of the most important technical factors. 
But this means fundamentally that it is dependent on the peculi- 
arities of modern science, especially the natural sciences based 
on mathematics and exact and rational experiment. On the other 
hand, the development of these sciences and of the technique 
resting upon them now receives important stimulation from 
these capitalistic interests in its practical economic application. It 
is true that the origin of Western science cannot be attributed to 
such interests. Calculation, even with decimals, and algebra have 
been carried on in India, where the decimal system was 
invented. But it was only made use of by developing capitalism 
in the West, while in India it led to no modern arithmetic or 
book-keeping. Neither was the origin of mathematics and mech- 
anics determined by capitalistic interests. But the technical 
utilization of scientific knowledge, so important for the living 
conditions of the mass of people, was certainly encouraged by 
economic considerations, which were extremely favourable to it 
in the Occident. But this encouragement was derived from the 
peculiarities of the social structure of the Occident. We must 

XXXVili AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION 

hence ask, from what parts of that structure was it derived, since 
not all of them have been of equal importance? 

Among those of undoubted importance are the rational struc- 
tures of law and of administration. For modern rational capital- 
ism has need, not only of the technical means of production, but 
of a calculable legal system and of administration in terms of 
formal rules. Without it adventurous and speculative trading 
capitalism and all sorts of politically determined capitalisms are 
possible, but no rational enterprise under individual initiative, 
with fixed capital and certainty of calculations. Such a legal sys- 
tem and such administration have been available for economic 
activity in a comparative state of legal and formalistic perfection 
only in the Occident. We must hence inquire where that law 
came from. Among other circumstances, capitalistic interests 
have in turn undoubtedly also helped, but by no means alone 
nor even principally, to prepare the way for the predominance in 
law and administration of a class of jurists specially trained in 
rational law. But these interests did not themselves create that 
law. Quite different forces were at work in this development. And 
why did not the capitalistic interests do the same in China or 
India? Why did not the scientific, the artistic, the political, or the 
economic development there enter upon that path of rationaliza- 
tion which is peculiar to the Occident? 

For in all the above cases it is a question of the specific and 
peculiar rationalism of Western culture. Now by this term very 
different things may be understood, as the following discussion 
will repeatedly show. There is, for example, rationalization of 
mystical contemplation, that is of an attitude which, viewed 
from other departments of life, is specifically irrational, just as 
much as there are rationalizations of economic life, of technique, 
of scientific research, of military training, of law and administra- 
tion. Furthermore, each one of these fields may be rationalized 
in terms of very different ultimate values and ends, and what is 
rational from one point of view may well be irrational from 

AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION 

another. Hence rationalizations of the most varied character have 
existed in various departments of life and in all areas of culture. 
To characterize their differences from the view-point of cultural 
history it is necessary to know what departments are rational- 
ized, and in what direction. It is hence our first concern to work 
out and to explain genetically the special peculiarity of Occi- 
dental rationalism, and within this field that of the modern 
Occidental form. Every such attempt at explanation must, recog- 
nizing the fundamental importance of the economic factor, 
above all take account of the economic conditions. But at the 
same time the opposite correlation must not be left out of con- 
sideration. For though the development of economic rationalism 
is partly dependent on rational technique and law, it is at the 
same time determined by the ability and disposition of men to 
adopt certain types of practical rational conduct. When these 
types have been obstructed by spiritual obstacles, the develop- 
ment of rational economic conduct has also met serious inner 
resistance. The magical and religious forces, and the ethical ideas 
of duty based upon them, have in the past always been among 
the most important formative influences on conduct. In the 
studies collected here we shall be concerned with these forces.” 

Two older essays have been placed at the beginning which 
attempt, at one important point, to approach the side of the 
problem which is generally most difficult to grasp: the influence 
of certain religious ideas on the development of an economic 
spirit, or the ethos of an economic system. In this case we are 
dealing with the connection of the spirit of modern economic 
life with the rational ethics of ascetic Protestantism. Thus we 
treat here only one side of the causal chain. The later studies on 
the Economic Ethics of the World Religions attempt, in the form 
of a survey of the relations of the most important religions to 
economic life and to the social stratification of their environ- 
ment, to follow out both causal relationships, so far as it is 
necessary in order to find points of comparison with the 

XXXİX 

xl 

AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION 

Occidental development. For only in this way is it possible to 
attempt a causal evaluation of those elements of the economic 
ethics of the Western religions which differentiate them from 
others, with a hope of attaining even a tolerable degree of 
approximation. Hence these studies do not claim to be complete 
analyses of cultures, however brief. On the contrary, in every 
culture they quite deliberately emphasize the elements in which 
it differs from Western civilization. They are, hence, definitely 
oriented to the problems which seem important for the under- 
standing of Western culture from this view-point. With our 
object in view, any other procedure did not seem possible. But to 
avoid misunderstanding we must here lay special emphasis on 
the limitation of our purpose. 

In another respect the uninitiated at least must be warned 
against exaggerating the importance of these investigations. The 
Sinologist, the Indologist, the Semitist, or the Egyptologist, will 
of course find no facts unknown to him. We only hope that he 
will find nothing definitely wrong in points that are essential. 
How far it has been possible to come as near this ideal as a non- 
specialist is able to do, the author cannot know. It is quite evident 
that anyone who is forced to rely on translations, and further- 
more on the use and evaluation of monumental, documentary, 
or literary sources, has to rely himself on a specialist literature 
which is often highly controversial, and the merits of which he 
is unable to judge accurately. Such a writer must make modest 
claims for the value of his work. All the more so since the num- 
ber of available translations of real sources (that is, inscriptions 
and documents) is, especially for China, still very small in com- 
parison with what exists and is important. From all this follows 
the definitely provisional character of these studies, and espe- 
cially of the parts dealing with Asia.” Only the specialist is 
entitled to a final judgment. And, naturally, it is only because 
expert studies with this special purpose and from this particular 
view-point have not hitherto been made, that the present ones 

AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION 

have been written at all. They are destined to be superseded in a 
much more important sense than this can be said, as it can be, of 
all scientific work. But however objectionable it may be, such 
trespassing on other special fields cannot be avoided in compara- 
tive work. But one must take the consequences by resigning one- 
self to considerable doubts regarding the degree of one’s success. 
Fashion and the zeal of the literati would have us think that the 
specialist can to-day be spared, or degraded to a position sub- 
ordinate to that of the seer. Almost all sciences owe something to 
dilettantes, often very valuable view-points. But dilettantism as a 
leading principle would be the end of science. He who yearns 
for seeing should go to the cinema, though it will be offered to 
him copiously to-day in literary form in the present field of 
investigation also." Nothing is farther from the intent of these 
thoroughly serious studies than such an attitude. And, I might 
add, whoever wants a sermon should go to a conventicle. The 
question of the relative value of the cultures which are compared 
here will not receive a single word. It is true that the path of 
human destiny cannot but appal him who surveys a section of it. 
But he will do well to keep his small personal commentarie to 
himself, as one does at the sight of the sea or of majestic moun- 
tains, unless he knows himself to be called and gifted to give 
them expression in artistic or prophetic form. In most other 
cases the voluminous talk about intuition does nothing but con- 
ceal a lack of perspective toward the object, which merits the 
same judgment as a similar lack of perspective toward men. 
Some justification is needed for the fact that ethnographical 
material has not been utilized to anything like the extent which 
the value of its contributions naturally demands in any really 
thorough investigation, especially of Asiatic religions. This 
limitation has not only been imposed because human powers 
of work are restricted. This omission has also seemed to be 
permissible because we are here necessarily dealing with the 
religious ethics of the classes which were the culture-bearers of 

xli 

xlii 

AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION 

their respective countries. We are concerned with the influence 
which their conduct has had. Now it is quite true that this can 
only be completely known in all its details when the facts from 
ethnography and folk-lore have been compared with it. Hence 
we must expressly admit and emphasize that this is a gap to 
which the ethnographer will legitimately object. I hope to con- 
tribute something to the closing of this gap in a systematic study 
of the Sociology of Religion.'' But such an undertaking would 
have transcended the limits of this investigation with its closely 
circumscribed purpose. It has been necessary to be content with 
bringing out the points of comparison with our Occidental 
religions as well as possible. 

Finally, we may make a reference to the anthropological side of 
the problem. When we find again and again that, even in 
departments of life apparently mutually independent, certain 
types of rationalization have developed in the Occident, and only 
there, it would be natural to suspect that the most important 
reason lay in differences of heredity. The author admits that he is 
inclined to think the importance of biological heredity very 
great. But in spite of the notable achievements of anthropo- 
logical research, I see up to the present no way of exactly or even 
approximately measuring either the extent or, above all, the form 
of its influence on the development investigated here. It must be 
one of the tasks of sociological and historical investigation first 
to analyse all the influences and causal relationships which can 
satisfactorily be explained in terms of reactions to environmental 
conditions. Only then, and when comparative racial neurology 
and psychology shall have progressed beyond their present and 
in many ways very promising beginnings, can we hope for even 
the probability of a satisfactory answer to that problem.'” In the 
meantime that condition seems to me not to exist, and an appeal 
to heredity would therefore involve a premature renunciation of 
the possibility of knowledge attainable now, and would shift the 
problem to factors (at present) still unknown. 

Part | 

The Problem 

7 

RELIGIOUS AFFILIATION AND 
SOCIAL STRATIFICATION’ 

A glance at the occupational statistics of any country of mixed 
religious composition brings to light with remarkable fre- 
quency’ a situation which has several times provoked discussion 
in the Catholic press and literature,’ and in Catholic congresses 
in Germany, namely, the fact that business leaders and owners of 
capital, as well as the higher grades of skilled labour, and even 
more the higher technically and commercially trained personnel 
of modern enterprises, are overwhelmingly Protestant.* This is 
true not only in cases where the difference in religion coincides 
with one of nationality, and thus of cultural development, as in 
Eastern Germany between Germans and Poles. The same thing is 
shown in the figures of religious affiliation almost wherever 
capitalism, at the time of its great expansion, has had a free hand 
to alter the social distribution of the population in accordance 
with its needs, and to determine its occupational structure. The 
more freedom it has had, the more clearly is the effect shown. It 
is true that the greater relative participation of Protestants in the 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

ownership of capital,’ in management, and the upper ranks of 
labour in great modern industrial and commercial enterprises,‘ 
may in part be explained in terms of historical circumstances’ 
which extend far back into the past, and in which religious 
affiliation is not a cause of the economic conditions, but to a 
certain extent appears to be a result of them. Participation in the 
above economic functions usually involves some previous own- 
ership of capital, and generally an expensive education; often 
both. These are to-day largely dependent on the possession of 
inherited wealth, or at least on a certain degree of material well- 
being. A number of those sections of the old Empire which were 
most highly developed economically and most favoured by nat- 
ural resources and situation, in particular a majority of the 
wealthy towns, went over to Protestantism in the sixteenth cen- 
tury. The results of that circumstance favour the Protestants even 
to-day in their struggle for economic existence. There arises thus 
the historical question: why were the districts of highest eco- 
nomic development at the same time particularly favourable to a 
revolution in the Church? The answer is by no means so simple 
as one might think. 

The emancipation from economic traditionalism appears, no 
doubt, to be a factor which would greatly strengthen the ten- 
dency to doubt the sanctity of the religious tradition, as of all 
traditional authorities. But it is necessary to note, what has often 
been forgotten, that the Reformation meant not the elimination 
of the Church’s control over everyday life, but rather the substi- 
tution of a new form of control for the previous one. It meant 
the repudiation of a control which was very lax, at that time 
scarcely perceptible in practice, and hardly more than formal, in 
favour of a regulation of the whole of conduct which, penetrat- 
ing to all departments of private and public life, was infinitely 
burdensome and earnestly enforced. The rule of the Catholic 
Church, “punishing the heretic, but indulgent to the sinner”, as 
it was in the past even more than to-day, is now tolerated by 

RELIGIOUS AFFILIATION AND SOCIAL STRATIFICATION 

peoples of thoroughly modern economic character, and was 
borne by the richest and economically most advanced peoples 
on earth at about the turn of the fifteenth century. The rule of 
Calvinism, on the other hand, as it was enforced in the sixteenth 
century in Geneva and in Scotland, at the turn of the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries in large parts of the Netherlands, in 
the seventeenth in New England, and for a time in England itself, 
would be for us the most absolutely unbearable form of ecclesi- 
astical control of the individual which could possibly exist. That 
was exactly what large numbers of the old commercial aris- 
tocracy of those times, in Geneva as well as in Holland and 
England, felt about it. And what the reformers complained of in 
those areas of high economic development was not too much 
supervision of life on the part of the Church, but too little. Now 
how does it happen that at that time those countries which were 
most advanced economically, and within them the rising bour- 
geois middle classes, not only failed to resist this unexampled 
tyranny of Puritanism, but even developed a heroism in its 
defence? For bourgeois classes as such have seldom before and 
never since displayed heroism. It was “the last of our heroisms”, 
as Carlyle, not without reason, has said. 

But further, and especially important: it may be, as has been 
claimed, that the greater participation of Protestants in the posi- 
tions of ownership and management in modern economic life 
may to-day be understood, in part at least, simply as a result of 
the greater material wealth they have inherited. But there are 
certain other phenomena which cannot be explained in the 
same way. Thus, to mention only a few facts: there is a great 
difference discoverable in Baden, in Bavaria, in Hungary, in the 
type of higher education which Catholic parents, as opposed to 
Protestant, give their children. That the percentage of Catholics 
among the students and graduates of higher educational institu- 
tions in general lags behind their proportion of the total popula- 
tion,® may, to be sure, be largely explicable in terms of inherited 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

differences of wealth. But among the Catholic graduates them- 
selves the percentage of those graduating from the institutions 
preparing, in particular, for technical studies and industrial and 
commercial occupations, but in general from those preparing 
for middle-class business life, lags still farther behind the per- 
centage of Protestants.” On the other hand, Catholics prefer the 
sort of training which the humanistic Gymnasium affords. That 
is a circumstance to which the above explanation does not apply, 
but which, on the contrary, is one reason why so few Catholics 
are engaged in capitalistic enterprise. 

Even more striking is a fact which partly explains the smaller 
proportion of Catholics among the skilled labourers of modern 
industry. It is well known that the factory has taken its skilled 
labour to a large extent from young men in the handicrafts; but 
this is much more true of Protestant than of Catholic journey- 
men. Among journeymen, in other words, the Catholics show a 
stronger propensity to remain in their crafts, that is they more 
often become master craftsmen, whereas the Protestants are 
attracted to a larger extent into the factories in order to fill the 
upper ranks of skilled labour and administrative positions. '° The 
explanation of these cases is undoubtedly that the mental and 
spiritual peculiarities acquired from the environment, here the 
type of education favoured by the religious atmosphere of 
the home community and the parental home, have determined 
the choice of occupation, and through it the professional career. 

The smaller participation of Catholics in the modern business 
life of Germany is all the more striking because it runs counter to 
a tendency which has been observed at all times'' including the 
present. National or religious minorities which are in a position 
of subordination to a group of rulers are likely, through their 
voluntary or involuntary exclusion from positions of political 
influence, to be driven with peculiar force into economic activ- 
ity. Their ablest members seek to satisfy the desire for recogni- 
tion of their abilities in this field, since there is no opportunity in 

RELIGIOUS AFFILIATION AND SOCIAL STRATIFICATION 

the service of the State. This has undoubtedly been true of the 
Poles in Russia and Eastern Prussia, who have without question 
been undergoing a more rapid economic advance than in Gali- 
cia, where they have been in the ascendant. It has in earlier times 
been true of the Huguenots in France under Louis XIV, the Non- 
conformists and Quakers in England, and, last but not least, the 
Jew for two thousand years. But the Catholics in Germany have 
shown no striking evidence of such a result of their position. In 
the past they have, unlike the Protestants, undergone no particu- 
larly prominent economic development in the times when they 
were persecuted or only tolerated, either in Holland or in Eng- 
land. On the other hand, it is a fact that the Protestants (espe- 
cially certain branches of the movement to be fully discussed 
later) both as ruling classes and as ruled, both as majority and as 
minority, have shown a special tendency to develop economic 
rationalism which cannot be observed to the same extent among 
Catholics either in the one situation or in the other.'* Thus the 
principal explanation of this difference must be sought in the 
permanent intrinsic character of their religious beliefs, and not 
only in their temporary external historico-political situations. '* 
It will be our task to investigate these religions with a view to 
finding out what peculiarities they have or have had which 
might have resulted in the behaviour we have described. On 
superficial analysis, and on the basis of certain current impres- 
sions, one might be tempted to express the difference by saying 
that the greater other-worldliness of Catholicism, the ascetic 
character of its highest ideals, must have brought up its 
adherents to a greater indifference toward the good things of 
this world. Such an explanation fits the popular tendency in the 
judgment of both religions. On the Protestant side it is used as a 
basis of criticism of those (real or imagined) ascetic ideals of the 
Catholic way of life, while the Catholics answer with the accus- 
ation that materialism results from the secularization of all ideals 
through Protestantism. One recent writer has attempted to 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

formulate the difference of their attitudes toward economic life 
in the following manner: “The Catholic is quieter, having less of 
the acquisitive impulse; he prefers a life of the greatest possible 
security, even with a smaller income, to a life of risk and excite- 
ment, even though it may bring the chance of gaining honour 
and riches. The proverb says jokingly, ‘either eat well or sleep 
well’. In the present case the Protestant prefers to eat well, the 
Catholic to sleep undisturbed.” '* 

In fact, this desire to eat well may be a correct though 
incomplete characterization of the motives of many nominal 
Protestants in Germany at the present time. But things were very 
different in the past: the English, Dutch, and American Puritans 
were characterized by the exact opposite of the joy of living, a 
fact which is indeed, as we shall see, most important for our 
present study. Moreover, the French Protestants, among others, 
long retained, and retain to a certain extent up to the present, the 
characteristics which were impressed upon the Calvinistic 
Churches everywhere, especially under the cross in the time of 
the religious struggles. Nevertheless (or was it, perhaps, as we 
shall ask later, precisely on that account?) it is well known that 
these characteristics were one of the most important factors in 
the industrial and capitalistic development of France, and on the 
small scale permitted them by their persecution remained so. If 
we may call this seriousness and the strong predominance of 
religious interests in the whole conduct of life otherworldliness, 
then the French Calvinists were and still are at least as other- 
worldly as, for instance, the North German Catholics, to whom 
their Catholicism is undoubtedly as vital a matter as religion is to 
any other people in the world. Both differ from the predominant 
religious trends in their respective countries in much the same 
way. The Catholics of France are, in their lower ranks, greatly 
interested in the enjoyment of life, in the upper directly hostile 
to religion. Similarly, the Protestants of Germany are to-day 
absorbed in worldly economic life, and their upper ranks are 

RELIGIOUS AFFILIATION AND SOCIAL STRATIFICATION 

most indifferent to religion." Hardly anything shows so clearly 
as this parallel that, with such vague ideas as that of the alleged 
otherworldliness of Catholicism, and the alleged materialistic joy 
of living of Protestantism, and others like them, nothing can be 
accomplished for our purpose. In such general terms the distinc- 
tion does not even adequately fit the facts of to-day, and certainly 
not of the past. If, however, one wishes to make use of it at all, 
several other observations present themselves at once which, 
combined with the above remarks, suggest that the supposed 
conflict between other-worldliness, asceticism, and ecclesiastical 
piety on the one side, and participation in capitalistic acquisition 
on the other, might actually turn out to be an intimate 
relationship. 

As a matter of fact it is surely remarkable, to begin with quite a 
superficial observation, how large is the number of representa- 
tives of the most spiritual forms of Christian piety who have 
sprung from commercial circles. In particular, very many of the 
most zealous adherents of Pietism are of this origin. It might be 
explained as a sort of reaction against mammonism on the part 
of sensitive natures not adapted to commercial life, and, as in the 
case of Francis of Assisi, many Pietists have themselves inter- 
preted the process of their conversion in these terms. Similarly, 
the remarkable circumstance that so many of the greatest capital- 
istic entrepreneurs—down to Cecil Rhodes—have come from 
clergymen’s families might be explained as a reaction against 
their ascetic upbringing. But this form of explanation fails where 
an extraordinary capitalistic business sense is combined in the 
same persons and groups with the most intensive forms of a 
piety which penetrates and dominates their whole lives. Such 
cases are not isolated, but these traits are characteristic of many 
of the most important Churches and sects in the history of Prot- 
estantism. Especially Calvinism, wherever it has appeared,'® has 
shown this combination. However little, in the time of the 
expansion of the Reformation, it (or any other Protestant belief) 

10 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

was bound up with any particular social class, it is characteristic 
and in a certain sense typical that in French Huguenot Churches 
monks and business men (merchants, craftsmen) were particu- 
larly numerous among the proselytes, especially at the time of 
the persecution.'” Even the Spaniards knew that heresy (i.e. the 
Calvinism of the Dutch) promoted trade, and this coincides 
with the opinions which Sir William Petty expressed in his 
discussion of the reasons for the capitalistic development of 
the Netherlands. Gothein’? rightly calls the Calvinistic diaspora 
the seed-bed of capitalistic economy.'’ Even in this case one 
might consider the decisive factor to be the superiority of the 
French and Dutch economic cultures from which these com- 
munities sprang, or perhaps the immense influence of exile in 
the breakdown of traditional relationships.” But in France the 
situation was, as we know from Colbert’s struggles, the same 
even in the seventeenth century. Even Austria, not to speak of 
other countries, directly imported Protestant craftsmen. 

But not all the Protestant denominations seem to have had an 
equally strong influence in this direction. That of Calvinism, 
even in Germany, was among the strongest, it seems, and the 
reformed faith’! more than the others seems to have promoted 
the development of the spirit of capitalism, in the Wupperthal as 
well as elsewhere. Much more so than Lutheranism, as com- 
parison both in general and in particular instances, especially in 
the Wupperthal, seems to prove.”” For Scotland, Buckle, and 
among English poets, Keats, have emphasized these same rela- 
tionships.” Even more striking, as it is only necessary to men- 
tion, is the connection of a religious way of life with the most 
intensive development of business acumen among those sects 
whose otherworldliness is as proverbial as their wealth, espe- 
cially the Quakers and the Mennonites. The part which the for- 
mer have played in England and North America fell to the latter 
in Germany and the Netherlands. That in East Prussia Frederick 
William I tolerated the Mennonites as indispensable to industry, 

RELIGIOUS AFFILIATION AND SOCIAL STRATIFICATION 

in spite of their absolute refusal to perform military service, is 
only one of the numerous well-known cases which illustrates 
the fact, though, considering the character of that monarch, it is 
one of the most striking. Finally, that this combination of intense 
piety with just as strong a development of business acumen, was 
also characteristic of the Pietists, is common knowledge.”* 

It is only necessary to think of the Rhine country and of Calw. 
In this purely introductory discussion it is unnecessary to pile up 
more examples. For these few already all show one thing: that 
the spirit of hard work, of progress, or whatever else it may be 
called, the awakening of which one is inclined to ascribe to 
Protestantism, must not be understood, as there is a tendency to 
do, as joy of living nor in any other sense as connected with the 
Enlightenment. The old Protestantism of Luther, Calvin, Knox, 
Voet, had precious little to do with what to-day is called pro- 
gress. To whole aspects of modern life which the most extreme 
religionist would not wish to suppress to-day, it was directly 
hostile. If any inner relationship between certain expressions of 
the old Protestant spirit and modern capitalistic culture is to be 
found, we must attempt to find it, for better or worse not in its 
alleged more or less materialistic or at least anti-ascetic joy of 
living, but in its purely religious characteristics. Montesquieu 
says (Esprit des Lois, Book XX, chap. 7) of the English that they 
“had progressed the farthest of all peoples of the world in three 
important things: in piety, in commerce, and in freedom”. Is it 
not possible that their commercial superiority and their adapta- 
tion to free political institutions are connected in some way with 
that record of piety which Montesquieu ascribes to them? 

A large number of possible relationships, vaguely perceived, 
occur to us when we put the question in this way. It will now be 
our task to formulate what occurs to us confusedly as clearly as is 
possible, considering the inexhaustible diversity to be found in 
all historical material. But in order to do this it is necessary to 
leave behind the vague and general concepts with which we have 

11 

12 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

dealt up to this point, and attempt to penetrate into the peculiar 
characteristics of and the differences between those great worlds 
of religious thought which have existed historically in the vari- 
ous branches of Christianity. 

Before we can proceed to that, however, a few remarks are 
necessary, first on the peculiarities of the phenomenon of which 
we are seeking an historical explanation, then concerning the 
sense in which such an explanation is possible at all within 
the limits of these investigations. 

2 

THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

In the title of this study is used the somewhat pretentious phrase, 
the spirit of capitalism. What is to be understood by it? The 
attempt to give anything like a definition of it brings out certain 
difficulties which are in the very nature of this type of 
investigation. 

If any object can be found to which this term can be applied 
with any understandable meaning, it can only be an historical 
individual, i.e. a complex of elements associated in historical 
reality which we unite into a conceptual whole from the 
standpoint of their cultural significance. 

Such an historical concept, however, since it refers in its con- 
tent to a phenomenon significant for its unique individuality, 
cannot be defined according to the formula genus proximum, dif- 
ferentia specifica, but it must be gradually put together out of the 
individual parts which are taken from historical reality to make 
it up. Thus the final and definitive concept cannot stand at the 
beginning of the investigation, but must come at the end. We 
must, in other words, work out in the course of the discussion, 

14 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

as its most important result, the best conceptual formulation of 
what we here understand by the spirit of capitalism, that is the 
best from the point of view which interests us here. This point of 
view (the one of which we shall speak later) is, further, by no 
means the only possible one from which the historical phenom- 
ena we are investigating can be analysed. Other standpoints 
would, for this as for every historical phenomenon, yield other 
characteristics as the essential ones. The result is that it is by no 
means necessary to understand by the spirit of capitalism only 
what it will come to mean to us for the purposes of our analysis. 
This is a necessary result of the nature of historical concepts 
which attempt for their methodological purposes not to grasp 
historical reality in abstract general formule, but in concrete 
genetic sets of relations which are inevitably of a specifically 
unique and individual character.’ 

Thus, if we try to determine the object, the analysis and his- 
torical explanation of which we are attempting, it cannot be in 
the form of a conceptual definition, but at least in the beginning 
only a provisional description of what is here meant by the spirit 
of capitalism. Such a description is, however, indispensable in 
order clearly to understand the object of the investigation. For 
this purpose we turn to a document of that spirit which contains 
what we are looking for in almost classical purity, and at the 
same time has the advantage of being free from all direct rela- 
tionship to religion, being thus, for our purposes, free of 
preconceptions. 

Remember, that time is money. He that can earn ten shillings 
a day by his labour, and goes abroad, or sits idle, one half of 
that day, though he spends but sixpence during his diversion or 
idleness, ought not to reckon that the only expense; he has 
really spent, or rather thrown away, five shillings besides. 
Remember, that credit is money. If a man lets his money lie 
in my hands after it is due, he gives me the interest, or so much 

THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

as | can make of it during that time. This amounts to a con- 
siderable sum where a man has good and large credit, and 
makes good use of it. 

Remember, that money is of the prolific, generating nature. 
Money can beget money, and its offspring can beget more, and 
so on. Five shillings turned is six, turned again it is seven and 
threepence, and so on, till it becomes a hundred pounds. The 
more there is of it, the more it produces every turning, so that 
the profits rise quicker and quicker. He that kills a breeding- 
sow, destroys all her offspring to the thousandth generation. 
He that murders a crown, destroys all that it might have pro- 
duced, even scores of pounds. 

Remember this saying, The good paymaster is lord of another 
man’s purse. He that is known to pay punctually and exactly to 
the time he promises, may at any time, and on any occasion, 
raise all the money his friends can spare. This is sometimes of 
great use. After industry and frugality, nothing contributes 
more to the raising of a young man in the world than punctual- 
ity and justice in all his dealings; therefore never keep borrowed 
money an hour beyond the time you promised, lest a disap- 
pointment shut up your friend’s purse for ever. 

The most trifling actions that affect a man’s credit are to be 
regarded. The sound of your hammer at five in the morning, or 
eight at night, heard by a creditor, makes him easy six months 
longer; but if he sees you at a billiard-table, or hears your voice 
at a tavern, when you should be at work, he sends for his 
money the next day; demands it, before he can receive it, in a 
lump. 

It shows, besides, that you are mindful of what you owe; it 
makes you appear a careful as well as an honest man, and that 
still increases your credit. 

Beware of thinking all your own that you possess, and of 
living accordingly. It is a mistake that many people who have 

15 

16 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

credit fall into. To prevent this, keep an exact account for some 
time both of your expenses and your income. If you take the 
pains at first to mention particulars, it will have this good effect: 
you will discover how wonderfully small, trifling expenses 
mount up to large sums; and will discern what might have 
been, and may for the future be saved, without occasioning any 
great inconvenience. 

For six pounds a year you may have the use of one hundred 
pounds, provided you are a man of known prudence and 
honesty. 

He that spends a groat a day idly, spends idly above six 
pounds a year, which is the price for the use of one hundred 
pounds. 

He that wastes idly a groat’s worth of his time per day, one 
day with another, wastes the privilege of using one hundred 
pounds each day. 

He that idly loses five shillings’ worth of time; loses five shil- 
lings, and might as prudently throw five shillings into the sea. 

He that loses five shillings, not only loses that sum, but all 
the advantage that might be made by turning it in dealing, 
which by the time that a young man becomes old, will amount 
to a considerable sum of money.” 

It is Benjamin Franklin who preaches to us in these sentences, 
the same which Ferdinand Kirnberger satirizes in his clever and 
malicious Picture of American Culture’ as the supposed confession of 
faith of the Yankee. That it is the spirit of capitalism which here 
speaks in characteristic fashion, no one will doubt, however 
little we may wish to claim that everything which could be 
understood as pertaining to that spirit is contained in it. Let us 
pause a moment to consider this passage, the philosophy of 
which Kirnberger sums up in the words, “They make tallow out 
of cattle and money out of men”. The peculiarity of this 

THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

philosophy of avarice appears to be the ideal of the honest man 
of recognized credit, and above all the idea of a duty of the 
individual toward the increase of his capital, which is assumed as 
an end in itself. Truly what is here preached is not simply a 
means of making one’s way in the world, but a peculiar ethic. 
The infraction of its rules is treated not as foolishness but as 
forgetfulness of duty. That is the essence of the matter. It is not 
mere business astuteness, that sort of thing is common enough, 
it is an ethos. This is the quality which interests us. 

When Jacob Fugger, in speaking to a business associate who 
had retired and who wanted to persuade him to do the same, 
since he had made enough money and should let others have a 
chance, rejected that as pusillanimity and answered that “he 
(Fugger) thought otherwise, he wanted to make money as long 
as he could”,* the spirit of his statement is evidently quite differ- 
ent from that of Franklin. What in the former case was an 
expression of commercial daring and a personal inclination 
morally neutral,’ in the latter takes on the character of an ethic- 
ally coloured maxim for the conduct of life. The concept spirit of 
capitalism is here used in this specific sense,‘ it is the spirit of 
modern capitalism. For that we are here dealing only with West- 
ern European and American capitalism is obvious from the way 
in which the problem was stated. Capitalism existed in China, 
India, Babylon, in the classic world, and in the Middle Ages. But 
in all these cases, as we shall see, this particular ethos was 
lacking. 

Now, all Franklin’s moral attitudes are coloured with utili- 
tarianism. Honesty is useful, because it assures credit; so are 
punctuality, industry, frugality, and that is the reason they are 
virtues. A logical deduction from this would be that where, for 
instance, the appearance of honesty serves the same purpose, 
that would suffice, and an unnecessary surplus of this virtue 
would evidently appear to Franklin’s eyes as unproductive waste. 
And as a matter of fact, the story in his autobiography of his 

17 

18 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

conversion to those virtues,’ or the discussion of the value of a 
strict maintenance of the appearance of modesty, the assiduous 
belittlement of one’s own deserts in order to gain general 
recognition later,® confirms this impression. According to Frank- 
lin, those virtues, like all others, are only in so far virtues as they 
are actually useful to the individual, and the surrogate of mere 
appearance is always sufficient when it accomplishes the end in 
view. It is a conclusion which is inevitable for strict utilitarian- 
ism. The impression of many Germans that the virtues professed 
by Americanism are pure hypocrisy seems to have been con- 
firmed by this striking case. But in fact the matter is not by any 
means so simple. Benjamin Franklin’s own character, as it 
appears in the really unusual candidness of his autobiography, 
belies that suspicion. The circumstance that he ascribes his rec- 
ognition of the utility of virtue to a divine revelation which was 
intended to lead him in the path of righteousness, shows that 
something more than mere garnishing for purely egocentric 
motives is involved. 

In fact, the summum bonum of this ethic, the earning of more 
and more money, combined with the strict avoidance of all 
spontaneous enjoyment of life, is above all completely devoid of 
any eudzmonistic, not to say hedonistic, admixture. It is 
thought of so purely as an end in itself, that from the point of 
view of the happiness of, or utility to, the single individual, it 
appears entirely transcendental and absolutely irrational.’ Man is 
dominated by the making of money, by acquisition as the ultim- 
ate purpose of his life. Economic acquisition is no longer sub- 
ordinated to man as the means for the satisfaction of his material 
needs. This reversal of what we should call the natural relation- 
ship, so irrational from a naive point of view, is evidently as 
definitely a leading principle of capitalism as it is foreign to all 
peoples not under capitalistic influence. At the same time it 
expresses a type of feeling which is closely connected with cer- 
tain religious ideas. If we thus ask, why should “money be made 

THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

out of men”, Benjamin Franklin himself, although he was a 
colourless deist, answers in his autobiography with a quotation 
from the Bible, which his strict Calvinistic father drummed into 
him again and again in his youth: “Seest thou a man diligent in 
his business? He shall stand before kings” (Prov. xxii. 29). The 
earning of money within the modern economic order is, so long 
as it is done legally, the result and the expression of virtue and 
proficiency in a calling; and this virtue and proficiency are, as it 
is now not difficult to see, the real Alpha and Omega of Frank- 
lin’s ethic, as expressed in the passages we have quoted, as well 
as in all his works without exception. "° 

And in truth this peculiar idea, so familiar to us to-day, but in 
reality so little a matter of course, of one’s duty in a calling, is 
what is most characteristic of the social ethic of capitalistic cul- 
ture, and is in a sense the fundamental basis of it. It is an obliga- 
tion which the individual is supposed to feel and does feel 
towards the content of his professional’ activity, no matter in 
what it consists, in particular no matter whether it appears on 
the surface as a utilization of his personal powers, or only of his 
material possessions (as capital). 

Of course, this conception has not appeared only under capit- 
alistic conditions. On the contrary, we shall later trace its origins 
back to a time previous to the advent of capitalism. Still less, 
naturally, do we maintain that a conscious acceptance of these 
ethical maxims on the part of the individuals, entrepreneurs or 
labourers, in modern capitalistic enterprises, is a condition of 
the further existence of present-day capitalism. The capitalistic 
economy of the present day is an immense cosmos into which 
the individual is born, and which presents itself to him, at least 
as an individual, as an unalterable order of things in which he 
must live. It forces the individual, in so far as he is involved in the 
system of market relationships, to conform to capitalistic rules of 
action, The manufacturer who in the long run acts counter to 
these norms, will just as inevitably be eliminated from the 

19 

20 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

economic scene as the worker who cannot or will not adapt 
himself to them will be thrown into the streets without a job. 

Thus the capitalism of to-day, which has come to dominate 
economic life, educates and selects the economic subjects which 
it needs through a process of economic survival of the fittest. But 
here one can easily see the limits of the concept of selection as a 
means of historical explanation. In order that a manner of life so 
well adapted to the peculiarities of capitalism could be selected 
at all, i.e. should come to dominate others, it had to originate 
somewhere, and not in isolated individuals alone, but as a way of 
life common to whole groups of men. This origin is what really 
needs explanation. Concerning the doctrine of the more naive 
historical materialism, that such ideas originate as a reflection or 
superstructure of economic situations, we shall speak more in 
detail below. At this point it will suffice for our purpose to call 
attention to the fact that without doubt, in the country of Ben- 
jamin Franklin’s birth (Massachusetts), the spirit of capitalism 
(in the sense we have attached to it) was present before the 
capitalistic order. There were complaints of a peculiarly calculat- 
ing sort of profit-seeking in New England, as distinguished from 
other parts of America, as early as 1632. It is further undoubted 
that capitalism remained far less developed in some of the 
neighbouring colonies, the later Southern States of the United 
States of America, in spite of the fact that these latter were 
founded by large capitalists for business motives, while the New 
England colonies were founded by preachers and seminary 
graduates with the help of small bourgeois, craftsmen and yoe- 
men, for religious reasons. In this case the causal relation is 
certainly the reverse of that suggested by the materialistic 
standpoint. 

But the origin and history of such ideas is much more com- 
plex than the theorists of the superstructure suppose. The spirit 
of capitalism, in the sense in which we are using the term, had to 
fight its way to supremacy against a whole world of hostile 

THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

forces. A state of mind such as that expressed in the passages we 
have quoted from Franklin, and which called forth the applause 
of a whole people, would both in ancient times and in the 
Middle Ages’? have been proscribed as the lowest sort of avarice 
and as an attitude entirely lacking in self-respect. It is, in fact, still 
regularly thus looked upon by all those social groups which are 
least involved in or adapted to modern capitalistic conditions. 
This is not wholly because the instinct of acquisition was in 
those times unknown or undeveloped, as has often been said. 
Nor because the auri sacra fames, the greed for gold, was then, or 
now, less powerful outside of bourgeois capitalism than within 
its peculiar sphere, as the illusions of modern romanticists are 
wont to believe. The difference between the capitalistic and pre- 
capitalistic spirits is not to be found at this point. The greed of 
the Chinese Mandarin, the old Roman aristocrat, or the modern 
peasant, can stand up to any comparison. And the auri sacra fames 
of a Neapolitan cab-driver or barcaiuolo, and certainly of Asiatic 
representatives of similar trades, as well as of the craftsmen of 
southern European or Asiatic countries, is, as anyone can find 
out for himself, very much more intense, and especially more 
unscrupulous than that of, say, an Englishman in similar 
circumstances. '* 

The universal reign of absolute unscrupulousness in the pur- 
suit of selfish interests by the making of money has been a 
specific characteristic of precisely those countries whose 
bourgeois-capitalistic development, measured according to 
Occidental standards, has remained backward. As every 
employer knows, the lack of coscienziosita of the labourers'* of 
such countries, for instance Italy as compared with Germany, 
has been, and to a certain extent still is, one of the principal 
obstacles to their capitalistic development. Capitalism cannot 
make use of the labour of those who practise the doctrine of 
undisciplined liberum arbitrium, any more than it can make use of 
the business man who seems absolutely unscrupulous in his 

21 

22 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

dealings with others, as we can learn from Franklin. Hence the 
difference does not lie in the degree of development of any 
impulse to make money. The auri sacra fames is as old as the history 
of man. But we shall see that those who submitted to it without 
reserve as an uncontrolled impulse, such as the Dutch sea- 
captain who “would go through hell for gain, even though he 
scorched his sails”, were by no means the representatives of that 
attitude of mind from which the specifically modern capitalistic 
spirit as a mass phenomenon is derived, and that is what matters. 
At all periods of history, wherever it was possible, there has been 
ruthless acquisition, bound to no ethical norms whatever. Like 
war and piracy, trade has often been unrestrained in its relations 
with foreigners and those outside the group. The double ethic 
has permitted here what was forbidden in dealings among 
brothers. 

Capitalistic acquisition as an adventure has been at home in all 
types of economic society which have known trade with the use 
of money and which have offered it opportunities, through com- 
menda, farming of taxes, State loans, financing of wars, ducal 
courts and office-holders. Likewise the inner attitude of the 
adventurer, which laughs at all ethical limitations, has been uni- 
versal. Absolute and conscious ruthlessness in acquisition has 
often stood in the closest connection with the strictest conform- 
ity to tradition. Moreover, with the breakdown of tradition and 
the more or less complete extension of free economic enter- 
prise, even to within the social group, the new thing has not 
generally been ethically justified and encouraged, but only toler- 
ated as a fact. And this fact has been treated either as ethically 
indifferent or as reprehensible, but unfortunately unavoidable. 
This has not only been the normal attitude of all ethical teach- 
ings, but, what is more important, also that expressed in the 
practical action of the average man of pre-capitalistic times, pre- 
capitalistic in the sense that the rational utilization of capital in a 
permanent enterprise and the rational capitalistic organization 

THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

of labour had not yet become dominant forces in the determin- 
ation of economic activity. Now just this attitude was one of the 
strongest inner obstacles which the adaptation of men to the 
conditions of an ordered bourgeois-capitalistic economy has 
encountered everywhere. 

The most important opponent with which the spirit of capit- 
alism, in the sense of a definite standard of life claiming ethical 
sanction, has had to struggle, was that type of attitude and reac- 
tion to new situations which we may designate as traditionalism. 
In this case also every attempt at a final definition must be held 
in abeyance. On the other hand, we must try to make the pro- 
visional meaning clear by citing a few cases. We will begin from 
below, with the labourers. 

One of the technical means which the modern employer uses 
in order to secure the greatest possible amount of work from his 
men is the device of piece-rates. In agriculture, for instance, the 
gathering of the harvest is a case where the greatest possible 
intensity of labour is called for, since, the weather being 
uncertain, the difference between high profit and heavy loss may 
depend on the speed with which the harvesting can be done. 
Hence a system of piece-rates is almost universal in this case. 
And since the interest of the employer in a speeding-up of har- 
vesting increases with the increase of the results and the inten- 
sity of the work, the attempt has again and again been made, by 
increasing the piece-rates of the workmen, thereby giving them 
an opportunity to earn what is for them a very high wage, to 
interest them in increasing their own efficiency. But a peculiar 
difficulty has been met with surprising frequency: raising the 
piece-rates has often had the result that not more but less has 
been accomplished in the same time, because the worker reacted 
to the increase not by increasing but by decreasing the amount 
of his work. A man, for instance, who at the rate of 1 mark per 
acre mowed 2% acres per day and earned 2⁄4 marks, when the 
rate was raised to 1.25 marks per acre mowed, not 3 acres, as he 

23 

24 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

might easily have done, thus earning 3.75 marks, but only 2 
acres, so that he could still earn the 22 marks to which he was 
accustomed. The opportunity of earning more was less attractive 
than that of working less. He did not ask: how much can I earn 
in a day if I do as much work as possible? but: how much must I 
work in order to earn the wage, 2⁄2 marks, which I earned 
before and which takes care of my traditional needs? This is an 
example of what is here meant by traditionalism. A man does 
not “by nature” wish to earn more and more money, but simply 
to live as he is accustomed to live and to earn as much as is 
necessary for that purpose. Wherever modern capitalism has 
begun its work of increasing the productivity of human labour 
by increasing its intensity, it has encountered the immensely 
stubborn resistance of this leading trait of pre-capitalistic labour. 
And to-day it encounters it the more, the more backward (from 
a capitalistic point of view) the labouring forces are with which 
it has to deal. 

Another obvious possibility, to return to our example, since 
the appeal to the acquisitive instinct through higher wage-rates 
failed, would have been to try the opposite policy, to force the 
worker by reduction of his wage-rates to work harder to earn the 
same amount than he did before. Low wages and high profits 
seem even to-day to a superficial observer to stand in correlation; 
everything which is paid out in wages seems to involve a corres- 
ponding reduction of profits. That road capitalism has taken 
again and again since its beginning. For centuries it was an article 
of faith, that low wages were productive, i.e. that they increased 
the material results of labour so that, as Pieter de la Cour, on this 
point, as we shall see, quite in the spirit of the old Calvinism, 
said long ago, the people only work because and so long as they 
are poor. 

But the effectiveness of this apparently so efficient method has 
its limits. "° Of course the presence of a surplus population which 
it can hire cheaply in the labour market is a necessity for the 

THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

development of capitalism. But though too large a reserve army 
may in certain cases favour its quantitative expansion, it checks 
its qualitative development, especially the transition to types of 
enterprise which make more intensive use of labour. Low wages 
are by no means identical with cheap labour.'® From a purely 
quantitative point of view the efficiency of labour decreases with 
a wage which is physiologically insufficient, which may in the 
long run even mean a survival of the unfit. The present-day 
average Silesian mows, when he exerts himself to the full, little 
more than two-thirds as much land as the better paid and nour- 
ished Pomeranian or Mecklenburger, and the Pole, the further 
East he comes from, accomplishes progressively less than the 
German. Low wages fail even from a purely business point of 
view wherever it is a question of producing goods which require 
any sort of skilled labour, or the use of expensive machinery 
which is easily damaged, or in general wherever any great 
amount of sharp attention or of initiative is required. Here low 
wages do not pay, and their effect is the opposite of what was 
intended. For not only is a developed sense of responsibility 
absolutely indispensable, but in general also an attitude which, at 
least during working hours, is freed from continual calculations 
of how the customary wage may be earned with a maximum of 
comfort and a minimum of exertion. Labour must, on the con- 
trary, be performed as if it were an absolute end in itself, a 
calling. But such an attitude is by no means a product of nature. It 
cannot be evoked by low wages or high ones alone, but can only 
be the product of a long and arduous process of education. To- 
day, capitalism, once in the saddle, can recruit its labouring force 
in all industrial countries with comparative ease. In the past this 
was in every case an extremely difficult problem.'’ And even to- 
day it could probably not get along without the support of a 
powerful ally along the way, which, as we shall see below, was at 
hand at the time of its development. 

What is meant can again best be explained by means of an 

25 

26 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

example. The type of backward traditional form of labour is to- 
day very often exemplified by women workers, especially 
unmarried ones. An almost universal complaint of employers of 
girls, for instance German girls, is that they are almost entirely 
unable and unwilling to give up methods of work inherited or 
once learned in favour of more efficient ones, to adapt them- 
selves to new methods, to learn and to concentrate their intelli- 
gence, or even to use it at all. Explanations of the possibility of 
making work easier, above all more profitable to themselves, 
generally encounter a complete lack of understanding. Increases 
of piece-rates are without avail against the stone wall of habit. In 
general it is otherwise, and that is a point of no little importance 
from our view-point, only with girls having a specifically 
religious, especially a Pietistic, background. One often hears, and 
statistical investigation confirms it, '* that by far the best chances 
of economic education are found among this group. The ability 
of mental concentration, as well as the absolutely essential feel- 
ing of obligation to one’s job, are here most often combined 
with a strict economy which calculates the possibility of high 
earnings, and a cool self-control and frugality which enor- 
mously increase performance. This provides the most favourable 
foundation for the conception of labour as an end in itself, as a 
calling which is necessary to capitalism: the chances of overcom- 
ing traditionalism are greatest on account of the religious 
upbringing. This observation of present-day capitalism’? in itself 
suggests that it is worth while to ask how this connection of 
adaptability to capitalism with religious factors may have come 
about in the days of the early development of capitalism. For that 
they were even then present in much the same form can be 
inferred from numerous facts. For instance, the dislike and the 
persecution which Methodist workmen in the eighteenth cen- 
tury met at the hands of their comrades were not solely nor even 
principally the result of their religious eccentricities, England 
had seen many of those and more striking ones. It rested rather, 

THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

as the destruction of their tools, repeatedly mentioned in the 
reports, suggests, upon their specific willingness to work as we 
should say to-day. 

However, let us again return to the present, and this time to 
the entrepreneur, in order to clarify the meaning of traditional- 
ism in his case. 

Sombart, in his discussions of the genesis of capitalism,”° has 
distinguished between the satisfaction of needs and acquisition 
as the two great leading principles in economic history. In the 
former case the attainment of the goods necessary to meet per- 
sonal needs, in the latter a struggle for profit free from the limits 
set by needs, have been the ends controlling the form and direc- 
tion of economic activity. What he calls the economy of needs 
seems at first glance to be identical with what is here described 
as economic traditionalism. That may be the case if the concept 
of needs is limited to traditional needs. But if that is not done, a 
number of economic types which must be considered capital- 
istic according to the definition of capital which Sombart gives 
in another part of his work,”’ would be excluded from the 
category of acquisitive economy and put into that of needs 
economy. Enterprises, namely, which are carried on by private 
entrepreneurs by utilizing capital (money or goods with a 
money value) to make a profit, purchasing the means of produc- 
tion and selling the product, i.e. undoubted capitalistic enter- 
prises, may at the same time have a traditionalistic character. This 
has, in the course even of modern economic history, not been 
merely an occasional case, but rather the rule, with continual 
interruptions from repeated and increasingly powerful con- 
quests of the capitalistic spirit. To be sure the capitalistic form of 
an enterprise and the spirit in which it is run generally stand in 
some sort of adequate relationship to each other, but not in one 
of necessary interdependence. Nevertheless, we provisionally use 
the expression spirit of (modern) capitalism’? to describe that 
attitude which seeks profit rationally and systematically in the 

27 

28 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

manner which we have illustrated by the example of Benjamin 
Franklin. This, however, is justified by the historical fact that that 
attitude of mind has on the one hand found its most suitable 
expression in capitalistic enterprise, while on the other the 
enterprise has derived its most suitable motive force from the 
spirit of capitalism. 

But the two may very well occur separately. Benjamin Franklin 
was filled with the spirit of capitalism at a time when his 
printing business did not differ in form from any handicraft 
enterprise. And we shall see that at the beginning of modern 
times it was by no means the capitalistic entrepreneurs of the 
commercial aristocracy, who were either the sole or the pre- 
dominant bearers of the attitude we have here called the spirit of 
capitalism.” It was much more the rising strata of the lower 
industrial middle classes. Even in the nineteenth century its clas- 
sical representatives were not the elegant gentlemen of Liverpool 
and Hamburg, with their commercial fortunes handed down for 
generations, but the self-made parvenus of Manchester and 
Westphalia, who often rose from very modest circumstances. As 
early as the sixteenth century the situation was similar; the 
industries which arose at that time were mostly created by 
parvenus.” 

The management, for instance, of a bank, a wholesale export 
business, a large retail establishment, or of a large putting-out 
enterprise dealing with goods produced in homes, is certainly 
only possible in the form of a capitalistic enterprise. Neverthe- 
less, they may all be carried on in a traditionalistic spirit. In fact, 
the business of a large bank of issue cannot be carried on in any 
other way. The foreign trade of whole epochs has rested on the 
basis of monopolies and legal privileges of strictly traditional 
character. In retail trade—and we are not here talking of the 
small men without capital who are continually crying out for 
Government aid—the revolution which is making an end of the 
old traditionalism is still in full swing. It is the same development 

THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

which broke up the old putting-out system, to which modern 
domestic labour is related only in form. How this revolution 
takes place and what is its significance may, in spite of the fact 
these things are so familiar, be again brought out by a concrete 
example. 

Until about the middle of the past century the life of a putter- 
out was, at least in many of the branches of the Continental 
textile industry,” what we should to-day consider very comfort- 
able. We may imagine its routine somewhat as follows: The 
peasants came with their cloth, often (in the case of linen) prin- 
cipally or entirely made from raw material which the peasant 
himself had produced, to the town in which the putter-out 
lived, and after a careful, often official, appraisal of the quality, 
received the customary price for it. The putter-out’s customers, 
for markets any appreciable distance away, were middlemen, 
who also came to him, generally not yet following samples, but 
seeking traditional qualities, and bought from his warehouse, or, 
long before delivery, placed orders which were probably in turn 
passed on to the peasants. Personal canvassing of customers took 
place, if at all, only at long intervals. Otherwise correspondence 
sufficed, though the sending of samples slowly gained ground. 
The number of business hours was very moderate, perhaps five 
to six a day, sometimes considerably less; in the rush season, 
where there was one, more. Earnings were moderate; enough to 
lead a respectable life and in good times to put away a little. On 
the whole, relations among competitors were relatively good, 
with a large degree of agreement on the fundamentals of busi- 
ness. A long daily visit to the tavern, with often plenty to drink, 
and a congenial circle of friends, made life comfortable and 
leisurely. 

The form of organization was in every respect capitalistic; the 
entrepreneur’s activity was of a purely business character; the 
use of capital, turned over in the business, was indispensable; 
and finally, the objective aspect of the economic process, the 

29 

30 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

book-keeping, was rational. But it was traditionalistic business, if 
one considers the spirit which animated the entrepreneur: the 
traditional manner of life, the traditional rate of profit, the 
traditional amount of work, the traditional manner of regulating 
the relationships with labour, and the essentially traditional cir- 
cle of customers and the manner of attracting new ones. All these 
dominated the conduct of the business, were at the basis, one 
may say, of the ethos of this group of business men. 

Now at some time this leisureliness was suddenly destroyed, 
and often entirely without any essential change in the form of 
organization, such as the transition to a unified factory, to mech- 
anical weaving, etc. What happened was, on the contrary, often 
no more than this: some young man from one of the putting- 
out families went out into the country, carefully chose weavers 
for his employ, greatly increased the rigour of his supervision of 
their work, and thus turned them from peasants into labourers. 
On the other hand, he would begin to change his marketing 
methods by so far as possible going directly to the final con- 
sumer, would take the details into his own hands, would person- 
ally solicit customers, visiting them every year, and above all 
would adapt the quality of the product directly to their needs 
and wishes. At the same time he began to introduce the principle 
of low prices and large turnover. There was repeated what 
everywhere and always is the result of such a process of rational- 
ization: those who would not follow suit had to go out of busi- 
ness. The idyllic state collapsed under the pressure of a bitter 
competitive struggle, respectable fortunes were made, and not 
lent out at interest, but always reinvested in the business. The old 
leisurely and comfortable attitude toward life gave way to a hard 
frugality in which some participated and came to the top, 
because they did not wish to consume but to earn, while others 
who wished to keep on with the old ways were forced to curtail 
their consumption.”° 

And, what is most important in this connection, it was not 

THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

generally in such cases a stream of new money invested in the 
industry which brought about this revolution—in several cases 
known to me the whole revolutionary process was set in motion 
with a few thousands of capital borrowed from relations—but 
the new spirit, the spirit of modern capitalism, had set to work. 
The question of the motive forces in the expansion of modern 
capitalism is not in the first instance a question of the origin of 
the capital sums which were available for capitalistic uses, but, 
above all, of the development of the spirit of capitalism. Where it 
appears and is able to work itself out, it produces its own capital 
and monetary supplies as the means to its ends, but the reverse is 
not true.” Its entry on the scene was not generally peaceful. A 
flood of mistrust, sometimes of hatred, above all of moral indig- 
nation, regularly opposed itself to the first innovator. Often—I 
know of several cases of the sort—regular legends of mysterious 
shady spots in his previous life have been produced. It is very 
easy not to recognize that only an unusually strong character 
could save an entrepreneur of this new type from the loss of 
his temperate self-control and from both moral and economic 
shipwreck. Furthermore, along with clarity of vision and ability 
to act, it is only by virtue of very definite and highly developed 
ethical qualities that it has been possible for him to command 
the absolutely indispensable confidence of his customers and 
workmen. Nothing else could have given him the strength to 
overcome the innumerable obstacles, above all the infinitely 
more intensive work which is demanded of the modern entre- 
preneur. But these are ethical qualities of quite a different sort 
from those adapted to the traditionalism of the past. 

And, as arule, it has been neither dare-devil and unscrupulous 
speculators, economic adventurers such as we meet at all periods 
of economic history, nor simply great financiers who have 
earned through this change, outwardly so inconspicuous, but 
nevertheless so decisive for the penetration of economic life 
with the new spirit. On the contrary, they were men who had 

3] 

32 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

grown up in the hard school of life, calculating and daring at 
the same time, above all temperate and reliable, shrewd and 
completely devoted to their business, with strictly bourgeois 
opinions and principles. 

One is tempted to think that these personal moral qualities 
have not the slightest relation to any ethical maxims, to say noth- 
ing of religious ideas, but that the essential relation between 
them is negative. The ability to free oneself from the common 
tradition, a sort of liberal enlightenment, seems likely to be the 
most suitable basis for such a business man’s success. And to-day 
that is generally precisely the case. Any relationship between 
religious beliefs and conduct is generally absent, and where any 
exists, at least in Germany, it tends to be of the negative sort. The 
people filled with the spirit of capitalism to-day tend to be indif- 
ferent, if not hostile, to the Church. The thought of the pious 
boredom of paradise has little attraction for their active natures; 
religion appears to them as a means of drawing people away 
from labour in this world. If you ask them what is the meaning 
of their restless activity, why they are never satisfied with what 
they have, thus appearing so senseless to any purely worldly view 
of life, they would perhaps give the answer, if they know any at 
all: “to provide for my children and grandchildren”. But more 
often and, since that motive is not peculiar to them, but was just 
as effective for the traditionalist, more correctly, simply: that 
business with its continuous work has become a necessary part 
of their lives. That is in fact the only possible motivation, but it at 
the same time expresses what is, seen from the view-point of 
personal happiness, so irrational about this sort of life, where a 
man exists for the sake of his business, instead of the reverse. 

Of course, the desire for the power and recognition which the 
mere fact of wealth brings plays its part. When the imagination 
of a whole people has once been turned toward purely quantita- 
tive bigness, as in the United States, this romanticism of num- 
bers exercises an irresistible appeal to the poets among business 

THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

men. Otherwise it is in general not the real leaders, and espe- 
cially not the permanently successful entrepreneurs, who are 
taken in by it. In particular, the resort to entailed estates and the 
nobility, with sons whose conduct at the university and in the 
officers’ corps tries to cover up their social origin, as has been 
the typical history of German capitalistic parvenu families, is a 
product of later decadence. The ideal type?? of the capitalistic 
entrepreneur, as it has been represented even in Germany by 
occasional outstanding examples, has no relation to such more 
or less refined climbers. He avoids ostentation and unnecessary 
expenditure, as well as conscious enjoyment of his power, and is 
embarrassed by the outward signs of the social recognition 
which he receives. His manner of life is, in other words, often, 
and we shall have to investigate the historical significance of just 
this important fact, distinguished by a certain ascetic tendency, 
as appears clearly enough in the sermon of Franklin which we 
have quoted. It is, namely, by no means exceptional, but rather 
the rule, for him to have a sort of modesty which is essentially 
more honest than the reserve which Franklin so shrewdly 
recommends. He gets nothing out of his wealth for himself, 
except the irrational sense of having done his job well. 

But it is just that which seems to the pre-capitalistic man so 
incomprehensible and mysterious, so unworthy and contempt- 
ible. That anyone should be able to make it the sole purpose of 
his life-work, to sink into the grave weighed down with a great 
material load of money and goods, seems to him explicable only 
as the product of a perverse instinct, the auri sacra fames. 

At present under our individualistic political, legal, and eco- 
nomic institutions, with the forms of organization and general 
structure which are peculiar to our economic order, this spirit of 
capitalism might be understandable, as has been said, purely as a 
result of adaptation. The capitalistic system so needs this devo- 
tion to the calling of making money, it is an attitude toward 
material goods which is so well suited to that system, so 

33 

34 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

intimately bound up with the conditions of survival in the eco- 
nomic struggle for existence, that there can to-day no longer be 
any question of a necessary connection of that acquisitive man- 
ner of life with any single Weltanschauung. In fact, it no longer 
needs the support of any religious forces, and feels the attempts 
of religion to influence economic life, in so far as they can still be 
felt at all, to be as much an unjustified interference as its regula- 
tion by the State. In such circumstances men’s commercial and 
social interests do tend to determine their opinions and atti- 
tudes. Whoever does not adapt his manner of life to the condi- 
tions of capitalistic success must go under, or at least cannot rise. 
But these are phenomena of a time in which modern capitalism 
has become dominant and has become emancipated from its old 
supports. But as it could at one time destroy the old forms of 
medizeval regulation of economic life only in alliance with the 
growing power of the modern State, the same, we may say provi- 
sionally, may have been the case in its relations with religious 
forces. Whether and in what sense that was the case, it is our task 
to investigate. For that the conception of money-making as an 
end in itself to which people were bound, as a calling, was 
contrary to the ethical feelings of whole epochs, it is hardly 
necessary to prove. The dogma Deo placere vix potest which was 
incorporated into the canon law and applied to the activities of 
the merchant, and which at that time (like the passage in the 
gospel about interest)’ was considered genuine, as well as St. 
Thomas’s characterization of the desire for gain as turpitudo 
(which term even included unavoidable and hence ethically jus- 
tified profit-making), already contained a high degree of conces- 
sion on the part of the Catholic doctrine to the financial powers 
with which the Church had such intimate political relations in 
the Italian cities,’ as compared with the much more radically 
anti-chrematistic views of comparatively wide circles. But even 
where the doctrine was still better accommodated to the facts, as 
for instance with Anthony of Florence, the feeling was never 

THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

quite overcome, that activity directed to acquisition for its own 
sake was at bottom a pudendum which was to be tolerated only 
because of the unalterable necessities of life in this world. 

Some moralists of that time, especially of the nominalistic 
school, accepted developed capitalistic business forms as inevit- 
able, and attempted to justify them, especially commerce, as 
necessary. The industria developed in it they were able to regard, 
though not without contradictions, as a legitimate source of 
profit, and hence ethically unobjectionable. But the dominant 
doctrine rejected the spirit of capitalistic acquisition as turpitudo, 
or at least could not give it a positive ethical sanction. An ethical 
attitude like that of Benjamin Franklin would have been simply 
unthinkable. This was, above all, the attitude of capitalistic circles 
themselves. Their life-work was, so long as they clung to the 
tradition of the Church, at best something morally indifferent. It 
was tolerated, but was still, even if only on account of the con- 
tinual danger of collision with the Church’s doctrine on usury, 
somewhat dangerous to salvation. Quite considerable sums, as 
the sources show, went at the death of rich people to religious 
institutions as conscience money, at times even back to former 
debtors as usura which had been unjustly taken from them. It was 
otherwise, along with heretical and other tendencies looked 
upon with disapproval, only in those parts of the commercial 
aristocracy which were already emancipated from the tradition. 
But even sceptics and people indifferent to the Church often 
reconciled themselves with it by gifts, because it was a sort of 
insurance against the uncertainties of what might come after 
death, or because (at least according to the very widely held 
latter view) an external obedience to the commands of the 
Church was sufficient to insure salvation.*' Here the either non- 
moral or immoral character of their action in the opinion of the 
participants themselves comes clearly to light. 

Now, how could activity, which was at best ethically tolerated, 
turn into a calling in the sense of Benjamin Franklin? The fact to 

35 

36 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

be explained historically is that in the most highly capitalistic 
centre of that time, in Florence of the fourteenth and fifteenth 
centuries, the money and capital market of all the great political 
Powers, this attitude was considered ethically unjustifiable, or at 
best to be tolerated. But in the backwoods small bourgeois cir- 
cumstances of Pennsylvania in the eighteenth century, where 
business threatened for simple lack of money to fall back into 
barter, where there was hardly a sign of large enterprise, where 
only the earliest beginnings of banking were to be found, the 
same thing was considered the essence of moral conduct, even 
commanded in the name of duty. To speak here of a reflection of 
material conditions in the ideal superstructure would be patent 
nonsense. What was the background of ideas which could 
account for the sort of activity apparently directed toward profit 
alone as a calling toward which the individual feels himself to 
have an ethical obligation? For it was this idea which gave the 
way of life of the new entrepreneur its ethical foundation and 
justification. 

The attempt has been made, particularly by Sombart, in what 
are often judicious and effective observations, to depict eco- 
nomic rationalism as the salient feature of modern economic life 
as a whole. Undoubtedly with justification, if by that is meant 
the extension of the productivity of labour which has, through 
the subordination of the process of production to scientific 
points of view, relieved it from its dependence upon the natural 
organic limitations of the human individual. Now this process of 
rationalization in the field of technique and economic organiza- 
tion undoubtedly determines an important part of the ideals of 
life of modern bourgeois society. Labour in the service of a 
rational organization for the provision of humanity with 
material goods has without doubt always appeared to representa- 
tives of the capitalistic spirit as one of the most important pur- 
poses of their life-work. It is only necessary, for instance, to read 
Franklin’s account of his efforts in the service of civic improve- 

THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

ments in Philadelphia clearly to apprehend this obvious truth. 
And the joy and pride of having given employment to numerous 
people, of having had a part in the economic progress of his 
home town in the sense referring to figures of population and 
volume of trade which capitalism associated with the word, all 
these things obviously are part of the specific and undoubtedly 
idealistic satisfactions in life to modern men of business. Simi- 
larly it is one of the fundamental characteristics of an individual- 
istic capitalistic economy that it is rationalized on the basis of 
rigorous calculation, directed with foresight and caution toward 
the economic success which is sought in sharp contrast to the 
hand-to-mouth existence of the peasant, and to the privileged 
traditionalism of the guild craftsman and of the adventurers’ 
capitalism, oriented to the exploitation of political opportunities 
and irrational speculation. 

It might thus seem that the development of the spirit of capit- 
alism is best understood as part of the development of rational- 
ism as a whole, and could be deduced from the fundamental 
position of rationalism on the basic problems of life. In the 
process Protestantism would only have to be considered in so far 
as it had formed a stage prior to the development of a purely 
rationalistic philosophy. But any serious attempt to carry this 
thesis through makes it evident that such a simple way of putting 
the question will not work, simply because of the fact that the 
history of rationalism shows a development which by no means 
follows parallel lines in the various departments of life. The 
rationalization of private law, for instance, if it is thought of as a 
logical simplification and rearrangement of the content of the 
law, was achieved in the highest hitherto known degree in the 
Roman law of late antiquity. But it remained most backward in 
some of the countries with the highest degree of economic 
rationalization, notably in England, where the Renaissance of 
Roman Law was overcome by the power of the great legal cor- 
porations, while it has always retained its supremacy in the 

37 

38 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

Catholic countries of Southern Europe. The worldly rational 
philosophy of the eighteenth century did not find favour alone 
or even principally in the countries of highest capitalistic devel- 
opment. The doctrines of Voltaire are even to-day the common 
property of broad upper, and what is practically more important, 
middle-class groups in the Romance Catholic countries. Finally, 
if under practical rationalism is understood the type of attitude 
which sees and judges the world consciously in terms of the 
worldly interests of the individual ego, then this view of life was 
and is the special peculiarity of the peoples of the liberum arbi- 
trium, such as the Italians and the French are in very flesh and 
blood. But we have already convinced ourselves that this is by no 
means the soil in which that relationship of a man to his calling 
as a task, which is necessary to capitalism, has pre-eminently 
grown. In fact, one may—this simple proposition, which is 
often forgotten should be placed at the beginning of every study 
which essays to deal with rationalism—rationalize life from 
fundamentally different basic points of view and in very differ- 
ent directions. Rationalism is an historical concept which covers 
a whole world of different things. It will be our task to find out 
whose intellectual child the particular concrete form of rational 
thought was, from which the idea of a calling and the devotion 
to labour in the calling has grown, which is, as we have seen, 
so irrational from the standpoint of purely eudzmonistic 
self-interest, but which has been and still is one of the most 
characteristic elements of our capitalistic culture. We are here 
particularly interested in the origin of precisely the irrational 
element which lies in this, as in every conception of a calling. 

3 

LUTHER’S CONCEPTION OF 
THE CALLING 

Task of the investigation 

Now it is unmistakable that even in the German word Beruf, and 
perhaps still more clearly in the English calling, a religious con- 
ception, that of a task set by God, is at least suggested. The more 
emphasis is put upon the word in a concrete case, the more 
evident is the connotation. And if we trace the history of the 
word through the civilized languages, it appears that neither the 
predominantly Catholic peoples nor those of classical antiquity! 
have possessed any expression of similar connotation for what 
we know as a calling (in the sense of a life-task, a definite field in 
which to work), while one has existed for all predominantly 
Protestant peoples. It may be further shown that this is not due to 
any ethnical peculiarity of the languages concerned. It is not, for 
instance, the product of a Germanic spirit, but in its modern 
meaning the word comes from the Bible translations, through 

40 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

the spirit of the translator, not that of the original.’ In Luther’s 
translation of the Bible it appears to have first been used at a 
point in Jesus Sirach (xi. 20 and 21) precisely in our modern 
sense.* After that it speedily took on its present meaning in the 
everyday speech of all Protestant peoples, while earlier not even 
a suggestion of such a meaning could be found in the secular 
literature of any of them, and even, in religious writings, so far 
as I can ascertain, it is only found in one of the German mystics 
whose influence on Luther is well known. 

Like the meaning of the word, the idea is new, a product of the 
Reformation. This may be assumed as generally known. It is true 
that certain suggestions of the positive valuation of routine activ- 
ity in the world, which is contained in this conception of the 
calling, had already existed in the Middle Ages, and even in late 
Hellenistic antiquity. We shall speak of that later. But at least one 
thing was unquestionably new: the valuation of the fulfilment of 
duty in worldly affairs as the highest form which the moral 
activity of the individual could assume. This it was which inevit- 
ably gave every-day worldly activity a religious significance, and 
which first created the conception of a calling in this sense. The 
conception of the calling thus brings out that central dogma of 
all Protestant denominations which the Catholic division of eth- 
ical precepts into preecepta and consilia discards. The only way of 
living acceptably to God was not to surpass worldly morality in 
monastic asceticism, but solely through the fulfilment of the 
obligations imposed upon the individual by his position in the 
world. That was his calling. 

Luther* developed the conception in the course of the first 
decade of his activity as a reformer. At first, quite in harmony 
with the prevailing tradition of the Middle Ages, as represented, 
for example, by Thomas Aquinas,’ he thought of activity in the 
world as a thing of the flesh, even though willed by God. It is the 
indispensable natural condition of a life of faith, but in itself, like 
eating and drinking, morally neutral.° But with the development 

LUTHER’S CONCEPTION OF THE CALLING 

of the conception of sola fide in all its consequences, and its logical 
result, the increasingly sharp emphasis against the Catholic con- 
silia evangelica of the monks as dictates of the devil, the calling 
grew in importance. The monastic life is not only quite devoid of 
value as a means of justification before God, but he also looks 
upon its renunciation of the duties of this world as the product 
of selfishness, withdrawing from temporal obligations. In con- 
trast, labour in a calling appears to him as the outward expres- 
sion of brotherly love. This he proves by the observation that the 
division of labour forces every individual to work for others, but 
his view-point is highly naive, forming an almost grotesque 
contrast to Adam Smith’s well-known statements on the same 
subject.’ However, this justification, which is evidently essen- 
tially scholastic, soon disappears again, and there remains, more 
and more strongly emphasized, the statement that the fulfilment 
of worldly duties is under all circumstances the only way to live 
acceptably to God. It and it alone is the will of God, and hence 
every legitimate calling has exactly the same worth in the sight 
of God.* 

That this moral justification of worldly activity was one of the 
most important results of the Reformation, especially of Luther’s 
part in it, is beyond doubt, and may even be considered a plati- 
tude.” This attitude is worlds removed from the deep hatred of 
Pascal, in his contemplative moods, for all worldly activity, 
which he was deeply convinced could only be understood in 
terms of vanity or low cunning.'° And it differs even more from 
the liberal utilitarian compromise with the world at which the 
Jesuits arrived. But just what the practical significance of this 
achievement of Protestantism was in detail is dimly felt rather 
than clearly perceived. 

In the first place it is hardly necessary to point out that Luther 
cannot be claimed for the spirit of capitalism in the sense in 
which we have used that term above, or for that matter in 
any sense whatever. The religious circles which today most 

41 

42 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

enthusiastically celebrate that great achievement of the Reforma- 
tion are by no means friendly to capitalism in any sense. And 
Luther himself would, without doubt, have sharply repudiated 
any connection with a point of view like that of Franklin. Of 
course, one cannot consider his complaints against the great 
merchants of his time, such as the Fuggers,'! as evidence in this 
case. For the struggle against the privileged position, legal or 
actual, of single great trading companies in the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries may best be compared with the modern 
campaign against the trusts, and can no more justly be con- 
sidered in itself an expression of a traditionalistic point of view. 
Against these people, against the Lombards, the monopolists, 
speculators, and bankers patronized by the Anglican Church and 
the kings and parliaments of England and France, both the Pur- 
itans and the Huguenots carried on a bitter struggle." Cromwell, 
after the battle of Dunbar (September 1650), wrote to the Long 
Parliament: “Be pleased to reform the abuses of all professions: 
and if there be any one that makes many poor to make a few 
rich, that suits not a Commonwealth.” But, nevertheless, we will 
find Cromwell following a quite specifically capitalistic line of 
thought." On the other hand, Luther’s numerous statements 
against usury or interest in any form reveal a conception of the 
nature of capitalistic acquisition which, compared with that of 
late Scholasticism, is, from a capitalistic view-point, definitely 
backward."* Especially, of course, the doctrine of the sterility of 
money which Anthony of Florence had already refuted. 

But it is unnecessary to go into detail. For, above all, the con- 
sequences of the conception of the calling in the religious sense 
for worldly conduct were susceptible to quite different inter- 
pretations. The effect of the Reformation as such was only that, 
as compared with the Catholic attitude, the moral emphasis on 
and the religious sanction of, organized worldly labour in a call- 
ing was mightily increased. The way in which the concept of the 
calling, which expressed this change, should develop further 

LUTHER’S CONCEPTION OF THE CALLING 

depended upon the religious evolution which now took place in 
the different Protestant Churches. The authority of the Bible, 
from which Luther thought he had derived his idea of the call- 
ing, on the whole favoured a traditionalistic interpretation. The 
Old Testament, in particular, though in the genuine prophets it 
showed no sign of a tendency to excel worldly morality, and 
elsewhere only in quite isolated rudiments and suggestions, con- 
tained a similar religious idea entirely in this traditionalistic 
sense. Everyone should abide by his living and let the godless 
run after gain. That is the sense of all the statements which bear 
directly on worldly activities. Not until the Talmud is a partially, 
but not even then fundamentally, different attitude to be found. 
The personal attitude of Jesus is characterized in classical purity 
by the typical antique-Oriental plea: “Give us this day our daily 
bread.” The element of radical repudiation of the world, as 
expressed in the wapi@vds tç dduciac, excluded the possibility 
that the modern idea of a calling should be based on his personal 
authority.'° In the apostolic era as expressed in the New Testa- 
ment, especially in St. Paul, the Christian looked upon worldly 
activity either with indifference, or at least essentially traditional- 
istically; for those first generations were filled with eschato- 
logical hopes. Since everyone was simply waiting for the coming 
of the Lord, there was nothing to do but remain in the station 
and in the worldly occupation in which the call of the Lord had 
found him, and labour as before. Thus he would not burden his 
brothers as an object of charity, and it would only be for a little 
while. Luther read the Bible through the spectacles of his whole 
attitude; at the time and in the course of his development from 
about 1518 to 1530 this not only remained traditionalistic but 
became ever more so.'® 

In the first years of his activity as a reformer he was, since he 
thought of the calling as primarily of the flesh, dominated by an 
attitude closely related, in so far as the form of world activity 
was concerned, to the Pauline eschatological indifference as 

43 

44 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

expressed in 1 Cor. vii.” One may attain salvation in any walk of 
life; on the short pilgrimage of life there is no use in laying 
weight on the form of occupation. The pursuit of material gain 
beyond personal needs must thus appear as a symptom of lack of 
grace, and since it can apparently only be attained at the expense 
of others, directly reprehensible.'* As he became increasingly 
involved in the affairs of the world, he came to value work in the 
world more highly. But in the concrete calling an individual 
pursued he saw more and more a special command of God to 
fulfil these particular duties which the Divine Will had imposed 
upon him. And after the conflict with the Fanatics and the peas- 
ant disturbances, the objective historical order of things in 
which the individual has been placed by God becomes for 
Luther more and more a direct manifestation of divine will.'” 
The stronger and stronger emphasis on the providential element, 
even in particular events of life, led more and more to a trad- 
itionalistic interpretation based on the idea of Providence. The 
individual should remain once and for all in the station and 
calling in which God had placed him, and should restrain his 
worldly activity within the limits imposed by his established 
station in life. While his economic traditionalism was originally 
the result of Pauline indifference, it later became that of a more 
and more intense belief in divine providence,” which identified 
absolute obedience to God’s will,’! with absolute acceptance of 
things as they were. Starting from this background, it was 
impossible for Luther to establish a new or in any way funda- 
mental connection between worldly activity and religious prin- 
ciples.’* His acceptance of purity of doctrine as the one infallible 
criterion of the Church, which became more and more irrevoc- 
able after the struggles of the ‘twenties, was in itself sufficient to 
check the development of new points of view in ethical matters. 

Thus for Luther the concept of the calling remained trad- 
itionalistic.** His calling is something which man has to accept 
as a divine ordinance, to which he must adapt himself. This 

LUTHER’S CONCEPTION OF THE CALLING 

aspect outweighed the other idea which was also present, that 
work in the calling was a, or rather the, task set by God.** And in 
its further development, orthodox Lutheranism emphasized this 
aspect still more. Thus, for the time being, the only ethical result 
was negative; worldly duties were no longer subordinated to 
ascetic ones; obedience to authority and the acceptance of things 
as they were, were preached.” In this Lutheran form the idea of a 
calling had, as will be shown in our discussion of medieval 
religious ethics, to a considerable extent been anticipated by the 
German mystics. Especially in Tauler’s equalization of the values 
of religious and worldly occupations, and the decline in valu- 
ation of the traditional forms of ascetic practices”® on account of 
the decisive significance of the ecstatic-contemplative absorption 
of the divine spirit by the soul. To a certain extent Lutheranism 
means a step backward from the mystics, in so far as Luther, and 
still more his Church, had, as compared with the mystics, partly 
undermined the psychological foundations for a rational ethics. 
(The mystic attitude on this point is reminiscent partly of the 
Pietest and partly of the Quaker psychology of faith.””) That was 
precisely because he could not but suspect the tendency to 
ascetic self-discipline of leading to salvation by works, and hence 
he and his Church were forced to keep it more and more in the 
background. 

Thus the mere idea of the calling in the Lutheran sense is at 
best of questionable importance for the problems in which we 
are interested. This was all that was meant to be determined 
here.** But this is not in the least to say that even the Lutheran 
form of the renewal of the religious life may not have had some 
practical significance for the objects of our investigation; quite 
the contrary. Only that significance evidently cannot be derived 
directly from the attitude of Luther and his Church to worldly 
activity, and is perhaps not altogether so easily grasped as the 
connection with other branches of Protestantism. It is thus well 
for us next to look into those forms in which a relation between 

45 

46 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

practical life and a religious motivation can be more easily per- 
ceived than in Lutheranism. We have already called attention to 
the conspicuous part played by Calvinism and the Protestant 
sects in the history of capitalistic development. As Luther found a 
different spirit at work in Zwingli than in himself, so did his 
spiritual successors in Calvinism. And Catholicism has to the 
present day looked upon Calvinism as its real opponent. 

Now that may be partly explained on purely political 
grounds. Although the Reformation is unthinkable without 
Luther’s own personal religious development, and was spiritu- 
ally long influenced by his personality, without Calvinism his 
work could not have had permanent concrete success. Neverthe- 
less, the reason for this common repugnance of Catholics and 
Lutherans lies, at least partly, in the ethical peculiarities of 
Calvinism. A purely superficial glance shows that there is here 
quite a different relationship between the religious life and 
earthly activity than in either Catholicism or Lutheranism. Even 
in literature motivated purely by religious factors that is evident. 
Take for instance the end of the Divine Comedy, where the poet in 
Paradise stands speechless in his passive contemplation of the 
secrets of God, and compare it with the poem which has come 
to be called the Divine Comedy of Puritanism. Milton closes the last 
song of Paradise Lost after describing the expulsion from paradise as 
follows:— 

They, looking back, all the eastern side beheld 

Of paradise, so late their happy seat, 

Waved over by that flaming brand; the gate 

With dreadful faces thronged and fiery arms. 

Some natural tears they dropped, but wiped them soon: 
The world was all before them, there to choose 

Their place of rest, and Providence their guide. 

And only a little before Michael had said to Adam: 

LUTHER’S CONCEPTION OF THE CALLING 

... “Only add 
Deeds to thy knowledge answerable; add faith; 
Add virtue, patience, temperance; add love, 
By name to come called Charity, the soul 
Of all the rest: then wilt thou not be loth 
To leave this Paradise, but shall possess 
A Paradise within thee, happier far.” 

One feels at once that this powerful expression of the Pur- 
itan’s serious attention to this world, his acceptance of his life in 
the world as a task, could not possibly have come from the pen 
of a medizeval writer. But it is just as uncongenial to Lutheran- 
ism, as expressed for instance in Luther’s and Paul Gerhard’s 
chorales. It is now our task to replace this vague feeling by a 
somewhat more precise logical formulation, and to investigate 
the fundamental basis of these differences. The appeal to 
national character is generally a mere confession of ignorance, 
and in this case it is entirely untenable. To ascribe a unified 
national character to the Englishmen of the seventeenth century 
would be simply to falsify history. Cavaliers and Roundheads did 
not appeal to each other simply as two parties, but as radically 
distinct species of men, and whoever looks into the matter care- 
fully must agree with them.”’ On the other hand, a difference of 
character between the English merchant adventurers and the old 
Hanseatic merchants is not to be found; nor can any other fun- 
damental difference between the English and German characters 
at the end of the Middle Ages, which cannot easily be explained 
by the differences of their political history.*? It was the power of 
religious influence, not alone, but more than anything else, 
which created the differences of which we are conscious 
to-day.” 

We thus take as our starting-point in the investigation of the 
relationship between the old Protestant ethic and the spirit of 
capitalism the works of Calvin, of Calvinism, and the other 

47 

48 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

Puritan sects. But it is not to be understood that we expect to find 
any of the founders or representatives of these religious move- 
ments considering the promotion of what we have called the 
spirit of capitalism as in any sense the end of his life-work. We 
cannot well maintain that the pursuit of worldly goods, con- 
ceived as an end in itself, was to any of them of positive ethical 
value. Once and for all it must be remembered that programmes 
of ethical reform never were at the centre of interest for any of 
the religious reformers (among whom, for our purposes, we 
must include men like Menno, George Fox, and Wesley). They 
were not the founders of societies for ethical culture nor the 
proponents of humanitarian projects for social reform or cul- 
tural ideals. The salvation of the soul and that alone was the 
centre of their life and work. Their ethical ideals and the practical 
results of their doctrines were all based on that alone, and were 
the consequences of purely religious motives. We shall thus have 
to admit that the cultural consequences of the Reformation were 
to a great extent, perhaps in the particular aspects with which we 
are dealing predominantly, unforeseen and even unwished-for 
results of the labours of the reformers. They were often far 
removed from or even in contradiction to all that they them- 
selves thought to attain. 

The following study may thus perhaps in a modest way form a 
contribution to the understanding of the manner in which ideas 
become effective forces in history. In order, however, to avoid 
any misunderstanding of the sense in which any such effective- 
ness of purely ideal motives is claimed at all, I may perhaps be 
permitted a few remarks in conclusion to this introductory 
discussion. 

In such a study, it may at once be definitely stated, no attempt 
is made to evaluate the ideas of the Reformation in any sense, 
whether it concern their social or their religious worth. We have 
continually to deal with aspects of the Reformation which must 
appear to the truly religious consciousness as incidental and even 

LUTHER’S CONCEPTION OF THE CALLING 

superficial. For we are merely attempting to clarify the part 
which religious forces have played in forming the developing 
web of our specifically worldly modern culture, in the complex 
interaction of innumerable different historical factors. We are 
thus inquiring only to what extent certain characteristic features 
of this culture can be imputed to the influence of the Reforma- 
tion. At the same time we must free ourselves from the idea that 
it is possible to deduce the Reformation, as a historically neces- 
sary result, from certain economic changes. Countless historical 
circumstances, which cannot be reduced to any economic law, 
and are not susceptible of economic explanation of any sort, 
especially purely political processes, had to concur in order that 
the newly created Churches should survive at all. 

On the other hand, however, we have no intention whatever 
of maintaining such a foolish and doctrinaire thesis?” as that the 
spirit of capitalism (in the provisional sense of the term 
explained above) could only have arisen as the result of certain 
effects of the Reformation, or even that capitalism as an eco- 
nomic system is a creation of the Reformation. In itself, the fact 
that certain important forms of capitalistic business organization 
are known to be considerably older than the Reformation is a 
sufficient refutation of such a claim. On the contrary, we only 
wish to ascertain whether and to what extent religious forces 
have taken part in the qualitative formation and the quantitative 
expansion of that spirit over the world. Furthermore, what con- 
crete aspects of our capitalistic culture can be traced to them. In 
view of the tremendous confusion of interdependent influences 
between the material basis, the forms of social and political 
organization, and the ideas current in the time of the Reforma- 
tion, we can only proceed by investigating whether and at what 
points certain correlations between forms of religious belief and 
practical ethics can be worked out. At the same time we shall as 
far as possible clarify the manner and the general direction in 
which, by virtue of those relationships, the religious movements 

49 

50 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

have influenced the development of material culture. Only when 
this has been determined with reasonable accuracy can the 
attempt be made to estimate to what extent the historical devel- 
opment of modern culture can be attributed to those religious 
forces and to what extent to others. 

Part II 

The Practical Ethics of the Ascetic 
Branches of Protestantism 

4 

THE RELIGIOUS 
FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY 
ASCETICISM 

In history there have been four principal forms of ascetic Protes- 
tantism (in the sense of word here used): (1) Calvinism in the 
form which it assumed in the main area of its influence in 
Western Europe, especially in the seventeenth century; (2) Piet- 
ism; (3) Methodism; (4) the sects growing out of the Baptist 
movement.’ None of these movements was completely separ- 
ated from the others, and even the distinction from the non- 
ascetic Churches of the Reformation is never perfectly clear. 
Methodism, which first arose in the middle of the eighteenth 
century within the Established Church of England, was not, in 
the minds of its founders, intended to form a new Church, but 
only a new awakening of the ascetic spirit within the old. Only 
in the course of its development, especially in its extension to 
America, did it become separate from the Anglican Church. 
Pietism first split off from the Calvinistic movement in 

54 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

England, and especially in Holland. It remained loosely con- 
nected with orthodoxy, shading off from it by imperceptible 
gradations, until at the end of the seventeenth century it was 
absorbed into Lutheranism under Spener’s leadership. Though 
the dogmatic adjustment was not entirely satisfactory, it 
remained a movement within the Lutheran Church. Only the 
faction dominated by Zinzendorf, and affected by lingering 
Hussite and Calvinistic influences within the Moravian brother- 
hood, was forced, like Methodism against its will, to form a 
peculiar sort of sect. Calvinism and Baptism were at the begin- 
ning of their development sharply opposed to each other. But in 
the Baptism of the latter part of the seventeenth century they 
were in close contact. And even in the Independent sects of 
England and Holland at the beginning of the seventeenth cen- 
tury the transition was not abrupt. As Pietism shows, the transi- 
tion to Lutheranism is also gradual, and the same is true of 
Calvinism and the Anglican Church, though both in external 
character and in the spirit of its most logical adherents the latter 
is more closely related to Catholicism. It is true that both the 
mass of the adherents and especially the staunchest champions 
of that ascetic movement which, in the broadest sense of a 
highly ambiguous word, has been called Puritanism,’ did attack 
the foundations of Anglicanism; but even here the differences 
were only gradually worked out in the course of the struggle. 
Even if for the present we quite ignore the questions of govern- 
ment and organization which do not interest us here, the facts 
are just the same. The dogmatic differences, even the most 
important, such as those over the doctrines of predestination 
and justification, were combined in the most complex ways, and 
even at the beginning of the seventeenth century regularly, 
though not without exception, prevented the maintenance of 
unity in the Church. Above all, the types of moral conduct in 
which we are interested may be found in a similar manner 
among the adherents of the most various denominations, 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

derived from any one of the four sources mentioned above, or a 
combination of several of them. We shall see that similar ethical 
maxims may be correlated with very different dogmatic founda- 
tions. Also the important literary tools for the saving of souls, 
above all the casuistic compendia of the various denominations, 
influenced each other in the course of time; one finds great 
similarities in them, in spite of very great differences in actual 
conduct. 

It would almost seem as though we had best completely 
ignore both the dogmatic foundations and the ethical theory and 
confine our attention to the moral practice so far as it can be 
determined. That, however, is not true. The various different 
dogmatic roots of ascetic morality did no doubt die out after 
terrible struggles. But the original connection with those 
dogmas has left behind important traces in the later undogmatic 
ethics; moreover, only the knowledge of the original body of 
ideas can help us to understand the connection of that morality 
with the idea of the afterlife which absolutely dominated the 
most spiritual men of that time. Without its power, overshadow- 
ing everything else, no moral awakening which seriously 
influenced practical life came into being in that period. 

We are naturally not concerned with the question of what was 
theoretically and officially taught in the ethical compendia of the 
time, however much practical significance this may have had 
through the influence of Church discipline, pastoral work, and 
preaching.’ We are interested rather in something entirely differ- 
ent: the influence of those psychological sanctions which, ori- 
ginating in religious belief and the practice of religion, gave a 
direction to practical conduct and held the individual to it. 
Now these sanctions were to a large extent derived from the 
peculiarities of the religious ideas behind them. The men of that 
day were occupied with abstract dogmas to an extent which 
itself can only be understood when we perceive the connec- 
tion of these dogmas with practical religious interests. A few 

55 

56 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

observations on dogma,* which will seem to the non- 
theological reader as dull as they will hasty and superficial to the 
theologian, are indispensable. We can of course only proceed by 
presenting these religious ideas in the artificial simplicity of 
ideal types, as they could at best but seldom be found in history. 
For just because of the impossibility of drawing sharp boundar- 
ies in historical reality we can only hope to understand their 
specific importance from an investigation of them in their most 
consistent and logical forms. 

A. CALVINISM 

Now Calvinism’ was the faith® over which the great political 
and cultural struggles of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries 
were fought in the most highly developed countries, the Nether- 
lands, England, and France. To it we shall hence turn first. At that 
time, and in general even to-day, the doctrine of predestination 
was considered its most characteristic dogma. It is true that there 
has been controversy as to whether it is the most essential 
dogma of the Reformed Church or only an appendage. Judg- 
ments of the importance of a historical phenomenon may be 
judgments of value or faith, namely, when they refer to what is 
alone interesting, or alone in the long run valuable in it. Or, on 
the other hand, they may refer to its influence on other historical 
processes as a causal factor. Then we are concerned with judg- 
ments of historical imputation. If now we start, as we must do 
here, from the latter standpoint and inquire into the significance 
which is to be attributed to that dogma by virtue of its cultural 
and historical consequences, it must certainly be rated very 
highly.’ The movement which Oldenbarneveld led was shattered 
by it. The schism in the English Church became irrevocable 
under James I after the Crown and the Puritans came to differ 
dogmatically over just this doctrine. Again and again it was 
looked upon as the real element of political danger in Calvinism 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

and attacked as such by those in authority.* The great synods 
of the seventeenth century, above all those of Dordrecht and West- 
minster, besides numerous smaller ones, made its elevation to 
canonical authority the central purpose of their work. It served 
as a rallying-point to countless heroes of the Church militant, 
and in both the eighteenth and the nineteenth centuries it 
caused schisms in the Church and formed the battle-cry of 
great new awakenings. We cannot pass it by, and since to-day 
it can no longer be assumed as known to all educated men, 
we can best learn its content from the authoritative words of 
the Westminster Confession of 1647, which in this regard is 
simply repeated by both Independent and Baptist creeds. 

Chapter IX (of Free Will), No. 3. Man, by his fall into a state 
of sin, hath wholly lost all ability of will to any spiritual good 
accompanying salvation. So that a natural man, being 
altogether averse from that Good, and dead in sin, is not able, 
by his own strength, to convert himself, or to prepare himself 
thereunto. 

Chapter III (of God’s Eternal Decree), No. 3. By the decree of 
God, for the manifestation of His glory, some men and angels 
are predestinated unto everlasting life, and others foreordained 
to everlasting death. 

No. 5. Those of mankind that are predestinated unto life, 
God before the foundation of the world was laid, according to 
His eternal and immutable purpose, and the secret counsel 
and good pleasure of His will, hath chosen in Christ unto ever- 
lasting glory, out of His mere free grace and love, without any 
foresight of faith or good works, or perseverance in either of 
them, or any other thing in the creature as conditions or causes 
moving Him thereunto, and all to the praise of His glorious 
grace. 

No. 7. The rest of mankind God was pleased, according 
to the unsearchable counsel of His own will, whereby He 

57 

58 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

extendeth, or with-holdeth mercy, as He pleaseth, for the glory 
of His sovereign power over His creatures, to pass by, and to 
ordain them to dishonour and wrath for their sin, to the praise 
of His glorious justice. 

Chapter X (of Effectual Calling), No. 1. All those whom God 
hath predestinated unto life, and those only, He is pleased in 
His appointed and accepted time effectually to call by His word 
and spirit (out of that state of sin and death, in which they are 
by nature) . . . taking away their heart of stone, and giving unto 
them an heart of flesh; renewing their wills, and by His almighty 
power determining them to that which is good. ... 

Chapter V (of Providence), No. 6. As for those wicked and 
ungodly men, whom God as a righteous judge, for former sins 
doth blind and harden, from them He not only with-holdeth 
His grace, whereby they might have been enlightened in their 
understandings and wrought upon in their hearts, but some- 
times also withdraweth the gifts which they had and exposeth 
them to such objects as their corruption makes occasion of sin: 
and withal, gives them over to their own lusts, the temptations 
of the world, and the power of Satan: whereby it comes to pass 
that they harden themselves, even under those means, which 
God useth for the softening of others.° 

“Though I may be sent to Hell for it, such a God will never 
command my respect”, was Milton’s well-known opinion of the 
doctrine.'° But we are here concerned not with the evaluation, 
but the historical significance of the dogma. We can only briefly 
sketch the question of how the doctrine originated and how it 
fitted into the framework of Calvinistic theology. 

Two paths leading to it were possible. The phenomenon of the 
religious sense of grace is combined, in the most active and 
passionate of those great worshippers which Christianity has 
produced again and again since Augustine, with the feeling of 
certainty that that grace is the sole product of an objective power, 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

and not in the least to be attributed to personal worth. The 
powerful feeling of light-hearted assurance, in which the tre- 
mendous pressure of their sense of sin is released, apparently 
breaks over them with elemental force and destroys every possi- 
bility of the belief that this overpowering gift of grace could owe 
anything to their own co-operation or could be connected with 
achievements or qualities of their own faith and will. At the time 
of Luther’s greatest religious creativeness, when he was capable 
of writing his Freiheit eines Christenmenschen, God’s secret decree was 
also to him most definitely the sole and ultimate source of his 
state of religious grace.'' Even later he did not formally abandon 
it. But not only did the idea not assume a central position for 
him, but it receded more and more into the background, the 
more his position as responsible head of his Church forced him 
into practical politics. Melanchthon quite deliberately avoided 
adopting the dark and dangerous teaching in the Augsburg Con- 
fession, and for the Church fathers of Lutheranism it was an 
article of faith that grace was revocable (amissibilis), and could be 
won again by penitent humility and faithful trust in the word of 
God and in the sacraments. 

With Calvin the process was just the opposite; the significance 
of the doctrine for him increased,’* perceptibly in the course of 
his polemical controversies with theological opponents. It is not 
fully developed until the third edition of his Institutes, and only 
gained its position of central prominence after his death in the 
great struggles which the Synods of Dordrecht and Westminster 
sought to put an end to. With Calvin the decretum horribile is 
derived not, as with Luther, from religious experience, but from 
the logical necessity of his thought; therefore its importance in- 
creases with every increase in the logical consistency of that reli- 
gious thought. The interest of it is solely in God, not in man; God 
does not exist for men, but men for the sake of God. "° All creation, 
including of course the fact, as it undoubtedly was for Calvin, 
that only a small proportion of men are chosen for eternal 

59 

60 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

grace, can have any meaning only as means to the glory and 
majesty of God. To apply earthly standards of justice to His sove- 
reign decrees is meaningless and an insult to His Majesty, '* since 
He and He alone is free, i.e. is subject to no law. His decrees can 
only be understood by or even known to us in so far as it has been 
His pleasure to reveal them. We can only hold to these fragments 
of eternal truth. Everything else, including the meaning of our 
individual destiny, is hidden in dark mystery which it would be 
both impossible to pierce and presumptuous to question. 

For the damned to complain of their lot would be much the 
same as for animals to bemoan the fact they were not born as 
men. For everything of the flesh is separated from God by an 
unbridgeable gulf and deserves of Him only eternal death, in so 
far as He has not decreed otherwise for the glorification of His 
Majesty. We know only that a part of humanity is saved, the rest 
damned. To assume that human merit or guilt play a part in 
determining this destiny would be to think of God’s absolutely 
free decrees, which have been settled from eternity, as subject to 
change by human influence, an impossible contradiction. The 
Father in heaven of the New Testament, so human and under- 
standing, who rejoices over the repentance of a sinner as a 
woman over the lost piece of silver she has found, is gone. His 
place has been taken by a transcendental being, beyond the reach 
of human understanding, who with His quite incomprehensible 
decrees has decided the fate of every individual and regulated the 
tiniest details of the cosmos from eternity.’ God’s grace is, since 
His decrees cannot change, as impossible for those to whom He 
has granted it to lose as it is unattainable for those to whom He 
has denied it. 

In its extreme inhumanity this doctrine must above all have 
had one consequence for the life of a generation which sur- 
rendered to its magnificent consistency. That was a feeling of 
unprecedented inner loneliness of the single individual.'® In 
what was for the man of the age of the Reformation the most 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

important thing in life, his eternal salvation, he was forced to 
follow his path alone to meet a destiny which had been decreed 
for him from eternity. No one could help him. No priest, for the 
chosen one can understand the word of God only in his own 
heart. No sacraments, for though the sacraments had been 
ordained by God for the increase of His glory, and must hence 
be scrupulously observed, they are not a means to the attainment 
of grace, but only the subjective externa subsidia of faith. No 
Church, for though it was held that extra ecclesiam nulla salus in the 
sense that whoever kept away from the true Church could never 
belong to God’s chosen band,'” nevertheless the membership of 
the external Church included the doomed. They should belong 
to it and be subjected to its discipline, not in order thus to attain 
salvation, that is impossible, but because, for the glory of God, 
they too must be forced to obey His commandments. Finally, 
even no God. For even Christ had died only for the elect,'* for 
whose benefit God had decreed His martyrdom from eternity. 
This, the complete elimination of salvation through the Church 
and the sacraments (which was in Lutheranism by no 
means developed to its final conclusions), was what formed the 
absolutely decisive difference from Catholicism. 

That great historic process in the development of religions, 
the elimination of magic from the world’? which had begun 
with the old Hebrew prophets and, in conjunction with Hel- 
lenistic scientific thought, had repudiated all magical means to 
salvation as superstition and sin, came here to its logical conclu- 
sion. The genuine Puritan even rejected all signs of religious cere- 
mony at the grave and buried his nearest and dearest without 
song or ritual in order that no superstition, no trust in the effects 
of magical and sacramental forces on salvation, should creep in.”° 

There was not only no magical means of attaining the grace of 
God for those to whom God had decided to deny it, but no 
means whatever. Combined with the harsh doctrines of the abso- 
lute transcendentality of God and the corruption of everything 

61 

62 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

pertaining to the flesh, this inner isolation of the indi- 
vidual contains, on the one hand, the reason for the entirely 
negative attitude of Puritanism to all the sensuous and emo- 
tional elements in culture and in religion, because they are of no 
use toward salvation and promote sentimental illusions and 
idolatrous superstitions. Thus it provides a basis for a funda- 
mental antagonism to sensuous culture of all kinds.*’ On the 
other hand, it forms one of the roots of that disillusioned and 
pessimistically inclined individualism’? which can even to-day 
be identified in the national characters and the institutions of 
the peoples with a Puritan past, in such a striking contrast to the 
quite different spectacles through which the Enlightenment 
later looked upon men.” We can clearly identify the traces of 
the influence of the doctrine of predestination in the elementary 
forms of conduct and attitude toward life in the era with which 
we are concerned, even where its authority as a dogma was on 
the decline. It was in fact only the most extreme form of that 
exclusive trust in God in which we are here interested. It comes 
out for instance in the strikingly frequent repetition, especially 
in the English Puritan literature, of warnings against any trust in 
the aid of friendship of men.” Even the amiable Baxter coun- 
sels deep distrust of even one’s closest friend, and Bailey directly 
exhorts to trust no one and to say nothing compromising to 
anyone. Only God should be your confidant.” In striking con- 
trast to Lutheranism, this attitude toward life was also con- 
nected with the quiet disappearance of the private confession, 
of which Calvin was suspicious only on account of its possible 
sacramental misinterpretation, from all the regions of fully 
developed Calvinism. That was an occurrence of the greatest 
importance. In the first place it is a symptom of the type of 
influence this religion exercised. Further, however, it was a psy- 
chological stimulus to the development of their ethical attitude. 
The means to a periodical discharge of the emotional sense of 
sin’® was done away with. 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

Of the consequences for the ethical conduct of everyday life 
we speak later. But for the general religious situation of a man 
the consequences are evident. In spite of the necessity of mem- 
bership in the true Church” for salvation, the Calvinist’s inter- 
course with his God was carried on in deep spiritual isolation. To 
see the specific results?? of this peculiar atmosphere, it is only 
necessary to read Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress,” by far the most 
widely read book of the whole Puritan literature. In the descrip- 
tion of Christian’s attitude after he had realized that he was 
living in the City of Destruction and he had received the call to 
take up his pilgrimage to the celestial city, wife and children 
cling to him, but stopping his ears with his fingers and crying, 
“life, eternal life”, he staggers forth across the fields. No refine- 
ment could surpass the naive feeling of the tinker who, writing 
in his prison cell, earned the applause of a believing world, in 
expressing the emotions of the faithful Puritan, thinking only of 
his own salvation. It is expressed in the unctuous conversations 
which he holds with fellow-seekers on the way, in a manner 
somewhat reminiscent of Gottfried Keller’s Gerechte Kammacher. 
Only when he himself is safe does it occur to him that it would 
be nice to have his family with him. It is the same anxious fear of 
death and the beyond which we feel so vividly in Alfonso of 
Liguori, as Ddllinger has described him to us. It is worlds 
removed from that spirit of proud worldliness which Machi- 
avelli expresses in relating the fame of those Florentine citizens 
who, in their struggle against the Pope and his excommunica- 
tion, had held “Love of their native city higher than the fear for 
the salvation of their souls”. And it is of course even farther from 
the feelings which Richard Wagner puts into the mouth of 
Siegmund before his fatal combat, “Grtisse mir Wotan, grtisse 
mir Wallhall—Doch von Wallhall’s spr6den Wonnen sprich du 
wahrlich mir nicht”. But the effects of this fear on Bunyan and 
Liguori are characteristically different. The same fear which 
drives the latter to every conceivable self-humiliation spurs the 

63 

64 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

former on to a restless and systematic struggle with life. Whence 
comes this difference? 

It seems at first a mystery how the undoubted superiority of 
Calvinism in social organization can be connected with this ten- 
dency to tear the individual away from the closed ties with 
which he is bound to this world.’ But, however strange it may 
seem, it follows from the peculiar form which the Christian 
brotherly love was forced to take under the pressure of the inner 
isolation of the individual through the Calvinistic faith. In the 
first place it follows dogmatically.*' The world exists to serve the 
glorification of God and for that purpose alone. The elected 
Christian is in the world only to increase this glory of God by 
fulfilling His commandments to the best of his ability. But God 
requires social achievement of the Christian because He wills 
that social life shall be organized according to His command- 
ments, in accordance with that purpose. The social’? activity of 
the Christian in the world is solely activity in majorem gloriam Dei. 
This character is hence shared by labour in a calling which serves 
the mundane life of the community. Even in Luther we found 
specialized labour in callings justified in terms of brotherly love. 
But what for him remained an uncertain, purely intellectual sug- 
gestion became for the Calvinists a characteristic element in 
their ethical system. Brotherly love, since it may only be prac- 
tised for the glory of God?’ and not in the service of the flesh,** 
is expressed in the first place in the fulfilment of the daily tasks 
given by the lex nature and in the process this fulfilment assumes a 
peculiarly objective and impersonal character, that of service in 
the interest of the rational organization of our social environ- 
ment. For the wonderfully purposeful organization and 
arrangement of this cosmos is, according both to the revelation 
of the Bible and to natural intuition, evidently designed by God 
to serve the utility of the human race. This makes labour in the 
service of impersonal social usefulness appear to promote the 
glory of God and hence to be willed by Him. The complete 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

elimination of the theodicy problem and of all those questions 
about the meaning of the world and of life, which have tortured 
others, was as self-evident to the Puritan as, for quite different 
reasons, to the Jew, and even in a certain sense to all the non- 
mystical types of Christian religion. 

To this economy of forces Calvinism added another tendency 
which worked in the same direction. The conflict between the 
individual and the ethic (in Sören Kierkegaard’s sense) did not 
exist for Calvinism, although it placed the individual entirely on 
his own responsibility in religious matters. This is not the place 
to analyse the reasons for this fact, or its significance for the 
political and economic rationalism of Calvinism. The source of 
the utilitarian character of Calvinistic ethics lies here, and 
important peculiarities of the Calvinistic idea of the calling were 
derived from the same source as well.** But for the moment we 
must return to the special consideration of the doctrine of 
predestination. 

For us the decisive problem is: How was this doctrine borne’® 
in an age to which the after-life was not only more important, 
but in many ways also more certain, than all the interests of life 
in this world?” The question, Am I one of the elect? must sooner 
or later have arisen for every believer and have forced all other 
interests into the background. And how can I be sure of this state 
of grace?** For Calvin himself this was not a problem. He felt 
himself to be a chosen agent of the Lord, and was certain of his 
own salvation. Accordingly, to the question of how the indi- 
vidual can be certain of his own election, he has at bottom only 
the answer that we should be content with the knowledge that 
God has chosen and depend further only on that implicit trust in 
Christ which is the result of true faith. He rejects in principle the 
assumption that one can learn from the conduct of others 
whether they are chosen or damned. It is an unjustifiable attempt 
to force God’s secrets. The elect differ externally in this life in no 
way from the damned”; and even all the subjective experiences 

65 

66 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

of the chosen are, as ludibria spiritus sancti, possible for the damned 
with the single exception of that finaliter expectant, trusting faith. 
The elect thus are and remain God’s invisible Church. 

Quite naturally this attitude was impossible for his followers 
as early as Beza, and, above all, for the broad mass of ordinary 
men. For them the certitudo salutis in the sense of the recogniz- 
ability of the state of grace necessarily became of absolutely 
dominant importance.*° So, wherever the doctrine of predestin- 
ation was held, the question could not be suppressed whether 
there were any infallible criteria by which membership in the 
electi could be known. Not only has this question continually had 
a central importance in the development of the Pietism which 
first arose on the basis of the Reformed Church; it has in fact ina 
certain sense at times been fundamental to it. But when we 
consider the great political and social importance of the 
Reformed doctrine and practice of the Communion, we shall see 
how great a part was played during the whole seventeenth cen- 
tury outside of Pietism by the possibility of ascertaining the state 
of grace of the individual. On it depended, for instance, his 
admission to Communion, i.e. to the central religious ceremony 
which determined the social standing of the participants. 

It was impossible, at least so far as the question of a man’s 
own state of grace arose, to be satisfied*! with Calvin’s trust in 
the testimony of the expectant faith resulting from grace, even 
though the orthodox doctrine had never formally abandoned 
that criterion.“ Above all, practical pastoral work, which had 
immediately to deal with all the suffering caused by the doc- 
trine, could not be satisfied. It met these difficulties in various 
ways.“ So far as predestination was not reinterpreted, toned 
down, or fundamentally abandoned,“ two principal, mutually 
connected, types of pastoral advice appear. On the one hand it is 
held to be an absolute duty to consider oneself chosen, and to 
combat all doubts as temptations of the devil,* since lack of self- 
confidence is the result of insufficient faith, hence of imperfect 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

grace. The exhortation of the apostle to make fast one’s own call 
is here interpreted as a duty to attain certainty of one’s own 
election and justification in the daily struggle of life. In the place 
of the humble sinners to whom Luther promises grace if they 
trust themselves to God in penitent faith are bred those self- 
confident saints*® whom we can rediscover in the hard Puritan 
merchants of the heroic age of capitalism and in isolated 
instances down to the present. On the other hand, in order to 
attain that self-confidence intense worldly activity is recom- 
mended as the most suitable means.*’ It and it alone disperses 
religious doubts and gives the certainty of grace. 

That worldly activity should be considered capable of this 
achievement, that it could, so to speak, be considered the most 
suitable means of counteracting feelings of religious anxiety, 
finds its explanation in the fundamental peculiarities of religious 
feeling in the Reformed Church, which come most clearly to 
light in its differences from Lutheranism in the doctrine of justi- 
fication by faith. These differences are analysed so subtly and 
with such objectivity and avoidance of value-judgments in Sch- 
neckenburger’s excellent lectures,*® that the following brief 
observations can for the most part simply rest upon his 
discussion. 

The highest religious experience which the Lutheran faith 
strives to attain, especially as it developed in the course of the 
seventeenth century, is the unio mystica with the deity.“ As the 
name itself, which is unknown to the Reformed faith in this 
form, suggests, it is a feeling of actual absorption in the deity, 
that of a real entrance of the divine into the soul of the believer. It 
is qualitatively similar to the aim of the contemplation of the 
German mystics and is characterized by its passive search for the 
fulfilment of the yearning for rest in God. 

Now the history of philosophy shows that religious belief 
which is primarily mystical may very well be compatible with a 
pronounced sense of reality in the field of empirical fact; it may 

67 

68 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

even support it directly on account of the repudiation of dia- 
lectic doctrines. Furthermore, mysticism may indirectly even 
further the interests of rational conduct. Nevertheless, the posi- 
tive valuation of external activity is lacking in its relation to the 
world. In addition to this, Lutheranism combines the unio mystica 
with that deep feeling of sin-stained unworthiness which is 
essential to preserve the pænitentia quotidiana of the faithful 
Lutheran, thereby maintaining the humility and simplicity 
indispensable for the forgiveness of sins. The typical religion of 
the Reformed Church, on the other hand, has from the begin- 
ning repudiated both this purely inward emotional piety of 
Lutheranism and the Quietist escape from everything of Pascal. 
A real penetration of the human soul by the divine was made 
impossible by the absolute transcendentality of God compared 
to the flesh: fmitum non est capax infiniti. The community of the elect 
with their God could only take place and be perceptible to them 
in that God worked (operatur) through them and that they were 
conscious of it. That is, their action originated from the faith 
caused by God’s grace, and this faith in turn justified itself by 
the quality of that action. Deep-lying differences of the most 
important conditions of salvation’ which apply to the classifica- 
tion of all practical religious activity appear here. The religious 
believer can make himself sure of his state of grace either in that 
he feels himself to be the vessel of the Holy Spirit or the tool of 
the divine will. In the former case his religious life tends to 
mysticism and emotionalism, in the latter to ascetic action; 
Luther stood close to the former type, Calvinism belonged defi- 
nitely to the latter. The Calvinist also wanted to be saved sola fide. 
But since Calvin viewed all pure feelings and emotions, no mat- 
ter how exalted they might seem to be, with suspicion,”' faith 
had to be proved by its objective results in order to provide a 
firm foundation for the certitudo salutis. It must be a fides efficax,* 
the call to salvation an effectual calling (expression used in 
Savoy Declaration). 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

If we now ask further, by what fruits the Calvinist thought 
himself able to identify true faith? the answer is: by a type of 
Christian conduct which served to increase the glory of God. 
Just what does so serve is to be seen in his own will as revealed 
either directly through the Bible or indirectly through the pur- 
poseful order of the world which he has created (lex nature).°’ 
Especially by comparing the condition of one’s own soul with 
that of the elect, for instance the patriarchs, according to the 
Bible, could the state of one’s own grace be known.”* Only one 
of the elect really has the fides efficax,™ only he is able by virtue of 
his rebirth (regeneratio) and the resulting sanctification (sanctificatio) 
of his whole life, to augment the glory of God by real, and not 
merely apparent, good works. It was through the consciousness 
that his conduct, at least in its fundamental character and con- 
stant ideal (propositum obædientie), rested on a power’® within him- 
self working for the glory of God; that it is not only willed of 
God but rather done by God” that he attained the highest good 
towards which this religion strove, the certainty of salvation.” 
That it was attainable was proved by 2 Cor. xiii. 5.° Thus, how- 
ever useless good works might be as a means of attaining salva- 
tion, for even the elect remain beings of the flesh, and everything 
they do falls infinitely short of divine standards, nevertheless, 
they are indispensable as a sign of election.® They are the tech- 
nical means, not of purchasing salvation, but of getting rid of the 
fear of damnation. In this sense they are occasionally referred to 
as directly necessary for salvation®' or the possessio salutis is made 
conditional on them. 

In practice this means that God helps those who help them- 
selves. Thus the Calvinist, as it is sometimes put, himself 
creates his own salvation, or, as would be more correct, the 
conviction of it. But this creation cannot, as in Catholicism, con- 
sist in a gradual accumulation of individual good works to one’s 
credit, but rather in a systematic self-control which at every 
moment stands before the inexorable alternative, chosen or 

69 

70 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

damned. This brings us to a very important point in our 
investigation. 

It is common knowledge that Lutherans have again and again 
accused this line of thought, which was worked out in the 
Reformed Churches and sects with increasing clarity,® of rever- 
sion to the doctrine of salvation by works.°° And however justi- 
fied the protest of the accused against identification of their 
dogmatic position with the Catholic doctrine, this accusation has 
surely been made with reason if by it is meant the practical 
consequences for the everyday life of the average Christian of the 
Reformed Church.” For a more intensive form of the religious 
valuation of moral action than that to which Calvinism led its 
adherents has perhaps never existed. But what is important for 
the practical significance of this sort of salvation by works must 
be sought in a knowledge of the particular qualities which char- 
acterized their type of ethical conduct and distinguished it from 
the everyday life of an average Christian of the Middle Ages. The 
difference may well be formulated as follows: the normal 
medizval Catholic layman“? lived ethically, so to speak, from 
hand to mouth. In the first place he conscientiously fulfilled his 
traditional duties. But beyond that minimum his good works did 
not necessarily form a connected, or at least not a rationalized, 
system of life, but rather remained a succession of individual 
acts. He could use them as occasion demanded, to atone for 
particular sins, to better his chances for salvation, or, toward the 
end of his life, as a sort of insurance premium. Of course the 
Catholic ethic was an ethic of intentions. But the concrete intentio 
of the single act determined its value. And the single good or bad 
action was credited to the doer determining his temporal and 
eternal fate. Quite realistically the Church recognized that man 
was not an absolutely clearly defined unity to be judged one way 
or the other, but that his moral life was normally subject to 
conflicting motives and his action contradictory. Of course, it 
required as an ideal a change of life in principle. But it weakened 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

just this requirement (for the average) by one of its most 
important means of power and education, the sacrament of 
absolution, the function of which was connected with the deep- 
est roots of the peculiarly Catholic religion. 

The rationalization of the world, the elimination of magic as a 
means to salvation,® the Catholics had not carried nearly so far 
as the Puritans (and before them the Jews) had done. To the 
Catholic” the absolution of his Church was a compensation for 
his own imperfection. The priest was a magician who performed 
the miracle of transubstantiation, and who held the key to 
eternal life in his hand. One could turn to him in grief and 
penitence. He dispensed atonement, hope of grace, certainty of 
forgiveness, and thereby granted release from that tremendous 
tension to which the Calvinist was doomed by an inexorable 
fate, admitting of no mitigation. For him such friendly and 
human comforts did not exist. He could not hope to atone for 
hours of weakness or of thoughtlessness by increased good will 
at other times, as the Catholic or even the Lutheran could. The 
God of Calvinism demanded of his believers not single good 
works, but a life of good works combined into a unified sys- 
tem.”' There was no place for the very human Catholic cycle of 
sin, repentance, atonement, release, followed by renewed sin. 
Nor was there any balance of merit for a life as a whole which 
could be adjusted by temporal punishments or the Churches’ 
means of grace. 

The moral conduct of the average man was thus deprived of 
its planless and unsystematic character and subjected to a con- 
sistent method for conduct as a whole. It is no accident that the 
name of Methodists stuck to the participants in the last great 
revival of Puritan ideas in the eighteenth century just as the 
term Precisians, which has the same meaning, was applied to 
their spiritual ancestors in the seventeenth century.” For only 
by a fundamental change in the whole meaning of life at every 
moment and in every action’? could the effects of grace 

71 

72 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

transforming a man from the status nature to the status gratie be 
proved. 

The life of the saint was directed solely toward a transcen- 
dental end, salvation. But precisely for that reason it was thor- 
oughly rationalized in this world and dominated entirely by the 
aim to add to the glory of God on earth. Never has the precept 
omnia in majorem dei gloriam been taken with more bitter serious- 
ness.’* Only a life guided by constant thought could achieve 
conquest over the state of nature. Descartes’s cogito ergo sum was 
taken over by the contemporary Puritans with this ethical 
reinterpretation.” It was this rationalization which gave the 
Reformed faith its peculiar ascetic tendency, and is the basis both 
of its relationship’® to and its conflict with Catholicism. For 
naturally similar things were not unknown to Catholicism. 

Without doubt Christian asceticism, both outwardly and in its 
inner meaning, contains many different things. But it has had a 
definitely rational character in its highest Occidental forms as 
early as the Middle Ages, and in several forms even in antiquity. 
The great historical significance of Western monasticism, as con- 
trasted with that of the Orient, is based on this fact, not in all 
cases, but in its general type. In the rules of St. Benedict, still 
more with the monks of Cluny, again with the Cistercians, and 
most strongly the Jesuits, it has become emancipated from plan- 
less otherworldliness and irrational self-torture. It had developed 
a systematic method of rational conduct with the purpose of 
overcoming the status nature, to free man from the power of 
irrational impulses and his dependence on the world and on 
nature. It attempted to subject man to the supremacy of a pur- 
poseful will,” to bring his actions under constant self-control 
with a careful consideration of their ethical consequences. Thus 
it trained the monk, objectively, as a worker in the service 
of the kingdom of God, and thereby further, subjectively, 
assured the salvation of his soul. This active self-control, which 
formed the end of the exercitia of St. Ignatius and of the rational 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

monastic virtues everywhere,’* was also the most important 
practical ideal of Puritanism.” In the deep contempt with which 
the cool reserve of its adherents is contrasted, in the reports of the 
trials of its martyrs, with the undisciplined blustering of the 
noble prelates and officials*® can be seen that respect for quiet 
self-control which still distinguishes the best type of English 
or American gentleman to-day.*' To put it in our terms**: The 
Puritan, like every rational type of asceticism, tried to enable a 
man to maintain and act upon his constant motives, especially 
those which it taught him itself, against the emotions. In this 
formal psychological sense of the term it tried to make him into 
a personality. Contrary to many popular ideas, the end of this 
asceticism was to be able to lead an alert, intelligent life: the most 
urgent task the destruction of spontaneous, impulsive enjoy- 
ment, the most important means was to bring order into the 
conduct of its adherents. All these important points are empha- 
sized in the rules of Catholic monasticism as strongly*’ as in the 
principles of conduct of the Calvinists.** On this methodical 
control over the whole man rests the enormous expansive power 
of both, especially the ability of Calvinism as against Lutheranism 
to defend the cause of Protestantism as the Church militant. 

On the other hand, the difference of the Calvinistic from the 
medizval asceticism is evident. It consisted in the disappearance 
of the consilia evangelica and the accompanying transformation of 
asceticism to activity within the world. It is not as though 
Catholicism had restricted the methodical life to monastic cells. 
This was by no means the case either in theory or in practice. On 
the contrary, it has already been pointed out that, in spite of the 
greater ethical moderation of Catholicism, an ethically 
unsystematic life did not satisfy the highest ideals which it had 
set up even for the life of the layman.** The tertiary order of St. 
Francis was, for instance, a powerful attempt in the direction of 
an ascetic penetration of everyday life, and, as we know, by no 
means the only one. But, in fact, works like the Nachfolge Christi 

73 

74 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

show, through the manner in which their strong influence was 
exerted, that the way of life preached in them was felt to be 
something higher than the everyday morality which sufficed as a 
minimum, and that this latter was not measured by such stand- 
ards as Puritanism demanded. Moreover, the practical use made 
of certain institutions of the Church, above all of indulgences 
inevitably counteracted the tendencies toward systematic 
worldly asceticism. For that reason it was not felt at the time of 
the Reformation to be merely an unessential abuse, but one of 
the most fundamental evils of the Church. 

But the most important thing was the fact that the man who, 
par excellence, lived a rational life in the religious sense was, and 
remained, alone the monk. Thus asceticism, the more strongly it 
gripped an individual, simply served to drive him farther away 
from everyday life, because the holiest task was definitely to 
surpass all worldly morality. Luther, who was not in any sense 
fulfilling any law of development, but acting upon his quite 
personal experience, which was, though at first somewhat 
uncertain in its practical consequences, later pushed farther by 
the political situation, had repudiated that tendency, and Calvin- 
ism simply took this over from him.*’ Sebastian Franck struck 
the central characteristic of this type of religion when he saw the 
significance of the Reformation in the fact that now every Chris- 
tian had to be a monk all his life. The drain of asceticism from 
everyday worldly life had been stopped by a dam, and those 
passionately spiritual natures which had formerly supplied the 
highest type of monk were now forced to pursue their ascetic 
ideals within mundane occupations. 

But in the course of its development Calvinism added some- 
thing positive to this, the idea of the necessity of proving one’s 
faith in worldly activity.** Therein it gave the broader groups of 
religiously inclined people a positive incentive to asceticism. By 
founding its ethic in the doctrine of predestination, it substi- 
tuted for the spiritual aristocracy of monks outside of and above 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

the world the spiritual aristocracy of the predestined saints of 
God within the world.’ It was an aristocracy which, with its 
character indelebilis, was divided from the eternally damned 
remainder of humanity by a more impassable and in its invisibil- 
ity more terrifying gulf,” than separated the monk of the Middle 
Ages from the rest of the world about him, a gulf which pene- 
trated all social relations with its sharp brutality. This conscious- 
ness of divine grace of the elect and holy was accompanied by an 
attitude toward the sin of one’s neighbour, not of sympathetic 
understanding based on consciousness of one’s own weakness, 
but of hatred and contempt for him as an enemy of God bearing 
the signs of eternal damnation.” This sort of feeling was capable 
of such intensity that it sometimes resulted in the formation of 
sects. This was the case when, as in the Independent movement 
of the seventeenth century, the genuine Calvinist doctrine that 
the glory of God required the Church to bring the damned 
under the law, was outweighed by the conviction that it was an 
insult to God if an unregenerate soul should be admitted to His 
house and partake in the sacraments, or even, as a minister, 
administer them.” Thus, as a consequence of the doctrine of 
proof, the Donatist idea of the Church appeared, as in the case of 
the Calvinistic Baptists. The full logical consequence of the 
demand for a pure Church, a community of those proved to be 
in a state of grace, was not often drawn by forming sects. Modifi- 
cations in the constitution of the Church resulted from the 
attempt to separate regenerate from unregenerate Christians, 
those who were from those who were not prepared for the 
sacrament, to keep the government of the Church or some 
other privilege in the hands of the former, and only to ordain 
ministers of whom there was no question.” 

The norm by which it could always measure itself, of which it 
was evidently in need, this asceticism naturally found in the 
Bible. It is important to note that the well-known bibliocracy of 
the Calvinists held the moral precepts of the Old Testament, 

75 

76 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

since it was fully as authentically revealed, on the same level of 
esteem as those of the New. It was only necessary that they 
should not obviously be applicable only to the historical circum- 
stances of the Hebrews, or have been specifically denied by 
Christ. For the believer, the law was an ideal though never quite 
attainable norm” while Luther, on the other hand, originally had 
prized freedom from subjugation to the law as a divine privilege 
of the believer.” The influence of the God-fearing but perfectly 
unemotional wisdom of the Hebrews, which is expressed in the 
books most read by the Puritans, the Proverbs and the Psalms, 
can be felt in their whole attitude toward life. In particular, its 
rational suppression of the mystical, in fact the whole emotional 
side of religion, has rightly been attributed by Sanford”® to the 
influence of the Old Testament. But this Old Testament rational- 
ism was as such essentially of a small bourgeois, traditionalistic 
type, and was mixed not only with the powerful pathos of the 
prophets, but also with elements which encouraged the devel- 
opment of a peculiarly emotional type of religion even in the 
Middle Ages.” It was thus in the last analysis the peculiar, fun- 
damentally ascetic, character of Calvinism itself which made it 
select and assimilate those elements of Old Testament religion 
which suited it best. 

Now that systematization of ethical conduct which the asceti- 
cism of Calvinistic Protestantism had in common with the 
rational forms of life in the Catholic orders is expressed quite 
superficially in the way in which the conscientious Puritan con- 
tinually supervised” his own state of grace. To be sure, the 
religious account-books in which sins, temptations, and pro- 
gress made in grace were entered or tabulated were common to 
both the most enthusiastic Reformed circles”? and some parts of 
modern Catholicism (especially in France), above all under the 
influence of the Jesuits. But in Catholicism it served the purpose 
of completeness of the confession, or gave the directeur de l'âme a 
basis for his authoritarian guidance of the Christian (mostly 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

female). The Reformed Christian, however, felt his own pulse 
with its aid. It is mentioned by all the moralists and theologians, 
while Benjamin Franklin’s tabulated statistical book-keeping on 
his progress in the different virtues is a classic example.'*? On 
the other hand, the old medizval (even ancient) idea of God’s 
book-keeping is carried by Bunyan to the characteristically taste- 
less extreme of comparing the relation of a sinner to his God 
with that of customer and shopkeeper. One who has once got 
into debt may well, by the product of all his virtuous acts, suc- 
ceed in paying off the accumulated interest but never the 
principal.'°’ 

As he observed his own conduct, the later Puritan also 
observed that of God and saw His finger in all the details of life. 
And, contrary to the strict doctrine of Calvin, he always knew 
why God took this or that measure. The process of sanctifying 
life could thus almost take on the character of a business enter- 
prise.'°* A thoroughgoing Christianization of the whole of life 
was the consequence of this methodical quality of ethical con- 
duct into which Calvinism as distinct from Lutheranism forced 
men. That this rationality was decisive in its influence on prac- 
tical life must always be borne in mind in order rightly to under- 
stand the influence of Calvinism. On the one hand we can see 
that it took this element to exercise such an influence at all. But 
other faiths as well necessarily had a similar influence when their 
ethical motives were the same in this decisive point, the doctrine 
of proof. 

So far we have considered only Calvinism, and have thus 
assumed the doctrine of predestination as the dogmatic back- 
ground of the Puritan morality in the sense of methodically 
rationalized ethical conduct. This could be done because the 
influence of that dogma in fact extended far beyond the single 
religious group which held in all respects strictly to Calvinistic 
principles, the Presbyterians. Not only the Independent Savoy 
Declaration of 1658, but also the Baptist Confession of Hanserd 

77 

78 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

Knolly of 1689 contained it, and it had a place within Method- 
ism. Although John Wesley, the great organizing genius of the 
movement, was a believer in the universality of Grace, one of the 
great agitators of the first generation of Methodists and their 
most consistent thinker, Whitefield, was an adherent of the doc- 
trine. The same was true of the circle around Lady Huntingdon, 
which for a time had considerable influence. It was this doctrine 
in its magnificent consistency which, in the fateful epoch of the 
seventeenth century, upheld the belief of the militant defenders 
of the holy life that they were weapons in the hand of God, and 
executors of His providential will.'°’ Moreover, it prevented a 
premature collapse into a purely utilitarian doctrine of good 
works in this world which would never have been capable of 
motivating such tremendous sacrifices for non-rational ideal 
ends. 

The combination of faith in absolutely valid norms with abso- 
lute determinism and the complete transcendentality of God was 
in its way a product of great genius. At the same time it was, in 
principle, very much more modern than the milder doctrine, 
making greater concessions to the feelings which subjected God 
to the moral law. Above all, we shall see again and again how 
fundamental is the idea of proof for our problem. Since its prac- 
tical significance as a psychological basis for rational morality 
could be studied in such purity in the doctrine of predestination, 
it was best to start there with the doctrine in its most consistent 
form. But it forms a recurring framework for the connection 
between faith and conduct in the denominations to be studied 
below. Within the Protestant movement the consequences which 
it inevitably had for the ascetic tendencies of the conduct of its 
first adherents form in principle the strongest antithesis to the 
relative moral helplessness of Lutheranism. The Lutheran gratia 
amissibilis, which could always be regained through penitent 
contrition evidently, in itself, contained no sanction for what 
is for us the most important result of ascetic Protestantism, a 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

systematic rational ordering of the moral life as a whole.'** The 
Lutheran faith thus left the spontaneous vitality of impulsive 
action and naive emotion more nearly unchanged. The motive 
to constant self-control and thus to a deliberate regulation of 
one’s own life, which the gloomy doctrine of Calvinism gave, 
was lacking. A religious genius like Luther could live in this 
atmosphere of openness and freedom without difficulty and, so 
long as his enthusiasm was powerful enough, without danger of 
falling back into the status naturalis. That simple, sensitive, and 
peculiarly emotional form of piety, which is the ornament of 
many of the highest types of Lutherans, like their free and spon- 
taneous morality, finds few parallels in genuine Puritanism, but 
many more in the mild Anglicanism of such men as Hooker, 
Chillingsworth, etc. But for the everyday Lutheran, even the able 
one, nothing was more certain than that he was only temporar- 
ily, as long as the single confession or sermon affected him, 
raised above the status naturalis. 

There was a great difference which was very striking to con- 
temporaries between the moral standards of the courts of 
Reformed and of Lutheran princes, the latter often being 
degraded by drunkenness and vulgarity.'” Moreover, the help- 
lessness of the Lutheran clergy, with their emphasis on faith 
alone, against the ascetic Baptist movement, is well known. The 
typical German quality often called good nature (Gemütlichkeit) or 
naturalness contrasts strongly, even in the facial expressions of 
people, with the effects of that thorough destruction of the spon- 
taneity of the status naturalis in the Anglo-American atmosphere, 
which Germans are accustomed to judge unfavourably as nar- 
rowness, unfreeness, and inner constraint. But the differences of 
conduct, which are very striking, have clearly originated in the 
lesser degree of ascetic penetration of life in Lutheranism as 
distinguished from Calvinism. The antipathy of every spon- 
taneous child of nature to everything ascetic is expressed in 
those feelings. The fact is that Lutheranism, on account of its 

79 

80 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

doctrine of grace, lacked a psychological sanction of systematic 
conduct to compel the methodical rationalization of life. 

This sanction, which conditions the ascetic character of 
religion, could doubtless in itself have been furnished by various 
different religious motives, as we shall soon see. The Calvinistic 
doctrine of predestination was only one of several possibilities. 
But nevertheless we have become convinced that in its way it had 
not only a quite unique consistency, but that its psychological 
effect was extraordinarily powerful.'°° In comparison with it the 
non-Calvinistic ascetic movements, considered purely from the 
view-point of the religious motivation of asceticism, form an 
attenuation of the inner consistency and power of Calvinism. 

But even in the actual historical development the situation 
was, for the most part, such that the Calvinistic form of asceti- 
cism was either imitated by the other ascetic movements or used 
as a source of inspiration or of comparison in the development 
of their divergent principles. Where, in spite of a different 
doctrinal basis, similar ascetic features have appeared, this has 
generally been the result of Church organization. Of this we shall 
come to speak in another connection." 

B. PIETISM 

Historically the doctrine of predestination is also the starting- 
point of the ascetic movement usually known as Pietism. In so 
far as the movement remained within the Reformed Church, it is 
almost impossible to draw the line between Pietistic and non- 
Pietistic Calvinists.” Almost all the leading representatives of 
Puritanism are sometimes classed among the Pietists. It is even 
quite legitimate to look upon the whole connection between 
predestination and the doctrine of proof, with its fundamental 
interest in the attainment of the certitudo salutis as discussed above, 
as in itself a Pietistic development of Calvin’s original doctrines. 
The occurrence of ascetic revivals within the Reformed 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

Church was, especially in Holland, regularly accompanied by a 
regeneration of the doctrine of predestination which had been 
temporarily forgotten or not strictly held to. Hence for England 
it is not customary to use the term Pietism at all. +°’ 

But even the Continental (Dutch and Lower Rhenish) Pietism 
in the Reformed Church was, at least fundamentally, just as 
much a simple intensification of the Reformed asceticism as, for 
instance, the doctrines of Bailey. The emphasis was placed so 
strongly on the praxis pietatis that doctrinal orthodoxy was pushed 
into the background; at times, in fact, it seemed quite a matter of 
indifference. Those predestined for grace could occasionally be 
subject to dogmatic error as well as to other sins and experience 
showed that often those Christians who were quite uninstructed 
in the theology of the schools exhibited the fruits of faith most 
clearly, while on the other hand it became evident that mere 
knowledge of theology by no means guaranteed the proof of 
faith through conduct.''® 

Thus election could not be proved by theological learning at 
all.''’ Hence Pietism, with a deep distrust of the Church of the 
theologians,''* to which—this is characteristic of it—it still 
belonged officially, began to gather the adherents of the praxis 
pietatis in conventicles removed from the world.'!’ It wished to 
make the invisible Church of the elect visible on this earth. 
Without going so far as to form a separate sect, its members 
attempted to live, in this community, a life freed from all the 
temptations of the world and in all its details dictated by God’s 
will, and thus to be made certain of their own rebirth by external 
signs manifested in their daily conduct. Thus the ecclesiola of the 
true converts—this was common to all genuinely Pietistic 
groups—wished, by means of intensified asceticism, to enjoy 
the blissfulness of community with God in this life. 

Now this latter tendency had something closely related to the 
Lutheran unio mystica, and very often led to a greater emphasis on 
the emotional side of religion than was acceptable to orthodox 

81 

82 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

Calvinism. In fact this may, from our view-point, be said to be 
the decisive characteristic of the Pietism which developed 
within the Reformed Church. For this element of emotion, 
which was originally quite foreign to Calvinism, but on the 
other hand related to certain medizeval forms of religion, led 
religion in practice to strive for the enjoyment of salvation 
in this world rather than to engage in the ascetic struggle for 
certainty about the future world. Moreover, the emotion was 
capable of such intensity, that religion took on a positively hys- 
terical character, resulting in the alternation which is familiar 
from examples without number and neuropathologically under- 
standable, of half-conscious states of religious ecstasy with 
periods of nervous exhaustion, which were felt as abandonment 
by God. The effect was the direct opposite of the strict and 
temperate discipline under which men were placed by the sys- 
tematic life of holiness of the Puritan. It meant a weakening of 
the inhibitions which protected the rational personality of the 
Calvinist from his passions.''* Similarly it was possible for the 
Calvinistic idea of the depravity of the flesh, taken emotionally, 
for instance in the form of the so-called worm-feeling, to lead 
to a deadening of enterprise in worldly activity." Even the 
doctrine of predestination could lead to fatalism if, contrary to 
the predominant tendencies of rational Calvinism, it were made 
the object of emotional contemplation.''* Finally, the desire to 
separate the elect from the world could, with a strong emotional 
intensity, lead to a sort of monastic community life of half- 
communistic character, as the history of Pietism, even within the 
Reformed Church, has shown again and again." 

But so long as this extreme effect, conditioned by this 
emphasis on emotion, did not appear, as long as Reformed 
Pietism strove to make sure of salvation within the everyday 
routine of life in a worldly calling, the practical effect of Pietistic 
principles was an even stricter ascetic control of conduct in the 
calling, which provided a still more solid religious basis for the 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

ethic of the calling, than the mere worldly respectability of 
the normal Reformed Christian, which was felt by the superior 
Pietist to be a second-rate Christianity. The religious aristocracy 
of the elect, which developed in every form of Calvinistic asceti- 
cism, the more seriously it was taken, the more surely, was then 
organized, in Holland, on a voluntary basis in the form of con- 
venticles within the Church. In English Puritanism, on the other 
hand, it led partly to a virtual differentiation between active and 
passive Christians within the Church organization, and partly, as 
has been shown above, to the formation of sects. 

On the other hand, the development of German Pietism from 
a Lutheran basis, with which the names of Spener, Francke, and 
Zinzendorf are connected, led away from the doctrine of pre- 
destination. But at the same time it was by no means outside the 
body of ideas of which that dogma formed the logical climax, as 
is especially attested by Spener’s own account of the influence 
which English and Dutch Pietism had upon him, and is shown 
by the fact that Bailey was read in his first conventicles.''* 

From our special point of view, at any rate, Pietism meant 
simply the penetration of methodically controlled and super- 
vised, thus of ascetic, conduct into the non-Calvinistic denomin- 
ations.'’’ But Lutheranism necessarily felt this rational asceticism 
to be a foreign element, and the lack of consistency in German 
Pietistic doctrines was the result of the difficulties growing out 
of that fact. As a dogmatic basis of systematic religious conduct 
Spener combines Lutheran ideas with the specifically Calvinistic 
doctrine of good works as such which are undertaken with the 
“intention of doing honour to God”. He also has a faith, 
suggestive of Calvinism, in the possibility of the elect attaining a 
relative degree of Christian perfection.'*' But the theory lacked 
consistency. Spener, who was strongly influenced by the mys- 
tics,” attempted, in a rather uncertain but essentially Lutheran 
manner, rather to describe the systematic type of Christian con- 
duct which was essential to even his form of Pietism than to 

83 

84 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

justify it. He did not derive the certitudo salutis from sanctification; 
instead of the idea of proof, he adopted Luther’s somewhat loose 
connection between faith and works, which has been discussed 
above. '?° 

But again and again, in so far as the rational and ascetic elem- 
ent of Pietism outweighed the emotional, the ideas essential to 
our thesis maintained their place. These were: (1) that the 
methodical development of one’s own state of grace to a higher 
and higher degree of certainty and perfection in terms of the law 
was a sign of grace;'** and (2) that “God’s Providence works 
through those in such a state of perfection”, i.e. in that He gives 
them His signs if they wait patiently and deliberate methodic- 
ally. Labour in a calling was also the ascetic activity par excellence 
for A. H. Francke;'*® that God Himself blessed His chosen ones 
through the success of their labours was as undeniable to him as 
we shall find it to have been to the Puritans. 

And as a substitute for the double decree Pietism worked out 
ideas which, in a way essentially similar to Calvinism, though 
milder, established an aristocracy of the elect'”’ resting on God’s 
especial grace, with all the psychological results pointed out 
above. Among them belongs, for instance, the so-called doctrine 
of Terminism,'** which was generally (though unjustly) attrib- 
uted to Pietism by its opponents. It assumes that grace is offered 
to all men, but for everyone either once at a definite moment in 
his life or at some moment for the last time.'*” Anyone who let 
that moment pass was beyond the help of the universality of 
grace; he was in the same situation as those neglected by God in 
the Calvinistic doctrine. Quite close to this theory was the idea 
which Francke took from his personal experience, and which 
was very widespread in Pietism, one may even say predominant, 
that grace could only become effective under certain unique and 
peculiar circumstances, namely, after previous repentance.'*° 
Since, according to Pietist doctrine, not everyone was capable of 
such experiences, those who, in spite of the use of the ascetic 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

methods recommended by the Pietists to bring it about, did not 
attain it, remained in the eyes of the regenerate a sort of passive 
Christian. On the other hand, by the creation of a method to 
induce repentance even the attainment of divine grace became in 
effect an object of rational human activity. 

Moreover, the antagonism to the private confessional, which, 
though not shared by all—for instance, not by Francke—was 
characteristic of many Pietists, especially, as the repeated ques- 
tions in Spener show, of Pietist pastors, resulted from this 
aristocracy of grace. This antagonism helped to weaken its ties 
with Lutheranism. The visible effects on conduct of grace gained 
through repentance formed a necessary criterion for admission 
to absolution; hence it was impossible to let contritio alone 
suffice.'* 

Zinzendorf’s conception of his own religious position, even 
though it vacillated in the face of attacks from orthodoxy, 
tended generally toward the instrumental idea. Beyond that, 
however, the doctrinal standpoint of this remarkable religious 
dilettante, as Ritschl calls him, is scarcely capable of clear for- 
mulation in the points of importance for us.'*’ He repeatedly 
designated himself a representative of Pauline-Lutheran Christi- 
anity; hence he opposed the Pietistic type associated with 
Jansen with its adherence to the law. But the Brotherhood itself 
in practice upheld, as early as its Protocol of August 12, 1729, a 
standpoint which in many respects closely resembled that of the 
Calvinistic aristocracy of the elect.'*? And in spite of his 
repeated avowals of Lutheranism, '** he permitted and encour- 
aged it. The famous stand of attributing the Old Testament to 
Christ, taken on November 12, 1741, was the outward expres- 
sion of somewhat the same attitude. However, of the three 
branches of the Brotherhood, both the Calvinistic and the 
Moravian accepted the Reformed ethics in essentials from the 
beginning. And even Zinzendorf followed the Puritans in 
expressing to John Wesley the opinion that even though a man 

85 

86 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

himself could not, others could know his state of grace by his 
conduct.'*° 

But on the other hand, in the peculiar piety of Herrnhut, the 
emotional element held a very prominent place. In particular 
Zinzendorf himself continually attempted to counteract the ten- 
dency to ascetic sanctification in the Puritan sense'** and to turn 
the interpretation of good works in a Lutheran direction.'*” Also 
under the influence of the repudiation of conventicles and the 
retention of the confession, there developed an essentially 
Lutheran dependence on the sacraments. Moreover, Zinzendorf’s 
peculiar principle that the childlikeness of religious feeling was a 
sign of its genuineness, as well as the use of the lot as a means of 
revealing God’s will, strongly counteracted the influence of 
rationality in conduct. On the whole, within the sphere of influ- 
ence of the Count, '?? the anti-rational, emotional elements pre- 
dominated much more in the religion of the Herrnhuters than 
elsewhere in Pietism." The connection between morality and 
the forgiveness of sins in Spangenberg’s Idea fides fratrum is as 
loose'*® as in Lutheranism generally. Zinzendorf’s repudiation of 
the Methodist pursuit of perfection is part, here as everywhere, 
of his fundamentally eudazemonistic ideal of having men experi- 
ence eternal bliss (he calls it happiness) emotionally in the pres- 
ent,'*' instead of encouraging them by rational labour to make 
sure of it in the next world.'** 

Nevertheless, the idea that the most important value of the 
Brotherhood as contrasted with other Churches lay in an active 
Christian life, in missionary, and, which was brought into con- 
nection with it, in professional work in a calling,'** remained a 
vital force with them. In addition, the practical rationalization of 
life from the standpoint of utility was very essential to Zinzen- 
dorf’s philosophy.'** It was derived for him, as for other Pietists, 
on the one hand from his decided dislike of philosophical specu- 
lation as dangerous to faith, and his corresponding preference 
for empirical knowledge; '45 on the other hand, from the shrewd 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

common sense of the professional missionary. The Brotherhood 
was, aS a great mission centre, at the same time a business 
enterprise. Thus it led its members into the paths of worldly 
asceticism, which everywhere first seeks for tasks and then car- 
ries them out carefully and systematically. However, the glorifi- 
cation of the apostolic poverty, of the disciples'** chosen by God 
through predestination, which was derived from the example of 
the apostles as missionaries, formed another obstacle. It meant in 
effect a partial revival of the consilia evangelica. The development of 
a rational economic ethic similar to the Calvinistic was certainly 
retarded by these factors, even though, as the development of the 
Baptist movement shows, it was not impossible, but on the con- 
trary subjectively strongly encouraged by the idea of work solely 
for the sake of the calling. 

All in all, when we consider German Pietism from the point of 
view important for us, we must admit a vacillation and 
uncertainty in the religious basis of its asceticism which makes it 
definitely weaker than the iron consistency of Calvinism, and 
which is partly the result of Lutheran influences and partly of its 
emotional character. To be sure, it is very one-sided to make this 
emotional element the distinguishing characteristic of Pietism as 
opposed to Lutheranism.'*” But compared to Calvinism, the 
rationalization of life was necessarily less intense because the 
pressure of occupation with a state of grace which had continu- 
ally to be proved, and which was concerned for the future in 
eternity, was diverted to the present emotional state. The place 
of the self-confidence which the elect sought to attain, and con- 
tinually to renew in restless and successful work at his calling, 
was taken by an attitude of humility and abnegation.’** This in 
turn was partly the result of emotional stimulus directed solely 
toward spiritual experience; partly of the Lutheran institution of 
the confession, which, though it was often looked upon with 
serious doubts by Pietism, was still generally tolerated. '*’ All this 
shows the influence of the peculiarly Lutheran conception of 

87 

88 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

salvation by the forgiveness of sins and not by practical sanctifi- 
cation. In place of the systematic rational struggle to attain and 
retain certain knowledge of future (otherworldly) salvation 
comes here the need to feel reconciliation and community with 
God now. Thus the tendency of the pursuit of present enjoyment 
to hinder the rational organization of economic life, depending 
as it does on provision for the future, has in a certain sense a 
parallel in the field of religious life. 

Evidently, then, the orientation of religious needs to present 
emotional satisfaction could not develop so powerful a motive to 
rationalize worldly activity, as the need of the Calvinistic elect 
for proof with their exclusive preoccupation with the beyond. 
On the other hand, it was considerably more favourable to the 
methodical penetration of conduct with religion than the trad- 
itionalistic faith of the orthodox Lutheran, bound as it was to the 
Word and the sacraments. On the whole Pietism from Francke 
and Spener to Zinzendorf tended toward increasing emphasis on 
the emotional side. But this was not in any sense the expression 
of an immanent law of development. The differences resulted 
from differences of the religious (and social) environments from 
which the leaders came. We cannot enter into that here, nor can 
we discuss how the peculiarities of German Pietism have affected 
its social and geographical extension.'*° We must again remind 
ourselves that this emotional Pietism of course shades off into 
the way of life of the Puritan elect by quite gradual stages. If we 
can, at least provisionally, point out any practical consequence of 
the difference, we may say that the virtues favoured by Pietism 
were more those on the one hand of the faithful official, clerk, 
labourer, or domestic worker,'®! and on the other of the pre- 
dominantly patriarchal employer with a pious condescension 
(in Zinzendorf’s manner). Calvinism, in comparison, appears to 
be more closely related to the hard legalism and the active enter- 
prise of bourgeois-capitalistic entrepreneurs.'** Finally, the 
purely emotional form of Pietism is, as Ritschl’*’ has pointed 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

out, a religious dilettantism for the leisure classes. However far 
this characterization falls short of being exhaustive, it helps to 
explain certain differences in the character (including the 
economic character) of peoples which have been under the 
influence of one or the other of these two ascetic movements. 

C. METHODISM 

The combination of an emotional but still ascetic type of religion 
with increasing indifference to or repudiation of the dogmatic 
basis of Calvinistic asceticism is characteristic also of the Anglo- 
American movement corresponding to Continental Pietism, 
namely Methodism.'** The name in itself shows what impressed 
contemporaries as characteristic of its adherents: the methodical, 
systematic nature of conduct for the purpose of attaining the 
certitudo salutis. This was from the beginning the centre of 
religious aspiration for this movement also, and remained so. In 
spite of all the differences, the undoubted relationship to certain 
branches of German Pietism’** is shown above all by the fact that 
the method was used primarily to bring about the emotional act 
of conversion. And the emphasis on feeling, in John Wesley 
awakened by Moravian and Lutheran influences, led Methodism, 
which from the beginning saw its mission among the masses, to 
take on a strongly emotional character, especially in America. 
The attainment of repentance under certain circumstances 
involved an emotional struggle of such intensity as to lead to the 
most terrible ecstasies, which in America often took place in a 
public meeting. This formed the basis of a belief in the 
undeserved possession of divine grace and at the same time of an 
immediate consciousness of justification and forgiveness. 

Now this emotional religion entered into a peculiar alliance, 
containing no small inherent difficulties, with the ascetic ethics 
which had for good and all been stamped with rationality 
by Puritanism. For one thing, unlike Calvinism, which held 

89 

90 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

everything emotional to be illusory, the only sure basis for the 
certitudo salutis was in principle held to be a pure feeling of abso- 
lute certainty of forgiveness, derived immediately from the tes- 
timony of the spirit, the coming of which could be definitely 
placed to the hour. Added to this is Wesley’s doctrine of sancti- 
fication which, though a decided departure from the orthodox 
doctrine, is a logical development of it. According to it, one 
reborn in this manner can, by virtue of the divine grace already 
working in him, even in this life attain sanctification, the con- 
sciousness of perfection in the sense of freedom from sin, by a 
second, generally separate and often sudden spiritual trans- 
formation. However difficult of attainment this end is, generally 
not till toward the end of one’s life, it must inevitably be 
sought, because it finally guarantees the certitudo salutis and sub- 
stitutes a serene confidence for the sullen worry of the Calvin- 
ist.'°° And it distinguishes the true convert in his own eyes and 
those of others by the fact that sin at least no longer has power 
over him. 

In spite of the great significance of self-evident feeling, 
righteous conduct according to the law was thus naturally also 
adhered to. Whenever Wesley attacked the emphasis on works of 
his time, it was only to revive the old Puritan doctrine that works 
are not the cause, but only the means of knowing one’s state of 
grace, and even this only when they are performed solely for the 
glory of God. Righteous conduct alone did not suffice, as he had 
found out for himself. The feeling of grace was necessary in 
addition. He himself sometimes described works as a condition 
of grace, and in the Declaration of August 9, 1771,'” he 
emphasized that he who performed no good works was not a 
true believer. In fact, the Methodists have always maintained that 
they did not differ from the Established Church in doctrine, but 
only in religious practice. This emphasis on the fruits of belief 
was mostly justified by 1 John iii. 9; conduct is taken as a clear 
sign of rebirth. 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

But in spite of all that there were difficulties.’** For those 
Methodists who were adherents of the doctrine of predestin- 
ation, to think of the certitudo salutis as appearing in the immediate 
feeling'® of grace and perfection instead of the consciousness of 
grace which grew out of ascetic conduct in continual proof of 
faith—since then the certainty of the perservantia depended only 
on the single act of repentance—meant one of two things. For 
weak natures there was a fatalistic interpretation of Christian 
freedom, and with it the breakdown of methodical conduct; or, 
where this path was rejected, the self-confidence of the right- 
eous man'® reached untold heights, an emotional intensifica- 
tion of the Puritan type. In the face of the attacks of opponents, 
the attempt was made to meet these consequences. On the one 
hand by increased emphasis on the normative authority of the 
Bible and the indispensability of proof :'61 on the other by, in 
effect, strengthening Wesley’s anti-Calvinistic faction within the 
movement with its doctrine that grace could be lost. The strong 
Lutheran influences to which Wesley was exposed'® through 
the Moravians strengthened this tendency and increased the 
uncertainty of the religious basis of the Methodist ethics.'®* In 
the end only the concept of regeneration, an emotional certainty 
of salvation as the immediate result of faith, was definitely main- 
tained as the indispensable foundation of grace; and with it sanc- 
tification, resulting in (at least virtual) freedom from the power 
of sin, as the consequent proof of grace. The significance of 
external means of grace, especially the sacraments, was cor- 
respondingly diminished. In any case, the general awakening 
which followed Methodism everywhere, for example in New 
England, meant a victory for the doctrine of grace and 
election. '“* 

Thus from our view-point the Methodist ethic appears to rest 
on a foundation of uncertainty similar to Pietism. But the aspir- 
ation to the higher life, the second blessedness, served it as a sort 
of makeshift for the doctrine of predestination. Moreover, being 

91 

92 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

English in origin, its ethical practice was closely related to that of 
English Puritanism, the revival of which it aspired to be. 

The emotional act of conversion was methodically induced. 
And after it was attained there did not follow a pious enjoyment 
of community with God, after the manner of the emotional 
Pietism of Zinzendorf, but the emotion, once awakened, was 
directed into a rational struggle for perfection. Hence the emo- 
tional character of its faith did not lead to a spiritualized religion 
of feeling like German Pietism. It has already been shown by 
Schneckenburger that this fact was connected with the less 
intensive development of the sense of sin (partly directly on 
account of the emotional experience of conversion), and this has 
remained an accepted point in the discussion of Methodism. The 
fundamentally Calvinistic character of its religious feeling here 
remained decisive. The emotional excitement took the form of 
enthusiasm which was only occasionally, but then powerfully 
stirred, but which by no means destroyed the otherwise rational 
character of conduct.'® The regeneration of Methodism thus 
created only a supplement to the pure doctrine of works, a 
religious basis for ascetic conduct after the doctrine of pre- 
destination had been given up. The signs given by conduct 
which formed an indispensable means of ascertaining true con- 
version, even its condition as Wesley occasionally says, were in 
fact just the same as those of Calvinism. As a late product'®® we 
can, in the following discussion, generally neglect Methodism, 
as it added nothing new to the development'” of the idea of 
calling. 

D. THE BAPTIST SECTS 

The Pietism of the Continent of Europe and the Methodism of 
the Anglo-Saxon peoples are, considered both in their content of 
ideas and their historical significance, secondary movements. “° 
On the other hand, we find a second independent source of 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

Protestant asceticism besides Calvinism in the Baptist movement 
and the sects!® which, in the course of the sixteenth and seven- 
teenth centuries, came directly from it or adopted its forms of 
religious thought, the Baptists, Mennonites, and, above all, the 
Quakers.'’? With them we approach religious groups whose eth- 
ics rest upon a basis differing in principle from the Calvinistic 
doctrine. The following sketch, which only emphasizes what is 
important for us, can give no true impression of the diversity of 
this movement. Again we lay the principal emphasis on the 
development in the older capitalistic countries. 

The feature of all these communities, which is both historic- 
ally and in principle most important, but whose influence on the 
development of culture can only be made quite clear in a some- 
what different connection, is something with which we are 
already familiar, the believer’s Church.'’' This means that the 
religious community, the visible Church in the language of the 
Reformation Churches,'’* was no longer looked upon as a sort 
of trust foundation for supernatural ends, an institution, neces- 
sarily including both the just and the unjust, whether for 
increasing the glory of God (Calvinistic) or as a medium for 
bringing the means of salvation to men (Catholic and Lutheran), 
but solely as a community of personal believers of the reborn, 
and only these. In other words, not as a Church but as a sect.'”’ 
This is all that the principle, in itself purely external, that only 
adults who have personally gained their own faith should be 
baptized, is meant to symbolize.'”* The justification through this 
faith was for the Baptists, as they have insistently repeated in all 
religious discussions, radically different from the idea of work in 
the world in the service of Christ, such as dominated the ortho- 
dox dogma of the older Protestantism.'”° It consisted rather in 
taking spiritual possession of His gift of salvation. But this 
occurred through individual revelation, by the working of the 
Divine Spirit in the individual, and only in that way. It was 
offered to everyone, and it sufficed to wait for the Spirit, and not 

93 

94 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

to resist its coming by a sinful attachment to the world. The 
significance of faith in the sense of knowledge of the doctrines 
of the Church, but also in that of a repentant search for divine 
grace, was consequently quite minimized, and there took place, 
naturally with great modifications, a renaissance of Early Chris- 
tian pneumatic doctrines. For instance, the sect to which Menno 
Simons in his Fondamentboek (1539) gave the first reasonably con- 
sistent doctrine, wished, like the other Baptist sects, to be the 
true blameless Church of Christ; like the apostolic community, 
consisting entirely of those personally awakened and called by 
God. Those who have been born again, and they alone, are breth- 
ren of Christ, because they, like Him, have been created in spirit 
directly by God.'’° A strict avoidance of the world, in the sense of 
all not strictly necessary intercourse with worldly people, 
together with the strictest bibliocracy in the sense of taking the 
life of the first generations of Christians as a model, were the 
results for the first Baptist communities, and this principle of 
avoidance of the world never quite disappeared so long as the 
old spirit remained alive.'”” 

As a permanent possession, the Baptist sects retained from 
these dominating motives of their early period a principle with 
which, on a somewhat different foundation, we have already 
become acquainted in Calvinism, and the fundamental import- 
ance of which will again and again come out. They absolutely 
repudiated all idolatry of the flesh, as a detraction from the 
reverence due to God alone.'”* The Biblical way of life was con- 
ceived by the first Swiss and South German Baptists with a radic- 
alism similar to that of the young St. Francis, as a sharp break 
with all the enjoyment of life, a life modelled directly on that of 
the Apostles. And, in truth, the life of many of the earlier Baptists 
is reminiscent of that of St. Giles. But this strict observation of 
Biblical precepts'”” 
connection with the pneumatic character of the faith. What God 
had revealed to the prophets and apostles was not all that He 

was not on very secure foundations in its 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

could and would reveal. On the contrary, the continued life of 
the Word, not as a written document, but as the force of the 
Holy Spirit working in daily life, which speaks directly to any 
individual who is willing to hear, was the sole characteristic of 
the true Church. That, as Schwenkfeld taught as against Luther 
and later Fox against the Presbyterians, was the testimony of the 
early Christian communities. From this idea of the continuance 
of revelation developed the well-known doctrine, later consist- 
ently worked out by the Quakers, of the (in the last analysis 
decisive) significance of the inner testimony of the Spirit in 
reason and conscience. This did away, not with the authority, 
but with the sole authority, of the Bible, and started a develop- 
ment which in the end radically eliminated all that remained of 
the doctrine of salvation through the Church; for the Quakers 
even with Baptism and the Communion. '*® 

The Baptist denominations along with the predestinationists, 
especially the strict Calvinists, carried out the most radical 
devaluation of all sacraments as means to salvation, and thus 
accomplished the religious rationalization of the world in its 
most extreme form. Only the inner light of continual revelation 
could enable one truly to understand even the Biblical revela- 
tions of God.'*! On the other hand, at least according to the 
Quaker doctrine which here drew the logical conclusion, its 
effects could be extended to people who had never known reve- 
lation in its Biblical form. The proposition extra ecclesiam nulla salus 
held only for this invisible Church of those illuminated by the 
Spirit. Without the inner light, the natural man, even the man 
guided by natural reason,'** remained purely a creature of the 
flesh, whose godlessness was condemned by the Baptists, includ- 
ing the Quakers, almost even more harshly than by the Calvin- 
ists. On the other hand, the new birth caused by the Spirit, if we 
wait for it and open our hearts to it, may, since it is divinely 
caused, lead to a state of such complete conquest of the power of 
sin,'® that relapses, to say nothing of the loss of the state of 

95 

96 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

grace, become practically impossible. However, as in Methodism 
at a later time, the attainment of that state was not thought of as 
the rule, but rather the degree of perfection of the individual was 
subject to development. 

But all Baptist communities desired to be pure Churches in the 
sense of the blameless conduct of their members. A sincere 
repudiation of the world and its interests, and unconditional 
submission to God as speaking through the conscience, were the 
only unchallengeable signs of true rebirth, and a corresponding 
type of conduct was thus indispensable to salvation. And hence 
the gift of God’s grace could not be earned, but only one who 
followed the dictates of his conscience could be justified in con- 
sidering himself reborn. Good works in this sense were a causa 
sine qua non. As we see, this last reasoning of Barclay, to whose 
exposition we have adhered, was again the equivalent in practice 
of the Calvinistic doctrine, and was certainly developed under 
the influence of the Calvinistic asceticism, which surrounded the 
Baptist sects in England and the Netherlands. George Fox devoted 
the whole of his early missionary activity to the preaching of its 
earnest and sincere adoption. 

But, since predestination was rejected, the peculiarly rational 
character of Baptist morality rested psychologically above all on 
the idea of expectant waiting for the Spirit to descend, which 
even to-day is characteristic of the Quaker meeting, and is well 
analysed by Barclay. The purpose of this silent waiting is to over- 
come everything impulsive and irrational, the passions and sub- 
jective interests of the natural man. He must be stilled in order to 
create that deep repose of the soul in which alone the word of 
God can be heard. Of course, this waiting might result in hyster- 
ical conditions, prophecy, and, as long as eschatological hopes 
survived, under certain circumstances even in an outbreak of 
chiliastic enthusiasm, as is possible in all similar types of 
religion. That actually happened in the movement which went to 
pieces in Munster. 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

But in so far as Baptism affected the normal workaday world, 
the idea that God only speaks when the flesh is silent evidently 
meant an incentive to the deliberate weighing of courses of 
action and their careful justification in terms of the individual 
conscience. '** The later Baptist communities, most particularly 
the Quakers, adopted this quiet, moderate, eminently conscien- 
tious character of conduct. The radical elimination of magic 
from the world allowed no other psychological course than the 
practice of worldly asceticism. Since these communities would 
have nothing to do with the political powers and their doings, 
the external result also was the penetration of life in the calling 
with these ascetic virtues. The leaders of the earliest Baptist 
movement were ruthlessly radical in their rejection of worldli- 
ness. But naturally, even in the first generation, the strictly apos- 
tolic way of life was not maintained as absolutely essential to the 
proof of rebirth for everyone. Well-to-do bourgeois there were, 
even in this generation and even before Menno, who definitely 
defended the practical worldly virtues and the system of private 
property; the strict morality of the Baptists had turned in prac- 
tice into the path prepared by the Calvinistic ethic.'** This was 
simply because the road to the otherworldly monastic form of 
asceticism had been closed as unbiblical and savouring of salva- 
tion by works since Luther, whom the Baptists also followed in 
this respect. 

Nevertheless, apart from the half-communistic communities 
of the early period, one Baptist sect, the so-called Dunckards 
(Tunker, dompelaers), has to this day maintained its condemnation 
of education and of every form of possession beyond that 
indispensable to life. And even Barclay looks upon the obligation 
to one’s calling not in Calvinistic or even Lutheran terms, but 
rather Thomistically, as naturali ratione, the necessary consequence 
of the believers having to live in the world.'*° 

This attitude meant a weakening of the Calvinistic conception 
of the calling similar to those of Spener and the German Pietists. 

97 

98 

THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

But, on the other hand, the intensity of interest in economic 
occupations was considerably increased by various factors at 
work in the Baptist sects. In the first place, by the refusal to 
accept office in the service of the State, which originated as a 
religious duty following from the repudiation of everything 
worldly. After its abandonment in principle it still remained, at 
least for the Mennonites and Quakers, effective in practice, 
because the strict refusal to bear arms or to take oaths formed a 
sufficient disqualification for office. Hand in hand with it in all 
Baptists’ denominations went an invincible antagonism to any 
sort of aristocratic way of life. Partly, as with the Calvinists, it was 
a consequence of the prohibition of all idolatry of the flesh, 
partly a result of the aforementioned unpolitical or even anti- 
political principles. The whole shrewd and conscientious ration- 
ality of Baptist conduct was thus forced into non-political 
callings. 

At the same time, the immense importance which was attrib- 
uted by the Baptist doctrine of salvation to the rôle of the con- 
science as the revelation of God to the individual gave their 
conduct in worldly callings a character which was of the greatest 
significance for the development of the spirit of capitalism. We 
shall have to postpone its consideration until later, and it can 
then be studied only in so far as this is possible without entering 
into the whole political and social ethics of Protestant asceticism. 
But, to anticipate this much, we have already called attention to 
that most important principle of the capitalistic ethic which is 
generally formulated “honesty is the best policy”.'*” Its classical 
document is the tract of Franklin quoted above. And even in the 
judgment of the seventeenth century the specific form of the 
worldly asceticism of the Baptists, especially the Quakers, lay in 
the practical adoption of this maxim.'** On the other hand, we 
shall expect to find that the influence of Calvinism was exerted 
more in the direction of the liberation of energy for private 
acquisition. For in spite of all the formal legalism of the elect, 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 

Goethe’s remark in fact applied often enough to the Calvinist: 
“The man of action is always ruthless; no one has a conscience 
but an observer.” '*’ 

A further important element which promoted the intensity of 
the worldly asceticism of the Baptist denominations can in its 
full significance also be considered only in another connection. 
Nevertheless, we may anticipate a few remarks on it to justify the 
order of presentation we have chosen. We have quite deliberately 
not taken as a starting-point the objective social institutions of 
the older Protestant Churches, and their ethical influences, espe- 
cially not the very important Church discipline. We have pre- 
ferred rather to take the results which subjective adoption of an 
ascetic faith might have had in the conduct of the individual. 
This was not only because this side of the thing has previously 
received far less attention than the other, but also because the 
effect of Church discipline was by no means always a similar 
one. On the contrary, the ecclesiastical supervision of the life of 
the individual, which, as it was practised in the Calvinistic State 
Churches, almost amounted to an inquisition, might even retard 
that liberation of individual powers which was conditioned by 
the rational ascetic pursuit of salvation, and in some cases actu- 
ally did so. 

The mercantilistic regulations of the State might develop 
industries, but not, or certainly not alone, the spirit of capital- 
ism; where they assumed a despotic, authoritarian character, 
they to a large extent directly hindered it. Thus a similar effect 
might well have resulted from ecclesiastical regimentation when 
it became excessively despotic. It enforced a particular type of 
external conformity, but in some cases weakened the subjective 
motives of rational conduct. Any discussion of this point!” must 
take account of the great difference between the results of the 
authoritarian moral discipline of the Established Churches and 
the corresponding discipline in the sects which rested on volun- 
tary submission. That the Baptist movement everywhere and in 

99 

100 THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

principle founded sects and not Churches was certainly as 
favourable to the intensity of their asceticism as was the case, to 
differing degrees, with those Calvinistic, Methodist, and Pietist 
communities which were driven by their situations into the 
formation of voluntary groups.'”’ 

It is our next task to follow out the results of the Puritan idea 
of the calling in the business world, now that the above sketch 
has attempted to show its religious foundations. With all the 
differences of detail and emphasis which these different ascetic 
movements show in the aspects with which we have been con- 
cerned, much the same characteristics are present and important 
in all of them.'”* But for our purposes the decisive point was, to 
recapitulate, the conception of the state of religious grace, 
common to all the denominations, as a status which marks off 
its possessor from the degradation of the flesh, from the 
world.'” 

On the other hand, though the means by which it was 
attained differed for different doctrines, it could not be guaran- 
teed by any magical sacraments, by relief in the confession, nor 
by individual good works. That was only possible by proof in a 
specific type of conduct unmistakably different from the way of 
life of the natural man. From that followed for the individual an 
incentive methodically to supervise his own state of grace in his 
own conduct, and thus to penetrate it with asceticism. But, as we 
have seen, this ascetic conduct meant a rational planning of the 
whole of one’s life in accordance with God’s will. And this 
asceticism was no longer an opus supererogationis, but something 
which could be required of everyone who would be certain of 
salvation. The religious life of the saints, as distinguished from 
the natural life, was—the most important point—no longer 
lived outside the world in monastic communities, but within the 
world and its institutions. This rationalization of conduct within 
this world, but for the sake of the world beyond, was the con- 
sequence of the concept of calling of ascetic Protestantism. 

THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISM 101 

Christian asceticism, at first fleeing from the world into soli- 
tude, had already ruled the world which it had renounced from 
the monastery and through the Church. But it had, on the whole, 
left the naturally spontaneous character of daily life in the world 
untouched. Now it strode into the market-place of life, slammed 
the door of the monastery behind it, and undertook to penetrate 
just that daily routine of life with its methodicalness, to fashion 
it into a life in the world, but neither of nor for this world. With 
what result, we shall try to make clear in the following 
discussion. 

5 

ASCETICISM AND THE SPIRIT 
OF CAPITALISM 

In order to understand the connection between the fundamental 
religious ideas of ascetic Protestantism and its maxims for every- 
day economic conduct, it is necessary to examine with especial 
care such writings as have evidently been derived from minis- 
terial practice. For in a time in which the beyond meant every- 
thing, when the social position of the Christian depended upon 
his admission to the Communion, the clergyman, through his 
ministry, Church discipline, and preaching, exercised an influ- 
ence (as a glance at collections of consilia, casus conscientie, etc., 
shows) which we modern men are entirely unable to picture. In 
such a time the religious forces which express themselves 
through such channels are the decisive influences in the forma- 
tion of national character. 

For the purposes of this chapter, though by no means for all 
purposes, we can treat ascetic Protestantism as a single whole. 
But since that side of English Puritanism which was derived 
from Calvinism gives the most consistent religious basis for the 

ASCETICISM AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 103 

idea of the calling, we shall, following our previous method, 
place one of its representatives at the centre of the discussion. 
Richard Baxter stands out above many other writers on Puritan 
ethics, both because of his eminently practical and realistic atti- 
tude, and, at the same time, because of the universal recognition 
accorded to his works, which have gone through many new 
editions and translations. He was a Presbyterian and an apologist 
of the Westminster Synod, but at the same time, like so many of 
the best spirits of his time, gradually grew away from the 
dogmas of pure Calvinism. At heart he opposed Cromwell's 
usurpation as he would any revolution. He was unfavourable to 
the sects and the fanatical enthusiasm of the saints, but was very 
broad-minded about external peculiarities and objective towards 
his opponents. He sought his field of labour most especially in 
the practical promotion of the moral life through the Church. In 
the pursuit of this end, as one of the most successful ministers 
known to history, he placed his services at the disposal of the 
Parliamentary Government, of Cromwell, and of the Restora- 
tion,’ until he retired from office under the last, before St. 
Bartholomew’s day. His Christian Directory is the most complete 
compendium of Puritan ethics, and is continually adjusted to the 
practical experiences of his own ministerial activity. In com- 
parison we shall make use of Spener’s Theologische Bedenken, as 
representative of German Pietism, Barclay’s Apology for the 
Quakers, and some other representatives of ascetic ethics,” 
which, however, in the interest of space, will be limited as far 
as possible.” 

Now, in glancing at Baxter’s Saints’ Everlasting Rest, or his Christian 
Directory, or similar works of others,* one is struck at first glance 
by the emphasis placed, in the discussion of wealth’ and its 
acquisition, on the ebionitic elements of the New Testament.° 
Wealth as such is a great danger; its temptations never end, and 
its pursuit’ is not only senseless as compared with the dominat- 
ing importance of the Kingdom of God, but it is morally suspect. 

104 THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

Here asceticism seems to have turned much more sharply against 
the acquisition of earthly goods than it did in Calvin, who saw 
no hindrance to the effectiveness of the clergy in their wealth, 
but rather a thoroughly desirable enhancement of their prestige. 
Hence he permitted them to employ their means profitably. 
Examples of the condemnation of the pursuit of money and 
goods may be gathered without end from Puritan writings, and 
may be contrasted with the late medizval ethical literature, 
which was much more open-minded on this point. 

Moreover, these doubts were meant with perfect seriousness; 
only it is necessary to examine them somewhat more closely in 
order to understand their true ethical significance and implica- 
tions. The real moral objection is to relaxation in the security of 
possession,* the enjoyment of wealth with the consequence of 
idleness and the temptations of the flesh, above all of distraction 
from the pursuit of a righteous life. In fact, it is only because 
possession involves this danger of relaxation that it is objection- 
able at all. For the saints’ everlasting rest is in the next world; on 
earth man must, to be certain of his state of grace, “do the works 
of him who sent him, as long as it is yet day”. Not leisure and 
enjoyment, but only activity serves to increase the glory of God, 
according to the definite manifestations of His will.’ 

Waste of time is thus the first and in principle the deadliest of 
sins. The span of human life is infinitely short and precious to 
make sure of one’s own election. Loss of time through sociabil- 
ity, idle talk,'® luxury,'' even more sleep than is necessary for 
health,’’ six to at most eight hours, is worthy of absolute moral 
condemnation.’* It does not yet hold, with Franklin, that time is 
money, but the proposition is true in a certain spiritual sense. It 
is infinitely valuable because every hour lost is lost to labour for 
the glory of God.'* Thus inactive contemplation is also valueless, 
or even directly reprehensible if it is at the expense of one’s daily 
work.'° For it is less pleasing to God than the active performance 
of His will in a calling.'® Besides, Sunday is provided for that, 

ASCETICISM AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 105 

and, according to Baxter, it is always those who are not diligent 
in their callings who have no time for God when the occasion 
demands it.'” 

Accordingly, Baxter’s principal work is dominated by the con- 
tinually repeated, often almost passionate preaching of hard, 
continuous bodily or mental labour.’* It is due to a combination 
of two different motives.'? Labour is, on the one hand, an 
approved ascetic technique, as it always has been” in the West- 
ern Church, in sharp contrast not only to the Orient but to 
almost all monastic rules the world over.” It is in particular the 
specific defence against all those temptations which Puritanism 
united under the name of the unclean life, whose rôle for it was 
by no means small. The sexual asceticism of Puritanism differs 
only in degree, not in fundamental principle, from that of 
monasticism; and on account of the Puritan conception of mar- 
riage, its practical influence is more far-reaching than that of the 
latter. For sexual intercourse is permitted, even within marriage, 
only as the means willed by God for the increase of His glory 
according to the commandment, “Be fruitful and multiply.”” 
Along with a moderate vegetable diet and cold baths, the same 
prescription is given for all sexual temptations as is used against 
religious doubts and a sense of moral unworthiness: “Work hard 
in your calling.””’? But the most important thing was that even 
beyond that labour came to be considered in itself’* the end of 
life, ordained as such by God. St. Paul’s “He who will not work 
shall not eat” holds unconditionally for everyone.” Unwilling- 
ness to work is symptomatic of the lack of grace.”° 

Here the difference from the medizval view-point becomes 
quite evident. Thomas Aquinas also gave an interpretation of that 
statement of St. Paul. But for him?” labour is only necessary 
naturali ratione for the maintenance of individual and community. 
Where this end is achieved, the precept ceases to have any mean- 
ing. Moreover, it holds only for the race, not for every individual. 
It does not apply to anyone who can live without labour on his 

106 THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

possessions, and of course contemplation, as a spiritual form of 
action in the Kingdom of God, takes precedence over the com- 
mandment in its literal sense. Moreover, for the popular the- 
ology of the time, the highest form of monastic productivity lay 
in the increase of the Thesaurus ecclesie through prayer and chant. 
Now only do these exceptions to the duty to labour naturally 
no longer hold for Baxter, but he holds most emphatically that 
wealth does not exempt anyone from the unconditional com- 
mand.”* Even the wealthy shall not eat without working, for even 
though they do not need to labour to support their own needs, 
there is God’s commandment which they, like the poor, must 
obey.” For everyone without exception God’s Providence has 
prepared a calling, which he should profess and in which he 
should labour. And this calling is not, as it was for the 
Lutheran,” a fate to which he must submit and which he must 
make the best of, but God’s commandment to the individual to 
work for the divine glory. This seemingly subtle difference had 
far-reaching psychological consequences, and became con- 
nected with a further development of the providential interpret- 
ation of the economic order which had begun in scholasticism. 
The phenomenon of the division of labour and occupations 
in society had, among others, been interpreted by Thomas 
Aquinas, to whom we may most conveniently refer, as a direct 
consequence of the divine scheme of things. But the places 
assigned to each man in this cosmos follow ex causis naturalibus and 
are fortuitous (contingent in the Scholastic terminology). The 
differentiation of men into the classes and occupations estab- 
lished through historical development became for Luther, as we 
have seen, a direct result of the divine will. The perseverance of 
the individual in the place and within the limits which God 
had assigned to him was a religious duty.*' This was the more 
certainly the consequence since the relations of Lutheranism to 
the world were in general uncertain from the beginning and 
remained so. Ethical principles for the reform of the world could 

ASCETICISM AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 107 

not be found in Luther’s realm of ideas; in fact it never quite 
freed itself from Pauline indifference. Hence the world had to be 
accepted as it was, and this alone could be made a religious duty. 

But in the Puritan view, the providential character of the play 
of private economic interests takes on a somewhat different 
emphasis. True to the Puritan tendency to pragmatic interpret- 
ations, the providential purpose of the division of labour is to be 
known by its fruits. On this point Baxter expresses himself in 
terms which more than once directly recall Adam Smith’s well- 
known apotheosis of the division of labour.** The specialization 
of occupations leads, since it makes the development of skill 
possible, to a quantitative and qualitative improvement in pro- 
duction, and thus serves the common good, which is identical 
with the good of the greatest possible number. So far, the motiv- 
ation is purely utilitarian, and is closely related to the customary 
view-point of much of the secular literature of the time.*? 

But the characteristic Puritan element appears when Baxter 
sets at the head of his discussion the statement that “outside of a 
well-marked calling the accomplishments of a man are only cas- 
ual and irregular, and he spends more time in idleness than at 
work”, and when he concludes it as follows: “and he [the 
specialized worker] will carry out his work in order while 
another remains in constant confusion, and his business knows 
neither time nor place** . . . therefore is a certain calling the best 
for everyone”. Irregular work, which the ordinary labourer is 
often forced to accept, is often unavoidable, but always an 
unwelcome state of transition. A man without a calling thus 
lacks the systematic, methodical character which is, as we have 
seen, demanded by worldly asceticism. 

The Quaker ethic also holds that a man’s life in his calling is 
an exercise in ascetic virtue, a proof of his state of grace through 
his conscientiousness, which is expressed in the care? and 
method with which he pursues his calling. What God demands 
is not labour in itself, but rational labour in a calling. In the 

108 THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

Puritan concept of the calling the emphasis is always placed on 
this methodical character of worldly asceticism, not, as with 
Luther, on the acceptance of the lot which God has irretrievably 
assigned to man.’ 

Hence the question whether anyone may combine several call- 
ings is answered in the affirmative, if it is useful for the common 
good or one’s own,” and not injurious to anyone, and if it does 
not lead to unfaithfulness in one of the callings. Even a change of 
calling is by no means regarded as objectionable, if it is not 
thoughtless and is made for the purpose of pursuing a calling 
more pleasing to God,** which means, on general principles, 
one more useful. 

It is true that the usefulness of a calling, and thus its favour in 
the sight of God, is measured primarily in moral terms, and thus 
in terms of the importance of the goods produced in it for the 
community. But a further, and, above all, in practice the most 
important, criterion is found in private profitableness.*” For if 
that God, whose hand the Puritan sees in all the occurrences of 
life, shows one of His elect a chance of profit, he must do it with 
a purpose. Hence the faithful Christian must follow the call by 
taking advantage of the opportunity.*’ “If God show you a way 
in which you may lawfully get more than in another way (with- 
out wrong to your soul or to any other), if you refuse this, and 
choose the less gainful way, you cross one of the ends of your 
calling, and you refuse to be God’s steward, and to accept His 
gifts and use them for Him when He requireth it: you may 
labour to be rich for God, though not for the flesh and sin.”*' 

Wealth is thus bad ethically only in so far as it is a temptation 
to idleness and sinful enjoyment of life, and its acquisition is bad 
only when it is with the purpose of later living merrily and 
without care. But as a performance of duty in a calling it is not 
only morally permissible, but actually enjoined.** The parable of 
the servant who was rejected because he did not increase the 
talent which was entrusted to him seemed to say so directly.** To 

ASCETICISM AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 109 

wish to be poor was, it was often argued, the same as wishing to 
be unhealthy;** it is objectionable as a glorification of works and 
derogatory to the glory of God. Especially begging, on the part 
of one able to work, is not only the sin of slothfulness, but a 
violation of the duty of brotherly love according to the Apostle’s 
own word.‘ 

The emphasis on the ascetic importance of a fixed calling 
provided an ethical justification of the modern specialized div- 
ision of labour. In a similar way the providential interpretation of 
profit-making justified the activities of the business man.*° The 
superior indulgence of the seigneur and the parvenu ostentation of 
the nouveau riche are equally detestable to asceticism. But, on the 
other hand, it has the highest ethical appreciation of the sober, 
middle-class, self-made man.*” “God blesseth His trade” is a 
stock remark about those good men** who had successfully fol- 
lowed the divine hints. The whole power of the God of the Old 
Testament, who rewards His people for their obedience in this 
life,” necessarily exercised a similar influence on the Puritan 
who, following Baxter’s advice, compared his own state of grace 
with that of the heroes of the Bible,” and in the process inter- 
preted the statements of the Scriptures as the articles of a book of 
statutes. 

Of course, the words of the Old Testament were not entirely 
without ambiguity. We have seen that Luther first used the con- 
cept of the calling in the secular sense in translating a passage 
from Jesus Sirach. But the book of Jesus Sirach belongs, with the 
whole atmosphere expressed in it, to those parts of the broad- 
ened Old Testament with a distinctly traditionalistic tendency, in 
spite of Hellenistic influences. It is characteristic that down to 
the present day this book seems to enjoy a special favour among 
Lutheran German peasants,’’ just as the Lutheran influence 
in large sections of German Pietism has been expressed by a 
preference for Jesus Sirach.”” 

The Puritans repudiated the Apocrypha as not inspired, 

110 THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

consistently with their sharp distinction between things divine 
and things of the flesh.” But among the canonical books that of 
Job had all the more influence. On the one hand it contained a 
grand conception of the absolute sovereign majesty of God, 
beyond all human comprehension, which was closely related to 
that of Calvinism. With that, on the other hand, it combined the 
certainty which, though incidental for Calvin, came to be of 
great importance for Puritanism, that God would bless His own 
in this life—in the book of Job only—and also in the material 
sense.’* The Oriental quietism, which appears in several of the 
finest verses of the Psalms and in the Proverbs, was interpreted 
away, just as Baxter did with the traditionalistic tinge of the 
passage in the Ist Epistle to the Corinthians, so important for 
the idea of the calling. 

But all the more emphasis was placed on those parts of the 
Old Testament which praise formal legality as a sign of conduct 
pleasing to God. They held the theory that the Mosaic Law had 
only lost its validity through Christ in so far as it contained 
ceremonial or purely historical precepts applying only to the 
Jewish people, but that otherwise it had always been valid as an 
expression of the natural law, and must hence be retained.” This 
made it possible, on the one hand, to eliminate elements which 
could not be reconciled with modern life. But still, through its 
numerous related features, Old Testament morality was able to 
give a powerful impetus to that spirit of self-righteous and sober 
legality which was so characteristic of the worldly asceticism of 
this form of Protestantism.” 

Thus when authors, as was the case with several contemporar- 
ies as well as later writers, characterize the basic ethical tendency 
of Puritanism, especially in England, as English Hebraism*’ they 
are, correctly understood, not wrong. It is necessary, however, 
not to think of Palestinian Judaism at the time of the writing of 
the Scriptures, but of Judaism as it became under the influence 
of many centuries of formalistic, legalistic, and Talmudic 

ASCETICISM AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 111 

education. Even then one must be very careful in drawing paral- 
lels. The general tendency of the older Judaism toward a naïve 
acceptance of life as such was far removed from the special 
characteristics of Puritanism. It was, however, just as far—and 
this ought not to be overlooked—from the economic ethics of 
medizval and modern Judaism, in the traits which determined 
the positions of both in the development of the capitalistic ethos. 
The Jews stood on the side of the politically and speculatively 
oriented adventurous capitalism; their ethos was, in a word, that 
of pariah-capitalism. But Puritanism carried the ethos of the 
rational organization of capital and labour. It took over from the 
Jewish ethic only what was adapted to this purpose. 

To analyse the effects on the character of peoples of the pene- 
tration of life with Old Testament norms—a tempting task 
which, however, has not yet satisfactorily been done even for 
Judaism°*—would be impossible within the limits of this sketch. 
In addition to the relationships already pointed out, it is import- 
ant for the general inner attitude of the Puritans, above all, that 
the belief that they were God’s chosen people saw in them a 
great renaissance.” Even the kindly Baxter thanked God that he 
was born in England, and thus in the true Church, and nowhere 
else. This thankfulness for one’s own perfection by the grace of 
God penetrated the attitude toward life®° of the Puritan middle 
class, and played its part in developing that formalistic, hard, 
correct character which was peculiar to the men of that heroic 
age of capitalism. 

Let us now try to clarify the points in which the Puritan idea 
of the calling and the premium it placed upon ascetic conduct 
was bound directly to influence the development of a capitalistic 
way of life. As we have seen, this asceticism turned with all its 
force against one thing: the spontaneous enjoyment of life and 
all it had to offer. This is perhaps most characteristically brought 
out in the struggle over the Book of Sports*' which James I and 
Charles I made into law expressly as a means of counteracting 

112 THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

Puritanism, and which the latter ordered to be read from all the 
pulpits. The fanatical opposition of the Puritans to the ordin- 
ances of the King, permitting certain popular amusements on 
Sunday outside of Church hours by law, was not only explained 
by the disturbance of the Sabbath rest, but also by resentment 
against the intentional diversion from the ordered life of the 
saint, which it caused. And, on his side, the King’s threats 
of severe punishment for every attack on the legality of those 
sports were motivated by his purpose of breaking the anti- 
authoritarian ascetic tendency of Puritanism, which was so dan- 
gerous to the State. The feudal and monarchical forces protected 
the pleasure seekers against the rising middle-class morality and 
the anti-authoritarian ascetic conventicles, just as to-day capital- 
istic society tends to protect those willing to work against the 
class morality of the proletariat and the anti-authoritarian trade 
union. 

As against this the Puritans upheld their decisive character- 
istic, the principle of ascetic conduct. For otherwise the Puritan 
aversion to sport, even for the Quakers, was by no means simply 
one of principle. Sport was accepted if it served a rational pur- 
pose, that of recreation necessary for physical efficiency. But as a 
means for the spontaneous expression of undisciplined 
impulses, it was under suspicion; and in so far as it became 
purely a means of enjoyment, or awakened pride, raw instincts 
or the irrational gambling instinct, it was of course strictly con- 
demned. Impulsive enjoyment of life, which leads away both 
from work in a calling and from religion, was as such the enemy 
of rational asceticism, whether in the form of seigneurial sports, 
or the enjoyment of the dance-hall or the public-house of the 
common man.° 

Its attitude was thus suspicious and often hostile to the aspects 
of culture without any immediate religious value. It is not, how- 
ever, true that the ideals of Puritanism implied a solemn, 
narrow-minded contempt of culture. Quite the contrary is the 

ASCETICISM AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 113 

case at least for science, with the exception of the hatred of 
Scholasticism. Moreover, the great men of the Puritan movement 
were thoroughly steeped in the culture of the Renaissance. The 
sermons of the Presbyterian divines abound with classical allu- 
sions,‘ and even the Radicals, although they objected to it, were 
not ashamed to display that kind of learning in theological 
polemics. Perhaps no country was ever so full of graduates as 
New England in the first generation of its existence. The satire of 
their opponents, such as, for instance, Butler’s Hudibras, also 
attacks primarily the pedantry and highly trained dialectics of 
the Puritans. This is partially due to the religious valuation of 
knowledge which followed from their attitude to the Catholic 
fides implicita. 

But the situation is quite different when one looks at non- 
scientific literature, * and especially the fine arts. Here asceticism 
descended like a frost on the life of “merrie old England”. And 
not only worldly merriment felt its effect. The Puritan’s fer- 
ocious hatred of everything which smacked of superstition, of 
all survivals of magical or sacramental salvation, applied to the 
Christmas festivities and the May Pole® and all spontaneous 
religious art. That there was room in Holland for a great, often 
uncouthly realistic art®® proves only how far from completely the 
authoritarian moral discipline of that country was able to coun- 
teract the influence of the court and the regents (a class of 
rentiers), and also the joy in life of the parvenu bourgeoisie, after 
the short supremacy of the Calvinistic theocracy had been trans- 
formed into a moderate national Church, and with it Calvinism 
had perceptibly lost in its power of ascetic influence.‘ 

The theatre was obnoxious to the Puritans,°* and with the 
strict exclusion of the erotic and of nudity from the realm of 
toleration, a radical view of either literature or art could not 
exist. The conceptions of idle talk, of superfluities,°’ and of vain 
ostentation, all designations of an irrational attitude without 
objective purpose, thus not ascetic, and especially not serving 

114 THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

the glory of God, but of man, were always at hand to serve in 
deciding in favour of sober utility as against any artistic tenden- 
cies. This was especially true in the case of decoration of the 
person, for instance clothing.” That powerful tendency toward 
uniformity of life, which to-day so immensely aids the capital- 
istic interest in the standardization of production,’' had its ideal 
foundations in the repudiation of all idolatry of the flesh.” 

Of course we must not forget that Puritanism included a 
world of contradictions, and that the instinctive sense of eternal 
greatness in art was certainly stronger among its leaders than in 
the atmosphere of the Cavaliers.” Moreover, a unique genius like 
Rembrandt, however little his conduct may have been acceptable 
to God in the eyes of the Puritans, was very strongly influenced 
in the character of his work by his religious environment.”* But 
that does not alter the picture as a whole. In so far as the devel- 
opment of the Puritan tradition could, and in part did, lead to a 
powerful spiritualization of personality, it was a decided benefit 
to literature. But for the most part that benefit only accrued to 
later generations. 

Although we cannot here enter upon a discussion of the influ- 
ence of Puritanism in all these directions, we should call atten- 
tion to the fact that the toleration of pleasure in cultural goods, 
which contributed to purely esthetic or athletic enjoyment, cer- 
tainly always ran up against one characteristic limitation: they 
must not cost anything. Man is only a trustee of the goods which 
have come to him through God’s grace. He must, like the servant 
in the parable, give an account of every penny entrusted to 
him,” and it is at least hazardous to spend any of it for a purpose 
which does not serve the glory of God but only one’s own 
enjoyment.’® What person, who keeps his eyes open, has not 
met representatives of this view-point even in the present?” The 
idea of a man’s duty to his possessions, to which he subordin- 
ates himself as an obedient steward, or even as an acquisitive 
machine, bears with chilling weight on his life. The greater the 

ASCETICISM AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 115 

possessions the heavier, if the ascetic attitude toward life stands 
the test, the feeling of responsibility for them, for holding them 
undiminished for the glory of God and increasing them by rest- 
less effort. The origin of this type of life also extends in certain 
roots, like so many aspects of the spirit of capitalism, back into 
the Middle Ages.” But it was in the ethic of ascetic Protestantism 
that it first found a consistent ethical foundation. Its significance 
for the development of capitalism is obvious.” 

This worldly Protestant asceticism, as we may recapitulate up 
to this point, acted powerfully against the spontaneous enjoy- 
ment of possessions; it restricted consumption, especially of 
luxuries. On the other hand, it had the psychological effect of 
freeing the acquisition of goods from the inhibitions of trad- 
itionalistic ethics. It broke the bonds of the impulse of acquisi- 
tion in that it not only legalized it, but (in the sense discussed) 
looked upon it as directly willed by God. The campaign against 
the temptations of the flesh, and the dependence on external 
things, was, as besides the Puritans the great Quaker apologist 
Barclay expressly says, not a struggle against the rational acquisi- 
tion, but against the irrational use of wealth. 

But this irrational use was exemplified in the outward forms 
of luxury which their code condemned as idolatry of the flesh,*° 
however natural they had appeared to the feudal mind. On the 
other hand, they approved the rational and utilitarian uses of 
wealth which were willed by God for the needs of the individual 
and the community. They did not wish to impose mortifica- 
tion?" on the man of wealth, but the use of his means for neces- 
sary and practical things. The idea of comfort characteristically 
limits the extent of ethically permissible expenditures. It is nat- 
urally no accident that the development of a manner of living 
consistent with that idea may be observed earliest and most 
clearly among the most consistent representatives of this whole 
attitude toward life. Over against the glitter and ostentation of 
feudal magnificence which, resting on an unsound economic 

116 THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

basis, prefers a sordid elegance to a sober simplicity, they set the 
clean and solid comfort of the middle-class home as an ideal.** 

On the side of the production of private wealth, asceticism 
condemned both dishonesty and impulsive avarice. What was 
condemned as covetousness, Mammonism, etc., was the pursuit 
of riches for their own sake. For wealth in itself was a tempta- 
tion. But here asceticism was the power “which ever seeks the 
good but ever creates evil”:°? what was evil in its sense was 
possession and its temptations. For, in conformity with the Old 
Testament and in analogy to the ethical valuation of good works, 
asceticism looked upon the pursuit of wealth as an end in itself 
as highly reprehensible; but the attainment of it as a fruit of 
labour in a calling was a sign of God’s blessing. And even more 
important: the religious valuation of restless, continuous, sys- 
tematic work in a worldly calling, as the highest means to asceti- 
cism, and at the same time the surest and most evident proof of 
rebirth and genuine faith, must have been the most powerful 
conceivable lever for the expansion of that attitude toward life 
which we have here called the spirit of capitalism.** 

When the limitation of consumption is combined with this 
release of acquisitive activity, the inevitable practical result is 
obvious: accumulation of capital through ascetic compulsion to 
save." The restraints which were imposed upon the consump- 
tion of wealth naturally served to increase it by making possible 
the productive investment of capital. How strong this influence 
was is not, unfortunately, susceptible of exact statistical demon- 
stration. In New England the connection is so evident that it did 
not escape the eye of so discerning a historian as Doyle.*® But 
also in Holland, which was really only dominated by strict Cal- 
vinism for seven years, the greater simplicity of life in the more 
seriously religious circles, in combination with great wealth, led 
to an excessive propensity to accumulation.*” 

That, furthermore, the tendency which has existed every- 
where and at all times, being quite strong in Germany to-day, for 

ASCETICISM AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 117 

middle-class fortunes to be absorbed into the nobility, was 
necessarily checked by the Puritan antipathy to the feudal way of 
life, is evident. English Mercantilist writers of the seventeenth 
century attributed the superiority of Dutch capital to English to 
the circumstance that newly acquired wealth there did not regu- 
larly seek investment in land. Also, since it is not simply a ques- 
tion of the purchase of land, it did not there seek to transfer itself 
to feudal habits of life, and thereby to remove itself from the 
possibility of capitalistic investment.** The high esteem for agri- 
culture as a peculiarly important branch of activity, also espe- 
cially consistent with piety, which the Puritans shared, applied 
(for instance in Baxter) not to the landlord, but to the yeoman 
and farmer, in the eighteenth century not to the squire, but the 
rational cultivator.” Through the whole of English society in the 
time since the seventeenth century goes the conflict between 
the squirearchy, the representatives of “merrie old England”, 
and the Puritan circles of widely varying social influence.” Both 
elements, that of an unspoiled naive joy of life, and of a strictly 
regulated, reserved self-control, and conventional ethical con- 
duct are even to-day combined to form the English national 
character.” Similarly, the early history of the North American 
Colonies is dominated by the sharp contrast of the adventurers, 
who wanted to set up plantations with the labour of indentured 
servants, and live as feudal lords, and the specifically middle- 
class outlook of the Puritans.” 

As far as the influence of the Puritan outlook extended, under 
all circumstances—and this is, of course, much more important 
than the mere encouragement of capital accumulation—it 
favoured the development of a rational bourgeois economic life; 
it was the most important, and above all the only consistent 
influence in the development of that life. It stood at the cradle of 
the modern economic man. 

To be sure, these Puritanical ideals tended to give way under 
excessive pressure from the temptations of wealth, as the 

118 THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

Puritans themselves knew very well. With great regularity we 
find the most genuine adherents of Puritanism among the classes 
which were rising from a lowly status,” the small bourgeois and 
farmers, while the beati possidentes, even among Quakers, are often 
found tending to repudiate the old ideals.” It was the same fate 
which again and again befell the predecessor of this worldly 
asceticism, the monastic asceticism of the Middle Ages. In the 
latter case, when rational economic activity had worked out its 
full effects by strict regulation of conduct and limitation of con- 
sumption, the wealth accumulated either succumbed directly to 
the nobility, as in the time before the Reformation, or monastic 
discipline threatened to break down, and one of the numerous 
reformations became necessary. 

In fact the whole history of monasticism is in a certain sense 
the history of a continual struggle with the problem of the secu- 
larizing influence of wealth. The same is true on a grand scale of 
the worldly asceticism of Puritanism. The great revival of Meth- 
odism, which preceded the expansion of English industry 
toward the end of the eighteenth century, may well be compared 
with such a monastic reform. We may hence quote here a pas- 
sage” from John Wesley himself which might well serve as a 
motto for everything which has been said above. For it shows 
that the leaders of these ascetic movements understood the 
seemingly paradoxical relationships which we have here ana- 
lysed perfectly well, and in the same sense that we have given 
them.” He wrote: 

| fear, wherever riches have increased, the essence of religion 
has decreased in the same proportion. Therefore | do not see 
how it is possible, in the nature of things, for any revival of true 
religion to continue long. For religion must necessarily produce 
both industry and frugality, and these cannot but produce 
riches. But as riches increase, so will pride, anger, and love of 
the world in all its branches. How then is it possible that 

ASCETICISM AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 119 

Methodism, that is, a religion of the heart, though it flourishes 
now as a green bay tree, should continue in this state? For the 
Methodists in every place grow diligent and frugal; con- 
sequently they increase in goods. Hence they proportionately 
increase in pride, in anger, in the desire of the flesh, the desire 
of the eyes, and the pride of life. So, although the form of 
religion remains, the spirit is swiftly vanishing away. Is there no 
way to prevent this—this continual decay of pure religion? We 
ought not to prevent people from being diligent and frugal; we 
must exhort all Christians to gain all they can, and to save all they 
can; that is, in effect, to grow rich.” 

There follows the advice that those who gain all they can and 
save all they can should also give all they can, so that they will 
grow in grace and lay up a treasure in heaven. It is clear that 
Wesley here expresses, even in detail, just what we have been 
trying to point out.” 

As Wesley here says, the full economic effect of those great 
religious movements, whose significance for economic devel- 
opment lay above all in their ascetic educative influence, gener- 
ally came only after the peak of the purely religious enthusiasm 
was past. Then the intensity of the search for the Kingdom of 
God commenced gradually to pass over into sober economic 
virtue; the religious roots died out slowly, giving way to utilitar- 
ian worldliness. Then, as Dowden puts it, as in Robinson Crusoe, the 
isolated economic man who carries on missionary activities on 
the side” takes the place of the lonely spiritual search for the 
Kingdom of Heaven of Bunyan’s pilgrim, hurrying through the 
market-place of Vanity. 

When later the principle “to make the most of both worlds” 
became dominant in the end, as Dowden has remarked, a good 
conscience simply became one of the means of enjoying a com- 
fortable bourgeois life, as is well expressed in the German prov- 
erb about the soft pillow. What the great religious epoch of the 

120 THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

seventeenth century bequeathed to its utilitarian successor 
was, however, above all an amazingly good, we may even say a 
pharisaically good, conscience in the acquisition of money, so 
long as it took place legally. Every trace of the deplacere vix potest has 
disappeared. ‘°° 

A specifically bourgeois economic ethic had grown up. With 
the consciousness of standing in the fullness of God’s grace 
and being visibly blessed by Him, the bourgeois business man, 
as long as he remained within the bounds of formal correctness, 
as long as his moral conduct was spotless and the use to which he 
put his wealth was not objectionable, could follow his pecuniary 
interests as he would and feel that he was fulfilling a duty in doing 
so. The power of religious asceticism provided him in addition 
with sober, conscientious, and unusually industrious workmen, 
who clung to their work as to a life purpose willed by God.'°' 

Finally, it gave him the comforting assurance that the unequal 
distribution of the goods of this world was a special dispensation 
of Divine Providence, which in these differences, as in particular 
grace, pursued secret ends unknown to men.” Calvin himself 
had made the much-quoted statement that only when the 
people, i.e. the mass of labourers and craftsmen, were poor did 
they remain obedient to God.'™ In the Netherlands (Pieter de la 
Court and others), that had been secularized to the effect that the 
mass of men only labour when necessity forces them to do so. 
This formulation of a leading idea of capitalistic economy later 
entered into the current theories of the productivity of low 
wages. Here also, with the dying out of the religious root, the 
utilitarian interpretation crept in unnoticed, in the line of 
development which we have again and again observed. 

Mediæval ethics not only tolerated begging but actually glori- 
fied it in the mendicant orders. Even secular beggars, since they 
gave the person of means opportunity for good works through 
giving alms, were sometimes considered an estate and treated as 
such. Even the Anglican social ethic of the Stuarts was very close 

ASCETICISM AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 121 

to this attitude. It remained for Puritan Asceticism to take part in 
the severe English Poor Relief Legislation which fundamentally 
changed the situation. And it could do that, because the Protest- 
ant sects and the strict Puritan communities actually did not 
know any begging in their own midst. '“* 

On the other hand, seen from the side of the workers, the 
Zinzendorf branch of Pietism, for instance, glorified the loyal 
worker who did not seek acquisition, but lived according to the 
apostolic model, and was thus endowed with the charisma'®’ of 
the disciples.'°° Similar ideas had originally been prevalent 
among the Baptists in an even more radical form. 

Now naturally the whole ascetic literature of almost all 
denominations is saturated with the idea that faithful labour, 
even at low wages, on the part of those whom life offers no other 
opportunities, is highly pleasing to God. In this respect Protest- 
ant Asceticism added in itself nothing new. But it not only deep- 
ened this idea most powerfully, it also created the force which 
was alone decisive for its effectiveness: the psychological sanc- 
tion of it through the conception of this labour as a calling, as 
the best, often in the last analysis the only means of attaining 
certainty of grace.” And on the other hand it legalized the 
exploitation of this specific willingness to work, in that it also 
interpreted the employer’s business activity as a calling. '®® It is 
obvious how powerfully the exclusive search for the Kingdom of 
God only through the fulfilment of duty in the calling, and the 
strict asceticism which Church discipline naturally imposed, 
especially on the propertyless classes, was bound to affect 
the productivity of labour in the capitalistic sense of the word. 
The treatment of labour as a calling became as characteristic of 
the modern worker as the corresponding attitude toward acqui- 
sition of the business man. It was a perception of this situation, 
new at his time, which caused so able an observer as Sir William 
Petty to attribute the economic power of Holland in the seven- 
teenth century to the fact that the very numerous dissenters in 

122 THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

that country (Calvinists and Baptists) “are for the most part 
thinking, sober men, and such as believe that Labour and Indus- 
try is their duty towards God”.'”” 

Calvinism opposed organic social organization in the fiscal- 
monopolistic form which it assumed in Anglicanism under the 
Stuarts, especially in the conceptions of Laud, this alliance of 
Church and State with the monopolists on the basis of a 
Christian-social ethical foundation. Its leaders were universally 
among the most passionate opponents of this type of politically 
privileged commercial, putting-out, and colonial capitalism. 
Over against it they placed the individualistic motives of rational 
legal acquisition by virtue of one’s own ability and initiative. 
And, while the politically privileged monopoly industries in 
England all disappeared in short order, this attitude played a large 
and decisive part in the development of the industries which 
grew up in spite of and against the authority of the State.''” The 
Puritans (Prynne, Parker) repudiated all connection with the 
large-scale capitalistic courtiers and projectors as an ethically 
suspicious class. On the other hand, they took pride in their own 
superior middle-class business morality, which formed the true 
reason for the persecutions to which they were subjected on the 
part of those circles. Defoe proposed to win the battle against 
dissent by boycotting bank credit and withdrawing deposits. The 
difference of the two types of capitalistic attitude went to a very 
large extent hand in hand with religious differences. The 
opponents of the Nonconformists, even in the eighteenth cen- 
tury, again and again ridiculed them for personifying the spirit 
of shopkeepers, and for having ruined the ideals of old England. 
Here also lay the difference of the Puritan economic ethic from 
the Jewish; and contemporaries (Prynne) knew well that the 
former and not the latter was the bourgeois capitalistic ethic.'"! 

One of the fundamental elements of the spirit of modern 
capitalism, and not only of that but of all modern culture: 
rational conduct on the basis of the idea of the calling, was 

ASCETICISM AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 123 

born—that is what this discussion has sought to demonstrate— 
from the spirit of Christian asceticism. One has only to re-read 
the passage from Franklin, quoted at the beginning of this essay, 
in order to see that the essential elements of the attitude which 
was there called the spirit of capitalism are the same as what we 
have just shown to be the content of the Puritan worldly asceti- 
12 only without the religious basis, which by Franklin’s 
time had died away. The idea that modern labour has an ascetic 
character is of course not new. Limitation to specialized work, 
with a renunciation of the Faustian universality of man which it 
involves, is a condition of any valuable work in the modern 
world; hence deeds and renunciation inevitably condition each 
other to-day. This fundamentally ascetic trait of middle-class life, 
if it attempts to be a way of life at all, and not simply the absence 
of any, was what Goethe wanted to teach, at the height of his 
wisdom, in the Wanderjahren, and in the end which he gave to the 
life of his Faust.!'? For him the realization meant a renunciation, a 
departure from an age of full and beautiful humanity, which can 
no more be repeated in the course of our cultural development 
than can the flower of the Athenian culture of antiquity. 

The Puritan wanted to work in a calling; we are forced to do 
so. For when asceticism was carried out of monastic cells into 
everyday life, and began to dominate worldly morality, it did its 
part in building the tremendous cosmos of the modern eco- 
nomic order. This order is now bound to the technical and 
economic conditions of machine production which to-day 
determine the lives of all the individuals who are born into this 
mechanism, not only those directly concerned with economic 
acquisition, with irresistible force. Perhaps it will so determine 
them until the last ton of fossilized coal is burnt. In Baxter’s view 
the care for external goods should only lie on the shoulders of 
the “saint like a light cloak, which can be thrown aside at any 
moment”.''* But fate decreed that the cloak should become an 
iron cage. 

cism, 

124 THE PROTESTANT ETHIC AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

Since asceticism undertook to remodel the world and to work 
out its ideals in the world, material goods have gained an 
increasing and finally an inexorable power over the lives of men 
as at no previous period in history. To-day the spirit of religious 
asceticism—whether finally, who knows?—has escaped from 
the cage. But victorious capitalism, since it rests on mechanical 
foundations, needs its support no longer. The rosy blush of its 
laughing heir, the Enlightenment, seems also to be irretrievably 
fading, and the idea of duty in one’s calling prowls about in our 
lives like the ghost of dead religious beliefs. Where the fulfil- 
ment of the calling cannot directly be related to the highest 
spiritual and cultural values, or when, on the other hand, it need 
not be felt simply as economic compulsion, the individual gen- 
erally abandons the attempt to justify it at all. In the field of its 
highest development, in the United States, the pursuit of wealth, 
stripped of its religious and ethical meaning, tends to become 
associated with purely mundane passions, which often actually 
give it the character of sport.''” 

No one knows who will live in this cage in the future, or 
whether at the end of this tremendous development entirely new 
prophets will arise, or there will be a great rebirth of old ideas 
and ideals, or, if neither, mechanized petrification, embellished 
with a sort of convulsive self-importance. For of the last stage of 
this cultural development, it might well be truly said: “Special- 
ists without spirit, sensualists without heart; this nullity 
imagines that it has attained a level of civilization never before 
achieved.” 

But this brings us to the world of judgments of value and of 
faith, with which this purely historical discussion need not be 
burdened. The next task would be rather to show the signifi- 
cance of ascetic rationalism, which has only been touched in the 
foregoing sketch, for the content of practical social ethics, thus 
for the types of organization and the functions of social groups 
from the conventicle to the State. Then its relations to humanistic 

ASCETICISM AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 1295 

rationalism, !'° its ideals of life and cultural influence; further to 
the development of philosophical and scientific empiricism, to 
technical development and to spiritual ideals would have to be 
analysed. Then its historical development from the medizval 
beginnings of worldly asceticism to its dissolution into pure 
utilitarianism would have to be traced out through all the areas 
of ascetic religion. Only then could the quantitative cultural 
significance of ascetic Protestantism in its relation to the other 
plastic elements of modern culture be estimated. 

Here we have only attempted to trace the fact and the direc- 
tion of its influence to their motives in one, though a very 
important point. But it would also further be necessary to 
investigate how Protestant Asceticism was in turn influenced in 
its development and its character by the totality of social condi- 
tions, especially economic.''’ The modern man is in general, 
even with the best will, unable to give religious ideas a signifi- 
cance for culture and national character which they deserve. But 
it is, of course, not my aim to substitute for a one-sided material- 
istic an equally one-sided spiritualistic causal interpretation of 
culture and of history. Each is equally possible,''* but each, if it 
does not serve as the preparation, but as the conclusion of an 
investigation, accomplishes equally little in the interest of 
historical truth." 

NOTES 

GIDDENS’ INTRODUCTION 

1 

N 

w 

wo 

oo N 

Dieter Lindenlaub: Richtungskämpfe im Verein für Sozialpolitik. 
Wiesbaden, 1967. 

Talcott Parsons: ‘“Capitalism” in recent German literature: 
Sombart and Weber’, Parts 1 and 2, The Journal of Political Econ- 
omy, Vols. 36 and 37, 1928 and 1929; Philip Siegelman: ‘Intro- 
duction’ to Werner Sombart: Luxury and Capitalism. Ann Arbor, 
1967. 

Anthony Giddens: Politics and Sociology in the Thought of Max 
Weber. London, 1972. 

See Max Weber: General Economic History. New York, 1961. 
Ancient Judaism. Glencoe, 1952; The Religion of India. Glencoe, 
1958; The Religion of China. London, 1964 (all bracketed within 
the collection Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Religionssoziologie); cf. 
Bryan S. Turner: Weber and Islam. London, 1974. 

The Religion of India, p. 112. 

The Religion of India, p. 337. 

Anthony Giddens: ‘Marx, Weber, and the development of capit- 
alism’, Sociology, Vol. 4, 1970. 

R. K. Merton: ‘Science, technology and society in seventeenth 
century England’, Osiris, Vol. 4, 1938 (reprinted as a single vol- 
ume, New York, 1970). 

Max Weber: ‘Antikritisches Schlusswort zum “Geist des Kapi- 

Notes 127 

nı 

talismus”’, Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, Vol. 31, 
1910. See, for example, the following footnotes in the present 
work: Chapter I, footnote, 1; Chapter 2, footnotes 10, 12, 13 and 
29; Chapter 3, footnotes 1 and 3; Chapter 4, footnotes 3 and 4; 
Chapter 5, footnotes 31, 58 and 84. 

For the best survey of the debate up to the early 1940s, see 
Ephraim Fischoff: ‘The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capital- 
ism: the history of a controversy’ Social Research, Vol. 11, 1944. 
For a somewhat different classification, see Ehud Sprinzak: 
‘Weber’s thesis as an historical explanation’, History and Theory, 
Vol. 11, 1972. 

Brentano was one of the first to criticise Weber’s treatment of 
the ‘calling’. See Lujo Brentano: Die Anfänge des moderne Kapi- 
talismus. Munich, 1916; also H. M. Robertson: Aspects of the 
Rise of Economic Individualism. Cambridge, 1933. On Puritan- 
ism: Albert Hyma: Renaissance to Reformation. Grand Rapids, 
1951; Gabriel Kolko: ‘Max Weber on America: theory and evi- 
dence’, History and Theory, Vol. 1, 1960-61 There are many, 
many others: as on each of the further points noted below. A 
partial bibliography appears in S. N. Eisenstadt: The Protestant 
Ethic and Modernisation. New York, 1968; see also David Little: 
Religion, Order, and the Law. Oxford, 1970, pp. 226-37. 

Cf. Max Weber: ‘Die Protestantischen Sekten und der Geist des 
Kapitalismus’ (‘The Protestant sects and the spirit of capital- 
ism’), in Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Religionssoziologie. 

W. Sombart: The Quintessence of Capitalism. London, 1951; 
Hyma, op. cit.; A. Fanfani: Catholicism, Protestantism and Capit- 
alism. London, 1935; R. H. Tawney: Religion and the Rise of Cap- 
italism. London, 1926; Herbert Liithy: ‘Once again: Calvinism 
and capitalism’, Encounter, Vol. 22, 1964. 

Kurt Samuelsson: Religion and Economic Action. London, 1961 
pp. 137ff. 

W. Hudson: ‘The Weber thesis re-examined’, Church History, Vol. 
30, 1961; Michael Walzer: The Revolution of the Saints. London, 
1966 (pp. 306ff); and especially Samuelsson, op. cit. 

Sombart, op. cit.; H. Sée: ‘Dans quelle mesure Puritains et Juifs 
ont-ils contribué au progrés du capitalisme moderne?’, Revue 

128 Notes 

19 
20 

21 
22 

historique, Vol. 155, 1927; Tawney, op. cit.; Christopher Hill: ‘Prot- 
estantism and the rise of capitalism’, in F. J. Fisher: Essays in 
the Economic and Social History of Tudor and Stuart England. 
Cambridge, 1961. 

E.g. Karl Kautsky: Materialistische Geschichtsauffassung. 

For a recent version, see Alasdair MacIntyre : ‘A mistake about 
causality in the social sciences’, in Peter Laslett and W. G. 
Runciman: Philosophy, Politics and Society, Vol. 2, Oxford, 1962. 
(Certain of the views expressed in the article have however been 
subsequently abandoned by its author.) 

See, for instance, Little; op. cit.; Sprinzak: op. cit. 

Weber’s detailed reply to Brentano’s criticism on this point 
appears below, in footnotes 1-3, Chapter 3. 

AUTHOR’S INTRODUCTION 

1 

Stdndestaat. The term refers to the late form taken by feudal- 
ism in Europe in its transition to absolute monarchy.— 
TRANSLATOR’S NOTE. 

Here, as on some other points, | differ from our honoured 
master, Lujo Brentano (in his work to be cited later). Chiefly in 
regard to terminology, but also on questions of fact. It does not 
seem to me expedient to bring such different things as acquisi- 
tion of booty and acquisition by management of a factory 
together under the same category; still less to designate every 
tendency to the acquisition of money as the spirit of capitalism 
as against other types of acquisition. The second sacrifices all 
precision of concepts, and the first the possibility of clarifying 
the specific difference between Occidental capitalism and other 
forms. Also in Simmel’s Philosophie des Geldes money economy 
and capitalism are too closely identified, to the detriment of his 
concrete analysis. In the writings of Werner Sombart, above all 
in the second edition of his most important work, Der moderne 
Kapitalismus, the differentia specifica of Occidental capitalism— 
at least from the view-point of my problem—the rational organ- 
ization of labour, is strongly overshadowed by genetic factors 
which have been operative everywhere in the world. 

Notes 129 

3 Commenda was a form of medizval trading association, 
entered into ad hoc for carrying out one sea voyage. A producer 
or exporter of goods turned them over to another who took 
them abroad (on a ship provided sometimes by one party, 
sometimes by the other) and sold them, receiving a share in the 
profits. The expenses of the voyage were divided between 
the two in agreed proportion, while the original shipper bore 
the risk. See Weber, “Handelsgesellschaften im Mittelalter”, 
Gesammelte Aufsdtze zur Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte, 
pp. 323-8.—TRANSLATOR’S NOTE. 

4 The sea loan, used in maritime commerce in the Middle Ages, 
was “a method of insuring against the risks of the sea without 
violating the prohibitions against usury. ... When certain risky 
maritime ventures were to be undertaken, a certain sum... 
was obtained for the cargo belonging to such and such a per- 
son or capitalist. If the ship was lost, no repayment was exacted 
by the lender; if it reached port safely, the borrower paid a 
considerable premium, sometimes 50 per cent.” Henri Sée, 
Modern Capitalism, p. 189.—TRANSLATOR’S NOTE. 

5 A form of company between the partnership and the limited 
liability corporation. At least one of the participants is made 
liable without limit, while the others enjoy limitation of liability 
to the amount of their investment.—TRANSLATOR’S NOTE. 

6 Naturally the difference cannot be conceived in absolute terms. 
The politically oriented capitalism (above all tax-farming) of 
Mediterranean and Oriental antiquity, and even of China and 
India, gave rise to rational, continuous enterprises whose book- 
keeping—though known to us only in pitiful fragments— 
probably had a rational character. Furthermore, the politically 
oriented adventurers’ capitalism has been closely associated 
with rational bourgeois capitalism in the development of mod- 
ern banks, which, including the Bank of England, have for the 
most part originated in transactions of a political nature, often 
connected with war. The difference between the characters of 
Paterson, for instance—a typical promoter—and of the mem- 
bers of the directorate of the Bank who gave the keynote to its 
permanent policy, and very soon came to be known as the 

130 notes 

1 

= 

“Puritan usurers of Grocers’ Hall”, is characteristic of it. Simi- 
larly, we have the aberration of the policy of this most solid 
bank at the time of the South Sea Bubble. Thus the two natur- 
ally shade off into each other. But the difference is there. The 
great promoters and financiers have no more created the 
rational organization of labour than—again in general and with 
individual exceptions—those other typical representatives of 
financial and political capitalism, the Jews. That was done, 
typically, by quite a different set of people. 

For Weber’s discussion of the ineffectiveness of slave labour, 
especially so far as calculation is concerned, see his essay, 
“Agrarverhältnisse im Altertum”, in the volume Gesammelte 
Aufsätze zur Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte.—TRANSLATOR’S 
NOTE. 

That is, in the whole series of Aufsätze zur Religionssoziologie, 
not only in the essay here translated. See translator’s preface.— 
TRANSLATOR’ S NOTE. 

The remains of my knowledge of Hebrew are also quite 
inadequate. 

| need hardly point out that this does not apply to attempts like 
that of Karl Jasper’s (in his book Psychologie der Weltanschauun- 
gen, 1919), nor to Klages’s Charakterologie, and similar studies 
which differ from our own in their point of departure. There is 
no space here for a criticism of them. 

The only thing of this kind which Weber ever wrote is the sec- 
tion on “Religionssoziologie” in his large work Wirtschaft und 
Gesellschaft. It was left unfinished by him and does not really 
close the gap satisfactorily—TRANSLATOR’S NOTE. 

Some years ago an eminent psychiatrist expressed the same 
opinion to me. 

1 THE PROBLEM 

1 From the voluminous literature which has grown up around 

this essay | cite only the most comprehensive criticisms. (1) F. 
Rachfahl, “Kalvinismus und Kapitalismus”, Internationale 
Wochenschrift fiir Wissenschaft, Kunst und Technik (1909), Nos. 

Notes 131 

39-43. In reply, my article: “Antikritisches zum Geist des 
Kapitalismus,” Archiv fiir Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik 
(Tubingen), XX, 1910. Then Rachfahl’s reply to that: “Nochmals 
Kalvinismus und Kapitalismus”, 1910, Nos. 22-25, of 
the Internationale Wochenschrift. Finally my “Antikritisches 
Schlusswort”, Archiv, XXXI. (Brentano, in the criticism pres- 
ently to be referred to, evidently did not know of this last phase 
of the discussion, as he does not refer to it.) | have not 
incorporated anything in this edition from the somewhat 
unfruitful polemics against Rachfahl. He is an author whom | 
otherwise admire, but who has in this instance ventured into a 
field which he has not thoroughly mastered. | have only added 
a few supplementary references from my anti-critique, and have 
attempted, in new passages and footnotes, to make impossible 
any future misunderstanding. (2) W. Sombart, in his book Der 
Bourgeois (Munich and Leipzig, 1913, also translated into Eng- 
lish under the title The Quintessence of Capitalism, London, 
1915), to which | shall return in footnotes below, Finally (3) Lujo 
Brentano in Part II of the Appendix to his Munich address (in 
the Academy of Sciences, 1913) on Die Anfänge des modernen 
Kapitalismus, which was published in 1916. (Since Weber’s 
death Brentano has somewhat expanded these essays and 
incorporated them into his recent book Der wirtschaftende 
Mensch in der Geschichte —TRANSLATOR’S NoTE.) | shall also 
refer to this criticism in special footnotes in the proper places. | 
invite anyone who may be interested to convince himself by 
comparison that | have not in revision left out, changed the 
meaning of, weakened, or added materially different state- 
ments to, a single sentence of my essay which contained any 
essential point. There was no occasion to do so, and the devel- 
opment of my exposition will convince anyone who still doubts. 
The two latter writers engaged in a more bitter quarrel with 
each other than with me. Brentano’s criticism of Sombart’s 
book, Die Juden und das Wirtschaftsleben, | consider in many 
points well founded, but often very unjust, even apart from the 
fact that Brentano does not himself seem to understand the 
real essence of the problem of the Jews (which is entirely 

132 Notes 

omitted from this essay, but will be dealt with later [in a later 
section of the Religionssoziologie —TRANSLATOR’S NOTE]). 

From theologians | have received numerous valuable sug- 
gestions in connection with this study. Its reception on their 
part has been in general friendly and impersonal, in spite of 
wide differences of opinion on particular points. This is the 
more welcome to me since | should not have wondered at a 
certain antipathy to the manner in which these matters must 
necessarily be treated here. What to a theologian is valuable in 
his religion cannot play a very large part in this study. We are 
concerned with what, from a religious point of view, are often 
quite superficial and unrefined aspects of religious life, but 
which, and precisely because they were superficial and 
unrefined, have often influenced outward behaviour most 
profoundly. 

Another book which, besides containing many other things, 
is a very welcome confirmation of and supplement to this 
essay in so far as it deals with our problem, is the important 
work of E. Troeltsch, Die Soziallehren der christlichen Kirchen und 
Gruppen (Tübingen, 1912). It deals with the history of the ethics 
of Western Christianity from a very comprehensive point of 
view of its own. | here refer the reader to it for general com- 
parison instead of making repeated references to special 
points. The author is principally concerned with the doctrines 
of religion, while | am interested rather in their practical 
results. 

2 The exceptions are explained, not always, but frequently, by the 
fact that the religious leanings of the labouring force of an 
industry are naturally, in the first instance, determined by those 
of the locality in which the industry is situated, or from which 
its labour is drawn. This circumstance often alters the impres- 
sion given at first glance by some statistics of religious adher- 
ence, for instance in the Rhine provinces. Furthermore, figures 
can naturally only be conclusive if individual specialized 
occupations are carefully distinguished in them. Otherwise very 
large employers may sometimes be grouped together with 
master craftsmen who work alone, under the category of “pro- 

Notes 133 

prietors of enterprises”. Above all, the fully developed capital- 

ism of the present day, especially so far as the great unskilled 

lower strata of labour are concerned, has become independent 
of any influence which religion may have had in the past. | shall 
return to this point. 

Compare, for instance, Schell, Der Katholizismus als Prinzip des 

Fortschrittes (Wurzburg, 1897), p. 31, and v. Hertling, Das 

Prinzip des Katholizismus und die Wissenschaft (Freiburg, 1899), 

p. 58. 

4 One of my pupils has gone through what is at this time the 
most complete statistical material we possess on this subject: 
the religious statistics of Baden. See Martin Offenbacher, “Kon- 
fession und soziale Schichtung”, Eine Studie über die wirt- 
schaftliche Lage der Katholiken und Protestanten in Baden 
(Tubingen und Leipzig, 1901), Vol. IV, part v, of the Volkswirt- 
schaftliche Abhandlungen der badischen Hochschulen. The facts 
and figures which are used for illustration below are all drawn 
from this study. 

5 For instance, in 1895 in Baden there was taxable capital avail- 
able for the tax on returns from capital: 

Ww 

Per 1,000 Protestants ...... 954,000 marks 
Per 1,000 Catholics ...... 589,000 marks 

It is true that the Jews, with over four millions per 1,000, 
were far ahead of the rest. (For details see Offenbacher, op. cit., 
p. 21.) 

6 On this point compare the whole discussion in Offenbacher’s 
study. 

7 On this point also Offenbacher brings forward more detailed 
evidence for Baden in his first two chapters. 

8 The population of Baden was composed in 1895 as follows: 
Protestants, 37.0 per cent.; Catholics, 61.3 per cent.; Jewish, 1.5 
per cent. The students of schools beyond the compulsory pub- 
lic school stage were, however, divided as follows (Offenbacher, 

p. 16): 

134 Notes 

Protestant. Catholic. Jews. 

Per Cent. Per Cent. Per Cent. 
Gymnasien 43 46 9.5 
Realgymnasien 69 31 9 
Oberrealschulen 52 41 7 
Realschulen 49 40 11 
Höhere Bürgerschulen 51 37 12 

Average 48 42 10 

(In the Gymnasium the main emphasis is on the classics. In 
the Realgymnasium Greek is dropped and Latin reduced in 
favour of modern languages, mathematics and science. The 
Realschule and Oberrealschule are similar to the latter except 
that Latin is dropped entirely in favour of modern languages. 
See G. E. Bolton, The Secondary School System in Germany, New 
York, 1900.—TRANSLATOR’S NOTE.) 

The same thing may be observed in Prussia, Bavaria, 
Wiurtemberg, Alsace-Lorraine, and Hungary (see figures in 
Offenbacher, pp. 16 ff.). 

See the figures in the preceding note, which show that the 
Catholic attendance at secondary schools, which is regularly 
less than the Catholic share of the total population by a third, 
only exceeds this by a few per cent. in the case of the grammar 
schools (mainly in preparation for theological studies). With 
reference to the subsequent discussion it may further be noted 
as characteristic that in Hungary those affiliated with the 
Reformed Church exceed even the average Protestant record of 
attendance at secondary schools. (See Offenbacher, p. 19, note.) 
For the proofs see Offenbacher, p. 54, and the tables at the end 
of his study. 

Especially well illustrated by passages in the works of Sir 
William Petty, to be referred to later. 

Petty’s reference to the case of Ireland is very simply explained 
by the fact that the Protestants were only involved in the cap- 
acity of absentee landlords. If he had meant to maintain more 
he would have been wrong, as the situation of the Scotch-Irish 

14 
15 

Notes 135 

shows. The typical relationship between Protestantism and 
capitalism existed in Ireland as well as elsewhere. (On the 
Scotch-Irish see C. A. Hanna, The Scotch-Irish, two vols., 
Putnam, New York.) 

This is not, of course, to deny that the latter facts have had 
exceedingly important consequences. As | shall show later, the 
fact that many Protestant sects were small and hence homo- 
geneous minorities, as were all the strict Calvinists outside of 
Geneva and New England, even where they were in possession 
of political power, was of fundamental significance for the 
development of their whole character, including their manner 
of participation in economic life. The migration of exiles of all 
the religions of the earth, Indian, Arabian, Chinese, Syrian, 
Phoenician, Greek, Lombard, to other countries as bearers of 
the commercial lore of highly developed areas, has been of 
universal occurrence and has nothing to do with our problem. 
Brentano, in the essay to which | shall often refer, Die Anfänge 
des modern Kapitalismus, calls to witness his own family. But 
bankers of foreign extraction have existed at all times and in all 
countries as the representatives of commercial experience and 
connections. They are not peculiar to modern capitalism, and 
were looked upon with ethical mistrust by the Protestants (see 
below). The case of the Protestant families, such as the Muralts, 
Pestalozzi, etc., who migrated to Zurich from Locarno, was dif- 
ferent. They very soon became identified with a specifically 
modern (industrial) type of capitalistic development. 
Offenbacher, op. cit., p. 58. 

Unusually good observations on the characteristic peculiarities 
of the different religions in Germany and France, and the rela- 
tion of these differences to other cultural elements in the con- 
flict of nationalities in Alsace are to be found in the fine study of 
W. Wittich, “Deutsche und französische Kultur im Elsass”, 
Illustrierte Elsdssische Rundschau (1900, also published 
separately). 

This, of course, was true only when some possibility of capital- 
istic development in the area in question was present. 

On this point see, for instance, Dupin de St. André “L’ancienne 

136 Notes 

19 

20 

église réformée de Tours. Les membres de l'église”, Bull. de la 
soc. de I’hist. du Protest., 4, p. 10. Here again one might, espe- 
cially from the Catholic point of view, look upon the desire for 
emancipation from monastic or ecclesiastical control as the 
dominant motive. But against that view stands not only the 
judgment of contemporaries (including Rabelais), but also, for 
instance, the qualms of conscience of the first national synods 
of the Huguenots (for instance 1st Synod, C. partic. qu. 10 in 
Aymon, Synod. Nat., p. 10), as to whether a banker might 
become an elder of the Church; and in spite of Calvin’s own 
definite stand, the repeated discussions in the same bodies of 
the permissibility of taking interest occasioned by the ques- 
tions of ultra-scrupulous members. It is partly explained by the 
number of persons having a direct interest in the question, but 
at the same time the wish to practise usuraria pravitas without 
the necessity of confession could not have been alone decisive. 
The same, see below, is true of Holland. Let it be said explicitly 
that the prohibition of interest in the canon law will play no part 
in this investigation. 

Gothein, Wirtschaftsgeschichte des Schwarzwaldes, |, p. 67. 

In connection with this see Sombart’s brief comments (Der 
moderne Kapitalismus, first edition, p. 380). Later, under the 
influence of a study of F. Keller (Unternehmung und Mehrwert, 
Publications of the Goerres-Gesellschaft, XII), which, in spite of 
many good observations (which in this connection, however, 
are not new), falls below the standard of other recent works of 
Catholic apologetics, Sombart, in what is in these parts in my 
opinion by far the weakest of his larger works (Der Bourgeois), 
has unfortunately maintained a completely untenable thesis, to 
which | shall refer in the proper place. 

That the simple fact of a change of residence is among the 
most effective means of intensifying labour is thoroughly estab- 
lished (compare note 13 above). The same Polish girl who at 
home was not to be shaken loose from her traditional laziness 
by any chance of earning money, however tempting, seems to 
change her entire nature and become capable of unlimited 
accomplishment when she is a migratory worker in a foreign 

21 

22 

23 

24 

Notes 137 

country. The same is true of migratory Italian labourers. That 
this is by no means entirely explicable in terms of the educative 
influence of the entrance into a higher cultural environment, 
although this naturally plays a part, is shown by the fact that the 
same thing happens where the type of occupation, as in agri- 
cultural labour, is exactly the same as at home. Furthermore, 
accommodation in labour barracks, etc., may involve a degrad- 
ation to a standard of living which would never be tolerated at 
home. The simple fact of working in quite different surround- 
ings from those to which one is accustomed breaks through 
the tradition and is the educative force. It is hardly necessary to 
remark how much of American economic development is the 
result of such factors. In ancient times the similar significance 
of the Babylonian exile for the Jews is very striking, and 
the same is true of the Parsees. But for the Protestants, as 
is indicated by the undeniable difference in the economic 
characteristics of the Puritan New England colonies from Cath- 
olic Maryland, the Episcopal South, and mixed Rhode island, 
the influence of their religious belief quite evidently plays a part 
as an independent factor. Similarly in India, for instance, with 
the Jains. 

It is well known in most of its forms to be a more or less 
moderated Calvinism or Zwinglianism. 

In Hamburg, which is almost entirely Lutheran, the only fortune 
going back to the seventeenth century is that of a well-known 
Reformed family (kindly called to my attention by Professor A. 
Wahl). 

It is thus not new that the existence of this relationship is 
maintained here. Lavelye, Matthew Arnold, and others already 
perceived it. What is new, on the contrary, is the quite 
unfounded denial of it. Our task here is to explain the relation. 

Naturally this does not mean that official Pietism, like other 
religious tendencies, did not at a later date, from a patriarchal 
point of view, oppose certain progressive features of capitalistic 
development, for instance, the transition from domestic indus- 
try to the factory system. What a religion has sought after as an 
ideal, and what the actual result of its influence on the lives of 

138 Notes 

its adherents has been, must be sharply distinguished, as we 
shall often see in the course of our discussion. On the specific 
adaptation of Pietists to industrial labour, | have given 
examples from a Westphalian factory in my article, “Zur Psy- 
chophysik der gewerblichen Arbeit”, Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft 
und Sozielpolitik, XXVIII, and at various other times. 

2 THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

1 

N 

These passages represent a very brief summary of some 
aspects of Weber’s methodological views. At about the same 
time that he wrote this essay he was engaged in a thorough 
criticism and revaluation of the methods of the Social Sciences, 
the result of which was a point of view in many ways different 
from the prevailing one, especially outside of Germany. In order 
thoroughly to understand the significance of this essay in its 
wider bearings on Weber’s sociological work as a whole it is 
necessary to know what his methodological aims were. Most 
of his writings on this subject have been assembled since his 
death (in 1920) in the volume Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Wis- 
senschaftslehre. A shorter exposition of the main position is con- 
tained in the opening chapters of Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft, 
Grundriss der Sozialokonomik, |I|—TRANSLATOR’S NOTE. 

The final passage is from Necessary Hints to Those That would 
Be Rich (written 1736, Works, Sparks edition, Il, p. 80), the rest 
from Advice to a Young Tradesman (written 1748, Sparks edition, 
Il, pp. 87 ff.). The italics in the text are Franklin’s. 

Der Amerikamiide (Frankfurt, 1835), well known to be an 
imaginative paraphrase of Lenau’s impressions of America. As 
a work of art the book would to-day be somewhat difficult to 
enjoy, but it is incomparable as a document of the (now long 
since blurred-over) differences between the German and the 
American outlook, one may even say of the type of spiritual life 
which, in spite of everything, has remained common to all 
Germans, Catholic and Protestant alike, since the German mys- 
ticism of the Middle Ages, as against the Puritan capitalistic 
valuation of action. 

Notes 139 

4 Sombart has used this quotation as a motto for his section 
dealing with the genesis of capitalism (Der moderne Kapitalis- 
mus, first edition, |, p. 193. See also p. 390). 

5 Which quite obviously does not mean either that Jacob Fugger 
was a morally indifferent or an irreligious man, or that Ben- 
jamin Franklin’s ethic is completely covered by the above 
quotations. It scarcely required Brentano’s quotations (Die 
Anfänge des modernen Kapitalismus, pp. 150 ff.) to protect this 
well-known philanthropist from the misunderstanding which 
Brentano seems to attribute to me. The problem is just the 
reverse: how could such a philanthropist come to write 
these particular sentences (the especially charactenstic form 
of which Brentano has neglected to reproduce) in the manner 
of a moralist? 

6 This is the basis of our difference from Sombart in stating the 
problem. Its very considerable practical significance will 
become clear later. In anticipation, however, let it be remarked 
that Sombart has by no means neglected this ethical aspect of 
the capitalistic entrepreneur. But in his view of the problem it 
appears as a result of capitalism, whereas for our purposes we 
must assume the opposite as an hypothesis. A final position 
can only be taken up at the end of the investigation. For Som- 
bart’s view see op. cit., pp. 357, 380, etc. His reasoning here 
connects with the brilliant analysis given in Simmel’s Philoso- 
phie des Geldes (final chapter). Of the polemics which he has 
brought forward against me in his Bourgeois | shall come to 
speak later. At this point any thorough discussion must be 
postponed. 

7 “l grew convinced that truth, sincerity, and integrity in dealings 
between man and man were of the utmost importance to the 
felicity of life; and | formed written resolutions, which still 
remain in my journal book to practise them ever while | lived. 
Revelation had indeed no weight with me as such; but | enter- 
tained an opinion that, though certain actions might not be bad 
because they were forbidden by it, or good because it com- 
manded them, yet probably these actions might be forbidden 
because they were bad for us, or commanded because they 

140 notes 

were beneficial to us in their own nature, all the circumstances 
of things considered.” Autobiography (ed. F. W. Pine, Henry 
Holt, New York, 1916), p. 112. 

8 “I therefore put myself as much as | could out of sight 
and started it’—that is the project of a library which he 
had initiated—“as a scheme of a number of friends, who had 
requested me to go about and propose it to such as they 
thought lovers of reading. In this way my affair went on 
smoothly, and | ever after practised it on such occasions; and 
from my frequent successes, can heartily recommend it. The 
present little sacrifice of your vanity will afterwards be amply 
repaid. If it remains awhile uncertain to whom the merit 
belongs, someone more vain than yourself will be encouraged 
to claim it, and then even envy will be disposed to do you 
justice by plucking those assumed feathers and restoring them 
to their right owner.” Autobiography, p. 140. 

9 Brentano (op. cit., pp. 125, 127, note 1) takes this remark as an 
occasion to criticize the later discussion of “that rationalization 
and discipline” to which worldly asceticism’ has subjected 
men. That, he says, is a rationalization toward an irrational 
mode of life. He is, in fact, quite correct. A thing is never 
irrational in itself, but only from a particular rational point of 
view. For the unbeliever every religious way of life is irrational, 
for the hedonist every ascetic standard, no matter whether, 
measured with respect to its particular basic values, that 
opposing asceticism is a rationalization. If this essay makes 
any contribution at all, may it be to bring out the complexity of 
the only superficially simple concept of the rational. 

' This seemingly paradoxical term has been the best translation | could find 
for Weber’s innerweltliche Askese, which means asceticism practised within 
the world as contrasted with ausserweltliche Askese, which withdraws from 
the world (for instance into a monastery). Their precise meaning will 
appear in the course of Weber’s discussion. It is one of the prime points of 
his essay that asceticism does not need to flee from the world to be ascetic. 
| shall consistently employ the terms worldly and otherworldly to denote 
the contrast between the two kinds of asceticism.—T RANSLATOR’S NOTE. 

Notes 141 

10 In reply to Brentano’s (Die Anfänge des modernen Kapitalismus, 
pp. 150 ff.) long and somewhat inaccurate apologia for Franklin, 
whose ethical qualities | am supposed to have misunderstood, 
| refer only to this statement, which should, in my opinion, have 
been sufficient to make that apologia superfluous. 

11 The two terms profession and calling | have used in translation 
of the German Beruf, whichever seemed best to fit the particular 
context. Vocation does not carry the ethical connotation in 
which Weber is interested. It is especially to be remembered 
that profession in this sense is not contrasted with business, 
but it refers to a particular attitude toward one’s occupation, 
no matter what that occupation may be. This should become 
abundantly clear from the whole of Weber’s argument.— 
TRANSLATOR’S NOTE. 

12 | make use of this opportunity to insert a few anti-critical 
remarks in advance of the main argument. Sombart (Bourgeois) 
makes the untenable statement that this ethic of Franklin is a 
word-for-word repetition of some writings of that great and 
versatile genius of the Renaissance, Leon Battista Alberti, who 
besides theoretical treatises on Mathematics, Sculpture, Paint- 
ing, Architecture, and Love (he was personally a woman-hater), 
wrote a work in four books on household management (Della 
Famiglia). (Unfortunately, | have not at the time of writing been 
able to procure the edition of Mancini, but only the older one of 
Bonucci.) The passage from Franklin is printed above word for 
word. Where then are corresponding passages to be found in 
Alberti’s work, especially the maxim “time is money”, which 
stands at the head, and the exhortations which follow it? The 
only passage which, so far as | know, bears the slightest resem- 
blance to it is found towards the end of the first book of Della 
Famiglia (ed. Bonucci, Il, p. 353), where Alberti speaks in very 
general terms of money as the nervus rerum of the household, 
which must hence be handled with special care, just as Cato 
spoke in De Re Rustica. To treat Alberti, who was very proud of 
his descent from one of the most distinguished cavalier fam- 
ilies of Florence (Nobilissimi Cavalieri, op. cit., pp. 213, 228, 247, 
etc.), as a man of mongrel blood who was filled with envy for 

142 notes 

the noble families because his illegitimate birth, which was not 
in the least socially disqualifying, excluded him as a bourgeois 
from association with the nobility, is quite incorrect. It is true 
that the recommendation of large enterprises as alone worthy 
of a nobile è onesta famiglia and a libero è nobile animo, and as 
costing less labour is characteristic of Alberti (p. 209; compare 
Del governo della Famiglia, IV, p. 55, as well as p. 116 in the 
edition for the Pandolfini). Hence the best thing is a putting-out 
business for wool and silk. Also an ordered and painstaking 
regulation of his household, i.e. the limiting of expenditure to 
income. This is the santa masserizia, which is thus primarily a 
principle of maintenance, a given standard of life, and not of 
acquisition (as no one should have understood better than 
Sombart). Similarly, in the discussion of the nature of money, 
his concern is with the management of consumption funds 
(money or possessioni), not with that of capital; all that is clear 
from the expression of it which is put into the mouth of Gian- 
ozzo. He recommends, as protection against the uncertainty of 
fortuna, early habituation to continuous activity, which is also 
(pp. 73-4) alone healthy in the long run, in cose magnifiche é 
ample, and avoidance of laziness, which always endangers the 
maintenance of one’s position in the world. Hence a careful 
study of a suitable trade in case of a change of fortune, but 
every opera mercenaria is unsuitable (op. cit., |, p. 209). His idea 
of tranquillita dell’ animo and his strong tendency toward the 
Epicurean Ad@e Biwoac (vivere a sé stesso, p. 262); especially 
his dislike of any office (p. 258) as a source of unrest, of making 
enemies, and of becoming involved in dishonourable dealings; 
the ideal of life in a country villa; his nourishment of vanity 
through the thought of his ancestors; and his treatment of the 
honour of the family (which on that account should keep its 
fortune together in the Florentine manner and not divide it up) 
as a decisive standard and ideal—all these things would in the 
eyes of every Puritan have been sinful idolatry of the flesh, and 
in those of Benjamin Franklin the expression of incompre- 
hensible aristocratic nonsense. Note, further, the very high 
opinion of literary things (for the industria is applied principally 

Notes 143 

to literary and scientific work), which is really most worthy of a 
man’s efforts. And the expression of the masserizia, in the sense 
of “rational conduct of the household” as the means of living 
independently of others and avoiding destitution, is in general 
put only in the mouth of the illiterate Gianozzo as of equal 
value. Thus the origin of this concept, which comes (see below) 
from monastic ethics, is traced back to an old priest (p. 249). 
Now compare all this with the ethic and manner of life of 
Benjamin Franklin, and especially of his Puritan ancestors; the 
works of the Renaissance littérateur addressing himself to 
the humanistic aristocracy, with Franklin’s works addressed to 
the masses of the lower middle class (he especially mentions 
clerks) and with the tracts and sermons of the Puritans, in 
order to comprehend the depth of the difference. The economic 
rationalism of Alberti, everywhere supported by references to 
ancient authors, is most clearly related to the treatment of eco- 
nomic problems in the works of Xenophon (whom he did not 
know), of Cato, Varro, and Columella (all of whom he quotes), 
except that especially in Cato and Varro, acquisition as such 
stands in the foreground in a different way from that to be 
found in Alberti. Furthermore, the very occasional comments of 
Alberti on the use of the fattori, their division of labour and 
discipline, on the unreliability of the peasants, etc., really sound 
as if Cato’s homely wisdom were taken from the field of the 
ancient slave-using household and applied to that of free 
labour in domestic industry and the metayer system. When 
Sombart (whose reference to the Stoic ethic is quite mislead- 
ing) sees economic rationalism as “developed to its farthest 
conclusions” as early as Cato, he is, with a correct interpret- 
ation, not entirely wrong. It is possible to unite the diligens pater 
familias of the Romans with the ideal of the massajo of Alberti 
under the same category. It is above all characteristic for Cato 
that a landed estate is valued and judged as an object for the 
investment of consumption funds. The concept of industria, on 
the other hand, is differently coloured on account of Christian 
influence. And there is just the difference. In the conception of 
industria, which comes from monastic asceticism and which 

144 notes 

was developed by monastic writers, lies the seed of an ethos 
which was fully developed later in the Protestant worldly asceti- 
cism. Hence, as we shall often point out, the relationship of the 
two, which, however, is less close to the official Church doctrine 
of St. Thomas than to the Florentine and Siennese mendicant- 
moralists. In Cato and also in Alberti’s own writings this ethos is 
lacking; for both it is a matter of worldly wisdom, not of ethic. 
In Franklin there is also a utilitarian strain. But the ethical qual- 
ity of the sermon to young business men is impossible to mis- 
take, and that is the characteristic thing. A lack of care in the 
handling of money means to him that one so to speak murders 
capital embryos, and hence it is an ethical defect. 

An inner relationship of the two (Alberti and Franklin) exists 
in fact only in so far as Alberti, whom Sombart calls pious, but 
who actually, although he took the sacraments and held a 
Roman benefice, like so many humanists, did not himself 
(except for two quite colourless passages) in any way make use 
of religious motives as a justification of the manner of life he 
recommended, had not yet, Franklin on the other hand no 
longer, related his recommendation of economy to religious 
conceptions. Utilitarianism, in Alberti’s preference for wool and 
silk manufacture, also the mercantilist social utilitarianism 
“that many people should be given employment” (see Alberti, 
op. cit., p. 292), is in this field at least formally the sole justifi- 
cation for the one as for the other. Alberti’s discussions of 
this subject form an excellent example of the sort of econ- 
omic rationalism which really existed as a reflection of eco- 
nomic conditions, in the work of authors interested purely in 
“the thing for its own sake” everywhere and at all times; in the 
Chinese classicism and in Greece and Rome no less than in 
the Renaissance and the age of the Enlightenment. There is no 
doubt that just as in ancient times with Cato, Varro, and Colu- 
mella, also here with Alberti and others of the same type, espe- 
cially in the doctrine of industria, a sort of economic rationality 
is highly developed. But how can anyone believe that such a 
literary theory could develop into a revolutionary force at all 
comparable to the way in which a religious belief was able to set 

Notes 145 

the sanctions of salvation and damnation on the fulfillment of a 
particular (in this case methodically rationalized) manner of 
life? What, as compared with it, a really religiously oriented 
rationalization of conduct looks like, may be seen, outside of 
the Puritans of all denominations, in the cases of the Jains, the 
Jews, certain ascetic sects of the Middle Ages, the Bohemian 
Brothers (an offshoot of the Hussite movement), the Skoptsi 
and Stundists in Russia, and numerous monastic orders, how- 
ever much all these may differ from each other. 

The essential point of the difference is (to anticipate) that an 
ethic based on religion places certain psychological sanctions 
(not of an economic character) on the maintenance of the atti- 
tude prescribed by it, sanctions which, so long as the religious 
belief remains alive, are highly effective, and which mere worldly 
wisdom like that of Alberti does not have at its disposal. Only in 
so far as these sanctions work, and, above all, in the direction in 
which they work, which is often very different from the doctrine 
of the theologians, does such an ethic gain an independent 
influence on the conduct of life and thus on the economic order. 
This is, to speak frankly, the point of this whole essay, which | 
had not expected to find so completely overlooked. 

Later on | shall come to speak of the theological moralists of 
the late Middle Ages, who were relatively friendly to capital 
(especially Anthony of Florence and Bernhard of Siena), and 
whom Sombart has also seriously misinterpreted. In any case 
Alberti did not belong to that group. Only the concept of indus- 
tria did he take from monastic lines of thought, no matter 
through what intermediate links. Alberti, Pandolfini, and their 
kind are representatives of that attitude which, in spite of all its 
outward obedience, was inwardly already emancipated from 
the tradition of the Church. With all its resemblance to the 
current Christian ethic, it was to a large extent of the antique 
pagan character, which Brentano thinks | have ignored in its 
significance for the development of modern economic thought 
(and also modern economic policy). That | do not deal with its 
influence here is quite true. It would be out of place in a study 
of the Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism. But, as will 

146 Notes 

appear in a different connection, far from denying its signifi- 
cance, | have been and am for good reasons of the opinion that 
its sphere and direction of influence were entirely different from 
those of the Protestant ethic (of which the spiritual ancestry, of 
no small practical importance, lies in the sects and in the ethics 
of Wyclif and Hus). It was not the mode of life of the rising 
bourgeoisie which was influenced by this other attitude, but the 
policy of statesmen and princes; and these two partly, but by no 
means always, convergent lines of development should for 
purposes of analysis be kept perfectly distinct. So far as Frank- 
lin is concerned, his tracts of advice to business men, at pres- 
ent used for school reading in America, belong in fact to a 
category of works which have influenced practical life, far more 
than Alberti’s large book, which hardly became known outside 
of learned circles. But | have expressly denoted him as a man 
who stood beyond the direct influence of the Puritan view 
of life, which had paled considerably in the meantime, just 
as the whole English enlightenment, the relations of which to 
Puritanism have often been set forth. 

Unfortunately Brentano (op. cit.) has thrown every kind of 
struggle for gain, whether peaceful or warlike, into one pot, and 
has then set up as the specific criterion of capitalistic (as con- 
trasted, for instance, with feudal) profit-seeking, its acquisitive- 
ness of money (instead of land). Any further differentiation, 
which alone could lead to a clear conception, he has not only 
refused to make, but has made against the concept of the spirit 
of (modern) capitalism which we have formed for our pur- 
poses, the (to me) incomprehensible objection that it already 
includes in its assumptions what is supposed to be proved. 
Compare the, in every respect, excellent observations of Som- 
bart, Die deutsche Volkswirtschaft im 19ten Jahrhundert, p. 123. In 
general | do not need specially to point out, although the fol- 
lowing studies go back in their most important points of view 
to much older work, how much they owe in their development 
to the mere existence of Sombart’s important works, with their 
pointed formulations and this even, perhaps especially, where 
they take a different road. Even those who feel themselves con- 

Notes 147 

tinually and decisively disagreeing with Sombart’s views, and 
who reject many of his theses, have the duty to do so only after 
a thorough study of his work. 

15 Of course we cannot here enter into the question of where 
these limits lie, nor can we evaluate the familiar theory of the 
relation between high wages and the high productivity of labour 
which was first suggested by Brassey, formulated and main- 
tained theoretically by Brentano, and both historically and the- 
oretically by Schulze-Gaevernitz. The discussion was again 
opened by Hasbach’s penetrating studies (Schmollers Jahrbuch, 
1903, pp. 385-91 and 417 ff.), and is not yet finally settled. For 
us it is here sufficient to assent to the fact which is not, and 
cannot be, doubted by anyone, that low wages and high profits, 
low wages and favourable opportunities for industrial devel- 
opment, are at least not simply identical, that generally speak- 
ing training for capitalistic culture, and with it the possibility of 
capitalism as an economic system, are not brought about sim- 
ply through mechanical financial operations. All examples are 
purely illustrative. 

16 It must be remembered that this was written twenty-five years 
ago, when the above statement was by no means the common- 
place that it is now, even among economists, to say nothing of 
business men.—TRANSLATOR’S NOTE. 

17 The establishment even of capitalistic industries has hence 
often not been possible without large migratory movements 
from areas of older culture. However correct Sombart’s 
remarks on the difference between the personal skill and trade 
secrets of the handicraftsman and the scientific, objective 
modern technique may be, at the time of the rise of capitalism 
the difference hardly existed. In fact the, so to speak, ethical 
qualities of the capitalistic workman (and to a certain extent 
also of the entrepreneur) often had a higher scarcity value than 
the skill of the craftsman, crystallized in traditions hundreds of 
years old. And even present-day industry is not yet by any 
means entirely independent in its choice of location of such 
qualities of the population, acquired by long-standing tradi- 
tion and education in intensive labour. It is congenial to the 

148 Notes 

20 
21 
22 

23 

scientific prejudices of to-day, when such a dependence is 
observed to ascribe it to congenital racial qualities rather than 
to tradition and education, in my opinion with very doubtful 
validity. 

See my “Zur Psychophysik der gewerblichen Arbeit”, Archiv fiir 
Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, XXVIII. 

The foregoing observations might be misunderstood. The ten- 
dency of a well-known type of business man to use the belief 
that “religion must be maintained for the people” for his own 
purpose, and the earlier not uncommon willingness of large 
numbers, especially of the Lutheran clergy, from a general sym- 
pathy with authority, to offer themselves as black police when 
they wished to brand the strike as sin and trade unions as 
furtherers of cupidity, all these are things with which our pres- 
ent problem has nothing to do. The factors discussed in the 
text do not concern occasional but very common facts, which, 
as we Shall see, continually recur in a typical manner. 

Der moderne Kapitalismus, first edition, |, p. 62. 

Ibid., p. 195. 

Naturally that of the modern rational enterprise peculiar to the 
Occident, not of the sort of capitalism spread over the world for 
three thousand years, from China, India, Babylon, Greece, 
Rome, Florence, to the present, carried on by usurers, military 
contractors, traders in offices, tax-farmers, large merchants, 
and financial magnates. See the Introduction. 

The assumption is thus by no means justified a priori, that is all 
| wish to bring out here, that on the one hand the technique of 
the capitalistic enterprise, and on the other the spirit of profes- 
sional work which gives to capitalism its expansive energy, 
must have had their original roots in the same social classes. 
Similarly with the social relationships of religious beliefs. Cal- 
vinism was historically one of the agents of education in the 
spirit of capitalism. But in the Netherlands, the large moneyed 
interests were, for reasons which will be discussed later, not 
predominately adherents of strict Calvinism, but Arminians. 
The rising middle and small bourgeoisie, from which entre- 
preneurs were principally recruited, were for the most part here 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

Notes 149 

and elsewhere typical representatives both of capitalistic ethics 
and of Calvinistic religion. But that fits in very well with our 
present thesis: there were at all times large bankers and mer- 
chants. But a rational capitalistic organization of industrial 
labour was never known until the transition from the Middle 
Ages to modern times took place. 

On this point see the good Zurich dissertation of J. Maliniak 
(1913). 

The following picture has been put together as an ideal type 
from conditions found in different industrial branches and at 
different places. For the purposes of illustration which it here 
serves, it is of course of no consequence that the process has 
not in any one of the examples we have in mind taken place in 
precisely the manner we have described. 

For this reason, among others, it is not by chance that this first 
period of incipient (economic) rationalism in German industry 
was accompanied by certain other phenomena, for instance the 
catastrophic degradation of taste in the style of articles of 
everyday use. 

This is not to be understood as a claim that changes in the 
supply of the precious metals are of no economic importance. 

This is only meant to refer to the type of entrepreneur (business 
man) whom we are making the object of our study, not any 
empirical average type. On the concept of the ideal type see my 
discussion in the Archiv fiir Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, 
XIX, No. 1. (Republished since Weber's death in the Gesam- 
melte Aufsdtze zur Wissenschaftslehre. The concept was first 
thoroughly developed by Weber himself in these essays, and is 
likely to be unfamiliar to non-German readers. It is one of the 
most important aspects of Weber’s methodological work, 
referred to in a note above—TRANSLATOR’S NOTE.) 

This is perhaps the most appropriate place to make a few 
remarks concerning the essay of F. Keller, already referred to 
(volume 12 of the publications of the Gérres-Gesellschaft), and 
Sombart’s observations (Der Bourgeois) in following it up, so 
far as they are relevant in the present context. That an author 
should criticize a study in which the canonical prohibition 

150 notes 

of interest (except in one incidental remark which has no 
connection with the general argument) is not even mentioned, 
on the assumption that this prohibition of interest, which has a 
parallel in almost every religious ethic in the world, is taken to 
be the decisive criterion of the difference between the Catholic 
and Protestant ethics, is almost inconceivable. One should 
really only criticize things which one has read, or the argument 
of which, if read, one has not already forgotten. The campaign 
against usuraria pravitas runs through both the Huguenot and 
the Dutch Church history of the sixteenth century; Lombards, 
i.e. bankers, were by virtue of that fact alone often excluded 
from communion (see Chap. 1, note 17). The more liberal atti- 
tude of Calvin (which did not, however, prevent the inclusion of 
regulations against usury in the first plan of the ordinances) did 
not gain a definite victory until Salmasius. Hence the difference 
did not lie at this point; quite the contrary. But still worse are 
the author’s own arguments on this point. Compared to the 
works of Funck and other Catholic scholars (which he has not, 
in my opinion, taken as fully into consideration as they 
deserve), and the investigations of Endemann, which, however 
obsolete in certain points to-day, are still fundamental, they 
make a painful impression of superficiality. To be sure, Keller 
has abstained from such excesses as the remarks of Sombart 
(Der Bourgeois, p. 321) that one noticed how the “pious gentle- 
men” (Bernard of Siena and Anthony of Florence) “wished to 
excite the spirit of enterprise by every possible means”, that is, 
since they, just like nearly everyone else concerned with the 
prohibition of interest, interpreted it in such a way as to exempt 
what we should call the productive investment of capital. That 
Sombart, on the one hand, places the Romans among the 
heroic peoples, and on the other, what is for his work as a whole 
an impossible contradiction, considers economic rationalism 
to have been developed to its final consequences in Cato 
(p. 267), may be mentioned by the way as a symptom that this 
is a book with a thesis in the worst sense. 

He has also completely misrepresented the significance of 
the prohibition of interest. This cannot be set forth here in 

Notes 151 

detail. At one time it was often exaggerated, then strongly 
underestimated, and now, in an era which produces Catholic 
millionaires as well as Protestant, has been turned upside 
down for apologetic purposes. As is well known, it was not, in 
spite of Biblical authority, abolished until the last century by 
order of the Congregatio S. Officii, and then only temporum 
ratione habita and indirectly, namely, by forbidding confessors 
to worry their charges by questions about usuraria pravitas, even 
though no claim to obedience was given up in case it should be 
restored. Anyone who has made a thorough study of the 
extremely complicated history of the doctrine cannot claim, 
considering the endless controversies over, for instance, the 
justification of the purchase of bonds, the discounting of notes 
and various other contracts (and above all considering the 
order of the Congregatio S. Officii, mentioned above, concerning 
a municipal loan), that the prohibition of interest was only 
intended to apply to emergency loans, nor that it had the inten- 
tion of preserving capital, or that it was even an aid to capital- 
istic enterprise (p. 25). The truth is that the Church came to 
reconsider the prohibition of interest comparatively late. At the 
time when this happened the forms of purely business invest- 
ment were not loans at fixed interest rate, but the fænus nauti- 
cum, commenda, societas maris, and the dare ad proficuum de 
mari (a loan in which the shares of gain and loss were adjusted 
according to degrees of risk), and were, considering the char- 
acter of the return on loans to productive enterprise, necessar- 
ily of that sort. These were not (or only according to a few 
rigorous canonists) held to fall under the ban, but when 
investment at a definite rate of interest and discounting became 
possible and customary, the first sort of loans also encountered 
very troublesome difficulties from the prohibition, which led to 
various drastic measures of the merchant guilds (black lists). 
But the treatment of usury on the part of the canonists was 
generally purely legal and formal, and was certainly free from any 
such tendency to protect capital as Keller ascribes to it. Finally, in 
so far as any attitude towards capitalism as such can be ascer- 
tained, the decisive factors were: on the one hand, a traditional, 

152 Notes 

mostly inarticulate hostility towards the growing power of cap- 
ital which was impersonal, and hence not readily amenable to 
ethical control (as it is still reflected in Luther's pronounce- 
ments about the Fuggers and about the banking business); on 
the other hand, the necessity of accommodation to practical 
needs. But we cannot discuss this, for, as has been said, the 
prohibition of usury and its fate can have at most a symptomatic 
significance for us, and that only to a limited degree. 

The economic ethic of the Scotists, and especially of certain 
mendicant theologians of the fourteenth century, above all 
Bernhard of Siena and Anthony of Florence, that is monks with 
a specifically rational type of asceticism, undoubtedly deserves 
a separate treatment, and cannot be disposed of incidentally in 
our discussion. Otherwise | should be forced here, in reply to 
criticism, to anticipate what | have to say in my discussion of 
the economic ethics of Catholicism in its positive relations to 
capitalism. These authors attempt, and in that anticipate some 
of the Jesuits, to present the profit of the merchant as a reward 
for his industria, and thus ethically to justify it. (Of course, even 
Keller cannot claim more.) 

The concept and the approval of industria come, of course, 
in the last analysis from monastic asceticism, probably also 
from the idea of masserizia, which Alberti, as he himself says 
through the mouth of Gianozzo, takes over from clerical 
sources. We shall later speak more fully of the sense in which 
the monastic ethics is a forerunner of the worldly ascetic 
denominations of Protestantism. In Greece, among the Cynics, 
as shown by late-Hellenic tombstone inscriptions, and, with an 
entirely different background, in Egypt, there were suggestions 
of similar ideas. But what is for us the most important thing is 
entirely lacking both here and in the case of Alberti. As we shall 
see later, the characteristic Protestant conception of the proof 
of one’s own salvation, the certitudo salutis in a calling, provided 
the psychological sanctions which this religious belief put 
behind the industria. But that Catholicism could not supply, 
because its means to salvation were different. In effect these 
authors are concerned with an ethical doctrine, not with 

30 

31 

Notes 153 

motives to practical action, dependent on the desire for salva- 
tion. Furthermore, they are, as is very easy to see, concerned 
with concessions to practical necessity, not, as was worldly 
asceticism, with deductions from fundamental religious 
postulates. (Incidentally, Anthony and Bernhard have long ago 
been better dealt with than by Keller.) And even these conces- 
sions have remained an object of controversy down to the 
present. Nevertheless the significance of these monastic 
ethical conceptions as symptoms is by no means small. 

But the real roots of the religious ethics which led the way to 
the modern conception of a calling lay in the sects and the 
heterodox movements, above all in Wyclif; although Brodnitz 
(Englische Wirtschaftsgeschichte), who thinks his influence was 
so great that Puritanism found nothing left for it to do, greatly 
overestimates his significance. All that cannot be gone into 
here. For here we can only discuss incidentally whether and to 
what extent the Christian ethic of the Middle Ages had in fact 
already prepared the way for the spirit of capitalism. 

The words pndév arreAmiCovres (Luke vi. 35) and the translation 
of the Vulgate, nihil inde sperantes, are thought (according to A. 
Merx) to be a corruption of undéva arreAtriCovres (or meminem 
desperantes), and thus to command the granting of loans to 
all brothers, including the poor, without saying anything at 
all about interest. The passage Deo placere vix potest is 
now thought to be of Arian origin (which, if true, makes no 
difference to our contentions). 

How a compromise with the prohibition of usury was achieved 
is shown, for example, in Book 1, chapter 65, of the statutes of 
the Arte di Calimala (at present | have only the Italian edition in 
Emiliani-Guidici, Stor. dei Com. Ital., IIl, p. 246), “Procurino i 
consoli con quelli frate, che parra loro, che perdono si faccia e 
come fare si possa il meglio per l'amore di ciascuno, del dono, 
merito o guiderdono, ovvero interesse per l’anno presente e 
secondo che altra volta fatto fue.” It is thus a way for the guild 
to secure exemption for its members on account of their official 
positions, without defiance of authority. The suggestions 
immediately following, as well as the immediately preceding 

154 notes 

idea to book all interest and profits as gifts, are very character- 
istic of the amoral attitude towards profits on capital. To the 
present stock exchange black list against brokers who hold 
back the difference between top price and actual selling price, 
often corresponded the outcry against those who pleaded 
before the ecclesiastical court with the exceptio usurarice 
pravitatis. 

3 LUTHER’S CONCEPTION OF THE CALLING 

1 Of the ancient languages only Hebrew has any similar concept. 
Most of all in the word TIN 71). It is used for sacerdotal func- 
tions (Exod, xxxv. 21; Neh. xi. 22; 1 Chron. ix. 13; xxiii. 4; xxvi. 30), 
for business in the service of the king (especially 1 Sam. viii. 16; 
1 Chron. iv. 23; xxix. 26), for the service of a royal official (Esther 
iii. 9; ix. 3), of a superintendant of labour (2 Kings xii. 12), of a 
slave (Gen. xxxix. 11), of labour in the fields (1 Chron. xxvii. 26), 
of craftsmen (Exod. xxxi. 5; xxxv. 21; 1 Kings vii. 14), for traders 
(Psa. cvii. 23), and for worldly activity of any kind in the pas- 
sage, Sirach xi. 20, to be discussed later. The word is derived 
from the root IN”, to send, thus meaning originally a task. That 
it originated in the ideas current in Solomon’s bureaucratic 
kingdom of serfs (Fronstaat), built up as it was according to the 
Egyptian model, seems evident from the above references. In 
meaning, however, as | learn from A. Merx, this root concept 
had become lost even in antiquity. The word came to be used 
for any sort of labour, and in fact became fully as colourless as 
the German Beruf, with which it shared the fate of being used 
primarily for mental and not manual functions. The expression 
(PTT), assignment, task, lesson, which also occurs in Sirach xi. 
20, and is translated in the Septuagint with dia@jKn, is also 
derived from the terminology of the servile bureaucratic regime 
of the time, as is 01" DT (Exod. v. 13, cf. Exod. v. 14), where 
the Septuagint also uses Oia@/Kn for task. In Sirach xliii. 10 it is 
rendered in the Septuagint with kpíua. In Sirach xi. 20 it is 
evidently used to signify the fulfillment of God’s command- 
ments, being thus related to our calling. On this passage in 

Notes 155 

Jesus Sirach reference may here be made to Smend’s well- 
known book on Jesus Sirach, and for the words dia@rjKn, &pyov, 
Tr6voc, to his Index zur Weisheit des Jesus Sirach (Berlin, 1907). 
As is well known, the Hebrew text of the Book of Sirach was 
lost, but has been rediscovered by Schechter, and in part sup- 
plemented by quotations from the Talmud. Luther did not pos- 
sess it, and these two Hebrew concepts could not have had any 
influence on his use of language. (See below on Prov. xxii. 29.) 

In Greek there is no term corresponding in ethical connota- 
tion to the German or English words at all. Where Luther, quite 
in the spirit of the modern usage (see below), translates Jesus 
Sirach xi. 20 and 21, bleibe in deinem Beruf, the Septuagint has 
at one point &pyov, at the other, which however seems to be an 
entirely corrupt passage, rróvoç (the Hebrew original speaks 
of the shining of divine help!). Otherwise in antiquity ra 
TpoorjKovro is used in the general sense of duties. In the works 
of the Stoics káuartoç occasionally carries similar connotations, 
though its linguistic source is indifferent (called to my attention 
by A. Dieterich). All other expressions (such as rdéi¢ etc.) have 
no ethical implications. 

In Latin what we translate as calling, a man’s sustained activ- 
ity under the division of labour, which is thus (normally) his 
source of income and in the long run the economic basis of his 
existence, is, aside from the colourless opus, expressed with an 
ethical content, at least similar to that of the German word, 
either by officium (from opificium, which was originally ethically 
colourless, but later, as especially in Seneca de benef, IV, p. 18, 
came to mean Beruf); or by munus, derived from the compul- 
sory obligations of the old civic community; or finally by profes- 
sio. This last word was also characteristically used in this sense 
for public obligations, probably being derived from the old tax 
declarations of the citizens. But later it came to be applied in 
the special modern sense of the liberal professions (as in pro- 
fessio bene dicendi), and in this narrower meaning had a signifi- 
cance in every way similar to the German Beruf, even in the 
more spiritual sense of the word, as when Cicero says of some- 
one “non intelligit quid profiteatur”, in the sense of “he does 

156 Notes 

not know his real profession”. The only difference is that it is, of 
course, definitely secular without any religious connotation. 
That is even more true of ars, which in Imperial times was used 
for handicraft. The Vulgate translates the above passages from 
Jesus Sirach, at one point with opus, the other (verse 21) with 
locus, which in this case means something like social station. 
The addition of mandaturam tuorum comes from the ascetic 
Jerome, as Brentano quite rightly remarks, without, however, 
here or elsewhere, calling attention to the fact that this was 
characteristic of precisely the ascetic use of the term, before the 
Reformation in an otherworldly, afterwards in a worldly, sense. 
It is furthermore uncertain from what text Jerome’s translation 
was made. An influence of the old liturgical meaning of 
mas does not seem to be impossible. 

In the Romance languages only the Spanish vocacion in the 
sense of an inner call to something, from the analogy of a 
clerical office, has a connotation partly corresponding to that of 
the German word, but it is never used to mean calling in the 
external sense. In the Romance Bible translations the Spanish 
vocacion, the Italian vocazione and chiamamento, which other- 
wise have a meaning partly corresponding to the Lutheran and 
Calvinistic usage to be discussed presently, are used only to 
translate the KAfjoic; of the New Testament, the call of the 
Gospel to eternal salvation, which in the Vulgate is vocatio. 
Strange to say, Brentano, op. cit., maintains that this fact, which 
| have myself adduced to defend my view, is evidenced for the 
existence of the concept of the calling in the sense which it had 
later, before the Reformation. But it is nothing of the kind. 
kAfjoig had to he translated by vocatio. But where and when in 
the Middle Ages was it used in our sense? The fact of this 
translation, and in spite of it, the lack of any application of the 
word to worldly callings is what is decisive. Chiamamento is 
used in this manner along with vocazione in the Italian Bible 
translation of the fifteenth century, which is printed in the 
Collezione di opere inedite e rare (Bologna, 1887), while the mod- 
ern Italian translations use the latter alone. On the other hand, 
the words used in the Romance languages for calling in the 

Notes 157 

external worldly sense of regular acquisitive activity carry, as 
appears from all the dictionaries and from a report of my friend 
Professor Baist (of Freiburg), no religious connotation what- 
ever. This is so no matter whether they are derived from minis- 
terium or officium, which originally had a certain religious col- 
ouring, or from ars, professio, and implicare (impeigo), from 
which it has been entirely absent from the beginning. The pas- 
sages in Jesus Sirach mentioned above, where Luther used 
Beruf, are translated: in French, v. 20, office; v. 21, labeur (Calvin- 
istic translation); Spanish, v. 20, obra; v. 21, lugar (following the 
Vulgate); recent translations, posto (Protestant). The Protest- 
ants of the Latin countries, since they were minorities, did not 
exercise, possibly without even making the attempt, such a 
creative influence over their respective languages as Luther did 
over the still less highly rationalized (in an academic sense) 
German official language. 

On the other hand, the Augsburg Confession only contains the 
idea implicitly and but partially developed. Article XVI (ed. by 
Kolde, p. 43) teaches: “Meanwhile it (the Gospel) does not 
dissolve the ties of civil or domestic economy, but strongly 
enjoins us to maintain them as ordinances of God and in such 
ordinances (ein jeder nach seinem Beruf) to exercise charity.” 
(Translated by Rev. W. H. Teale, Leeds, 1842.) 

(In Latin it is only “et in talibus ordinationibus exercere 
caritatem”. The English is evidently translated directly from 
the Latin, and does not contain the idea which came into the 
German version.—TRANSLATOR’S NOTE.) 

The conclusion drawn, that one must obey authority, shows 
that here Beruf is thought of, at least primarily, as an objective 
order in the sense of the passage in 1 Cor. vii. 20. 

And Article XXVII (Kolde, p. 83) speaks of Beruf (Latin in 
vocatione sua) only in connection with estates ordained by 
God: clergy, magistrates, princes, lords, etc. But even this is 
true only of the German version of the Konkordienbuch, while in 
the German Ed. princeps the sentence is left out. 

Only in Article XXVI (Kolde, p. 81) is the word used in a sense 
which at least includes our present meaning: “that he did 

158 Notes 

chastise his body, not to deserve by that discipline remission of 
sin, but to have his body in bondage and apt to spiritual things, 
and to do his calling”. Translated by Richard Taverner, Philadel- 
phia Publications Society, 1888. (Latin juxta vocationem suam.) 

3 According to the lexicons, kindly confirmed by my colleagues 
Professors Braune and Hoops, the word Beruf (Dutch 
beroep, English calling, Danish kald, Swedish kallelse) does not 
occur in any of the languages which now contain it in its pres- 
ent worldly (secular) sense before Luther's translation of the 
Bible. The Middle High German, Middle Low German, and 
Middle Dutch words, which sound like it, all mean the same as 
Ruf in modern German, especially inclusive, in late mediaeval 
times, of the calling (vocation) of a candidate to a clerical 
benefice by those with the power of appointment. It is a special 
case which is also often mentioned in the dictionaries of the 
Scandinavian languages. The word is also occasionally used by 
Luther in the same sense. However, even though this special 
use of the word may have promoted its change of meaning, the 
modern conception of Beruf undoubtedly goes linguistically 
back to the Bible translations by Protestants, and any anticipa- 
tion of it is only to be found, as we shall see later, in Tauler (died 
1361). All the languages which were fundamentally influenced 
by the Protestant Bible translations have the word, all of which 
this was not true (like the Romance languages) do not, or at 
least not in its modern meaning. 

Luther renders two quite different concepts with Beruf. First 
the Pauline kAñoiç in the sense of the call to eternal salvation 
through God. Thus: 1 Cor. i. 26; Eph. i. 18; iv. 1, 4; 2 Thess. i. 11; 
Heb. iii. 1; 2 Peter i. 10. All these cases concern the purely 
religious idea of the call through the Gospel taught by the apos- 
tle; the word kAñoiç has nothing to do with worldly callings in 
the modern sense. The German Bibles before Luther use in this 
case ruffunge (so in all those in the Heidelberg Library), and 
sometimes instead of “von Gott geruffet” say “von Gott 
gefordert”. Secondly; however, he, as we have already seen, 
translates the words in Jesus Sirach discussed in the previous 
note (in the Septuagint év 1@ g0yw oou maAaweénti and kai 

Notes 159 

&upeve TH T6v@ oou), with “beharre in deinem Beruf” and 
“bliebe in deinem Beruf”, instead of “bliebe bei deiner Arbeit”. 
The later (authorized) Catholic translations (for instance that of 
Fleischiitz, Fulda, 1781) have (as in the New Testament pas- 
sages) simply followed him. Luther’s translation of the passage 
in the Book of Sirach is, so far as | know, the first case in which 
the German word Beruf appears in its present purely secular 
sense. The preceding exhortation, verse 20, o77@1 ev diaOrhKn 
oou he translates “bliebe in Gottes Wort”, although Sirach xiv. | 
and xliii. 10 show that, corresponding to the Hebrew pn, which 
(according to quotations in the Talmud) Sirach used, diaOAKn 
really did mean something similar to our calling, namely one’s 
fate or assigned task. In its later and present sense the word 
Beruf did not exist in the German language, nor, so far as | can 
learn, in the works of the older Bible translators or preachers. 
The German Bibles before Luther rendered the passage from 
Sirach with Werk. Berthold of Regensburg, at the points in his 
sermons where the modern would say Benif, uses the word 
Arbeit. The usage was thus the same as in antiquity. The first 
passage | know, in which not Beruf but Ruf (as a translation of 
kKAfjai¢) is applied to purely worldly labour, is in the fine sermon 
of Tauler on Ephesians iv (Works, Basle edition, f. 117. v), of 
peasants who misten go: they often fare better “so sie folgen 
einfeltiglich irem Ruff denn die geistlichen Menschen, die auf 
ihren Ruf nicht Acht haben”. The word in this sense did not find 
its way into everyday speech. Although Luther’s usage at first 
vacillates between Ruf and Beruf (see Werke, Erlangen edition, 
p. 51.), that he was directly influenced by Tauler is by no means 
certain, although the Freiheit eines Christenmenschen is in many 
respects similar to this sermon of Tauler. But in the purely 
worldly sense of Tauler, Luther did not use the word Ruf. (This 
against Denifle, Luther, p. 163.) 

Now evidently Sirach’s advice in the version of the Septu- 
agint contains, apart from the general exhortation to trust in 
God, no suggestion of a specifically religious valuation of 
secular labour in a calling. The term rrdvoc, toil, in the corrupt 
second passage would be rather the opposite, if it were not 

160 notes 

corrupted. What Jesus Sirach says simply corresponds to the 
exhortation of the psalmist (Psa. xxxvii. 3), “Dwell in the land, 
and feed on his faithfulness”, as also comes out clearly in the 
connection with the warning not to let oneself be blinded with 
the works of the godless, since it is easy for God to make a poor 
man rich. Only the opening exhortation to remain in the pn 
(verse 20) has a certain resemblance to the kAñoiç of the Gos- 
pel, but here Luther did not use the word Beruf for the Greek 
õiaðńkn. The connection between Luther's two seemingly quite 
unrelated uses of the word Beruf is found in the first letter to the 
Corinthians and its translation. 

In the usual modern editions, the whole context in which the 
passage stands is as follows, 1 Cor. vii. 17 (English, King James 
version [American revision, 1901]): “(17) Only as the Lord hath 
distributed to each man, as God hath called each, so let him 
walk. And so ordain | in all churches. (18) Was any man called 
being circumcised? let him not become uncircumcised. Hath 
any man been called in uncircumcision? let him not be circum- 
cised. (19) Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is noth- 
ing; but the keeping of the commandments of God. (20) Let 
each man abide in that calling wherein he was called (év rñ 
kAnoe! Ñ €KAHOn; an undoubted Hebraism, as Professor Merx 
tells me). (21) Wast thou called being a bondservant? care not 
for it; nay even if thou canst become free use it rather. (22) For 
he that was called in the Lord being a bondservant is the Lord’s 
freedman; likewise he that was called being free is Christ's 
bondservant. (23) Ye were bought with a price; become not 
bondservants of men. (24) Brethren, let each man, wherein he 
was called, therein abide with God.” 

In verse 29 follows the remark that time is shortened, fol- 
lowed by the well-known commandments motivated by 
eschatological expectations: (31) to possess women as though 
one did not have them, to buy as though one did not have 
what one had bought, etc. In verse 20 Luther, following the 
older German translations, even in 1523 in his exigesis of this 
chapter, renders kAñoiç with Beruf, and interprets it with Stand. 
(Erlangen ed., LI, p. 51.) 

notes 161 

In fact it is evident that the word kAñoiç at this point, and only 
at this, corresponds approximately to the Latin status and the 
German Stand (status of marriage, status of a servant, etc.). 
But of course not as Brentano, op. cit., p. 137, assumes, in the 
modern sense of Beruf. Brentano can hardly have read this 
passage, or what | have said about it, very carefully. In a sense 
at least suggesting it this word, which is etymologically related 
to éxkAnaja an assembly which has been called, occurs in Greek 
literature, so far as the lexicons tell, only once in a passage from 
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, where it corresponds to the Latin 
classis, a word borrowed from the Greek, meaning that part of 
the citizenry which has been called to the colours. Theophylak- 
tos (eleventh—-twelfth century) interprets 1 Cor. vii. 20: évoiw 
Biw Kai év oiw Taypati Kai TroAITedpati Wy éttioTevoev. (My col- 
league Professor Deissmann called my attention to this pas- 
sage.) Now, even in our passage, KAfjai¢ does not correspond to 
the modern Beruf. But having translated kAñoiç with Beruf in the 
eschatologically motivated exhortation, that everyone should 
remain in his present status, Luther, when he later came to 
translate the Apocrypha, would naturally, on account of the 
similar content of the exhortations alone, also use Beruf for 
Trovog in the traditionalistic and anti-chrematistic command- 
ment of Jesus Sirach, that everyone should remain in the same 
business. This is what is important and characteristic. The pas- 
sage in 1 Cor. vii. 17 does not, as has been pointed out, use 
KAfjais at all in the sense of Beruf, a definite field of activity. 

In the meantime (or about the same time), in the Augsburg 
Confession, the Protestant dogma of the uselessness of the 
Catholic attempt to excel worldly morality was established, and 
in it the expression “einem jeglichen nach seinem Beruf” was 
used (see previous note). In Luther’s translation, both this and 
the positive valuation of the order in which the individual was 
placed, as holy, which was gaining ground just about the 
beginning of the 1530s, stand out. It was a result of his more 
and more sharply defined belief in special Divine Providence, 
even in the details of life, and at the same time of his increasing 
inclination to accept the existing order of things in the world as 

162 Notes 

immutably willed by God. Vocatio, in the traditional Latin, 
meant the divine call to a life of holiness, especially in a monas- 
tery or as a priest. But now, under the influence of this dogma, 
life in a worldly calling came for Luther to have the same conno- 
tation. For he now translated rróvoç and gpyov in Jesus Sirach 
with Beruf, for which, up to that time, there had been only the 
(Latin) analogy, coming from the monastic translation. But a 
few years earlier, in Prov. xxii. 29, he had still translated the 
Hebrew Tason, which was the original of Zoyov in the Greek 
text of Jesus Sirach, and which, like the German Beruf and the 
Scandinavian kald, kallelse, originally related to a spiritual call 
(Beruf), as in other passages (Gen. xxxix. 11), with Geschäft 
(Septuagint gpyov, Vulgate opus, English Bibles business, and 
correspondingly in the Scandinavian and all the other transla- 
tions before me). 

The word Beruf, in the modern sense which he had finally 
created, remained for the time being entirely Lutheran. To the 
Calvinists the Apocrypha are entirely uncanonical. It was only 
as a result of the development which brought the interest in 
proof of salvation to the fore that Luther’s concept was taken 
over, and then strongly emphasized by them. But in their first 
(Romance) translations they had no such word available, and 
no power to create one in the usage of a language already so 
stereotyped. 

Aa early as the sixteenth century the concept of Beruf in its 
present sense became established in secular literature. The 
Bible translators before Luther had used the word Berufung for 
KAfjois (as for instance in the Heidelberg versions of 1462-66 
and 1485), and the Eck translation of 1537 says “in dem Ruf, 
worin er beruft ist”. Most of the later Catholic translators dir- 
ectly follow Luther. In England, the first of all, Wyclif s transla- 
tion (1382), used cleping (the Old English word which was later 
replaced by the borrowed calling). It is quite characteristic of the 
Lollard ethics to use a word which already corresponded to the 
later usage of the Reformation. Tyndale’s translation of 1534, on 
the other hand, interprets the idea in terms of status: “in the 
same state wherein he was called”, as also does the Geneva 

Notes 163 

Bible of 1557. Cranmer’s official translation of 1539 substituted 
calling for state, while the (Catholic) Bible of Rheims (1582), 
as well as the Anglican Court Bibles of the Elizabethan era, 
characteristically return to vocation, following the Vulgate. 

That for England, Cranmer’s Bible translation is the source of 
the Puritan conception of calling in the sense of Beruf, trade, 
has already, quite correctly, been pointed out by Murray. As 
early as the middle of the sixteenth century calling is used in 
that sense. In 1588 unlawful callings are referred to, and in 1603 
greater callings in the sense of higher occupations, etc. (see 
Murray). Quite remarkable is Brentano’s idea (op. cit., p. 139), 
that in the Middle Ages vocatio was not translated with Beruf, 
and that this concept was not known, because only a free man 
could engage in a Beruf, and freemen, in the middle-class pro- 
fessions, did not exist at that time. Since the whole social struc- 
ture of the medizeval crafts, as opposed to those of antiquity, 
rested upon free labour, and, above all, almost all the mer- 
chants were freemen, | do not clearly understand this thesis. 
Compare with the following the instructive discussion in K. 
Eger, Die Anschauung Luthers vom Beruf (Giessen, 1900). Per- 
haps its only serious fault, which is shared by almost all other 
theological writers, is his insufficiently clear analysis of the con- 
cept of lex nature. On this see E. Troeltsch in his review of 
Seeberg’s Dogmengeschichte, and now above all in the relevant 
parts of his Soziallehren der christlichen Kirchen. 
For when Thomas Aquinas represents the division of men into 
estates and occupational groups as the work of divine provi- 
dence, by that he means the objective cosmos of society. But 
that the individual should take up a particular calling (as we 
should say; Thomas, however, says ministerium or officium) is 
due to cause naturales. Quest. quodlibetal, VII, Art. 17c. “Hæc 
autem diversificatio hominum in diversis officiis contingit 
primo ex divina providentia, quæ ita hominum status distribuit 

. secundo etiam ex causis naturalibus, ex quibus contingit, 
quod in diversis hominibus sunt diversæ inclinationes ad 
diversa officia . . .” 

Quite similar is Pascal’s view when he says that it is chance 

164 Notes 

which determines the choice of a calling. See on Pascal, A. 
Koester, Die Ethik Pascals (1907). Of the organic systems of 
religious ethics, only the most complete of them, the Indian, is 
different in this respect. The difference between the Thomistic 
and the Protestant ideas of the calling is so evident that we may 
dismiss it for the present with the above quotation. This is true 
even as between the Thomistic and the later Lutheran ethics, 
which are very similar in many other respects, especially in their 
emphasis on Providence. We shall return later to a discussion 
of the Catholic view-point. On Thomas Aquinas, see Mauren- 
brecher, Thomas von Aquino’s Stellung zum Wirtschaftsleben 
seiner Zeit, 1888. Otherwise, where Luther agrees with Thomas 
in details, he has probably been influenced rather by the general 
doctrines of Scholasticism than by Thomas in particular. For, 
according to Denifle’s investigations, he seems really not to 
have known Thomas very well. See Denifle, Luther und Luther- 
tum (1903), p. 501, and on it, Koehler, Ein Wort zu Denifles 
Luther (1904), p. 25. 

6 In Von der Freiheit eines Cristenmenschen, (1) the double nature 
of man is used for the justification of worldly duties in the sense 
of the lex nature (here the natural order of the world). From 
that it follows (Erlangen edition, 27, p. 188) that man is inevit- 
ably bound to his body and to the social community. (2) In this 
situation he will (p. 196: this is a second justification), if he is a 
believing Christian, decide to repay God’s act of grace, which 
was done for pure love, by love of his neighbour. With this very 
loose connection between faith and love is combined (3) (p. 
190) the old ascetic justification of labour as a means of secur- 
ing to the inner man mastery over the body. (4) Labour is 
hence, as the reasoning is continued with another appearance 
of the idea of lex nature in another sense (here, natural moral- 
ity), an original instinct given by God to Adam (before the fall), 
which he has obeyed “solely to please God”. Finally (5) (pp. 161 
and 199), there appears, in connection with Matt. vii. 18 f., the 
idea that good work in one’s ordinary calling is and must be the 
result of the renewal of life, caused by faith, without, however, 
developing the most important Calvinistic idea of proof. The 

Notes 165 

powerful emotion which dominates the work explains the pres- 
ence of such contradictory ideas. 

“It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or 
the baker, that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to 
their own interest. We address ourselves, not to their humanity, 
but to their self-love; and never talk to them of our own neces- 
sities, but of their advantages” (Wealth of Nations, Book |, 
chap. ii). 

“Omnia enim per te operabitur (Deus), mulgebit per te vaccam 
et servilissima quaeque opera faciet, ac maxima pariter et min- 
ima ipsi grata erunt” (Exigesis of Genesis, Opera lat. exeget., ed., 
Elsperger, VII, p. 213). The idea is found before Luther in Tauler, 
who holds the spiritual and the worldly Ruf to be in principle of 
equal value. The difference from the Thomistic view is common 
to the German mystics and Luther. It may be said that Thomas, 
principally to retain the moral value of contemplation, but also 
from the view-point of the mendicant friar, is forced to interpret 
Paul’s doctrine that “if a man will not work he shall not eat” in 
the sense that labour, which is of course necessary lege nature, 
is imposed upon the human race as a whole, but not on all 
individuals. The gradation in the value of forms of labour, from 
the opera servilia of the peasants upwards, is connected with the 
specific character of the mendicant friars, who were for material 
reasons bound to the town as a place of domicile. It was equally 
foreign to the German mystics and to Luther, the peasant’s 
son; both of them, while valuing all occupations equally, looked 
upon their order of rank as willed by God. For the relevant 
passages in Thomas see Maurenbrecher, op. cit., pp. 65 ff. 

It is astonishing that some investigators can maintain that 
such a change could have been without effect upon the actions 
of men. | confess my inability to understand such a view. 
“Vanity is so firmly imbedded in the human heart that a camp- 
follower, a kitchen-helper, or a porter, boast and seek admir- 
ers... .” (Faugeres edition, l, p. 208. Compare Koester, op. cit., 
pp. 17, 136 ff.). On the attitude of Port Royal and the Jansenists 
to the calling, to which we shall return, see now the excellent 
study of Dr. Paul Honigsheim, Die Staats- und Soziallehren der 

166 Notes 

französischen Jansenisten im 17ten Jahrhundert (Heidelberg His- 
torical Dissertation, 1914. It is a separately printed part of a 
more comprehensive work on the Vorgeschichte der 
französischen Aufklärung. Compare especially pp. 138 ff.). 
Apropos of the Fuggers, he thinks that it “cannot be right and 
godly for such a great and regal fortune to be piled up in the 
lifetime of one man”. That is evidently the peasant’s mistrust of 
capital. Similarly (Grosser Sermon vom Wucher, Erlangen edition, 
XX, p. 109) investment in securities he considers ethically 
undesirable, because it is “ein neues behendes erfunden 
Ding”—i.e. because it is to him economically incomprehensible; 
somewhat like margin trading to the modern clergyman. 

The difference is well worked out by H. Levy (in his study, Die 
Grundlagen des ökonomischen Liberalismus in der Geschichte 
der englischen Volkswirtschaft, Jena, 1912). Compare also, for 
instance, the petition of the Levellers in Cromwell’s army of 
1653 against monopolies and companies, given in Gardiner, 
Commonwealth, ||, p. 179. Laud’s regime, on the other hand, 
worked for a Christian, social, economic organization under the 
joint leadership of Crown and Church, from which the King 
hoped for political and fiscal-monopolistic advantages. It was 
against just this that the Puritans were struggling. 

What | understand by this may be shown by the example of the 
proclamation addressed by Cromwell to the Irish in 1650, with 
which he opened his war against them and which formed his 
reply to the manifestos of the Irish (Catholic) clergy of Clon- 
macnoise of December 4 and 13, 1649. The most important 
sentences follow: “Englishmen had good inheritances (namely 
in Ireland) which many of them purchased with their money... 
they had good leases from Irishmen for long time to come, 
great stocks thereupon, houses and plantations erected at their 
cost and charge. ... You broke the union ... at a time when 
Ireland was in perfect peace and when, through the example of 
English industry, through commerce and traffic, that which was 
in the nation’s hands was better to them than if all Ireland had 
been in their possession. . . . ls God, will God be with you? | am 
confident He will not.” 

Notes 167 

This proclamation, which is suggestive of articles in the 
English Press at the time of the Boer War, is not characteristic, 
because the capitalistic interests of Englishmen are held to be 
the justification of the war. That argument could, of course, 
have just as well been made use of, for instance, in a quarrel 
between Venice and Genoa over their respective spheres of 
influence in the Orient (which, in spite of my pointing it 
out here, Brentano, op. cit., p. 142, strangely enough holds 
against me). On the contrary, what is interesting in the docu- 
ment is that Cromwell, with the deepest personal conviction, as 
everyone who knows his character will agree, bases the moral 
justification of the subjection of the Irish, in calling God to 
witness, on the fact that English capital has taught the Irish to 
work. (The proclamation is in Carlyle, and is also reprinted 
and analysed in Gardiner, History of the Commonwealth, |, pp. 
163 f.) 

This is not the place to follow the subject farther. Compare the 
authors cited in Note 16 below. 

Compare the remarks in Jiilicher’s fine book, Die Gleichnisreden 
Jesu, Il, pp. 108, 636 f. 

With what follows, compare above all the discussion in Eger, 
op. cit. Also Schneckenburger’s fine work, which is even to-day 
not yet out of date (Vergleichende Darstellung der lutherischen 
und reformierten Lehrbegriffe, Griider, Stuttgart, 1855). 
Luthardt’s Ethik Luthers, p. 84 of the first edition, the only one 
to which | have had access, gives no real picture of the devel- 
opment. Further compare Seeberg, Dogmengeschichte, Il, pp. 
262 ff. The article on Beruf in the Realenzyklopddie für protestan- 
tische Theologie und Kirche is valueless. Instead of a scientific 
analysis of the conception and its origin, it contains all sorts of 
rather sentimental observations on all possible subjects, such 
as the position of women, etc. Of the economic literature on 
Luther, | refer here only to Schmoller’s studies (“Geschichte der 
Nationalékonomischen Ansichten in Deutschland während der 
Reformationszeit”, Zeitschrift f. Staatswiss., XVI, 1860); Wiske- 
mann’s prize essay (1861); and the study of Frank G. Ward 
(“Darstellung und Würdigung von Luthers Ansichten vom 

168 Notes 

20 

Staat und seinen wirtschaftlichen Aufgaben”, Conrads Abhand- 
lungen, XXI, Jena, 1898). The literature on Luther in com- 
memoration of the anniversary of the Reformation, part of 
which is excellent, has, so far as | can see, made no definite 
contribution to this particular problem. On the social ethics of 
Luther (and the Lutherans) compare, of course, the relevant 
parts of Troeltsch’s Soziallehren. 

Analysis of the Seventh Chapter of the First Epistle to the Corinthi- 
ans, 1523, Erlangen edition, LI, p. 1. Here Luther still interprets 
the idea of the freedom of every calling before God in the sense 
of this passage, so as to emphasize (1) that certain human 
institutions should be repudiated (monastic vows, the prohib- 
ition of mixed marriages, etc.), (2) that the fulfillment of trad- 
itional worldly duties to one’s neighbour (in itself indifferent 
before God) is turned into a commandment of brotherly love. 
In fact this characteristic reasoning (for instance pp. 55, 56) 
fundamentally concerns the question of the dualism of the lex 
nature in its relations with divine justice. 

Compare the passage from Von Kaufhandlung und Wucher, 
which Sombart rightly uses as a motto for his treatment of the 
handicraft spirit (= traditionalism): “Darum musst du dir 
flirsetzen, nichts denn deine ziemliche Nahrung zu suchen in 
solchem Handel, danach Kost, Mühe, Arbeit und Gefahr rech- 
nen und überschlagen und also dann die Ware selbst setzen, 
steigern oder niedern, dass du solcher Arbeit und Mühe Lohn 
davon hasst.” The principle is formulated in a thoroughly 
Thomistic spirit. 

As early as the letter to H. von Sternberg of 1530, in which he 
dedicates the Exigesis of the 117th Psalm to him, the estate of 
the lower nobility appears to him, in spite of its moral degrad- 
ation, as ordained of God (Erlangen edition, XL, pp. 282 ff.). 
The decisive influence of the Münzer disturbances in develop- 
ing this view-point can clearly be seen in the letter (p. 282). 
Compare also Eger, op. cit., p. 150. 

Also in the analysis of the 111th Psalm, verses 5 and 6 (Erlangen 
edition, XL, pp. 215-16), written in 1530, the starting-point is the 
polemics against withdrawal from the world into monasteries. 

21 

22 

23 

Notes 169 

But in this case the lex nature (as distinct from positive law 
made by the Emperor and the Jurists) is directly identical with 
divine justice. It is God’s ordinance, and includes especially 
the division of the people into classes (p. 215). The equal 
value of the classes is emphasized, but only in the sight of 
God. 
As taught especially in the works Von Konzilien und Kirchen 
(1539) and Kurzer Bekenntnis vom heiligen Sakrament (1545). 
How far in the background of Luther’s thought was the most 
important idea of proof of the Christian in his calling and his 
worldly conduct, which dominated Calvinism, is shown by this 
passage from Von Konzilien und Kirchen (1539, Erlangen edition, 
XXV, p. 376): “Besides these seven principal signs there are 
more superficial ones by which the holy Christian Church can 
be known. If we are not unchaste nor drunkards, proud, inso- 
lent, nor extravagant, but chaste, modest, and temperate.” 
According to Luther these signs are not so infallible as the 
others (purity of doctrine, prayer, etc.). “Because certain of the 
heathen have borne themselves so and sometimes even 
appeared holier than Christians.” Calvin’s personal position 
was, as we shall see, not very different, but that was not true of 
Puritanism. In any case, for Luther the Christian serves God 
only in vocatione, not per vocationem (Eger, pp. 117 ff.). Of the 
idea of proof, on the other hand (more, however, in its Pietistic 
than its Calvinistic form), there are at least isolated suggestions 
in the German mystics (see for instance in Seeberg, Dogmenge- 
schichte, p. 195, the passage from Suso, as well as those from 
Tauler quoted above), even though it was understood only in a 
psychological sense. 
His final position is well expressed in some parts of the exe- 
gesis of Genesis (in the op. lat. exeget. edited by Elsperger). 
Vol. IV, p. 109: “Neque hec fuit levis tentatio, intentum esse 
suz vocationi et de aliis non esse curiosum. ... Paucissimi 
sunt, qui sua sorte vivant contenti... (p. 111). Nostrum autem 
est, ut vocanti Deo pareamus ... (p. 112). Regula igitur hzec 
servanda est, ut unusquisque maneat in sua vocatione et 
suo dono contentus vivat, de aliis autem non sit curiosus.” In 

170 Notes 

24 

25 

effect that is thoroughly in accordance with Thomas Aqui- 
nas’s formulation of traditionalism (Secunda secunde, Quest. 
118, Art. 1): “Unde necese eat, quod bonum hominis circa ea 
consistat in quadam mensura, dum scilicet homo ... queerit 
habere exteriores divitas, prout sunt necessariz ad vitam ejus 
secundum suam conditionem. Et ideo in excessu hujus men- 
sure consistit peccatum, dum scilicet aliquis supra debitum 
modum vult eas vel acquirere vel retinere, quod pertinet ad 
avaritiam.” The sinfulness of the pursuit of acquisition 
beyond the point set by the needs of one’s station in life is 
based by Thomas on the lex nature as revealed by the pur- 
pose (ratio) of external goods; by Luther, on the other hand, 
on God’s will. On the relation of faith and the calling in 
Luther see also Vol. VII, p. 225: “ ... quando es fidelis, tum 
placent Deo etiam physica, carnalia, animalia, officia, sive 
edas, sive bibas, sive vigiles, sive dormias, quz mere corpo- 
ralia et animalia sunt. Tanta res est fides.... Verum est qui- 
dem, placere Deo etiam in impiis sedulitatem et industriam 
in officio [This activity in practical life is a virtue lege nature] 
sed obstat incredulitas et vana gloria, ne possint opera sua 
referre ad gloriam Dei [reminiscent of Calvinistic ways of 
speaking).... Merentur igitur etiam impiorum bona opera in 
hac quidem vita preemia sua [as distinct from Augustine’s 
‘vitia specie virtutum palliata’] sed non numerantur, non 
colliguntur in altero.” 

In the Kirchenpostille it runs (Erlangen edition, X, pp. 233, 235- 
6): “Everyone is called to some calling.” He should wait for this 
call (on p. 236 it even becomes command) and serve God in it. 
God takes pleasure not in man’s achievements but in his 
obedience in this respect. 

This explains why, in contrast to what has been said above 
about the effects of Pietism on women workers, modern 
business men sometimes maintain that strict Lutheran 
domestic workers to-day often, for instance in Westphalia, 
think very largely in traditional terms. Even without going 
over to the factory system, and in spite of the temptation of 
higher earnings, they resist changes in methods of work, and 

26 
27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

32 

Notes 171 

in explanation maintain that in the next world such trifles 
won't matter anyway. It is evident that the mere fact of Church 
membership and belief is not in itself of essential significance 
for conduct as a whole. It has been much more concrete 
religious values and ideals which have influenced the devel- 
opment of capitalism in its early stages and, to a lesser extent, 
still do. 

Compare Tauler, Basle edition, BI., pp. 161 ff. 

Compare the peculiarly emotional sermon of Tauler referred to 
above, and the following one, 17, 18, verse 20. 

Since this is the sole purpose of these present remarks on 
Luther, | have limited them to a brief preliminary sketch, which 
would, of course, be wholly inadequate as an appraisal of 
Luther’s influence as a whole. 

One who shared the philosophy of history of the Levellers 
would be in the fortunate position of being able to attribute this 
in turn to racial differences. They believed themselves to be the 
defenders of the Anglo-Saxon birthright, against the descend- 
ants of William the Conqueror and the Normans. It is astonish- 
ing enough that it has not yet occurred to anyone to maintain 
that the plebeian Roundheads were round-headed in the 
anthropometric sense! 

Especially the English national pride, a result of Magna Charta 
and the great wars. The saying, so typical to-day, “She looks like 
an English girl” on seeing any pretty foreign girl, is reported as 
early as the fifteenth century. 

These differences have, of course, persisted in England as well. 
Especially the Squirearchy has remained the centre of “merrie 
old England” down to the present day, and the whole period 
since the Reformation may be looked upon as a struggle of the 
two elements in English society. In this point | agree with M. J. 
Bonn’s remarks (in the Frankfurter Zeitung) on the excellent 
study of v. Schulze-Gaevernitz on British Imperialism. Compare 
H. Levy in the Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, 46, 3. 
In spite of this and the following remarks, which in my opinion 
are clear enough, and have never been changed, | have again 
and again been accused of this. 

172 Notes 

4 THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF WORLDLY ASCETICISIM 

1 

N 

Zwinglianism we do not discuss separately, since after a short 
lease of power it rapidly lost in importance. Arminianism, the 
dogmatic peculiarity of which consisted in the repudiation of 
the doctrine of predestination in its strict form, and which also 
repudiated worldly asceticism, was organized as a sect only in 
Holland (and the United States). In this chapter it is without 
interest to us, or has only the negative interest of having been 
the religion of the merchant patricians in Holland (see below). 
In dogma it resembled the Anglican Church and most of the 
Methodist denominations. Its Erastian position (i.e. upholding 
the sovereignty of the State even in Church matters) was, how- 
ever, common to all the authorities with purely political inter- 
ests: the Long Parliament in England, Elizabeth, the Dutch 
States-General, and, above all, Oldenbarnereldt. 

On the development of the concept of Puritanism see, above 
all, Sanford, Studies and Reflections of the Great Rebellion, p. 65 f. 
When we use the expression it is always in the sense which it 
took on in the popular speech of the seventeenth century, to 
mean the ascetically inclined religious movements in Holland 
and England without distinction of Church organization or 
dogma, thus including Independents, Congregationalists, 
Baptists, Mennonites, and Quakers. 

This has been badly misunderstood in the discussion of these 
questions. Especially Sombart, but also Brentano, continually 
cite the ethical writers (mostly those of whom they have heard 
through me) as codifications of rules of conduct without ever 
asking which of them were supported by psychologically effect- 
ive religious sanctions. 

| hardly need to emphasize that this sketch, so far as it is 
concerned solely with the field of dogma, falls back everywhere 
on the formulations of the literature of the history of the Church 
and of doctrine. It makes no claim whatever to originality. Nat- 
urally | have attempted, so far as possible, to acquaint myself 
with the sources for the history of the Reformation. But to 
ignore in the process the intensive and acute theological 

Notes 173 

research of many decades, instead of, as is quite indispensable, 
allowing oneself to be led from it to the sources, would have 
been presumption indeed. | must hope that the necessary brev- 
ity of the sketch has not led to incorrect formulations, and that | 
have at least avoided important misunderstandings of fact. The 
discussion contributes something new for those familiar with 
theological literature only in the sense that the whole is, of 
course, considered from the point of view of our problem. For 
that reason many of the most important points, for instance 
the rational character of this asceticism and its significance for 
modern life, have naturally not been emphasized by theological 
writers. 

This aspect, and in general the sociological side, has, since 
the appearance of this study, been systematically studied in the 
work of E. Troeltsch, mentioned above, whose Gerhard und 
Melancthon, as well as numerous reviews in the Gétt. Gel. Anz., 
contained several preliminary studies to his great work. For 
reasons of space the references have not included everything 
which has been used, but for the most part only those works 
which that part of the text follows, or which are directly relevant 
to it. These are often older authors, where our problems have 
seemed closer to them. The insufficient pecuniary resources of 
German libraries have meant that in the provinces the most 
important source materials or studies could only be had from 
Berlin or other large libraries on loan for very short periods. This 
is the case with Voét, Baxter, Tyermans, Wesley, all the Method- 
ist, Baptist, and Quaker authors, and many others of the earlier 
writers not contained in the Corpus Reformatorum. For any thor- 
ough study the use of English and American libraries is almost 
indispensable. But for the following sketch it was necessary (and 
possible) to be content with material available in Germany. In 
America recently the characteristic tendency to deny their own 
sectarian origins has led many university libraries to provide 
little or nothing new of that sort of literature. It is an aspect of the 
general tendency to the secularization of American life which 
will in a short time have dissolved the traditional national char- 
acter and changed the significance of many of the fundamental 

174 notes 

institutions of the country completely and finally. It is now 
necessary to fall back on the small orthodox sectarian colleges. 

5 On Calvin and Calvinism, besides the fundamental work of 
Kampschulte, the best source of information is the discussion 
of Erick Marcks (in his Coligny). Campbell, The Puritans in Hol- 
land, England, and America (2 vols.), is not always critical and 
unprejudiced. A strongly partisan anti-Calvinistic study is Pier- 
son, Studien over Johan Calvijn. For the development in Holland 
compare, besides Motley, the Dutch classics, especially Groen 
van Prinsterer, Geschiedenis v.h. Vaderland; La Hollande et !’influ- 
ence de Calvin (1864); Le parti anti-révolutionnaire et confession- 
nel dans l’église des P.B. (1860) (for modern Holland); further, 
above all, Fruin’s Tien jaren mit den tachtigjarigen oorlog, and 
especially Naber, Calvinist of Libertijnsch. Also W. J. F. Nuyens, 
Gesch. der kerkel. an pol. geschillen in de Rep. d. Ver. Prov. 
(Amsterdam, 1886); A. Kohler, Die Niederl. ref. Kirche (Erlangen, 
1856), for the nineteenth century. For France, besides Polenz, 
now Baird, Rise of the Huguenots. For England, besides Carlyle, 
Macaulay, Masson, and, last but not least, Ranke, above all, 
now the various works of Gardiner and Firth. Further, Taylor, A 
Retrospect of the Religious Life in England (1854), and the excel- 
lent book of Weingarten, Die englischen Revolutionskirchen. Then 
the article on the English Moralists by E. Troeltsch in the 
Realenzyklopddie für protestantische Theologie und Kirche, third 
edition, and of course his Soziallehren. Also E. Bernstein’s excel- 
lent essay in the Geschichte des Sozialismus (Stuttgart, 1895, l, p. 
50 ff.). The best bibliography (over seven thousand titles) is in 
Dexter, Congregationalism of the Last Three Hundred Years (prin- 
cipally, though not exclusively, questions of Church organiza- 
tion). The book is very much better than Price (History of Non- 
conformism), Skeats, and others. For Scotland see, among 
others, Sack, Die Kirche von Schottland (1844), and the literature 
on John Knox. For the American colonies the outstanding work 
is Doyle, The English in America. Further, Daniel Wait Howe, The 
Puritan Republic; |. Brown, The Pilgrim Fathers of New England 
and their Puritan Successors (third edition, Revell). Further refer- 
ences will be given later. 

Notes 175 

For the differences of doctrine the following presentation is 
especially indebted to Schneckenburger’s lectures cited above. 
Ritschl’s fundamental work, Die christliche Lehre von der Rech- 
tfertigung und Versöhnung (references to Vol. III of third edition), 
in its mixture of historical method with judgments of value, 
shows the marked peculiarities of the author, who with all his 
fine acuteness of logic does not always give the reader the 
certainty of objectivity. Where, for instance, he differs from 
Schneckenburger’s interpretation | am often doubtful of his 
correctness, however little | presume to have an opinion of my 
own. Further, what he selects out of the great variety of religious 
ideas and feelings as the Lutheran doctrine often seems to be 
determined by his own preconceptions. It is what Ritschl him- 
self conceives to be of permanent value in Lutheranism. It is 
Lutheranism as Ritschl would have had it, not always as it was. 
That the works of Karl Müller, Seeberg, and others have every- 
where been made use of it is unnecessary to mention particu- 
larly. If in the following | have condemned the reader as well as 
myself to the penitence of a malignant growth of footnotes, it 
has been done in order to give especially the non-theological 
reader an opportunity to check up the validity of this sketch by 
the suggestion of related lines of thought. 

In the following discussion we are not primarily interested in 
the origin, antecedents, or history of these ascetic movements, 
but take their doctrines as given in a state of full development. 
For the following discussion | may here say definitely that we 
are not studying the personal views of Calvin, but Calvinism, 
and that in the form to which it had evolved by the end of the 
sixteenth and in the seventeenth centuries in the great areas 
where it had a decisive influence and which were at the same 
time the home of capitalistic culture. For the present, Germany 
is neglected entirely, since pure Calvinism never dominated 
large areas here. Reformed is, of course, by no means identical 
with Calvinistic. 

Even the Declaration agreed upon between the University of 
Cambridge and the Archbishop of Canterbury on the 17th Art- 
icle of the Anglican Confession, the so-called Lambeth Article of 

176 notes 

1595, which (contrary to the official version) expressly held that 
there was also predestination to eternal death, was not ratified 
by the Queen. The Radicals (as in Hanserd Knolly’s Confession) 
laid special emphasis on the express predestination to death 
(not only the admission of damnation, as the milder doctrine 
would have it). 

Westminster Confession, fifth official edition, London, 1717. 
Compare the Savoy and the (American) Hanserd Knolly’s Dec- 
larations. On predestination and the Huguenots see, among 
others, Polenz, |, pp. 545 ff. 

On Milton’s theology see the essay of Eibach in the Theol. Stu- 
dien und Kritiken, 1879. Macaulay's essay on it, on the occasion 
of Sumner’s translation of the Doctrina Christiana, rediscovered 
in 1823 (Tauchnitz edition, 185, pp. 1 ff.), is superficial. For more 
detail see the somewhat too schematic six-volume English work 
of Masson, and the German biography of Milton by Stern which 
rests upon it. Milton early began to grow away from the doctrine 
of predestination in the form of the double decree, and reached 
a wholly free Christianity in his old age. In his freedom from the 
tendencies of his own time he may in a certain sense be com- 
pared to Sebastian Franck. Only Milton was a practical and 
positive person, Franck predominantly critical. Milton is a Puri- 
tan only in the broader sense of the rational organization of his 
life in the world in accordance with the divine will, which formed 
the permanent inheritance of later times from Calvinism. Franck 
could be called a Puritan in much the same sense. Both, as 
isolated figures, must remain outside our investigation. 

“Hic est fides summus gradus; credere Deum esse clementum, 
qui tam paucos salvat, justum, qui sua voluntate nos damna- 
biles facit”, is the text of the famous passage in De servo 
arbitrio. 

The truth is that both Luther and Calvin believed fundamentally 
in a double God (see Ritschl’s remarks in Geschichte des Pietis- 
mus and Késtlin, Gott in Realenzyklopddie für protestantische 
Theologie und Kirche, third edition), the gracious and kindly 
Father of the New Testament, who dominates the first books of 
the Institutio Christiana, and behind him the Deus absconditus as 

14 
15 

Notes 1/77 

an arbitrary despot. For Luther, the God of the New Testament 
kept the upper hand, because he avoided reflection on meta- 
physical questions as useless and dangerous, while for Calvin 
the idea of a transcendental God won out. In the popular 
development of Calvinism, it is true, this idea could not be 
maintained, but what took his place was not the Heavenly 
Father of the New Testament but the Jehovah of the Old. 
Compare on the following: Scheibe, Calvins Prédestinationslehre 
(Halle, 1897). On Calvinistic theology in general, Heppe, Dog- 
matik des evangelisch-reformierten Kirche (Elberfeld, 1861). 
Corpus Reformatorum, LXXVII, pp. 186 ff. 

The preceding exposition of the Calvinistic doctrine can be 
found in much the same form as here given, for instance in 
Hoornbeek’s Theologia practica (Utrecht, 1663), L. Il, c. 1; de 
predestinatione, the section stands characteristically directly 
under the heading De Deo. The Biblical foundation for it is 
principally the first chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians. It is 
unnecessary for us here to analyse the various inconsistent 
attempts to combine with the predestination and providence of 
God the responsibility and free will of the individual. They 
began as early as in Augustine’s first attempt to develop the 
doctrine. 

“The deepest community (with God) is found not in institu- 
tions or corporations or churches, but in the secrets of a soli- 
tary heart”, as Dowden puts the essential point in his fine book 
Puritan and Anglican (p. 234). This deep spiritual loneliness of 
the individual applied as well to the Jansenists of Port Royal, 
who were also predestinationists. 

“Contra qui huiusmodi coetum [namely a Church which main- 
tains a pure doctrine, sacraments, and Church discipline) con- 
temnunt ... salutis suæ certi esse non possunt; et qui in illo 
contemtu perseverat electus non est.” Olevian, De subst. Foed., 
p. 222. 

“It is said that God sent His Son to save the human race, but 
that was not His purpose, He only wished to help a few out of 
their degradation—and | say unto you that God died only 
for the elect” (sermon held in 1609 at Broek, near Rogge, 

178 Notes 

20 

21 

22 

Wtenbogaert, Il, p. 9. Compare Nuyens, op. cit., Il, p. 232). The 
explanation of the role of Christ is also confused in Hanserd 
Knolly’s Confession. It is everywhere assumed that God did not 
need His instrumentality. 

Entzauberung der Welt. On this process see the other essays in 
my Wirtschaftsethik der Weltreligionen. The peculiar position of 
the old Hebrew ethic, as compared with the closely related 
ethics of Egypt and Babylon, and its development after the time 
of the prophets, rested, as is shown there, entirely on this fun- 
damental fact, the rejection of sacramental magic as a road to 
salvation. (This process is for Weber one of the most important 
aspects of the broader process of rationalization, in which he 
sums up his philosophy of history. See various parts of Wirt- 
schaft und Gesellschaft and H. Grab, Der Begriff des Rationalen 
bei Max Weber.—TRANSLATOR’S NOTE.) 

Similarly the most consistent doctrine held that baptism was 
required by positive ordinance, but was not necessary to salva- 
tion. For that reason the strictly Puritan Scotch and English 
Independents were able to maintain the principle that children 
of obvious reprobates should not be baptized (for instance, 
children of drunkards). An adult who desired to be baptized, 
but was not yet ripe for the communion, the Synod of Edam of 
1586 (Art. 32, 1) recommended should be baptized only if his 
conduct were blameless, and he should have placed his desires 
sonder superstitie. 

This negative attitude toward all sensuous culture is, as Dow- 
den, op. cit., shows, a very fundamental element of Puritanism. 
The expression individualism includes the most heterogeneous 
things imaginable. What is here understood by it will, | hope, be 
clear from the following discussion. In another sense of the 
word, Lutheranism has been called individualistic, because it 
does not attempt any ascetic regulation of life. In yet another 
quite different sense the word is used, for example, by Dietrich 
Schafer when in his study, “Zur Beurteilung des Wormser 
Konkordats”, Abh. d. Berl. Akad. (1905), he calls the Middle 
Ages the era of pronounced individuality because, for the 
events relevant for the historian, irrational factors then had a 

23 

24 
25 

Notes 179 

significance which they do not possess to-day. He is right, but 
so perhaps are also those whom he attacks in his remarks, for 
they mean something quite different, when they speak of indi- 
viduality and individualism. Jacob Burchhardt’s brilliant ideas 
are to-day at least partly out of date, and a thorough analysis of 
these concepts in historical terms would at the present time be 
highly valuable to science. Quite the opposite is, of course, true 
when the play impulse causes certain historians to define the 
concept in such a way as to enable them to use it as a label for 
any epoch of history they please. 

And in a similar, though naturally less sharp, contrast to the 
later Catholic doctrine. The deep pessimism of Pascal, which 
also rests on the doctrine of predestination, is, on the other 
hand, of Jansenist origin, and the resulting individualism of 
renunciation by no means agrees with the official Catholic pos- 
ition. See the study by Honigsheim on the French Jansenists, 
referred to in Chap. 3. note 10. 

The same holds for the Jansenists. 

Bailey, Praxis pietatis (German edition, Leipzig, 1724); p. 187. 
Also P. J. Spener in his Theologische Bedenken (according to 
third edition, Halle, 1712) adopts a similar standpoint. A friend 
seldom gives advice for the glory of God, but generally for 
mundane (though not necessarily egotistical) reasons. “He [the 
knowing man] is blind in no man’s cause, but best sighted in his 
own. He confines himself to the circle of his own affairs and 
thrusts not his fingers into needless fires. He sees the falseness 
of it [the world] and therefore learns to trust himself ever, others 
so far as not to be damaged by their disappointment”, is the 
philosophy of Thomas Adams (Works of the Puritan Divines, 
p. 11). Bailey (Praxis pietatis, p. 176) further recommends every 
morning before going out among people to imagine oneself 
going into a wild forest full of dangers, and to pray God for the 
“cloak of foresight and righteousness”. This feeling is charac- 
teristic of all the ascetic denominations without exception, and 
in the case of many Pietists led directly to a sort of hermit’s life 
within the world. Even Spangenberg in the (Moravian) Idea fides 
fratum, p. 382, calls attention with emphasis to Jer. xvii. 5: 

180 Notes 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

“Cursed is the man who trusteth in man.” To grasp the peculiar 
misanthropy of this attitude, note also Hoornbeek’s remarks 
(Theologia practica, |, p. 882) on the duty to love one’s enemy: 
“Denique hoc magis nos ulcisimur, quo proximum, inultum 
nobis, tradimus ultori Deo—Quo quis plus se ulscitur, eo 
minus id pro ipso agit Deus.” It is the same transfer of ven- 
geance that is found in the parts of the Old Testament written 
after the exile; a subtle intensification and refinement of the 
spirit of revenge compared to the older “eye for an eye”. On 
brotherly love, see below, note 34. 

Of course the confessional did not have only that effect. The 
explanations, for instance, of Muthmann, Z. f Rel. Psych., |, Heft 
2, p. 65, are too simple for such a highly complex psychological 
problem as the confessional. 

This is a fact which is of especial importance for the interpret- 
ation of the psychological basis of Calvinistic social organiza- 
tions. They all rest on spiritually individualistic, rational 
motives. The individual never enters emotionally into them. 
The glory of God and one’s own salvation always remain above 
the threshold of consciousness. This accounts for certain char- 
acteristic features of the social organization of peoples with a 
Puritan past even to-day. 

The fundamentally anti-authoritarian tendency of the doctrine, 
which at bottom undermined every responsibility for ethical 
conduct or spiritual salvation on the part of Church or State as 
useless, led again and again to its proscription, as, for instance, 
by the States-General of the Netherlands. The result was always 
the formation of conventicles (as after 1614). 

On Bunyan compare the biography of Froude in the English 
Men of Letters series, also Macaulay’s superficial sketch (Miscel. 
Works, Il, p. 227). Bunyan was indifferent to the denominational 
distinctions within Calvinism, but was himself a strict Calvinis- 
tic Baptist. 

It is tempting to refer to the undoubted importance for the 
social character of Reformed Christianity of the necessity for 
salvation, following from the Calvinistic idea of “incorporation 
into the body of Christ” (Calvin, Instit. Christ, Ill, 11, 10), of 

notes 181 

reception into a community conforming to the divine prescrip- 
tions. From our point of view, however, the centre of the prob- 
lem is somewhat different. That doctrinal tenet could have 
been developed in a Church of purely institutional character 
(anstaltsmdssig), and, as is well known, this did happen. But in 
itself it did not possess the psychological force to awaken the 
initiative to form such communities nor to imbue them with 
the power which Calvinism possessed. Its tendency to form a 
community worked itself out very largely in the world outside 
the Church organizations ordained by God. Here the belief that 
the Christian proved (see below) his state of grace by action in 
majorem Dei gloriam was decisive, and the sharp condemna- 
tion of idolatry of the flesh and of all dependence on personal 
relations to other men was bound unperceived to direct this 
energy into the field of objective (impersonal) activity. The 
Christian who took the proof of his state of grace seriously 
acted in the service of God’s ends, and these could only be 
impersonal. Every purely emotional, that is not rationally 
motivated, personal relation of man to man easily fell in the 
Puritan, as in every ascetic ethic, under the suspicion of idolatry 
of the flesh. In addition to what has already been said, this is 
clearly enough shown for the case of friendship by the following 
warning: “It is an irrational act and not fit for a rational creature 
to love any one farther than reason will allow us.... It very 
often taketh up men’s minds so as to hinder their love of God” 
(Baxter, Christian Directory, IV, p. 253). We shall meet such 
arguments again and again. 

The Calvinist was fascinated by the idea that God in creating 
the world, including the order of society, must have willed 
things to be objectively purposeful as a means of adding to His 
glory; not the flesh for its own sake, but the organization of the 
things of the flesh under His will. The active energies of the 
elect, liberated by the doctrine of predestination, thus flowed 
into the struggle to rationalize the world. Especially the idea 
that the public welfare, or as Baxter (Christian Directory, IV, p. 
262) puts it, quite in the sense of later liberal rationalism, “The 
good of the many” (with a somewhat forced reference to Rom. 

182 Notes 

31 

32 

33 

34 

ix. 3), was to be preferred to any personal or private good of the 
individual, followed, although not in itself new, for Puritanism 
from the repudiation of idolatry of the flesh. The traditional 
American objection to performing personal service is probably 
connected, besides the other important causes resulting from 
democratic feelings, at least indirectly with that tradition. Simi- 
larly, the relative immunity of formerly Puritan peoples to 
Czesarism, and, in general, the subjectively free attitude of the 
English to their great statesmen as compared with many things 
which we have experienced since 1878 in Germany positively 
and negatively. On the one hand, there is a greater willingness 
to give the great man his due, but, on the other, a repudiation of 
all hysterical idolization of him and of the naive idea that polit- 
ical obedience could be due anyone from thankfulness. On the 
sinfulness of the belief in authority, which is only permissible in 
the form of an impersonal authority, the Scriptures, as well as 
of an excessive devotion to even the most holy and virtuous of 
men, since that might interfere with obedience to God, see 
Baxter, Christian Directory (second edition, 1678), |, p. 56. The 
political consequences of the renunciation of idolatry of 
the flesh and the principle which was first applied only to the 
Church but later to life in general, that God alone should rule, 
do not belong in this investigation. 

Of the relation between dogmatic and practical psychological 
consequence we shall often have to speak. That the two are not 
identical it is hardly necessary to remark. 

Social, used of course without any of the implications attached 
to the modern sense of the word, meaning simply activity 
within the Church, politics, or any other social organization. 
“Good works performed for any other purpose than the glory of 
God are sinful” (Hanserd Knolly’s Confession, chap. xvi). 

What such an impersonality of brotherly love, resulting from 
the orientation of life solely to God’s will, means in the field of 
religious group life itself may be well illustrated by the attitude 
of the China Inland Mission and the International Missionaries 
Alliance (see Warneck, Gesch. d. prot. Missiondren, pp. 99, 111). 
At tremendous expense an army of missionaries was fitted out, 

Notes 183 

for instance one thousand for China alone, in order by itinerant 
preaching to offer the Gospel to all the heathen in a strictly 
literal sense, since Christ had commanded it and made His 
second coming dependent on it. Whether these heathen 
should be converted to Christianity and thus attain salvation, 
even whether they could understand the language in which the 
missionary preached, was a matter of small importance and 
could be left to God, Who alone could control such things. 
According to Hudson Taylor (see Warneck, op. cit.), China has 
about fifty million families; one thousand missionaries could 
each reach fifty families per day (!) or the Gospel could be 
presented to all the Chinese in less than three years. It is pre- 
cisely the same manner in which, for instance, Calvinism car- 
ried out its Church discipline. The end was not the salvation of 
those subject to it, which was the affair of God alone (in prac- 
tice their own) and could not be in any way influenced by the 
means at the disposal of the Church, but simply the increase of 
God’s glory. Calvinism as such is not responsible for those 
feats of missionary zeal, since they rest on an interdenomin- 
ational basis. Calvin himself denied the duty of sending mis- 
sions to the heathen since a further expansion of the Church is 
unius Dei opus. Nevertheless, they obviously originate in the 
ideas, running through the whole Puritan ethic, according to 
which the duty to love one’s neighbour is satisfied by fulfilling 
God’s commandments to increase His glory. The neighbour 
thereby receives all that is due him, and anything further is 
God’s affair. Humanity in relation to one’s neighbour has, so 
to speak, died out. That is indicated by the most various 
circumstances. 

Thus, to mention a remnant of that atmosphere, in the field 
of charity of the Reformed Church, which in certain respects is 
justly famous, the Amsterdam orphans, with (in the twentieth 
century!) their coats and trousers divided vertically into a black 
and a red, or a red and a green half, a sort of fool’s costume, 
and brought in parade formation to church, formed, for the 
feelings of the past, a highly uplifting spectacle. It served the 
glory of God precisely to the extent that all personal and human 

184 Notes 

35 

36 

feelings were necessarily insulted by it. And so, as we shall see 
later, even in all the details of private life. Naturally all that 
signified only a tendency and we shall later ourselves have to 
make certain qualifications. But as one very important tendency 
of this ascetic faith, it was necessary to point it out here. 

In all these respects the ethic of Port Royal, although predesti- 
nationist, takes quite a different standpoint on account of 
its mystical and otherworldly orientation, which is in so far 
Catholic (see Honigsheim, op. cit.). 

Hundeshagen (Beitr. z. Kirchenverfassungsgesch. u. Kirchenpoli- 
tik, 1864, |, p. 37) takes the view, since often repeated, that 
predestination was a dogma of the theologians, not a popular 
doctrine. But that is only true if the people is identified with the 
mass of the uneducated lower classes. Even then it has only 
limited validity. Köhler (op. cit.) found that in the forties of the 
nineteenth century just those masses (meaning the petite bour- 
geoisie of Holland) were thoroughly imbued with predestin- 
ation. Anyone who denied the double decree was to them a 
heretic and a condemned soul. He himself was asked about the 
time of his rebirth (in the sense of predestination). Da Costa 
and the separation of de Kock were greatly influenced by it. Not 
only Cromwell, in whose case Zeller (Das Theologische System 
Zwinglis, p. 17) has already shown the effects of the dogma 
most effectively, but also his army knew very well what it was 
about. Moreover, the canons of the synods of Dordrecht and 
Westminster were national questions of the first importance. 
Cromwell’s tryers and ejectors admitted only believers in pre- 
destination, and Baxter (Life, |, p. 72), although he was other- 
wise its opponent, considers its effect on the quality of the 
clergy to be important. That the Reformed Pietists, the mem- 
bers of the English and Dutch conventicles, should not have 
understood the doctrine is quite impossible. It was precisely 
what drove them together to seek the certitudo salutis. 

What significance the doctrine of predestination does or 
does not have when it remains a dogma of the theologians is 
shown by perfectly orthodox Catholicism, to which it was by no 
means strange as an esoteric doctrine under various forms. 

Notes 185 

What is important is that the idea of the individual’s obligation 
to consider himself of the elect and prove it to himself was 
always denied. Compare for the Catholic doctrine, for instance, 
A. Van Wyck, Tract. de proedestinatione (Cologne, 1708). To what 
extent Pascal’s doctrine of predestination was correct, we 
cannot inquire here. 

Hundeshagen, who dislikes the doctrine, evidently gets his 
impressions primarily from German sources. His antipathy is 
based on the purely deductive opinion that it necessarily leads 
to moral fatalism and antinomianism. This opinion has already 
been refuted by Zeller, op. cit. That such a result was possible 
cannot, of course, be denied. Both Melanchthon and Wesley 
speak of it. But it is characteristic that in both cases it is com- 
bined with an emotional religion of faith. For them, lacking 
the rational idea of proof, this consequence was in fact not 
unnatural. 

The same consequences appeared in Islam. But why? 
Because the Mohammedan idea was that of predetermination, 
not predestination, and was applied to fate in this world, not in 
the next. In consequence the most important thing, the proof of 
the believer in predestination, played no part in Islam. Thus 
only the fearlessness of the warrior (as in the case of moira) 
could result, but there were no consequences for rationaliza- 
tion of life; there was no religious sanction for them. 
See the (Heidelberg) theological dissertation of F. Ullrich, 
Die Vorherbestimmungslehre im Islam u. Christenheit, 1900. The 
modifications of the doctrine which came in practice, for 
instance Baxter, did not disturb it in essence so long as the idea 
that the election of God, and its proof, fell upon the concrete 
individual, was not shaken. Finally, and above all, all the great 
men of Puritanism (in the broadest sense) took their departure 
from this doctrine, whose terrible seriousness deeply influ- 
enced their youthful development. Milton like, in declining 
order it is true, Baxter, and, still later, the free-thinker Franklin. 
Their later emancipation from its strict interpretation is dir- 
ectly parallel to the development which the religious movement 
as a whole underwent in the same direction. And all the great 

186 Notes 

37 

38 

39 

40 

41 

religious revivals, at least in Holland, and most of those in 
England, took it up again. 

As is true in such a striking way of the basic atmosphere of 
Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress. 

This question meant less to the later Lutheran, even apart from 
the doctrine of predestination, than to the Calvinist. Not 
because he was less interested in the salvation of his soul, but 
because, in the form which the Lutheran Church had taken, its 
character as an institution for salvation (Heilsanstalt) came to 
the fore. The individual thus felt himself to be an object of its 
care and dependent on it. The problem was first raised within 
Lutheranism characteristically enough through the Pietist 
movement. The question of certitudo salutis itself has, how- 
ever, for every non-sacramental religion of salvation, whether 
Buddhism, Jainism, or anything else, been absolutely funda- 
mental; that must not be forgotten. It has been the origin of all 
psychological drives of a purely religious character. 

Thus expressly in the letter to Bucer, Corp. Ref. 29, pp. 883 f. 
Compare with that again Scheibe, op. cit., p. 30. 

The Westminster Confession (XVIII, p. 2) also assures the elect of 
indubitable certainty of grace, although with all our activity we 
remain useless servants and the struggle against evil lasts 
one’s whole life long. But even the chosen one often has to 
struggle long and hard to attain the certitudo which the con- 
sciousness of having done his duty gives him and of which a 
true believer will never entirely be deprived. 

The orthodox Calvinistic doctrine referred to faith and the con- 
sciousness of community with God in the sacraments, and 
mentioned the “other fruits of the Spirit” only incidentally. See 
the passages in Heppe, op. cit., p. 425. Calvin himself most 
emphatically denied that works were indications of favour 
before God, although he, like the Lutherans, considered them 
the fruits of belief (Instit. Christ, Ill, 2, 37, 38). The actual evolu- 
tion to the proof of faith through works, which is characteristic 
of asceticism, is parallel to a gradual modification of the doc- 
trines of Calvin. As with Luther, the true Church was first marked 
off primarily by purity of doctrine and sacraments, but later the 

Notes 187 

disciplina came to be placed on an equal footing with the other 
two. This evolution may be followed in the passages given by 
Heppe, op. cit., pp. 194-5, as well as in the manner in which 
Church members were acquired in the Netherlands by the end 
of the sixteenth century (express subjection by agreement to 
Church discipline as the principal prerequisite). 

42 For example, Olevian, De substantia feederis gratuiti inter Deum 
et electos (1585), p. 257; Heidegger, Corpus Theologie, XXIV, 
p. 87; and other passages in Heppe, Dogmatik der ev. ref. Kirche 
(1861), p. 425. 

43 On this point see the remarks of Schneckenburger, op. cit., p. 48. 

44 Thus, for example, in Baxter the distinction between mortal and 
venial sin reappears in a truly Catholic sense. The former is a 
sign of the lack of grace which can only be attained by the 
conversion of one’s whole life. The latter is not incompatible 
with grace. 

45 As held in many different shades by Baxter, Bailey, Sedgwick, 
Hoornbeek. Further see examples given by Schneckenburger, 
op. cit., p. 262. 

46 The conception of the state of grace as a sort of social estate 
(somewhat like that of the ascetics of the early Church) is 
very common. See for instance Schortinghuis, Het innige 
Christendom (1740 proscribed by the States-General)! 

47 Thus, as we shall see later, in countless passages, especially the 
conclusion, of Baxter’s Christian Directory. This recommenda- 
tion of worldly activity as a means of overcoming one’s own 
feeling of moral inferiority is reminiscent of Pascal’s psycho- 
logical interpretation of the impulse of acquisition and ascetic 
activity as means to deceive oneself about one’s own moral 
worthlessness. For him the belief in predestination and the 
conviction of the original sinfulness of everything pertaining to 
the flesh resulted only in renunciation of the world and the 
recommendation of contemplation as the sole means of light- 
ening the burden of sin and attaining certainty of salvation. Of 
the orthodox Catholic and the Jansenist versions of the idea of 
calling an acute analysis has been made by Dr. Paul Honig- 
sheim in the dissertation cited above (part of a larger study, 

188 Notes 

48 

49 

which it is hoped will be continued). The Jansenists lacked 
every trace of a connection between certainty of salvation and 
worldly activity. Their concept of calling has, even more strongly 
than the Lutheran or even the orthodox Catholic, the sense of 
acceptance of the situation in life in which one finds oneself, 
sanctioned not only, as in Catholicism by the social order, but 
also by the voice of one’s own conscience (Honigsheim, op. cit., 
pp. 139 ff.). 

The very lucidly written sketch of Lobstein in the Festgabe fiir H. 
Holtzmann, which starts from his view-point, may also be com- 
pared with the following. It has been criticized for too sharp an 
emphasis on the certitudo salutis. But just at this point Calvin’s 
theology must be distinguished from Calvinism, the theological 
system from the needs of religious practice. All the religious 
movements which have affected large masses have started 
from the question, “How can | become certain of my salva- 
tion?” As we have said, it not only plays a central part in this 
case but in the history of all religions, even in India. And could 
it well be otherwise? 

Of course it cannot be denied that the full development of this 
conception did not take place until late Lutheran times (Przto- 
rius, Nicolai, Meisner). It is present, however, even in Johannes 
Gerhard, quite in the sense meant here. Hence Ritschl in Book 
IV of his Geschichte des Pietismus (Il, pp. 3 ff.) interprets the 
introduction of this concept into Lutheranism as a Renaissance 
or an adoption of Catholic elements. He does not deny (p. 10) 
that the problem of individual salvation was the same for 
Luther as for the Catholic Mystics, but he believes that the 
solution was precisely opposite in the two cases. | can, of 
course, have no competent opinion of my own. That the 
atmosphere of Die Freiheit eines Christenmenschen is different, 
on the one hand, from the sweet flirtation with the liebem Jesu- 
lein of the later writers, and on the other from Tauler’s religious 
feeling, is naturally obvious to anyone. Similarly the retention 
of the mystic-magical element in Luther’s doctrines of the 
Communion certainly has different religious motives from the 
Bernhardine piety, the “Song of Songs feeling” to which Ritschl 

50 

51 

52 

Notes 189 

again and again returns as the source of the bridal relations 
with Christ. But might not, among other things, that doctrine of 
the Communion have favoured the revival of mystical religious 
emotions? Further, it is by no means accurate to say that (p. 11, 
op. cit.) the freedom of the mystic consisted entirely in isolation 
from the world. Especially Tauler has, in passages which from 
the point of view of the psychology of religion are very interest- 
ing, maintained that the order which is thereby brought into 
thoughts concerning worldly activities is one practical result of 
the nocturnal contemplation which he recommends, for 
instance, in case of insomnia. “Only thereby [the mystical 
union with God at night before going to sleep] is reason clari- 
fied and the brain strengthened, and man is the whole day the 
more peacefully and divinely guided by virtue of the inner dis- 
cipline of having truly united himself with God: then all his 
works shall be set in order. And thus when a man has fore- 
warned (= prepared) himself of his work, and has placed his 
trust in virtue; then if he comes into the world, his works shall 
be virtuous and divine” (Predigten, fol. 318). Thus we see, and 
we shall return to the point, that mystic contemplation and a 
rational attitude toward the calling are not in themselves mutu- 
ally contradictory. The opposite is only true when the religion 
takes on a directly hysterical character, which has not been the 
case with all mystics nor even all Pietists. 

On this see the introduction to the following essays on the 
Wirtschaftsethik der Weltreligionen (not included in this transla- 
tion: German in Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Religionssoziologie. — 
TRANSLATOR’S NOTE). 

In this assumption Calvinism has a point of contact with official 
Catholicism. But for the Catholics there resulted the necessity 
of the sacrament of repentance; for the Reformed Church that 
of practical proof through activity in the world. 

See, for instance, Beza (De preedestinat doct ex preelect. in Rom 
ga, Raph. Eglino exc. 1584), p. 133: “Sicut ex operibus vere bonis 
ad sanctificationis donum, a sanctificatione ad fidem— 
ascendimus: ita ex certis illis effectis non quamvis vocationem, 
sed efficacem illam et ex hac vocatione electionem et ex 

190 notes 

electione donum preedestinationis in Christo tam firmam quam 
immotus est Dei thronus certissima connexione effectorum 
et acausarum colligimus. ...” Only with regard to the signs 
of damnation is it necessary to be careful, since it is a matter of 
final judgment. On this point the Puritans first differed. See 
further the thorough discussion of Schneckenburger, op. cit., 
who to be sure only cites a limited category of literature. In the 
whole Puritan literature this aspect comes out. “It will not be 
said, did you believe?>—but: were you Doers or Talkers only?” 
says Bunyan. According to Baxter (The Saints’ Everlasting Rest, 
chap. xii), who teaches the mildest form of predestination, faith 
means subjection to Christ in heart and in deed. “Do what you 
are able first, and then complain of God for denying you grace if 
you have cause”, was his answer to the objection that the will 
was not free and God alone was able to insure salvation (Works 
of the Puritan Divines, |V, p. 155). The investigation of Fuller (the 
Church historian) was limited to the one question of practical 
proof and the indications of his state of grace in his conduct, 
The same with Howe in the passage referred to elsewhere. 
Any examination of the Works of the Puritan Divines gives ample 
proofs. 

Not seldom the conversion to Puritanism was due to 
Catholic ascetic writings, thus, with Baxter, a Jesuit tract. These 
conceptions were not wholly new compared with Calvin’s own 
doctrine (Instit. Christ, chap. i, original edition of 1536, pp. 97, 
113). Only for Calvin himself the certainty of salvation could not 
be attained in this manner (p. 147). Generally one referred to 1 
John iii. 5 and similar passages. The demand for fides efficax is 
not—to anticipate—limited to the Calvinists. Baptist confes- 
sions of faith deal, in the article on predestination, similarly 
with the fruits of faith (“and that its—regeneration—proper 
evidence appears in the holy fruits of repentance and faith and 
newness of life’—Article 7 of the Confession printed in the 
Baptist Church Manual by J. N. Brown, D.D., Philadelphia, Am. 
Bapt. Pub. Soc.). In the same way the tract (under Mennonite 
influence), Oliif—Tacxken, which the Harlem Synod adopted in 
1649, begins on page 1 with the question of how the children of 

53 

54 

55 

56 

57 

58 
59 
60 
61 

62 
63 

64 

65 

Notes 191 

God are to be known, and answers (p. 10): “Nu al is’t dat 
dasdanigh vruchtbare ghelove alleene zii het seker fondamen- 
tale kennteeken—om de conscientien der gelovigen in het 
nieuwe verbondt der genade Gods te versekeren.” 

Of the significance of this for the material content of social 
ethics some hint has been given above. Here we are interested 
not in the content, but in the motives of moral action. 

How this idea must have promoted the penetration of Puritan- 
ism with the Old Testament Hebrew spirit is evident. 

Thus the Savoy Declaration says of the members of the ecclesia 
pura that they are “saints by effectual calling, visibly manifested 
by their profession and walking”. 

“A Principle of Goodness”, Charnock in the Works of the Puritan 
Divines, p. 175. 

Conversion is, as Sedgwick puts it, an “exact copy of the decree 
of predestination”. And whoever is chosen is also called to 
obedience and made capable of it, teaches Bailey. Only those 
whom God calls to His faith (which is expressed in their con- 
duct) are true believers, not merely temporary believers, 
according to the (Baptist) Confession of Hanserd Knolly. 
Compare, for instance, the conclusion to Baxter’s Christian 
Directory. 

Thus, for instance, Charnock, Self-Examination, p. 183, in refuta- 
tion of the Catholic doctrine of dubitatio. 

This argument recurs again and again in Hoornbeek, Theologia 
practica. For instance, |, p. 160; Il, pp. 70, 72, 182. 

For instance, the Conf. Helvet, 16, says “et improprie his [the 
works] salus adtribuitur’”. 

With all the above compare Schneckenburger, pp. 80 ff. 
Augustine is supposed to have said “si non es pradestinatus, 
fac ut preedestineris”. 

One is reminded of a saying of Goethe with essentially the 
same meaning: “How can a man know himself? Never by 
observation, but through action. Try to do your duty and you 
will know what is in you. And what is your duty? Your daily 
task.” 

For though Calvin himself held that saintliness must appear on 

192 notes 

66 

the surface (Instit. Christ, IV, pp. 1, 2, 7, 9), the dividing-line 
between saints and sinners must ever remain hidden from 
human knowledge. We must believe that where God’s pure 
word is alive in a Church, organized and administered accord- 
ing to his law, some of the elect, even though we do not know 
them, are present. 

The Calvinistic faith is one of the many examples in the history 
of religions of the relation between the logical and the psycho- 
logical consequences for the practical religious attitude to be 
derived from certain religious ideas. Fatalism is, of course, the 
only logical consequence of predestination. But on account of 
the idea of proof the psychological result was precisely the 
opposite. For essentially similar reasons the followers of 
Nietzsche claim a positive ethical significance for the idea of 
eternal recurrence. This case, however, is concerned with 
responsibility for a future life which is connected with the active 
individual by no conscious thread of continuity, while for the 
Puritan it was tua res agitur. Even Hoornbeek (Theologia prac- 
tica, |, p. 159) analyses the relation between predestination and 
action well in the language of the times. The electi are, on 
account of their election, proof against fatalism because in 
their rejection of it they prove themselves “quos ipsa electio 
sollicitos reddit et diligentes officiorum”. The practical interests 
cut off the fatalistic consequences of logic (which, however, in 
spite of everything occasionally did break through). 

But, on the other hand, the content of ideas of a religion is, 
as Calvinism shows, far more important than William James 
(Varieties of Religious Experience, 1902, pp. 444 f.) is inclined to 
admit. The significance of the rational element in religious 
metaphysics is shown in classical form by the tremendous 
influence which especially the logical structure of the Calvinistic 
concept of God exercised on life. If the God of the Puritans has 
influenced history as hardly another before or since, it is princi- 
pally due to the attributes which the power of thought had 
given him. James’s pragmatic valuation of the significance of 
religious ideas according to their influence on life is inci- 
dentally a true child of the world of ideas of the Puritan home of 

67 

Notes 193 

that eminent scholar. The religious experience as such is of 
course irrational, like every experience. In its highest, mystical 
form it is even the experience. In its highest, mystical form it is 
even the experience xar' ¿£oxħv, and, as James has well shown, 
is distinguished by its absolute incommunicability. It has a spe- 
cific character and appears as knowledge, but cannot be 
adequately reproduced by means of our lingual and conceptual 
apparatus. It is further true that every religious experience loses 
some of its content in the attempt of rational formulation, the 
further the conceptual formulation goes, the more so. That is 
the reason for many of the tragic conflicts of all rational the- 
ology, as the Baptist sects of the seventeenth century already 
knew. But that irrational element, which is by no means pecu- 
liar to religious experience, but applies (in different senses and 
to different degrees) to every experience, does not prevent its 
being of the greatest practical importance, of what particular 
type the system of ideas is, that captures and moulds the 
immediate experience of religion in its own way. For from this 
source develop, in times of great influence of the Church on life 
and of strong interest in dogmatic considerations within it, 
most of those differences between the various religions in their 
ethical consequences which are of such great practical import- 
ance. How unbelievably intense, measured by present stand- 
ards, the dogmatic interests even of the layman were, everyone 
knows who is familiar with the historical sources. We can find a 
parallel to-day only in the at bottom equally superstitious belief 
of the modern proletariat in what can be accomplished and 
proved by science. 

Baxter, The Saints’ Everlasting Rest, |, p. 6, answers to the ques- 
tion: “Whether to make salvation our end be not mercenary or 
legal? It is property mercenary when we expect it as wages for 
work done.... Otherwise it is only such a mercenarism as 
Christ commandeth ... and if seeking Christ be mercenary, | 
desire to be so mercenary.” Nevertheless, many Calvinists who 
are considered orthodox do not escape falling into a very crass 
sort of mercenariness. According to Bailey, Praxis pietatis, 
p. 262, alms are a means of escaping temporal punishment. 

194 notes 

68 

69 

70 

71 

Other theologians urged the damned to perform good works, 
since their damnation might thereby become somewhat more 
bearable, but the elect because God will then not only love 
them without cause but ob causam, which shall certainly some- 
time have its reward. The apologists have also made certain 
small concessions concerning the significance of good works 
for the degree of salvation (Schneckenburger, op. cit., p. 101). 
Here also it is absolutely necessary, in order to bring out the 
characteristic differences, to speak in terms of ideal types, thus 
in a certain sense doing violence to historical reality. But with- 
out this a clear formulation would be quite impossible con- 
sidering the complexity of the material. In how far the differ- 
ences which we here draw as sharply as possible were merely 
relative, would have to be discussed separately. It is, of course, 
true that the official Catholic doctrine, even in the Middle Ages, 
itself set up the ideal of a systematic sanctification of life as a 
whole. But it is just as certain (1) that the normal practice of the 
Church, directly on account of its most effective means of dis- 
cipline, the confession, promoted the unsystematic way of life 
discussed in the text, and further (2) that the fundamentally 
rigorous and cold atmosphere in which he lived and the abso- 
lute isolation of the Calvinst were utterly foreign to medizeval 
lay-Catholicism. 

The absolutely fundamental importance of this factor will, as 
has already once been pointed out, gradually become clear in 
the essays on the Wirtschaftsethik der Weltreligionen. 

And to a certain extent also to the Lutheran. Luther did not wish 
to eliminate this last vestige of sacramental magic. 

Compare, for instance, Sedgwick, Buss- und Gnadenlehre (Ger- 
man by Roscher, 1689). The repentant man has a fast rule to 
which he holds himself exactly, ordering thereby his whole life 
and conduct (p. 591). He lives according to the law, shrewdly, 
wakefully, and carefully (p. 596). Only a permanent change in 
the whole man can, since it is a result of predestination, cause 
this (p. 852). True repentance is always expressed in conduct 
(p. 361). The difference between only morally good work and 
opera spiritualia lies, as Hoornbeek (op. cit., |, IX, chap. ii) 

72 

73 

74 

75 

76 

Notes 195 

explains, in the fact that the latter are the results of a regenerate 
life (op. cit., 1, p. 160). A continuous progress in them is dis- 
cernible which can only be achieved by the supernatural 
influence of God’s grace (p. 150). Salvation results from the 
transformation of the whole man through the grace of God 
(pp. 190 f.). These ideas are common to all Protestantism, and 
are of course found in the highest ideals of Catholicism as well. 
But their consequences could only appear in the Puritan 
movements of worldly asceticism, and above all only in those 
cases did they have adequate psychological sanctions. 

The latter name is, especially in Holland, derived from those 
who modelled their lives precisely on the example of the Bible 
(thus with Voet). Moreover, the name Methodists occurs 
occasionally among the Puritans in the seventeenth century. 
For, as the Puritan preachers emphasize (for instance Bunyan 
in the Pharisee and the Publican, Works of the Puritan Divines, 
p. 126), every single sin would destroy everything which might 
have been accumulated in the way of merit by good works in a 
lifetime, if, which is unthinkable, man were alone able to 
accomplish anything which God should necessarily recognize 
as meritorious, or even could live in perfection for any length of 
time. Thus Puritanism did not think as did Catholicism in terms 
of a sort of account with calculation of the balance, a simile 
which was common even in antiquity, but of the definite alter- 
native of grace or damnation held for a life as a whole. For 
suggestions of the bank account idea see note 102 below. 
Therein lies the distinction from the mere Legality and Civility 
which Bunyan has living as associates of Mr. Worldly-Wiseman 
in the City called Morality. 

Charnock, Self-Examination (Works of the Puritan Divines, 
p. 172): “Reflection and knowledge of self is a prerogative of a 
rational nature.” Also the footnote: “Cogito, ergo sum, is the 
first principle of the new philosophy.” 

This is not yet the place to discuss the relationship of the 
theology of Duns Scotus to certain ideas of ascetic Protestant- 
ism. It never gained official recognition, but was at best toler- 
ated and at times proscribed. The later specific repugnance of 

196 Notes 

77 

78 

79 

80 

81 

the Pietists to Aristotelean philosophy was shared by Luther, in 
a somewhat different sense, and also by Calvin in conscious 
antagonism to Catholicism (cf. Instit. Christ, Il, chap. xii, p. 4; IV, 
chap. xvii, p. 24). The “primacy of the will”, as Kahl has put it, is 
common to all these movements. 

Thus, for instance, the article on “Asceticism” in the Catholic 
Church Lexicon defines its meaning entirely in harmony with 
its highest historical manifestations. Similarly Seeberg in the 
Realenzyklopddie für protestantische Theologie und Kirche. For the 
purpose of this study we must be allowed to use the concept as 
we have done. That it can be defined in other ways, more 
broadly as well as more narrowly, and is generally so defined, | 
am well aware. 

In Hudibras (ist Song, 18, 19) the Puritans are compared with 
the bare-foot Franciscans. A report of the Genoese Ambas- 
sador, Ficeschi, calls Cromwell’s army an assembly of monks. 
In view of the close relationship between otherworldly monastic 
asceticism and active worldly asceticism, which | here expressly 
maintain, | am surprised to find Brentano (op. cit., p. 134 and 
elsewhere) citing the ascetic labour of the monks and its rec- 
ommendation against me. His whole “Exkurs” against me 
culminates in that. But that continuity is, as anyone can see, a 
fundamental postulate of my whole thesis: the Reformation 
took rational Christian asceticism and its methodical habits out 
of the monasteries and placed them in the service of active life 
in the world. Compare the following discussion, which has not 
been altered. 

So in the many reports of the trials of Puritan heretics cited in 
Neal’s History of the Puritans and Crosby’s English Baptists. 
Sanford, op. cit. (and both before and after him many others), 
has found the origin of the ideal of reserve in Puritanism. 
Compare on that ideal also the remarks of James Bryce on the 
American college in Vol. Il of his American Commonwealth. 
The ascetic principle of self-control also made Puritanism one 
of the fathers of modern military discipline. (On Maurice of 
Orange as a founder of modern army organization, see Roloff, 
Preuss. Jahrb., 1903, Ill, p. 255.) Cromwells Ironsides, with 

Notes 197 

cocked pistols in their hands, and approaching the enemy at a 
brisk trot without shooting, were not the superiors of the Cava- 
liers by virtue of their fierce passion, but, on the contrary, 
through their cool self-control, which enabled their leaders 
always to keep them well in hand. The knightly storm-attack of 
the Cavaliers, on the other hand, always resulted in dissolving 
their troops into atoms. See Firth, Cromwell’s Army. 

82 See especially Windelband, Ueber Willensfreiheit, pp. 77 ff. 

83 Only not so unmixed. Contemplation, sometimes combined 
with emotionalism, is often combined with these rational 
elements. But again contemplation itself is methodically 
regulated. 

84 According to Richard Baxter everything is sinful which is con- 
trary to the reason given by God as a norm of action. Not only 
passions which have a sinful content, but all feelings which are 
senseless and intemperate as such. They destroy the counten- 
ance and, as things of the flesh, prevent us from rationally 
directing all action and feeling to God, and thus insult Him. 
Compare what is said of the sinfulness of anger (Christian Dir- 
ectory, second edition, 1698, p. 285. Tauler is cited on p. 287). 
On the sinfulness of anxiety, Ebenda, |, p. 287. That it is idolatry 
if our appetite is made the “rule or measure of eating” is main- 
tained very emphatically (op. cit., |, pp. 310, 316, and else- 
where). In such discussions reference is made everywhere to 
the Proverbs and also to Plutarch’s De tranquilitate Animi, and 
not seldom to ascetic writings of the Middle Ages: St. Bernard, 
Bonaventura, and others. The contrast to “who does not love 
wine, women, and song ...” could hardly be more sharply 
drawn than by the extension of the idea of idolatry to all sensu- 
ous pleasures, so far as they are not justified by hygienic con- 
siderations, in which case they (like sport within these limits, 
but also other recreations) are permissible. See below (Chapter 
5) for further discussion. Please note that the sources referred 
to here and elsewhere are neither dogmatic nor edifying works, 
but grew out of practical ministry, and thus give a good picture 
of the direction which its influence took. 

85 | should regret it if any evaluation of one or the other form of 

198 Notes 

86 

87 

88 

89 

90 

91 

religion should be read into this discussion. We are not con- 
cerned with that here. It is only a question of the influence of 
certain things which, from a purely religious point of view, are 
perhaps incidental, but important for practical conduct. 

On this, see especially the article “Moralisten, englische”, by 
E. Troeltsch, in the Realenzyklopädie für protestantische Theologie 
und Kirche, third edition. 

How much influence quite definite religious ideas and situ- 
ations, which seem to be historical accidents, have had is 
shown unusually clearly by the fact that in the circles of Pietism 
of a Reformed origin the lack of monasteries was occasionally 
directly regretted, and that the communistic experiments of 
Labadie and others were simply a substitute for monastic life. 
As early even as several confessions of the time of the Refor- 
mation. Even Ritschl (Pietismus, |, p. 258 f.) does not deny, 
although he looks upon the later development as a deterior- 
ation of the ideas of the Reformation, that, for instance, in 
Conf. Gall. 25, 26, Conf. Belg. 29, Conf. Helv. post, 17, the true 
Reformed Church was defined by definitely empirical attributes, 
and that to this true Church believers were not accounted 
without the attribute of moral activity. (See above, note 42.) 
“Bless God that we are not of the many” (Thomas Adams, 
Works of the Puritan Divines, p. 138). 

The idea of the birthright, so important in history, thus received 
an important confirmation in England. “The firstborn which are 
written in heaven. . . . As the firstborn is not to be defeated in 
his inheritance, and the enrolled names are never to be obliter- 
ated, so certainly they shall inherit eternal life’ (Thomas 
Adams, Works of the Puritan Divines, p. xiv). 

The Lutheran emphasis on penitent grief is foreign to the spirit 
of ascetic Calvinism, not in theory, but definitely in practice. For 
it is of no ethical value to the Calvinist; it does not help the 
damned, while for those certain of their election, their own sin, 
so far as they admit it to themselves, is a symptom of back- 
wardness in development. Instead of repenting of it they hate it 
and attempt to overcome it by activity for the glory of God. 
Compare the explanation of Howe (Cromwell’s chaplain 1656- 

92 

93 
94 

95 

96 
97 

Notes 199 

58) in Of Men’s Enmity against God and of Reconciliation between 
God and Man (Works of English Puritan Divines, p. 237): “The 
carnal mind is enmity against God. It is the mind, therefore, not 
as speculative merely, but as practical and active that must be 
renewed”, and, p. 246: “Reconciliation ... must begin in (1) a 
deep conviction ... of your former enmity .... | have been 
alienated from God. . . . (2) (p. 251) a clear and lively apprehen- 
sion of the monstrous iniquity and wickedness thereof.” The 
hatred here is that of sin, not of the sinner. But as early as the 
famous letter of the Duchess Renata d’Este (Leonore’s mother) 
to Calvin, in which she speaks of the hatred which she would 
feel toward her father and husband if she became convinced 
they belonged to the damned, is shown the transfer to the 
person. At the same time it is an example of what was said 
above [pp. 104-6] of how the individual became loosed from 
the ties resting on his natural feelings, for which the doctrine of 
predestination was responsible. 

“None but those who give evidence of being regenerate or holy 
persons ought to be received or counted fit members of visible 
Churches. Where this is wanting, the very essence of a Church 
is lost”, as the principle is put by Owen, the Independent- 
Calvinistic Vice-Chancellor of Oxford under Cromwell (Inv. into 
the Origin of Ev. Ch.). Further, see the following essay (not 
translated here—TRANSLATOR). 

See following essay. 

Cat. Genev., p. 149. Bailey, Praxis pietatis, p. 125: “In life we 
should act as though no one but Moses had authority over us.” 
“The law appears to the Calvinist as an ideal norm of action. It 
oppresses the Lutheran because it is for him unattainable.” In 
the Lutheran catechism it stands at the beginning in order to 
arouse the necessary humility, in the Reformed catechism it 
generally stands after the Gospel. The Calvinists accused the 
Lutherans of having a “virtual reluctance to becoming holy” 
(Mohler), while the Lutherans accused the Calvinists of an 
“unfree servitude to the law”, and of arrogance. 

Studies and Reflections of the Great Rebellion, pp. 79 f. 

Among them the Song of Songs is especially noteworthy. It was 

200 notes 

98 

99 

100 

101 

102 

103 

104 

for the most part simply ignored by the Puritans. Its Oriental 
eroticism has influenced the development of certain types of 
religion, such as that of St. Bernard. 

On the necessity of this self-observation, see the sermon of 
Charnock, already referred to, on 2 Cor. xiii, 5, Works of the 
Puritan Divines, pp. 161 ff. 

Most of the theological moralists recommended it. Thus 
Baxter, Christian Directory, ||, pp. 77 ff., who, however, does not 
gloss over its dangers. 

Moral book-keeping has, of course, been widespread else- 
where. But the emphasis which was placed upon it as the sole 
means of knowledge of the eternal decree of salvation or 
damnation was lacking, and with it the most important psy- 
chological sanction for care and exactitude in this calculation. 
This was the significant difference from other attitudes which 
were superficially similar. 

Baxter (Saints’ Everlasting Rest, chap. xii) explains God’s 
invisibility with the remark that just as one can carry on profit- 
able trade with an invisible foreigner through correspondence, 
so is it possible by means of holy commerce with an invisible 
God to get possession of the one priceless pearl. These com- 
mercial similes rather than the forensic ones customary with 
the older moralists and the Lutherans are thoroughly charac- 
teristic of Puritanism, which in effect makes man buy his own 
salvation. Compare further the following passage from a ser- 
mon: “We reckon the value of a thing by that which a wise man 
will give for it, who is not ignorant of it nor under necessity. 
Christ, the Wisdom of God, gave Himself, His own precious 
blood, to redeem souls, and He knew what they were and had 
no need of them” (Matthew Henry, The Worth of the Soul, 
Works of the Puritan Divines, p. 313). 

In contrast to that, Luther himself said: “Weeping goes before 
action and suffering excells all accomplishment” (Weinen geht 
vor Wirken und Leiden übertrifft alles tun). 

This is also shown most clearly in the development of the 
ethical theory of Lutheranism. On this see Hoennicke, Studien 
zur altprotestantischen Ethik (Berlin, 1902), and the instructive 

Notes 201 

review of it by E. Troeltsch, Gött. Gel. Anz., 1902, No. 8. The 
approach of the Lutheran doctrine, especially to the older 
orthodox Calvinistic, was in form often very close. But the 
difference of religious background was always apparent. In 
order to establish a connection between morality and faith, 
Melanchthon had placed the idea of repentance in the fore- 
ground. Repentance through the law must precede faith, but 
good works must follow it, otherwise it cannot be the truly 
justifying faith—almost a Puritan formula. Melanchthon 
admitted a certain degree of perfection to be attainable on 
earth. He had, in fact, originally taught that justification was 
given in order to make men capable of good works, and in 
increasing perfection lay at least the relative degree of bless- 
edness which faith could give in this world. Also later Lutheran 
theologians held that good works are the necessary fruits of 
faith, that faith results in a new external life, just as the 
Reformed preachers did. The question in what good works 
consist Melanchthon, and especially the later Lutherans, 
answered more and more by reference to the law. There 
remained of Luther’s original doctrines only the lesser degree 
of seriousness with which the Bible, especially the particular 
norms of the Old Testament, was taken. The decalogue 
remained, as a codification of the most important ideas of the 
natural moral law, the essential norm of human action. But 
there was no firm limit connecting its legal validity with the 
more and more strongly emphasized importance of faith for 
justification, because this faith (see above) had a funda- 
mentally different psychological character from the Calvinistic. 

The true Lutheran standpoint of the early period had to be 
abandoned by a Church which looked upon itself as an institu- 
tion for salvation. But another had not been found. Especially 
was it impossible, for fear of losing their dogmatic foundation 
(sola fide!), to accept the ascetic rationalization of conduct as 
the moral task of the individual. For there was no motive to 
give the idea of proof such a significance as it attained in 
Calvinism through the doctrine of predestination. Moreover, 
the magical interpretation of the sacraments, combined with 

202 notes 

the lack of this doctrine, especially the association of the 
regeneratio, or at least its beginning with baptism, necessarily, 
assuming as it did the universality of grace, hindered the 
development of methodical morality. For it weakened the con- 
trast between the state of nature and the state of grace, espe- 
cially when combined with the strong Lutheran emphasis on 
original sin. No less important was the entirely forensic inter- 
pretation of the act of justification which assumed that God’s 
decrees might be changed through the influence of particular 
acts of repentance of the converted sinner. And that was just 
the element to which Melanchthon gave increasing emphasis. 
The whole development of his doctrine, which gave increasing 
weight to repentance, was intimately connected with his pro- 
fession of the freedom of the will. That was what primarily 
determined the unmethodical character of Lutheran conduct. 

Particular acts of grace for particular sins, not the develop- 
ment of an aristocracy of saints creating the certainty of their 
own salvation, was the necessary form salvation took for the 
average Lutheran, as the retention of the confession proves. 
Thus it could develop neither a morality free from the law nor 
a rational asceticism in terms of the law. Rather the law 
remained in an unorganic proximity to faith as an ideal, and, 
moreover, since the strict dependence on the Bible was 
avoided as suggesting salvation by works, it remained 
uncertain, vague, and, above all, unsystematic in its content. 
Their conduct remained, as Troeltsch has said of their ethical 
theory, a “sum of mere beginnings which never quite material- 
ized”; which, “taught in particular, uncertain, and unrelated 
maxims”, did not succeed in “working out an articulate sys- 
tem of conduct”, but formed essentially, following the devel- 
opment through which Luther himself (see above) had gone, 
a resignation to things as they were in matters both small and 
great. The resignation of the Germans to foreign cultures, 
their rapid change of nationality, of which there is so much 
complaint, is clearly to be attributed, along with certain polit- 
ical circumstances in the history of the nation, in part to the 
results of this influence, which still affects all aspects of our 

Notes 203 

life. The subjective assimilation of culture remained weak 
because it took place primarily by means of a passive absorp- 
tion of what was authoritatively presented. 

105 On these points, see the gossipy book of Tholuck, Vorge- 
schichte des Rationalismus. 

106 On the quite different results of the Mohammedan doctrine of 
predestination (or rather predetermination) and the reasons 
for it, see the theological dissertation (Heidelberg) of 
F. Ullrich, Die Vorherbestimmungslehre im Islam u. Ch., 1912. 
On that of the Jansenists, see P. Honigsheim, op. cit. 

107 See the following essay in this collection (not translated here). 

108 Ritschl, Geschichte des Pietismus, |, p. 152, attempts to dis- 
tinguish them for the time before Labadie (only on the basis of 
examples from the Netherlands) (1) in that the Pietists formed 
conventicles; (2) they held the doctrine of the “worthlessness 
of existence in the flesh” in a “manner contrary to the Protest- 
ant interests in salvation”; (3) “the assurance of grace in the 
tender relationship with the Lord Jesus” was sought in an un- 
Calvinistic manner. The last criterion applies for this early 
period only to one of the cases with which he deals. The idea 
of worthlessness of the flesh was in itself a true child of the 
Calvinistic spirit, and only where it led to practical renunciation 
of the world was it antagonistic to normal Protestantism. 
The conventicles, finally, had been established to a certain 
extent (especially for catechistic purposes) by the Synod of 
Dordrecht itself. Of the criteria of Pietism analysed in Ritschl’s 
previous discussion, those worth considering are (1) the 
greater precision with which the letter of the Bible was fol- 
lowed in all external affairs of life, as Gisbert Voet for a time 
urged; (2) the treatment of justification and reconciliation 
with God, not as ends in themselves, but simply as means 
toward a holy ascetic life as can be seen perhaps in Loden- 
steyn, but as is also suggested by Melanchthon [see above, 
note 104]; (3) the high value placed on repentance as a sign of 
true regeneration, as was first taught by W. Teellinck; (4) 
abstention from communion when unregenerate persons 
partake of it (of which we shall speak in another connection). 

204 notes 

Connected with that was the formation of conventicles with a 
revival of prophecy, i.e. interpretation of the Scriptures by lay- 
men, even women. That went beyond the limits set by the 
canons of Dordrecht. 

Those are all things forming departures, sometimes con- 
siderable, from both the doctrine and practice of the Reform- 
ers. But compared with the movements which Ritschl does 
not include in his treatment, especially the English Puritans, 
they form, except for No. 3, only a continuation of tendencies 
which lay in the whole line of development of this religion. The 
objectivity of Ritschl’s treatment suffers from the fact that the 
great scholar allows his personal attitude towards the Church 
or, perhaps better, religious policy, to enter in, and, in his 
antipathy to all peculiarly ascetic forms of religion, interprets 
any development in that direction as a step back into Catholi- 
cism. But, like Catholicism, the older Protestantism included 
all sorts and conditions of men. But that did not prevent the 
Catholic Church from repudiating rigorous worldly asceticism 
in the form of Jansenism; just as Pietism repudiated the pecu- 
liar Catholic Quietism of the seventeenth century. From our 
special view-point Pietism differs not in degree, but in kind 
from Calvinism only when the increasing fear of the world 
leads to flight from ordinary economic life and the formation 
of monastic-communistic conventicles (Labadie). Or, which 
has been attributed to certain extreme Pietists by their con- 
temporaries, they were led deliberately to neglect worldly 
duties in favour of contemplation. This naturally happened 
with particular frequency when contemplation began to 
assume the character which Ritschl calls Bernardism, because 
it suggests St. Bernard’s interpretation of the Song of Songs; a 
mystical, emotional form of religion seeking the unio mystica 
with an esoteric sexual tinge. Even from the view-point of 
religious psychology alone this is undoubtedly something 
quite different from Calvinism, including its ascetic form 
exemplified by men like Voet. Ritschl, however, everywhere 
attempts to connect this quietism with the Pietist asceticism 
and thus to bring the latter under the same indictment; in 

Notes 205 

doing so he puts his finger on every quotation from Catholic 
mysticism or asceticism which he can find in Pietist literature. 
But English and Dutch moralists and theologians who are 
quite beyond suspicion cite Bernard, Bonaventura, and 
Thomas a Kempis. The relationship of all the Reformation 
Churches to the Catholic past was very complex and, according 
to the point of view which is emphasized, one or another ap- 
pears most closely related to Catholicism or certain sides of it. 

109 The illuminating article on “Pietism” by Mirbt in the third 
edition of the Realenzyklopddie fiir protestantische Theologie 
und Kirche, treats the origin of Pietism, leaving its Protestant 
antecedents entirely on one side, as a purely personal 
religious experience of Spener, which is somewhat improb- 
able. As an introduction to Pietism, Gustav Freytag’s descrip- 
tion in Bilder der deutschen Vergangenheit is still worth reading. 
For the beginnings of English Pietism in the contemporary 
literature, compare W. Whitaker, Prima Instituto disciplinaque 
pietatis (1570). 

110 It is well known that this attitude made it possible for Piet- 
ism to be one of the main forces behind the idea of toler- 
ation. At this point we may insert a few remarks on that 
subject. In the West its historical origin, if we omit the 
humanistic indifference of the Enlightenment, which in itself 
has never had great practical influence, is to be found in the 
following principal sources: (1) Purely political expediency 
(type: William of Orange). (2) Mercantilism (especially clear 
for the City of Amsterdam, but also typical of numerous cit- 
ies, landlords, and rulers who received the members of sects 
as valuable for economic progress). (3) The radical wing of 
Calvinism. Predestination made it fundamentally impossible 
for the State really to promote religion by intolerance. It 
could not thereby save a single soul. Only the idea of the 
glory of God gave the Church occasion to claim its help in 
the suppression of heresy. Now the greater the emphasis on 
the membership of the preacher, and all those that partook 
of the communion, in the elect, the more intolerable became 
the interference of the State in the appointment of the clergy. 

206 notes 

For clerical positions were often granted as benefices to men 
from the universities only because of their theological train- 
ing, though they might be personally unregenerate. In general, 
any interference in the affairs of the religious community by 
those in political power, whose conduct might often be 
unsatisfactory, was resented. Reformed Pietism strengthened 
this tendency by weakening the emphasis on doctrinal ortho- 
doxy and by gradually undermining the principle of extra 
ecclesiam nulla salus. 

Calvin had regarded the subjection of the damned to the 
divine supervision of the Church as alone consistent with the 
glory of God; in New England the attempt was made to con- 
stitute the Church as an aristocracy of proved saints. Even 
the radical Independents, however, repudiated every interfer- 
ence of temporal or any sort of hierarchical powers with the 
proof of salvation which was only possible within the indi- 
vidual community. The idea that the glory of God requires 
the subjection of the damned to the discipline of the Church 
was gradually superseded by the other idea, which was pres- 
ent from the beginning and became gradually more promin- 
ent, that it was an insult to His glory to partake of the Com- 
munion with one rejected by God. That necessarily led to 
voluntarism, for it led to the believers’ Church the religious 
community which included only the twice-born. Calvinistic 
Baptism, to which, for instance, the leader of the Parliament 
of Saints Praisegod Barebones belonged, drew the con- 
sequences of this line of thought with great emphasis. 
Cromwell's army upheld the liberty of conscience and the 
parliament of saints even advocated the separation of 
Church and State, because its members were good Pietists, 
thus on positive religious grounds. (4) The Baptist sects, 
which we shall discuss later, have from the beginning of their 
history most strongly and consistently maintained the prin- 
ciple that only those personally regenerated could be admit- 
ted to the Church. Hence they repudiated every conception 
of the Church as an institution (Anstalt) and every interfer- 
ence of the temporal power. Here also it was for positive 

111 

Notes 207 

religious reasons that unconditional toleration was 
advocated. 

The first man who stood out for absolute toleration and the 
separation of Church and State, almost a generation before 
the Baptists and two before Roger Williams, was probably 
John Browne. The first declaration of a Church group in this 
sense appears to be the resolution of the English Baptists in 
Amsterdam of 1612 or 1613: “The magistrate is not to middle 
with religion or matters of conscience ... because Christ is 
the King and Law-giver of the Church and conscience.” The 
first official document of a Church which claimed the positive 
protection of liberty of conscience by the State as a right was 
probably Article 44 of the Confession of the Particular Baptists 
of 1644. 

Let it be emphatically stated again that the idea sometimes 
brought forward, that toleration as such was favourable to 
capitalism, is naturally quite wrong. Religious toleration is nei- 
ther peculiar to modern times nor to the West. It has ruled in 
China, in India, in the great empires of the Near East in Hel- 
lenistic times, in the Roman Empire and the Mohammedan 
Empires for long periods to a degree only limited by reasons 
of political expediency (which form its limits to-day also!) 
which was attained nowhere in the world in the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries. Moreover, it was least strong in those 
areas which were dominated by Puritanism, as, for instance, 
Holland and Zeeland in their period of political and economic 
expansion or in Puritan old or New England. Both before arid 
after the Reformation, religious intolerance was peculiarly 
characteristic of the Occident as of the Sassanian Empire. 
Similarly, it has prevailed in China, Japan, and India at certain 
particular times, though mostly for political reasons. Thus 
toleration as such certainly has nothing whatever to do with 
capitalism. The real question, Who benefited by it? Of the 
consequences of the believers’ Church we shall speak further 
in the following article. 

This idea is illustrated in its practical application by 
Cromwell's tryers, the examiners of candidates for the 

208 notes 

112 

113 

114 

position of preacher. They attempted to ascertain not only the 
knowledge of theology, but also the subjective state of grace of 
the candidate. See also the following article. 

The characteristic Pietistic distrust of Aristotle and classical 
philosophy in general is suggested in Calvin himself (compare 
Instit. Christ, Il, chap. ii, p. 4; Ill, chap. xxiii, p. 5; IV, chap. xvii, 
p. 24). Luther in his early days distrusted it no less, but that 
was later changed by the humanistic influence (especially of 
Melanchthon) and the urgent need of ammunition for apolo- 
getic purposes. That everything necessary for salvation was 
contained in the Scriptures plainly enough for even the 
untutored was, of course, taught by the Westminster Confes- 
sion (chap. i, No. 7.), in conformity with the whole Protestant 
tradition. 

The official Churches protested against this, as, for example, 
in the shorter catechism of the Scotch Presbyterian Church of 
1648, sec. vii. Participation of those not members of the same 
family in family devotions was forbidden as interference with 
the prerogatives of the office. Pietism, like every ascetic 
community-forming movement, tended to loosen the ties of 
the individual with domestic patriarchalism, with its interest 
in the prestige of office. 

We are here for good reasons intentionally neglecting discus- 
sion of the psychological, in the technical sense of the word, 
aspect of these religious phenomena, and even its termin- 
ology has been as far as possible avoided. The firmly estab- 
lished results of psychology, including psychiatry, do not as 
present go far enough to make them of use for the purposes 
of the historical investigation of our problems without preju- 
dicing historical judgments. The use of its terminology would 
only form a temptation to hide phenomena which were 
immediately understandable, or even sometimes trivial, 
behind a veil of foreign words, and thus give a false impres- 
sion of scientific exactitude, such as is unfortunately typical of 
Lamprecht. For a more serious attempt to make use of psy- 
chological concepts in the interpretation of certain historical 
mass phenomena, see W. Hellpach, Grundlinien zu einer 

Notes 209 

Psychologie der Hysterie, chap. xii, as well as his Nervosität und 
Kultur. | cannot here attempt to explain that in my opinion 
even this many-sided writer has been harmfully influenced by 
certain of Lamprecht’s theories. How completely worthless, as 
compared with the older literature, Lamprecht’s schematic 
treatment of Pietism is (in Vol. VII of the Deutsche Geschichte) 
everyone knows who has the slightest acquaintance with the 
literature. 

115 Thus with the adherents of Schortinghuis’s Innige Christen- 
dom. In the history of religion it goes back to the verse about 
the servant of God in Isaiah and the 22nd Psalm. 

116 This appeared occasionally in Dutch Pietism and then under 
the influence of Spinoza. 

117 Labadie, Teersteegen, etc. 

118 Perhaps this appears most clearly when he (Spener !) disputes 
the authority of the Government to control the conventicles 
except in cases of disorder and abuses, because it concerns a 
fundamental right of Christians guaranteed by apostolic 
authority (Theologische Bedenken, II, pp. 81 f.). That is, in prin- 
ciple, exactly the Puritan standpoint regarding the relations of 
the individual to authority and the extent to which individual 
rights, which follow ex jure divino and are therefore inalienable, 
are valid. Neither this heresy, nor the one mentioned farther 
on in the text, has escaped Ritschl (Pietismus, Il, pp. 115, 157). 
However unhistorical the positivistic (not to say philistine) 
criticism to which he has subjected the idea of natural rights 
to which we are nevertheless indebted for not much less than 
everything which even the most extreme reactionary prizes 
as his sphere of individual freedom, we naturally agree 
entirely with him that in both cases an organic relationship to 
Spener’s Lutheran standpoint is lacking. 

The conventicles (collegia pietitatis) themselves, to which 
Spener’s famous pia desideria gave the theoretical basis, and 
which he founded in practice, corresponded closely in essen- 
tials to the English prophesyings which were first practised in 
John of Lasco’s London Bible Classes (1547), and after that 
were a regular feature of all forms of Puritanism which 

210 notes 

119 

120 

121 

122 

123 

revolted against the authority of the Church. Finally, he bases 
his well-known repudiation of the Church discipline of Geneva 
on the fact that its natural executors, the third estate (status 
@conomicus: the Christian laity), were not even a part of 
the organization of the Lutheran Church. On the other hand, 
in the discussion of excommunication the lay members’ 
recognition of the Consistorium appointed by the prince as 
representatives of the third estate is weakly Lutheran. 

The name Pietism in itself, which first occurs in Lutheran terri- 
tory, indicates that in the opinion of contemporaries it was 
characteristic of it that a methodical business was made out 
of pietas. 

It is, of course, granted that though this type of motivation 
was primarily Calvinistic it is not exclusively such. It is also 
found with special frequency in some of the oldest Lutheran 
Church constitutions. 

In the sense of Heb. v. 13, 14. Compare Spener, Theologische 
Bedenken, |, p. 306. 

Besides Bailey and Baxter (see Consilia theologica, Ill, 6, 1; 1, 
47; 3, 6), Spener was especially fond of Thomas à Kempis, and 
even more of Tauler—whom he did not entirely understand 
(op. cit., II], 61, 1, No. 1). For detailed discussion of the latter, 
see op. cit., |, 1, 1, No. 7. For him Luther is derived directly from 
Tauler. 

See in Ritschl, op. cit., Il, p. 113. He did not accept the repent- 
ance of the later Pietists (and of Luther) as the sole trustworthy 
indication of true conversion (Theologische Bedenken, Ill, p. 
476). On sanctification as the fruit of thankfulness in the belief 
of forgiveness, a typically Lutheran idea, see passages cited by 
Ritschl, op. cit., p. 115, note 2. On the certitudo salutis see, on 
the one hand, Theologische Bedenken, |, p. 324: “true belief is 
not so much felt emotionally as known by its fruits” (love and 
obedience to God); on the other, Theologische Bedenken, |, 
p. 335 f.: “As far as anxiety that they should be assured of salva- 
tion and grace is concerned, it is better to trust to our books, 
the Lutheran, than to the English writings.” But on the nature 
of sanctification he was at one with the English view-point. 

Notes 211 

124 Of this the religious account books which A. H. Francke 
recommended were external symptoms. The methodical prac- 
tice and habit of virtue was supposed to cause its growth and 
the separation of good from evil. This is the principal theme of 
Francke’s book, Von des Christen Vollkommenheit. 

125 The difference between this rational Pietist belief in Provi- 
dence and its orthodox interpretation is shown characteristic- 
ally in the famous controversy between the Pietists of Halle 
and the orthodox Lutheran Léscher. Léscher in his Timotheus 
Verinus goes so far as to contrast everything that is attained by 
human action with the decrees of Providence. On the other 
hand, Francke’s consistent view was that the sudden flash of 
clarity over what is to happen, which comes as a result of quiet 
waiting for decision, is to be considered as “God’s hint”, quite 
analogous to the Quaker psychology, and corresponding to 
the general ascetic idea that rational methods are the way to 
approach nearer to God. It is true that Zinzendorf, who in one 
most vital decision entrusted the fate of his community to lot, 
was far from Francke’s form of the belief in Providence. 
Spener, Theologische Bedenken, |, p. 314, referred to Tauler for a 
description of the Christian resignation in which one should 
bow to the divine will, and not cross it by hasty action on one’s 
own responsibility, essentially the position of Francke. Its 
effectiveness as compared to Puritanism is essentially weak- 
ened by the tendency of Pietism to seek peace in this world, as 
can everywhere be clearly seen. “First righteousness, then 
peace”, as was said in opposition to it in 1904 by a leading 
Baptist (G. White in an address to be referred to later) in 
formulating the ethical programme of his denomination 
(Baptist Handbook, 1904, p. 107). 

126 Lect. paraenet., |V, p. 271. 

127 Ritschl’s criticism is directed especially against this continu- 
ally recurrent idea. See the work of Francke containing the 
doctrine which has already been referred to. (See note 124 
above.) 

128 It occurs also among English Pietists who were not adherents 
of predestination, for instance Goodwin. On him and others 

212 Notes 

129 

130 

131 

132 

133 

134 

compare Heppe, Geschichte des Pietismus in der reformierten 
Kirche (Leiden, 1879), a book which even with Ritschl’s stand- 
ard work cannot yet be dispensed with for England, and here 
and there also for the Netherlands. Even in the nineteenth 
century in the Netherlands Köhler, Die Niederl. ref. Kirche, was 
asked about the exact time of his rebirth. 

They attempted thus to counteract the lax results of the 
Lutheran doctrine of the recoverability of grace (especially the 
very frequent conversion in extremis). 

Against the corresponding necessity of knowing the day 
and hour of conversion as an indispensable sign of its genu- 
ineness. See Spener, Theologische Bedenken, ||, 6, 1, p. 197. 
Repentance was as little known to him as Luther's terrores 
conscientice to Melanchthon. 

At the same time, of course, the anti-authoritarian interpret- 
ation of the universal priesthood, typical of all asceticism, 
played a part. Occasionally the minister was advised to delay 
absolution until proof was given of genuine repentance which, 
as Ritschl rightly says, was in principle Calvinistic. 

The essential points for our purposes are most easily found in 
Putt, Zinzendorf’s Theologie (3 vols., Gotha, 1869), |, pp. 325, 
345, 381, 412, 429, 433 f., 444, 448; Il, pp. 372, 381, 385, 409 f.; 
Ill, pp. 131, 167, 176. Compare also Bernh. Becker, Zinzendorf 
und sein Christentum (Leipzig, 1900), Book III, chap. iii. 

“In no religion do we recognize as brothers those who have 
not been washed in the blood of Christ and continue thor- 
oughly changed in the sanctity of the Spirit. We recognize no 
evident (= visible) Church of Christ except where the Word of 
Cod is taught in purity and where the members live in holiness 
as children of God following its precepts.” The last sentence, 
it is true, is taken from Luther’s smaller catechism but, as 
Ritschl points out, there it serves to answer the question how 
the Name of God shall be made holy, while here it serves to 
delimit the Church of the saints. 

It is true that he only considered the Augsburg Confession to 
be a suitable document of the Lutheran Christian faith if, as he 
expressed it in his disgusting terminology, a Wundbriihe had 

Notes 213 

been poured upon it. To read him is an act of penitence 
because his language, in its insipid melting quality, is even 
worse than the frightful Christo-turpentine of F. T. Vischer (in 
his polemics with the Munich christoterpe). 

135 See Plitt, op. cit., |, p. 346. Even more decisive is the answer, 
quoted in Plitt, op. cit., |, p. 381, to the question whether good 
works are necessary to salvation. “Unnecessary and harmful 
to the attainment of salvation, but after salvation is attained 
so necessary that he who does not perform them is not really 
saved.” Thus here also they are not the cause of salvation, but 
the sole means of recognizing it. 

136 For instance, through those caricatures of Christian freedom 
which Ritschl, op cit., Ill, p. 381, so severely criticizes. 

137 Above all in the greater emphasis on the idea of retributive 
punishment in the doctrine of salvation, which, after the 
repudiation of his missionary attempts by the American sects, 
he made the basis of his method of sanctification. After that 
he places the retention of childlikeness and the virtues of 
humble resignation in the foreground as the end of Herrnhut 
asceticism, in sharp contrast to the inclination of his own 
community to an asceticism closely analogous to the Puritan. 

138 Which, however, had its limits. For this season alone it is 
wrong to attempt to place Zinzendorf’s religion in a scheme of 
social psychological evolutionary stages, as Lamprecht does. 
Furthermore, however, his whole religious attitude is influ- 
enced by nothing more strongly than the fact that he was a 
Count with an outlook fundamentally feudal. Further, the 
emotional side of it would, from the point of view of social 
psychology, fit just as well into the period of the sentimental 
decadence of chivalry as in that of sensitiveness. If social 
psychology gives any clue to its difference from West 
European rationalism, it is most likely to be found in the 
patriarchal traditionalism of Eastern Germany. 

139 This is evident from Zinzendorf’s controversy with Dippel just 
as, after his death, the doctrines of the Synod of 1764 bring 
out the character of the Herrnhut community as an institution 
for salvation. See Ritschl’s criticism, op. cit., Ill, pp. 443 f. 

214 notes 

140 

141 

142 

143 

144 

145 

Compare, for instance, §§151, 153, 160. That sanctification may 
not take place in spite of true penitence and the forgiveness of 
sins is evident, especially from the remarks on p. 311, and 
agrees with the Lutheran doctrine of salvation just as it is in 
disagreement with that of Calvinism (and Methodism). 
Compare Zinzendorf’s opinion, cited in Plitt, op. cit., Il, p. 345. 
Similarly Spangenberg, Idea Fidei, p. 325. 

Compare, for instance, Zinzendorf’s remark on Matt. xx. 28, 
cited by Plitt, op. cit., Ill, p. 131: “When | see a man to whom 
God has given a great gift, | rejoice and gladly avail myself of 
the gift. But when | note that he is not content with his own, 
but wishes to increase it further, | consider it the beginning of 
that person’s ruin.” In other words, Zinzendorf denied, espe- 
cially in his conversation with John Wesley in 1743, that there 
could be progress in holiness, because he identified it with 
justification and found it only in the emotional relationship to 
Christ (Plitt, |, p. 413). In place of the sense of being the 
instrument of God comes the possession of the divine; mysti- 
cism, not asceticism (in the sense to be discussed in the 
introduction to the following essays) (not here translated.— 
TRANSLATOR’S Note). As is pointed out there, a present, 
worldly state of mind is naturally what the Puritan really seeks 
for also. But for him the state which he interprets as the certi- 
tudo salutis is the feeling of being an active instrument. 

But which, precisely on account of this mystical tendency, did 
not receive a consistent ethical justification. Zinzendorf 
rejects Luther’s idea of divine worship in the calling as the 
decisive reason for performing one’s duty in it. It is rather a 
return for the “Saviour’s loyal services” (Plitt, Il, p. 411). 

His saying that “a reasonable man should not be without faith 
and a believer should not be unreasonable” is well known. See 
his Sokrates, d. i. Aufrichtige Anzeige verschiedener nicht sowohl 
unbekannter als vielmehr in Abfall geratener Hauptwahrheiten 
(1725). Further, his fondness for such authors as Bayle. 

The decided propensity of Protestant asceticism for empiri- 
cism, rationalized on a mathematical basis, is well known, but 
cannot be further analysed here. On the development of the 

Notes 215 

sciences in the direction of mathematically rationalized exact 
investigation, the philosophical motives of it and their con- 
trast to Bacon’s view-point, see Windelband, Geschichte der 
Philosophie, pp. 305-7, especially the remark on p. 305, which 
rightly denies that modern natural science can be understood 
as the product of material and technical interests. Highly 
important relationships exist, of course, but they are much 
more complex. See further Windelband, Neuere Phil., |, pp. 40 
ff. For the attitude of Protestant asceticism the decisive point 
was, as may perhaps be most clearly seen in Spener’s Theolo- 
gische Bedenken, |, p. 232; IIl, p. 260, that just as the Christian 
is known by the fruits of his belief, the knowledge of God and 
His designs can only be attained through a knowledge of His 
works. The favourite science of all Puritan, Baptist, or Pietist 
Christianity was thus physics, and next to it all those other 
natural sciences which used a similar method, especially 
mathematics. It was hoped from the empirical knowledge of 
the divine laws of nature to ascend to a grasp of the essence of 
the world, which on account of the fragmentary nature of the 
divine revelation, a Calvinistic idea, could never be attained by 
the method of metaphysical speculation. The empiricism of 
the seventeenth century was the means for asceticism to seek 
God in nature. It seemed to lead to God, philosophical specu- 
lation away from Him. In particular Spener considers the Aris- 
totelean philosophy to have been the most harmful element in 
Christian tradition. Every other is better, especially the Pla- 
tonic: Cons. Theol., Ill; 6, 1, Dist. 2, No. 13. Compare further the 
following characteristic passage: “Unde pro Cartesio quid 
dicam non habeo [he had not read him], semper tamen optavi 
et opto, ut Deus viros excitet, qui veram philosophiam vel 
tandem oculis sisterent in qua nullius hominis attenderetur 
auctoritas, sed sana tantum magistri nescia ratio”, Spener, 
Cons. Theol., ||, 5, No. 2. The significance of this attitude of 
ascetic Protestantism for the development of education, 
especially technical education, is well known. Combined with 
the attitude to fides implicita they furnished a pedagogical 
programme. 

216 notes 

146 

147 

148 

149 

150 

151 
152 

“That is a type of men who seek their happiness in four main 
ways: (i) to be insignificant, despised, and abased; (2) to neg- 
lect all things they do not need for the service of their Lord; (3) 
either to possess nothing or to give away again what they 
receive; (4) to work as wage labourers, not for the sake of the 
wage, but of the calling in the service of the Lord and their 
neighbour” (Rel. Reden, Il, p. 180; Plitt, op. cit., |, p. 445). Not 
everyone can or may become a disciple, but only those who 
receive the call of the Lord. But according to Zinzendorf’s own 
confession (Plitt, op. cit., |, p. 449) there still remain difficul- 
ties, for the Sermon on the Mount applies formally to all. The 
resemblance of this free universality of love to the old Baptist 
ideals is evident. 

An emotional intensification of religion was by no means 
entirely unknown to Lutheranism even in its later period. 
Rather the ascetic element, the way of life which the Lutheran 
suspected of being salvation by works, was the fundamental 
difference in this case. 

A healthy fear is a better sign of grace than certainty, says 
Spener, Theologische Bedenken, |, p. 324. In the Puritan writers 
we, of course, also find emphatic warnings against false cer- 
tainty; but at least the doctrine of predestination, so far as its 
influence determined religious practice, always worked in the 
opposite direction. 

The psychological effect of the confessional was everywhere to 
relieve the individual of responsibility for his own conduct, 
that is why it was sought, and that weakened the rigorous 
consistency of the demands of asceticism. 

How important at the same time, even for the form of 
the Pietist faith, was the part played by purely political factors, 
has been indicated by Ritschl in his study of Württemberg 
Pietism. 

See Zinzendorf’s statement [quoted above, note 146]. 

Of course Calvinism, in so far as it is genuine, is also patri- 
archal. The connection, for instance, of the success of Baxter’s 
activities with the domestic character of industry in Kidder- 
minster is evident from his autobiography. See the passage 

Notes 217 

quoted in the Works of the Puritan Divines, p. 38: “The town 
liveth upon the weaving of Kidderminster stuffs, and as they 
stand in their loom, they can set a book before them, or edify 
each other....” Nevertheless, there is a difference between 
patriarchalism based on Pietism and on the Calvinistic and 
especially the Baptist ethics. This problem can only be dis- 
cussed in another connection. 

153 Lehre von der Rechtfertigung und Versöhnung, third edition, |, p. 
598. That Frederick William | called Pietism a religion for the 
leisure class is more indicative of his own Pietism than that of 
Spener and Francke. Even this king knew very well why he 
had opened his realm to the Pietists by his declaration of 
toleration. 

154 As an introduction to Methodism the excellent article Method- 
ismus by Loofs in the Realenzyklopddie für protestantische The- 
ologie und Kirche is particularly good. Also the works of Jacoby 
(especially the Handbuch des Methodismus), Kolde, Jiingst, 
and Southey are useful. On Wesley: Tyerman, Life and Times of 
John Wesley is popular. One of the best libraries on the history 
of Methodism is that of Northwestern University, Evanston, 
Ill. A sort of link between classical Puritanism and Methodism 
was formed by the religious poet Isaac Watts, a friend of the 
chaplain of Oliver Cromwell (Howe) and then of Richard 
Cromwell. Whitefield is said to have sought his advice (cf. 
Skeats, op. cit., pp. 254 f.). 

155 Apart from the personal influence of the Wesleys the similarity 
is historically determined, on the one hand, by the decline of 
the dogma of predestination, on the other by the powerful 
revival of the sola fide in the founders of Methodism, especially 
motivated by its specific missionary character. This brought 
forth a modified rejuvenation of certain medizeval methods of 
revival preaching and combined them with Pietistic forms. It 
certainly does not belong in a general line of development 
toward subjectivism, since in this respect it stood behind not 
only Pietism, but also the Bernardine religion of the Middle 
Ages. 

156 In this manner Wesley himself occasionally characterized the 

218 Notes 

157 
158 

159 

160 

161 

162 

163 

164 
165 

effect of the Methodist faith. The relationship to Zinzendorf’s 
Glückseligkeit is evident. 

Given in Watson’s Life of Wesley, p. 331 (German edition). 

J. Schneckenburger, Vorlesungen über die Lehrbegriffe der 
kleinen protestantischen Kirchenparteien, edited by Hundes- 
hagen (Frankfurt, 1863), p. 147. 

Whitefield, the leader of the predestinationist group which 
after his death dissolved for lack of organization, rejected 
Wesley’s doctrine of perfection in its essentials. In fact, it is 
only a makeshift for the real Calvinistic idea of proof. 
Schneckenburger, op. cit., p. 145. Somewhat different in Loofs, 
op. cit. Both results are typical of all similar religious 
phenomena. 

Thus in the conference of 1770. The first conference of 1744 
had already recognized that the Biblical words came “within a 
hair” of Calvinism on the one hand and Antinomianism on the 
other. But since they were so obscure it was not well to be 
separated by doctrinal differences so long as the validity of the 
Bible as a practical norm was upheld. 

The Methodists were separated from the Herrnhuters by their 
doctrine of the possibility of sinless perfection, which Zinzen- 
dorf, in particular, rejected. On the other hand, Wesley felt the 
emotional element in the Herrnhut religion to be mysticism 
and branded Luther’s interpretation of the law as blasphem- 
ous. This shows the barrier which existed between Lutheran- 
ism and every kind of rational religious conduct. 

John Wesley emphasizes the fact that everywhere, among 
Quakers, Presbyterians, and High Churchmen, one must 
believe in dogmas, except in Methodism. With the above, 
compare the rather summary discussion in Skeats, History of 
the Free Churches of England, 1688-1851. 

Compare Dexter, Congregationalism, pp. 455 ff. 

Though naturally it might interfere with it, as is to-day the case 
among the American negroes. Furthermore, the often def- 
initely pathological character of Methodist emotionalism as 
compared to the relatively mild type of Pietism may possibly, 
along with purely historical reasons and the publicity of the 

Notes 219 

process, be connected with the greater ascetic penetration of 
life in the areas where Methodism is widespread. Only a 
neurologist could decide that. 

166 Loofs, op. cit., p. 750, strongly emphasizes the fact that Meth- 
odism is distinguished from other ascetic movements in that 
it came after the English Enlightenment, and compares it with 
the (surely much less pronounced) German Renaissance of 
Pietism in the first third of the nineteenth century. Neverthe- 
less, itis permissible, following Ritschl, Lehre von der Rechtfer- 
tigung und Versöhnung, |, pp. 568 f., to retain the parallel with 
the Zinzendorf form of Pietism, which, unlike that of Spener 
and Francke, was already itself a reaction against the 
Enlightenment. However, this reaction takes a very different 
course in Methodism from that of the Herrnhuters, at least so 
far as they were influenced by Zinzendorf. 

167 But which, as is shown by the passage from John Wesley 
(below, pp. 118-19), it developed in the same way and with the 
same effect as the other ascetic denominations. 

168 And, as we have seen, milder forms of the consistent ascetic 
ethics of Puritanism; while if, in the popular manner, one 
wished to interpret these religious conceptions as only 
exponents or reflections of capitalistic institutions, just the 
opposite would have to be the case. 

169 Of the Baptists only the so-called General Baptists go back to 
the older movement. The Particular Baptists were, as we have 
pointed out already, Calvinists, who in principle limited 
Church membership to the regenerate, or at least personal 
believers, and hence remained in principle voluntarists and 
opponents of any State Church. Under Cromwell, no doubt, 
they were not always consistent in practice. Neither they nor 
the General Baptists, however important they are as the 
bearers of the Baptist tradition, give us any occasion for an 
especial dogmatic analysis here. That the Quakers, though 
formally a new foundation of George Fox and his associates, 
were fundamentally a continuation of the Baptist tradition, 
is beyond question. The best introduction to their history, 
including their relations to Baptists and Mennonites, is Robert 

220 notes 

170 

Barclay, The Inner Life of the Religious Societies of the Common- 
wealth, 1876. On the history of the Baptists, compare, among 
others, H. M. Dexter, The True Story of John Smyth, the Se- 
Baptist, as told by himself and his contemporaries, Boston, 
1881 (also J. C. Lang in The Baptist Quarterly Review, 1883, p. 1); 
J. Murch, A History of the Presb. and Gen. Bapt. Church in the 
West of England, London, 1835; A. H. Newman, History of the 
Baptist Church in the U.S., New York, 1894 (Am. Church Hist. 
Series, vol. 2); Vedder, A Short History of the Baptists, London, 
1897; E. B. Bax, Rise and Fall of the Anabaptists, New York, 
1902; G. Lorimer, The Baptists in History, 1902; J. A. Seiss, The 
Baptist System Examined, Lutheran Publication Society, 1902; 
further material in the Baptist Handbook, London, 1896 ff.; 
Baptist Manuals, Paris, 1891-93; The Baptist Quarterly Review; 
and the Bibliotheca Sacra, Oberlin, 1900. 

The best Baptist library seems to be that of Colgate College 
in the State of New York. For the history of the Quakers the 
collection in Devonshire House in London is considered the 
best (not available to me). The official modern organ of ortho- 
doxy is the American Friend, edited by Professor Jones; the 
best Quaker history that of Rowntree. In addition Rufus B. 
Jones, George Fox, an Autobiography, Phila., 1903; Alton C. 
Thomas, A History of the Society of Friends in America, Phila., 
1895; Edward Grubbe, Social Aspects of the Quaker Faith, 
London, 1899. Also the copious and excellent biographical 
literature. 

It is one of the many merits of Karl Miller's Kirchengeschichte 
to have given the Baptist movement, great in its way, even 
though outwardly unassuming, the place it deserved in his 
work. It has suffered more than any other from the pitiless 
persecution of all the Churches, because it wished to be a sect 
in the specific sense of that word. Even after five generations it 
was discredited before the eyes of all the world by the debacle 
of the related eschatological experiment in Münster. And, con- 
tinually oppressed and driven underground, it was long after 
its origin before it attained a consistent formulation of its 
religious doctrines. Thus it produced even less theology than 

Notes 221 

would have been consistent with its principles, which were 
themselves hostile to a specialized development of its faith in 
God as a science. That was not very pleasing to the older 
professional theologians, even in its own time, and it made 
little impression on them. But many more recent ones have 
taken the same attitude. In Ritschl, Pietismus, |, pp. 22 f., 
the rebaptizers are not very adequately, in fact, rather con- 
temptuously, treated. One is tempted to speak of a theological 
bourgeois standpoint. That, in spite of the fact that Cor- 
nelius’s fine work (Geschichte des Miinsterschen Aufruhrs) had 
been available for decades. 

Here also Ritschl everywhere sees a retrogression from his 
standpoint toward Catholicism, and suspects direct influ- 
ences of the radical wing of the Franciscan tradition. Even if 
such could be proved in a few cases, these threads would be 
very thin. Above all, the historical fact was probably that the 
official Catholic Church, wherever the worldly asceticism of 
the laity went as far as the formation of conventicles, regarded 
it with the utmost suspicion and attempted to encourage the 
formation of orders, thus outside the world, or to attach it as 
asceticism of the second grade to the existing orders and 
bring it under control. Where this did not succeed, it felt the 
danger that the practice of subjectivist ascetic morality might 
lead to the denial of authority and to heresy, just as, and with 
the same justification, the Elizabethan Church felt toward the 
half-Pietistic prophesying Bible conventicles, even when their 
conformism was undoubted; a feeling which was expressed by 
the Stuarts in their Book of Sports, of which later. The history of 
numerous heretical movements, including, for instance, the 
Humiliati and the Beguins, as well as the fate of St. Francis, 
are the proofs of it. The preaching of the mendicant friars, 
especially the Franciscans, probably did much to prepare the 
way for the ascetic lay morality of Calvinist-Baptist Protestant- 
ism. But the numerous close relationships between the 
asceticism of Western monasticism and the ascetic conduct 
of Protestantism, the importance of which must continually 
be stressed for our particular problems, are based in the last 

222 Notes 

171 
172 

173 

analysis on the fact that important factors are necessarily 
common to every asceticism on the basis of Biblical Chris- 
tianity. Furthermore, every asceticism, no matter what its 
faith, has need of certain tried methods of subduing the flesh. 

Of the following sketch it may further be remarked that its 
brevity is due to the fact that the Baptist ethic is of only very 
limited importance for the problem considered primarily in 
this study, the development of the religious background of the 
bourgeois idea of the calling. It contributed nothing new what- 
ever to it. The much more important social aspect of the move- 
ment must for the present remain untouched. Of the history 
of the older Baptist movement, we can, from the view-point 
of our problem, present here only what was later important 
for the development of the sects in which we are interested: 
Baptists, Quakers, and, more incidentally, Mennonites. 
See above [note 92]. 
On their origin and changes, see A. Ritschl in his Gesammelte 
Aufsätze, pp. 69 f. 
Naturally the Baptists have always repudiated the designation 
of a sect. They form the Church in the sense of the Epistle to 
the Ephesians v. 27. But in our terminology they form a sect 
not only because they lack all relation to the State. The relation 
between Church and State of early Christianity was even for 
the Quakers (Barclay) their ideal; for to them, as to many 
Pietists, only a Church under the Cross was beyond suspicion 
of its purity. But the Calvinists as well, faute de mieux, similarly 
even the Catholic Church in the same circumstances, were 
forced to favour the separation of Church and State under an 
unbelieving State or under the Cross. Neither were they a sect, 
because induction to membership in the Church took place de 
facto through a contract between the congregation and the 
candidates. For that was formally the case in the Dutch 
Reformed communities (as a result of the original political 
situation) in accordance with the old Church constitution (see 
v. Hoffmann, Kirchenverfassungsrecht der niederl. Reformierten, 
Leipzig, 1902). 

On the contrary, it was because such a religious community 

Notes 223 

could only be voluntarily organized as a sect, not compulsorily 
as a Church, if it did not wish to include the unregenerate and 
thus depart from the Early Christian ideal. For the Baptist 
communities it was an essential of the very idea of their 
Church, while for the Calvinists it was an historical accident. 
To be sure, that the latter were also urged by very definite 
religious motives in the direction of the believers’ Church has 
already been indicated. On the distinction between Church 
and sect, see the following essay. The concept of sect which | 
have adopted here has been used at about the same time and, 
| assume, independently from me, by Kattenbusch in the 
Realenzyklopddie für protestantische Theologie und Kirche 
(Article Sekte). Troeltsch in his Die Soziallehren der christlichen 
Kirchen und Gruppen accepts it and discusses it more in detail. 
See also below, the introduction to the essays on the Wirt- 
schaftsethik der Weltreligionen. 

174 How important this symbol was, historically, for the conserva- 
tion of the Church community, since it was an unambiguous 
and unmistakable sign, has been very clearly shown by Cor- 
nelius, op. cit. 

175 Certain approaches to it in the Mennonites’ doctrine of justifi- 
cation need not concern us here. 

176 This idea is perhaps the basis of the religious interest in the 
discussion of questions like the incarnation of Christ and his 
relationship to the Virgin Mary, which, often as the sole purely 
dogmatic part, stands out so strangely in the oldest docu- 
ments of Baptism (for instance the confessions printed in 
Cornelius, op. cit., Appendix to Vol. Il. On this question, see K. 
Müller, Kirchengeschichte, lI, i, p. 330). The difference between 
the christology of the Reformed Church and the Lutheran (in 
the doctrine of the so-called communicatio idiomatum) seems 
to have been based on similar religious interests. 

177 It was expressed especially in the original strict avoidance 
even of everyday intercourse with the excommunicated, a 
point at which even the Calvinists, who in principle held the 
opinion that worldly affairs were not affected by spiritual cen- 
sure, made large concessions. See the following essay. 

224 Notes 

178 

179 

180 

181 

How this principle was applied by the Quakers to seemingly 
trivial externals (refusal to remove the hat, to kneel, bow, or 
use formal address) is well known. The basic idea is to a 
certain extent characteristic of all asceticism. Hence the fact 
that true asceticism is always hostile to authority. In Calvinism 
it appeared in the principle that only Christ should rule in the 
Church. In the case of Pietism one may think of Spener’s 
attempts to find a Biblical justification of titles. Catholic 
asceticism, so far as ecclesiastical authority was concerned, 
broke through this tendency in its oath of obedience, by 
interpreting obedience itself in ascetic terms. The overturning 
of this principle in Protestant asceticism is the historical basis 
of the peculiarities of even the contemporary democracy of the 
peoples influenced by Puritanism as distinct from that of the 
Latin spirit. It is also part of the historical background of 
that lack of respect of the American which is, as the case may 
be, so irritating or so refreshing. 

No doubt this was true from the beginning for the Baptists 
essentially only of the New Testament, not to the same extent 
of the Old. Especially the Sermon on the Mount enjoyed a 
peculiar prestige as a programme of social ethic in all 
denominations. 

Even Schwenkfeld had considered the outward performance 
of the sacraments an adiaphoron, while the General Baptists 
and the Mennonites held strictly to Baptism and the Com- 
munion, the Mennonites to the washing of feet in addition. 
On the other hand, for the predestinationists the depreciation, 
in fact for all except the communion—one may even say the 
suspicion—in which the sacraments were held, went very far. 
See the following essay. 

On this point the Baptist denominations, especially the Quak- 
ers (Barclay, Apology for the True Christian Divinity, fourth edi- 
tion, London, 1701, kindly placed at my disposal by Eduard 
Bernstein), referred to Calvin’s statements in the Instit. Christ, 
Ill, p. 2, where in fact quite unmistakable suggestions of Bap- 
tist doctrine are to be found. Also the older distinction 
between the Word of God as that which God had revealed to 

Notes 225 

the patriarchs, the prophets, and the apostles, and the Holy 
Scriptures as that part of it which they had written down, was, 
even though there was no historical connection, intimately 
related to the Baptist conception of revelation. The mechan- 
ical idea of inspiration, and with it the strict bibliocracy of the 
Calvinists, was just as much the product of their development 
in one direction in the course of the sixteenth century as the 
doctrine of the inner light of the Quakers, derived from Baptist 
sources, was the result of a directly opposite development. 
The sharp differentiation was also in this case partly a result of 
continual disputes. 

182 That was emphasized strongly against certain tendencies of 
the Socinians. The natural reason knows nothing whatever of 
God (Barclay, op. cit., p. 102). That meant that the part played 
by the lex nature elsewhere in Protestantism was altered. In 
principle there could be no general rules, no moral code, for 
the calling which everyone had, and which is different for every 
individual, is revealed to him by God through his conscience. 
We should do, not the good in the general sense of natural 
reason, but God’s will as it is written in our hearts and known 
through the conscience (Barclay, pp. 73, 76). This irrationality 
of morality, derived from the exaggerated contrast between 
the divine and the flesh, is expressed in these fundamental 
tenets of Quaker ethics: “What a man does contrary to his 
faith, though his faith may be wrong, is in no way acceptable 
to God—though the thing might have been lawful to another” 
(Barclay, p. 487). Of course that could not be upheld in prac- 
tice. The “moral and perpetual statutes acknowledged by all 
Christians” are, for instance, for Barclay the limit of toleration. 
In practice the contemporaries felt their ethic, with certain 
peculiarities of its own, to be similar to that of the Reformed 
Pietists. “Everything good in the Church is suspected of being 
Quakerism”, as Spener repeatedly points out. It thus seems 
that Spener envied the Quakers this reputation. Cons. Theol., 
Ill, 6,1, Dist. 2, No. 64. The repudiation of oaths on the basis of 
a passage in the Bible shows that the real emancipation from 
the Scriptures had not gone far. The significance for social 

226 NotTES 

184 

186 

ethics of the principle, “Do unto others as you would that they 
should do unto you”, which many Quakers regarded as the 
essence of the whole Christian ethics, need not concern us 
here. 

The necessity of assuming this possibility Barclay justifies 
because without it “there should never be a place known by 
the Saints wherein they might be free of doubting and despair, 
which—is most absurd”. It is evident that the certitudo salutis 
depends upon it. Thus Barclay, op. cit., p. 20. 

There thus remains a difference in type between the Calvinistic 
and the Quaker rationalization of life. But when Baxter formu- 
lates it by saying that the spirit is supposed by the Quakers to 
act upon the soul as on a corpse, while the characteristically 
formulated Calvinistic principle is “reason and spirit are con- 
junct principles” (Christian Directory, Il, p. 76), the distinction 
was no longer valid for his time in this form. 

Thus in the very careful articles “Menno” and “Mennoniten” 
by Cramer in the Realenzyklopddie für protestantische Theologie 
und Kirche, especially p. 604. However excellent these art- 
icles are, the article “Baptisten” in the same encyclopedia is 
not very penetrating and in part simply incorrect. Its author 
does not know, for instance, the Publications of the Hanserd 
Knolly’s Society, which are indispensable for the history of 
Baptism. 

Thus Barclay, op. cit., p. 404, explains that eating, drinking, 
and acquisition are natural, not spiritual acts, which may be 
performed without the special sanction of God. The explan- 
ation is in reply to the characteristic objection that if, as the 
Quakers teach, one cannot pray without a special motion 
of the Spirit, the same should apply to ploughing. It is, of 
course, significant that even in the modern resolutions of 
Quaker Synods the advice is sometimes given to retire 
from business after acquiring a sufficient fortune, in order, 
withdrawn from the bustle of the world, to be able to live in 
devotion to the Kingdom of God alone. But the same idea 
certainly occurs occasionally in other denominations, includ- 
ing Calvinism. That betrays the fact that the acceptance of the 

Notes 22/7 

bourgeois practical ethics by these movements was the 
worldly application of an asceticism which had originally fled 
from the world. 

187 Veblen in his suggestive book The Theory of Business Enterprise 
is of the opinion that this motto belongs only to early capital- 
ism. But economic supermen, who, like the present captains 
of industry, have stood beyond good and evil, have always 
existed, and the statement is still true of the broad underlying 
strata of business men. 

188 We may here again expressly call attention to the excellent 
remarks of Eduard Bernstein, op. cit. To Kautsky’s highly 
schematic treatment of the Baptist movement and his theory 
of heretical communism in general (in the first volume of the 
same work) we shall return on another occasion. 

189 “In civil actions it is good to be as the many, in religious to be 
as the best”, says, for example, Thomas Adams (Works of the 
Puritan Divines, p. 138). That sounds somewhat more drastic 
than it is meant to be. It means that the Puritan honesty is 
formalistic legality, just as the uprightness which the some- 
time Puritan people like to claim as a national virtue is some- 
thing specifically different from the German Ehrlichkeit. Some 
good remarks on the subject from the educational standpoint 
may be found in the Preuss. Jahrb., CXII (1903), p. 226. The 
formalism of the Puritan ethic is in turn the natural con- 
sequence of its relation to the law. 

190 Something is said on this in the following essay. 

191 This is the reason for the economic importance of the ascetic 
Protestant, but not Catholic, minorities. 

192 That the difference of dogmatic basis was not inconsistent 
with the adoption of the most important interest in proof is 
to be explained in the last analysis by the historical peculiar- 
ities of Christianity in general which cannot be discussed 
here. 

193 “Since God hath gathered us to be a people”, says Barclay, op. 
cit., p. 357. | myself heard a Quaker sermon at Haverford Col- 
lege which laid great emphasis on the interpretation of saints 
as meaning separate. 

228 NoTES 

5 ASCETICISM AND THE SPIRIT OF CAPITALISM 

1 

N 

See the excellent sketch of his character in Dowden, op. cit. A 
passable introduction to Baxter’s theology, after he had aban- 
doned a strict belief in the double decree, is given in the intro- 
duction to the various extracts from his works printed in the 
Works of the Puritan Divines (by Jenkyn). His attempt to com- 
bine universal redemption and personal election satisfied no 
one. For us it is important only that he even then held to per- 
sonal election, i.e. to the most important point for ethics in the 
doctrine of predestination. On the other hand, his weakening of 
the forensic view of redemption is important as being suggest- 
ive of baptism. 

Tracts and sermons by Thomas Adams, John Howe, Matthew 
Henry, J. Janeway, Stuart Charnock, Baxter, Bunyan, have been 
collected in the ten volumes of the Works of the Puritan Divines 
(London, 1845-8), though the choice is often somewhat arbi- 
trary. Editions of the works of Bailey, Sedgwick, and Hoornbeek 
have already been referred to. 

We could just as well have included Voet and other continental 
representatives of worldly asceticism. Brentano’s view that the 
whole development was purely Anglo-Saxon is quite wrong. My 
choice is motivated mainly (though not exclusively) by the wish 
to present the ascetic movement as much as possible in the 
second half of the seventeenth century, immediately before the 
change to utilitarianism. It has unfortunately been impossible, 
within the limits of this sketch, to enter upon the fascinating 
task of presenting the characteristics of ascetic Protestantism 
through the medium of the biographical literature; the Quakers 
would in this connection be particularly important, since they 
are relatively little known in Germany. 

For one might just as well take the writings of Gisbert Voet, the 
proceedings of the Huguenot Synods, or the Dutch Baptist lit- 
erature. Sombart and Brentano have unfortunately taken just 
the ebionitic parts of Baxter, which | myself have strongly 
emphasized, to confront me with the undoubted capitalistic 
backwardness of his doctrines. But (1) one must know this 

NOTES 229 

whole literature thoroughly in order to use it correctly, and (2) 
not overlook the fact that | have attempted to show how, in 
spite of its anti-mammonistic doctrines, the spirit of this 
ascetic religion nevertheless, just as in the monastic com- 
munities, gave birth to economic rationalism because it 
placed a premium on what was most important for it: the fun- 
damentally ascetic rational motives. That fact alone is under 
discussion and is the point of this whole essay. 

5 Similarly in Calvin, who was certainly no champion of bour- 
geois wealth (see the sharp attacks on Venice and Antwerp in 
Jes. Opp. , Ill, 140a, 308a). 

6 Saints’ Everlasting Rest, chaps. x, xii. Compare Bailey (Praxis 
Pietatis, p. 182) or Matthew Henry (The Worth of the Soul, Works 
of the Puritan Divines, p. 319). “Those that are eager in pursuit 
of worldly wealth despise their Soul, not only because the Soul 
is neglected and the body preferred before it, but because it is 
employed in these pursuits” (Psa. cxxvii. 2). On the same page, 
however, is the remark to be cited below about the sinfulness of 
all waste of time, especially in recreations. Similarly in almost 
the whole religious literature of English-Dutch Puritanisn. See 
for instance, Hoornbeek’s (op cit., L, X, ch. 18, 18) Phillipics 
against avaritia. This writer is also affected by sentimental piet- 
istic influences. See the praise of tranquillitas animi which is 
much more pleasing to God than the sollicitudo of this world. 
Also Bailey, referring to the well-known passage in Scripture, is 
of the opinion that “A rich man is not easily saved” (op. cit., p. 
182). The Methodist catechisms also warn against “gathering 
treasure on this earth”. For Pietism this is quite obvious, as 
also for the Quakers. Compare Barday (op. cit., p. 517), “. . . and 
therefore beware of such temptations as to use their callings as 
an engine to be richer”. 

7 For not wealth alone, but also the impulsive pursuit of it (or 
what passed as such) was condemned with similar severity. In 
the Netherlands the South Holland Synod of 1574 declared, in 
reply to a question, that money-lenders should not be admitted 
to communion even though the business was permitted by law; 
and the Deventer Provincial Synod of 1598 (Art. 24) extended 

230 notes 

foe) 

this to the employees of money-lenders. The Synod of Gorichem 
in 1606 prescribed severe and humiliating conditions under 
which the wives of usurers might be admitted, and the question 
was discussed as late as 1644 and 1657 whether Lombards 
should be admitted to communion (this against Brentano, who 
cites his own Catholic ancestors, although foreign traders and 
bankers have existed in the whole European and Asiatic world 
for thousands of years). Gisbert Voet (Disp. Theol., IV, 1667, de 
usuris, p. 665) still wanted to exclude the Trapezites (Lombards, 
Piedmontese). The same was true of the Huguenot Synods. 
This type of capitalistic classes were not the typical representa- 
tives of the philosophy or the type of conduct with which we are 
concerned. They were also not new as compared with antiquity 
or the Middle Ages. 

Developed in detail in the tenth chapter of the Saints’ Everlast- 
ing Rest. He who should seek to rest in the shelter of posses- 
sions which God gives, God strikes even in this life. A self- 
satisfied enjoyment of wealth already gained is almost always a 
symptom of moral degradation, If we had everything which we 
could have in this world, would that be all we hoped for? Com- 
plete satisfaction of desires is not attainable on earth because 
God's will has decreed it should not be so. 

Christian Directory, |, pp. 375-6. “It is for action that God main- 
taineth us and our activities; work is the moral as well as the 
natural end of power.... It is action that God is most served 
and honoured by.... The public welfare or the good of the 
many is to be valued above our own.” Here is the connecting- 
point for the transition from the will of God to the purely utili- 
tarian view-point of the later liberal theory. On the religious 
sources of Utilitarianism, see below in the text and above, chap. 
4, note 145. 

The commandment of silence has been, starting from the Bib- 
lical threat of punishment for every useless word, especially 
since the Cluny monks, a favourite ascetic means of education 
in self-control. Baxter also speaks in detail of the sinfulness of 
unnecessary words. Its place in his character has been pointed 
out by Sanford, op. cit., pp. 90 ff. 

Notes 231 

What contemporaries felt as the deep melancholy and 
moroseness of the Puritans was the result of breaking down the 
spontaneity of the status naturalis, and the condemnation of 
thoughtless speech was in the service of this end. When Wash- 
ington Irving (Bracebridge Hall, chap. xxx) seeks the reason for 
it partly in the calculating spirit of capitalism and partly in 
the effect of political freedom, which promotes a sense of 
responsibility, it may be remarked that it does not apply to the 
Latin peoples. For England the situation was probably that : (1) 
Puritanism enabled its adherents to create free institutions and 
still become a world power; and (2) it transformed that calculat- 
ing spirit (what Sombart calls Rechenhaftigkeit), which is in 
truth essential to capitalism, from a mere means to economy 
into a principle of general conduct. 

Op. cit., 1, p. 111. 

Op. cit., |, pp. 383 f. 

Similarly on the preciousness of time, see Barclay, op. cit., p. 14. 
Baxter, op. cit., |, p. 79. “Keep up a high esteem of time and be 
every day more careful that you lose none of your time, than 
you are that you lose none of your gold and silver. And if vain 
recreation, dressings, feastings, idle talk, unprofitable com- 
pany, or sleep be any of them temptations to rob you of any of 
your time, accordingly heighten your watchfulness.” “Those 
that are prodigal of their time despise their own souls”, says 
Matthew Henry (Worth of the Soul, Works of the Puritan Divines, 
p. 315). Here also Protestant asceticism follows a well-beaten 
track. We are accustomed to think it characteristic of the mod- 
ern man that he has no time, and for instance, like Goethe in 
the Wanderjahren, to measure the degree of capitalistic devel- 
opment by the fact that the clocks strike every quarter-hour. So 
also Sombart in his Kapitalismus. We ought not, however, to 
forget that the first people to live (in the Middle Ages) with 
careful measurement of time were the monks, and that the 
church bells were meant above all to meet their needs, 
Compare Baxter's discussion of the calling, op. cit., |, pp. 108 ff. 
Especially the following passage : “Question : But may | not 
cast off the world that | may only think of my salvation? Answer: 

232 NoTES 

You may cast off all such excess of worldly cares or business as 
unnecessarily hinder you in spiritual things. But you may not 
cast off all bodily employment and mental labour in which you 
may serve the common good. Everyone as a member of Church 
or Commonwealth must employ their parts to the utmost for 
the good of the Church and the Commonwealth. To neglect this 
and say: | will pray and meditate, is as if your servant should 
refuse his greatest work and tie himself to some lesser, easier 
part. And God hath commanded you some way or other to 
labour for your daily bread and not to live as drones of the 
sweat of others only.” God’s commandment to Adam, “In the 
sweat of thy brow”, and Paul’s declaration, “He who will not 
work shall not eat”, are also quoted. It has always been known 
of the Quakers that even the most well-to-do of them have had 
their sons learn a calling, for ethical and not, as Alberti recom- 
mends, for utilitarian reasons. 

Here are points where Pietism, on account of its emotional char- 
acter, takes a different view. Spener, although he emphasizes in 
characteristic Lutheran fashion that labour in a calling is worship 
of God (Theologische Bedenken, 111, p. 445), nevertheless holds 
that the restlessness of business affairs distracts one from God, 
a most characteristic difference from Puritanism. 

l, op. cit., p. 242. “It’s they that are lazy in their callings that can 
find no time for holy duties.” Hence the idea that the cities, the 
seat of the middle class with its rational business activities, are 
the seats of ascetic virtue. Thus Baxter says of his hand-loom 
weavers in Kidderminster: “And their constant converse and 
traffic with London doth much to promote civility and piety 
among tradesmen...” in his autobiography (Works of the Pur- 
itan Divines, p. 38). That the proximity of the capital should 
promote virtue would astonish modern clergymen, at least in 
Germany. But Pietism also inclined to similar views. Thus 
Spener, speaking of a young colleague, writes: “At least it 
appears that among the great multitudes in the cities, though 
the majority is quite depraved, there are nevertheless a number 
of good people who can accomplish much, while in villages 
often hardly anything good can be found in a whole com- 

20 

21 

22 

Notes 233 

munity” (Theologische Bedenken, |, 66, p. 303). In other words, 
the peasant is little suited to rational ascetic conduct. Its ethical 
glorification is very modern. We cannot here enter into the sig- 
nificance of this and similar statements for the question of the 
relation of asceticism to social classes. 

Take, for instance, the following passages (op. cit., pp. 336 f.): 
“Be wholly taken up in diligent business of your lawful callings 
when you are not exercised in the more immediate service of 
God.” “Labour hard in your callings.” “See that you have a 
calling which will find you employment for all the time which 
God’s immediate service spareth.” 

That the peculiar ethical valuation of labour and its dignity was 
not originally a Christian idea nor even peculiar to Christianity 
has recently again been strongly emphasized by Harnack (Mitt. 
des Ev.-Soz Kongr., 14. Folge, 1905, Nos. 3, 4, p. 48). 

Similarly in Pietism (Spener, op. cit., Ill, pp. 429-30). The char- 
acteristic Pietist version is that loyalty to a calling which is 
imposed upon us by the fall serves to annihilate one’s own 
selfish will. Labour in the calling is, as a service of love to one’s 
neighbour, a duty of gratitude for God’s grace (a Lutheran 
idea), and hence it is not pleasing to God that it should be 
performed reluctantly (op. cit., III, p. 272). The Christian should 
thus “prove himself as industrious in his labour as a worldly 
man” (Ill, p. 278). That is obviously less drastic than the 
Puritan version. 

The significance of this important difference, which has been 
evident ever since the Benedictine rules, can only be shown by a 
much wider investigation. 

“A sober procreation of children” is its purpose according to 
Baxter. Similarly Spener, at the same time with concessions to 
the coarse Lutheran attitude, which makes the avoidance of 
immorality, which is otherwise unavoidable, an accessory aim. 
Concupiscence as an accompaniment of sexual intercourse is 
sinful even in marriage. For instance, in Spener’s view it is a 
result of the fall which transformed such a natural, divinely 
ordained process into something inevitably accompanied by 
sinful sensations, which is hence shameful. Also in the opinion 

234 Notes 

of various Pietistic groups the highest form of Christian mar- 
riage is that with the preservation of virginity, the next highest 
that in which sexual intercourse is only indulged in for the 
procreation of children, and so on down to those which are 
contracted for purely erotic or external reasons and which are, 
from an ethical standpoint, concubinage. On these lower levels 
a marriage entered into for purely economic reasons is pre- 
ferred (because after all it is inspired by rational motives) to 
one with erotic foundations. We may here neglect the Herrnhut 
theory and practice of marriage. Rationalistic philosophy 
(Christian Wolff) adopted the ascetic theory in the form that 
what was designed as a means to an end, concupiscence and 
its satisfaction, should not be made an end in itself. 

The transition to a pure, hygienically oriented utilitarianism 
had already taken place in Franklin, who took approximately the 
ethical standpoint of modern physicians, who understand by 
chastity the restriction of sexual intercourse to the amount 
desirable for health, and who have, as is well known, even given 
theoretical advice as to how that should be accomplished. 
As soon as these matters have become the object of purely 
rational consideration the same development has everywhere 
taken place. The Puritan and the hygienic sex-rationalist gener- 
ally tread very different paths, but here they understand each 
other perfectly. In a lecture, a zealous adherent of hygienic 
prostitution—it was a question of the regulation of brothels 
and prostitutes—defended the moral legitimacy of extra- 
marital intercourse (which was looked upon as hygienically 
useful) by referring to its poetic justification in the case of Faust 
and Margaret. To treat Margaret as a prostitute and to fail to 
distinguish the powerful sway of human passions from sexual 
intercourse for hygienic reasons, both are thoroughly congenial 
to the Puritan standpoint. Similar, for instance, is the typical 
specialist’s view, occasionally put forward by very distinguished 
physicians, that a question which extends so far into the sub- 
tlest problems of personality and of culture as that of sexual 
abstinence should be dealt with exclusively in the forum of the 
physician (as an expert). For the Puritan the expert was the 

23 

24 

25 

Notes 235 

moral theorist, now he is the medical man; but the claim of 
competence to dispose of the questions which seem to us 
somewhat narrow-minded is, with opposite signs of course, the 
same in both cases. 

But with all its prudery, the powerful idealism of the Puritan 
attitude can show positive accomplishments, even from the 
point of view of race conservation in a purely hygienic sense, 
while modern sex hygiene, on account of the appeal to unpreju- 
dicedness which it is forced to make, is in danger of destroying 
the basis of all its success. How, with the rationalistic interpret- 
ation of sexual relations among peoples influenced by Puritan- 
ism, acertain refinement and spiritual and ethical penetration of 
marital relationships, with a blossoming of matrimonial chiv- 
alry, has grown up, in contrast to the patriarchal sentimentality 
(Brodem), which is typical of Germany even in the circles of the 
intellectual aristocracy, must necessarily remain outside this 
discussion. Baptist influences have played a part in the emanci- 
pation of woman; the protection of her freedom of conscience, 
and the extension of the idea of the universal priesthood to her 
were here also the first breaches in patriarchal ideas. 

This recurs again and again in Baxter. The Biblical basis is regu- 
larly either the passages in Proverbs, which we already know 
from Franklin (xxii. 29), or those in praise of labour (xxxi. 16). 
Cf. op. cit., |, pp. 377, 382, etc. 

Even Zinzendorf says at one point : “One does not only work in 
order to live, but one lives for the sake of one’s work, and if 
there is no more work to do one suffers or goes to sleep” (Plitt, 
op. cit., |, p. 428). 

Also a symbol of the Mormons closes (after quotations) with 
the words : “But a lazy or indolent man cannot be a Christian 
and be saved. He is destined to be struck down and cast from 
the hive.” But in this case it was primarily the grandiose discip- 
line, half-way between monastery and factory, which placed the 
individual before the dilemma of labour or annihilation and, of 
course in connection with religious enthusiasm and only pos- 
sible through it, brought forth the astonishing economic 
achievements of this sect. 

236 NoTES 

26 

27 
28 

29 

30 

31 

Hence (op. cit., |, p. 380) its symptoms are carefully analysed. 
Sloth and idleness are such deadly sins because they have a 
cumulative character. They are even regarded by Baxter as “des- 
troyers of grace” (op. cit., |, pp. 279-80). That is, they are the 
antitheses of the methodical life. 

See above, chap. 3, note 5. 

Baxter, op. cit., |, pp. 108 ff. Especially striking are the following 
passages : “Question: But will not wealth excuse us? Answer: It 
may excuse you from some sordid sort of work by making you 
more serviceable to another, but you are no more excused from 
service of work ... than the poorest man.” Also, p. 376: 
“Though they [the rich] have no outward want to urge them, 
they have as great a necessity to obey God . . . God hath strictly 
commanded it [labour] to all.” Chap. 4, note 47. 

Similarly Spener (op. cit., Ill, pp. 338, 425), who for this reason 
opposes the tendency to early retirement as morally objection- 
able, and, in refuting an objection to the taking of interest, that 
the enjoyment of interest leads to laziness, emphasizes that 
anyone who was in a position to live upon interest would still 
be obligated to work by God’s commandment. 

Including Pietism. Whenever a question of change of calling 
arises, Spener takes the attitude that after a certain calling has 
once been entered upon, it is a duty of obedience to Providence 
to remain and acquiesce in it. 

The tremendous force, dominating the whole of conduct, 
with which the Indian religious teaching sanctions economic 
traditionalism in terms of chances of favourable rebirth, | 
have shown in the essays on the Wirtschaftsethik der Weltreli- 
gionen. It is an excellent example by which to show the 
difference between mere ethical theories and the creation of 
psychological sanctions with a religious background for certain 
types of conduct. The pious Hindu could advance in the 
scale of transmigration only by the strictly traditional fulfil- 
ment of the duties of the caste of his birth. It was the 
strongest conceivable religious basis for traditionalism. In 
fact, the Indian ethic is in this respect the most completely 
consistent antithesis of the Puritan, as in another respect 

32 
33 

34 

35 

36 

37 

Notes 237 

(traditionalism of the caste structure) it is opposed to the 
Hebrew. 

Baxter, op. cit., |, p. 377. 

But this does not mean that the Puritan view-point was histor- 
ically derived from the latter. On the contrary, it is an expression 
of the genuinely Calvinistic idea that the cosmos of the world 
serves the glory of God. The utilitarian turn, that the economic 
cosmos should serve the good of the many, the common good, 
etc., was a consequence of the idea that any other interpret- 
ation of it would lead to aristocratic idolatry of the flesh, or at 
least did not serve the glory of God, but only fleshly cultural 
ends. But God’s will, as it is expressed (chap. 4, note 34) in the 
purposeful arrangements of the economic cosmos, can, so far 
as secular ends are in question at all, only be embodied in the 
good of the community, in impersonal usefulness. Utilitarian- 
ism is thus, as has already been pointed out, the result of the 
impersonal character of brotherly love and the repudiation of 
all glorification of this world by the exclusiveness of the Puritan 
in majorem Dei gloriam. 

How completely this idea, that all idolatry of the flesh is 
inconsistent with the glory of God and hence unconditionally 
bad, dominated ascetic Protestantism is clearly shown by the 
doubts and hesitation which it cost even Spener, who certainly 
was not infected with democracy, to maintain the use of titles as 
adiapopov against numerous objections. He finally comforted 
himself with the reflection that even in the Bible the Prætor 
Festus was given the title of kpoárioroç by the Apostles. The 
political side of the question does not arise in this connection. 
“The inconstant man is a stranger in his own house”, says 
Thomas Adams (Works of the Puritan Divines, p. 77). 

On this, see especially George Fox’s remarks in the Friends’ 
Library (ed. W. & T. Evans, Philadelphia, 1837), |, p. 130. 

Above all, this sort of religious ethic cannot be regarded as a 
reflex of economic conditions. The specialization of occupa- 
tions had, if anything, gone further in medizval Italy than in 
the England of that period. 

For, as is often pointed out in the Puritan literature, God never 

238 NoTES 

38 

39 

40 

commanded “love thy neighbour more than thyself”, but only 
as thyself. Hence self-regard is also a duty. For instance, a man 
who can make better use of his possessions, to the greater 
glory of God, than his neighbour, is not obliged by the duty of 
brotherly love to part with them. 

Spener is also close to this view-point. But even in the case of 
transfer from commercial occupations (regarded as especially 
dangerous to virtue) to theology, he remains hesitant and on 
the whole opposed to it (op. cit., Ill, pp. 435, 443; |, p. 524). The 
frequent occurrence of the reply to just this question (of the 
permissibility of changing a calling) in Spener’s naturally 
biassed opinion shows, incidentally, how eminently practical 
the different ways of interpreting 1 Corinthians vii were. 

Such ideas are not to be found, at least in the writings, of 
the leading Continental Pietists. Spener’s attitude vacillates 
between the Lutheran (that of satisfaction of needs) and Mer- 
cantilist arguments for the usefulness of the prosperity of 
commerce, etc. (op. cit., IIl, pp. 330, 332; |, p. 418: “the cultiva- 
tion of tobacco brings money into the country and is thus use- 
ful, hence not sinful”. Compare also IIl, pp. 426-7, 429, 434). 
But he does not neglect to point out that, as the example of 
the Quakers and the Mennonites shows, one can make profit 
and yet remain pious; in fact, that even especially high profits, 
as we shall point out later, may be the direct result of pious 
uprightness (op. cit., p. 435). 

These views of Baxter are not a reflection of the economic 
environment in which he lived. On the contrary, his auto- 
biography shows that the success of his home missionary work 
was partly due to the fact that the Kidderminster tradesmen 
were not rich, but only earned food and raiment, and that the 
master craftsmen had to live from hand to mouth just as their 
employees did. “It is the pool who receive the glad tidings of 
the Gospel.” Thomas Adams remarks on the pursuit of gain : 
“He [the knowing man] knows . . . that money may make a man 
richer, not better, and thereupon chooseth rather to sleep with a 
good conscience than a full purse . . . therefore desires no more 
wealth than an honest man may bear away” (Works of the Pur- 

41 

42 

Notes 239 

itan Divines, Ll). But he does want that much, and that means 
that every formally honest gain is legitimate. 

Thus Baxter, op. cit., |, chap. x, 1, 9 (par. 24); |, p. 378, 2. In Prov. 
xxiii. 4: “Weary thyself not to be rich” means only “riches for our 
fleshly ends must not ultimately be intended”. Possession in 
the feudal-seigneurial form of its use is what is odious (cf. the 
remark, op. cit., |, p. 380, on the “debauched part of the gen- 
try”), not possession in itself. Milton, in the first Defensio pro 
populo Anglicano, held the well-known theory that only the mid- 
dle class can maintain virtue. That middle class here means 
bourgeoisie as against the aristocracy is shown by the state- 
ment that both luxury and necessity are unfavourable to virtue. 
This is most important. We may again add the general remark: 
we are here naturally not so much concerned with what con- 
cepts the theological moralists developed in their ethical theor- 
ies, but, rather, what was the effective morality in the life of 
believers—that is, how the religious background of economic 
ethics affected practice. In the casuistic literature of Catholi- 
cism, especially the Jesuit, one can occasionally read discus- 
sions which—for instance on the question of the justification of 
interest, into which we do not enter here—sound like those of 
many Protestant casuists, or even seem to go farther in permit- 
ting or tolerating things. The Puritans have since often enough 
been reproached that their ethic is at bottom the same as that 
of the Jesuits. Just as the Calvinists often cite Catholic moral- 
ists, not only Thomas Aquinas, Bernhard of Clairvaux, Bon- 
aventura, etc., but also contemporaries, the Catholic casuists 
also took notice of heretical ethics. We cannot discuss all that 
here. 

But quite apart from the decisive fact of the religious sanc- 
tion of the ascetic life for the layman, there is the fundamental 
difference, even in theory, that these latitudinarian ideas within 
Catholicism were the products of peculiarly lax ethical theories, 
not sanctioned by the authority of the Church, but opposed by 
the most serious and strictest disciples of it. On the other 
hand, the Protestant idea of the calling in effect placed 
the most serious enthusiasts for asceticism in the service of 

240 notes 

43 

45 

capitalistic acquisition. What in the one case might under cer- 
tain conditions be allowed, appeared in the other as a positive 
moral good. The fundamental differences of the two ethics, 
very important in practice, have been finally crystallized, even 
for modern times, by the Jansenist controversy and the Bull 
Unigenitus. 

“You may labour in that manner as tendeth most to your suc- 
cess and lawful gain. You are bound to improve all your tal- 
ents.” There follows the passage cited above in the text. A 
direct parallel between the pursuit of wealth in the Kingdom 
of Heaven and the pursuit of success in an earthly calling is 
found in Janeway, Heaven upon Earth (Works of the Puritan 
Divines, p. 275). 

Even in the Lutheran Confession of Duke Christopher of Wirt- 
temberg, which was submitted to the Council of Trent, objec- 
tion is made to the oath of poverty. He who is poor in his 
station should bear it, but if he swore to remain so it would be 
the same as if he swore to remain sick or to maintain a bad 

reputation. 
Thus in Baxter and also in Duke Christopher's confession. 
Compare further passages like: “ . . . the vagrant rogues whose 

lives are nothing but an exorbitant course; the main begging”, 
etc. (Thomas Adams, Works of the Puritan Divines, p. 259). Even 
Calvin had strictly forbidden begging, and the Dutch Synods 
campaigned against licences to beg. During the epoch of the 
Stuarts, especially Laud’s regime under Charles |, which had 
systematically developed the principle of public poor relief and 
provision of work for the unemployed, the Puritan battle-cry 
was: “Giving alms is no charity” (title of Defoe’s later well- 
known work). Towards the end of the seventeenth century they 
began the deterrent system of workhouses for the unemployed 
(compare Leonard, Early History of English Poor Relief, Cam- 
bridge, 1900, and H. Levy, Die Grundlagen des ökonomischen 
Liberalismus in der Geschichte der englischen Volkswirtschaft, 
Jena, 1912, pp. 69 ff.). 

The President of the Baptist Union of Great Britain and Ireland, 
G. White, said emphatically in his inaugural address before the 

47 

48 

49 

Notes 241 

assembly in London in 1903 (Baptist Handbook, 1904, p. 104): 
“The best men on the roll of our Puritan Churches were men of 
affairs, who believed that religion should permeate the whole of 
life.” 

Here also lies the characteristic difference from all feudal 
view-points. For the latter only the descendants of the parvenu 
(political or social) can reap the benefit of his success in a 
recognized station (characteristically expressed in the Spanish 
Hidalgo = hijo d’algo = filius de aliquo where the aliquid means 
an inherited property). However rapidly these differences are 
to-day fading out in the rapid change and Europeanization of 
the American national character, nevertheless the precisely 
opposite bourgeois attitude which glorifies business success 
and earnings as a symptom of mental achievement, but has no 
respect for mere inherited wealth, is still sometimes repre- 
sented there. On the other hand, in Europe (as James Bryce 
once remarked) in effect almost every social honour is now 
purchasable for money, so long as the buyer has not himself 
stood behind the counter, and carries out the necessary meta- 
morphosis of his property (formation of trusts, etc.). Against 
the aristocracy of blood, see for instance Thomas Adams, 
Works of the Puritan Divines, p. 216. 

That was, for instance, already true of the founder of the Famil- 
ist sect, Hendrik Nicklaes, who was a merchant (Barclay, Inner 
Life of the Religious Societies of the Commonwealth, p. 34). 

This is, for instance, definitely true for Hoornbeek, since Matt. 
v. 5 and 1 Tim. iv. 8 also made purely worldly promises to the 
saints (op. cit., |, p. 193). Everything is the work of God’s Provi- 
dence, but in particular He takes care of His own. Op. cit., p. 
192: “Super alios autem summa cura et modis singularissimis 
versatur Dei providentia circa fideles.” There follows a discus- 
sion of how one can know that a stroke of luck comes not from 
the communis providentia, but from that special care. Bailey also 
(op. cit., p. 191) explains success in worldly labours by reference 
to Providence. That prosperity is often the reward of a godly life 
is a common expression in Quaker writings (for example see 
such an expression as late as 1848 in Selection from the Christian 

242 Notes 

50 

51 

52 

53 

54 

Advices, issued by the General Meeting of the Society of 
Friends, London, sixth edition, 1851, p. 209). We shall return to 
the connection with the Quaker ethics. 

Thomas Adams’s analysis of the quarrel of Jacob and Esau may 
serve as an example of this attention to the patriarchs, which is 
equally characteristic of the Puritan view of life (Works of the 
Puritan Divines, p. 235): “His [Esau’s] folly may be argued from 
the base estimation of the birthright” [the passage is also 
important for the development of the idea of the birthright, of 
which more later] “that he would so lightly pass from it and on 
so easy condition as a pottage.” But then it was perfidious that 
he would not recognize the sale, charging he had been cheated. 
He is, in other words, “a cunning hunter, a man of the fields”; a 
man of irrational, barbarous life; while Jacob, “a plain man, 
dwelling in tents”, represents the “man of grace”. 

The sense of an inner relationship to Judaism, which is 
expressed even in the well-known work of Roosevelt, Köhler 
(op. cit.) found widespread among the peasants in Holland. 
But, on the other hand, Puritanism was fully conscious of 
its differences from Hebrew ethics in practical affairs, as 
Prynne’s attack on the Jews (apropos of Cromwell’s proposals 
for toleration) plainly shows. See below, note 58. 

Zur bäuerlichen Glaubens- und Sittenlehre. Von einem thüring- 
ischen Landpfarrer, second edition, Gotha, 1890, p. 16. The 
peasants who are here described are characteristic products of 
the Lutheran Church. Again and again | wrote Lutheran in the 
margin when the excellent author spoke of peasant religion in 
general. 

Compare for instance the passage cited in Ritschl, Pietismus Il, 
p. 158. Spener also bases his objections to change of calling and 
pursuit of gain partly on passages in Jesus Sirach. Theologische 
Bedenken, Ill, p. 426. 

It is true that Bailey, nevertheless, recommends reading them, 
and references to the Apocrypha occur now and then, though 
naturally not often. | can remember none to Jesus Sirach just 
now (though perhaps by chance). 

Where outward success comes to persons evidently damned, 

55 

56 

57 

Notes 243 

the Calvinist (as for instance Hoornbeek) comforts himself with 
the reflection, following the theory of stubbornness, that God 
allows it to them in order to harden them and make their doom 
the more certain. 

We cannot go farther into this point in this connection. We are 
here interested only in the formalistic character of Puritan 
righteousness. On the significance of Old Testament ethics for 
the lex nature there is much in Troeltsch’s Soziallehren. 

The binding character of the ethical norms of the Scriptures 
goes for Baxter (Christian Directory, II, p. 173 f.) so far that they 
are (1) only a transcript of the law of nature, or (2) hear the 
“express character of universality and perpetuity”. 

For instance Dowden (with reference to Bunyan), op. cit., p, 39. 
More on this point in the essays on the Wirtschaftsethik der 
Weltreligionen. The enormous influence which, for instance, the 
second commandment (“thou shalt not make unto thee a 
graven image”) has had on the development of the Jewish 
character, its rationality and abhorrence of sensuous culture, 
cannot be analysed here. However, it may perhaps be noted as 
characteristic that one of the leaders of the Educational Alliance 
in the United States, an organization which carries on the 
Americanization of Jewish immigrants on a grand scale and 
with astonishing success, told me that one of the first purposes 
aimed at in all forms of artistic and social educational work was 
emancipation from the second commandment. To the Israel- 
ite’s prohibition of any anthropomorphic representation of God 
corresponds in Puritanism the somewhat different but in effect 
similar prohibition of idolatry of the flesh. 

As far as Talmudic Judaism is concerned, some fundamental 
traits of Puritan morality are certainly related to it. For instance, 
it is stated in the Talmud (in Wünsche, Babyl. Talmud, 1l, p. 34) 
that it is better and will be more richly rewarded by God if one 
does a good deed for duty’s sake than one which is not com- 
manded by the law. In other words, loveless fulfillment of duty 
stands higher ethically than sentimental philanthropy. The Pur- 
itan ethics would accept that in essentials. Kant in effect also 
comes close to it, being partly of Scotch ancestry and strongly 

244 Notes 

influenced by Pietism in his bringing up. Though we cannot 
discuss the subject here, many of his formulations are closely 
related to ideas of ascetic Protestantism. But nevertheless the 
Talmudic ethic is deeply saturated with Oriental traditionalism. 
“R. Tanchum said to Ben Chanilai, ‘Never alter a custom’” 
(Gemara to Mischna. VII, i, 86b, No. 93, in Wünsche. It is a 
question of the standard of living of day labourers). The only 
exception to the conformity is relation to strangers. 

Moreover, the Puritan conception of lawfulness as proof evi- 
dently provided a much stronger motive to positive action than 
the Jewish unquestioned fulfillment of all commandments. The 
idea that success reveals the blessing of God is of course not 
unknown to Judaism. But the fundamental difference in 
religious and ethical significance which it took on for Judaism 
on account of the double ethic prevented the appearance of 
similar results at just the most important point. Acts toward a 
stranger were allowed which were forbidden toward a brother. 
For that reason alone it was impossible for success in this field 
of what was not commanded but only allowed to be a sign of 
religious worth and a motive to methodical conduct in the way 
in which it was for the Puritan. On this whole problem, which 
Sombart, in his book Die Juden und das Wirtschaftsleben, has 
often dealt with incorrectly, see the essays referred to above. 
The details have no place here. 

The Jewish ethics, however strange that may at first sound, 
remained very strongly traditionalistic. We can likewise not 
enter into the tremendous change which the inner attitude 
toward the world underwent with the Christian form of the 
ideas of grace and salvation which contained in a peculiar way 
the seeds of new possibilities of development. On Old Testa- 
ment lawfulness compare for example Ritschl, Die christliche 
Lehre von der Rechtfertigung und Versöhnung, Il, p. 265. 

To the English Puritans, the Jews of their time were representa- 
tives of that type of capitalism which was involved in war, Gov- 
ernment contracts, State monopolies, speculative promotions, 
and the construction and financial projects of princes, which 
they themselves condemned. In fact the difference may, in 

Notes 245 

general, with the necessary qualifications, be formulated: that 
Jewish capitalism was speculative pariah-capitalism, while the 
Puritan was bourgeois organization of labour. 

59 The truth of the Holy Scriptures follows for Baxter in the last 
analysis from the “wonderful difference of the godly and 
ungodly”, the absolute difference of the renewed man from 
others, and God's evident quite special care for His chosen 
people (which may of course be expressed in temptations), 
Christian Directory, |, p. 165. 

60 As a characterization of this, it is only necessary to read how 
tortuously even Bunyan, who still occasionally approaches the 
atmosphere of Luther’s Freiheit eines Christenmenschen (for 
example in Of the Law and a Christian, Works of the Puritan 
Divines, p. 254), reconciles himself with the parable of the Phar- 
isee and the Publican (see the sermon The Pharisee and the 
Publican, op. cit., p. 100) Why is the Pharisee condemned? He 
does not truly keep God’s commandments, for he is evidently a 
sectarian who is only concerned with external details and cere- 
monies (p. 107), but above all because he ascribes merit to 
himself, and at the same time, like the Quakers, thanks God for 
virtue by misuse of His name. In a sinful manner he exalts this 
virtue (p. 126), and thus implicitly contests God’s predestin- 
ation (p. 139). His prayer is thus idolatry of the flesh, and that is 
the reason it is sinful. On the other hand, the publican is, as the 
honesty of his confession shows, spiritually reborn, for, as it is 
put with a characteristic Puritan mitigation of the Lutheran 
sense of sin, “to a right and sincere conviction of sin there 
must be a conviction of the probability of mercy” (p. 209). 

61 Printed in Gardiner’s Constitutional Documents. One may 
compare this struggle against anti-authoritarian asceticism 
with Louis XIV’s persecution of Port Royal and the Jansenists. 

62 Calvin’s own standpoint was in this respect distinctly less dras- 
tic, at least in so far as the finer aristocratic forms of the enjoy- 
ment of life were concerned. The only limitation is the Bible. 
Whoever adheres to it and has a good conscience, need not 
observe his every impulse to enjoy life with anxiety. The discus- 
sion in Chapter X of the Instit. Christ (for instance, “nec fugere 

246 Notes 

63 

64 

65 

66 

ea quoque possumus que videntur oblectatione magis quam 
necessitate inservire”) might in itself have opened the way to a 
very lax practice. Along with increasing anxiety over the certi- 
tudo salutis the most important circumstance for the later dis- 
ciples was, however, as we shall point out in another place, that 
in the era of the ecclesia militans it was the small bourgeoisie 
who were the principal representatives of Calvinistic ethics. 
Thomas Adams (Works of the Puritan Divines, p. 3) begins a 
sermon on the “three divine sisters” (“but love is the greatest 
of these”) with the remark that even Paris gave the golden 
apple to Aphrodite! 

Novels and the like should not be read; they are “wastetimes” 
(Baxter, Christian Directory, |, p. 51). The decline of lyric poetry 
and folk-music, as well as the drama, after the Elizabethan age 
in England is well known. In the pictorial arts Puritanism per- 
haps did not find very much to suppress. But very striking is the 
decline from what seemed to be a promising musical begin- 
ning (England’s part in the history of music was by no means 
unimportant) to that absolute musical vacuum which we find 
typical of the Anglo-Saxon peoples later, and even to-day. 
Except for the negro churches, and the professional singers 
whom the Churches now engage as attractions (Trinity Church 
in Boston in 1904 for $8,000 annually), in America one also 
hears as community singing in general only a noise which is 
intolerable to German ears (partly analogous things in Holland 
also). 

Just the same in Holland, as the reports of the Synods show. 
(See the resolutions on the Maypole in the Reitmaas Collection, 
VI, 78, 139.) 

That the “Renaissance of the Old Testament” and the Pietistic 
orientation to certain Christian attitudes hostile to beauty in 
art, which in the last analysis go back to Isaiah and the 22nd 
Psalm, must have contributed to making ugliness more of a 
possible object for art, and that the Puritan repudiation of 
idolatry of the flesh played a part, seems likely. But in detail 
everything seems uncertain. In the Roman Church quite differ- 
ent demagogic motives led to outwardly similar effects, but, 

67 

NOTES 247 

however, with quite different artistic results. Standing before 
Rembrandt's Saul and David (in the Mauritshuis), one seems 
directly to feel the powerful influence of Puritan emotions. The 
excellent analysis of Dutch cultural influences in Carl Neu- 
mann’s Rembrandt probably gives everything that for the time 
being we can know about how far ascetic Protestantism may be 
credited with a positive fructifying influence on art. 
The most complex causes, into which we cannot go here, were 
responsible for the relatively smaller extent to which the Calvin- 
istic ethic penetrated practical life there. The ascetic spirit 
began to weaken in Holland as early as the beginning of the 
seventeenth century (the English Congregationalists who fled 
to Holland in 1608 were disturbed by the lack of respect for the 
Sabbath there), but especially under the Stadtholder Frederick 
Henry. Moreover, Dutch Puritanism had in general much less 
expansive power than English. The reasons for it lay in part in 
the political constitution (particularistic confederation of towns 
and provinces) and in the far smaller degree of military force 
(the War of Independence was soon fought principally with 
the money of Amsterdam and mercenary armies. English 
preachers illustrated the Babylonian confusion of tongues by 
reference to the Dutch Army). Thus the burden of the war of 
religion was to a large extent passed on to others, but at the 
same time a part of their political power was lost. On the other 
hand, Cromwell’s army, even though it was partly conscripted, 
felt that it was an army of citizens. It was, to be sure, all the 
more characteristic that just this army adopted the abolition of 
conscription in its programme, because one could fight justly 
only for the glory of God in a cause hallowed by conscience, but 
not at the whim of a sovereign. The constitution of the British 
Army, so immoral to traditional German ideas, had its histor- 
ical origin in very moral motives, and was an attainment of 
soldiers who had never been beaten. Only after the Restoration 
was it placed in the service of the interests of the Crown. 

The Dutch schutterijen, the champions of Calvinism in the 
period of the Great War, only half a generation after the Synod 
of Dordrecht, do not look in the least ascetic in the pictures of 

248 Notes 

68 

69 

Hals. Protests of the Synods against their conduct occur 
frequently. The Dutch concept of Deftigkeit is a mixture of 
bourgeois-rational honesty and patrician consciousness of sta- 
tus. The division of church pews according to classes in the 
Dutch churches shows the aristocratic character of this religion 
even to-day. The continuance of the town economy hampered 
industry. It prospered almost alone through refugees, and 
hence only sporadically. Nevertheless, the worldly asceticism of 
Calvinism and Pietism was an important influence in Holland 
in the same direction as elsewhere. Also in the sense to be 
referred to presently of ascetic compulsion to save, as Groen 
van Prinsterer shows in the passage cited below, note 87. 
Moreover, the almost complete lack of belles lettres in Calvin- 
istic Holland is of course no accident (see for instance Busken- 
Huet, Het Land van Rembrandt). The significance of Dutch 
religion as ascetic compulsion to save appears clearly even in 
the eighteenth century in the writings of Albertus Haller. For the 
characteristic peculiarities of the Dutch attitude toward art and 
its motives, compare for example the autobiographical remarks 
of Constantine Huyghens (written in 1629-31) in Oud Holland, 
1891. The work of Groen van Prinsterer, La Hollande et I’influ- 
ence de Calvin, 1864, already referred to, offers nothing import- 
ant for our problems. The New Netherlands colony in America 
was socially a half-feudal settlement of patroons, merchants 
who advanced capital, and, unlike New England, it was difficult 
to persuade small people to settle there. 
We may recall that the Puritan town government closed the 
theatre at Stratford-on-Avon while Shakespeare was still alive 
and residing there in his last years. Shakespeare’s hatred and 
contempt of the Puritans appear on every occasion. As late as 
1777 the City of Birmingham refused to license a theatre 
because it was conducive to slothfulness, and hence unfavour- 
able to trade (Ashley, Birmingham Trade and Commerce, 1913). 
Here also it was of decisive importance that for the Puritan 
there was only the alternative of divine will or earthly vanity. 
Hence for him there could be no adiaphora. As we have already 
pointed out, Calvin’s own view was different in this respect. 

70 

72 

73 

NOTES 249 

What one eats, wears, etc., as long as there is no enslavement 
of the soul to earthly desire as a result, is indifferent. Freedom 
from the world should be expressed, as for the Jesuits, in indif- 
ference, which for Calvin meant an indifferent, uncovetous use 
of whatever goods the earth offered (pp. 409 ff. of the original 
edition of the Instit. Christ). 

The Quaker attitude in this respect is well known. But as early 
as the beginning of the seventeenth century the heaviest 
storms shook the pious congregation of exiles in Amsterdam 
for a decade over the fashionable hats and dresses of a 
preacher’s wife (charmingly described in Dexter's Congrega- 
tionalism of the Last Three Hundred Years). Sanford (op. cit.) has 
pointed out that the present-day male hair-cut is that of the 
ridiculous Roundheads, and the equally ridiculous (for the 
time) male clothing of the Puritans is at least in principle 
fundamentally the same as that of to-day. 

On this point again see Veblen’s Theory of Business Enterprise. 
Again and again we come back to this attitude. It explains 
statements like the following: “Every penny which is paid upon 
yourselves and children and friends must be done as by God’s 
own appointment and to serve and please Him. Watch nar- 
rowly, or else that thievish, carnal self will leave God nothing” 
(Baxter, op. cit., |, p. 108). This is decisive; what is expended for 
personal ends is withdrawn from the service of God’s glory. 
Quite rightly it is customary to recall (Dowden, op. cit.) that 
Cromwell saved Raphael’s drawings and Mantegna’s Triumph 
of Cesar from destruction, while Charles II tried to sell them. 
Moreover, the society of the Restoration was distinctly cool or 
even hostile to English national literature. In fact the influence 
of Versailles was all-powerful at courts everywhere. A detailed 
analysis of the influence of the unfavourable atmosphere for 
the spontaneous enjoyment of everyday life on the spirit of the 
higher types of Puritan, and the men who went through the 
schooling of Puritanism, is a task which cannot be undertaken 
within the limits of this sketch. Washington Irving (Bracebridge 
Hall) formulates it in the usual English terms thus : “It [he says 
political freedom, we should say Puritanism] evinces less play 

250 notes 

74 

75 
76 

77 

of the fancy, but more power of the imagination.” It is only neces- 
sary to think of the place of the Scotch in science, literature, and 
technical invention, as well as in the business life of Great Brit- 
ain, to be convinced that this remark approaches the truth, even 
though put somewhat too narrowly. We cannot speak here of 
its significance for the development of technique and the 
empirical sciences. The relation itself is always appearing in 
everyday life. For the Quakers, for instance, the recreations which 
are permissible (according to Barclay) are: visiting of friends, 
reading of historical works, mathematical and physical experi- 
ments, gardening, discussion of business and other occurrences 
in the world, etc. The reason is that pointed out above. 

Already very finely analysed in Carl Neumann’s Rembrandt, 
which should be compared with the above remarks in general. 
Thus Baxter in the passage cited above, l, p. 108, and below. 
Compare the well-known description. of Colonel Hutchinson 
(often quoted, for instance, in Sanford, op. cit., p. 57) in the 
biography written by his widow. After describing all his chival- 
rous virtues and his cheerful, joyous nature, it goes. on: “He 
was wonderfully neat, cleanly, and genteel in his habit, and had 
a very good fancy in it; but he left off very early the wearing of 
anything that was costly.” Quite similar is the ideal of the edu- 
cated and highly civilized Puritan woman who, however, is 
penurious of two things: (1) time, and (2) expenditure for pomp 
and pleasure, as drawn in Baxter’s funeral oration for Mary 
Hammer (Works of the Puritan Divines, p. 533). 

| think, among many other examples, especially of a manu- 
facturer unusually successful in his business ventures, and in 
his later years very wealthy, who, when for the treatment of a 
troublesome digestive disorder the doctor prescribed a few 
oysters a day, could only be brought to comply with difficulty. 
Very considerable gifts for philanthropic purposes which he 
made during his lifetime and a certain openhandedness 
showed, on the other hand, that it was simply a survival of that 
ascetic feeling which looks upon enjoyment of wealth for one- 
self as morally reprehensible, but has nothing whatever to do 
with avarice. 

Notes 251 

78 The separation of workshop, office, of business in general and 
the private dwelling, of firm and name, of business capital 
and private wealth, the tendency to make of the business a 
corpus mysticum (at least in the case of corporate property) 
all lay in this direction. On this, see my Handelsgesellschaften 
im Mittelalter (Gesammelte Aufsdtze zur Sozial- und Wirtschafts- 
geschichte, pp. 312 ff.). 

79 Sombart in his Kapitalismus (first edition) has already well 
pointed out this characteristic phenomenon. It must, however, 
be noted that the accumulation of wealth springs from two 
quite distinct psychological sources. One reaches into the 
dimmest antiquity and is expressed in foundations, family for- 
tunes, and trusts, as well as much more purely and clearly in 
the desire to die weighted down with a great burden of 
material goods; above all to insure the continuation of a busi- 
ness even at the cost of the personal interests of the majority 
of one’s children. In such cases it is, besides the desire to give 
one’s own creation an ideal life beyond one’s death, and thus 
to maintain the splendor familie and extend the personality of 
the founder, a question of, so to speak, fundamentally ego- 
centric motives. That is not the case with that bourgeois 
motive with which we are here dealing. There the motto of 
asceticism is “Entsagen sollst du, sollst entsagen” in the posi- 
tive capitalistic sense of “Erwerben sollst du, sollst erwerben”. 
In its pure and simple non-rationality it is a sort of categorical 
imperative. Only the glory of God and one’s own duty, not 
human vanity, is the motive for the Puritans; and to-day only 
the duty to one’s calling. If it pleases anyone to illustrate an 
idea by its extreme consequences, we may recall the theory of 
certain American millionaires, that their millions should not 
be left to their children, so that they will not be deprived of the 
good moral effects of the necessity of working and earning for 
themselves. To-day that idea is certainly no more than a theor- 
etical soap-bubble. 

80 This is, as must continually be emphasized, the final decisive 
religious motive (along with the purely ascetic desire to mortify 
the flesh). It is especially clear in the Quakers. 

252 NoTEs 

81 

82 

83 

84 

Baxter (Saints’ Everlasting Rest, p. 12) repudiates this with pre- 
cisely the same reasoning as the Jesuits : the body must have 
what it needs, otherwise one becomes a slave to it. 

This ideal is clearly present, especially for Quakerism, in the 
first period of its development, as has already been shown in 
important points by Weingarten in his Englische Revolution- 
skirchen. Also Barclay’s thorough discussion (op. cit., pp. 519 ff., 
533) shows it very clearly. To be avoided are: (1) Worldly vanity; 
thus all ostentation, frivolity, and use of things having no prac- 
tical purpose, or which are valuable only for their scarcity (i.e. 
for vanity’s sake). (2) Any unconscientious use of wealth, such 
as excessive expenditure for not very urgent needs above 
necessary provision for the real needs of life and for the future. 
The Quaker was, so to speak, a living law of marginal utility. 
“Moderate use of the creature” is definitely permissible, but in 
particular one might pay attention to the quality and durability 
of materials so long as it did not lead to vanity. On all this 
compare Morgenblatt fiir gebildete Leser, 1846, pp. 216 ff. Espe- 
cially on comfort and solidity among the Quakers, compare 
Schneckenburger, Vorlesungen, pp. 96 f. 

Adapted by Weber from Faust, Act |. Goethe there depicts 
Mephistopheles as “Die Kraft, die stets das Bése will, und stets 
das Gute schafft” —TRANSLATOR’s NOTE. 

It has already been remarked that we cannot here enter into the 
question of the class relations of these religious movements 
(see the essays on the Wirtschaftsethik der Weltreligionen). In 
order to see, however, that for example Baxter, of whom we 
make so much use in this study, did not see things solely as a 
bourgeois of his time, it will suffice to recall that even for him in 
the order of the religious value of callings, after the learned 
professions comes the husband-man, and only then mariners, 
clothiers, booksellers, tailors, etc. Also, under mariners (char- 
acteristically enough) he probably thinks at least as often of 
fishermen as of shipowners. In this regard several things in the 
Talmud are in a different class. Compare, for instance, in 
Wünsche, Babyl Talmud, ||, pp. 20, 21, the sayings of Rabbi 
Eleasar, which though not unchallenged, all contend in effect 

85 

86 

NoTES 253 

that business is better than agriculture. In between see Il, 2, 
p. 68, on the wise investment of capital: one-third in land, 
one-third in merchandise, and one-third in cash. 

For those to whom no causal explanation is adequate with- 

out an economic (or materialistic as it is unfortunately still 
called) interpretation, it may be remarked that | consider the 
influence of economic development on the fate of religious 
ideas to be very important and shall later attempt to show how 
in our case the process of mutual adaptation of the two took 
place. On the other hand, those religious ideas themselves 
simply cannot be deduced from economic circumstances. They 
are in themselves, that is beyond doubt, the most powerful 
plastic elements of national character, and contain a law of 
development and a compelling force entirely their own. More- 
over, the most important differences, so far as non-religious 
factors play a part, are, as with Lutheranism and Calvinism, the 
result of political circumstances, not economic. 
That is what Eduard Bernstein means to express when he says, 
in the essay referred to above (pp. 625, 681), “Asceticism is a 
bourgeois virtue.” His discussion is the first which has sug- 
gested these important relationships. But the connection is a 
much wider one than he suspected. For not only the accumula- 
tion of capital, but the ascetic rationalization of the whole of 
economic life was involved. 

For the American Colonies, the difference between the Puritan 
North, where, on account of the ascetic compulsion to save, 
capital in search of investment was always available, from the 
conditions in the South has already been clearly brought out by 
Doyle. 

Doyle, The English in America, Il, chap. i. The existence of iron- 
works (1643), weaving for the market (1659), and also the high 
development of the handicrafts in New England in the first 
generation after the foundation of the colonies are, from a 
purely economic view-point, astounding. They are in striking 
contrast to the conditions in the South, as well as the non- 
Calvinistic Rhode Island with its complete freedom of con- 
science. There, in spite of the excellent harbour, the report of 

254 Notes 

87 

88 

89 

90 

the Governor and Council of 1686 said: “The great obstruction 
concerning trade is the want of merchants and men of con- 
siderable estates amongst us” (Arnold, History of the State of 
Rhode Island, p. 490). It can in fact hardly be doubted that the 
compulsion continually to reinvest savings, which the Puritan 
curtailment of consumption exercised, played a part. In add- 
ition there was the part of Church discipline which cannot be 
discussed here. 

That, however, these circles rapidly diminished in the Nether- 
lands is shown by Busken-Huet’s discussion (op. cit., Il, chaps. 
iii and iv). Nevertheless, Groen van Prinsterer says (Handb. der 
Gesch. van het Vaderland, third edition, par. 303, note, p. 254), 
“De Nederlanders verkoopen veel en verbruiken wenig”, even 
of the time after the Peace of Westphalia. 

For England, for instance, a petition of an aristocratic Royalist 
(quoted in Ranke, Engl. Geschichte, IV, p. 197) presented after 
the entry of Charles II into London, advocated a legal prohib- 
ition of the acquisition of landed estates by bourgeois capital, 
which should thereby be forced to find employment in trade. 
The class of Dutch regents was distinguished as an estate from 
the bourgeois patricians of the cities by the purchase of landed 
estates. See the complaints, cited by Fruin, Tien jaren uit den 
tachtigjarigen oorlog, of the year 1652, that the regents have 
become landlords and are no longer merchants. To be sure 
these circles had never been at bottom strictly Calvinistic. And 
the notorious scramble for membership in the nobility and 
titles in large parts of the Dutch middle class in the second 
half of the seventeenth century in itself shows that at least for 
this period the contrast between English and Dutch conditions 
must be accepted with caution. In this case the power of 
hereditary moneyed property broke through the ascetic spirit. 
Upon the strong movement for bourgeois capital to buy 
English landed estates followed the great period of prosperity 
of English agriculture. 

Even down into this century Anglican landlords have often 
refused to accept Nonconformists as tenants. At the present 
time the two parties of the Church are of approximately equal 

Notes 255 

numbers, while in earlier times the Nonconformists were 
always in the minority. 

91 H. Levy (article in Archiv fiir Sozialwissenschaft and Sozialpolitik, 
XLVI, p. 605) rightly notes that according to the native character 
of the English people, as seen from numerous of its traits, they 
were, if anything, less disposed to welcome an ascetic ethic and 
the middle-class virtues than other peoples. A hearty and 
unrestrained enjoyment of life was, and is, one of their funda- 
mental traits. The power of Puritan asceticism at the time of its 
predominance is shown most strikingly in the astonishing 
degree to which this trait of character was brought under 
discipline among its adherents. 

92 This contrast recurs continually in Doyle’s presentation. In the 
attitude of the Puritan to everything the religious motive always 
played an important part (not always, of course, the sole 
important one). The colony (under Winthrop’s leadership) was 
inclined to permit the settlement of gentlemen in Mas- 
sachusetts, even an upper house with a hereditary nobility, if 
only the gentlemen would adhere to the Church. The colony 
remained closed for the sake of Church discipline. The colon- 
ization of New Hampshire and Maine was carried out by large 
Anglican merchants, who laid out large stock-raising plan- 
tations. Between them and the Puritans there was very little 
social connection. There were complaints over the strong 
greed for profits of the New Englanders as early as 1632 (see 
Weeden’s Economic and Social History of New England, |, p. 125). 

93 This is noted by Petty (Pol. Arith.), and all the contemporary 
sources without exception speak in particular of the Puritan 
sectarians, Baptists, Quakers, Mennonites, etc., as belonging 
partly to a propertyless class, partly to one of small capitalists, 
and contrast them both with the great merchant aristocracy 
and the financial adventurers. But it was from just this small 
capitalist class, and not from the great financial magnates, 
monopolists, Government contractors, great lenders to the 
King, colonial entrepreneurs, promoters, etc., that there origin- 
ated what was characteristic of Occidental capitalism : the 
middle-class organization of industrial labour on the basis of 

256 NotTEs 

94 

95 

96 

97 

private property (see Unwin, Industrial Organization in the 
Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries, London, 1914, pp. 196 ff.). 
To see that this difference was fully known even to con- 
temporaries, compare Parker's Discourse Concerning Puritans of 
1641, where the contrast to promoters and courtiers is also 
emphasized. 

On the way in which this was expressed in the politics of 
Pennsylvania in the eighteenth century, especially during the 
War of Independence, see Sharpless, A Quaker Experiment in 
Government, Philadelphia, 1902. 

Quoted in Southey, Life of Wesley, chap. xxix (second American 
edition, Il, p. 308). For the reference, which | did not know, | 
am indebted to a letter from Professor Ashley (1913). Ernst 
Troeltsch, to whom | communicated it for the purpose, has 
already made use of it. 

The reading of this passage may be recommended to all those 
who consider themselves to-day better informed on these mat- 
ters than the leaders and contemporaries of the movements 
themselves. As we see, they knew very well what they were 
doing and what dangers they faced. It is really inexcusable to 
contest so lightly, as some of my critics have done, facts 
which are quite beyond dispute, and have hitherto never been 
disputed by anyone. All | have done is to investigate their 
underlying motives somewhat more carefully. No one in the 
seventeenth century doubted the existence of these relation- 
ships (compare Manley, Usury of 6 per Cent. Examined, 1669, p. 
137). Besides the modern writers already noted, poets like 
Heine and Keats, as well as historians like Macaulay, Cun- 
ningham, Rogers, or an essayist such as Matthew Arnold, have 
assumed them as obvious. From the most recent literature see 
Ashley, Birmingham Industry and Commerce (1913). He has also 
expressed his complete agreement with me in correspondence. 
On the whole problem now compare the study by H. Levy 
referred to above, note 91. 

Weber's italics. 

That exactly the same things were obvious to the Puritans of 
the classical era cannot perhaps be more clearly shown than by 

Notes 257 

the fact that in Bunyan Mr. Money-Love argues that one may 
become religious in order to get rich, for instance to attract 
customers. For why one has become religious makes no dif- 
ference (see p. 114, Tauchnitz edition). 

99 Defoe was a zealous Nonconformist. 

100 Spener also (Theologische Bedenken, pp. 426, 429, 432 ff), 
although he holds that the merchant’s calling is full of tempta- 
tions and pitfalls, nevertheless declares in answer to a ques- 
tion: “I am glad to see, so far as trade is concerned, that my 
dear friend knows no scruples, but takes it as an art of life, 
which it is, in which much good may be done for the human 
race, and God’s will may be carried out through love.” This is 
more fully justified in other passages by mercantilist argu- 
ments. Spener, at times in a purely Lutheran strain, designates 
the desire to become rich as the main pitfall, following 1 Tim. 
vi, viii, and ix, and referring to Jesus Sirach (see above), and 
hence rigidly to be condemned. But, on the other hand, he 
takes some of it back by referring to the prosperous sectarians 
who yet live righteously (see above, note 39). As the result of 
industrious work wealth is not objectionable to him either. But 
on account of the Lutheran influence his standpoint is less 
consistent than that of Baxter. 

101 Baxter, op cit., Il, p. 16, warns against the employment of 
“heavy, flegmatic, sluggish, fleshly, slothful persons” as ser- 
vants, and recommends preference for godly servants, not 
only because ungodly servants would be mere eye-servants, 
but above all because “a truly godly servant will do all your 
service in obedience to God, as if God Himself had bid him do 
it”. Others, on the other hand, are inclined “to make no great 
matter of conscience of it”. However, the criterion of saintli- 
ness of the workman is not for him the external confession of 
faith, but the “conscience to do their duty”. It appears here 
that the interests of God and of the employers are curiously 
harmonious. Spener also (Theologische Bedenken, 111, p. 272), 
who otherwise strongly urges taking time to think of God, 
assumes it to be obvious that workers must be satisfied 
with the extreme minimum of leisure time (even on Sundays). 

258 NoTES 

102 

103 

104 

105 

106 

107 

English writers have rightly called the Protestant immigrants 
the pioneers of skilled labour. See also proofs in H. Levy, Die 
Grundlagen des ökonomischen Liberalimus in der Geschichte der 
englischen Volkswirtschaft, p. 53. 

The analogy between the unjust (according to human stand- 
ards) predestination of only a few and the equally unjust, but 
equally divinely ordained, distribution of wealth, was too obvi- 
ous to be escaped. See for example Hoornbeek, op. cit., |, p. 
153. Furthermore, as for Baxter, op. cit., |, p. 380, poverty is 
very often a symptom of sinful slothfulness. 

Thomas Adams (Works of the Puritan Divines, p. 158) thinks 
that God probably allows so many people to remain poor 
because He knows that they would not be able to withstand 
the temptations that go with wealth. For wealth all too often 
draws men away from religion. 

See above, note 45, and the study of H. Levy referred to there. 
The same is noted in all the discussions (thus by Manley for 
the Huguenots). 

Charisma is a sociological term coined by Weber himself. It 
refers to the quality of leadership which appeals to non- 
rational motives. See Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft, pp. 140 ff— 
TRANSLATOR’S NOTE. 

Similar things were not lacking in England. There was, for 
example, that Pietism which, starting from Law's Serious Call 
(1728), preached poverty, chastity, and, originally, isolation 
from the world. 

Baxter’s activity in Kidderminster, a community absolutely 
debauched when he arrived, which was almost unique in the 
history of the ministry for its success, is at the same time a 
typical example of how asceticism educated the masses to 
labour, or, in Marxian terms, to the production of surplus 
value, and thereby for the first time made their employment in 
the capitalistic labour relation (putting-out industry, weaving, 
etc.) possible at all. That is very generally the causal relation- 
ship. From Baxter’s own view-point he accepted the employ- 
ment of his charges in capitalistic production for the sake of 
his religious and ethical interests. From the standpoint of the 

Notes 259 

development of capitalism these latter were brought into the 
service of the development of the spirit of capitalism. 

108 Furthermore, one may well doubt to what extent the joy of the 
medizeval craftsman in his creation, which is so commonly 
appealed to, was effective as a psychological motive force. 
Nevertheless, there is undoubtedly something in that thesis. 
But in any case asceticism certainly deprived all labour of this 
worldly attractiveness, to-day for ever destroyed by capitalism, 
and oriented it to the beyond. Labour in a calling as such is 
willed by God. The impersonality of present-day labour, what, 
from the standpoint of the individual, is its joyless lack of 
meaning, still has a religious justification here. Capitalism at 
the time of its development needed labourers who were avail- 
able for economic exploitation for conscience’ sake. To-day it is 
in the saddle, and hence able to force people to labour without 
transcendental sanctions. 

109 Petty, Political Arithmetick, Works, edited by Hull, |, p. 262. 

110 On these conflicts and developments see H. Levy in the hook 
cited above. The very powerful hostility of public opinion to 
monopolies, which is characteristic of England, originated his- 
torically in a combination of the political struggle for power 
against the Crown—the Long Parliament excluded monopol- 
ists from its membership—with the ethical motives of Pur- 
itanism; and the economic interests of the small bourgeois 
and moderate-scale capitalists against the financial magnates 
in the seventeenth century. The Declaration of the Army of 
August 2, 1652, as well the Petition of the Levellers of January 
28, 1653, demand, besides the abolition of excises, tariffs, and 
indirect taxes, and the introduction of a single tax on estates, 
above all free trade, i.e. the abolition of the monopolistic bar- 
riers to trade at home and abroad, as a violation of the natural 
rights of man. 

111 Compare H. Levy, Die Grundlagen des ökonomischen Liberalis- 
mus in des Geschichte des englischen Volkswirtschaft, pp. 51 f. 

112 That those other elements, which have here not yet been 
traced to their religious roots, especially the idea that honesty 
is the best policy (Franklin’s discussion of credit), are also of 

260 notes 

113 

114 
115 

116 

Puritan origin, must be proved in a somewhat different con- 
nection (see the following essay [not translated here]). Here | 
shall limit myself to repeating the following remark of J. A. 
Rowntree (Quakerism, Past and Present, pp. 95-6), to which E. 
Bernstein has called my attention : “Is it merely a coincidence, 
or is it a consequence, that the lofty profession of spirituality 
made by the Friends has gone hand in hand with shrewdness 
and tact in the transaction of mundane affairs? Real piety 
favours the success of a trader by insuring his integrity and 
fostering habits of prudence and forethought, important 
items in obtaining that standing and credit in the commercial 
world, which are requisites for the steady accumulation of 
wealth” (see the following essay). “Honest as a Huguenot” 
was as proverbial in the seventeenth century as the respect for 
law of the Dutch which Sir W. Temple admired, and, a century 
later, that of the English as compared with those Continental 
peoples that had not been through this ethical schooling. 
Well analysed in Bielschowsky’s Goethe, II, chap. xviii. For the 
development of the scientific cosmos Windelband, at the end 
of his Blütezeit der deutschen Philosophie (Vol. || of the Gesch. d. 
Neueren Philosophie), has expressed a similar idea. 

Saints’ Everlasting Rest, chap. xii. 

“Couldn’t the old man be satisfied with his $75,000 a year and 
rest? No! The frontage of the store must be widened to 400 
feet. Why? That beats everything, he says. In the evening when 
his wife and daughter read together, he wants to go to bed. 
Sundays he looks at the clock every five minutes to see when 
the day will be over—what a futile life!” In these terms the son- 
in-law (who had emigrated from Germany) of the leading dry- 
goods man of an Ohio city expressed his judgment of the 
latter, a judgment which would undoubtedly have seemed 
simply incomprehensible to the old man. A symptom of 
German lack of energy. 

This remark alone (unchanged since his criticism) might 
have shown Brentano (op. cit.) that | have never doubted its 
independent significance. That humanism was also not 
pure rationalism has lately again been strongly emphasized 

Notes 261 

by Borinski in the Abhandl. der Münchener Akad. der Wiss., 
1919. 

117 The academic oration of v. Below, Die Ursachen der Reforma- 
tion (Freiburg, 1916), is not concerned with this problem, but 
with that of the Reformation in general, especially Luther. For 
the question dealt with here, especially the controversies 
which have grown out of this study, | may refer finally to the 
work of Hermelink, Reformation und Gegenreformation, which, 
however, is also primarily concerned with other problems. 

118 For the above sketch has deliberately taken up only the rela- 
tions in which an influence of religious ideas on the material 
culture is really beyond doubt. It would have been easy to 
proceed beyond that to a regular construction which logically 
deduced everything characteristic of modern culture from 
Protestant rationalism. But that sort of thing may be left to the 
type of dilettante who believes in the unity of the group mind 
and its reducibility to a single formula. Let it be remarked only 
that the period of capitalistic development lying before that 
which we have studied was everywhere in part determined by 
religious influences, both hindering and helping. Of what sort 
these were belongs in another chapter. Furthermore, whether, 
of the broader problems sketched above, one or another can 
be dealt with in the limits of this Journal [the essay first 
appeared in the Archiv fiir Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik— 
TRANSLATOR’S NOTE] is not certain in view of the problems to 
which it is devoted. On the other hand, to write heavy tomes, 
as thick as they would have to be in this case, and dependent 
on the work of others (theologians and historians), | have no 
great inclination (| have left these sentences unchanged). 

For the tension between ideals and reality in early capital- 
istic times before the Reformation, see now Strieder, Studien 
zur Geschichte der kapit. Organizationsformen, 1914, Book II. 
(Also as against the work of Keller, cited above, which was 
utilized by Sombart.) 

119 | should have thought that this sentence and the remarks and 
notes immediately preceding it would have sufficed to prevent 
any misunderstanding of what this study was meant to 

262 Notes 

accomplish, and | find no occasion for adding anything. 
Instead of following up with an immediate continuation in 
terms of the above programme, | have, partly for fortuitous 
reasons, especially the appearance of Troeltsch’s Die Sozial- 
lehren der christlichen Kirchen und Gruppen, which disposed of 
many things | should have had to investigate in a way in which 
l, not being a theologian, could not have done it; but partly 
also in order to correct the isolation of this study and to place 
it in relation to the whole of cultural development, deter- 
mined, first, to write down some comparative studies of the 
general historical relationship of religion and society. These 
follow. Before them is placed only a short essay in order to 
clear up the concept of sect used above, and at the same time 
to show the significance of the Puritan conception of the 
Church for the capitalistic spirit of modern times. 

INDEX 

absolution, sacrament of 70-1, 85 

acquisition, as principle of 
economic action 27 

acquisition, impulse to xxxi, 21 

Adams, Thomas 179, 198, 227, 228, 
237, 238, 242, 246, 258 

adaptation 34; see selection 

adiaphora 224, 248 

administration xxxviii 

adventurers, capitalistic xxxiv, 
xxxvii, 22, 31, 37, 111, 117, 129, 147, 
255 

after-life, idea of 55, 65 

Alberti, Leon Battista 141-6, 152, 
232 

Anglican Church 42, 56, 122 

Anthony of Florence 34, 42, 145, 
150, 152 

anthropology xlii 

anti-authoritarianism 112; see also 
asceticism 

architecture, in West xxx 

aristocracy, antagonism to 98 

aristocracy, commerical 5, 27, 35 

Aristotle xxix, 196, 208, 215 

Arminians 148, 172 

Arnold, Matthew 137, 256 

Arnold, Samuel G. 254 

art in West xxix 

Arte di Calimala 153 

arts, Puritan attitude to 112-13, 246 

asceticism, anti-authoritarian 
tendency of 112, 224 

asceticism, definition of 140 

asceticism, monastic 40, 74, 221-2 

asceticism, sexual 105 

asceticism, tendency of capitalism 
to 33 

asceticism, types of 72 

asceticism, worldly 97, 100-1 

Ashley, W. J. 256 

Augsburg Confession 59, 157, 161 

Augustine, St. 58 

Aymon, Jean 136 

264 INDEX 

Bailey, R. 62, 81, 83, 179, 187, 191, 
193, 199, 210, 228, 241 

Baird, Henry M. 174 

Bank of England 129 

baptism 93, 178 

Barclay, Robert 96, 103, 115, 
219-20, 224, 225, 226, 227, 241 

Barebones, Praisegod 206 

Bartholomew's day, St. 103 

Bax, E. Belfort 220 

Baxter, Richard 62, 103, 123, 173, 
181, 184ff., 210, 228ff. 

Becker, Bernhard 212 

begging 120 

believers’ church 75, 93; see also 
sect 

Below, Georg von 261 

Benedict, St. 72 

Bernhard, St. 188, 197, 200, 204, 
240 

Bernhard of Siena 145, 150, 152 

Bernstein, Eduard 174, 224, 227, 
253, 260 

Berthold of Regensburg 159 

Beruf 39, 155ff. 

Beruf, translation of 141 

Beza, Theodore 66, 189 

bibliocracy 75, 94 

Bielschowsky, Albert 260 

Bohemian Brothers 145 

Bonaventura, St. 197, 205, 239 

Bonn, M. J. 171 

book-keeping xxxv, 30 

book-keeping, moral 77, 200 

Borinski, Karl 261 

bourgeoisie xxxvi, xxxvii, 120 

Brassey, Thomas 147 

Braune, Wilhelm 158 

Brentano, Lujo 128, 131, 135, 139, 
140, 141, 146, 156, 161, 163, 172, 
228, 260 

Brodnitz, Georg 153 

brotherly love 41, 64, 109, 168, 183 

Brown, John 174 

Browne, John 207 

Bryce, James 196, 241 

Bucer, letter to 186 

Buckle, Henry Thomas 10 

Buddhism 186 

Bunyan, John 63, 77, 119, 180, 186, 
190, 195, 228, 245, 257 

Busken-Huet 248, 254 

Butler, Samuel 113 

Ceesarism, Puritan immunity to 182 

calling, duty in a 19, 25 

calling, idea of 39ff. 

Calvin, John 11, 47; and 
predestination 59; attitude to 
certitudo salutis 66; attitude 
toward wealth 104 

Calvinism, social organization of 
181 

Calw 11 

Campbell, Douglas 174 

Carlyle, Thomas 5, 174, 219 

capital, definition of xxxii 

capital, origin of 31 

capital, ownership of 4 

capitalism, concept of xxxi—xxxii 

Cato 141, 150 

Cavaliers 47, 114 

certitudo salutis 66, 68-9, 80, 84, 
89-91, 152, 184, 188, 246 

charisma 121, 258 

Charles 1111 

Charnock, Stuart 191, 195, 200, 228 

Chillingsworth, William 79 

chosen people, belief in 111; see 
also elect 

Christopher, Duke of Wiirttemberg 
240 

Cicero 155 

Cistercians 72 

Cluny, Monks of 72 

Colbert, Jean Baptiste 10 

Columella 143 

comfort, idea of 115 

commenda xxxiii, xxxiv, 22 

Communion, admission to 66, 102 

confession 62, 76, 85, 87, 100 

confessions, Baptist 190; see also 
Dordrecht, Westminster, 
Augsburg, Hanserd Knolly 

Congregationalists 172 

consilia evangelica 40, 73, 87 

contemplation xxxviii, 67, 104, 106, 
165 

conventicles 81, 83, 112, 209 

conversion 89 

Corinthians ist Epistle to the 44, 
110, 157, 158, 160, 161, 168 

Cornelius, Carl Adolf 221, 223 

counterpoint xxix 

Court, Peter de la 120 

Cramer, S. 226 

Cranmer, Thomas 163 

creation, joy of 259 

Cromwell, Oliver 42, 103, 166-7, 
184, 249 

Cromwell, Richard 217 

Crosby, Thomas 196 

Cunningham, William 256 

Da Costa 184 

Defoe, Daniel 122, 257 
Deissmann, Adolf 161 
democracy 182 

Denifle, Heinrich 164 

Deventer, Provincial Synod of 229 
Dexter, H. M. 174, 218, 249 
Dieterich, A. 155 

dilettantes xli 

Dionysius of Halicarnassus 161 
Dippel, Johann Conrad 213 
discipline, Church 55, 99, 102, 121 

INDEX 265 

discipline, monastic 118 

distribution of goods, unequal 120 

Divine Comedy 46 

Dollinger, Johann Joseph Iquaz von 
63 

domestic industry xxxv, 137 

Dordrecht, Synod of 57, 59, 184, 203 

Dowden, Edward 119, 177, 178, 228, 
243, 249 

Doyle, John Andrew 116, 174, 253 

Dunckards 97 

Eck Bible translation xxvi 

Economic interpretation of History: 
see materialism, historical 

education and capitalism 6 

Eger, Karl 163 

elect, aristocracy of 61, 74, 75, 
83-8, 98, 205 

elect, membership in 65-6 

emotion, emphasis on 82, 86, 88 

Enlightenment, The 11, 32, 62, 124 

Entzauberung der Welt 178; see also 
magic, elimination of 

Erastianism 172 

d’Este, Renata 199 

Ethnography xli 

experiment, method of xxix 

faith, justification by 67, 68-9 

faith, results of 68; see also proof 

fatalism 82, 192 

feudal state xxxi 

feudalism 128 

Fieschi 196 

Firth, Charles Harding 174, 197 

Fleischtitz, Bible translator 159 

formalism, as characteristic of 
Puritanism 111 

Fox, George 48, 95, 96, 220, 237 

Francis of Assisi 73, 94, 221 

Franciscans 221 

266 INDEX 

Franck, Sebastian 74, 176 

Francke, August Hermann 83-4, 
88, 211 

Franklin, Benjamin 14, 16, 27, 33, 
42, 77, 98, 104, 123, 139, 142, 234 

Frederick, Henry, Stadholder 247 

Frederick William | 10, 217 

Freytag, Gustav 205 

Froude, James Anthony 180 

Fruin, Robert 174, 254 

Fugger, Jacob 17, 139 

Fuggers 42, 152, 166 

Fuller, Thomas 190 

Funck 150 

Gardiner, Samuel Rawson 166, 174, 
245 

Gerhard, Johannes 188 

Gerhard, Paul 47 

Giles, St. 94 

God, Calvinistic conception of 
59-60 

Goethe, Wolfgang 99, 123, 231, 252 

Goodwin, John 211 

Gorichem, Synod of 230 

Gothein, Eberhard 10 

Grab, Hermann von 178 

Grubbe, Edward 220 

Haller, Albertus 248 

Hals, Frans 247-8 

handicrafts xxxv, 6, 27 

Hanna, C. A. 135 

Hanserd Knolly, Confession of 
77-8, 176, 178, 182, 191, 226 

harmony xxix 

Harnack, Adolf 233 

Hasbach, Wilhelm 147 

Hebrews 237; see Jews 

Heidegger, Johann Heinrich 187 

Heine, Heinrich 256 

Hellpach, W. 208 

Henry, Matthew 200, 228, 231 

Heppe, Heinrich Ludwig 177, 187, 
212 

heredity, influence of xlii, 254 

Hermelink, Heinrich 261 

Herrnhut 86, 213 

Hertling, Georg von 133 

historical individual 13 

Hoenicke 200 

Hoffmann 222 

honesty, best policy 259 

Honigsheim, Paul 165, 179, 184, 
188 

Hooker, Richard 79 

Hoops, Johannes 158 

Hoornbeek, J. 177, 180, 187, 192, 
194, 229 

Howe, Daniel Wait 174 

Howe, John 198, 217, 228 

Hudibras 196; see also Butler 

Huguenots 7, 10, 150 

Humiliati 221 

Hundeshagen, Carl Bernhard 184 

Huntingdon, Lady 78 

Hus, John 54, 146 

Hutchinson, Colonel John 250 

Huyghens, Constantine 248 

ideal type 33, 56, 149 

idolatry of the flesh 62, 94, 98, 114, 
115, 181, 237, 243, 245, 246-7 

Ignatius, St. 72 

Independents 56-7, 75, 172, 178, 
206 

India, religious teaching of 236-7 

individualism 61-2, 179 

indulgences 74 

industria 35, 143, 145 

inner light, doctrine of 95 

institution for salvation, church as 
186 

interest, prohibition of 34, 149-54 

interests, capitalistic, influence of 
xxxvii 

Irving, Washington 231, 250-1 

isolation of individual 64 

Jacoby, Ludwig S. 217 

Jains 137, 145, 186 

James | 56, 111 

James, William 192 

Janeway, James 228, 240 

Jansenists 177, 179, 188 

Jaspers, Karl 130 

Jerome, St. 156 

Jesuits 41, 72, 76, 239, 249, 252 

Jesus 43 

Jews as minorities 7, 137 

Jews as representing adventurer’s 
capitalism 130, 244-5 

Jews, problem of 131-2, 145 

Jews, Puritans’ relation to 111, 122 

Jews, rationalization of 71, 178 

Job, Book of 110 

Jones, Rufus B. 220 

joy of living 8, 9, 11 

joy of living, relation of Puritanism 
to 108, 111-12, 117 

Judaism: see Jews 

Jülicher, A. 167 

Jüngst, Johannes 217 

Kampschulte, F. Wilhelm 174 

Kant, Immanuel 243-4 

Kattenbusch, Ferdinand 223 

Kautsky, Karl 227 

Keats, John 10 

Keller, F. 136, 149, 261 

Keller, Gottfried 63 

Kierkegaard, Soren 65 

Klages, Ludwig 130 

de Kock 184 

Knolly, Hanserd: see Hanserd 
Knolly 

INDEX 267 

Knox, John 11, 174 

Koehler, Walther 164 

Koester, A. 163-4 

Köhhler, August 174, 184, 212, 242 
Kolde, Theodor 217 
Kommanditgesellschaft xxxiv 
Késtlin, Julius 176 

Kurnberger, Ferdinand 16 

Labadie, Jean de 203, 204, 209 

laboratory, modern xxix 

labour, division of 41, 106, 107 

labour, rational, capitalistic 
organization of xxxiv—xxxvii, 111 

labour, valuation of 64 

Lambeth Article 175-6 

Lamprecht, Karl 209, 213 

Lang, J. C. 220 

Laud, Bishop William, 122, 166 

Lavelye, Emile 137 

law, canon xxix, 34 

law, mosaic 76, 110, 244 

law, natural: see lex nature 

law, rational structure of xxxviii 

law, Roman xxix, 37 

Lenau, Nicolaus 138 

Leonard, Ellen M. 240 

Levy, Hermann 166, 171, 240, 255, 
258, 259 

lex nature 64, 69, 164, 225, 243 

liberum arbitrium 21, 38 

Liguori, Alfonso of 63 

literature, Puritan attitude to 112-13 

Lobstein, Paul 188 

Lodensteyn, Jodocus van 203 

Loofs, Friedrich 217, 219 

Lorimer, G. 220 

Löscher, Valentine Ernest 211 

Luthardt, Christoph Ernst 167 

Luther, use of calling, 110, 155ff. 

Lutheranism, ethical theory of, 
200 

268 INDEX 

Lutheranism, moral helplessness 
of 78 

Lutheranism, relation to Pietism 53 

Lutheranism, relation to world 45, 
106 

Lutheranism, traditionalistic 
tendency of 45 

Lutheranism and predestination 
59-60 

Macaulay, Thomas Babington 174, 
176, 180, 256 

Machiavelli, Nicolo xxix, 63 

magic, elimination of 61, 71, 97 

Magna Charta 171 

Maliniak, J. 149 

Manley, Thomas 256 

manors xxxv 

Marcks, Erich 174 

marriage, Puritan conception of 
105, 233-4 

masserizia 143 

Masson, David 174, 176 

materialism, historical xxxvii, 20, 
36, 48-50, 125, 237-8, 252-3 

Maurenbrecher, Max 164 

Maurice of Orange 196 

Meisner, Balthasar 188 

Melanchthon, Philip 59, 185, 201, 208 

Menno, Simons 48, 94 

Mennonites 10, 93, 97, 98, 172, 223, 
224, 226 

mercantilism xxxvi, 99, 144, 205 

Merx, Albrecht 153, 154, 160 

Milton, John 46, 58, 176, 239 

minorities 6-7, 135 

Mirbt, Carl 205 

missionary 86, 182-3 

monasticism 72-5, 105, 118 

money-lenders xxxiv 

monopolies 27, 42, 122, 244 

Montesquieu, Charles Louis de 11 

Moravians 54, 85 

Mormons 235 

Motley, John Lothrop 174 
Miller, Karl 175, 220, 223 
Munster 96, 220 

Murch, J. 220 

music xxix 

Muthmann 180 

mystics, German 40, 45, 67, 83 

Naber 174 

Neal, David 196 

needs, satisfaction of 27 
Neumann, Carl 247, 250 
Newman, A. H. 220 
Nicklaes, Hendrik 241 
Nicolai, Philip 188 
Nietzsche, Friedrich 192 
Nuyens, W. J. F. 174, 178 

official xxx 

Offenbacher, Martin 133 

oikos xxxv 

Old Testament 76 

Oldenbarneveld, Joan van 56 

Olevian, Kaspar 177, 187 

organization, capitalistic forms of 
26, 29-30 

organization, Church 80 

organization, social, superiority of 
Calvinism in 64 

orphans, Amsterdam 183 

ostentation, avoidance of 33 

otherworldliness 7, 8, 9, 72 

Owen, John 199 

Parker 122 

Parsees 137 

parvenus 27, 33, 109, 241 

Pascal, Blaise 41, 68, 163-4, 179, 
185, 187 

Paterson, William 129-30 

Paul, St. 44, 105, 107, 165 
Petty, Sir William 10, 121-2, 134, 
255, 259 

piece-rates 23 

Pierson, Allard 175 

Pietism 9 

Plitt, Hermann 213 

Plutarch 197 

Polenz, Gottlob van 174 

Poor Relief, English 121 

poverty, glorification of 87 

Prætorius, Abdias 188 

Praxis pietatis 81 

Precisians 71 

predestination, doctrine of 56ff., 
65ff., 74, 77, 80, 82, 91, 96, 184, 
185, 191, 192 

Presbyterians 77, 95 

Price, Thomas 174 

Prinsterer, Groen van 174, 248, 254 

printing xxx 

privileges 27 

profitableness, as sign of grace 108 

proletariat xxxvii 

proof, doctrine of 67, 70, 78, 80, 
84, 87, 90-1, 100, 152-3 

Prynne, William 122, 242 

psychology, in sociological 
investigation xlii, 208-9 

Puritanism, attitude to sensuous 
culture 62 

Puritanism, definition of 54 

putting-out system xxxvi, 29, 122 

Quakers 7, 10, 45, 93ff., 98, 172, 251, 
260; see also Barclay, Robert 

Rabelais, François 136 

Rachfahl, Felix 130 

Ranke, Leopold von 174 

rationalism xxxix, 7, 36; see also 
rationalization 

INDEX 269 

rationalization xxxviii—xxxix, 30, 86, 
95; see also magic, elimination 
of; rationalism 

Rembrandt 114, 247 

Renaissance, Puritan relation to 113 

Rhodes, Cecil 9 

Ritschl, Albrecht 85, 88, 175, 176, 
188-9, 198, 203, 209, 213, 221, 
222, 244 

Rogers, Thorold 256 

Roloff, Gustav 196 

romanticism 32 

romanticists 27 

Roosevelt, Theodore 242 

Roundheads 47 

Rowntree, J. A. 260 

Sack, Carl Heinrich 174 

sacraments 61 

Salmasius, Claudius 150 

salvation, conditions of 68 

sanctification 87, 90 

sanctions, psychological 55, 79, 121, 
145, 239 

Sanford, John Langton 76, 172, 249 

saving, ascetic compulsion to, 116, 
251 

Savoy Declaration 68, 77, 191 

Schafer, Dietrich 178 

Schechter, Solomon 155 

Scheibe, Max 177 

Schell, Hermann, 133 

Schmoller, Gustav 167 

Schneckenburger, Matthias 67, 92, 
167, 175, 187, 190, 191, 218, 252 

Scholasticism 42, 113; see also 
Thomas Aquinas 

Schortinghuis, Wilhelmus 187, 209 

Schulze-Gaevernitz, C. von 147 

Schwenkfeld, Caspar 95, 224 

science, Puritan attitude to 112-13, 

214-15 

270 inDex 

science, Western characteristics of 
xxvii, XXX, XXXVIi 

Scotists 152 

Scotus, Duns 195 

sea loans xxxiv, 129 

sect, distinguished from church 93, 
99, 152, 222, 254; see also 
believers’ church 

Sedgwick, Obadiah 187, 191, 194, 
228 

Sée, Henri 127 

Seeberg 163, 167, 169, 175, 196 

Seiss, J. A. 220 

selection, concept of 20, 33-4 

Seneca 155 

Septuagint 154 

Sermon on the Mount 216 

Shakespeare, William 248 

Simmel, Georg 128, 139 

Sirach, Jesus 40, 109, 154ff., 257 

Skeats, Herbert S. 218 

Skoptsi 145 

Sloth 236 

Smend, Rudolf 155 

Smith, Adam 41, 107 

socialism xxxvi 

Sombart, Werner 27, 36, 127, 13], 
136, 139-47, 140ff., 168, 172, 228, 
231, 244, 251 

South Sea Bubble 130 

Southey, Robert 217, 256 

Spangenberg, A. C. 86, 179-80, 214 

Spener, Philip Jacob 54, 83-5, 88, 
99, 103, 179, 209, 210, 211, 212, 
225, 232, 238 

Spinoza, Batuch de 209 

Sports, Book of 111-12 

St. André, Dupin de 135-6 

State, characteristics of 122 

State, modern xxxi, 34 

Sternberg, H. von 168 

Strieder, Jacob 261 

Stundists 145 

talents, parable of the 108 

Talmud 43, 110-11, 159, 243-4, 
252-3 

Tauler, Johannes 45, 159, 165, 171, 
188, 197, 210 

Taylor, Hudson 183 

Taylor, J. J. 174 

Teellinck, W. 203 

Teersteegen 209 

Terminism, doctrine of 84 

theodicy problem 65 

Theophylaktos 161 

Tholuck, A. 203 

Thomas, Alton C. 220 

Thomas Aquinas, St. 40, 97, 105, 
106, 144, 163, 170, 239 

Thomas à Kempis, St. 205, 210 

Thucydides xxix 

time is money 14, 104 

time, waste of 104 

toleration, idea of 205 

traditionalism 4, 23ff., 27ff., 37, 43, 
109, 136-7, 168, 170, 236-7, 244 

Troeltsch, Ernst 132, 163, 168, 173, 
174, 198, 201, 202, 223, 243, 262 

Tyerman, Luke 217 

Tyermans 173 

Tyndale, William 162 

Ullrich, F. 185, 203 

uniformity, tendency toward 114 

unio mystica 67, 68, 31 

Unwin, George 256 

utilitarianism 18, 41, 65, 107, 120, 
125, 144, 234 

utilitarianism, hygienic 234 

Van Wyck, A. 185 
value, judgments of xli, 56, 67, 124, 
197 

Varro 143 

Veblen, Thorstein 227, 249 
Vedder, Henry C. 220 

Vischer, F. T. 213 

Voét, Gisbert 11, 173, 195, 203, 228 
Voltaire 38 

Vulgate 156 

wages and productivity 24, 147 

Wagner, Richard 63 

Wahl, Adalbert 137 

waiting for Spirit 96 

Ward, Frank G. 167-8 

Warneck, Johannes 182, 183 

Watson, Richard 218 

Watts, Isaac 217 

wealth, temptations of 62, 116, 
117-18 

wealth, uses approved by Puritans 
115 

Weingarten, H. 174, 252 

Wesley, John 48, 78, 85, 89-92, 118, 
173, 185, 217, 218, 219 

Westminster Confession 57, 176, 186, 
208 

INDEX 271 

Westminster, Synod of 57, 59, 103, 
184 

Whitaker, W. 205 

White, G. 211, 240-1 

Whitefield, George 78, 218 

William of Orange 205 

Williams, Roger 207 

Windelband, Wilhelm 197, 215, 260 

Wiskemann, Heinrich 167 

Wittich, W. 135 

Wolff, Christian 234 

workers, women 26 

works, good 69, 71, 96 

works, salvation by 70, 90, 92, 97 

Wupperthal 10 

Wyclif, John 146, 153, 162 

Xenophon 143 

Zeller 184 

Zinzendorf, Count Nicolaus 54, 83, 
85, 88, 92, 121, 213, 214, 215, 216, 
218, 219, 235 

Zwingli, Ullrich 46 

Zwinglianism 172